A TREATISE OF THE LOVE OF GOD.

Written in french by B. FRANCIS DE SALES Bishope and Prince of Geneua,
Translated into English by MILES CAR Priest of the English College of Doway.

THE EIGHTEENTH EDITION.

Printed at Doway, By GERARD PINCHON, at the sign of Coleyn, 1630.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS LADY, THE LADY ELISABETH DORMER.
MADAME,
NO sooner had this Divine Book of DIVINE LOVE happened into my hands, but it
seemed as well by the circumstances of the AUTHOR, whether we respect his
Extraction; as being descended from one of the most Illustrious Houses of
Sauoye; his Function, as being Bishope and Prince of Geneua; the TITLE and
CONTENTS of his Work, already honored by the eighteenth Edition; or my
OBLIGATION, as well in my self, as in those of whom I glory to have so happy
a dependence, to be determined to your HONOR, as nearly symbolising, and due
to your VERTVS and HONOR'S worth: and as having had the weak^ colors in which
it now appears from my n^^ilfull Pensill, to fly to your HONOR'S p^werfull
Protection. For w^it^er ind^^de could so Pious, Worthy, and Noble an AUTHOR be
better addre^'t then to Piety, Worth, and Nobility? where Piety bears so
absolute aswaye in a Noble breast, that Worth and Nobility would be reputed
ignoble and worthless, if they bore not a Testimony about them, that they had
passed by VERTVES TEMPLE; where either from other is so richly embellished, and
receive so mutually each others qualities, that Virtue would be taken for
Nobility and Worth, or Nobility and Worth for Virtue, if both were not seen
to conspire to make up one PEERLESS PIECE. Where could DIVINE LOVE be
provided of a fitter Mansion then a heavenly Heart? Where effects out-speake
Fame, where Charity out-strips pouerties expectation, Riches are possessed and
despised; where a noble saying of Saint Hierom's S. Hier. ad Demetr. ep. 8.
properly suits: It is proper to your Stock, at once to have and contemn
riches; Witness your honorable and pious Father, the LORD VICE-COVNT MONTAGVE,
who made them in all occurrences stoop to vertu's Lore. Witness your equally
honorable and pious mother whose bountiful, and frequent works of Charity
(being the^ widow) struck even heritikes with astonishment. Witness a later
branch of the same stock, your honorable Nephew, the LORD VICE-COVNT MOVNTAGVE
of fresh and Blessed memory, whose matchless Zeal in God's cause, which all
the world speaks of with admiration, and which, as it may seem by God's
special Providence, he came to write in our heart's some few weeks before he
went to receive the reward of it, does easily draw me to instance in him. What
did not he bountifully emploie in the assistance of God's servants? what did
not he piously spend in the riches and glory of God's house? what did not he
Catholikly, repute as nothing, that he might gain Christ? and to descend yet
further, is not the same Bounty, Piety and Religion, and for them, a contempt
of all, brought down as it were by right line, and translated together with
his Dominions to the Honorable now LORD VICE-COVNT MOVNTAGVE, who actually
possesses his Country of the happiness he long promised? Finally is not the
same plainly seen in your Honor's own honored and happy progeny? It were
to long, MADAME, to mention all in your line, Aug. de diligendo Deo cap. 4.
to whom Saint Augustines pitthie and heavenly Contemplation might seem to be
addressed; Love Riches, but as thy subiect's, but as thy slaves, but as pledges
from a Spouse, as Presents from a friend, as benefits from a Master: where
Love and eue^ that Love which casteth-out Fear might seem to be possessed by
Right of blood, so does your HONOR give to the life your renowned Fathers
undaunted Zeal, together with your Noble Mothers incomparable Piety; and yet
be found to be held by Right of Conquest, so frequent and fortunate are your
VERTV'S essays and performances! Performances which send even away strangers
hearts taken with admiring Love; and teach Forrainers to speak and use your
HONOR'S name in terms of respect and honor: For the rest, touching our
general OBLIGATION, (wherein my Pen was provided most to have labored) for
reasons, as I hope, neither unknown, nor vnapproued to your HONOR,
vnvvillingly will I pass over in silence: Yet with this assurance, that
what in words is here omitted, our hearts (wherein your HONOR'S CHARITY
has engraven her Memore deeper then that the iniquity of times can raise it
out) shall speak to the Tribunal, where the heart's language is only
agreeable. Mean while MADAME license my pen, to put down that which many
vvish with one consent of hearts and voices; That as his pen that did not
study your Honorable Fathers advantages, Camb. in Elis. page 26. and 51.
left for after ages to bless and adore, his noble Memory marked with these
better marks of Nobility KNOWN PRVDENCE: VNDAVNTED CONSTANCY: CATHOLIC
ZEAL. So this my first ess^y may be the Pyramides wherein in his and yours may
jointly live for ever; and vvherin eu n little ones may read, that DIVINE LOVE
could not on earth find a fitter TABERNACLE, nor a more nobly pious PATRONESS.
For whose prosperity.

MADAME, YOUR HONOR'S Humblest servant will not cease to pray, MILES CAR.

THE AUTHORS DEDICATORIE PRAYER.
THRICE holy mother of God: Vessel of incomparable election, Queen of
Sovereign dilection, thou art the most lovely, the most loving, and most
beloved of all creatures. The love of the heavenly father pleased himself in
thee from all eternity, alloting thy chaste heart to the perfection of holy
love, to the end that one day thou might love his only son, with an only
Motherly love, as he had done from all eternity with a fatherly love, o
Savior JESUS, to whom could I better dedicate a speech of thy Love, then to a
heart best beloved of the well-beloued of thy heart.

But o all triumphant mother who can cast his eyes upon thy Majesty, without
seeing him at thy right hand whom for the love of thee, thy Son deigned so
often to honor with the title of Father, having united him unto thee by the
celestial band of a virginal marriage, to the end that he might be thy
Coadiutour and Helper, in the charge of the direction and education of thy
Divine Infancy? o great S. JOSEPH most beloved Spouse, of the well-beloued
mother. Ah how often have thou borne betwixt thy arms, the love of heaven and
earth, till burnt with the sweet embracements, and kisses of this Divine
child, thy soul melted away with joy, while he tenderly whispered in thy
ears, (o God what content) that thou was his dear friend, and dear y beloved
^eare Father. It was the custom of old to place the lamps of the ancient
Temple upon flowers of golden Lylies O MARIE and JOSEPH, Pair without compare
sacred Lilies of incomparable beauty, amongst which the well-beloued feeds
himself and his Lovers. Alas if I might give my self any hope, that this
Loue-le^ter might inflame and lighten the children of light, where might I
better place it, then amongst your Lilies, Lilies, where the Son of Justice,
the splendor and candor of the eternal Light, did so soueraignely recreate
himself that he the^e practiced the delights of the ineffable Love of his
heart toward us? O well beloved mother of the well-be loved; o well beloved
spouse of the well-beloued! prone laid at thy sacred feet who bore my
Savior, I vow, dedicate and consecrate this little work of Love, to the
immence greatness of thy Love; ah! I conjure thee by the heart of thy sweet
JESUS, king of hearts, whom thine adore, animate my heart, and all theirs who
shall read this writing of thy all puissant favor, with the Holy Ghost, so
that hence-fourth, we may offer up in holocaust all our affections to his
Divine goodness, to live, die, and revive for ever in the flames of this
heavenly fire, which our Savior, thy son has so much labored to kindle in
our hearts, that he never ceased to labor and travel therein, even unto death;
and death of the Cross.

VIVE JESUS. THE PREFACE OF THE AUTHOR.
THE Holy Ghost teaches, that the lips of the heavenly Spouse, which is the
CHVRCH, rese^bles scarlate, and the honey comb whence honey distilleth, to
the end that every one may know, that the doctrine which she announceth
consists of sacred Love, of a more fair vermilio^ then Scarlate, by reason
of the Spouse his blood wherein she is dyed; more sweet then honey, by reason
of the Beloved his sweetness, who crowns her with delights. So this
heavenly Spouse when he thought good to give an entry to the publication of
his Law, streamed down a number of fiery tongues upon the Assembly of his
disciples, which he had deputed to this office: sufficiently intimating thereby,
that the preaching of the Gospel, was wholly designed to the inflaming of
hearts.

Propose unto your selves a fine done amidst the Sun rays; you shall see her
change into so many diverse colors, as you behold her diversely; because her
feathers are so apt to receive the light, that the sun spreading his
sple^dour amongst the^, there is caused a number of transparences, which bring
forth a great variety of alterations and mutations of colors; but colors so
agreeable to the eye, that they put down all other colors, yea the enamell of
richest jewels; colors that are glittering, and so quaintly guilt, that the
gold gives them more life. In consideration hereof the Royal Prophet said
unto the Israelites. Although affliction rudly d^ght your face,
Yet shall your hew henceforth to men appear
As pigions plumes, when siluers trembling grace,
And burnisht gold, do make their shine more clear.
Truly the Church is adorned with an incomparable variety of excellent
documents, sermons, Treatises, Spiritual books, all very comely and pleasant
to the sight, by reason of the admirable mixture which the sun of Justice
makes of his Divine wisdom with the tongues of his Pastors, which are their
Penns, and with their Penns, which sometimes they use in lieu of their tongues,
and do compose the rich plumes of this mystical dove. But amongst all the
diverse colors of the doctrine which she does publish, the fine gold of holy
Charity is especially discovered, who makes herself be gloriously
enteruiewed, gilding all the sciences of Saints with her incomparable luster,
and raising them above all other Sciences. All is to Love, in Love, for Love,
and from Love in the holy Church.

But as we are not ignorant that all the light of the day proceeds from the
Sun, and yet do ordinarily say, that the Sun shines not, save only when
it does openly send out its beams here or there. In like manner though all
Christian doctrine consist of sacred Love, yet do we not indistinctly honor
all Divinity with the title of DIVINE LOVE, but only those parts of it, which
do contemplate the birth, nature, properties, and operations thereof in
particular.

Now it is certain, that diverse writers, have admirably handled this subject;
Above all the rest those ancient Fathers, who as they did lovingly serve God,
so did they speak divinely of his Love. O what a pleasure it is to hear S.
PAVLE, speak of heavenly things, who learned them even in Heaven it self. And
how good a thing it is to see those souls that were nurced in the bosom of
Love, write of its sweetness I For this reason, those amongst the school men
that discoursed the most and the best of it, did also most excel in piety. S.
THOMAS made a Treatise of it, worthy of S. THOMAS: S. BONAVENTVRE, and Blessed
Denis the Carthusian, have made diverse most excellent ones of it, under sundry
titles: and as for John Garson, Chancelour of the university of P^^l^, Sixtus
Senensis speaks of him in this sort: He has so worthily discoursed upon fifty
properties of Divine Love, which are drawn here and there out of the
Canticles, that he alone may seem to have hit the number of the affections of
Divine Love. Verily he was a man exceeding learned, judicious and deuote.

Yet that we might know that this kind of writing is performed with more
felicity by the devotion of Lovers, then by the learning of the learned, it
has pleased the Holy Ghost that diverse women should work wonders in this
kind. Who did ever better express the heavenly passions of heavenly Love then
S. CATHARINE of Genua. S. ANGELA of Folligni, S. CATHARINE of Sienna. S.
MATILDA?

In our age also diverse have wrote upon this subject, whose works I have not
had leisure to read distinctly, but only here and there so far forth as was
requisite, to discover whether this might yet find place. Father Jews of
Granado, that great Doctor of piety, left a treatise of the Love of God in
his Memorial, which is sufficiently commended, in saying it is his. Stella, a
Franciscan made a very affectiue one, and profitable for Prayer. Christoph:
Fonceca an Austine, put out yet a greater, wherein he has many excellent
things. Father Richeome of the Society, has also published a book, under the
title of the Art of loving God by his Creaturs, and this Author is so amiable
in his person, and in his singular writings, that one cannot doubt but he is
yet more amiable by writing of Love it self. Father Iohh of JESUS MARIA a
discalced Carmelite, composed a little book, which is also called the Art of
loving God, which is much esteemed. The great and famous Cardinal Bellermine
did also a while ago give into light a little book entitled, The little
Ladder to ascend unto God by his creaturs, which cannot be but admirable,
coming from so deuote a soul and so learned a pen, which has wrote so much,
and so learnedly in the Church her behalf. I will say nothing of Parenetique
that floode of Eloquence, who flotes at this hour through all France, in the
multitude and variety of his sermons, and noble writings, the straight
spiritual consanguinitie, which my soul has con^racted with his, when by the
impositio^ of my hands he received the Caracter of Episcopal dignity, to the
great happiness of the Diocese of Belley, and to the honor of the Church,
besides a thousand bands of a sincere friendshipe which ties us together,
permits me not to speak with credit of his works, amongst which this
Parenetique of Divine Love, was one of the first sallies of the incomparable
fullness of wit, which every one admires in him,

Further, we do see a goodly and magnifice^t Palace which the R. Father
Laurence Paris, a Capucine Preacher erected in the honor of heavenly Love,
which being finished, will be a complete course of the Art of loving well. And
lastly the B. Mother Teresa of JESUS, has written so accuratly of the sacred
motions of Love, in all the books she has left us, that a man is astonished
to see so much eloquence, masked in so profound humility; so great soliditie
of wit, in so great simplicity: and her most learned ignorance, makes the
knowledge of many learned men appear ignorant, who after a great tormoile in
studies, blushe, not to understand that which she so happily puts down
touching the practice of holy Love. Thus does God raise the Throne of his
Power, upon the Theather of our infirmity, making use of weak things to
confound the strong.

And be it, my dear Reader, that this Treatise which I now present, come far
short of those excellent works, without hope of ever coming nigh the^, yet
have I such confidence in that pa^re of heavenly Lovers, to whom I dedicate it,
that it may be some ways serviceable unto thee, and that there, thou shall
meet with many wholesome considerations, which thou should not else where so
easily find, as again thou may else where find many rare things, which are
not here. Yea me thinks, my design falls not in with theirs, save in general,
in so much as the glory of Divine Love is all our aims. But this you shall
know by reading it.

Truly mine intention was only, simply and nakedly with art or varnish, to
represent the History of the Birth, progress, decay, operations,
proprieties, advantages, and excellencies of heavenly Love. And if besides all
this thou find somewhat else they are certain superfluities which are hard
for such an one as my self, who write amidst many distractio^s, to avoid.
Howbeit I hope, nothing therein shall be without some profit. Nature her self,
who is so skillful a work woman, proiecting the production of grapes, produces
withal, as by a certain prudent inaduertance, such an abundance of leaves and
vinebranches, that there are very few vines, which are not in the season to be
pruined and cut.

Writers often are handled to harshly, the Censures that are made of them being
precipitated, ordinarily with more impertinencie, then they practiced
imprudence in taking upon them to publish their writings. Precipitation of
judgment does greatly enda^ger the Judges conscience, and the innocence of the
Accused: Diverse do write foolishly, and diverse also do censure grossly. The
sweetness of the Reader, makes his reading sweet and profitable. And my dear
Reader, to have thee more favorable, I will here render thee a reason of some
passages, which might peradventure, otherwise put thee out of humor.

Some, peradventure, may apprehend, that I have said too much, and that it was
not requisite, to bring down the discourse even from its heads. But I am of
opinion, that heavenly Love is a Plant, like to that which we call Angelica,
whose root is no less odoriferous then the bole, and branches. The 4. first
books, and some chapters of the rest, might without doubt have been omitted to
the liking of such souls as only seake the practice of holy Love, yet all of
it will be profitable unto them if they behold it with a deuote eye, While
others also might have disliked, not to have had the whole continuance of that
which belongs to the Treatise of Divine Love. Certes I took as I ought, into
my consideration the condition of the wits of this age wherein we are. It does
much import one, to know in what Age he writs.

I cite the Scripture, sometimes in other terms, then are found in the vulgar
Edition. O good God, my dear Reader, do me not therefore the wrong to think,
that I would go from that Edition: ah no; for I know the Holy Ghost has
authorized it by the Holy Council of Trent, and that therefore all of us ought
to stick to it: but contrariwise I make no other use of the other versions, but
only to serve this, when they explicate and confirm the true sense thereof.
For example. That which the heavenly Spouse says to his Spouse, THOU HAVE
WOVNDED MY HEART, is wonderfully cleared by the other version, THOU HAVE TAKEN
AWAY MY HEART, or, THOU HAVE SNACHED AWAY, AND RAVISH^D MY HEART. That which
our Savior says, BLESSED ARE THE POOR OF SPIRIT is much amplified and
declared, by the Greek, BLESSED ARE THE BEGGARS OF SPIRIT, and so of others.

I have often cited the sacred Psalmist in verse, and it was done to recreate
thy mind, and through the facility which I found in it by reason: of the
sweet translation of Philipe de Ports, Abbot of Tiron, which notwithstanding
I have not precisely followed; yet not out of any hope I had to be able to do
better then this famous Poet. For I should be too impertinent, if, never having
so much as thought of this kind of writing, I should pretend to be happy in
it; in an age and condition of life, which would oblige me to retire my self
from it, in case I had ever been engaged therein. But in some places where the
sense might be diversely taken, I followed not his verse, because I would not
follow his sense; as in the Ps. 132. where he has taken a latin word, for the
fringe of the garment, which I apprehended, was to be taken for the coler,
whereupon I translated it to mine own mind.

I have said nothing which I have not learned of others: yet it is impossible
for me to remember whence I had every thing in particular; But believe it, if I
had drawn any great pieces of remarke out of any Author, I would make a
conscience not to let him have the deserved honor of it; and to deliver you of
a suspicion which you may conceive against my sincerity in this behalf, I
give you to know, that the 13. Chap. of the 7. book, is extracted out of a
Sermon which I made at Paris at S. JOHN'S in Grieve, upon the feast of the
Assumption of our B. Lady. 1602.

I have not always expressed how one Chapter follows another, but if you
mark, you will easily find the connection. In that and diverse other things I
had a care to spare mine own labor, and your patience. After I had caused the
Introductio^ to a deuote to life be printed, my Lord Archbishope of Vienna,
Peter villars, did me the favor to unite his opinion of it, in terms so
aduantagious to me, and that little book, that I dare never rehease it; and
exhorting me to apply the most of my leisure to the likes works; amongst many
rare aduises wherewith ^e gratified me, one was, that as far forth as the
matter would permit, I should be short in the Chapters. For even as, quoth he,
the Traveler knowing that there is a fair Garden some twenty or twenty five
pa^es out of his way, does easily divert, for so small away, to go see it,
which he would not do, if it were further distant* even so one that knows
that there is but a little distance betwixt the beginning and end of a Chapter,
does willingly undertake to read it, which he would not do, though the subject
were never so delightful, if a long time were required to the reading of it.
And therefore I had good reason to follow mine own inclination in this
respect, since it was agreeable to this great Personage, who was one of the
most saintly Prelates, and learned Doctors that the Church had in our age, and
who, at the time that he honored me with his letter, was the most ancient of
all the Doctors of the Faculty of Paris.

A great servant of God advertised me not long a go, that by addressing my
speech still to Philothie in the Introduction to a deuote life, I hindered
many men to profit by it; for that they did not esteem the aduertissements
made to a woman, worthy of a man. I admired that there were men, who to be
thought men, did show themselves so little men, in effect. For I leave it to
your consideration, my dear Reader, whether devotion be not as well for women
as men; and whether wear not to read the second epistle of S. JOHN with as
great attention and reverence which was addressed to the holy Lady Electa, as
the third which he directs to Caius: and whether a thousand thousand
Epistles, and Treatises of the ancient Fathers of the Church ought to be held
unprofitable to me^, for that they are addressed to holy women of those times.
But again, it is the soul which aspires to devotion that I call Philothie,
and men have souls as well as women.

Nevertheless to imitate the great Apostle in this occasion who esteemed
himself liable to every one, I changed my address in this Treatise, and
speak to THEOTIME: but if peradventure there should be any women (and such an
impertinencie would be more tolerable in them) who would not read the
instructions which are made to men, I beseech them to know, that THEOTIME, to
whom I speak, is man's spirit desiring to make progress in holy Love, which is
as well in men as in women.

This Treatise then is made for a soul already deuote, to advance her in her
design; and for this cause, I have been forced to speak many things less
known to the common sort, which consequently will appear obscure: The bottom
of a science is always hardest to be founded; and few Diverse are found, who
will, or knows how to diue for Pearls, or other precious stones in the
midst of the Ocean. But if you have a free heart to diue into this writing,
it will truly happen to you as to Diverse, who, says Pliny, being in the
deepest gulf of the Sea, clearly discover the light of the Sun. For you
shall find even in the darkest places of this discourse, a good and amiable
light. And verily as I do not follow those who despise certain books, which
treat of a life supereminent in perfection, so would I not speak of this
supereminencie. For neither can I censure the Authors, nor yet authorize the
censures of a doctrine which I understand not.

I have touched many points of Divinity; not with a Spirit of contradiction,
but simply proposing, not so much what long ago I learned in the schools, as
that which the care I have had of souls, and the experience of 24. years I
have spent in preaching, has made me apprehend to be most to the glory of the
Gospel and the Church.

For the rest, diverse men of note from diverse places have signified unto me,
that certain little Pamphlets have been published, under the only first
letters of their Authors name, which light to be the very same with mine;
which made some believe that they were my works not without touch of scandal
to such as apprehended thereby that I had bidden Adieu to my wounted
simplicity, to puff up my style with words of ostentation, my discourse with
vain conceits, and my conceits with a lofty and plumed eloquence. For this
cause, my dear reader I will tell thee, that as such as grave or cut in
precious stones, having their sight dazzled by keeping it continually fixed upon
the small stikes of their work, do willlingly hold before them some fair
Emerald, that by beholding it from time to time, they may be recreated in it is
greenesse, and relieve their weakened sight. So in this Press of business,
which my function daily draws upon me, I have still some proiects of certain
treatises of piety, which at my leisure I look upon, to reuieue and vnwearie
my mind.

Howbeit, I do not profess my self a writer; for the dullness of my spirit,
and the condition of my, life, exposed to the service and approach of many,
would not permit me so to be. Wherefore I have written very little, and yet
have published less, and to complie with the Council and will of my friends,
I will tell thee what I have written to the end that thou may not attribute
the praises of another man's labors to him, who of himself deserves them not.

It is now 19. years ago, that being at Thonon a little town situated upon
the Lack of Geneua, which by little and little began at that time to be
converted to the Catholic faith. The Minister, Enemy of the Church, cried all
up and down, that the Catholic Article of the Real Presence of our Saviors
body in the Eucharist, did distroye the Symbol and the Analogy of Faith (for
he was glad to mouth this word ANALOGY not understood of his Auditors, that
he might appear learned) and upon this the rest of the Catholic Preachers,
with whom I was, pressed me to write some thing in refutation of this vanity;
I did what seemed fitting, framing a brief meditation upon the Creed to
confirm the Truth, and all the copies were dispersed in this Diocese, where
now I find not one of them.

Soon after his Highness came over the Mountains, and finding the Bailiwike
of Cablaies, Gaillard, and Ternier, which are about Geneua, well disposed to
receive the Catholic faith, which had been banished thence by force of wars
and reuoults, about 70. years past, he resolved to reestablish the exercise
thereof in all the Parishes, and to abolish the exercise of Heresy: And
whereas on the one side this great Happiness had many obstacles, according to
the considerations, which are called reasons of state, and yet on the other
side, diverse, as yet not well instructed in the truth, made resistance against
this so much desired establishment, his Highness surmounted the first
difficulty by the invincible constancy of his Zeal to the Catholic
Religion, and the second, by an extraordinary sweetness and prudence. For he
made the chief and most obstinate be called together, and made a speech unto
the^ with so lovely and pressing an eloquence that in a manner being all
vanquished by the gentle violence of his fatherly love toward the^ deposed the
arms of their obstinacy at his feet, and their souls into the hands of the
Church.

License me my dear Reader, I pray thee, to speak this word by the by, one
might praise many rich actions of this great Prince, amongst which I see the
proof of his unspeakable valor, and military knowledge, which he makes now
admired through all Europe. But for my part, I cannot sufficiently extol the
establishment of the Catholic Religion in these three Bailiwikes, which I have
even now mentioned, having discovered in it so many marks of piety suited with
so great a varierie of actions of Prudence, Constancy, Magnanimity, Justice,
and mildness. Me thought, I discerned in this little Piece, as in an
abridgment, all that is praised in Princes, who have in times past with most
fervor striuen to advance Gods an the Church her glory. The stage was but
little, but the actions long. And like as that ancient Artist was never so
much prized for his great Pieces, as he was admired for making a shipe of
Yuorie, stored with all her furniture, in so little a form, that the wings of
a be did cover it: So I esteem more that which this great Prince did at that
time, in this small corner of his Dominions, then many more specious actions,
which others extol to the heavens.

Now by this means the victorious ensigns of the Cross were replanted in all
the ways and public places of those quarters: and whereas a little before,
there had been one erected very solemnly at Ennemassa near unto Geneua, a
certain Minister made a little treatise against the honor thereof, containing
a sharp and venomous inuectiue, to which therefore it was deemed fit to make
answer: And my Lord Claudius de Granier my Predecessor, whose memory is in
benediction, did impose the burden upon me, according to the power which he
had over me, who beheld him not only as my Bishope, but also as a holy servant
of God. I made therefore this answer under this Title, A Defense of the Banner
of the Cross, and dedicated it to his Highness, partly to testify unto him
my most humble submission, and partly to render him some small thanksgiving for
the care which he took of the Church in those parts.

Now a while ago this Defense is reimprinted under the prodigious tittle of
PANTHALOGIE, or Treasure of the Cross: a Title whereof I never dreamed, as in
truth I am not a man of that study and leisure, nor yet of that memory, to be
able to put together so many pieces of worth in one book as it might bear the
name of TREASVRE, or PANTHALOGIE, besides that I abhor such insolent
Frontispices.

A Sot, or senseless Creature we him call,
Who makes his Portall greater then his Hall.
In the year 1602. the obsequies of the Magnanimous Prince Philipe Emanuel of
Loraine, Duke of Mercury, who had done so many brave exploits upon the Turk
in Hungary, that all Christianity was bound to conspire to honor his
memory, were celebrated at Paris, I being there. But above all the rest, Lady
Marie of Luxembourg his widow, did for her part all that her heart, and the
Love of the dead could suggest unto her, to solemnize his funerals. And
because my Father, my Grand Father, and great Grand Father, had been brought up
Pages to the most illustrious and most excellent Princes of Martigues, his
Father, and Predecessors, she eyed me as an hereditarie servant of the house,
and made choice of me to make the funeral Sermon, in this so great a
celebritie, where there were not only diverse Cardinals and Prelates, but
certain Princes also, Princesses, Marshalls of France, knights of the Order,
yea and the Court of Parleament in Body. I made then this funeral Sermon, and
pronounced it in this so great an assemble, in the great Church of Paris; And
for so much as it contained a true abridgment of the heroical feats of the
deceased Prince. I did easily cause it to be imprinted at the request of the
widowe-Princesse, whose request was to me a law. Now I dedicated that Piece to
Madame the Duchess of Vandome, as yet a girl, and a very young Princess, yet
one, in whom was already apparently seen, the strains of that excellent
virtue and piety, which at this day shine in her, worthy of the extraction and
and breeding of so denote and pious a mother.

While this Sermon was in the press, I heard that I was made Bishope, so that
I came presently hither to be consacrated, and to begin my Residence, and upon
it, was proposed unto me how necessary it was to advertise the Confeslariouses
of some important points: for this reason I wrote 25. aduertisments, which I
caused to be printed, to get them more esily dispersed amongst those to whom I
directed them, but since, they have been reimprinted in diverse places.

Three or four years after I put out the Introduction to a deuote life, upon
the occasion, and in the manner which I have put down in the Preface thereof
touching which I have nothing to say to thee, my dear Reader, save only,
that though this little book have generally had a gracious and gentle
acceptance, yea even amongst the most grave Prelates and Doctors of the Church,
yet escaped it not the rude censure of some, who did not merely blame me, but
bitterly taunted me in public, for that I tell Philothe that dancing is an
action indifferent in it self, and that for recreations sake one may make
Quodlibets; and I kowing the manner of these censures, I praise their
intention, which I think was good. Yet should I have desired, that they had
pleased to have considered, that the first proposition is drawn out of the
common and true doctrine of the most holy and learned Divines, which I put
down for such as live in the world, and Court: that withal, I do carefully
incultate the extreme dangers which are found in dancing: and touching the
second proposition it is not mine, but that admirable king's S. Lewis, a
Doctor worthy to be followed, in conducting Courtiers to a deuote life. For I
believe, if they had weighed this, their Charity and discretion had never
permitted their Zeal, how rigorous and austere soever, to have armed their
indignation against me.

And to this purpose, my dear reader, I conjure thee to be gracious and
favorable unto me in reading this Treatise: and though thou should find the
style a little (and a little only I assure my self it shall be) different
from that which I used in writing unto Philothie, and both of them much
different from that which I used in the defense of the Cross, know that in
nine-teene years one learnes and vnlearnes many things; that the language of
the wars differs from that of Peace, and that a man uses one manner of speech
to young Prentises, an other to old iorneymen.

My purpose is here to speak to souls that are advanced in devotion; for you
must know, that we have in this town a congregation of young maids and
widows, who being retired from the world, do live unanimously in God's
service, under the protection of his most holy mother; and as their piety and
purity have often times given me great consolations, so have I striuen to
return them the like, by a frequent distribution of the holy word, which I
have announced unto them, as well in public sermons, as in spiritual
conferences, yea and that continually in the presence of diverse Religious men,
and people of great piety, whence I was often to treat of the most delicate
feelings of piety, passing beyond that which I had said unto Philothie. And I
owe a good part of that which now I communicate unto thee, to this blessed
assembly, because she that is the mother of them, and does rule, knowing that
I was writing upon this subject, and yet that scarcely was I able to accomplish
it without Gods very special assistance, and their continual solicitation,
she took a continual care, to pray and make me be prayed for to this end,
and holily coniured me to gather together all the odd ends of leisure which
she judged might be spared here and there from the press of my encumbrances,
and to employe them in this. And because I bear a great respect to this good
soul, she had, God knows, no little power to animate mine in this occasion; I
began indeed long ago, to think of writing of holy Love, but that thought
came far short of that, which this occasion caused to be produced, an
occasion which I declare unto you so nakedly, and sincerely, to the imitation
of the Ancients, that you may know that I wite only upon occasion, and that I
may find you more favorable. The Pagans held, that Phidras never represented
any thing so perfectly as the DIVINITY; nor Apelles, as Alexander. One is not
always alike happy; If I fall short in this Treatise, let thy goodness fly
home; and God bless thy reading.

To this end I have dedicated this work to the Mother of dilection, and to the
Father of cordial Love, as I dedicated the Introduction to the Heavenly Child,
who is the Savior of Lovers and the Love of the saved. Certes, as women while
they are strong and able to bring forth their children with ease, choose
commonly their worldly friends to be their Godfathers. But when their
feebleness and indisposition makes their delivery difficile and dangerous,
they inuoke the Saints of Heaven, and vow to make their children be christened
by some poor body, or by some deuote person in the name of S. JOSEPH, S.
FRANCIS OF ASSICIA, S. FRANCIS OF PAVLA, S. NICHOLAS, or to some other of the
Blessed, who may obtain of God their safe delivery, and that the child may be
borne alive. So I, while I was not yet Bishope, having more leisure and less
apprehension to write, I dedicated my little works to Princes of the earth; but
now being ouercharged with my charge, and having a thousand impediments. I
consecrate all to the Princes of Heaven, to the end they may obtain for me the
lig^t which is requisite, and that, if so it may plea^ the Divine will, these
my writings may have a birth profitable and fruitful.

Thus, my dear Reader, I beseech God to bless thee, and to enrich thee with
his love. Mean while from my very heart I submit all my writings, my words and
actions to the correction of the most holy Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman
Church, knowing that she is the Pillar, and soliditie of truth, wherein she ca^
neither be deceived nor deceive us; and that none ca^ have God for his Father,
who will not have this Church for his Mother. ANNESS^, the day of the most
loving Apostles S. PETER and S. PAVLE 1616.

Blessed be God.
THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS CONTAINED IN this Treatise. The first number shows
the Chapter, The second the Page.
THE TABLE OF THE FIRST BOOK. CONTA^NING A Preparation to the whole Treatise.
THat for the beauty of humane nature, God gave the ^^uernment of all the
faculties of the soul (...) the will. Chap. 1. page 1. How the w^^ diversely
gouernes the powers of the soul. Chap. 2. page 4. How the will gouerns the
^suall appetite. Cha. 3. page 7. That love rules over all i^ affections, and
passions, yea gouerns the will, albe^^ the will has also a dominion over it.
Chap. 4. page 12. Of the affections of the will. Chap. 5. page 15 How the Love
of God does rule over other Loves. Chap. 6. page 19 A description of Love in
general. chap 7. page 22 What that co^ueniencie is, which does excite love.
chapter 8. 28 That love tends to union. chap. 9. page 32 That the union which love
pretends is spiritual. chap. 10. page 35. That there are two portions in the
soul, and how, chap. 11. page 44. That in these 2 portions of the soul there
are found 4. different degrees of reason. chap. 12. page 49 The difference of
loves chap. 13. page 53 That charity ought to be named love. chap. 14. p. 55
Of the conueniencie betwixt God and man. chapter 15. p. 57 That we have a natural
inclination to love God above all things. chap. 16. 61 That we have not
naturally the power to love God above all things. chap. 17. 64 That the
natural inclination which we have to love God, is not without profit. chap.
18. 67
THE TABLE OF THE Second Book. THE HISTORY OF THE GENEration, or heavenly
birth of Divine Love.
THat the divine perfections are but one only, yet an infinite perfection.
chap. 1. page 71 Touching the divine providence in general. chap. 3. p. 79 Of
the supernatural providence which God, uses toward reasonable creaturs.
chap. 4. page 85 That the heavenly providence has provided man of a most
abundant Redemption. cha. 5. 90 Of certain special favors exercised by the
divine providence in the Redemption of man. chap. 6. 93 How admirable the
divine providence is in the diversity of graces given to men, chap. 7. 97 How
much God desires, we should love him, chap. 8. 100 How the eternal love of God
does prevent our hearts with his inspirations to the end we might love him.
chap. 9. page 104 How we often times repulse the inspiration, and refuse to
love. chap. 10. 108 That the divine bountie's will is that we should have a
most excellent love chap. 11. 112 That divine inspirations leave us in our
liberty to follow, or repulse them. chap. 12. 116 Of the first feelings of
Love which divine inspirations cause in the soul before she yet receive faith.
chapter 13. 121 Of the feeling of the Divine love which is had by faith. chap. 14.
126 Of the great feeling of love which we receive by holy hope. chap. 15. 130
How love is practiced in hope. chapter 16. 133 That the Love which is practiced in
hope, is very good, though imperfect. cha. 17. 137 That love is exercised in
penance, and first, that there are diverse sorts of penance. chapter 18. 141 That
Penance without love is imperfect. chapter 19 146 How there is mixture of Love and
sorrow in Contrition. chap. 20. page 148 How our Savior loving inspirations
do assist and accompany us to faith and charity. chap. 21. 154 A short
description of Charity. cha. 22. 159
THE TABLE OF THE Third Book. OF THE PROGRESS AND Perfection of Love.
THat holy love may be augmented still more and more in every of us. chap. 1.
page 162 How easy our Savior has made the increase of love. chapter 2. page 166
How a soul in Charity makes progress in it. chap. 3. page 170 Touching holy
perseverance in sacred Love. chapter 4. 178 That the happiness to die in heavenly
Charity, is a special gift of God. chap. 5. 182 That we cannot attain to a
perfect union with God in this mortal life. chapter 6. 186 That the Charity of
Saints in this mortal life does equalize, yea sometimes pass that of the
Blessed. chap. 7. page 189 Of the incomparable love of the mother of God our B.
Lady. chap. 8. 191 A Preparation to the discourse of the union of the Blessed
with God. chap. 9. 196 That the precedent desire shall much increase the union
of the Blessed with God. chapter 10. 200 Of the Union of the Blessed souls with
God, in seeing the Divinity. chap. 11. 202 Of the eternal union of the
blessed spirits with God, in the vision of the eternal birth of the Son of
God chap. 12. page 206 Of the union of the Blessed with God in the vision of
the Holy Ghost's production chapter 13. 209 That the Light of Glory, shall
concur to the union of the Blessed with God, chap. 14. 213 That there shall
be different degrees of the union of the Blessed with God. chap. 15. 215
THE TABLE OF THE Fourth Book. OF THE DECAY, OR RVINE of Charity.
THat while we are in this mortal life we may loose the love of God. chap 1.
page 219 How the soul waxes cool in holy Love. chap. 2. page 223 H^w we
forsake heauen^y love for that of Creaturs. chap. 3. page 227 That heavenly
love is lost in a moment. chap. 4. page 232 That the sole cause of the decay
and slackening of Charity, is in the creaturs will. chap. 5. page 235 That we
ought to acknowledge the love we bear to God, to be from God. chap. 6. page
239 That we must avoid all curiosity, and humbly repose in Gods most wise
providence. chap 7. page 244. An exhortation to the affectionat submission,
which we are to make to the Decrees of the divine providence chap. 8. page 249
Of a certain remainder of love which oftentimes stays in the soul, t at has
lost Charity. chap. 9. page 254 How dangerous this imperfect love is. chap 10.
page 258 A means to discern this imperfect Love. chap. 11. page 260
THE TABLE OF THE Fifth Book. OF THE TWO PRINCIPAL EXERcises of holy love,
performed by complacence and benevolence.
OF the sacred Complacence of love, and first in what it consists. chap. 1.
page 264 How by holy complacence we are made as little children, at our
Saviors breasts. chap. 2. page 269 That a holy complacence gives our heart to
God, and makes us feel a continual desire in enjoying him. chap. 3. page 274
Of a loving condoling, by which the complacence of love is better declared,
chap. 4. 280 Of the commiseration and Complacence of love in our Saviors
Passion. chap. 5. 284 Of the Love of Benevolence which we exercise toward our
Savior by way of desire. chap. 6. 288 How the desire to exalte and magnify
God, does separate us from inferior pleasures, and makes us attentive to the
Divine perfections. chap. 7. 291 How holy Benevolence does produce the Divine
well-beloueds Praises. chap. 8. 294 How Benevolence makes us inuoke all
Creaturs to God's Praise. chap. 9. 300 How the desire we have to praise God
makes us aspire to heaven. chap. 10. 303 How we practice the Love of
Benevolence in the praises which our Savior and his mother give to God. chap.
11. 307 Of the sovereign praise which God gives unto himself, and how we
exercise Benevolence in it. chap. 12. page 312
THE TABLE OF THE Sixth Book. OF THE EXERCISES OF HOLY Love in Prayer.
A Description of mystical Divinity, which is no other thing then prayer.
chap. 1. page 317 Of Meditation the first degree of Prayer, or mystical
Divinity. chap. 2. 323 A description of contemplation, and touching the first
difference that there is betwixt it and meditation. chap. 3. page 329 That love
in this life takes his origin, but not his excellency, from the knowledge of
God. chap. 4. 331 The second difference betwixt meditation and contemplation.
chap. 5. 336 That we do contemplate without pain, which it a third difference
betwixt it and meditation. chap. 6. 340 Of the loving recollection of the Soul
in Contemplation. chap. 7. 345 Of the repose of a soul recollected in her
well-beleeued. chap. 8. 350 How this sacred repose is practiced. chap. 9. 354
Of diverse degrees of this repose, and how it is to be conserved. chap. 10. 357
A continuation of the discourse touching the diverse degrees of holy repose, and
of any excellent abnegation of a man's self practiced therein chap. 11. 360 Of
the melting and liquifaction of the soul in God. cha. 12. page 365 Of the
wound of love. chap. 13. 370 Of some other means by which love wounds the
heart. chap. 14. 375 Of the amourous languishment of the heart wounded with
love. chap. 15. 380
THE TABLE OF THE Seventh Book. OF THE UNION OF THE SOVLE with her God which
is Perfected in Prayer.
HOw love units the soul to God in Prayer. chap. 1. page 388 Of the diverse
degrees of the holy union which is made in Prayer. chapter 2. page 395 Of the
sovereign degree of union, by suspension or rauishment. chapter 3. 400 Of Rapture,
and of the first species of the same. chap. 4. page 406. Of the second Species
of Rapture. ch 5. 409 Of the signs of a good Rapture, and of the third species
of the same. chapter 6. 412 How Love is the life of the soul, with a continuation
of the extaticall life. chapter 7. 417 An admirable e^^^ertation of S. Paul to the
extaticall and supernatural life. chapter 8. 420 Of the supreme effect of
affectiue love, which, is the death of Lovers, and first of such as died in
love. chap. 9. page 425 Of some that died by and for Divine Love. chap. 10.
page 429. How some of the heavenly Lovers died even of Love. chapter 11 page 431. A
wonderful history of the death of a gentleman who died of Love upon the
Mount-Oliuet. chap. 12. page 435. That the Sacred Virgin mother of God died of
the love of her Son. chap. 13. 441 That the Glorious virgin died of an
extremely sweet and calm love. chap. 14. 445
THE TABLE OF THE Eight Book. OF THE LOVE OF CONFORMITY, by which we unite
our Wills to the Will of God, signified unto us by his Commandments, Counsels
and inspirations.
OF the love of Conformity proceeding from holy Complacence. chap. 1. page 451
Of the conformity of Submission which proceeds from the Love of Benevolence.
chapter 2. 455 How we are to conform our selves to the Divine will, which is
called the signified will. chap. 3. 458 Of the Conformity of our will to the
will which God has to save us. chapter 4. 462 Of the Conformity of our will to
Gods will signified in his Commandments. chap. 5. 465 Of the Conformity of
our will to Gods, signified unto us by his Counsels. chap. 6. 469 That Gods
will signified in the commandments, does move us forwards to the love of
Counsels. chap. 7. page 472. That the contempt of Evangelical Counsels, is a
great sin. chap. 8. 478 A continuation of the precedent discourse: how every
one ought to love, though not to practice, the Evangelical Counsels, and yet
how every one is to practice what he is able. chap. 9. 482 How we are to
conform our selves to Gods will signified unto us by inspirations: and first
of the truth of the means by which God enspires us. chap. 10. 487 Of the union
of our will to Gods in the inspirations which are given for the extraordinary
practice of virtues; and of perseverance in ones vocation, the first mark of
the inspiration. chap. 11. 491 Of the union of Man's will to Gods in the
inspirations, which are contrary to the ordinary Laws: and of the peace and
tranquillity of heart, the second mark of Inspiration. chap. 12. 497 The
third Mark of the Inspiration, which is holy obedience to the Church and
Superiors. chap. 13. 501 A short method to know Gods will. chap. 14. 505
THE TABLE OF THE Ninth Book. OF LOVE OF SVBMISSION, Whereby our will is
united to Gods.
OF the union of our will, to the will of God, which is the will of good
pleasure. chap. 1. page 509 That the union of our will to the will of God, is
principally caused by tribulations. chap. 2. 513 Of the union of our will to
the Divine will, in spiritual afflictions by resignation. chap. 3. 518 Of the
union of our will to Gods will by Indifferency. chap. 4. 521 That holy
indifferency is extended to all things chapter 5. 525 Of the practice of the
loving indifferency, in things belonging to the service of God. chap. 6. 528
Of the indifferency which we are to have in our Spiritual advancement. chap.
7. 533 How we are to unite our will with Gods, in the permission of sin.
chap. 8. 539 How the purity of indifferency is practiced in the actions of
holy Love. chap. 9. 542 A means to discover when we chang in the matter of
this holy Love. chap. 10. 545 Of the perplexity of the heart in Love, which
doubts whether it please the Beloved. chap. 11. 549 How the soul amidst these
interior anguishes, knows not the Love she bears to God, and of the Lovely
death of the will. chap. 12. 553. How the will being dead to it self, lives
entirely to Gods will. chap. 13. 557 An explanation of that which has been
said touching the decease of our will. chap. 14. 561 Of the most excellent
exercise a man can make in the interior and exterior troubles of this life,
In sequel of the indifferency and death of the will chap. 15. 565 Of the
perfect stripping of the soul united to Gods will. chap. 16. 570
THE TABLE OF THE Tenth Book. OF THE COMMANDMENT OF loving God above all
things.
OF the sweetness of the Commandment, which God gave us, to love him above
all things. chapter 1. 5^5 That this Divine Commandment of Love tends to Heaven
yet is given to the faithful in this world. chap. 2: page 580. How,
notwithstanding, that the whole heart is employed in sacred Love, yet one may
Love God diversely, and also many other things together with him. chap. 3. 582
Of two degrees of perfection, in which this Commandment may be kept in this
mortal life. chap. 4. 387 Of two other degrees of greater perfection, by which
we may Love God above all things. chap. 5. 592 That the Love of God above all
things is common to all Lovers. chap. 6. 598 An illustration of the former
chapter. chap. 7. 601 A memorable history wherein is more clearly seen in
what the force and Excellency of holy love consists. cha. 8. page 605. A
confirmation of that which has been said by a notable comparison. chap 9. 612
That we are to Love the Divine Goodness, soueraignely more then our selves.
chap. 10. 617 How holy Charity brings forth the love of our neighbor. chap.
11. 620 How love produces Zeal. chap. 12. 624 That God is Jealous of us.
chap. 13. 626 Of the Zeal or Jealousy which we have toward our Savior.
chap. 14. 632 An advise for the direction of holy Zeal. chap. 15. 637 That the
examples of diverse saints which seemed to exercise their Zeal with Ang^r,
make nothing against the advice of the precedent Chapter, chap. 16. 643 How our
Savior practiced all the most Excellent acts of Love. chap. 17. 650
THE TABLE OF THE Eleauenth book. OF THE SOVEREIGN AVTHORITIE which sacred
love holds over all the virtues, actions and perfections of the soul.
HOw much all the virtues are aggreeable unto God chap. 1. page 656 That Divine
Love, makes the virtues more agreeable to God by excellency then they are in
their own nature. chap 2. page 661 That there are some virtues which Divine
Love does raise to a higher degree of excellency, then others. chap. 3. page
665 That Divine Love does yet more excellently sanctify the v^rtues, which are
pracitsed by his ordinance and Comman^ment. chap. 4. page 668 How sacred ^^ue
does spread it is worth through all the o her virtues, which by that means are
^erfected. chap. 5 page 972 Of the exc^llent worth which holy Love bestows upon
the actions whi h issue from it self, and to those which proceed from other
virtue s. chap 6. page 6^^ That perfect virtues are never one without the other.
chap. 7. page 682 How Charity contains all virtues. chap 8. page 683 That
virtues have their worth from sacred Love. chapter 9. page 693 A digression upon
the imperfection of the Pagans virtues. c ap. 10. page 697 How human actions
are without worth, being without Gods Love. chap. 11. page 7^4 How holy Love
returning into the soul, does revive al^ the works w ich sin had sl yne.
chap 12. ^09 How we are to reduce all the exercise of all the virtue s, and all
our actions to ^oly Love chap 13. ^^5. The practice of that which ^ath been
sated in the precedent chap er. chap. 14. 19 How Charity contains in it the
gift of the holy Ghost chap. 15. 722 Of the loving fear of spouses, a
continuation of the discourse alrea i^ begune. chap 10. 726 How scru^le Fea^t
remains together with holy Love. chap. 17. 730 How ^^^e makes use of natural,
servile, and mercinarie Fear. chap. 18. 734 How sacred Love contains the 12
fruits of the holy Ghost, together with the 8. beatitudes of the Gospel.
chap. 19. 740 How divine Love makes use of all the passions and affections of
the soul and reduces them to her obedience. chap 2^. 744 That Sadness is
almost always unprofitable, yea profi^e, to the service of ho y Love. chap 21.
page 750.
THE TABLE OF THE Twelfth book. CONTAINING CERTAIN ADVISES for the progress
of the soul in holy Love.
THat our progress in holy ^oue does not depend of our natural complexion. c
a^ 1. page 757 That we are to have a continual desire to love. ch 2. 7^9 That
to have the desire of sacred Love, we are to out off all other desires. chap 3.
page 762 That our lawful occasions do not hinder us to practice Divine Love.
chap. 4. 764 A Delightful example upon this subject. chap 5. 767 That we are
to employ all the occasions that are presented, in the practice of Divine Love.
chap. 6. 768 That we must have a care to do our actions very pe fectly. chap
7. 770 A general means whereby to apply our works to Gods service. chap. 8.
771 Of certain other means, whereby we may apply our works more
particularly to the Love of God. chapter 9. 776 An exhortation to the sacrifice
which we are to make to God of our free will chap. 10. 780 Of the motives we
have to holy Love. c^ap. 11. 784 A profitable met^ode whereby we may employ
these methodes chap. 2. 786 That the Mount of Caluarie is the true. Academie of
Love. chap. 13. 788
APPROBATIO.
Tra^tatem hunc De Am ^^et, ab ill^^trissimo ac Reuerendissimo D. D. FRANC.
SALESTO Episcopo Geneuensi conse iptum primo Gallice, and in An^licanum ia
deinde sermonem studio R D. CARRET Sacerdotis t a^luctum, ego infrascrip^us
perlegi, nimisque in eo inuem quod Cat^olicae doctrinae conse taneum non sit^
quinimo totus ardet, ign^mq^e perpetuo diuinum spirat, vt e coe^^ Gallicano,
nobis etiam diuisis ab rbe sidus hoc aff^lgere, plurimum ga^d^^ de ^em is, I a
^entio Datu^ Sent 9 1630.

EDMVNDVS STRA^FORDVS, S. Theol. Professor.

APPROBATIO.
Ego infra scriptus test^r (...) p^^l^g^^s^ versionem, cui titulus, A treatise
of the Love of ^od, Written in french by B. FRANCIS DE SALIS, Bishop and Prince
of Geneva, translated into Engli^h by M^LES CAR Priest of the English College
of D^W y, in eaque nihil deprehendesse contra fidem Catholicam, aut bonos
mores. Datum anno Domini 163^ Sept. 19.

GVILIELMVS HYDARVS Professor Philosophiae in Collegio Anglorum Duaceno.

APPROBATIO.
Hic liber, cui titul is e^t, de am^re Dei, Gallico sermon Conscriptus a
Reuere^t^s. D. D. FRANCISCO DE SALES, Episcopo Geneuensi fideliter translatus
est in Anglicanam lin^uam pot R. D. Milonem, alias Thomam Ca^ eum, vt fi^e
dignorum testimonio mihi constirit. ^ui ^am linguam ^oderunt, nec ^abet aliquid
fidei Catholicae, aut bonis moribus contra iu^: qua propter vtiliter excuderut.
Actum Duaci die 23 Septembris 1^30.

GEORGIUS COLVENERIVS S. Theol. Doctor. Regius ordinariusque Professor.
Collegiatae Ecclesiae S. Petri Exaepositus and Canonicus, Acad. Du^c. Cancel.
and librorum Censor.

THE TRANSLATOVR TO THE READER.
THough it be true (courtuous Reader) that where honor is not aimed at,
censure is not dreaded; yet that I might neither wrong my author, nor come
short in any point of civil regard to thee, I thought good, partly to implore
thy favor, partly to facilitate thy reading, by the ensuing aduertisements. Be
pleased therefore to know, that our Author, being one of the greatest Divines
of his time in France, speaks now and then in school terms and formalities,
which our English will scarcely bear, especially in the highest and hardest
matters of divinity, as predestination, the Trinity etc. And again I
desired, that so worthy an Author, should rather be heard speak in his own
words, then in my translation, esteeming FAITH, not SMOOTHNESS the grace
thereof. Hence as far forth as the language would permit, I have rendered his
own words, turning BOVNTIE Bounty (say the like of diverse other words) which
notwithstanding in the rigor of the school, should often rather have been
turned GOODNESS, as being the object of the divine Will Hence also, AMITY I
have translated, friendship, which following the approved custom of the
schools, should rather have been turned, LOVE, in the 212. page where it
signifies the holy Ghost. But the learned Reader, will favorably accomodate
them according to the matter, and not reprove such words as necessity, or
fidelity, made me admit, though they have not yet gotten so free and known
course in our English tongue. If I put for the rest of the faults, in sense or
words, mine own little skill, and less experience; and for the faults in the
print (especially comma's, which as they are frequent, and serve diverse times
for parentheses, so being omitted, or displaced, in lieu of clearing, they
violate, or at least trouble the smoothness of the periode) the Printers
total ignorance in the tongue (so that he will put as soon, TVB for, but, as
BUT) my excuse will be as full and entire, as sincere. Some of the chief
faults you may find in the end of the Book; the rest, your discretion and
courtisie, will supply and pardon. Adieu.

SALES an SAL-CS Francisce vocandus. Vtrumque Hoc tibi praeslat AVVS: hoc tibi
praestat AMOR Whence this burning Globe, Love simbole! Love did send it. Whence
this burning Book, Love Maister-peece Love pend it.



THE FIRST BOOK CONTAINING A PREPARATION TO THE WHOLE TREATISE.
THAT FOR THE BEAVTIE of humane nature, God gave the Government of all the
faculties of the soul to the will. THE FIRST CHAPTER.
I. UNION established in distinction, breeds Order, Order produces
Conueniencie, or Proportion; and from the Conueniencie of things entire and
accomplished, rises Beauty. An Army is then said to be Fair, when it is
composed of parts so ranged in order, that their distinction is reduced to
that proportion, which they ought to have together for the making of one only
army. That Music be pleasant, the voices must not only be neat, clear,
and well distinguished, but also so combined betwixt them selves, that thereof
be made a due Sound and Harmony by means of the Union which is in
Distinction, and the Distinction which is in the Union of voices: which is not
unfitly termed an According Discord, or rather, a Discording Accord.

2. Now as the Angelical S. THOMAS, following the great SAINT DENIS, says
excellently well, Beauty, and Goodness, though in some thing they agree, yet
are they not for all that one, and the same thing: for Good is that which
pleases the appetite, and will; Fair that which pleases the understanding or
knowledge: or else, Good is that, whose fruition delights us; Fair that,
whose knowledge is agreeable unto us. For which cause in proper speech, we do
never attribute corporal Beauty, but to objects of two senses, which are the
most capable, and most serviceable to the understanding, to wit sight, and
hearing: so that we do not say: behold Fair odours, or Fair savors: yet
do we customarily say behold Fair voices, and Fair colors.

3. Fair, then being called Fair, because the knowledge thereof does delight,
it is requisite that besides the Union, and Distinction of Integrity, Order
and Conueniencie of parts; there be also Splendour, and Light in abundance, to
the end that it may be intelligible, and visible. Voices to be Fair, must be
clear, and neat; discourses, intelligible; colors, glittering and shining;
obscurity, shades, and darkness are deformed and do disfigure all things:
because in them, nothing is intelligible; neither Order, Distinction, Union nor
Conueniencie: which caused S. DENIS to say, that God as Sovereign Beauty, is
author of the fair Conuenie^cie, Luster, and Good Grace, which is found in all
things, making appear in form of light, the distributions and diuisio^s of
his rays; by means whereof, all things are made fair, requiring, that for the
establishment of Beauty, there should be, Conueniencie, Light, and Good Grace.

4. Certes THEOTIME, Beauty is without effect, unprofitable, and dead, if
Light, and Splendour, should not give her life, and efficacy; whence we term
colors lively when they have light, and luster.

5. But as touching animated and living things, their Beauty is not complete
without a Good Grace, which adds to Conueniencie of perfect parts, wherein
Beauty consists, Conueniencie of Motion, Gesture, and Action, which are as
the life, and soul of Beauty in living things: so in the sovereign Beauty
of our Lord God, we do acknowledge Union, yea unity of essence, in the
distinction of persons, with an infinite Light, together with an
incomprehensible Concurrence of all the perfections of actions and motions,
soueraignely comprised, and as one would say, excellently joined and added in
the only, and most simple perfection of the pure divine act, which is God
himself, immutable, unvariable, as elsewhere we will show.

6. God therefore having a will to make all things Good and Fair, reduced the
multitude, and distinction of the same, to a perfect Unity, and as man would
say, brought them all, to a Monarchy, making a subordination of one thing to
an other, and of all things to himself, the sovereign Monarch. He disgested
all the members into one body, under one head: of many persons, he forms a
Family: of many Families, a Town: of many Towns, a Province: of many
Provinces, a Kingdom; putting the whole Kingdom under the government of one
only King: so THEOTIME, amongst the innumerable multitude and variety of
actions, motions, feelings, inclinations, habits, passions, faculties, and
powers which are in man, God has established a natural Monarchy in the will,
which does rule, and command all that is found in this little world. And God
seems to have said to the will, as Pharao said to Joseph: Thou shall govern
my house, all the people shall obaye thy command; without it none shall move.
But certes this power of the will is practiced in a far different manner.

How the will diversely gouernes the powers of the soul. CHAPTER. II.
THe Householder does Direct his Family, wife, children, and servants by his
ordidances, and commandments, to which they are obliged to obaye; though they
have absolute power not to obaye: but if he have servants, and slaves, them he
rules by force, which they have no power to co^tradict; but his horses, oxen,
and mules, he does manage by industry; binding, brideling, spurring, shutting
up, or giving the bridle.

2. Certes the will does govern the power of our exterior motions as a
servant, or slave: for unless some external thing do hinder, they are never
deficient in obedience. We open, and shut our mouth, move our tongue, our
hands, feet, eyes, and all the members, wherein the motion of this power is
conversant, without resistance, according to our wish and will.

3. But as for our senses, and touching the Nutritive, Augmentatiue and
Generatiue Faculties, we cannot with like ease govern them, but we must employ
therein industry, and art. If a slave be called, he comes; if he be willed to
stay, he stays; But we must not expect this obedience from a Sparrow-hauke,
or Faulcon; he that desires she should return to the hand, must show her the
lewre; if he would keep her quiet, he must hood her. We bid our boy turn to
the right or left hand, and he does it; but to make a horse turn so, one must
make use of the bridle; We must not THEOTIME command our eyes not to see, our
ears not to hear, our hands not to touch, our stomach not to digest, or our
body not to increase or breed; for these faculties not being intelligible,
are not capable of obedience. None can add a cubite to his stature. RACHEL
desired, but could not conceive. We eat often without nourishment, or grouth;
he that will prevail with these powers, must use industry. A Physician which
has to do with a Child in the cradle does never command him any thing: but
only gives order to the Nource to appointe such and such things, or else
peradventure he prescribs, that she shall eat this or that meat, take this or
that potio^, which dispersing it is qualities in the milk, and the milk in the
childs belly, the Physician does accomplish his will in this little weakling,
who has not even the power to think of it. It is not the way verily to impose
abstinence, sobriety, or continency upon the palate, stomach, or belly; but
the hands must be commanded not to administer to the mouth meat and drink,
but in such, and such a measure; we must keep short the power which does
advance the objects, and subjects, and take away the nourishment which does
fortify, as reason shall require. If we desire our eyes should not see, we
must divert, or cover, and shut them up in their natural hoode, and by these
means, one may bring them to the point which the will aims at. It is thus
THEOTIME that our Savior says, there are some, which are such for the
Kingdom of heaven, that is, which are not such by natural impotencie, but by
a certain industry, which the will uses to contain the^ within the limits
of holy continency. It were folly to command a horse that he should not wax
fat, that he grow not, that he should not kick; to effect all this, and to
break him; one must not command him, but his prouender.

4. The will does also exercise a certain kind of power over the Understanding
and Memory; for of the diversity of things which the Understanding has a
power to understand, and the Memory, a power to remember, the will does
determine those, to which she will have her faculties apply them selves; or
from which divert themselves. It is true she cannot manage, or range them so
absolutely as she does the hands, feet or tongue, by reason of sensitive
faculties (namely the Fantasy, which does not obaye the will with a prompt,
and infallible obedience) which are necessarily required to the operations of
the Understanding and Memory: notwithstanding the will does move, employ, and
apply these faculties at her pleasure, though not so firmly and constantly,
that the light and variable Fantasy, does not often divert, and distract them,
so that as the Apostle cries out, I do not the good which I desire, but the
evil which I hate, so we are often compelled to think not the good which we
love, but the evil which we hate.

How the will gouerns the sensual appetite. CHAPTER. III.
1. THe Will then THEOTIME bears rule over the Memory, Understanding, and
Fantasy, not by force, but by authority, so that she is not infallibly
obayed, like as the Master of the Family is nor always obayed by his
children, and servants. The like is touching the sensatiue appetite, which as
S. AUGUSTINE says, is called in us sinners concupiscence, and remains
subject to the will, and Understanding, as the wife to her Husband, because as
it was said to the woman; Thou shall return to thy Husband, who shall govern
thee; so was it said to Cain, that his appetite should return home to him,
and that he should master it: And no other thing is meant by, Return to man,
then to submit, and subject it self unto him. O man says S. BERNARD, it is
in thy power if thou will, to bring thine enemy so to be thy servant, that all
things should succeed well with thee: Thy appetite is under thee, and thou
shall dominere over it. Thy enemy can move in thee, the feeling of temptation;
but it is in thy power, to give or refuse consent; In case thou permit thy
appetite to carry thee away to sin, then thou shall be under it, and it
shall dominere over thee; for whosoever sins is made slave to sin; but
before thou sin, so long as sin gets not entry into thy consent, but
only into thy sense, that is to say, so long as it stays in the appetite,
not goeing so far as thy will, thy appetite is subject unto thee, and thou
Lord over it. While an Emperor is not yet created, he is subject to the
Electors Dominion, in whose hands it is to reject, or elect him to the
Imperial dignity: but being once elected and elevated by their means, from
thence they begin to be his subjects, and he their Lord. So long as the will
denies consent, she presides: but having once given consent; she becomes slave
to her own appetite.

2. To conclude, this sensual appetite in plain truth, is a rebellious
subject, seditious and stirring; and we must confess we cannot so defeat it,
that it does not rise again, encounter and assault the reason: yet has the
will such a strong hand over it, that she is able if she please, to bridle it,
break it is designs, and repulse it, sith that not to consent to the
suggestions thereof, is a sufficient repulse. One cannot hinder concupiscence to
conceive; yet well may we stay it, from bringing forth and accomplishing
sin.

3. Now this concupiscence or sensual appepetite, has 12. motions, by which
as by so many mutinous Captains it raises sedition in man. And because
ordinarily they trouble the soul, and disquiet the body: in so much as they
trouble the soul, they are called perturbations: in so much as they disquiete
the body, they are named passions, as witnesses S. AUGUSTINE. All place
before them selves, Good, or Evil, that, to atchiue it, this, to avoid it. If
Good be considered in it self according to it is natural goodness, it excites
Love, the prime and principal passion: If Good be represented as absent, it
prouokes a desire of it self: it being desired, we apprehend it possible, it
enters in us a Hope; if impossible, Despair begins to sease us. But when we
enioie it as present, it moves us to joy. Contrariwise as soon as we discover
Evil, we Hate it: if it be absent, we fly it: if we propose it as inevitable,
we Fear it; if we think we can eschew it, we do emboulden, and encourage our
selves: But if we feel it as present, we Grieve; and the^ Anger, and
Indignation, suddenly runs out to resist, and repulse the Evil, or at least
to be revenged of it. Which if it succeed not according to our mind, we
remain in Grief. But if we repel, or be revenged of it, we feel
satisfaction and content, which is a Pleasure of Triu^phe, for as the
possession of Good, does glad the heart, so the victory over Evil, does
satiate the courage. And over all this multitude of se^suall passions, the will
bears Empire, rejecting their suggestio^s, repulsing their embracements,
hindering their effects: or at the very least stiffly denying them consent,
without the which, they can never endamage us, and by refusal of which, they
remain vanquished; yea even a far off weakened, dejected, defeated,
repressed, and if not altogether slain, at least mortified and brought low.

4. And THEOTIME, this multitude of passions is permitted to reside in our
soul for the exercise of our will in virtue, and spiritual valor. In so
much that the STOIKES who denied that passions, were found in wise men, did
greatly err, and so much the more; for that they showed in effect, that which
in words they denied, as S. AUGUSTINE shows, recounting this pleasant
history. AVLVS GELIVS having embarked himself with a famous STOIKE, a great
tempest takes them, whereat, the STOIKE being affrighted begun to wax white,
and Pale, and sensibly to Tremble, so that all in the boat perceived it, and
took precise notice of him, albeit they did run the same hazard with him. In
the interim the sea waxed calm, the danger passed, and assurance did restore
to each of them Liberty to blame, yea even to rail at him: A certain
voluptuous ASIATIKE gybed at the STOIKE and reproched unto him his Fear, which
had made him become white, and Pale by apprehension of danger, whilst he for
his part remained firm without Fear, to which the STOIKE replied, by relation
of that which ARISTIPPVS a SOCRATICAL Philosopher had answered one, who for
the same reason had quipped him with the like reproach: saying unto him, for
thee, thou had no reason to be troubled for the death of a wicked Rascal:
but I should have wronged my self not to have feared to loose the life of an
ARISTIPPVS. And the best of it is, that AVLVS GELIVS an eye witness recites
the story: but touching the STOIKES reply contained therein, it did more
commend his wit, then his Cause, sythens, alleging a companion of his Fears,
he left two proofs, by two reprochlesse witnesses, that STOIKES were touched
with Fear, and with Fear which does leave it is effects in the Eyes, Face, and
Countenance, and is consequently a Passion.

5. Ah great folly! to wish to be wise, by a wisdom which is not possible.
Truly the Church has condemned the Folly of this wisdom, which certain
presumptuous ANCORITS would have long ago introduced, against which the whole
Scripture, but especially the great APOSTLE cries out: That we have a law in
our body, which resists the law of our mind. Amongst us Christians says
that great S. AUGUSTINE, according to holy Scripture, and Sound doctrine, the
Citizens of the sacred City of God, whose lives are agreeable to Gods own
heart, in the pilgrimage of this world do Fear, Desire, Grieve, Rejoice: Yea
even the sovereign King of this City, did Fear, Desire, Grieve, Rejoice,
even to tears, palenesse, trembling, sweating of blood; though in him these
were not the motions of Passions like to ours; whence the great S. HIEROME, and
after him the School, durst not there usurp the name, Passions, for reverence
of the person in whom they were, but the respectfull name, PRO-PASSIONS, to
testify that sensible motions in our Savior held the place of Passions,
though they were not such indeed, seeing that he suffered, or sustained
nothing by them, save that, which was thought good to him, and in manner which
liked him best, governing and guiding them at his pleasure; which we sinners
cannot do, who suffer, and endure these Motions with disorder, against our
wills, to the great prejudice of the good estate and policy of our soul.

That love rules over all the affections, and passions, yea gouerns the will,
albeit the will has also a dominion over it. CHAPTER IIII.
1. Love being the first complacence which we take in good, as we will
presently show; certes it preceedes desire; and in deed what other thing is it
which we Desire, but that which we Love? It forerunes Delectation, for how
could we rejoice in the fruition of a thing, if we loved it not? it goes before
Hope, for we hope for nothing, but the Good which we love: it preuents Hatred,
for we hate not evil, but in respect of the good which we love: nor is evil,
evil, but because it is contrary to good. And THEOTIME it is the like,
touching all other passions and affections: for they do all flow from love, as
from their source and root.

2. For which cause the other passions, and affections, are good, vicious, or
virtuous, according as the Love whence they proceed is good or bad; For Love
does so bedewe them with her own qualities, that they seem to be no other
then very Love it self. S. AUGUSTINE reducing all these passions to four as
did also BOETIVS, CICERO, VIRGIL with the greatest part of the Ancients, Love
says he, tending to the possession of that he loves, is termed Concupiscence,
or Desire: having and possessing it, it is called Joy: flying that which is
contrary to him, is named Fear: but if Love perceive it arrived, he puts on
the name of Grief, and consequently these passions are Evil if the Love be
Evil, Good if it be Good. The Citizens of the heaue^lie City do Fear,
Desire, Grieve, Joy, and because their love is just, all their affections are
also just. Christian doctrine does subject the Reason to God, to the end he
should guide and succor it; and to the Reason all the passions, that it may
bridle and moderate them; so that they might be converted to the service of
justice and virtue. The rectified will is the good love, the disordred will, is
the evil love: That is to say in a word THEOTIME, Love has such dominion
over the will, that he makes her just such as he is.

3. The wife does ordinarily change her condition into that of her Husband,
becoming noble, if he be noble; Queen, if he be King: Duchess if he be Ducke.
The will does also change her condition, into that of Love which she espouseth;
if he be carnal, she becomes carnal, if spiritual, she turns spiritual:
and all the affections, Desire, Joy, Hope, Fear, Grief, as issues of the
marriage, betwixt Love and the will, do consequently receive their qualities
from Love; to be short THEOTIME the will is not moved but by her affections,
amongst which, Love as the PRIMVM MOBILE and prime affection, gives motion to
all the rest, and causes all the other motions of the soul.

4. Nor does it follow hence, that the will does not also rule over Love,
seeing that the will does not Love, but in willing to Love, and that of the
diversity of Loves, which present them selves, she can apply her self to
which she list, otherwise, Love would neither be prohibited nor commanded. She
is then Mistress over Loves, as a Da^felle over her Suitors, amongst which she
may make election of whom she pleases. But as after the marriage, she loses
her liberty, and of Mistress becomes subject to her Husbands power; remaining
taken, by him whom she took, so the will which at her own pleasure made
election of Love, after she has embraced any one, she remain subject to him.
And as the wife is still subject to the Husband which she has chosen, so long
as he shall live, does after her Husbands death regaine her precedent liberty,
to marry an other: so while one Love lives in the will, it reigns there, and
the will is subject to his motions, but if this Love come to die, she can
afterward take an other. And again, there is a liberty in the will which a
wife has not; and it is, that the will can reject her Love at her pleasure, by
applying her understanding to motives, which makes it disgustfull, and by
undertaking, to chainge the object: For in this manner to make the divine Love
live, and reign in us, we ought to mortify Proper Love; if we cannot
altogether annihilate it, at least we must weaken it in such sort, that though
it live, yet it do not reign in us. As contrariwise in forsaking Divine Love,
we may adheare to that of creaturs, which is that infamous adultery, wherewith
the Divine Love does so often reproach sinners.

Of the affections of the will. CHAPTER. V.
1. THere is no less motion in the Intellectual or Reasonable appetite, which
is called the will, then there is in the Sensitive or Sensual: but those are
customarily named Affections, these Passions. The Philosophers and Pagans did
in some sort love God, their Common wealth, Virtue, Sciences: they hated Vice,
aspired after Honors, expected not to escape Death, or Calumny, were desirous
of knowledge, yea even of Beatitude after Death. They did encourage them
selves, to surmount the difficulties, which did cross the way of Virtue,
dreaded Blame, fled diverse Faults, revenged public Injuries, disdained
Tyrants, without any proper interest. Now all these Motions were seated in the
Reasonable part, sith that neither the Senses, nor consequently the Sensual
appetits are capable of application to these objects, and therefore these
Motions were Affections of the Intellectual, or Reasonable appetite, not
Passions of the Sensual.

2. How often do we feel Passions in the sensual appetite of desires,
contrary to the Affections, which at the same time we perceive in the
Reasonable appetite, or will. The young man mentioned by S. HIEROME did fairly
with his teeth cut of his tongue, and spet it in the face of that accursed
woman, which inflamed him to carnalitie: did he not testify thereby an extreme
Affection of Displeasure in his will, contrary to that Passion of Pleasure,
which by force she made him feel in his Concupistible, or sensible Appetite?
How often do we tremble amidst the dangers, to which our will brought us, and
makes us remain? How often do we Hate the Pleasure, wherein the sensual
appetite delights it self, and Love the Spiritual good wherein it is
disgusted? In this confisteth the war, which we daiely experience betwixt the
Spirit, and Flesh: betwixt our exterior Man, which depends of Sense, and our
interior, which depends of Reason: betwixt the old Adam which follows the
appetits of his EVE or Concupiscence, and the new Adam, which does second
heavenly wisdom, and holy Reason.

3. The STOIKES as S. AUGUSTINE, delivers, denying that a wiseman has
Passions, do confess notwithstanding as may Appear, that he had affections
which they termed EVPATHIES, or Good Passions, or else CONSTANCIES with CICERO:
for they said, the wiseman did not Couit, but will only; was not Light of
heart, but Setledly ioyefull; that he had no Fear but only a Foresight and
Precaution; so that he was not moved but by Reason, and according to Reason:
for this cause they peremptorily denied that a wiseman could ever be
Sorrowful, that being caused by present Evil, whereas no Evil can befale a
wiseman; sith that, no man is hurt but by himself, following their MAXIM.
And certes THEOTIME they did not amiss to hold that EVPATHIES, or Good
Affections reside in the Reasonable part of man, but they erred much in
auerring, that there were no Passions in the Sensitive part, and that Sorrow
did not touch a wisemans heart: For omitting what they them selves had
experienced in this behalf (as has been touched) by this means they might
conclud that wisdom might deprive one of Mercy, which is a virtuous sorrow,
touching our hearts, and working the^ to a desire to deliver our neighbor from
the evil which he endures. Nor does EPICTETES, the best man amongst the
Paga^s follow this error; that Passions, do not make Insurrections in a
wiseman, as S. AUGUSTINE does witness, showing further, that the dissension of
STOIKES, and other Philosophers about this subject, was but a mere dissension
in words, and strife in language.

4. Now the Affections which we feel in Our reasonable part, are more or less
Noble and Spiritual, according as their Object is more or less Sublime, and
as they are in a more eminent degree of the mind: for some of them proceed
from the Discourse which we make, following the Experience of Sense; others are
formed by a Discourse drawn from Humane Sciences; others rising from a
Discourse which is made according to Faith, and finally there are some which
have their Origin from the simple Taste and Repose, which the Soul, has in
Verity, and the will of God. The first, are called Natural affections: For
who is he that does not naturally desire Health, commodity of Meat, Drink,
and Cloth, Sweet and Agreeable conversation? The second, are named Reasonable,
as being altogether founded upon the spiritual Knowledge of Reason, by which
our will is excited to seek the Tranquillity of the mind, moral Virtues,
true Honor, a Philosophical Contemplation of heavenly things. The third sort
of Affections, are termed Christian, because they issue from Discourse derived
from the Doctrine of our Savior Christ, which causes in us a Love of
voluntary Prouertie, perfect Chastity, the Glory of Heaven: But the
Affections of the supreeme degree are instiled Divine, and Supernatural,
because God himself does pour them into our hearts, and they aim at, and
tend to him without the help of any Discourse, or natural Light, as it is
easy to conceive; and we will hereafter speak of the Restes, and gustes which
are practiced in the Sanctuary of the soul. And these supernatural
Affections are principally three: the Love of the mind toward the beauty of
the mysteries of faith: a Love toward the profit of things promised us in the
other life; and a Love toward the sovereign Bounty of the thrice holy and
eternal Divinity.

How the Love of God does rule over other Loves. CHAPTER VI.
1. THe will does govern all the other faculties of man's Soul: yet is she
governed by her Love, which makes her such as he is. Now, of all loves, that of
God holds the Septer, and has a commanding authority so inseparably united
unto him, and so proper to his nature, that if he be not Master, he cease to
be, and perishes.

2. ISMAEL, was not Coheire with Isaac his younger brother; ESAV, was appointed
to be his younger brothers servant; JOSEPH, was not only honored by his
brethren, but even by his Father, yea and his Mother also in the person of
BENJAMIN, as by dreams in his youth he had foreseen: Certes it is not void
of mystery, that the youngest of these brethren bore away the advantage from
the eldest. Divine Love is truly the last begotten of all the Affections of
man's heart: For as the Apostle says that which is Natural, is first: and
that which is spiritual, is after. But this last borne inherites all the
authority: and Self-love as an other ESAV is deputed to his service, and not
only all the other motions of the Soul, as his brethren do adore, and are
subject unto him, but also the Understanding, and will, which are to him as
Father, and Mother. All is subject to this heavenly Love who will either be
King, or nothing, who cannot live, but reign: nor reign if not in a
sovereign manner.

3. ISAAC, JACOB, and JOSEPH, were supernatural children: For their Mothers
SARA, REBECCA, and RACHEL being sterill by nature, conceived them by the grace
of the Divine Bounty, and for this cause they were established Masters of
their brethren: so divine Love, is a child of miracle; sith that man's will,
cannot conceive it, if it be not poured into our hearts, by the holy Ghost. And
as supernatural, it must preside, and reign over all the affections, yea even
over the Understanding, and will.

4. And be it, there are other supernatural motions in the soul, Fear,
Piety, Force, Hope, as ISAAC, and BENJAMIN, were Supernatural children of
RACHEL, and REBECCA: yet is divine Love still Master, Heir, and Superior, as
being the Son of promise: sith that in virtue of it, heaven is promised to
man. Salvation is showen to Faith, prepared for Hope, but is given only to
Charity. Faith points out the way to the Land of Promise as a Pillar of
clouds and fire, to wit CLEARDARKE: Hope does feed us with her Manna of
delight, but Charity does conduct us thither, as an Arc of Alliance, making
way through Iordain, that is, to Judgment, and shall remain amidst the people,
in the heavenly Land promissed to the true ISRAELITS, where neither the Pillar
of Faith does serve as guide, nor the MANNA of Hope is useful for food.

5. Divine Love, does make his abode in the most high and eminent region of the
Soul, where he does offer Sacrifice and Holocausts to the Divinity; as
ABRAHAM did, and as our Savior sacrificed himself upon the tope of CALVARIE,
to the end that from so eminent a place he might be heard, and obayed of his
people, that is, of all the Faculties and Affections of the Soul, which he
gouernes with an incomparable sweetness. For Love has none pressed, or
flaues: but brings all things under his power with a force so delightful, that
as nothing is so forcible as Love: so nothing is so amiable as his Force.

6. Virtues are seated in the soul to moderate her motions, and Charity as
prime of all the Virtues, gouerns ad tempers them all, not only because the
first in every Species of things, is as a rule, and measure to the rest; but
also, for that God having created man to his similitude, and liknesse, will,
that as in himself, so in man all things be ordered, for, and by Love.

A description of Love in general. CHAPTER VII.
1. THe will has so great a sympathy with Good, that as soon as she perceiues
it, she turns toward it, to please her self therein, as in her desired
object, to which she has so nearly allied her self, that one cannot even
declare her Nature, but by the reference she has to it: like as one cannot
show the nature of Good otherwise, then by the Affinity it has with the will:
For tell me THEOTIME what other thing is Good, then that which every one does
will. And what is the will, if not the faculty which bears us forward, and
makes us tend to Good, or that which the will esteems such?

2. The will then perceiving, and feeling Good, by the help of the
Understanding proposing it, feels at the same time, a sudden delight, and
complacence upon it, which does sweetly, yet powerfully move and incline her
toward this amiable object, with intention to be united thereunto, and moves
her to search the means most proper to attain this Union.

3. The will then has a strict affinity with Good, this affinity does
produce the complacence which the will does taste in feeling, and perceiving
Good: this complacence does move and prick forward the will to Good: this
motion tends to Union, and and in fine the will put in motion and tending to
Good, does search all means requisite to atchiue it.

4. And truly generally speaking, Love compriseth all this together; as a
fair Tree whose Root is the Sympathy which the will has to Good; the Bole
is the Complacence; her Motion, the tope; the INQVESTS, PVRSVITS; and other
Endeauours, are her Branches; but Union and Fruition, are her Fruits. So love,
seems to be composed of these five principale parts, under which a number of
other little pieces are contained; as we shall find in the process of this
work.

5. Let Us consider I pray you, the exercise of an insensible Love betwixt the
ADAMANT and IRON, being a true representation of sensible, and voluntary Love,
of which we speak. IRON then has such a Sympathy with the ADAMANT, that as
soon as it is touched with the virtue thereof it turns toward it, this done
suddenly it begins to stir, and quiver with a little hopping, testifying in
that, the Complacence it takes, and thereupon it does advance, and bear it
self toward the ADAMANT, striving by all means possible to be united unto
it. And do you not see all the parts of a lively Love represented in this
lifelesse stone?

6. But to conclud THEOTIME, the Complacence, and Motion, or Effusion of the
will upon the thing beloved, is properly speaking, Love, yet so as that the
Complacence, is but the beginning of Love, and the Motion or Effusion of the
heart which ensues, is the true essential Love: so that the one and the other,
may truly be named Love, but in a diverse manner: for as the break of day, may
be termed day; so this first Complacence of the heart in the thing beloved, may
be called Love, because it is the first impression of love. But as the true
Heart of the day begins only from day-breake, to the son setting: so the
true essence of Love does consiste in the motion, and current of the heart,
flowing immediately from Complacence, and ending it is course in Union: To be
short, Complacence is the first stirring, or motion which Good causes in the
will, and this motion is followed by a liquefaction, or effusion whereby the
soul does run and approache toward the thing beloved, which is the true and
proper Love. Let Us say thus: Good does touch, sease upon, and engaige the
heart by Complacence: but by Love, it does draw, conduct, and conueigh it to it
self: by Complacence, it makes the heart undertake the journey; but by Love,
does accomplish it. Complacence, is the awaker of the heart: but Love, the
operation; Complacence gives the Alarm, but Love causes the March. The heart
displayes his wings by Complace^ce; but Love, is it is Flight. Love then to
speak distinctly and precisely, is no other thing then the motion, course and
advancement of the heart, toward the thing beloved.

7. Many great personages have been of opinion, that Love was no other thing
then Complacence it self, in which they followed a fair semblance of reason:
For not only the motion of Love takes her origin, from the Complacence which
the heart feels at the first approach of Good, and ends in a second
Complacence begotten in the heart by Union with the beloved: but further it
keeps company with that Complacence, not being able to subsist without her,
who is his Mother, and Nource: so that, as soon as the Complacence cease,
Love cease. And as the Be is bred in the honey, feed of honey, flies not
abroad but for honey: so Love is borne of Complacence, maintained by
Complacence, and tends to Complacence. The poyse of things does sway, move, and
stay them; it is the weight of the stone that does stir and move it to
descent; it is the same weight that makes it continue motion after the
external impression be ended; and finally it is the same weight, that makes it
stop and stay as soon as it has attained it is Center: such is the nature of
the Complacence which moves the will, she it is that moves, and she that makes
the will repose in the Union of the thing beloved. This motion of Love then
having her birth, conservation, and perfection dependantly of Complacence, and
being always inseparably adjoined unto her; it is no marvel that these brave
wits esteemed Love and Complacence the same thing, though indeed, Love being a
true Passion of the mind, it cannot be a simple Complacence, but must needs be
a motion proceeding from it.

8. Now, this motion caused by Complacence dures till the Union or Fruition,
and therefore when it tends to a present Good, it has no other effect then to
put forwards, apply, join, and look the heart to the thing beloved, which by
this means it enioyes, and thereupon is called Love of delight, or Complacence,
because as soon as it is begotten of the first Complacence, it ends in the
second, which it receives in being united to it is object. But when the Good
toward which the heart is turned, inclyned, and moved is distant, absent, or
that so perfect an union cannot yet be made as is desired, then the motion of
Love by which the heart does tend, aspire, and make toward this absent object,
is properly named Desire, For desire is no other thing then an appetite, lust,
and coveting of things aimed at, but not yet obtained.

9. There are yet certain other motions of Love; by which we desire things
that we neither hope for, nor pretend in any sort, as when we say, why am I
not now in heaven! I wish I were King; I would to God I were Younger; I wish I
had never offended, and the like. These indeed are desires, but imperfect
ones, which in proper speech as it seems, might de called wishes; and indeed
these affections, are not expressed in manner of Desires, for when we express
our true Desires, we say I Desire; but when we signify our imperfect Desires,
we say, I should or I would Desire; we may well say I would Desire to be
young, but we do not say, I Desire to be young, seeing that this is not
possible; and this motion is called a half Desire, or as the Schoolmen term
it a Velleitie, which is nothing elsse but the beginning of a Desire without
effect, for that the will perceiving that she cannot attain unto that object
by reason of impossibility or extreme difficulty, she stops her motion, and
ends it in this simple affection of Velleitie, as though she should say, this
Good which I behold and cannot Hope for, is truly very agreeable unto me, and
though I cannot will or Hope for it; yet so my affection stands, that if I
could will or Desire it, I would willingly Desire, and will it.

10. To be short these half conceived Desires or Velleities, are only a
little Love, which is called Love of simple approbation, because without all
pretention the soul approues the Good she knows, and wanting means to
Desire it in effect, she protests she would willingly Desire it, and that it
is truly to be Desired.

11. Nor is this all THEOTIME, for there are Desires and Velleities which are
yet more imperfect then those we have spoaken of, for so much as their motions
are not stayed by reason of impossibility or extreme difficulty, but by the
incompossibilitie they have with other Desires or wishes more powerful, as
when a sickeman Desires to eat MVSHROMES, which though he have at his will,
yet will he not for all that eat the^ fearing thereby to impare his Health: and
who decernes not two Desires in this party? the one to eat MVSHROMES, the other
to be cured; but because the Desire of Health is greater, it does block up and
suffocate the other in such sort, as it can produce no effect. IEPHTE had a
Velleitie to conserve his daughter, but this not being compatible with a Desire
he had to keep his Vow, he made an election contrary to his Velleitie, to
wit, to sacrifice his daughter, and had a half wish or Velleitie, of that
which he desired not, which was to conserve his daughter. PILATE and HEROD had
Velleities, the one to diliuer out SAVIOVR the other his PRECVRSOR: but because
this was incompatible, the one with a Desire to please the JEWS, and CAESAR:
the other HERODIADAS and her daughter, these wishes were vain and fruitless.
Now according as the things incompatible with that which we would are less
amiable, the Velleities are less perfect, sith they are stopped, and as it
were stifled by so weak opposits. So the wish which HEROD had not to beheade
S. JOHN was more imperfect, then that of PILATS, to free our SAVIOVR. For the
one feared the calumny, and indignation of the people; the other to
contristate one sole woman.

9. The Velleities which are hindered, not by impossibility, but by
incompatibilitie with stronger Desires, are called indeed Desires but vain,
stifled and unprofitable ones. Following the Velleitie of things impossible, we
say, I would but cannot. And following the Velleitie of things possible, we
say, I wish but I will not.

What that conueniencie is, which does excite love. CHAPTER. VIII.
1. WE say the eye sees, the ear hears, the tongue speaks, the
understanding discourses, the memory remembers, the will loves; Sure it is
notwithstanding, that it is the whole man, to speak properly, who by diverse
Faculties, and different Organs, works all this variety of operations; man
also then it is; who by the affectiue Faculty, named the will, does tend to,
and please himself in Good, and who has so great a sympathy with it, as
being the Source and Origin of Love. But they did far miss the mark who
believed that Resemblance was the only Conueniencie, which produced Love: For
who knows not that crasie old men, do tenderly and dearly love little
infants, and are reciprocally loved of them; that the wise, love such as are
ignorant, if they find them docile; and the sick, their Physicians. And if we
may draw any argument from the image of Love, which is found in things without
sense, what resemblance can draw the Iron, toward the Adamant? has not one
Adamant more resemblance with an other, or an other stone, then with Iron of a
diverse kind? and though some to reduce all Conueniencie to a Resemblance,
would assure us that Iron draws Iron: and the Adamant, the Adamant: Yet are
they to seek for their reason, why the Adamant does more powerfully draw Iron;
then Iron does Iron it self. But I pray you what similitude is there betwixt
Lime, and water? or betwixt water, and a Sponge? and yet both of them drink
water with a quenchlesse desire, testifying an excessive insensible Love
toward it. It Is the like of humane love: For sometimes it takes more strongly
amongst persons of contrary quality, then those who have a great Resemblance.
Conueniencie then which causes Love does not always consist in Similitude,
but in the Proportion, Reference; and correspondance betwixt the Lover, and the
Beloved: And to this effect, it is not resemblance which moves the sickmans
affection to the Doctor, but a correspondance of the ones necessity with the
others sufficiency, for that the one can afford the assistance, which the
other stands in need of; as again the Doctor loves the sickman, knowing him
to be his patient, as upon whom he has power to exercise his faculty: the
old man loves children, not by sympathy, but for that the great simplicity,
feebleness and tenderness of the one, does exalt and make more apparent the
prudence and assurance of the other, and even this dissimilitude is agreeable:
on the other side, children love old men because they see them buisie and
careful about them, and that by a secret instinct they perceive they have
need of their directions. Musical concord stands in a kind of discord, in
which unlike voices do correspond, making up altogether one sole Close of
proportion, as the dissimilitude of precious stones, and flowers, do make the
grateful compositio^ of Imbosture and Diaprie, so Love is not caused always
by Resemblance, and Sympathy, but by Correspondance, and Proportion, which
consists in this, that by the union of one thing to another, they may
mutually receive one another perfection, and so be bettered. The head does not
resemble the body, nor the hand the arm; yet they have such a Correspo^dance,
and are seated so nearly together that by their mutual neighborhood they do
meruelously entercha^ge perfection; so that if these parts had each one a
distinct soul, they would have a perfect mutua^ Love; not by Similitude, but
by Correspondance which they have in their mutual perfection: For this cause
the melancholy and ioyefull, sour and sweet have often a correspondance of
mutual affection, by reason of the mutual impressions which they receive one
of an other, by which their humors are reciprocally moderated. But when this
mutual Correspondance meets with similitude, Love without doubt is engendered
more efficaciously: for Similitude being the true picture of Unity, when two
like things are united by a proportion to the same end, it seems rather to be
an Unity, then an Union.

11. The Sympathy then betwixt the Lover and the Beloved, is the first source
of Love, and this Sympathy, or Conueniencie consists in a Correspondance,
which is no other thing then a mutual aptitude making things proper to be
united, and mutually to communicate their perfections: but this will be cleared
in the process of this book.

That love tends to union. CHAPTER IX.
1. THe great Salamon in a delitiously admirable air, does sing our Saviors
loves, and those of the deuote soul, in that divine work, which for it is
excellent sweetness is instyled the Canticle of Canticles. And to raise our
selves in a more easy flight, to the consideration of this spiritual love,
which is exercised betwixt God and us, by the correspondance which the motions
of our hearts have with the inspirations of his divine Majesty, he makes use
of a perpetual representation of the loves of a chaste Shepherd, and
shamefast Shepherdess. Now (making the Spouse or Bride first begin the parlie
by manner of a certain surprise of love) he makes her at the first onset lance
out her heart in these words; let him deigne me a kiss of his mouth. Do you
mark THEOTIME how the soul personated by this Shepherdess, does pretend no
other thing by the first expression of her desire, the^ a chaste union with her
spouse, protesting that it is the highest aim of her ambition, and only thing
she breathes after: For I pray you what other thing would this first sigh
intimate? Let him deigne me with a Kiss of his mouth.

2. A Kiss, from all ages as by natural instinct, has been employed as a
representation of perfect love, that is the union of hearts; and not without
cause: we send out and muster the passions and motions, which our soul has
common with brute beasts by our eyes, eyebrows, forehead and countenance; in
general by his face a man is known says the Scripture; and Aristotle giving
a reason why ordinarily great men's faces only are pourtrated, it is says he,
that the countenances teach what they are.

3. Yet do we not utter our discourse, nor the thoughts which proceed from
the spiritual portion of our soul called reason, (by which we are
distinguished from Beasts) but by words; and in consequence by help of the
mouth: in so much that to pour out ones soul, and scatter ones heart, is
nothing else but to speak, Pour out your hearts before God says the
PSALMIST, that is, express and turn the affections of your hearts into words:
And SAMVEL'S pious Mother pronouncing her prayers, allthough so softly, that
one could hardly discern the motion of her lips: I have poured out (says
she) my heart before God: in this wise, one mouth is applied to another in
kissing, to testify that they desire to pour our one soul into the other,
reciprocally to unite them in a perfect union, and for this Reason in all
times, and amongst the most saintly men the world had, the kiss has been a
sign of love and affection: and such use was universally made of it amongst
the ancient Christians as the great S. PAVLE testifies, when writing to the
ROMAN'S and CORINTHIANS he says, Salute mutually one another in a holy kiss.
And as diverse do witness, IVDAS in betraying our SAVIOVR made use of a Kiss
to discover him, because this divine SAVIOVR, was accustomed to kiss his
Disciples when he met them; and not only his Disciples, but even little
Children whom he took lovingly in his arms: as he did him, by comparison of
whom, he so solemnly invited his APOSTLES to the love of their Neighbors, who
as IANSENIVS reports was thought to have been S. MARTIAL.

4. Thus then the Kiss being a lively mark of of the union of hearts, the
Spouse who has no other pretention in all her endeavors, and pursuits then to
be united to her beloved, let him kiss me, says she, with a kiss of his
mouth; as if she had cried out, so many sighs and inflamed groans as my heart
incessantly sobs out, will they never impetrate that, which my heart desires? I
run, alas shall I never gain the prise, for which I lance my self out?
which is to be united heart to heart, spirit to spirit, to my God, my Spouse,
my life? when will arrive the happy hour in which I shall pour my soul into
his heart, and that he will turn his heart into my soul, that we may live
inseparable in that happy union?

5. When the holy Ghost would express a perfect love, he always in a manner
makes choice of the word Union or Conjunction: amongst the multitude of the
faithful says S. LVCKE, there was but one heart and one soul: our SAVIOVR
prayed for all the faithful that they might be but on same thing: SAINT PAVLE
does advertise us to conserve unity of mind by the union of peace. These
Unities of heart, soul, and spirit do signify the perfection of Love, which
ioynes many souls in one; for so it is said that IONATHAS his soul was
glewed to DAVID'S, that is to say, as the Scripture adds, He loved DAVID as
his own soul. The great APOSTLE of FRANCE as well according to his own
Dictame^, as that of HIEROTHEVS who he cites; writes (I think a thousand
times in one Chapter OF DIVINE NAMES) that Love is of a Nature, vnifying,
uniting, referring, recollecting, and pressing things to an Unity. S. GREGORY
of NAZIANZEN, and S. AUGUSTINE says; that their friends and they, had but one
soul, and ARISTOTLE approving even in his time this manner of speech: when
says he we would express how much we love our friends, we say, his and my
soul is but one. Hatred does separate us, and Love does assemble us. The end
then of love, is no other thing, then the union of the lover and the beloved.

That the union which love pretends is spiritual. CHATPER. X.
1. WE are nevertheless to understand, that there are natural Unions, as
those of Similitude, Consanguinitie, and the Cause with the effect; and others
which not being natural, may be termed voluntary; for though they be
according to nature, yet are they not made, but by our will as those which rise
from benefits, and do undoubtedly unite him that receives them to the giver,
those of Company, Conversation and the like. Now Natural union produces
Love, and that Love being produced, inclines us to another Voluntary union
perfecting the natural: so the Father and the Son, the Mother and Daughter,
or two Brothers being joined in an Natural union, by the participation of the
same blood, are excited by this Union to Love; and by that Love are carried to
the Union of the will, and the mind which may be called Voluntary; because
allbeit her foundation is natural, yet is her action deliberate, and in these
Loves produced by Natural union, we must look for no other correspondence
then Union it self, by which nature preventing the will, does oblige her to
approve love, and perfect the Union which she has already made. But for
Voluntary unions, they being after Love in Effect, yet are his Cause, as being
his only end and pretention; so that as Love tends to Union, so Union again
does extend, and augment Love; for Love begets a desire of conversation, and
conversation does nourish and increase Love: Love causes a desire of nuptial
union, and this Union does reciprocally conserve, and dilate Love; so that in
every sense, it is true that love tends to union.

2. But to what kind of Union does it tend? Did you not note THEOTIME that the
sacred Spouse did express her desire of being united to her Spouse by a kiss?
and that a kiss does represent the spiritual union which is caused by the
reciprocal communication of hearts? true it is that man loves, but by his
will, and therefore the end of his Love is of the nature of his will; but his
will is spiritual, and consequently the union which Love pretends is also
spiritual, and so much the rather for that the heart, seat, and source of
Love, should not only not be perfected by union with corporal things, but
even become more vile.

3. It will not hence be inferred, that there are not certain passions in man,
which as Gum, or Missel to upon trees, by manner of excrement and ouergroth,
sproute up amongst and about Love, which notwithstanding are neither Love nor
any part thereof, but excrements, and superfluities of the same: which are so
far from an aptitude to maintain or accomplish Love, that it does endamage,
and weaken it: and in time if they be not weeded away, do utterly ruinate it.
See the reason hereof.

4. According to the multitude of operatio^s, (be they of the same, or of a
diverse Nature) to which the soul does apply her self, she performs them
less perfectly, and vigorously: because she being finite her active virtue is
also finite, so that furnishing her actiuitie to diverse operations it is
necessary that each one of the^ have less thereof; so that one atte^tiue to
diverse things, is less inte^ce in every of them; It is not possible that one
should at the same time exactly discern the feature of the face by the eyes;
and by the ear distinguish the harmony of an excellent music; nor at the
same instant be attentive to figure, and color. If our affection be to talk,
our attention is for no other thing.

5. Yet am I not ignorant what is said of CAESAR, nor incredulous of that which
so many great personages assures us of ORIGIN; that they could apply their
attentions at the same time to diverse objects. Yet every one does confess,
that according to the measure, in which they were applied to many, they were
less in every one of the same; there is then a difference betwixt to see,
hear, and understand much; and to see, hear and understand better: For he
that sees better, sees less; and he that sees more, sees not so well; it is
rare that he who knows much, knows that well which he knows; because the
virtue, and force of the understanding, being scatered upon the knowledge of
diverse things, is less strong and vigourous, then when it is restrained to
the consideration of one only object. Hence it is that when the soul imploies
her forces in diverse operations of Love, The actio^ so divided is less
vigorous. We have three sorts of actions of Love, the spiritual, reasonable,
and Sensitive: when Love lets run his forces through all these three
operations, doubtless it is more Extense, but less Intense: but when it
runs through one operation only; it is more Intense, though less Extense.
Do we not see that fire, the Symbol of love, forced to make way by the only
mouth of the Cannon, makes a prodigious flashe, which had been much less, if
it had found vent by two or three passages: sythence then that Love is an act
of our will, he that desires to have it not only noble, and generous, but also
very vigorous and active, must contain the virtue, and force of it, within the
limits of spiritual operations, for he that would apply it to the Sensitive
operatio^s of the soul, should so far fourth weaken the Intellectual, in
which essential love consists.

6. The ancient PHILOSOPHERS attained to the knowledge of two Extases, the one
whereof did place our selves above our selves: the other dejected us, and set us
below our selves; as though they would have said, that man was of a Nature
betwixt Angels and Beasts; in his intellectual part, participating the
Angelical Nature; and in his sensitive the Nature of Beasts; and yet that he
could by good moderation of life, and a continual care had of himself,
deliver and infrancise himself of this mean condition, so that applying and
exercising himself frequently in Intellectual actions, he might bring
himself nearer to the nature of Angels then Beasts: but if he did much apply
himself to Sensible actions, he made a descent from his middle condition to
that of beasts. And because an Ecstasy is no other thing then a going out of
ones self, whether one go upwards, or downwards, he is truly in an Ecstasy.
Those then that touched with intellectual and divine pleasures; do permit
their heart to be ravished with those touches, are truly out of them selves,
that is, above the condition of their Nature, but by a blessed and wishfull
departure, by which entering into a more noble, and eminent estate, they are as
much Angels by the operation of their soul, as men by the substance of their
Nature, and are either to be instiled Humane Angels, or Angelical men. On the
contrary side, those that enticed with sensual pleasurs give them selves over
to the enjoying of them, descend from their middle condition to the lowest of
brute Beasts, and merit as well to be called Brutall by their operations, as
men by Nature; unhappy to be out of themselves, for no better end then to
enter into a condition infinitely unworthy of their natural estate and calling.

7. Now according as the Ecstasy is more great, either above or below us; by so
much it does more hinder the soul to return to her self, and produce
contrary operations to the Ecstasy in which she is; so those Angelical men
which are ravished in God and heavenly things during their Ecstasy, do quite
loose the use of the attention of sense; motion and all exterior actions,
because their soul, to the end she may apply her virtue and actiuitie more
entirely and attentively to that divine object, does retire and withdraw it,
from all her other faculties wholly to deturne them from thence. And in like
manner, brutish men ravished by sensual pleasure, (especially by that of sense
in general,) do wholly loose the use of reason and understanding, because
their miserable souls, to have a more entire and attentive gust of their
brutall object, do divert themselves from spiritual operations, to give
themselves with more vigor to brutall and bestiall ones: mystically imitating
herein the one, HELIAS taken up in the fiery Chariot to the Company of
Angels; the other NABVCHODONOSOR debased to the rank of brute beasts.

8. Hence then I say, that when the Soul practices Love by actions of sense,
so that she is carried below her self, it is impossible that thereby the
exercise of her Superior love, should not be so much the more weakened: In such
sort that true and Essential love is so far from being ayeded, and conserved
by the union to which Sensual love tends, that it is impared, dissipated, and
perishes thereby. JACOBS Oxen plowed the ground as long as the idle Asses fed
by them, eating the pasture dew to the laboring Oxen. As long as the
Intellectual part of our soul, is employed in honest virtuous love upon any
object worthy thereof; it comes to pass often times that the senses and
faculties of the inferior part tend to their proper union, and graise
thereupon, though Union be only due unto the Heart and Soul, which alone is
able to produce true and Substantial Love.

9. HELISEVS having cured NAMAN the SYRIAN, pleasing himself in the obligation
he had put upon him refused the gold, money, and other moueables which were
offered him. But his trustlesse servant IESSE running after him, demanded and
took against his Master pleasure that, which he had refused; Intellectual
and cordial love, which either is, or should be the Master of our Heart, does
refuse all sorts of corporal, and Sensible Unions, and is contented with
good will only, but the powers of the Sensitive part which are, or should be
the Handmaids of the Spirit, do demand, seek after, and take that which
reason refused, and without her leave does make after their abject, servile,
and dishonorable loves, as another IESSE violating the purity of their
Masters intention, to wit the Spirit. And in what proportion the Soul does
convert her self to such gross Unions: in the same she does divert her self
from the delicate, Intellectual, and cordial union.

10. You see then planely THEOTIME that these Unions which tend to Sensible
Complacence and passions, are so far from producing, or conseruing Love, that
they do greatly hurt, and render it extremely weak. So when the incestuous
AMMON, who languished, and died as it were in the Love of THAMAR had once
arrived at these Se^suall and Brutall Unions, his heart was so robbed of
Cordial love, that never after he could endure to see her: but with indignity
pushed her out, violating no less cruelly the Right of love, then he had
impudently stained that of blood.

11. Basil, Rosmarie, Marigouls, Isope, Cloves, Camimell, Nutmeygs, Lemmans,
and Musk put together and incorporated, do yield a truly delightful odor by
the mixture of their good smells; yet not nigh that of the water which is
thence distilled, in which the sweetes of all these Ingredients squised from
their bodies, are mixed in a more excellent manner: meeting to the making up of
a most perfect odor, which does penetrate the sense of smelling far more
lively then it would, if together with the waters the bodies of the Ingredients
were found mingled, and united; So love may be found in the Unions of sensual
powers, mixed with the Unions of intellectual powers, but never so
excellently, as then, when the sole Heart and Courage abstracted from all
corporal affections, united together, do purify and Spiritualize Love. For
the sent of affections by such mixture, is not only sweeter, and better, but
more lively, active, and solid.

12. True it is, that many having rustike, earthy, and vile hearts, do put a
rate upon Loves, as upon pieces of gold: where the most massiue and weighty
are the best, and most current; for so their opinion goes, that Brutish love is
more strong because it is more violent, and turbulent: more solid because more
gross, and terreane: greater because more sensible, and rough: but
contrariwise Love is as fire, which by how much more it is matter is delicate,
by so much the flames are more clear and fair, which cannot be better
extinguihed then by depressing them, and covering them with earth, for in like
manner, by how much more abstract and spiritual the subject of love is, by so
much his actions are more lively, subsistent, and permanent: nor is there a
more easy way to ruinate it, then by prostituting it to vile and terreane
actions. The difference as S. GREGORY says betwixt spiritual and corporal
pleasurs, is, that corporal ones beget a desire before we obtain them: and
being obtained, a disgust; but spiritual ones contrariwise, bring disgust
before we have them: and being had, pleasure: so that brutall love which
thinks by the Union which he makes with the Beloved, to perfect and crown
his desires, finding that to the contrary, he destroieth them in ending them,
is left in disgust of such Union. Which moved the great Philosopher to say
that almost every beast after the enjoying of his most ardent and pressing
corporal pleasure remains sad, mournful and astonished: as a Merchant, who
having fed him self with hope of great gains, does find his hopes
frustrated, and his bark engaiged in a rude Haven: whereas Intellectual love
finding in the Union made with her object contentment passing his hopes,
accomplishing in the surplus his complacence; he continewes it in uniting
himself, and continually does further unite himself in continuing it.

That there are two portions in the soul, and how. CHAPTER XII.
1. WE have but one Soul THEOTIME, and an indivisible one: but in that one
Soul, there are diverse degrees of perfectio^s, for she is Living, Sensible,
and Reasonable, and according to these diverse degrees, she has also diverse
Proprieties, and Inclinations by which she is carried to the pursuit and Union
of things. For first we see, the Vine does hate as one would say, and fly the
Colewort, so that the one of them are pernicious to the other: and contrariwise
is delighted in the Olive; so we perceive a natural contrariety betwixt Men
and Serpents, in so much that a man's fasting spittle is to them mortal: and
contrariwise, Man and Sheep have a wondrous conueniencie, and does delight
the one in the other. Now this inclination does not proceed from any knowledge
the one has of the birth of his contrary, or of the profit of him with whom
he does sympathy: but only from a certain secret and hidden quality, which
does produce this insensible contrariety and antipathie, as also this
complacence and sympathy.

2. Secondly, we have in us the Sensitive appetite, whereby we are moved to the
inquiry and flight of diverse things by means of the sensitive knowledge we
have of them, not unlike to Cattle whereof one has an appetite to one thing,
an other to an other, according to the knowledge, which they have agreeable or
disagreeable unto the^, and this appetite resides, or from it flows the Love,
which we call Sensual or Brutall, which yet properly speaking ought not to be
termed love, but simply be called appetite.

3. Thirdly, in so much as we are reasonable we have a will by which we are
carried to the inquiry of Good, according as by discourse we know, or judge it
to be such; again, we manifestly discover in our Soul as it is Reasonable two
degrees of perfection, which great S. AUGUSTINE, and after him all the
DOCTOVRS, have named the two portions of the soul Inferior and Superior; of
which that is called Inferior which discourses, and deduceth consequences, as
she apprehends and experienceth by Sense: and that Superior, which reasons
and draws consequences, according to an Intellectual knowledge not founded
upon the experience of sense, but on the discretion and judgment of the mind
of spirit; hence this superior part is called the Spirit or the Mental part
of the soul, as the Inferior is termed commonly Sense, feeling, or humane
reason.

4. Now this Superior part discourses according to two sorts of lights, that
is either according to a Natural light, as the Philosophers, and all those who
discoursed by sciences did: or according to a Supernatural light as Diuins,
and Christians, so far fourth as they establish their discourse upon Faith,
and the revealed word of God, and more particular illustrations, inspirations,
and motions from heaven. This is that which S. AUGUSTINE says that by the
superior portion of the soul we adheare and apply our selves to the
observance of the eternal law.

5. JACOB extremely pressed with want of domestical necessaries, solicited
Benjamin that he might be led away by his brethren into EGIPTE, which yet he
did against his proper liking, as the sacred History witnesses, in which he
testifies two wills, the one Inferior by which he grudged his departure, the
other Superior by which he took resolution to part with him: for the
discourse which moved him to disaproue his departure, was founded in the
sensible pleasure he took in his presence, and the displeasure he was to feel
by his absence, which are apprehensiue and sensible grounds: but the resolution
which he took to send him, was grounded upon a reason of state in his family,
to provide for future, and approaching necessities. ABRAHAM according to the
Inferior portion of his soul spoake words testifying in him a kind of
diffide^ce when the Angel announced unto him the happy tidings of a Son,
do you think that by a CENTENARIE, a child may be begotten? but according to
his Superior part he believed in God, and it was reputed unto him for Justice.
According to his Inferior part doubtless he was in great anguish, when he had
received command to sacrifice his Son: but according to his Superior part he
resolved courageously to sacrifice him.

6. We also daily experience in our selves diverse Contra^^ ^ills. A Father
sending his Son either to Court, or to his studies, does not deny tears to
his departure, testifying, that though according to his Superior part, for the
Child's adua^ceme^t in virtue, he wills his departure, yet according to his
Inferior part he finds repugnance in the separation; and though a Girl be
married to her own contentment and her Mothers, yet with her benediction she
receives tears, in such sort that, though the Superior will, give way to the
departure, yet the Inferior shows resistance: We must not hence infer that
a man has two souls or two natures, as the MANICHEANS dreamed, no says S.
AUGUSTINE in the 8. BOOK OF HIS CONFESSIONS AND X. CHAP. but the will enticed
by diverse baits, and moved by diverse reasons seems to be divided in her
self, while she is diversely drawn, till making use of her liberty, she
makes choice of the one, or the other: for then the more efficacious Will
surmounteth, and gaining the day, leaves the soul to resent the evil that the
debate brought, which we call remorce.

7. But the example of our Savior is admirably useful in this behalf, and
being considered it leaves no further doubt touching the distinction of the
Superior, and Inferior part of the soul: for who amongst the Divines knows
not that he was perfectly glorious from the instant of his Conception in his
Virgin Mothers womb, and yet at the same time he was subject to Sorrow,
grief, and afflictions of heart: nor must we say he suffered only in body,
nor yet only in soul, as it was sensible, or, which is the sa^^ thing,
according to sense: for himself does attest that before he suffered any
exterior torment, or saw the Tormentour by him, his soul was heavy even to
death. For which cause he made his prayer, that the Cup of his Passion might be
transported from him: that is, that he might be exempted from it; in which he
does manifestly show the desire of the Inferior portion of his soul; which
discoursing upon the sad and anguishing objects of his Passion provided for him
(the lively image whereof was represented to his Imagination) he gathered by
lawful consequence, the absence and want of these things which he demanded of
his Father: by which we clearly see that the Inferior part of the soul, is
not the sensitive degree of the same, nor the Inferior will the same with the
Sensitive appetite: for neither the sensitive appetite, nor the Soul in so
much as it is Sensitive, is capable of making any demand or prayer, these being
acts of the Reasonable power: and especially they are incapable of speech with
God, an object above the senses reach, to make it known to the appetite; but
the same Savior having thus exercised the Inferior part, and testified that
according to it and it is codsiderations, his will declined the griefs and
pains; He showed afterward that he had a superior part by which inuiolably
adhering to the Eternal will, and Decree made by his heavenly Father, he
willingly accepted death, and notwithstanding the Inferior part of reason, he
says, ah! no Lord, not my will, but thine be done; when he says, My will,
he takes it according to the Inferior portion, and in as much as he says it
voluntarily, he shows in himself a Superior will.

That in these 2. portions of the soul there are found 4. different degrees of
reason. CHAPTER XII.
1. THere were three Portalls in SALOMONS Temple; one for Gentiles and
strangers, who having recourse to God, came to adore in Jerusalem: the second
for the Israelits, men and women, (the separation of men from women not being
made by SOLOMON); the third for Priests, and Leuits; and then there was the
Sanctuary or sacred house the which was open to the Hig^ Priest only, and
that but once a year. Our R^^son or rather our soul as she is reasonable is
the true Temple of the Almighty, who there takes up his chief residence. I
sought thee, Says S. AUGUSTINE, without my self, but found thee not, because
thou wast with in me. In this mystical Temple there are also three partitions,
which are Three different degrees of reason. In the first we discourse
according to the experience of Sense: in the second according to Humane
Sciences: in the third according to faith; but beyond all this we discover a
certain Hight, or highest point of reason, and the spiritual faculty, which
is not guided by the light of discourse or reason, but by a simple view of the
understanding, and a simple touch of the will, by which the soul yields, and
submits her self to Verity, and the will of God.

2. Now this extremity and Climate of our soul, this highest point of our
spirit, is naturally well represented by the Sanctuary or Holy place: For
first in the Sanctuary there were no windows to give light; In this degree of
the soul there is no discourse which does illuminate. Secondly in the
Sanctuary, all the light entered by the Port; in this degree of the soul
nothing enters but by faith, which produces in manner of rays, the view and
gust of the beauty and bounty of the good pleasure of God. Thirdly, none
entered into the Sanctuary, save the high Priest; In this point of the soul,
discourse approaches not, but only the high, universal, and sovereign
feeling, that the divine will ought soueraignely to be embraced, loved, and
approved, not only in some particular things, but generally in all things: nor
generally in all things only, but also particularly in each thing. Fouerthly,
the High Priest entering into the Sanctuary, obscured even that light which
came by the Port, and the abundance of perfumes from his Thurible repulsed the
rays of light, which by the Port sought passage; and all the light which is in
the supreme part of the soul, is in some sort obscured, and vealed, by the
renunciations, and resignations which the soul makes, not desiring so much to
behold and see the Beauty of the Truth, and the Truth of the Bounty
presented unto her, as to embrace and adore the same: in suchwise, that the
soul would almost shut her eyes, as soon as she begins to see the dignity of
Gods will, to the end, that not being further occupied in that consideration,
she might more powerfully and perfectly receive it, and by an absolute
complacence infinitely unite, and submit her self thereunto. Fifthly to conclude,
in the Sanctuary was kept the Arc of the Alliance, and in that, or joining to
it, the Tables of the Law, MANNA in a golden vessel, AARONS rod, which in a
night bore flowers, and fruit; and in this highest point of the soul, first
of all the light of faith, figured by the MANNA enclosed in the pot whereby we
quietly believe the truth of mysteries which our understanding can not attain
to; secondly, the profit of hope represented by Aarons flourishing and fruitful
rod, by which we confidently expect our promised happiness, which we see not.
Thirdly, the sweetness of holy charity represented by Gods commandments
which she contains whereby we repose in the union of our spirit with God's,
which we scarcely perceive.

3. And although Faith, Hope, and Charity do disperce their divine motions,
into almost all the faculties of the soul, as well reasonable as sensitive,
reducing and holily subiecting them to their just authority: yet their
special residence, their true and natural Manor, is this supreme region of
the soul, from whence as from a happy source of live water, it brancheth it
self out by diverse Conduits, and Brooks upon the inferior parts, and
faculties.

4. So that THEOTIME in the superior part of reason, there are Two degrees of
reason; in the one, those discourses are made which depend of faith, and
supernatural light; in the other the simple repose of faith, hope, and
charity. SAINT PAVLES soul, found here self pressed with two diverse
desires: the one, to be delivered from his body to fly up straight to JESUS
CHRIST, the other to remain in this would to labor in the conversion of
souls; both these desires were without doubt in the Superior part, for they
proceeded both from Charity: but his resolution of the later proceeded not
from discourse, but from a simple light, and liking he had of his masters
will, toward which the very point of the spirit of this great servant turned,
to the prejudice of all that Discourse might conclude.

5. But if Faith, Hope, and Charity, be formed by this holy Rest in the point
of the spirit, how comes it to pass that in the Inferior part, discourse is
made depending of the light of Faith. As we see Aduocats in many words plead
the facts, and rights of parties at the Bar; the Parliament, or Senate from
above resolves all the strife by a positive sentence, which being pronounced,
the Aduocats and Auditors rest not for all that to discourse amongst them
selves of the Parliaments motives there unto. Even so THEOTIME after discourse,
and above all that the grace of God have persuaded the point and highest part
of the spirit to believe, and form an Act of faith by manner of sentence, the
understanding does not leave to discourse again upon that same Act of faith
already conceived, to consider the motives and reasons thereof, yet so, as
Theological Discourses pass in the lower Benches, and Bar of the Superior
portion of the soul: but the Arrests, above in the Tribunal of the point of
the spirit. And because the knowledge of these 4. degrees of the reason, is
much conducing to the understanding of all the treatises of spiritual things,
I have enlarged my self in the explication thereof.

The difference of loves. CHAPTER. XIII.
1. Love is divided into two species whereof the one is called Love of
benevolence or good will, the other, Love of concupiscence. Love of
concupiscence is that, by which we love things with pretention of profit. Love
of benevolence that, by which we love a thing for it is own profit. For what
other thing is it, to love one with the love of benevolence or good will, then
to will him good?

2. If he to whom we will good, have already obtained and possessed it, then we
wish it him by the pleasure, and contentment which we have to see him possessed
of it; and hence springs Love of complacence, which is only an act of the will
by which it is joined and united to the pleasure, content, and good of an
other. But in case he to whom we wish good, have not yet obtained it, we desire
it him, and thence, that love is termed Love of desire.

3. When Love of benevolence is exercised without correspo^dance of the
beloved, it is called Love of simple benevolence, but when it is practiced with
mutual correspondance it is called love of friendship. Now Mutual
correspondence consists of three things, to wit a mutual love, a mutual
knowledge of the same, conversation and private familiarity.

4. If we love our friend without preferring him before others, it is Simple
familiarity; if with preference, then this familiarity turns to be
Dilection, or as one would say, A love by election, as making choice of this,
from amongst many things we love, and preferring it.

5. Again when by this Dilection we do not much prefer one friend before
others, it is called Simple dilection; but if contrariwise we much more esteem,
and greatly prefer one before another of the same rank, then this friendship
is called Dilection by excellency.

6. But if the esteem, and preference of our friend, though great and without
equal, do yet enter into comparison, and proportion with others, the
friendship shall be called Eminent dilection: but if the eminency thereof do
without proportion incomparably pass all others, then it is graced with the
Title of Incomparable, sovereign, and supereminent dilection; and in a word it
shall be Charity due to one God only: And indeed in our language the word
dear, dearly, indeared, does testify a certain particular esteem, prise,
or valewe: so, that as amongst the people the word HOMO is almost appropriated
to the male-kind as to the more excellent sex: and the word ADORATION is in a
manner due to God only as it is prime object: so the word CHARITY is
appropriated to him, as to the supreme and sovereign dilection.

That charity ought to be named love. CHAPTER XIIII.
1. ORIGIN says that the holy Scripture, in his opinion, used the word
Charity and Dilection as terms more honest; least the word Love might give
occasion of evil thoughts to the weaker sort, as being more proper to signify
a carnal passion then a spiritual affection. But S. AUGUSTINE having deeplier
weighed the use of Gods word, clearly shows, that the word Love is no less
sacred then the word Dilection, and that as well the one, as the other do
sometimes signify an holy affection, as sometimes also a depraved passion,
alleading to this purpose diverse passages of holy Scripture. But the great S.
DENIS, as chief Doctor of the PROPRIETY OF DIVINE NAMES, goes much further
in favor of the word Love, teaching that the Diuins, that is the Apostels and
their first Disciples (for this Saint knew no other Diuins) to disabuse the
vulgar, and tame their Fancy who took the word Love, in a profaine and
carnal sense, the more willingly employed it to signify divine things, then
that of Dilection, and though they thought that both were indifferently taken
for the same thing: yet some of them were of opinion, that the word Love was
more proper and agreeing to God, then the word Dilection. Hence the divine
IGNATIUS left these words written, MY LOVE IS CRVCIFIED. And as these Ancient
Diuins made use of the word Love in heavenly matters, to quit it of the touch
of impuritie, wherewith in the worlds imagination it was suspected, so to
express humane affections, they pleased to use the word Dilection, as exempt
from all suspicion of dishonestie. Whereupon some of them, as S. DENIS
reports, said, thy Dilection has made entry into my soul as the Dilection
of women, In fine the word Love does signify more fervor, efficacy, and
actiuitie, then that of Dilection; so that amongst the Latins, Dilection is
much less significatiue then Love. CLAUDIUS says, the great Orator bears me
Dilection, and to say it more excellently, He loves me: and therefore the word
Love, as the more excellent, has justly been imposed upon Charity as
principal, and most eminent of all Loves. For these reasons, and for that I
pretended to speak of the Acts of Charity more then of her habits, I have
entitled this small work, A TREATISE OF THE LOVE OF GOD.

Of the conueniencie betwixt God and man. CHAPTER. XV.
1. AS soon as a man takes the Divinity into his consideration with a little
atte^tion, he feels a certain delightful leaping of the heart, witnessing
that God, is God of man's heart, and that our understanding is never so filled
with pleasure, as in this consideration, the least knowledge whereof, as says
the prince of Philosophers, is more worth then the greatest of other things, as
the least Sun beam is brighter, then the greatest from the Moon, or
stars; yea is more lightsome then the Moon, and stars altogether, so that
if any dreadful accident assaie our heart, it has presently recourse to the
Divinity, protesting therein, that when all other things fail him, that only
stands his friend, and when danger threateneth, that only is his sovereign
good, and can save and warrant him.

2. This confidence, this pleasure which man's heart naturally takes in God,
can spring from no other root then from the conueniencie which is betwixt God
and man's soul, a great, but secret conueniencie; a conueniencie which each
one knows, but few understands; a conueniencie which cannot be denied, nor yet
be well founded; we are created to the similitude and likeness of God: what is
this to say? if not, that we have an extremely great proportion with the
divine Majesty.

3. Our soul is spiritual, indivisible, immortal, understands, wills, and
that freely, is capable of discourse, judgment, knowledge, and of virtues, in
all which it resembles God. It is all in all, and all in every part of the
body, as the Divinity is all in this our All, and all in every part thereof:
man knows and loves himself by acts produced, and expressed by his
understanding, and will, distinguished in them selves; remaining
notwithstanding inseparably united in the soul, and in these faculties from
whence they proceed. So the Son proceeds from the Father, as his knowledge
expressed; and the Holy Ghost, as love expired, and produced from the Father
and the Son: both the Persons being distinct in them selves, and from the
Father, and yet inseparable and united, or rather one same sole, simple, only,
indivisible Divinity.

4. But besides this conueniencie of similitude, there is an incomparable
correspondence betwixt God and man, by reason of their reciprocal perfection,
not that God can receive any perfection from man, but because, as man cannot be
perfected but by the divine Bounty, so the divine Bounty can scarcely so well
exercise it is perfection out of it self, as upon our humanity, the one has
great want, and capicitie to receive good; the other great abundance, and
inclination to bestow it: nothing is so agreeable to poverty as a liberal
abundance, nor to a liberal abundance, as a needy poverty, and by how much
the good is more abundant, by so much more strong is the inclination to pour
fourth, and communicate it self: By how much more the poor man is in want, by
so much greater is his appetite to receive, as an empty thing to fill it
self. The concurrence then of abundance and poverty, is most sweet and
agreeable: nor could one almost have discerned, whether the abounding good has
a greater contentment in opening, and communicating it self; or the needy and
indigent good in receiving and drawing to it self; if our Savior had not
said, that there is a greater felicity in giving then in receiving: but where
there is more felicity, there is more satisfaction, and therefore the divine
bounty receives greater pleasure in giving, then we in receiving.

5. Mothers have sometimes their breasts so fruitful and abundant, that they
cannot contain, but give them some child to suck, and though the child draw
the pappe with great ardour, yet does the Mother give it more ardently, the
sucking child pressed by it is necessity, and the nourishing Mother pressed
with her fecunditie.

6. The sacred Spouse wished for the holy kiss of union: o says she, let him
deigne me a kiss of his mouth. But is there Sympathy enough o thou Beloved of
the Beloved betwixt thee and thy heavenly Spouse, to come to the union which
thou desire? I quoth she, give me this kiss of union o thou dear friend of
my heart, for thy dugges are better then wine, though perfumed with excellent
odours. New wine works and boyles in it self by virtue of it is goodness, and
cannot be contained within the piece, and thy dugges are yet better, they
press thy breast with continual shuttings pouring out their superabundant
milk, as wishing to be discharged of it: and to draw the children of thy heart
to suck them, they pour out a more powerfully drawing odor then all the
odours of perfums, so that THEOTIME we stand in need of Gods abundance being
poor and needy, but Gods abundance has no need of our poverty but by
reason of the excellency of his perfection, and bounty. Bounty, which is not
at all bettered by communication: For it does acquire nothing in pouring it
self out of it self, but contrariwise gives: but our poverty would remain
abject and miserable, if it were not enriched by the divine abundance.

7. Our soul then seeing that nothing can perfectly content her, and that
nothing the world can afforde, is able to fill her capacity, considering that
her understanding has an infinite inclination still to know more; and her will
an unwearied appetite to search and love good: has she not reason to cry out.
Ah, I am not then made for this world! There is a sovereign good on which I
depend, an infinite workman who has impressed in me this endless desire of
knowing, and this insatiable appetite: and therefore I must tend and extend my
self toward him, to unite and join my self to his bounty, to whom I
appertain and am; Such is the sympathy betwixt God and man's soul!

That we have a natural inclination to love God above all things. CHAPTER XVI.
1. IF there were any of that integrity and original justice, in which ADAM
was created, though otherwise not helped by any other assistance, then that
which he affords to all Creaturs in common, to produce actions befitting
their naturs, they should not only have an inclination to love God above all
things, but even naturally they could put in execution that so just an
inclination: for as this heavenly author and Nature-maister does cooperate,
and lend his strong hand to the fires ascent, to the waters course toward the
sea, to the earth's descent unto the Center and it is abode there. So having
with his own finger planted in man's heart a special natural inclination not
only to love good in general; but in particular, and above all things to love
his divine goodness, which is better and more amiable then all things
together. The sweetness of his sovereign providence required, that he should
co^tribute to the happy men of whom we speak, as much help as should be
necessary to practice, and effect that inclination; And of one side this help
should be natural, as being agreeable to nature, and tending to the love of
God, as he is author and sovereign Master of nature; and on the other side it
should be supernatural; because it would correspond not with man's pure nature,
but with nature adorned, enriched and honored by original justice, which is a
supernatural quality proceeding from Gods special favor. But as touching
love above all things, which should be exercised according to this help, it
should be called natural, because virtuous actions take their names from their
objects and motives, and this love whereof we speak should tend only to God,
as acknowledged to be Author, Lord ad sovereign of every creature by a
natural light only, and consequently to be amiable and estimable above all
things, by natural propension and inclination.

2. And although now our humane nature be not endewed with that health and
original Justice, which the first man had in his Creation, and that
contrariwise we are greatly depraved by sin, yet notwithstanding the holy
inclination of of loving God above all things stays with us, as also the
natural light by which we see his sovereign goodness more amiable then all
other things, and it is impossible that one thinking attentively upon God, yea
even by natural discourse only, should not feel a certain touch of love,
which the secret inclination of our nature does excite in the bottom of our
hearts, by which at the prime apprehe^sion of this prime and sovereign object,
the will is prevented, and perceiues her self stirred up to a complacence in
him.

3. It happens often amongst PARTRIDGES, that one steals away an others eggs
with intention to sit them, whether moved by a greediness to become Mothers,
or a stupiditie which makes them mistake their own: And behold a strange
thing, yet not without good testimony; the young one which was hatched, and
nourished under the wings of a stranger Partridge, at her true Mothers first
call, who had laid the egg whence she was hatched, quits the pilching
Partridge, renders her self to her first Mother, and puts her self into her
Couie, by the correspondance which she has with her first origin: a
correspondance notwithstanding which appeared not, but remained secret, shut
up, and as it were put a sleep in the botton of nature, till she met with her
object, which suddenly excited and in a sort awakened, strikes the stroke, and
turns the young Partridge's appetite to her former duty. It Is the like THEOTIME
of our heart, which though it be couied, nourished, and bred amongst corporal,
base, and terreane things, and in a manner under the wings of nature,
notwithstanding at the first view it takes of God, upon the first intelligence
it receives of him it is Natural and prime inclination to love God, which was
dull and imperceptible, does waken in an instant, and of a sudden appears as a
spark from amongst the finders, which touching our will, lanceth her with
Supreme love dew unto the Sovereign and prime principale of all things.

That we have not naturally the power to love God above all things. CHATPER.
XVII.
1. THe Eagle has a good heart, and that, seconded with a strong winge for
flight, yet has she imcomparably more sight then winge, and does cast with
quicker dispatch, and in further distance her eye, then her body: so our
souls animated with an holy natural inclination toward the Divinity, has
far more light in her Understanding to see how much it is amiable, then force
in her will to love it in effect: For sin has much more debilitated man's
will, then dimmed his Reason; and the rebellion of the sensual appetite which
we call Concupiscence does indeed disturb the Understanding; but it is quite
contrary to the will, stirring up against it seditions and reuoults: so that
the poor will wholly infirm, and shaken with continual assaults, which
Concupiscence waigeth against her, cannot make so great progress in divine
Love, as Reason and Natural inclination suggesteth that she ought to do.

2. Alas THEOTIME, how fair arguments, not only of a great knowledge of God,
but also of a great inclination toward him, have those great Philosophers,
SOCRATES, PLATO, TRISMEGISTVS, ARISTOTLE, HIPPOCRATES, SENECA, EPICTETES, left
behind them. SOCRATES the most laudable amongst them, came to the clear
knowledge of the unity of God, and felt in himself such an inclination to
love him, that as S. AUGUSTINE witnesses, many were of opinion that he never
had other aim in teaching moral Philosophy, then to purify their wits for
the better contemplation of the Sovereign good, which is the most indivisible
Divinity. And for PLATO he does sufficiently declare himself in his
definition of Philosophy, and of a Philosopher, saying that to do the part of
a Philosopher is nothing else but to love God, and a Philosopher no other thing
then, A Lover of God. What shall I say of great ARISTOTLE, who so
efficaciously proves God's unity, and spoake so honorably of it, in diverse
occurrences.

3. But o eternal God! those great wits which had so great knowledge of the
Divinity, and so great a propension to love it, wanted all of them force and
courage to love it well indeed. By visible things they came to the invisible
things of God, yea even to his eternal virtue, and Divinity says the
Apostle; in so much, as they are inexcusable as having known God, and not
having glorified him as God, nor rendered him thanks. Indeed they glorified
him in some sort attributing unto him the sovereign Titles of honor, yet did
they not glorify him as they ought; that is, they glorified him not above all
things, not having the heart to ruinate Idolatry, but communicated with it,
detaining Verity, which they knew, prisoner by injustice in their hearts, and
preferring the honor and vain repose of their life, before the honor due
unto God, they vanished in their own knowledge.

4. Is it not great pity THEOTIME to see SOCRATES, as PLATO reports, speak
upon his deathbed, concerning the Gods, as though there had been many, he
knowing so well that there was but one only? Is It not a thing to be deplored,
that PLATO who understood so clearly the truth of the Divine unity, should
ordain that sacrifice should be done to many Gods? And is it not a lamentable
thing that TRISMEGISTVS should so basely lament, and plain the abolishment of
Idolatry, who in so many occasions, had spoaken so worthily of the Divinity?
But above all I admire the poor good man EPICTETES, whose words and sentences
are so sweet in our tongue, translated by the learned, and fair Plume of the
R. F. D. JOHN of S. FRANCIS, Provincial of the Congregation of the FVLIANS in
GAVLE, not long ago exposed to our view. For what a pity was it I pray you to
see this excellent Philosopher, speak of God some times with such gust,
feeling, and Zeal, that one would have taken him for a Christian, coming from
some holy, and profound meditation, and yet again at diverse times, mentioning
the Pagan Gods? Alas this good man who knew so well the unity of God and had
so much gust in his bounty, why had he not a pious jealousy of the divine
honor to the end not to flatter or dissemble in a matter of so great
consequence?

5. In sum THEOTIME our catiue nature, disinabled by sin, is like our
country Palme-trees, which in deed make some imperfect productions, and as it
were essays of fruit, but to bear entire, ripe, and seasoned Dates, is
reserved for a better Climate; for even so certes, man's heart does naturally
produce certain Onsets of God's love but to proceed so far, as to love him
above all things, which is the fulness of loves grouth, due unto this
Supreme goodness, this is proper only to hearts animated and assisted with
heavenly grace, being in the state of holy charity: and this little imperfect
love, of whose touches nature in her self is sensible, is but a will without
will, a will that would, but will not; a sterill will, which does not produce
true effects, a will sick of the Palsy, which sees the healthful Pond of
holy Love; but has not the strength to throw herself into it; to conclude
this will is an abortiue of the good will, and has not necessary life, and
generous vigor, to prefer God in effect before all things. Whereupon the
Apostle in person of the sinner, cries out, There is will in me, but I find not
the means to accomplish it.

That the natural inclination which we have to love God is not without profit.
CHAPTER XVIII.
1. But seeing we have not power naturally to love God above all things, why
have we naturally an inclination to it? Is not Nature vain to incite us to a
Love, which she cannot bestow upon us? Why does she move in us a thirst of a
precious water, whereof she cannot make us drink? Ah THEOTIME how good God was
with us! the perfidiousnesse which we did commit in offending him, deserved
truly that he should have deprived us of all the marks of his benevolence,
and of the favor which he deigned to our nature, when he imprinted upon her
the light of his divine countenance, and endued our hearts with a ioyfulnesse
to perceive themselves inclined to the love of the divine goodness, to the end
that the Angels seeing this miserable man, might by way of compassion have
occasion to say; is this the creature perfect in beauty? the glory of the
earth?

2. But this infinite Clemency could never be so rigorous to the work of his
hands. He saw that we were clothed with flesh; A wind which consumes in
passing and returns not; and therefore according to the bowels of his Mercy,
he would not utterly ruinate us, nor deprive us of the sign of his lost grace,
to the end that weighing, and feeling in our selves this inclination, and
propension to love, we should endeavor to love indeed, and to the end that
none might justly say, Who will show us the God? For though by this sole
natural inclination we cannot be so happy, as to love God as we ought; yet if
we imploie it faithfully, the sweetness of the divine Piety, would afford us
some assistance, by means whereof, we might make progress, and seconding this
first assistance. God would bestow upon us another greater, and conduct us from
good to better in all sweetness, till he brought us to the Sovereign love, to
which our natural inclination draws us; sythence it is certain, that the
divine goodness does never deny his helping hand, more and more to advance
him whom he sees faithful in a little, and do what he is able.

3. This natural inclination then which we have to love God above all things,
is not left for nothing in our hearts: for God of his part makes use of it as
of a Handle, by which he takes hold, to draw us more sweetly unto himself;
and it seems the Divine Goodness by this impression, does in some sort, hold
our hearts tied, as little birds in a string, by which he can draw us when it
pleases his mercy to take pity upon us: to us it is a mark and memorial of
our first Principle, and Creator, to whose love it moves us, leaving in us a
secret intimation, that we belong to his Divine Goodness. Even as Hearts whom
princes have sometimes taken, and put upon them Collers with their Arms,
though afterward they cause them so to be let loose, and run at liberty in
the Forest, do not leave to be known to any that lights upon them, not only
to have been once taken by the Prince, whose Cognoisance they bear but also to
be still reserved for him: for so the extreme old age of a Heart was known,
which according to some Historians was taken three hundred years after the
death of Caesar, because he was found in a Collar with Cesars Arms upon it, and
this Mote: CAESAR LET ME GO.

4. Certes the honorable inclination which God has left in our hearts does
testify as well to our friends as our enemies, that we did not only sometimes
belong to our Creator, but furthermore, though he did let us run, and leave
us to the mercy of our freewill, that we do still appertain unto him, and he
reserved a right in us, to take us again to himself when he pleased, to save
us according as his holy and sweet providence shall require. Hence the Royal
Prophet terms this inclination, not a light only, in that it makes us see
whether we are to tend, but also, a Joy and a cheerfulness, for that it does
comfort us in our straying, giving us a hope that he who did ingraue and left
in us this fair mark of our origin, pretends also and desires to reduce and
bring us back thither, if we be so happy as to leave our selves to the will of
the divine goodness.

The end of the first book.
THE SECOND BOOK. THE HISTORY OF THE GENERATION, OR heavenly birth of divine
Love.
That the divine perfections are but one only, yet an infinite perfection.
FIRST CHAPTER.
I. WHEN the sun rises read, soon after turning black, or hollow and
bended; or else when it sets bleake, pale, and sad, we say it is a sign of
rain. THEOTIME the sun is neither read, black, pale graie, nor green;
This great light is not obnoxious to vicissituds or change of colors, having no
other color at all, then it is most clear and perpetual brightness, which,
unless by Miracle, is unvariable. But we use this manner of speech, because it
seems such to us, following the variety of vapors interposed betwixt it and
us, making it so diversely appear.

2. Now we discourse in like manner of God, not so much according to that which
he in himself is, as by his works; by means whereof we contemplate him: for
according to our diverse considerations we name him diversely, even as though he
had a great multitude of different Excellences and Perfections; If we consider
him as he punishes the wicked, we term him JUST; If as he delivers sinners
from their misery, we publish him MERCIFVLL; As he created all things and
works Miracles, we name him OMNIPOTENT; as exactly performing his promises,
we diuulge him TRVE; as ranging all things in so goodly an order, we instile
him MOST-WISE: and consequently behoulding the diversity of his works, we
attribute unto him great diversity of perfections; This notwithstanding, in
God there is neither Variety, nor any kind of different Perfections. But he is
in himself one, most sole, most simple and most indiuisibly one Perfection:
for all that is in him, is no other thing then himself: And all the
Excelle^cies which we say are in him in so great diversity, are there united
in a most simple, and pure Unity. And as the Sun has none of the colors
which we asscribe unto it, but one sole most clear light, passing all color,
and re^dring all colors actually visible: so in God there is none of those
Perfections which we imagine, but one only most pure excellency, which is
above all Perfection, and gives perfection to all that is perfect. Now to
assign a perfect name to this Supreme excellency, which in it is most
singular unity does comprehend, yea surmount all excellency, is not within
the reach of a Creature Humane or Angelical. For as we find in the Apocalypse
our Lord has a Name which no man knows but himself; for that he only
perfectly seeing his own infinite Perfection, he also can only express it in
a Name proportionable: whence the Ancients affirmed, that God alone was true
Divine; for so much as none but he only could arrive to the full knowledge of
the infinite greatness of the divine Perfection, nor consequently set it out
in words. For this cause, God by the Angel answering Samsons Father who
demanded his Name. Why do thou demand my Name quoth he, which is Admirable?
As though he would have said; my Name may be admired, but never pronounced by
Creaturs: It must be adored, but cannot be comprised, save by me, who only can
pronounce the proper Name, by which truly and to the life I express my
Excellency. Our thoughts are too feeble to form a conceit which might
represent an Excellency so Immense, that comprehends in his most simple, and
most indivisible Perfection, distinctly and perfectly all other Perfections, in
an infinitely excellent and eminent manner, to which our thoughts cannot raise
themselves; At least in some sort to speak of God, we are forced to use a
great number of names saying that he is GOOD, WISE, OMNIPOTENT, TRVE, JUST,
HOLY, INFINITE, IMMORTAL, INVISIBLE. And certes we say true, God is all this
together, because he is more then all this; that is to say he is in so pure,
excellent, and elevated a manner, that in one most simple perfection he
contains the Virtue, Vigor, and excellency of all perfection.

3. So Manna was one only meat which containing in it se^fe the taste and
virtue of all other meats; one might have said of it, that it had the taste of
Lemmons, Melons, Raysins, Prunes, and Pears, yet might one truelyer have
said, that it had not all these gusts, but one only, which was properly it is
own: containing notwithstanding in it is unity, all that was agreeable, and to
be desired in all the diversity of all other gusts. As the herb DEDECATHEOS
which as PLINY says curing all deseases, is neither Rubarbe, Seen, Rose,
Betonie, or Bugle, but a pure simple, which in the only simplicity of it is
propriety contains as much virtue as the mixture of all the other medecins. O
Abyss of divine Perfections! how admirable thou art, to possess in one only
Perfection, the Excellency of all Perfection, in so excellent a sort, that
none can comprehend it but thy self?

4. We will say much, says the holy Scripture of this matter, and yet shall
always come short in words, the sum of all discourse is, that he is all
things. If we glory, to what purpose shall it be? for the Almighty is above
all his works. Blessing our Lord, exalte him as much as thou can, for he
passes all Praise: In exalting him take breath again, marry weary not your
self in it, for you shall never be able to comprehend him. No THEOTIME we can
never comprehend him, sith, as S. JOHN says, he is larger then our heart. Yet
nevertheless let each Spirit praise our Lord, calling him by all the most
eminent Names which may be found. And for the greatest Praise we can render
unto him, let us confess that never can he be sufficiently praised. And for
the most excellent Name we can attribute unto him, let us protest that his name
passes all Names, nor can we worthily name him.

That in God there is but one only Act, which is his proper Divinity.
CHAPTER. II.
1. THere are in us great diversity of Faculties, and Habits, which do
produce great variety of actions, and they also an incomparable number of
works. For in this manner the Faculties of hearing, seeing, tasting, touching,
moving, ingendering, nourishing, willing, and the Habits of speaking, walking,
playing, singing, sowing, leaping, swimming, are diverse, as also the actions
and works which issue from these faculties and Habits, are much different.

2. But it is not the like in God: for in him there is One only most simple
infinite Perfection, and in that Perfection one only most sole, and most pure
Act, yea to speak more sainctly, and sagely. God is one sole most soueraignly
indivisible, and most indiuisibly sovereign Perfection; and this Perfection is
one sole most purely simple, and most simply pure Act, which being no other
thing then the proper divine Essence, it is consequently ever permanent and
eternal. Nevertheless, miserable Creaturs that we are, we talk of Gods
Actions, as though daily done in great quantity and variety, knowing yet the
contrary. But our weakness THEOTIME forces us to this, for our Speech can
but follow our Understanding; and our Understanding the customarie passage of
things with us. Now for as much as in natural things there is hardly any
diversity of works, without diversity of Actions; when we behold so many
different works, so great variety of productions, and the innumerable
multitude of works of the divine Puissance, we deem forthwith, that this
diversity is caused by as many Acts as we see different Effects, and we speak
of them accordingly for our more ease, and to conform our selves to the
ordinary practice and custom we have to understand things, and yet do not we
in this violate Truth; For though in God there is no multitude of Actions, but
one sole act which is the Divinity it self; this Act notwithstanding is so
perfect, that it comprehends by manner of Excellency, the force and virtue of
all the Acts which might seem requisite to the production of all the diverse
Effects we see.

3. God spoake but one word, and in virtue of that in a moment, the Sun,
Moon, and that innumerable multitude of Stars, with their differences in
brightness, motion, and influence, were made. He spoake, and scarcely yet
begun:
Behold a perfect work was done.
One of Gods words filled the air with birds, and sea with fishes: made
spring from the earth all the plants, and all the beasts we see. For though the
sacred Historian, accommodating himself to our fashion of understanding
recounts, that God did often repeat that Omnipo^tent word, according to the
days of the world's Creation; nevertheless properly speaking, this word was
purely one; so that David terms it a Breathing or Aspiration of the divine
Mouth; that is one only Touch of his infinite will, which so powrefully with
his virtue does bedewe the variety of things created, that thereby we conceive
them as multiplied and diuersifiied into differences proportionable to the
Effects, though indeed it is most indivisible, and most simple; So does S.
CHRYSOSTOM mark that which MOSES made many words off describing the
Creation of the world, the glorious S. JOHN expressed in a word, saying, that
by the word, that is, by this Eternal word which is the Son of God, all
was made.

4. This word then THEOTIME being most simple, and most indivisible produces
all the distinction of things; being inuariable produces all good changes; and
in fine being permanent in his Eternity, gives succession, vicissitude,
order, rank and season to all things.

5. Let us imagine I pray you of one side a Painter drawing the picture of our
Saviors Birth (and I writ this in the Feast dedicated to this holy Mystery)
doubtless he will give a thousand and a thousand touches with his Pencill, and
will not only employ days, but even weeks, and months to perfect this
Table, as the variety of persons and other things which he will there
represent shall require. But on the other side let us behold a Stamper of
picturs, who having spread his leaf upon the graven Planch of the Nativity
giving but one only stroke of his Press, and in that only touch THEOTIME he
will perfect his work, and presently he will take off his picture, gratfully
representing in a fair and smouth cut all that ought to be imagined according
to the sacred History: and though in one motion he performed the work; yet it
carries a great number of personages and other different things, each one well
distinguished in his order, rank, place, distance, and proportion. And one
not acquainted with the secret, would be astonished to see proceed from one
Act, so great variety of effects. So THEOTIME Nature as a Painter, multiplies,
and diuersifies her Acts, according as the works she has in hand are diverse;
and she takes great time to finish great effects; But God as the Stamper, gave
being to all the diversity of Creaturs which have been, are, or shall be by
one only touch of his omnipotent will, drawing from his Idea, as from a well
graven stamp, this admirable difference of persons, and other things which
succeed in seasons, ages, and times in their due order and being, this
Sovereign unity of the divine Act being opposed to Confusion and Disorder,
not to Distinction and Variety, which it implies in the composition of
beauty, reducing all Differences and Diversities to Proportion; Proportion to
Order, and Order to the Unity of the world which compriseth all things created
visible and invisible, all which together are called the Universe peradventure
because their Diversity is reduced to Unity; as though one would say
One-diuerse that is One and Diverse, Unity with Diversity, or Diversity with
Unity.

6. In sum, the sovereign divine Unity does diuersifie; and his permanent
Eternity gives change to all things, because the perfection of this unity
being above all difference and variety it is able to furnish all the
diversities of created perfections with their being; and contains a virtue to
produce them; In sign of which the Scripture relats, that God in the beginning
said, let the lights be made in the firmament of heaven, and let them separate
day from night, and let them be signs for times, days, and years; further
we see even to this day a perpetual revolution of times and seasons, which
shall continue till the end of the world, to teach us, that as One word of his
commanding will
Does all the world with motion fill.
So the only eternal will of his divine Majesty, extends his force from age
to age, yea to the ages of ages, to all that has been, is, or shall be
eternally, nothing at all having any being, but by this sole, most simple, and
most eternal divine Act, to which be honor and glory. Amen.

Touching the divine providence in general. CHAPTER. III.
1. GOd then THEOTIME needs no diversity of Acts sith that one only divine
Act of his All puissant will by reason of it is infinite perfection, is
sufficient to produce all the variety of works. But we mortals must treat
of them, in such an intelligible method and manner, as our small capacities
may attain unto. Following which, in treating of the Divine providence, let us
consider I pray you the reign of the great SOLOMON, as a perfect model of
the art of good government.

2. This great king then, knowing by divine inspiration that the Weale-publicke
depends upon Religion, as the Body upon the Soul: and Religion upon the
Weale-publicke, as the Soul upon the Body, he disposed in his mind of all
the parts requisite, as well for the establishment of Religion, as that of the
Commonwealth; and touching Religion, he determined that a Temple was to be
erected of such and such a length, breadth, and hight; so many Porches, and
Portalls, so many windows and so fourth concerning the rest which belonged to
the Temple: Then so many Sacryficers, so many Singers, and other officers of
the Temple. And as for the Common wealth, he ordained to make a Royal Palace,
and a Court for his Majesty; in it, so many Stewards, so many Gentlemen and
other Courtiers. And for the people, Judges and other Magistrates who were to
execute Justice: further for the assurance of his kingdom and establishment of
the wealpublicks repose, whereof himself was partaker, he appointed in time of
peace a powrefull Preparation for war, and to this effect two hundred and
fifty Commanders in diverse charges, forty thousand horse, and all that great
furniture which the Scripture, and Historians do testify.

3. Now having thus made his count, and disposed in himself of all the
principal things requisite for his Kingdom, he came to the Act of Providence,
and passed in his cogitation all things necessary for the structure of the
Temple; to maintain the sacred Officers, Ministers, Royal Magistrates, and men
of arms, which he had proiected, he resolved to send to HIERAM for fit timber,
to begin commerce with PERV, and OPHIR, and to take all convenient means to
procure all things requisite for the entertainment and good conduct of his
enterprise. Neither stayed he there THEOTIME, for having made his project, and
deliberated in himself about the proper means to accomplish it; coming to
the practice, he created officers according to his determination, and by a good
government caused provision to be made of all things requisite to comply with,
and execute their charges; so that having the knowledge of the art of well
governing, he executed that disposition which he had passed in his mind
touching the creation of Officers of every sort, and effected his Providence by
the good government which he used; and so his art of good government which
consisted in disposition, providence, or foresight, was practiced in the
creation of Officers, Government, and good carriage of things; But for so much
as that disposition was frutelesse without the Creation of Officers, and
Creation also vain without Providence which looks for necessaries for the
conservation of Officers created or erected; and in fine, that this
Conservation effected by good government, is no other thing then Providence put
in execution: and therefore not only the Disposition, but also the Creation,
and good government of SOLOMON, were called by the name PROVIDENCE: nor do we
indeed say that a man is provident unless he govern well.

4. Now THEOTIME speaking of heavenly things, according to the impression made
in us by the consideration of humane things, we affirm that God, having had an
eternal, and most perfect knowledge of the Art of making the world for his
glory; First in his divine Understanding, he disposed all the principal parts
of the Universe, which might render him honor: to wit Angelical and Humane
Nature; and in the Angelical Nature, the variety of Hierarchies and Orders
taught us by the sacred Scripture, and holy Doctors: as also amongst Men he
ordained that there should be so great diversity as we see. Further in this
same Eternity, he made account in himself, and foresaw all the means
requisite for Men, and Angels to come to the end for which he had ordained
them, and so made the Act of his providence, and without staying there to
effect his Disposition, he Actually created Angels, and men: and to effect his
Providence he did and does furnish reasonable Creatures with all things
necessary to attain Glory: So that to speak in a word, the Sovereign
providence is no other thing, then the Act whereby God does furnish me^ or
Angels, with the means necessary or profitable to the obtaining of their end.
But because our means are of diverse kinds, we do also diuersifie the name
of Providence, and say that there is one Providence natural, another
Supernatural, and that this again is either General, special, or particular.

5. And because hereafter THEOTIME I shall exhort you to join your will to
God's Providence; while I am in hand with this discourse, I Will tell you a word
of Natural providence. God then willing to provide men of natural means
necessary for them to render glory to the divine bounty, he produced in
their behalf all the beasts, and plants: and to prouid for them also, he
produced variety of Territories, Seaso^s, Fountains, Winds, Rain, and as
well for man, as the other things appertaining unto him, he created the
elements, heaven, and stars, ordaining in an admirable manner, that almost
each Creature affords a reciprocal service one to another; Horses carry us,
and we dress and keep them; Sheep do feed and cloth us, and we graze them;
the Earth sends her vapors to the air, it renders the^ in showers; the Hand
serves the Foot, and the Foot the Hand. O! He that should consider the
commerce and general traffic with a great correspondance, exercised amongst
Creaturs, how many amorous passions would move his heart toward this sovereign
wisdom, to cry out; thy Providence, o great eternal father, gouernes all
things! S. BASILE and S. AMBROSE in their EXAMEROVS, the good LEWIS OF GRANADO
in his Introduction to the Creed, and LEWIS RICHEOME in diverse of his fair
works, would suggest many motives to well borne souls, to profit in this
subject.

6. Thus Dear THEOTIME this Providence touches all, reigns over all, and
reduces all to his glory. There is notwithstanding Chance, and Unexpected
accidents, but that in regard of us only; for doubtless they were most
certain to the Divine providence, who foreseeth and directs them to the good
of the worlds Commonwealth. Now these accident s do happen by the concourse of
diverse causes, which having no natural alliance one with the other, do
produce each of them their particular effect, yet so as from their concourse,
there issues another effect, of a diverse nature, to which though it could not
be foreseen, all the different causes did contribute. For example ESCHILVS his
curiosity was justly chastised, who being foretold by a Divine, that he
should perish by the fall of a house, kept himself all that day in a plain
field to escape the destiny, and staying close to it bareheadded, a Faulcon
who dareing in the air held in her beeke a TORTOISE (espying his bald head,
and gessing it had been the point of a Rock) let the shell fall right upon
him; and behold ESCHILVS dying in the broad field, suppressed with the house,
broken with the shell. This was doublesse an Unexpected chance: For he betook
not himself to the field to die, but to eschape death; nor did the Fanlcon
dream of cracking a Poets crown, but the crown and shell of the Tortoise, to
make him self master of the meat within; yet it chanced to the contrary,
for the Tortoise remained safe, and the poor ESCHILVS was slain. According to
us, this chance was unexpected, but in respect of the Divine providence which
looked from above and saw the concourse of causes, it was an Act of justice
punishing the superstition of the man. Old IOSEP'S aduenturs were admirable for
variety, and for their passages betwixt two extreemes. His Brethren, who to
extinguish him had sold him, were amazed to see him become Viceroy, and were
mighty apprehensiue that he remained sensible of the wrong they had done him:
but no, said he, it was not so much by your plot, that I was sent hither as by
the Divine providence, you had wicked designs against me, but God turned all
to good. Do you mark THEOTIME the world would have termed this Fortune or
Doubtful event, which JOSEPH calls a project of the Sovereign Providence,
which turns and reduces all to his service. The like it is of all things
which happen in the world, yea even of Monsters, the birth of which makes
complete and perfect works more esteemed, begets admiration, prouokes
discourse whence many wholesome thoughts proceed; In fine they are to the
world, as shadows to picturs, which give a grace, and seem even to raise the
colors.

Of the supernatural providence which God uses toward reasonable creaturs.
CHAPTER IIII.
1. All God's works are ordained to man and Angels salvation: but see the
order of his providence in this behalf, in such wise as by the observation of
holy Scripturs and the writings of the Ancients we are able to discover it,
and as our weakness permits us to speak of it.

2. God knew from all Eternity that he was able to make an innumerable number
of creaturs in diverse perfections and qualities, to whom he might communicate
himself; and considering that amongst all the sorts of communicatio^s, there
was none so excellent, as to join himself to some created nature in such sort
as the Creature might be ingraffed and implanted in the Divinity, and become
one only person with it; His infinite Bounty which of it self, and by it
self is carried toward a communication, resolved and determined to
communicate himself in this manner, to the end that as eternally there is an
Essential communication in God, by which the Father does communicate all his
infinite and indivisible Divinity to the Son in producing him, and the
Father and the Son together producing the holy Ghost do communicate to him
also their own indivisible Deity. So in like manner this Sovereign
sweetness was so perfectly communicated without himself to a Creature, that
the Created and Divine Nature, retaining each of them their own propriety
were notwithstanding so united together, that they were but one Person.

3. Now of all the Creaturs which that Sovereign omnipotency could produce,
he thought good to make choice of the same Humanity, which afterward in
effect, was joined to the Person of God the Son, to which he determined that
incomparable honor of the Personal union to his divine Majesty, to the end
that for all Eternity, it might enjoy by way of Excellency the treasurs of
his infinite glory, and having thus selected for this happiness, the sacred
Humanity of our Savior: the Supreme providence decreed not to restrain his
goodness to the only Person of his well beloved Son, but favorably to pour
it out upon diverse other Creaturs, and in gross upon the innumerable number
of things which he could produce, he made choice to create Men and Angels to
accompagnie his Son, participate of his graces and glory, adore and praise
him for ever. And for as much as he saw, that he could in diverse manners
effect the Humanity of his Son, making him true Man; as for example,
creating him of nothing, not only in regard of the soul, but even in regard
of the body also, either by forming the body of some precedent matter, as he
did that of ADAM and EVE; or by way of Ordinary generation by man and woman,
and finally by Extraordinary generation of a woman without man; he determined
that the work should be effected by the last way; and of all the women he
might have choisen to this end, he made choice of the most holy virgin our
Lady, by means whereof, the Savior of our souls should not only be Man, but
even a Child of mankind.

4. Furthermore the Sacred providence determined to produce all the other
things, as well natural as supernatural, in behalf of our Savior, to the end
that men and Angels, in serving him, might participate his glory, in sequall
whereof though God would create as well men, as Angels endewed with Freewill,
and possessed of Liberty to elect good or evil; yet nevertheless to testify
that of his part they were dedicated to glory, he created them all in
Original Justice which is no other thing then A most sweet love disposing,
converting, and weighing them to eternal felicity.

5. But because this Supreme Wisdom had deliberated to temper this Original
Love in such sort with the will of his Creaturs, that Love should not force the
will, but should leave her in her freedom; he foresaw that a part, yet the
less, of the Angelical nature voluntarily quitting the divine love, should
consequently loose their Glory. And for that, the Angelical nature could not
offend herein, but by an express malice without temptation, or motive
whatsoever which might plead their excuse; and that on the other side, the
far greater part of that same nature remained constant in the service of
their Savior; God who had so amply glorified his Mercy in the work of the
Creation of Angels, would also magnify his Justice, and for his indignations
sake, resolved for ever to abandon that woeful and accursed troop of
Traitors, who in the fury of their Rebellion had so villanously abandoned him.

6. He also foresaw well, that the first man would abuse his liberty, and
forsaking Grace would loose Glory, yet would he not treat humane nature so
rigorously, as he deliberated to treat the angelical. It Was humane nature
whereof he had determined to take a blessed peace to unite it to his Deity. He
saw that it was a feeble nature, a wind which passes and returns not, that
is, which is dissipated in passing. He considered the surprise which Satan made
against the first man, and weighed the gteatnesse of the temptation which
animated him. He saw that all the race of men perished, by the fault of one
only, so that moved by these reasons, he beheld our nature with the eye of
Pity, and resolved to take it to his Mercy.

7. But to the end that the sweetness of his Mercy might be adorned with the
beauty of his Justice he deliberated to save man by way of a rigorous
Redemption, which being it could not well be effected, but by his Son, he
concluded that he should redeem man, not only by the price of one of his
amourous actions, though more then most sufficient, to ransom a thousand
millions of worlds: but even by all the innumerable amourous actions, and
dolourous passions which he should do, or suffer till death, and death of the
cross, to which he determined him; that so he might be made a companion of our
Miseries, to make us afterward companions of his Glory, showing thereby the
riches of his Bounty in this copious, abundant, superabundant, magnificent,
and excessive Redemption which regained and restored us all necessaries to
attain Glory, so that no man can ever plain, as though the Divine mercy were
deficient to any

That the heavenly providence has provided man of a most abundant redemption.
CHAPTER. V.
1. NOw THEOTIME, affirming that God had seen, and willed first one thing, and
then secondly another, observing an order in his wills: I intended it according
to my declaration made before, to wit that though all this passed in a most
sole and most simple Act: yet in that Act, the order, distinction, and
dependence of things were no less observed, the^ in case there had been
indeed many Acts in the Understanding and will of God. And since that every
well ordered will determined to will diverse objects equally present, does love
better, and above all the rest that which is most amiable: it follows that
the Sovereign Providence making his eternal purpose and design of all which
he would produce he first willed and Loved, by a preference of Excellency, the
most amiable object of his Love which is our Savior; and then the other
Creaturs by degrees, according as they more or less belong to his service,
honor, and glory.

2. Thus was all things made for that Deified Man, who for this cause is called
THE FIRST BEGOTTEN OF ALL CREATVRS, possessed by the divine Majesty in the
beginning of his ways, before he made any thing, created in the beginning
before ages: For in him all things are made, he is before all, and all things
are established in him, and he is the head of all the Church, having the
Primacie in, and through all things. The principal reason of planting the
vine, is the fruit, and therefore the fruit is the first thing desired and
aimed at, though the leaves and the buds are first produced. So our great
Savior was the first in the Divine Intention, and in the Eternal Project
which the Divine Providence made of the production of Creaturs, and in
contemplation of this desired fruit, the Vine of the world was planted, and
the succession of many generations established which as leaves, or blossoms do
preceede it as forerunners, and fit preparatiues for the production of that
Grape, which the sacred Spouse does so much praise in the Canticles and the
juice of which does rejoice God and Man.

3. But now my THEOTIME who can doubt of the abundance of means to salvation,
having so great a Savior, in consideration of whom we were made, and by the
merits of whom we were ransomed. For he dyed for all, because all were dead,
and his Mercy was more Sovereign to buie the Race of mortals, then Adams
Misery was Venomous to loose it. And so far was ADAMS fault from surmounting
the Divine Benignity, that contrariwise, it was thereby excited and provoked.
So that by a most sweet, and most loving ANTIPERISTASIS and contention it
received vigor fuom it is adversaries presence, and as recollecting it is forces
to vanquish, it caused grace, to superabound where iniquity had abounded.
Whence the holy Church by a pious excess of admiration cries out upon EASTER
EVE, O Sin of ADAM truly necessary, which was cancelled by the death of
JESUS CHRIST! o Blessed fault, which merited to have such and so great a
Redemour! Certes THEOTIME, we may say as did that Ancient; we were lost, if
we had not been lost; that is our loss brought us profit, sythens in effect
humane nature has received more graces by the redemdemption of her Savior,
then ever she should have received by Adam's innocence, if he had perseuered
therein.

4. For though the Divine Providence has left in man deep marks of his
anger, yea even a midst the graces of his Mercy, as for example, the
necessity of death, sickness, labors, the rebellion of the sensuality, yet
the Divine Assistance, having the upper hand of all these, takes pleasure to
convert these miseries, to the greatest advantage of such as love him, making
Patience rise out of their travails; the Contempt of the world, out of the
necessity of death; a thousand victories over Concupiscence; and as the
Rainebowe touching the Thorn ASPALATHVS makes it more odoriferous then the
Lilly: so our Saviors Redemption touching our miseries, makes them more
profitable, and amiable, then Original Justice could ever have been. The
Angels in heaven says our Savior, do more joy in one penitent sinner, them
in nintie nine just, and so the State of Redemption, is an hundred times better
then that of Innocence. Verily by being watered with our Saviors Blood,
caused by the Isoppe of the Cross, we are reduced to a witness incomparably
more excellent, then the snow of innocence, returning out of the Flood of
health with NAMAN, more pure and unspotted, as though we had never been
Leprous: to the end that the divine Majesty, as he has also ordained we should
do, might not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil by good; that his Mercy
as a sacred oil might keep above Judgment, and his commiseration surpass all
his works.

Of certain special favors exercised by the divine providence in the
Redemption of man. CHAPTER. VI.
1. CErtainly God does admirably show the riches of his incomprehensible power
in this great variety of things which we see in Nature. Yet does he make the
Treasurs of his infinite Bounty more magnificently appear, in the
incomparable variety of benefits which we acknowledge in Grace. For THEOTIME
he was not content with the holy excess of his Mercy, in sending to his
people, that is to Mankind, a general and universal Redemption by means
whereof every one might be saved, but moreover he diuersified it in so many
sorts, that his Liberality did shine amiddest that variety, and that variety
again did mutually imbellish his Lliberalitie.

2. And following this, he first of all prepared for his most holy Mother a
favor, worthy the love of a Son, who being most wise, omnipotent and good,
was to provide himself of a Mother to his liking, and thefore he ordained that
his Redemption should be applied to her by way of a preservative to the end that
sin, which ran from generation to generation, might stop before it came at
her; so that she was ransomed in so excellent a manner, that although the
Torrent of original iniquity came rolling her unfortunate waters upon the
Conception of this sacred Lady, even with as great impetuositie, as against the
daughters of ADAM; yet being arrived there, it did not dare a further passage:
but made a sudden stay, as did of old, the waters of Iordaine, in the days
of IOSVE and for the same respect: for the flood stopped his course in reverence
of the Ark of Alliance which passed; and original sin made his waters
retire, adoring, and dreading the presence of the true Tabernacle of Eternal
Alliance.

3. In this sort then God deturned all bondage from his glorious Mother, giving
her the good of both the states of humane nature: retaining the Innocence
which the first ADAM had lost, and enjoying in an excellent sort the Redemption
which the second did acquire. Whence as a garden of election, which was to
bring fourth the fruit of life, she was made flourishing in all sorts of
perfections; This son of eternal love, having thus decked his Mother with a
Robe of gold wrought in fair variety, that she might be the Queen of his
right hand, that is to say, the first of the elect, which should enjoy the
delights of God's right hand; so that this sacred Mother, as being altogether
reserved for her Son, was by him infranchised, not only from damnation, but
even from all danger of damnation, giving her Assurance of grace, and the
Perfection of grace: not unlike an Aurora who beginning to appear increases
continually in brightness till perfect day light. Admirable redemption!
Master-pece of the Redemour! and Prime of all Redemptions! by which the son
with a truly filial heart, prevented his Mother in the benedictions of
sweetness, he preserved her, not only from sin as he did the Angels, but
even from all danger of sin and every thing that might divert, of hinder her
in the exercise of holy Love. Protesting that amongst all the reasonable
Creaturs he had chosen, this Mother was his only Dove, his entirely perfect,
his wholly dear well beloved without all paragon, and comparison.

4. God also appointed other savors for a small number of rare Creaturs, whom
he would assure from the peril of damnation; as certainly he did S. JOHN
BAPTIST, and probably JEREMY with certain others, which the Divine
Prouiuidence seized upon in their mothers womb, and stated upon them a
Perpetuity of Grace, by which they might remain firm in his Love, though
subject to delays and venial sins, which are contrary to the perfection of
Love, not to Love it self, and these souls in regard of others, are as
Queens continually crowned with Charity, holding the principal place in the
love of their Savior next to his Mother who is Queen of Queens. A Queen not
only crowned with Love, but with the Perfection of love, yea which is yet
more, crowned with her own Son the sovereign object of Love, being that
children are their Fathers and Mothers crowns.

5. There are yet other souls which God determined for a time to leave exposed
to the danger, not of loosing their salvation: but yet in peril to loose his
Love, yea he permitted them to loose it in effect, not assuring them Love for
the whole time of their life, but only for the periode thereof, and for
certain precedent times. Such were the APOSTLES, DAVID, MADELAINE, and diverse
others, who for a time remained out of God's grace, but in the end being
thoroughly converted they were confirmed in grace until death; so that, though
from thence they continued subject to imperfections, yet were they exempt from
all mortal sin, and consequently from danger of loosing the Divine love, and
were as the heavenly spouse his sacred souls, adorned indeed with a wedding
garment of this holy love: yet for all that not crowned; a crown being an
ornament of the head, that is of the prime part of a man: now the first years
of the Souls of this rank, having been subject to terreane love, they were
not to be adorned with the crown of heavenly love, but it is sufficient for
them to wear the Robe which renders them capable of the marriage-bede with the
heavenly Spouse, and to be eternally happy with him.

How admirable the divine providence is in the diversity of graces given to
men. CHAPTER. VII.
1. THere was then in the eternal Providence an incomparable favor for the
Queen of Queens, Mother of fair Dilection, and altogether most entirely
perfect. There were also for certain others, some special favors. After this
the sovereign Bounty poured an abundance of graces, and benedictions upon the
whole race of mankind, and the nature of Angels, with which all were watered,
as with a light which illuminateth every man coming into this world; every one
received their portion, as of seed which falls not only upon the good ground,
but upon the high way, amongst thorns, and upon rocks, that all might be
inexcusable before the Redeemour, if they should not employ this most abundant
Redemption, for their souls health.

2. But albeit THEOTIME that this most abundant sufficiency of grace, be thus
poured upon all humane nature; and that in this we are all equal that a rich
abounda^ce of benedictions is presented to us all; yet the variety of these
favors is so great, that one cannot say whether the greatness of these
graces in so great a diversity, or the diversity in such greatnesses be more
admirable: For who sees not that the means of Salvation amongst Christians are
greater, and more efficacious then amongst Barbarians, and again, that amongst
Christians, there are People and Towns where the Pastors are more profitable
and capable. Now to deny that these exterior means were benefits of the
divine Providence or to doubt whether they did avail to the salvation, and
perfection of souls, were to be ungrateful to the divine Bounty, and belie
certain experience, by which we see that ordinarily where these exterior
helps abound, the interior are more efficacious, and succeed better.

3. Certes as we see, that there are never found two men perfectly resembling
the one the other in natural gifts, so are there never any found wholly equal in
supernatural ones. The Angels, as great S. AUGUSTINE and S. THOMAS assure us,
received grace with proportion to the variety of their natural conditions.
Now they are all either of a different species or at least of a different
condition, being they are distinguished one from another: therefore according to
the diversity of Angels, there are different graces. And though grace is not
given to men according to their natural conditions, yet the divine sweetness
ioyeth, and as one would say exulteth in the production of graces, infinitely
diuersifying them, to the end that out of his variety, the fair enamell of
his Redemption and mercy might appear: whence the Church upon the Feasts of
every Confessor and Bishop does sing: There was not found the like to him; and
as in heaven none knows the new name, save him that receives it, because each
one of the Blessed, has his own a part, according to the new being of glory
which he attained. So in earth, every one does receive a grace so particular,
that all are diverse. Our Savior does also compare his grace to Pearls, which
as Plinnie says, are otherwise called Unions, because every one of them are so
singular in their qualities, that never two of them are found perfectly like.
And as one star is different from another in brightness, so shall one pass
another in glory, a sure sign of their advantage in Grace. Now this variety
in Grace, or this grace in variety, composeth a most sacred beauty, and most
sweet harmony, rejoicing all the holy city of the heavenly Jerusalem.

4. But we must be very wary never to make inquiry, why the supreme wisdom
bestows a GRACE rather upon one the^ another, nor why she makes her favors
abound rather in one behalf the^ another. No THEOTIME, never enter into this
curiosity: For having all of us sufficiently, yea abundantly, that which is
requisite to salvation, what reason can any creature living have to complain,
if it please God to bestow his graces more amply upon one then another? If one
should demand, why God made MELONS greater then STRAWBEARIES, or LYLIES greater
then VIOLETS, why ROSMARIE is not a ROSE, or why the Clouegillow flour is not a
Turnesole: why the Peacocke is more beautiful then the Rate, or why the Figue
is sweet and the Lemma^ sourishe, one would laugh at such demandes, and say;
poor man, since the beauty of the world does require variety, it is
necessary there should be difference, and inequality in things, and that the
one should not be the other? For which cause the one is little, the other great:
the one bitter, the other sweet: the one more, the other less fair. Now, it
is the same in supernatural things: every one has his gift, one thus and
another thus, says the Holy Ghost. It is then an impertinencie to search, why
S. PAVLE had not the grace of S. PETER; or S. PETER that of S. PAVLE; why S.
ANTONIE was not S. ATHANASIVS; or he, S. HIEROME; for one would answer these
demands, that the Church is a garden diapred with infinite flowers: it was
necessary then they should be of diverse quantities, diverse colors, diverse
odours, in fine of different perfections, every of them have their worth,
grace, and beauty; and all of them in the collection of their varieties do
make up a most grateful perfection of beauty.

How much God desires, we should love him. CHAPTER. VIII.
1. ALthough our Saviors Redemption be applied unto us, in as many different
manners, as there be souls; yet so notwithstanding that the universal means
of our Salvation, is Love, which goes through all, and without which nothing is
profitable, as elsewhere, we shall declare. The Cherubin was placed at the gate
of the earthly Paradise with his fiery sword, to teach us that none shall
enter into the heavenly Paradise, who is not pierced through with the sword of
love. For this cause THEOTIME the sweet JESUS who bought us with his blood,
desires infinitely that we should love him, that we might eternally be saved,
and desires we might be saved, that we might love him eternally, his love
tending to our salvation, and our salvation to his love. Ah says he, I came
to put fire into the world, to what end, but that it should burn; But to set
out more to the life the vehemency of his desire, he commands us this love
in admirable terms. Thou shall love says he the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, with all thy soul, with all thy force, this is the first and greatest
Commandment. Good God THEOTIME how amourous the divine heart is of our love,
had it not been sufficient to have published a permission, by which we might
have had leave to love him: as LABAN permitted Jacob to love his fair RACHEL,
and to gain her by services? ah no! he made a further declaration of his
amourous passion of love to us, and commandes us to love him with all our
power, least the consideration of his majesty, and our misery, which puts us
in so great a distance, and inequality, or other pretext whatsoever, might
divert us from his love: In which THEOTIME he well shows that he did not leave
in us a natural inclination to love for nothing: For to the end it might not be
idle, he urges us by this general commandment to employ it, and to the end
this commandment might have effect he furniseth every living creature
abundantly with all means requisite thereunto. The visible Sun touches every
thing with his lively heat, and as the common lover of things below, does
impart unto them requisite vigor to produce. And even so the divine goodness
does animate all souls and encourage all hearts to her love, none at all being
shut up from her heat. The eternal wisdom says Solomon preaches in
public, she makes her voice resou^d amongst the places, she cries and recries
before the people, she pronou^ceth her words in the gates of the City, saying
o children how long will it be, that you will love your infancy? how long will
fools desire hurtful things? and the imprudent hate knowledge? Convert your
selves, return to me upon this aduertissement; ah! behold how I profer you my
spirit, and I will show you my words. And the same wisdom pursues in
EZECHIEL saying. Let no man say I am dead in sin, and how ca^ I recover life
again? Ah no! for hark, God says, I am living, and as true as I live, I
will not the death of a sinner but that he be converted and live. Now, to live
according to God, is to love, and he that loves not remains in death; See now
THEOTIME whether God does not desire we should love him.

2. But he is not content to denounce in this manner publicly his great desire
to be loved, so that every one might receive a part of the seeds of his love,
but he goes even from door to door, knocking and beating; protesting that if
any one open, he will enter, and suppe with him; that is, he will testify all
sorts of good will toward him.

3. But what would all this say THEOTIME but that God does not only give us a
mere sufficiency of means to love him, and in loving him to save our selves:
but even a rich, ample and magnificent sufficiency, and such as ought to be
expected from so great a bounty, as his. The great Apostle speaking to the
obstinate sinner; Do thou contemn, says he, the riches of the bounty,
patience and longanimitie of God? art thou ignorant that the benignity of God
does draw thee to penance? But thou according to thy hardness and impenite^t
heart, do heap up against thy self anger in the day of Anger. My dear
THEO: God does not therefore exercise a mere sufficiency of remedies to
convert the obstinate, but imployes to this end the riches of his bounty. The
Apostle as you see does oppose the riches of God's goodness, against the
treasurs of the impenite^t hearts malice, and says, that the malicious heart
is so rich in iniquity, that he despises eue^ the riches of Gods mildness,
by which he draws him to repentance: and mark, that the obstinate does not
only contemn the riches of God's goodness, but eue^ riches attractiue to
repentance, Riches, whereof one cannot well be ignorant: verily this rich heap,
and abundant sufficiency of means which God freely bestows upon sinners to
love him, does appear almost through the whole Scripture. For see this divine
Lover at the gate, he does not simply beat, but stays beating; he calls the
Soul, go to, rise my well-beloued, dispach, put thy hand to the lock to try
whether it will open: When he preaches amidst the places, he does not simply
preach, but goes crying out, that is, he continues his cry, and when he
proclaims that every one should convert themselves, he thinks he has never
repeated it sufficiently. Convert your selves, convert your selves, do
penance, return to me, live, why do thou die o house of Israel? In
conclusion this heavenly Savior forgets nothing, to show that his mercyes are
above all his works, that his mercy does surpass his Judgment, that his
Redemption is copious, that his love is infinite, and as the Apostle says,
that he is rich in mercy, and by consequence, that his will is, that all men
should be saved, none perish.

How the eternal love of God does prevent our hearts with his inspirations to
the end we might love him. CHAPTER. IX.
1. I Have loved thee with a perpetual charity, and therefore have drawn thee
unto me having pity and mercy upon thee, and again I will reedifie thee, and
thou shall be built again virgin of ISRAEL: These are God's words by which he
promises that the Savior coming into the world shall establish a new reign
in his Church, which shall be his Virgin-spouse, and true spiritual Israelite.

2. Now as you see THEOT: it was not by any merit of the works which we had
done that he saved us, but according to his mercy, his ancient, yea eternal
charity which moved his divine Providence to draw us unto him. For if the
father had not drawn us, we had never come to the Son our Savior, nor
consequently to salvation.

3. There are certain birds THEOT: which Aristotle calls Apodes for that their
legs being extremely short, and their feet feable they have no more use of
them then though they had none at all, so that if at any time they light upon
the ground they are caught, never after being able to take flight, because
having no service of their legs or feet, they have no further power to raise
and regaine themselves into the air, but remain there peuling and dying,
unless some wind favorable to their impotencie, sending out his blastes upon
the face of the earth, sease upon them, and bear them up, as it does many
other things. For then making use of their wings, they correspond to this
first touch and motion which the wind gave them, it also continewing it is
assistance toward them bringing them by little and little to flight.

4. THEO: Angels are like to the birds, which for their beauty and raritie are
called birds of Paradise, never seen in earth, but dead. For those heavenly
spirits had no sooner forsaken Divine love to be fixed upon Self love till
suddenly they fell as dead, buried in Hell, seeing that the same effect which
death has in men, seperating them everlastingly from this mortal life, the
same had the Angels fall in them, excluding them for ever from eternal life.
But we mortals do rather resemble Apodes: For if it chance that we, quitting
the air of holy and divine love, fall upon the earth and adheare to creaturs,
which we do as often as we offend God, we die indeed, yet not so absolute a
death that there rests in us no motion, together with legs and feet to
wit, some weak affections, which enableth us to make some essaies of love, yet
so weakly, that in truth, we are impote^t of our selves to reclaim our hearts
from sin, or restore our selves to the flight of sacred love, which, catifs
that we are, we have perfideously and voluntarily forsaken.

5. And truly we should well deserve to remain abandoned of God, since we have
disloyally abandoned him but his eternal charity does often not permit his
justice to use this chastisement, but exciting his compassion, prouokes him to
reclaim us from our misery, which he does by sending unto us the favorable
wind of his most holy inspiration, which blowing upon our hearts with a sweet
violence, does sease and stir them, advancing our thoughts, and eleuating
our affections into the air of heavenly love.

6. Now this first stirring or motion, which God, causes in our hearts, to
incite them to their own good, is effected indeed in us, but not by us; for
it comes unexpectedly before we either have, or could have thought of it,
seeing we have not any sufficiency of our selves, as of our selves, to think
any thing necessary to our salvation, but all our ability is from God, who
did not only love us before we were, but even to the end we might be, and
become Saints; For which cause, he does prevent us with the blessings of his
fatherly sweetness and does excitate our hearts, to bring them to a holy
repentance and conversion. See, I pray you THEOT: the poor Apostle, stupid
with sin in the heavy night of his Masters passion; he did no more think
to sorrow for his sin, then though he had never known his heavenly Savior:
and as a miserable Apode fallen upon the ground had never risen, had not the
Cock, as an instrument of the divine providence, struke his ears with his
voice, at the same instante in which his sweet Redeemour casting upon him a
gracious look as a dart of love, transpearced his heart of love, whence
afterward did issue water in such abundance, as did from the ancient Rock
smot by Moses in the Desert. But look again and see this holy Apostle
sleeping in Herod's Prison, chained in two chains; he is there in quality of a
Martyr, and nevertheless he represents poor man, sleeping, environed with
sin, prisoner and slave to Satan. Alas who will deliver him? The Angel
descends from heaven, and striking upon the great emprisoned Peter's side,
awakes him, saying, up, arise; and the inspiration comes from heaven as an
Angel, and hitting right upon the poor sinners heart, stirs him up, that he
might rise from his iniquity. Is it not true then o my dear THEOT: that this
first motion and touch which the soul perceives, when God preventing it with
love, does awake and excite it to forsake sin returning unto him; and not
only the first touch but even the whole awaking is done in us and for us, but
not by us? We are awaked, but not of our selves; it was the inspiration which
wakened us, and to make us rise, did move and shake us, I slept says the
deuote Spouse, and my SPOUSE who is my Heart, watched. Ah! see him hear how he
awakes me calling me by the title of our loves, I know well by his voice, it is
he. It is at unawares and unexpectedly that God does call and stirs us up by
his holy inspiration. And in this beginning of grace, we do nothing, but feel
the touch which God gives in us indeed as S. BERRARD says, but without our
concourse.

How we often times repulse the inspiration, and refuse to love. CHAPTER. X.
1. VVoe be to thee COROSAIN, woe be to thee BETHSAIDA: For if in TIRIA and
SIDONIA the Miracles had been done which were done in thee, they had done
penance in hair cloth and ashes; it is the word of God; Hark I pray you THEOT:
how the inhabitants of COROSAIN, and BETSAIDA, instructed in the true Religion,
and possessed of favors, that would even have converted the Pagans themselves,
remain nevertheless obstinate never making use thereof, but rejecting this
holy light, by an incomparable rebellion. Certainly at the day of judgment,
the NINIVITS and the Queen Saba will rise up against the Jews, and will
convince them to be worthy of damnation: For as touching the NINIVITS they
being Idolatours, and Barbarians, at the voice of JONAS were converted and did
penance; And the Queen of SABA, though engaged in the affairs of her kingdom:
yet having heard the renown of SALOMONS wisdom, she forsook all, to go to
hear him speak. While the JEWS, hearing with their ears the heavenly
wisdom of the true SOLOMON Savior, of the world; seeing with their eyes his
miracles; touching with their hands his graces and benefits, ceased not for all
that to be hardened, and to resist the grace which was proffered them. See then
again THEOT: how they who had fewer drawings are brought to penance, and those
who had more remain obdurate: Those who had less occasion to come, come to
wisdoms school: and those who had more, stick in their folly.

2. Thus is the judgment of comparison made, as all the Doctors have noted,
which can have no foundation, if it consist not in this, that notwithstanding
some have had as many, or more callings, then others have, they denied consent
to God's mercy, whereas others assisted with the like, yea even lesser helps,
have followed the inspiration betaking themselves to holy penance: For how
could one otherwise reasonably reproach the impenitent with their impenitencie,
by comparison to such as are converted?

3. Certainly our Savior does clearly show, and all Christians do in
simplicity conceive, that in this just judgment the Jews shall be condemned,
by comparison to the NINIVITS; because those received many favors, and yet
loved not: much assistance, and yet repented not; these, less favor, and yet
loved much: less assistance, and yet sorrowed much.

4. The great S. AUGUSTINE gives great light to this discourse by a passage of
his in the 12. book of the City of God, 6. 7. 8. and 9. Chapter; for though
he have there a particular reference to Angels, yet so, as that he makes a
paritie in this point, betwixt them and men.

5. Now, after he had in the sixth chapter put two men, entirely equal in
goodness and all things, molested with the same temptation, he presupposes
that the one could resist, the other give way to the enemy: in the 9. chapter
having proved that all the Angels were created in charity, auerring further as
a thing probable, that grace and charity was equal in them all; he makes a
demand how it came to pass, that some of them perseuerd, and made progress in
goodness even to the attaining of glory, others forsook good, to embrace
evil, even to damnation. And he answers, that no other answer can be
rendered, then that the one company perseuered by the grace of their Creator:
the other, of good which they were, became bad by their own only will.

6. But if it be true, as S. THOMAS does singularly well prove, that grace was
diuersified in Angels with proportion, and according to the variety of their
natural gifts, the Seraphins should have had a grace incomparably more
excellent, then the simple Angels of the last Order: How then happened it, that
some of the Seraphins, yea even the first of all, according to the common and
most probable opinion of the ancients, did fall, while an innumerable
multitude of other Angels, inferior in nature and grace, did bravely and
courageously persevere? How came it to pass that Lucifer, excellent by nature,
and superexcellent by grace fell and so many Angels with less advantages stood
to their fidelity. Truly such as stood ought to render the praise thereof to
God, who of his mercy created and maintained them good: But to whom can Lucifer
and all his crew, ascribe their fall, if not as S. PAVLE says, to their own
will, which, by her liberty deuorced her self from God's grace that had so
sweetly prevented her? How art thou fallen o great Lucifer, who even like a
fair morning, came out into this invisible world, clothed with prime charity,
as from the beginning of the brightness of a fair day, who ought to increase
till the midday of eternal glory? Thou did not want grace, which
correspondant to thy nature, thou had most excellent of all; but thou wast
awanting to grace. God did not deprive thee of the operation of his love, but
thou deprived his love of thy cooperation: God had never rejected thee, if thou
had not rejected his love; O most good God, thou do not forsake, unless
forsaken: thou never recalls thy gifts till we recall our hearts.

7. We rob God of his right, if we take unto our selves the glory of our
salvation: but we dishonor his Mercy, if we say he failed us. In concealing
his benefits, we wrong his Liberality: but we blaspheme his bounty, if we
deny his assistance and succor. In fine God cries fair and high in our
ears, thy perdition comes from thy self, o Israel, I only am thy succor.

That the divine bountie's will is that we should have a most excellent love.
CHAPTER. XI.
1. O God THEOT: if we received divine inspiratio^s, in the full extent of
their virtue, in how short a time should we make a great progress in
sanctity? Be the fountain never so copious, her streams enter not into a
garden according to their plenty, but in a measure, according to the
littleness or amplitude of the channel, by which they are conducted thither.
And though the holy ghost, as a source of liue-water does drive upon our hearts
every side, to water them with his graces, yet so as he will not have them
enter without the free consent of our will. He will not pouer them out, but
according to his good pleasure, and our own disposition and cooperation, as
the Holy Council says, which also as I suppose, by reason of the
correspondance betwixt our consent and grace, calls the receipt thereof a free
receipt.

2. In this sense, S. PAVLE exhorts us not to receive God's grace in vain.
For as a sick man, who having received the potion in his hand, and should not
take it into his stomach, should truly have received the potio^, yet without
receiving it, that is, he received it in an unprofitable and fruitless sort,
so we receive the grace of God in vain, when we receive it at the gate of our
heart, without permitting it to enter into our hearts consent: for so we
receive it without receiving it to wit, we receive it without fruit, since it
auails nothing to feel the inspiration, unless we consent unto it. And as the
sick man, who had the potion given into his hand, if he took it not wholly but
in part only, had also the operation thereof in part only, not wholly: so when
God sends a great and puissant inspiration to embrace his love, if we consent
not according to it is whole amplitude, it will but profit us in the same
measure. It happens often, that being inspired to do much, we consent not to
the whole inspiration, but only to some part thereof, as did those good people
in the Gospel, who upon the inspiration, which God gave them to follow him,
made reseruations, the one, to go first and interre his father; the other, to
take leave of his friends.

3. As long as the poor widow had emtie vessels, the oil, whose
multiplication HELISEVS did miraculously impetrate, never left running; but
when she had no more, to receive it in, it seized to flow. In the same measure
in which our heart dilats it self, or rather, in the measure, in which it
permits it self to be amplified and dilated, not denying the freedom of it is
consent to Gods mercy, he streams out continually, and without delay poures in
his sacred inspirations, which still increase, and make us increase more and
more in heavenly love. But when there is no more freedom left; or that we give
no further consent, he stays their course.

4. What is the reason then we are not so much advanced in the love of God, as
was S. AUGUSTINE S. FRANCIS, S. CATHERINE of GENVA, or SAINT FRANCISCA: THEOT:
it is, because God gave us not the grace; and why did not God give us the
grace? for that we did not co^ply as we ought with his inspirations. And why
did we not comply? Because having liberty, we did therein abuse it. But why did
we abuse our liberty? Ah THEO: we must stop there: For, as S. AUGUSTINE
says, the deprauation of our will, proceeds from no cause but from the defect
of a cause, which causes the sin.

5. The deuote brother RVFIN, upon a certain vision which he had of the glory
which the great S. FRANCIS should attain unto, by his humility, made him this
demand: my dear father, I beseech you tell me in earnest, what opinion you
have of your self: The Saint answered, verily I hold my self the greatest
sinner in the world, and one which serves God the least. But brother RVFIN
replied, how can you say that in truth and conscience, seeing that many
others, as we manifestly see, commit many great sins, from which God
bethanked you are exempt? To which SAINT FRANCIS answered; if God, says he,
had favored those others of whom you speak, with so great mercy as he has me,
certain I am, be they never so bad now, they had been far more acknowliging
of God's gifts, then I am; and would serve him much better then I do; and if
my God did abandon me, I should commit more wickedness then they.

6. You see THEOT: the opinion of this man, who indeed was rather no man, but
a Seraphin upon earth, I know it was humility that moved him to speak thus of
himself, yet nevertheless he believed for a certain truth, that an equal
grace granted by a like mercy, might be more fruitfully employed by one sinner
then by another. Now I hold for an Oracle the feeling of this great doctor in
the science of Saints, who brought up in the school of the Cross, breathed
nothing but divine inspirations. This Apothegme has also been praised, and
repeated by the greatest deuotest that followed him, amongst which, diverse are
of opinion, that the great Apostle S. PAVLE, said in the same sense, that he
was the greatest of all sinners.

7. The blessed mother TERESA of JESUS a virgin indeed altogether angelical,
speaking of Prayer of repose, says these words. There are diverse souls,
which come to this perfection, but few pass further, and I know not the cause
of it, certainly the fault is not on Gods side: for since his divine majesty
does aid us, and gives us the grace to arrive at this point, I assure my
self, he would not be deficient to assist us further, if it were not our
fault, and the impediment which we of our part put. Let us therefore THEO: be
attentive to advancement in the love which we owe to God, for his to us can
never fail.

That divine inspirations leave us in our liberty to follow, or repulse them.
CHAPTER. XII.
1. I Will not hear speak my dear THEOT: of those miraculous graces, which
have almost in an instant, transformed wolfes into shepsheards, Rocks into
waters, persecutors into preachers; I Will leave a part those all-powerfull
vocations, and holily violent draughts by which God has brought some elect
souls, from the extreamitie of vice, to the extreamitie of grace, working, as
it were in the^, a certain TRANSSVBTANTIATION moral and spiritual, as it
happned to the great Apostle, who of SAVLE vessel of persecution, became
Suddenly PAVLE vessel of election. We must give a particular rank to those
priuileged souls upon whom it pleased God to exercise not a mere abundance,
but an inundation, and if one may so say, not a liberality only or a mere
owerflowing but even a prodigality and lauishing out of his love. The divine
justice does chastise us in this world with punishments, which as they are
ordinary, so they remain always in a manner unknown and imperceptible, yet
sometimes he sends out Deluges and Abisses of punishments, to make known, and
dreaded the severity of his indignation: In like manner, the divine Mercy does
ordinarily convert, and gratify souls so sweetly, gently, and delicatly,
that his motion is scarcely perceived, and yet it happens again, that his
sovereign bounty ouerflowing his ordinary banks, (as a flood swollen and
ouercharged with the abundance of waters, which breaks over the plain)
streams out his graces, so impetuously though lovingly, that in a moment he
does water and cover a soul with benedictions, that the riches of his love may
appear; and as his justice proceeds commonly the ordinary way, and but
seldom the extraordinary; so his mercy exercises liberality upon the common
sort of men the ordinary way, and but upon some few only the extraordinary.

2. But which are then the ordinary lines whereby the divine providence is
accustomed to draw our hearts to his love? Such truly as he himself does
design describing the means which he used to draw the people of Israel out of
Egipte, and out of the desert unto the land of Promise: I will draw them
says he by OSEE, with lines of humanity, charity, and love. Doubtless
THEOT: we are not drawn to God by Iron chains, as Bulls and Bufflers: but by
enticements, delicious touches and holy inspirations, which in some, are the
lines of ADAM and humanity; that is proportioned and squared to humane hearts,
where liberty is natural: the property of man's heart, is delight and
pleasure; we show Nuts to children says S. AUGUSTINE, and they are drawn in
loving them, they are drawn by the line, not of the body, but of the heart.
Mark then how the eternal father draws us, by teaching he delights us, not
by imposing upon us any necessity, he easteth into our hearts delectatio^s and
spiritual pleasures as sacred baits by which he sweetly draws us to take and
taste the sweetness of his doctrine.

3. In this sort then, dearest THEO: our freewill is in no wise forced, or
necessitated by grace; but notwithstanding the most powerful vigor of Gods
merciful hand, which touches, enuironeth, and ties the soul with such a
number of inspirations, seades, and draughtes, this humane will remains frank
and free, and exempt from all constrainte and necessity. Grace is so gracious
and so graciously seaseth our hearts to draw them, that she offends nothing in
the liberty of our will: she touches powerfully, but yet so delicatly the
parts of our heart, that our free will receives no force thereby: she has
forces, not to force, but to entice the heart, she is holily violent, not to
violate, but to make our liberty beloved. She acts strongly, yet so
sweetly, that our will does not remain oppressed by so powerful an action,
she presses, but oppresses not our liberty, so that amiddest these forces,
we have power to consent, or dissent from her motions, according to our liking.
But that which is no less admirable then true, is, that when our will
follows the draught, and consents to the divine motion, she follows no
less freely, then freely she does resist, when she resists: although the
consent to grace, depends much more of grace, then of the will, and that the
resistance of grace, depends upon the will only, so amiable is Gods hand in
the hadling of our hearts; so dexterous it is in communicating unto us its
force, without depriving us of liberty; and in imparting unto us the motion of
his power, without impeachme^t to the motion of our will; adding power to
sweetness; in such sort, that as in good things his power does sweetly give us
force, so his sweetness does ma^taine powerfully the freedom of our will. If
thou knew the gift of God, said our Savior to the Samaritane, and who he is
who says unto thee give me to drink, thou thy self peradventure would
have asked him, and he had given thee liue-water. See I pray you, THEO: the
touch of our Savior when he signifies his drawings: If thou knewst, would he
say, the gift of God, doubtless thou would be moved and drawn, to demand
the water of eternal life, and perchance thou would demand it: as though he
had said, thou should have power and motion to demand, yet in no wise be
forced or constained: but only, perchance, thou would demand it; for thy
liberty would remain to demand or not demand it. Such are our Saviors words
according to the vulgar edition, and according to S. AUGUSTINE upon S. JOHN.

4. To conclud, if any should say, that our free will does not cooperate in
consenting to the grace, with which God does prevent her: or that she could not
reject, and deny it consent, he should contradict the whole Scripture, all the
ancient fathers, experience, and be excommunicated by the Concell of Trent.
But when it is said that we have power to reject the divine inspirarions and
motions, there is no such meaning at all, as that one may hinder God to inspire
us, or touch our hearts; for as I have already said, that is done in us
without our help. These are favors which God bestows upon us, before we have
once thought on them: he awakes us when we sleep: and consequently we find our
selves awake before we thought on it, but it is in our power to rise or not to
rise; and though he have awaked us without us, he will not raise us without us.
Now not to rise is to resist the call, and sleep again, seeing we were called
only to the end we should rise. We cannot hinder that the inspiration thrust us
not on, and consequently put us not into motion, but if as it drives us
forwards, we repulse it by not yielding our selves to its motion, we then make
resistance; so the wind having seized upon, and mounted our Apodes, will not
bear the^ up very far unless they display their wings, and cooperate
raising themselves, and soaring up a loft into the air, toward which the wind
began their motion: but if contrariwise taken, as it happens, with some pray
they epsy upon the ground, or befium'd with their delay there, in lieu of
seconding the wind, they keep their wings foulded and do cast themselves
again upon the earth: they received indeed the motion of the wind, but in
vain since they did not help themselves thereby. THEO: inspirations do prevent
us, and even before they be thought on make themselves be felt, but after we
have felt them, it is in our hand's either to consent to them, to second and
follow their motion, or else to dissent and repel the^. They cause themselves
to be perceived by us without us: but without us they do not force consent.

Of the first feelings of love which divine inspirations cause in the soul
before she yet receive faith. CHAPTER XIII.
1. THe wind that raises the Apodes, blows first upon their feathers as parts
most light, and capable of agitation: by which it gives the beginning of motion
to their wings, extending and displaying the^; making use thereof as of a hold,
by which it may sease the birds, and waft them into the air. And if they thus
mounted, do co^tribute the motion of their wings to that of the wind, the
same wind that first entered their motion will still aid them more and more
to fly with ease. Even so, my dear THEO: when an inspiration, as a sacred
gale, blows us forward in the air of holy love, it first lays at our will,
and by the sense of some heavenly delectation moves, unfolds, and extends the
natural inclination which she has to good: so that it serves it self of this
inclination as a hold to fasten upon the soul, and all this as I have said is
done in us, without us: for it is the divine favor, that does prevent us in
this sort. But if our will thus holily prevented, perceiving the wings of her
inclination moved, displaied, extended, stirred and agitated by this heavenly
wind, do in any measure contribute her consent, ah how happy she is THEO:
for the same inspiration, and favor which has seized us, mixing their action
with our consent, animating our feeble motions with their vigor, and giving
life to our weak cooperation, by the puissance of their operation, they aid,
conduct and accompany us, from love to love, even unto the act of most holy
faith requisite for our conversion.

2. Sweet God THEO: what a consolation it is to consider the sacred method
with which the Holy Ghost pouers into our souls the first rays and feelings
of his light, and vital heat! O JESUS how delightful a pleasure it is, to
mark how the divine love goes by little and little; by degrees which
insensibly become sensible, displaying his light upon a soul, never disisting
till he have wholly covered it with the splendor of his presence, endewing it
in the end with the perfect beauty of his day! o how cheerful, fair,
amiable, and agreeable this day-breake is! Nevertheless true it is, that
either this break of day is not day, or if it be day, it is but a beginning
day, a rising of the day, and rather the infancy of the day then the day it
self. In like manner, without doubt these motions of love which forerunne the
act of faith requisite to our iustifition, are either not love properly
speaking, or but a beginning and imperfect love. They are the first verdant
blossoms, which the soul warmed with the heavenly Sun, as a mystical tree
begins to put fourth in spring time which are rather presages of fruit then
fruit it self.

3. S. PACOMIVS, as then a young soldier and ignorant of God, enrolled under
the colors of the army, which CONSTANCE had levied against the Tyrant
MAXENTIVS, came with the Company with whom he was to lodge nigh a little
town, not far distant from Thebes, where not only he, but all the army
were in extreme want of victuals; which the inhabitants of the little town
having understood, being by good fortune Christians, and consequently friendly
and charitable to their neighbors, they suddenly succored the soldiers in
their necessity; and that with such care, courtifie, and affection, that
PACOMIVS was struck with admiration thereat, and dema^ding what nation it was
that was so bountiful, amiable and gracious, it was answered him, they were
Christians; and enquiring again, of what law, and manner of life they were, he
learned that they believed in JESUS CHRIST the only son of God, and did good
to all sorts of people, with a firm hope to receive even of God himself, an
ample recompense thereof. Alas THEOT: the poor PACOMIVS, though of a good
nature, was then laid a sleep in the beed of his infidelity, and behold how
upon a sudden, God was present at the port of his heart, and by the good
example of these Christians, as by a sweet voice he calls him, awakes him and
gives him the first Feelings of the little heat of his love for scarcely had
he heard, as I have said, the sweet law of our Savior intimated, till filled
with a new light, and interior consolation, retiring himself a part, and
having for a space mused, he lifted up his hands toward heaven, and with a
profound sigh, fell into this speech. Lord God who made heaven and earth, if
thou deigne to cast thine eyes upon my baseness, and misery, and give me the
knowledge of thy divinity, I promise to serve thee, and obey thy
commandments all the days of my life. From this prayer and promise, the love
of the true good, and piety did so increase in him, that he ceased not to
practice, a thousand thousand acts of virtue.

4. Verily me thinks I see in this example, a Nightingale who waking at the
peep of the day begins to stir up, and strech her self, unfold her plumes,
skipe from branch to branch amidst the thickets, and chirpe out her delicious
notes. For did you not note, how the good example of the charitable Christians,
did excitate and stir up by manner of surprise the blessed PACOMIVS; Truly
the amaisement of admiration wherewith he was taken, was no other thing, then
his awaking. At which God touched him, as does the Sun the earth with a raie
of his heat, which filled him with a great feeling of spiritual pleasure. For
which cause PACOMIVS did a little divert himself: To the end he might with more
attention and facility recollect, and relish the grace he had received,
withdrawing himself to think thereupon: then he extends his heart and hands
toward heaven, whether the inspiration draws him, and beginning to displaie
the wings of his affections, flying betwixt the diffide^ce which he has of
himself, and the confidence which he reposeth in God he intons in an air
humbly amourous, the Canticle of his conversion, by which he testifies, that
even already he knew one only God Creator of heaven and earth: but withal he
knew that he did not know him sufficiently to serve him as he ought and
therefore he petitions, that a more perfect knowledge may be imparted unto him,
that thereby he may come to the perfect service of his divine majesty:

4. Behold in the interim, I beseech you THEO: how God in a sweet manner
fortifieth by little and little the grace of his inspiration in the consenting
hearts, drawing them after him, as it were stepp by stepp, upon this JACOBS
ladder. But of what sort are his drawhtes? The first, by which he does prevent,
and awake us, is his work in us, without our cooperation; All the other, are
his works, and in us, but not without our concourse. Draw me said the sacred
spouse, that is, begin thou first; for I cannot awake of my self, I cannot
move, unless thou move me; but when thou shall once have given motion, then o
thou dear Spouse of my heart, we run, we two, thou runns before me drawing
me still forward: and as for me, I will follow thee in thy course, consenting
to thy draught: but let no man think that thou haist me after the by
compulsion, as a slave, or as a liuelesse charret; ah no, thou draws me by the
odor of thy perfumes; though I follow thee, it is not that thou trayles me;
but that thou do entice me; thy drawghtes are puissant, but no way violent,
since their whole force, is placed in their sweetness; Perfumes have no other
force to draw men to follow them, then their sweetness; and how could
sweetness draw, but sweetly and delightfully.

Of the feeling of the divine love which is had by faith. CHAPTER. XIV.
1. When God gives us faith he enters into our soul, and speaks to our
heart, not by manner of discourse, but by way of inspiration, proposing in so
sweet a manner that which ought to be believed unto the understanding that the
will receives thereby a great complacence and such indeed, as that it incites
the understanding to consent, and yield to TRVTH without doubt or distrust at
all, and hear lies the miracle: for God proposes the mysteries of faith to
our souls, amid'st obscurities and clouds, in such sort: that we see not, but
only ENTER-VIEVV it, as TRVTH it happens sometimes that the face of the earth
being covered with fogges, we cannot view the Sun, but only a little more
then ordinary brightness about where it is; so that as one would say, we see
it without seeing it, because on the one side we see it not so fair, as that
we can well affirm we see it; nor yet again do we see it so little, that we
may auerre we see it not; and this is that which we term ENTER-VIEVV. And
notwithstanding this obscure brightness of faith, h^^ing got entry into our
soul, not by way of discourse or show of argument but by the only sweetness
of it is presence, it works the understanding to believe and obey it with as
great authority, as the assurance which it gives us of the TRVTH, surpasses
all other assurances, and does keep the understanding, and all the discourse
thereof in such subjection that they have no credit in comparison of faith.

2. Good God THEO: may I well say this? Faith is the great friend of our
understanding, and may justly say to humane sciences, which vante they are
more clear then she, as did the sacred spouse to the shepherds. I am black,
yet fair, o humane discourses of sciences acquired; I am black, for I am
seated amongst the obcurities of simple reuelatio^s, which have no appare^t
evidence, but makes me look black, putting me well nigh out of knowledge: yet
I am fair in my self, by reason of my infinite, certainty, and if mortal
eyes could behold me such as I am by nature, they would find me entirely
fair: And must it not necessarily follow that in effect I am infinitely
amiable, since that the gloomie darkness, and thick mistes amongst which I
am, not viewed but only ENTER-VIEVVED, could not hinder me to be so agreeable,
but that the understanding prising me above all things, and breaking the press
of other knowledges caused way be made unto me, and received me as his Queen
into he most sublime throne of his Palace, from whence I give laws to all
sciences, and do keep, all discourse and humane sense under: yea verily THEO:
even as the Commanders of the Army of Israel stripping themselves, put all
their clothes in a heap, and made them as a royal throne, upon which they
placed IEHV, crying IEHV is king, so at faiths arrival the understanding puts
of all discourse and arguments, and submitting them to faith, sets her upon
them, acknowledging her for Queen, and with a great joy cries out VIVE LA
FOY. Discourse and pious arguments, miracles and other advantages of Christian
religion, make faith wonderful credible and intelligible, but faith alone
makes her believed and acknowledged enamoring men with the beauty of her
VERITY. and making the^ believe the verity of her beauty by means of the
sweetness which she poures into their wills, and the assurance which she
gives to their understanding. The JEWS saw the miracles and heard the wonders
of our Savior, but being indisposed to receive faith, that is, their will not
being capable of the sweetness and pleasantness of faith, by reason of the
bitterness and malice, with which they were filled, they persisted in their
infidelity. They perceived the force of the argument, but they relished not
the sweetness of the conclusion, and therefore did not rest in her truth,
while notwithstanding the act of faith consists in this rest of the
understanding, which having received the grateful light of truth adheares to
it, as to a sweet, yet powerful and solid assurance and certainty, which it
draws from the authority of the REVELATION had thereof.

3. You have heard THEO: that in general Councels there are great disputatio^s
and inquiries made of truth by discourse, reason, and theological arguments,
but the matters being discussed, the FATHERS, that is the Bishops, but
especially the POPE, who is the head of Bishops does resolve, conclude, and
determine, and the determination being once pronounced every one does fully
therein rest, and quiet them selves, not in consideration of the reasons
alleged in the precedent discussion and inquisition; but in virtue of the Holy
Ghosts authority, who presiding inuisibly in Counsels, judged determined and
concluded by the mouth of his servants, whom he had established Pastors of
Christianity. The inquisition then and the disputation is made in the PORCES
by Priests and Doctors, but the resolution and determination is passed in the
SANCTVARIE where the Holy Ghost which animateth the body of his Church
speaks by the mouth of the head thereof: In like manner the Ostridg lays her
eggs upon the Libian shore, but the Sun alone does hatch her young ones. The
Doctors by their inquiry, and discourse do propose TRVTH, but the only
beams of the Sun of justice gives certainty, and repose therein. Now to
conclude THEOTIME this assurance which man's reason finds in sublime things,
and mysteries of faith, begins by an amorous sense of delight, which the will
receives from the beauty and sweetness of the proposed TRVTH, so that faith
does comprehend a beginning of love toward heavenly things, which our heart
resenteth.

Of the great feeling of love which we receive by holy hope. CHAPTER. XV.
1. AS being exposed to the Sun beams at midday, we hardly see the
brightness, till presently we feel the heat; so the light of faith has no
sooner spread the splendor of its verities in our understanding, but
incontinently our will perceiues the holy heat of heavenly love. Faith makes
us know by an infallible certainty that God is; that he is infinite in
bounty; that he can communicate himself unto us; and not only that he can,
but that he will; so that by an ineffable sweetness he has provided us of
all things requisite to obtain the happiness of eternal glory. Now we have
a natural inclination to the sovereign good, by reason of which our heart is
touched with a certain inward griping and a continual disquiet, not being
able to repose or cease to testify, that it enioyes not its perfect
satisfaction and solid contentment, but when holy faith has represented unto
our understanding this fair object of our natural inclination, o good God
THEO: what repose, what pleasure, how general an exultation possesses our
soul, whereupon, as being surprised at the aspect of so excellent a beauty,
in love she cries out, o how fair thou art my well-beloued, o how fair thou
art!

2. Eliezer sought for a wife to his master ABRAHAM'S son: how knew he that
she would appear fair and gracious in his eyes, as his desire was? but when
he had espied her at the fountain, and saw her so excellent in beauty and so
perfectly sweet, and especially when he had obtained her, he adored GOD and
blessed him with thanksgiving full of incomparable joy. Man's heart tends to
God by his natural inclination, without discerning well who he is, but when he
finds him at the fountain of faith, and sees him so good, fair, sweet, and
gentle toward all, and so prone, as sovereign good, to bestow himself upon
all which desire him, o God what contentments, and what sacred motions has the
soul to unite her self for ever to this bounty so soueraignly amiable? I
have found, says the soul thus inspired, I have found that which my heart
desired and now I am at repose: And as Jacob having seen the fair Rachel
after he had holily kissed her, melted into treares of joy, for the good he
apprehended in meeting with so desired an object; so our poor heart having
found out God, and received of him the first kiss of holy faith, it dissolues
fourthwith into the delights of love, by reason of the infinite good which it
presently espies in that sovereign Beauty.

3. We sometimes experience in our selves certain unexpected delights, without
any apparent cause, and these are diverse times presages of some greater joys,
whence many are of opinion that our good Angel foreseeing the good which
shall arrive unto us, gives us by this means a foretast thereof, as
contrariwise he strikes into us with a certain fear and dread amongst
unknown dangers, to the end we may be moved to inuoke GODS assistance, and
stand upon our guard: Now when the presaged good arriues we receive it with
open breast, and reflecting upon the content we formely tasted without knowing
the cause, we only then begin to perceive, that it was a forerunner of the
Hape we now enjoy. Even so my dear THEO: our heart having had for so long a
time an inclination to it is sovereign good, knew not to what end this motion
tended: But so soon as faith has set it at view, then the heart does clearly
discern, that it was that which his soul coueted, his understanding serched,
and his inclination aimed at. Certainly whether we wake, or sleep, our soul
tends toward the sovereign good: but what is this sovereign good? we are like
to these good ATHENIANS, who sacrificed unto the true God albeit unknown unto
them, till the great S. PAVLE taught the^ the knowledge thereof. For so our
heart by a deep and secret instinct, in all his actions does tend to, and
pretend felicity, pursuing it here and there as it were by groping, without
knowing either where it resides, or in what it consists, till faith shows
and describs the infinite mysteries thereof; but then having found the treasure
he sought for, ah! what contentment finds this poor humane heart! What joy,
what complacence of love! o I have met with him, whom my heart sought for
without knowing him; o how I was ignorant to what my pretentions did tend,
while nothing of that which I pretended, could content me, because I knew not
indeed what I pretended. I pretended to love, yet knew not upon what to place
my affection, and therefore my pretention not finding its true love, my love
remained always in a true, yet unknown pretention; I had indeed sufficient
touches of love to make me pretend, but not sense enough of the Bounty which I
was to love, to exercise love.

How love is practiced in hope. CHAPTER. XVI.
1. Man's understanding being conveniently applied to the consideration of that
which faith represents touching it is sovereign good, presently upon it, the
will conceiues an extreme, delight in this divine object which then being
absent, begets an ardent desire of it is presence, whence the soul holily cries
out, let him kiss me with a kiss of his mouth. To God it is I do aspire
God is all my hearts desire.
And as the vnhoodded Hawke having got her pray at view, does suddenly lanch
her self upon the winge, and being held in her leash strugles upon the hand
with extreme ardout; so faith having drawn the veil of ignorance, and made
us see our sovereign good, of which nevertheless we cannot yet be possessed,
retained by the condition of this mortal life; alas THEO: we then desire it in
such sort, that The long time chased Heart
In panting flight oppress't
Does not the floods so much desire;
As our poor hearts distress't
To thee o Lord aspire.
Our sickly hearts bring out
Desires that still augment,
And cry alas, when shall it be,
O God of Hosts omnipotent,
That we thy face shall set?
This desire is just, THEO: for who would not desire so desirable a good? But
this desire would be unprofitable, yea would be a continual torment to our
heart, if we had not assurance that we should at length satiate it, he, who,
because he was delaied in the possession of this happiness, protested that his
tears were his ordinary bread night and day, so long as his God was absent,
and his enemies demanded where is thy God, Alas what would he have done, if he
had not had some hope one day to enjoy this good after which he sighed. The
Divine spouse, wailes and pines with love, because she does not readily find
out the well-beloued she searches for. The love of the well-beloued had bred
in her a desire: that desire begot an ardour to pursue it: and that ardour,
caused in her a languishment, which had consumed, and annihilated her poor
heart, unless she had hoped at length to meet with that she pursued: So then
least the unrest, and dolourous langour which the essaies of coveting love
causes in our souls, might make us quail in courage or carry us to dispare,
the same souueraigne good, which moves in us so vehement a desire, does also
give us assurance, that we may with ease obtain it, by a thousand thousand
promises which he gives us thereof in his holy word and by his inspirations,
always provided, that we will employ the means he has prepared for us, and
which he offers us to this effect.

2. Now these divine promises and assurances, by a particular miracle increase
the cause of our disquiete, and according to that augmentation, they ruinate
and destroy the effects; yea verily THEO. for the assurance which GOD gives us,
that Paradise is for us, does infinitely fortify the desire we have to enjoy
it, and yet does weaken, yea altogether distroy the trouble and disquiet which
this desire brought unto us, so that our hearts, by the promises which the
divine goodness has made us, remain quieted, and this quiet is the root of
the most holy virtue, which we call hope. For the will assured by faith, that
she has power to enjoy the sovereign good, using the means appointed, makes
two great acts of virtue; by the one, she expects from God the fruition of his
sovereign goodness, by the other, she aspires to that holy fruition.

3. And indeed THEO: betwixt hoping and aspiring, there is but this
difference, that we hope for things which we expect by an others assistance,
and we aspire unto those things which we think to atchiue of our selves, by
our own endeavors: and for so much as we attain the fruition of our
sovereign good, which is GOD, by his favor, grace and mercy; and that
notwithstanding the said mercy will have us cooperate with his favors, by
contributing the weakness of our consent, to the strength of her grace; our
hope is thence in some sort mixed with aspiration, so that we do not
altogether hope without aspiring, nor do we ever aspire without altogeither
hopeing, in which, hope keeps the principal place, as being founded upon
heavenly grace: without which like as we cannot even so much as think of our
sovereign good in such sort as we ought to arrive there; so can we never
without hope in a competent manner aspire to the obtaining of it.

4. Our aspiration then is a young shoot of hope, as is our cooperation of
grace, and as those that would hope without aspiring, would be rejected as
degenerous and negligent, so those that should aspire without hopeing would be
rash, insolent, and presumptious: but when hope is seconded with aspiration,
and that hopeing we aspire, and aspiring we hope, then dear THEO: hope by
aspiration becomes a courageous desine, and aspiration is changed by hope into
an humble pretention while we hope and aspire as GOD shall inspire us. Howbeit
as well the one as the other is caused by the coveting love, tending, to our
sovereign good, which by how much more surely it is hoped for, by so much it
is more affected: yea hope is no other thing then a complacence of love, which
we take in the expectation and pretention of our sovereign good. All that is
there is love TH. As soon as faith had show me my sovereign good I loved it,
which because it was absent, I desired it, and having understood that he would
bestow himself upon me, I loved and desired him yet more ardently; and indeed
his bounty is so much more to be beloved, and desired, by how much it is more
prone to communicate it self. Now by this progress love turned his desire
into hope, pretention and expectation, so that hope is a pretending and
attending love, and because the sovereign good which hope expects, is God,
whom also she does not expect but from God himself, to whom and by whom she
does hope and aspire, this holy virtue of hope bounded on every side by God, is
by consequence a divine or Theological virtue.

That the Love which is practiced in hope, is very good, though imperfect.
CHAPTER. XVII.
1. THe love which we practice in hope aims at GOD indeed THEO: marry it
redounds upon our selves, his aspect is upon the divine goodness, yet with a
respect to our own profit; it tends to this supreme perfection, but it
pretends our own satisfaction; that is, it carries us not toward God, for
that he is soueraignely good in himself, but because he is soueraignely good
to us; in which, as you see, there is a certain respect to our selves, and our
proper interest; so that this love is truly love, but love of Concupiscence,
and profit; Yet do I not affirm, that it does in such sort return to our
selves, that it makes us love God only for the love of our selves; o God no:
For the soul which should not love God, but for the love of her self, placing
the end of the love which she bears to God in her proper interest, should
alas, commit an extreme sacrilege. If a wife love her husband only for the
love of her servant, she should love her husband in nature of a servant, and
her servant in the nature of a husband; so the soul that loves not God, but
for her self, loves her self as she ought to love God, and God as she ought
to love her self.

2. But there is a fair difference betwixt this word. I love God for the good
which I expect from him; and this, I do not love God but in regard of the good
which I expect from him; as it is also a far other thing, to say, I love God
for my self, and I love God for the love of my self, for when I say I love
God for my self, it is as though I should say I love to have God, I love that
God should be mine, my sovereign good, which is a holy affection of the
heavenly Spouse, who an hundred times in excess of delight protests; my
well-beloued is wholly mine, and I entirely his, I to him, and he to me: but to
say I love God, for love of my self? is as one should say, the love which I
bear to my self is the end why I love God; in such sort, that the love of God
would be dependant, subordinate and inferior to the love of our selves, which
is a matchless impiety.

3. This love then, which we term hope, is a love of concupiscence, but of a
holy, and well ordered concupiscence, by means where of we do not draw God to
us, nor to our profit, but we adioyne our selves unto him as to our final
happiness; by this love we love our selves together with God, yet not
preferring or equalizing our selves to him in this love; the love of our selves
is mixed with that of God, but that of God keeps the upper had; our own love
enters there, indeed but as a simple motife, not as principal end; our own
interest has some place there, but God holds the principal rank. Yea
without doubt THEO: for when we love God as our sovereign, we love him for a
quality, by which we do not refer him to us, but us to him. We are not his
end, pretention, or perfection, but he ours; he does not appertain to us, but
we to him; he depends not of us, but we of him. In sum, by the quality of
sovereign good for which we love him, he receives nothing of us, but we
receive of him. He does exercise upon us his plenty and bounty; and we our
scarcity and want; So that to love God in quality of sovereign good, is to
love him with an honorable and respectfull love, by which we acknowledge him to
be our perfection, repose and end, in the fruition of which our felicity is
placed: some things there are which are serviceable unto us in their use, as
our slaves, servants, horses, clothes, and the love which we bear unto them is
a love of pure concupiscence, since we love them not, but for our own profit
only. Other things there are whereof we have the fruition, but a fruition which
is reciprocal, and mutually equal, as we enjoy our friends: for the love we
have unto them, in that they do content us, is indeed a love of
concupiscence, yet an honest one, making them ours, and us mutually theirs:
them belong to us, and us again to them. But there are yet other things which
we enjoy by a fruition of dependence, participation, and subjection; as we do
the benevolence, presence or favor of our Prelates, Princes, fathers, and
mothers: for verily the love which we bear unto them, is truly a love of
concupiscence; when we love them in that they are our Princes, Prelates,
Fathers, or mothers, sithe^ce it is not the quality of a Prelate, Prince,
Father or mother, which is the cause of our affection toward them, but because
they are such to us, and to our respects. But this concupiscence is a love of
respect, reverence and honor: we love our Father, for example, not because he
is ours, but because we are his: and after the same manner it is that we love
and aspire to God by hope, not to the end he might become our good, but for
that he is our God already; not to the end he should be ours, but because we are
his; not as though he were for us, but in respect that we are for him.

4. And note, THEO: that in this love, the reason why we love; that is, the
reason why we apply our heart to the love of the good which we desire, is,
because it is our Good: but the reason of the measure and quantity of this
love, does depend of the excellency and dignity of the good which we love. We
love our benefactours, because they are such to us, yet we love them more o^
less, as they are more or less our benefactours, Why then do we love God,
THEO: with this love of concupiscence? because he is our Good; and why do we
soueraignly love him? because he is our sovereign good.

5. But when I say we love God soueraignely, I do not therefore say, that we
love him with a sovereign love; sovereign love is only in charity; whereas
in hope love is imperfect, because it does not tend to the sovereign Bounty
as being such in it self, but only for that it is such to us: and yet because
in this kind of love, there is no more excellent motife, then that which
proceeds from the consideration of the sovereign good, we are said by that,
to love soueraignly, though in very deed, none is able by virtue of this love,
either to keep Gods commandments, or obtain life everlasting, being a love
that yeeldes more affection then effect, when it is not accompanied with
charity.

That love is exercised in penance, and first, that there are diverse sorts of
penance. CHAPTER. XVIII.
1. TO speak generally, penance is a kind of repentance, whereby a man does
reject and detest the sin he has committed, with resolution to repair, as
much as in him lies, the offense and injury done against the offended. I
comprehend in penance a purpose to repair the offense, because that repentance
does not sufficiently detest the fault, which voluntarily permits the
principal effect thereof, to wit, the offense and injury to subsist; and it
does permit it to subsist, while it can in some sort make reparation, and will
not.

2. I will omit the penance of diverse pagans, who, as TERTVLLIAN does
witness; had some apparences of it amongst them, but so vain and frutlesse,
that they did often penance for having done well: and speak only of a
virtuous penance, which according to the different motifes whence it proceed's,
is of a diverse species. There is one sort purely moral and humane, as was
that of ALEXANDER the Great, who having slain his dear CLITVS thought to have
starued himself, so great was the force of penance, says CICERO: and that of
ALCIBIADES, who being by SOCRATES convinced not to be wise began to weep
bitterly, being sorrowful and afflicted, not to be that which he ought to have
been, as SAINT AUGUSTINE says. ARISTOTLE also acknowledging this sort of
penance, assures us, that the intemperate man, who on set purpose gives himself
over to pleasures, is wholly incorrigible, for that he cannot repent, and he
that is impenitent is incurable.

3. Certes SENECA, PLVTARKE, and the PYTHAGORIANS, who so highly commended the
examen of conscience, but especially the first, who speaks so feelingly of
the torment, which interior remorce does excite in the soul, without doubt
understood, that there was a repentance; and as for the wise E^ICTETES, he does
so well describe the reprehention, which a man is to use toward himself, that
scarcely is any thing to be added.

4. There is yet an other penance, which is indeed moral yet religious too,
yea in some sort divine, proceeding from the natural knowledge which we have
of our offending GOD by sin: For certainly many Philosophers understood, that
to live virtuously was a thing agreeable to the divine goodness, and
consequently, to live vitiously was offensive unto him. The good EPICTETES,
wished that he might dye a Christian (as it is very probable he did,) and
amongst other things, he said he should be content, if dying he could lift up
his hands to God and say unto him; For my part, I have not dishonored thee.
Furthermore, he will have his Philosopher to make an admirable Oath to God,
never to be disobedient to his divine Majesty, nor to accuse or blame any
thing coming from him, nor yet in any sort to complain thereof: And in another
place he teaches that GOD and our good Angel, are present to all our actions.
You see then THEO: that this Philosopher, as yet Pagan, knew that sin
offended GOD, as virtue honored him, and consequently, he thought repentance
necessary, since that even he ordained an examen of conscience at night, in
respect whereof with Pithagoras he gave this advertisement. Let conscience of
the fact be virtues meede,
Let bitter reprehension vice succeed.
Now this kind of repentance tied to the knowledge and love of GOD which nature
can give, was a dependence of moral religion: but as natural reason bestowed
more knowledge then love upon the Philosophers, who glorified him not with
proportion to the notice, they had thereof; so did nature furnish them with more
light to understand how much God was offended by sin, then heat to stire up
repentance, necessary for the reparation of the offense.

5. And abbeit religious penance has in some sort been acknowledged by some of
the Philolophers, yet so rarely and weakly, that those which were reputed the
most virtuous amongst them, to wit the STOIKES, gave assurance, that the
wiseman was never attristated, whereupon they framed a MAXIM, so contrary to
reason, as the proposition on which it was grounded, was contrary to
experience, THAT THE WISEMAN SINNED NOT.

6. We may therefore well say THEO: that penance is a virtue wholly Christian,
since on the one side it was so little known to the Pagans, and on the other
side, it is so well known amongst true Christians, that in it consists a
great part of the Evangelical Philosophy, according to which, who soever
affirms that he sins not, is mad and who soever thinks without penance
to redress his sin is frantike for it is our Saviors exhortation of
exortations, DO PENANCE Behold a brief description of the progress of this
virtue.

7. We enter into a deep apprehension, why we offend GOD so far as we are
able, in despising, dishonoring, disobeying and rebelling against him; who
again, of his part, holds himself offended theraat, irritated, and
contemned, distasting, reproving and abhorring iniquity. Out of this true
apprehension, diverse motives spring, which either all, or many together, or
each one a part, may carry us to this repentance: For it enters into our
thoughts some times, that GOD the offended has established a rigourous
punishment in Hell for sinners, and that he will deprive them of Paradise
prepared for the good. And as the desire of Paradise is extremely honorable; so
the fear to loose it, is greatly co^siderable, and not that only, but the
desire of Paradise, being of high esteem, the fear of its contrary, hell, is
good and laudable. O who would not dread so great a loss, so great a torment?
And this double fear, the one servile the other mercenarie, does greatly bear
us forwards, toward a repentance for our sins, by which we have incurred
them. And to this effect in the holy word, this fear is a thousand and a
thousand times intimated. Again we consider the deformity and malice of sin
according as faith does teach us, as for example, that by yet, the liknesse and
Image of GOD is defiled and disuigored, the dignity of our soul dishonored;
that we are become like brute beasts, that we have violated our duty toward
the CREATOR of the world, forfetted the happiness of the Angelical society,
to associate, and subject our selves to the Devil, and to the slavery of our
own passions, ouerturning the order of reason, offending our GOOD-ANGELS, to
whom we have so great obligation.

8. At other times we are provoked to repentance, by the beauty of virtue,
which brings as much good with it, as sin does evil. Further we are often
moved to it, by the example of Saints: for who did ever cast his eyes upon the
exercises of the incomparable penance of a MAGDELAINE, of a MARIE EGIPTIACA; or
of the PENITENTS of the Monastery surnamed PRISON, described by S. JOHN
CLIMACVS without being moved to repentance for his sins: sithence the very
reading of the History does incite thereto such, as are not altogether
insensible.

That Penance without love is imperfect. CHAPTER. XIX.
1. NOw all these motives are taught us by faith, and Christian religion, and
therefore the repentance which thence issues is very laudable, though
otherwise imperfect; very laudable certainly it is: for neither the holy
Scripture, nor Church would ever have used these motifes to have stirred us up,
if the penance thence proceeding had not been good; and we see manifestly, that
it is most agreeable to reason, to repent for sin, for these considerations;
yea that it is impossible, that he who considers them attentively, should not
repent. Yet it is an imperfect repentance, because the divine love is not as
yet found there: ah! do not you see THEO: that we have all these repentances
for the interest of our own soul, her felicity, her interior beauty,
honor, dignity, and in a word for self love, yet a lawful, just, and well
ordered love.

2. And note, that I do not say that these repentances reject the love of
God, but only that they do not include it; they do not repulse it, yet do
they not contain it; they are not contrary to it, but as yet are without it;
it is not excluded, nor yet is it included. The will which does simply embrace
good, is good, yet if she so embrace it as to reject the better, she is truly
disordinate, not in accepting the one, but in repulsing the other: So to vow to
give alms this day is good, yet to vow, to give only this day, were bad;
because it would exclude the better, that is to give both to day, to morrow,
and every day when commodity serves. Certes it is well done, it cannot be
denied, to repent for our sins to avoid the pains of Hell, and obtain
heaven, but he that should resolve never to repent for any other thing, should
wilfully exclude the better, which is to repent for the love of God, and commit
a great sin. And what father would not find it strange, that his son would
indeed serve him, yet not at all with love, or by love.

3. The beginning of good things is good: the progress, better: the end the
best; yet the beginning is good in the nature of a beginning: and the
progress, in the nature of a progress but to offer in the beginning, (...)
progress to end the work, were to pervert order. Infancy is good, but to
desire to remain still a child, is naught for a child of an hundred years old
is despised. It is laudable to begin to learn, yet he that should begin with
inte^tio^ never to perfect himself, should do against all reason. Fear, and
those other motifes of repe^ta^ce whereof I spoake, are good for the beginning
of Christian wisdom, consisting of penance: but he who deliberatly would not
attain to love the perfection of penance, should greatly offend him, who
ordained all to his own love, as to the end of all things.

4. To conclude, the penance which excluds the love of God, is infernal like
to that of the damned; The repentance which does not reject the love of GOD,
though as yet it be without it, is a good penance, but imperfect and cannot
give salvation, until it attain love and join it self unto it. So that as
the great Apostle said, that though he should deliver his body to be burnt,
and all his goods to the poor wanting charity, it should be unprofitable unto
him, so we may truly say, that though our penance were so great that it should
cause our eyes dissolve into tears, and our hearts break with sorrow without
the sacred love of God, all this were nothing auailable to eternal life.

How there is mixture of Love and sorrow in Contrition. CHAPTER. XX.
1. NAture did never, that I know, convert fire into water, though diverse
waters are converted into fire: yet God did it once by miracle: for as it is
written in the boo^^ of MACHABIES; when the children of Israel were co^ducted
into Babilo^ in the time of SEDECIAS; the Priests by HIEREMIES counsel hide
the HOLY FIRE in a vallie, in a dry well, and upon their return the children
of those that had hid it, went to seek it, following the directions their
fathers had given them, and they found it converted into a thike water, which
being drawn by them, and poured upon the sacrifices, according to NEHEMIAS his
ordinance, as soon as the sun beams had touched it, it was converted into a
great fire.

4. THE: amongst the sorrows of a lively repe^ta^ce, GOD does often put in the
botome of our heart the sacred fire of love; this love is converted into the
water of tears; they, by a second chang, into a greater fire of love. Thus the
famous PENITENT-LOVER loved first her Savior; that love was converted into
tears, and those into an excellent love: whence our Savior told her that many
sins were pardoned her because she loved much. And as we see fire does turn
wine into a certain water called AQVA-VITAE which does so easily conceive fire
that it is also termed hot: so the consideration of the soueraignly amiable
Bounty offended by sin, does produce the water of holy Penance, and thence
the fire of Divine Love does issue, properly termed AQVAVITAE, or hot water.
Penance is indeed a water in it is substance being a true dislike a real grief
and repentance, yet is it hot for that it contains the property of Love,
whence it springs, and gives the life of Grace. So that Penance has two
effect's; by sorrow and detestation it seperats us from sin, and the
Creaturs; and by love it reunits us to God, at once reclaiming us from si^ne in
quality of repentance, and in quality of Love, reuniting us to God.

5. Yet will I not affirm that the perfect love of God by which we love him
above all things, does always preceede this repentance, nor that this
repentance does always preceede this love: for though it does happen so many
times, yet so, as that otherwhiles also, at the same instant that divine love
is conceived in our heart, penance is conceived by love; and often times
penance entering into our heart, love does enter with it; and as when ESAV came
out of his mothers womb, JACOB his twinne-brother, held him by the foot, to
the end that their births might not only follow the one the other, but also
might hold and entangle one an other; so repentance, rude and rough in regard
of it is sorrow, was first borne, as another ESAV, and love sweet and
gracious, holds him by the foot and does cleeue so unto him, that their birth
was one, since the end of the birth of repentance was the beginning of that of
perfect love. Now as ESAV did first appear, so repentance does ordinarily make
it self to be seen before love, but love as another JACOB, although the
younger, does afterward subdue penance, converting it into consolation.

6. Mark I pray you THEO: the well-beloued MAGDELEINE, how she weeps with
love; they have taken up my Savior, quoth she melting into tears, and I know
not where they have put him: but having by tears and sobbs found him, she
holds and possesses him by love. Imperfect love desires and requires him,
penance does seek and find him, perfect love does hold and tie him. Even as it
is said of the Ethiopian Rubies whose fire is naturally very blew, but being
dipped in vinegar, it shins and casts out its clear rays: for the love
which goes before repentance, is ordinarily imperfect; but being steeped in
the bitterness of penace, it gains strengh, and becomes excellent love.

7. Yea it happens some times that penance, though imperfect, contains not in
it self the proper action of love, but only the virtue and propriety of it:
you will ask me, what virtue or propriety of love can repentance have, if she
have not the action: GOD's goodness is the motife of perfect repentance, whom
it displeases us to have offended: now this motife is for no other reason a
motife, then that it does stire, and move us. But the motion which the divine
goodness gives unto the heart which considers, it, can be no other then the
motion of love, that is of union. And therefore true repentance, though it
seem not so, and though we perceive not the proper effect of love, receives
always motion from love, and the unitive nature thereof by means of which she
does reunite and reioyne us to the divine goodness. Tell me I pray, is it the
property of the ADAMANT to draw, and join iron unto it self? Do we not see
that iron touched with the ADAMANT, without either it, or its nature, but only
its virtue, and attractiue power, does notwithstanding draw and unite unto it
an other iron? So perfect repentance touched with the motife of love, without
having the proper action of love, leaves not to have the virtue and quality
thereof, that is an uniting motion, to reioyne and reunite our hearts to the
divine will: But you will reply, what difference is there betwixt this uniting
motion of penance, and the proper action of love. THEO: the action of love is
indeed a motion to union, but it is performed by complacence, whereas the
motion of union which is in penance, is not done by way of complacence, but by
dislike, repentance, reparatio^, reconciliation; for so much therefore, as this
motion does unite, it is endued with the quality of love; in so much as it is
bitter, and dolorous, it receives the quality of penance, and in fine, by its
natural condition it is a true motion of penance; yet so, as it retains the
virtue and uniting quality of love.

8. So Treacle-wine is not so named for that it does contain the proper
Substance of Treacle, for there is none at all there, but it is so called,
because the plant of the vine having been steeped in Treacle, the grapes and
vines which sprung from it, drew into them selves, the virtue and operation of
the Treacle, against all sorts of poison; we must not therefore think it
strange, if penance according to the holy scripture, do blot-out sin, save
the soul, make her grateful to GOD, and justify her, which are effects
appertaining to love, and seem not to be attributed to any save it: for though
love it self be not always found in perfect penance; yet its virtue and
proprieties are always there, conveyed thither by the motife of love whence it
sprung.

9. Nor must we admire that the force of love should spring out of penance,
before love be there formed since we see that the reflection of the sun beams
beating upon a looking glass, heat, which is the virtue and proper quality
of fire, gains by little and little so much force, that it begins to burn,
before it have yet well produced the fire, or at least before we perceived it;
for so the holy ghost casting into our understanding the consideration of the
greatness of our sins, for that by them we have offended so sovereign a
Bounty, and our will receiving the reflection of this knowledge, repentance by
little and little grows so strong, with a certain affectiue heat and desire
to return into grace with God, that in fine this motion becomes so complete,
that it does burn and unite, even before the love be fully formed, which
notwithstanding as a sacred fire is immediately in that moment kindled: so that
repentance never comes to the point of burning and reuniting the heart to God,
which is her utmost perfection, but she find's her self wholly converted into
fire, and flames of love, the end of the one giving the other a beginning, yea
rather the end of penance is within the beginning of love, as ESAV his foot,
was within Jacobs hand, in such sort, that as soon as ESAV ended his birth,
Jacob begun his; the end of the ones birth, being joined, tied, and which is
more, environed with the beginning of the others for so the beginning of
perfect love, does not only follow the end of penance but does even cleave,
and tie it self to it; and to contain all in one word, this beginning of
love, does mix it self with the end of repentance and in this motion of
mixture, penance and contrition merits life everlasting.

3. Now because this loving repentance is ordinarily practiced by eleuations
and raisings up of the heart to God, like to those of the ancient penitents: I
am thine o Lord, save me, have mercy upon me, for in thee my soul does
confide; save me o Lord, for the waters do ouerwhelme my soul. Use me like
one of thy hirelings. Lord be propitious, to me a poor sinner. It is not
without reason that some have said, that Prayer did justify: for the
repentant Prayer, or the suppliant repentance, raising up the soul to God, and
reuniting it to his goodness without doubt obtaines Pardon, in virtue of holy
love, which gives the sacred motion. And therefore we ought to be furnished
with such iaculatorie prayers, made in manner of loving repentance, and desire
aiming at our reco^ciliatio^ to God, to the end that by the means thereof laying
before our Savior our tribulation, we may pour out our souls, before, and
with in his pitiful heart, who will receive them to mercy.

How our Savior loving inspirations do assist and accompany us to faith and
charity. CHAPTER XXI.
1. FRom the first awaking from sin or infidelity, to the final resolution
of a perfect belief, there often runs a great deal of time in which we may
pray as we have seen S. PACOMIVS do, and as the father of the poor Lunatike
(who by S. MARKS relation, giving assurance he believed, that is, that he
began to believe) knew with all that he believed not sufficiently whereupon he
cried out. Lord I believe, yet help my incredulity; as though he should have
said, I am now no more in the obscurity of the night of infidelity, the
rays of your faith does already touch upon the Orizon of my soul: yet do I
not, even yet believe so much as were convenient, it is yet an infant knowledge
and mixed with darkness, ah! Lord help me. S. AUGUSTINE also does solemnly
pronounce this remarkable word. But hark o man, and understand, art thou not
drawene pray that thou may be drawn; in which his intention is not to
speak of the first motion, which GOD work's in us without us, when he excites
and awakes us out of the sleep of sin: For how could we demand to be awaked
seeing no man can pray before he be awaked; but he speaks of the resolution
which a man undertakes to become faithful: For he esteems, that to believe,
is to be drawn, and therefore he admonishes, even such as were exercised in
faith, to demand the gift of faith, and indeed none could better know the
difficulties, which ordinarily pass betwixt the first motions that God works
in us, and the perfect resolution of perfect belief, then S. AUGUSTINE, who
having had so great a variety of touches, by the words of the glorious S.
AMBROSE, by the conferance he had with Potitian, and a thousand other means,
used notwithstanding so many delays, and had so much pain to resolve so that,
more truly to him, then any other, might have been applied that which he
afterward said to others: Alas AUGUSTINE, if thou be not drawn, if thou
believe not, pray that thou may be drawn, that thou may believe.

2. Our Savior draws hearts by the delight that he gives them, which makes
them find the heavenly learning sweet and agreeable, but till this sweetness
have engaged and assured our will, by his amiable bonds, to draw it to the
perfect agreement and consent of faith as GOD is not deficient in exercising
his goodness upon us by his holy inspirations; so does not our enemy cease to
practice his malice by temptations. In the interim, we remain in full
liberty, to consent to the divine drawghtes, or to reject them: for as the
Sacred CONC: of TRENT has clearly resolved. If any one should say that man's
freewill, being moved and incited by GOD does cooperate in nothing, by
consenting to GOD who did move and call him, to the end he might dispose and
prepare himself to obtain the grace of Justification, and that he could not
consent though he would, verily he should be excommunicated, and reproved by
the Church. But if we do not repulse the grace of holy love it does dilate it
self by continual increase in our souls, till they be entierily converted;
like to great rivers, which finding open plains spreed themselves still
gaining ground.

3. And if the inspiration having drawn us to faith find no resistance in us,
it draws us even to penance, and charity. S. PETER, as an Apode, helped up by
an inspiration which came from the eyes of his master permitting himself
freely to be moved and carried by the gentle blast of the holy Ghost, and
looking upon those comfortable eyes which had stirred him up he read's in the^
as in the book of life, the inuitations to pardon, which the divine clemency
does offer him, draws from it a just motife of hope, goes out of the Court,
co^siders the horror of his si^ne, and detests it: He weeps, he sobbs, he
prostrats his miserable heart before his Saviors mercy, craves Pardon for his
faults, makes resolution of an inviolable loyalty, and by this Progress of
motions practiced by the healpe of grace, which does continually conduct,
assist, and further it, he comes at length, to the holy remission of his sins
and passes so from grace to grace, according to that which S. PROSPER does
auerre; that without grace, a man does not run to grace.

4. So then to conclude this point, the soul prevented by grace, feeling the
first essaies, and consenting to their sweetness, as returning to her self
after so long a sownd, she begins to sigh out these words, ah my dear SPOUSE,
my friend! draw me, I beseech thee, and take me by the hand, otherwise I am not
able to walk: but if thou do draw me, we run; thou in helping me by the
odor of thy perfumes, and I by corresponding by my weak consent, and by
relishing thy sweet's which does recreate and strengthen me, till the Balm of
thy sacred name, that is the wholesome ointment of my justification, be spread
within me. Do you mark, THEO: she would not Pray, if she were not excited,
but as soon as that is done, and that she perceiues the draughtes, she Prays
that she may be drawn: being drawn, she runns: marry she would not run, if
the perfums which inticeth and by which she is drawn, did not revive her heart
by the virtue of their odor; and as her course is more swifte, and as she
approaches nearer her heavenly Spouse, she has a more delicious taste, of the
sweetness which he sends out; in such sort that in the end, her heart begins
to melt like scattered Baulme, whence she cries out: as being surprised by this
contentment not so quickly expected, but unlooked for; o my spouse thou are as
Baulme poured into my bosom, it is not strange that young souls dearly
esteem thee!

5. Thus my dear THEO: the divine inspiration does come unto us, and prevent
us moving our wills to sacred love. And if we do not repulse her she walks
with us, and does enuiron us, continually to incite and advance us; not
abandoning us, if we abando^ her not, till such time, as she has brought us to
holy Charities Gate, performing for us the three good offices which the great
Angel RAPHAEL did for his dear TOBIE: for she is a guide to us through all
our journey of holy penance, she is our warrant from dangers and assaults of
the the devil, and does comfort, love, and fortify us in difficulties.

A short description of Charity. CHAPTER. XXII.
1. Behold at length THEO: how GOD by a progress full of ineffable
sweetness conducteth the soul which he made go out of the Egypt of sin;
from Love to Love, as from Lodging to Lodging, till she have made her entry
into the LAND OF PROMIS, I mean of most holy Charity, which to say in one
word, is Friendshipe not a love of proper interest: for by Charity we love God
for his own sake, by reason of his most soueraignely amiable Bounty: But this
friendshipe, is a true friendshipe being reciprocal, God having loved all such
eternally, as have, do, or shall love him temporally it: is showen and
acknowledged mutually, since that GOD cannot be ignorant of the love we bear
him, he himself bestowing it upon us, nor can we be ignorant of his love to
us, seeing it is so published, and that we acknowledge all the good we have, as
true effects of his benevolence, and in fine we have continual communication
with him, who never cease to speak unto our hearts by inspirations,
allurements and sacred motions; he cease not to help us, and give all sorts
of testimonies of his holy affection, having openly revealed unto us all his
secrets, as to his confident friends and for the accomplishment of his holy
LOVE-COMMERCE with us, he made himself our proper food, in the most holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist; and as for us, we have freedom to treat with him
at all times when we please in holy Prayer, we having our whole life, motion,
and being, not only with him, but even in and by him.

2. Nor is this friendshipe a simple friendshipe, but a friendshipe of
dilection, by which we make election of God, to love him with a special love.
He is chosen says the sacred spouse from amongst a thousand, she says from
amongst a thousand, but she would say from amongst all, whence this love is
not a love of simple excellency, but an incomparable love: for charity loves
God by a certain esteem and preferance so high and transcending all other
esteems, that other loves either are not true loves, in comparison of this or
if they be true loves this love is infinitely more then love, and therefore
THEO: it is not a love which the force of nature either angelical or humane
can produce, but the holy Ghost does give it and pour it into our hearts; and
as our souls which animate the body, have not their origin from the body,
but are there put by the natural providence of God; so Charity, which gives
life to our hearts, has not her extraction from thence, but is poured into
them as an heavenly liquour, by the supernatural providence, of his divine
Majesty.

3. For this reason, and for that it has reference to God, and does tend unto
him, not according to the natural knowledge we have of his goodness, but
according to the supernatural knowledge of faith; we name it supernatural
frie^dshipe. Whence she together with faith, and hope, keeps residence.

4. And as a Maiesticall Queen, is seated in the will, as in her Throne,
whence she conueies into the soul her dainties, and sweetes, making her thereby
fair, agreeable, and amiable to the divine Goodness, so that if the soul be
a kingdom whereof the Holy Ghost is the king, Charity is the Queen set at his
right hand in a Robe of gold wrought in variety. If the soul be a Queen,
Spouse to the great king of heaven; Charity is her Crown which does roially
adorn her head: yea if the soul with the body be a little world, Charity
is the Sun which beautifies all, heates all, and reuiues all,

5. Charity then is a love of friendshipe, a friendshipe of dilection, a
dilection of preference, yea and an incomparable, sovereign, and supernatural
preference, which is as a Sun through all the soul, to lighten it with his
rays; in all the spiritual faculties, to perfect the^; in all the powers, to
moderate them; but in the will, as in his seat there to reside, and to cause
her to affect and love her God above all things; o how happy is the soul
wherein this holy love is spread, since that together with it, all good does
arrive.

The end of the 2. book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE PROGRESS AND PERFECTION OF LOVE.
That holy love may be augmented still more and more in every of us. CHAPTER. I.
1. THE holy Council of Trent assures us, that the friends of God proceeding
from virtue to virtue, are day by day renewed, that is, increased by good
works, in the justice, which they received by God's grace, and are more and
more justified, according to those heavenly aduertissements; he that is just,
let him be more justified; And he who is holy, let him be more sanctified.
Fear not but thou may be justified even until death: the path of the just
is advanced, and increases as a resplendant light, even till it be clear day
with charity doing right, increasing in all things, in him who is the head of
all, JESUS CHRIST: And I beseech you that your charity, do more and more
increase. All these are sacred words out of DAVID, S. JOHN, ECCLESIASTES, and
S. PAVLE.

2. I never heard of any living creature whose grouth was not bounded and
limited, save only the Crocodile who from an extremely little beginning never
cease to grow till she come to her end, representing equally in this the
good, and the wicked; for the arrogance of such as hate God, swells continually
says the great kind DAVID; and the good do increase as the break of the
day, from brightness to brightness: and to stand long at a stay in one
estate is a thing impossible; he that gains not, loses in this traficke; he
that ascends not, descends upon this ladder; he that vanquisheth not in this
battle, is vanquished: we live amidst the dangers of the wars which our
enemy does wage with us; if we resist not, we perish; and we cannot resist,
but we overcome, nor overcome without triumph: for, as says the glorious S.
BERNARD; it is written in particular of man, that he never remains in one
state; he does necessarily either go forward or return backward. Every one
runns, but one only bears away the prize, run so, as you may obtain it.
Who is the prize, but JESUS CHRIST? And how can you attain him, if you follow
him not? But if you follow him, you shall march, and run continually: for he
never makes stay, but continues his course of love and obedience even until
death, and death of the cross.

3. Go then, says S. BERNARD, go I say with him, go my dear THEO: and
admit no other bounds, then those of life, and as long as it remains, run
after this Savior; but run ardently and lovingly: for what better will you
be to follow him if you be not so happy as to ouerta him? Let us hear the
Prophet; I have inclined my heart to do thy Iustifications eternally, he does
not say, that he will do them for a time only, but everlastingly; and
because he desires eternally to do well, he shall have an eternal reward.
Blessed are they, who are pure in the way, who walk in the law of our Lord:
accursed are they who are defiled, who walk not in the law of our Lord: It is
only a saying of the Devil, that he will sit upon the Norh. Unworthy man will thou sit down? ah! know thou not that thou art upon the way, and that the
way is not made to sit down but to go in? and so to go in, that to go, is
to pass on the way. And God speaking to one of his greatest friends: walk
says he before me and be perfect.

4. True virtue has no limits she finds still PLUS VLTRA; but especially holy
Charity, which is the virtue of vert es, and having an infinite object, might
be capable to become infinite, if she could meet with a heart capable of
infinity; nothing hi^dering this love to be infinite save the condition of the
will which receives it, and is to become active by it; which, as it is cause
that never any shall see God, as much as he is visible, so never any shall be
able to love him, as much as he is amiable. The heart which could love GOD with
a love equal to the divine Goodness, should have a will infinitely good, which
cannot be but in God. Charity then in us may be perfected eue^ to infinity,
but exclusiuely, that is, Charity may become more and more and still more
excellent, yet never infinite. The Holy Ghost, may eleuate our hearts, and
apply them to what supernatural actions it shall please him, so they be not
infinite; for betwixt little an great things, though the one exceed the other
never so much, there is still some proportion, provided always, that the
excess of the thing which does exceed be not infinite: but between finite
and infinite there is no proportion nor can there be any made, unless either
the finite thing be raised to infinity, or the infinite brought down to
finitie, which is impossible.

5. So that even the Charity which is in our Redeemour, as he is man, though
greater then Angel or man can comprehend, yet is it not infinite of it self,
and in its own being, but only in the estimation of the dignity and merit
thereof, as being the charity of a divine Person who i^^e^^ eternal Son of
the omnipotent Father.

6. Mean while, it is an extreme honor to the soul; that she may still grow
more and more in the love of her God, as long as she shall live in this
miserable life.

And by virtues new ascend,
To a life that knows no end.
How easy our Savior has made the increase of love. CHAPTER. II.
1. Do you see. THEO. this glass of water, or this piece of bread which a
holy soul gives to a poor body for Gods sake, it is a small matter God-wot,
and in humane conceit hardly worthy of consideration: God notwithstanding does
recompense it, and forthwith for it does give some increase of Charity: the
Gotes hair which aunciently was presented to the TABERNACLE, was taken in good
part, and had place amongst the holy Offerings; and the little actions which
proceed from Charity are agreeable to God and meritorious: for as in the
happy ARABIA, not only the plants which are by nature odoriferous, but even
all the others are sweet, participating the felicity of that soil; so in a
charitable be ^e, not only the works which are excellent in their own
nature, but even every little action does relish the virtue of holy love, and
has a good odor before the majesty of God, who in consideration thereof does
augment charity. And I say God does it, because Charity does not produce her
own increase as does a tree, who by her own virtue does thrust and branch out
her boughs; but as Faith, Hope and Charity are virtues which have their
origin from the divine goodness; so thence also they draw their increase and
perfection; not unlike unto Bees, who having their extraction from honey, have
also their food from it.

2. Wherefore like as Pearls are not only bred of dew, but fed also with it,
the Mother-pearls to this end opening their shells toward Heaven to beg, in a
manner, the drops which the fresh air makes fall at the break of the day;
so we having received Faith, Hope, and Charity of the heavenly Bounty, we
ought always to turn and bend our hearts thitherwards, thence to obtain the
continuation and augmentation of the same virtues. O Lord, does the holy Church
our mother teach us to say, give us the increase of faith, hope, and charity;
And it is done in imitation of those that said to our Savior, Lord increase
faith in us, and following the counsel of S. PAVLE who assures us, that God
only is able to make all grace abound in us.

3. It is God therefore that gives this increase in consideration of the
imploime^t which we make of his grace, as it is written; to him who has, (that
is, who does employ the favors received) more shall be given, and he shall
abound. Thus is our Saviors exhortation practiced; Heap up treasurs in
heaven: as though he should say, to your precedent good works, add still new
ones: for Fasting, and Alms deeds are the pieces whereof your treasurs are to
consists. Now, as amongst the treasurs of the Temple, the poor widows mite
was much esteemed, and as indeed, by the addition of many little pieces the
treasurs wax great and a greater value is set upon them; so the least of
little good works, though performed even somewhat coldly, and not according to
the whole latitude of the Charity which is in us, is agreeable to God, and
esteemed by him; In such sort, that though of themselves they cannot cause any
increase in the precedent love, being of less force then it; yet the Divine
Providence, waighing, and out of his goodness highly prising them, does
forthwith reward them with increase of Charity for the present, and for the
time to come, with a more ample glory in heaven.

4. THEOT: the delicious honey is the Bee's Maister-peece; nor yet is their
wax therefore neglected, but is an honor to their labors: Loving hearts
ought to endeavor, to bring forth works full of fervor, and of high value, to
the end they might puissantly augment Charity: yet if they bring forth some of
lesser value, they shall not loose their recompense; for God will take them in
good part, that is to say, he will thereby love them a little more. Nor does
God ever love a soul that is in Charity more, without bestowing also upon her
more Charity, our love toward him being the proper, and special effect of
his love toward us,

5. By how much more lively we look upon our picture in a looking glass, by
so much more attentively it looks upon us again; and by how much more
lovingly God does cast his gracious eyes upon our soul, which is made to his
Image and liknesse, our soul mutually, with so much more attention and fervor
is fixed upon the Divine Goodness, answering, according to her littleness,
all the increase of Divine Love which this sovereign sweetness work's in
her. The Council of Trent says thus: If any say that justice received, is
not conserved, yea that it is not augmented by good works in the sight of God,
but that works are only the fruits and signs of justification acquired, and
not the cause of its increase, let him be accursed. Do you mark THEO: how
justification wrought by Charity, is augmented by good works, and which is to
be noted, by good works without exception: for as S. Bernard says excellently
well upon another passage; nothing is excepted, or nothing is distinguished;
the Council speaks of good works indistinctly and without reseruatio^, yet
gives to understand, that not only the great and fervent, but also the little
and faint works do cause the increase of Charity: but the great ones in a
greater manner, the little ones, in a lesser.

6. Such is the love which God bears to our souls, such his desire to make us
increase in the love which we owe to him. The Divine sweetness renders all
things profitable unto us; takes all to our advantage, and turns all our
endeavors, though never so faint and of low condition, to our gain.

7. In the commerce of moral virtues little works bring no increase to the
virtue whence they proceed, but contrariwise, if they be very little, do
impair it: for a great Liberality does perish, while she is busied in
bestowing things of small value, and of liberality becomes niggardnesse. But
in the traficke of virtues which issue from God's mercy, and especially from
Charity, every work returns profit: Nor is it strange that sacred Love, as
king of virtues, has nothing either great or small, which is not amiable, since
the Baulme tree, prince of sweet trees, bears neither bark nor leaf, that
is not odoriferous: and what could love bring fourth that were not worthy of
love, or did not tend to love?

How a soul in Charity makes progress in it. CHAPTER. III.
1. Let Us make use of a Parabole THEO: seeing it was a method that pleased the
Sovereign Master of Love, which we are to teach. A great and brave King
having espoused a most amiable young Princess, and having on a certain day
led her into his secret Closet, there to converse with her more at his
pleasure; after some discourse, he saw her by a certain sudden accident fall
down as dead at his foot. Alas! he was extremely astonished at this, and it
did well nigh put him also into a sownd; for she was dearer to him then his
own life. Yet the same Love that gave him this assault of grief, did
fourthwith give him strength to sustain it, and put him into action, to the end
that with an incomparable promptitude he might remedy the evil of the dear
Companion of his life: so that with a nimble speed opening a Dresser which
stood by, he takes a cordial water infinitely precious, and having filled his
mouth with it, by force he ope^s the closed lips and teeth of his
well-beloued Princess, the^ breathing, and spurting the precious liquor which
he held in his mouth, into his poor Loves, who lay in a sownd; and poureing
the rest of the glass upon her nose, her temples, and about her heart, he made
her return to her self and senses again; that done, he helps her up
softely, and by virtue of remedies, does so strengthen and bring her to life,
that she begins to stand, and walk fairly with him; but in no sort without
his help for he goes assisting and sustaining her under the arm, till at
length he laid to her heart an Epetheme so precious, and of so great virtue,
that finding her self entirely restored to her wounted health, she walks all
alone, her dear Spouse not now surtaiening her so much, but only holding her
right hand softly betwixt his, and his right arm folded under hers, and under
her breasts. Thus he entertained her, and with all did her four good offices:
for 1. he gave testimony that his heart was lovingly careful of her. 2. he
never desisted to solace her. 3. if she felt any touch of her former faintness
return, he would sustain her. 4. if she light into any rough and difficile
way, he would be her support and stay; And in Asce^ts, or when she would make
a little more have, he would lift her up, and powerfully succor her. In fine
he stayed by her with a cordial regard till night approached, and the^ also he
would assist in co^ueying her, to her royal bed.

2. The just soul is the Spouse of our Savior, and because she is never just,
but when she is in charity, she is also never spouse but she is led into the
sacred Closet, of those delicious perfumes, mentioned in the Canticles; Now,
when the soul thus honored, commits sin, she falls as dead of a spiritual
faintness; and this is truly an unexpected accident: for who would ever have
thought that a Creature would have forsaken her Creator and sovereign Good,
for things so slight as the baits of sin? Certes the Heavens are astonished
at it, and if God were subject to passions, he would fall down in a sownd at
this mishappe, as when he was mottall he died upon the cross for our
Redemption. But seeing it is not now necessary that he should employ his love
to dye for us, when he sees the soul overthrown by sin, he commonly runs
to her succor, and by an unspeakable mercy, lays open the gates of her heart,
by the stings and remorses of conscience, which coming from the diverse lights
and apprehensions which he cast's into our hearts, with healthful motions, by
which as by an odoriferous and vital water he makes the soul return home to
her self, and senses. And all this THEO: God works in us without our help,
his amiable Bounty preventing us with his sweetness. For even as our
languishing Bride had remained dead in her sownd, if the king had not assisted;
so the soul would remain lost in her sin if God prevented her not. But if
the soul thus excitated, add her consent to the feeling of Grace, seconding
the inspiration which prevented her, and receiving the aides and remedies
requisite, provided for her by God; he will fortify her and conduct her
through the diverse motions of Faith, Hope, and Penance, even till he restore
her to her true spiritual health which is Charity. Now in her passage from
virtue to virtue, by which he disposes her to Love, he does not conduct her
only, but in such sort sustain her, that as she of her side walks what she
is able, so he of his part supports and sustaines her, and it is hard to say,
whether she goes, or she is carried: for she is not so carried that she goes
not, and yet she goes so, that if she were not carried, she could not go at
all. So that to speak Apostolically, she must say; I go, not I alone, but
the Grace of God with me.

3. But the Soul being entirely restored to her health, by the excellent
Epitheme of Charity which the Holy Ghost infuseth into her heart, she is then
able to go, and keep her self upon her feet of her self, yet by virtue of
this health, and this sacred Epitheme of holy Love. Wherefore though she be
able to go of her self, yet is she to rende the glory thereof to God, who
bestowed upon her a health so vigourous, and manly: for whether the Holy Ghost
does fortify us by the motions which he does imprint in our hearts, or he does
sustain us by the Charity which he does infuse into it; whether he does
succor us by manner of assistance, in lightening and carrying us; or that he
does strengthen our hearts by poureing into them fortifying and quickening
Love; We always live, go, and operate, in and by him.

4. And although by means of Charity poured into our Souls, we are able to
walk in the presence of God, and make advancement in the way of Salvation, yet
so, as that the Goodness of God does still assist the soul whom he has
daigned with his Love, continually holding her with his holy hand: For so 1. he
does better make appear the sweetness of his love toward her. 2. he goes
still more and more encouraging her. 3. he gives her comfort against depraved
inclinations, and evil customs contracted by her former sin. 4. and
finally, he maintains and defends her from temptations.

5. Do not we often see THEO: that sound and lusty men must be provoked to
employ their strength and power well, and as one would say must be drawn by
the hand to the work? So God having endewed us with Charity, and in it, with
force and sufficiency to gain ground in the way of perfection; his Love does
not permit him to let us march all alone, but makes him put himself upon the
way with us, it urges him to urge us, and does solicit his heart, to
solicit and drive forwards ours to make good use of the Charity which he
gave us, repeating often by means of his inspirations, S. PAVLES
Aduertisements: See that thou receive not heavenly Grace in vain, while you
have time; do all the good you can; run so as you may win the goal. So
that we are often to think, that he iterats in our ears, the words which he
used to the good Father ABRAHAM: walk before me and be perfect.

6. But principally the special assistance of God is requisite for the soul
endewed with Charity, in her enterprises which are sublime and extraordinary:
for be it that Charity, though very weak, does sufficiently incline us, and
unless I be deceived, afford force enough to perform the works necessary to
salvation. yet so, that to aspire to, and undertake excellent and
extraordinary actions, our hearts stand in need of putting on, and heateing,
by the hand and motion of this great heavenly Lover; as the Princess in our
Parable, although restored to health, could not ascend, nor have gone fast, had
not her dear Spouse relieved and strongely sustained her. To this Purpose, S.
ANTONIE, and Simeon Stylite, were in the Grace of God and Charity, when they
did design so high e^terprises: as also the B. mother S. TERESA when she made
her particular vow of obedience: S. FRANCIS, and S. JEWS, when they undertook
their journey beyond sea for the advancement of God's glory: The B. ZAVERIVS
when he consecrated his life to the Indians conversion, S. CHARLES in exposing
himself to serve the pestiferous, S. PAVLINE, when he sold himself to
redeem the poor widows child; yet never had they dared so hardy and
generous enterprises, if God, to that Charity which they had in their hearts,
had not added special forces, inspirations, inuitations, and lights, whereby he
did animate and push them forward to these extraordinary essaies of spiritual
valor.

7. Do you not mark the young man of the Gospel, whom our Savior loved,
and who consequently was in Charity? certes he never dreamed of selling all he
had, to give it to the poor, and follow our Savior: nay though our Savior
had given him such an inspiration, yet had he not the courage to put it in
execution. In these great works THEO: only inspirations are not sufficient,
but further we must be fortified, to be able to effect that which the
inspiratio^ inclines us to. As again in the fierce assaults of extraordinary
temptations, the special and particular presence of heavenly succors is
altogether necessary. For this cause, the holy Church makes us so frequently
cry out: Excite our hearts o Lord, prevent our actions by breathing upon us;
and in aiding us, accompany us; O Lord be prompt to help us, and the like;
thereby to obtain grace to be able to effect excellent and extraordinary
works, and more frequently and fervently to exercise ordinary ones: as also
more ardently to resist small temptations, and more valliently to encounter
great ones. S. ANTONIE was assailed by a hideous legion of Devils, whose rage
having a long time sustained, not without incredible pain and torment; at
length he espied the cover of his Cell divided, and a heavenly raie enter the
breach, which made the black and disordered Route of his enemies vanish in a
moment, and delivered him of the pain of his wounds received in that
schirmish, whence he perceived God's particular presence, and casting out a
groan toward the brightness; where wast thou o good JESUS, quoth he, where
wast thou? why wast thou not here from the beginning to have remedied my pain?
It was answered him from above, Antonie, I was here: but I expected the event
of thy combat: And since thou behaved thy self bravely and valiently, I will
be thy continual aid. But in what the valor, and courage of this brave
spiritual Combatant did consist, he himself, another time declars, that being
set upon by a Devil who professed to be the Spirit of fornication, this
Glorious Saint after many words worthy of his great courage, fell a singing
the 7. verse of the 115. Psalm. The Eternal God is my defense,
In him it is I stand:
I weigh no enemies pretense,
I dread no hostell band.
And our Savior revealed to S. CATHERINE of Sienna, that he was in the midst
of her heart in a cruel temptation she had, as a Captain in the midst of a
Fort to hold it; and that without his succor she had lost her self in the
battle. It is the like, in all the hot assaults which our enemy makes
against us: and we may well say with JACOB, that it is the Angel that does
warrant us in all, and sing with the great king DAVID. The Pastor who does
guide my way,
Is God, who rules this ROVND.
While I to his commands obey,
At wish, all things abound:
When he behoulds my souls destresse
Her Anguish, grief, or care,
His Goodness grant's a quick redress
And th ruins does r^paire.
So that we ought often to repeat this exclama^ion and Prayer.

^o hour want I thy Bounti's hand,
Each where I Am guarded by thy Grace,
That in thy heauen^y PROMISED LAND,
Obtain I might a MANSION PLACE.
Touching holy perseverance in sacred Love. CHAPTER IIII.
1. EVen as a tender mother, leading with her, her little babe, does assist and
support him according as need requires, letting him now and then adventure a
step by himself in plain, or less dangerous way, now taking him by the hand
to weeld him, now taking him up in her arms and bearing him: so our Savior
has a continual care to conduct his children, that is such as are in
Charity; making the^ walk before him, reaching them his hand in difficulties,
and bearing them himself in such pains, as he sees otherwise insupportable
unto the^, which he declared by ISAIE saying, I am thy GOD, taking thee by the
hand, and saying fear not, I have helped thee. So that with a strong courage
we must have a firm confidence in God, and his assistance: for if we fail not
to second his Grace, he will accomplish in us the happy work of our
Salvation, which he also began, working in us both the VELLE and PERFICERE, as
the Holy Council of Trent does assure us.

2. In this conduct which the heavenly sweetness daignes to our souls, from
their entry to Charity, until their final perfection, which is not finished
but in the period of life, does the great gift of Perseverance consist to which
our Savior annecteth the greater gift of eternal glory, following that which
he says, he that shall persevere to the end, shall be saved: for this gift is
no other thing then a setting together, and a continuing of the diverse
supports, solaces, and succors whereby we continue in the Love of God till
death: as the education, breeding, and feeding of a child is no other thing,
the^ the many cares, aides and succors, and other offices befitting a child,
exercised, and continued toward him till he grow to years in which he shall
not need them.

3. But the continuance of succors and helps, are not equal in all those
that persevere: for in some it is short, as in such as were converted a little
before their death: so it happened to the good Thief; so to the Sergeant, who
seeing S. JAMES his constancy, made forthwith profession of Faith and became a
companion of the Matyrdome of this great Apostle: so to the glorious Porter who
kept the 40. Martyrs in SEBASTE, who seeing one of them loose courage, and
forsake the crown of Martyrdom did put himself in his place, and at o^ce
became Christian, Martyr, and Glorious: so to the Notarie, of whom mention is
made in S. ANTONIE of Padua his life, who having all his life been a false
villain, yet died a Martyr: And so it happened to a thousand others, whom we
have seen, and red that they died well, after an ill life. And as for these
they stand not in need of a great variety of succors, but unless some great
temptation cross their way, may perform this short perseverance by the only
Charity given then, and by the aides by which they were converted. For they
arrive at the PORT without sailing, and finish their pilgrimage in one only
iumpe, which the puissant mercy of God made them take in so due time, that
their enemies saw them triumph, before they stroke: so that their conversion
and perseverance were scarcely distinguished, and if one would be exact in the
propriety of words, the grace which they received of God, whereby they attained
as soon the issue, as the entry of their pretentions, could not well be termed
Perseverance, though otherwise holding in effect the place of perseverance, in
that it gives salvation, we comprehend it under the name of Perseverance. Now
in others Perseverance is longer, as in S. ANNE the Prophetess; in S. JOHN the
Evangelist; S. PAVLE the first Hermit; S. HILARION; S. ROMWALD; S FRANCIS of
Paula, and they stood in need of a thousand sundry kinds of assista^ces,
according to the variety of the aduenturs of their Pilgrimage, and the
sharpness of it.

4. Howbeit Perseverance is a gift, the most to be desired of any thing we can
hope for in this life, and which, as he Council of Trent says; we cannot
have but from the hand of God, who only can assure him that stand's, and help
him up that falls: Wherefore we must incessantly demand it, making use of the
means which our Savior has tought us, to the obtaining of it, Prayer,
Fasting, Alms deeds, frequenting the Sacraments, conversation with the good,
the hearing and reading of pious lessons.

5. Now since the gift of Prayer and devotion is liberally granted to all,
thar freely do consent to divine inspirations, it is consequently in our power
to persevere. Yet not so, that I would hence infer, that Perseuera^ce has her
beginning from our power; for contrariwise I know she does spring from God's
mercy, whose most precious gift she is, but I would say that though she does
not proceed from our power, yet comes she within the compass of it, by means
of our will which we cannot deny to be in our power: for be it, that Gods
grace is necessary for us, to will to persevere, yet is this will in our power,
because heavenly grace is never manting to our will, while our will is not
wanting to our power. And indeed, according to the great S. BERNARD'S opinion,
we may truly say with the Apostle: That neither death, nor life, nor Angels,
neither depth, nor hight can separate us from the Charity of God, which is in
Jesus Christ, no, for no creature can take us away by force from this holy
Love; but we only can forsake and abandon it by our own will, nor is there
any other thing in this behalf to be feared.

6. So THEO: following the advice of the holy Council, we ought to place our
whole hope in God, who will perfect the work of our Salvation which he has
begun in us, if we be not wanting to his grace: for we are not to think that
he who said to the Paralitike, go and sin not, gave him not also power to
avoid that which he did prohibit him: and surely he would never exhort the
faithful to persevere, if he were not ready to furnish them with power required
thereto. Be faithful till death said he to the Bishop of SMIRNA and I will
give thee a crown of Glory; be diligent, and remain in faith, labor
courageously, and comfort your selves, do all your works in Charity; run
so, that you may obtain the Prise. We must eftsonnes with the great king
demand of God the heavenly gift of Perseverance, and hope that he will grant it
us.

Do not permit thy seruant's fall,
O Lord my only HOPE, my ALL,
In th-winter of this mortal day.
But when untired time shall hasle
To render back to th-earth the waste
Of what I was; be thou my stay.
That the happiness to die in heavenly Charity, is a special gift of God.
CHAPTER. V.
1. When the heavenly king has brought the soul which he loves, to the end
of this life, he does not cease to assist her also in her blessed departure, by
which he draws her to the marriage bed of eternal glory, which is the
delicious fruit of holy Perseverance. And then, dear THEO. this soul wholly
ravished with the love of her well-beloued, putting before her eyes the
multitude of favors, and succors wherewith she was prevented and helped, while
she is yet in her pilgrimage, she does incessantly kiss this sweet helping
hand, which co^ducted, drew, and supported her in the way; and confesses, that
it is of this divine Savior that she holds her felicity, seeing he had done
for her all that the Patriarch JACOB wished for his journey at such time as he
saw the Ladder to heaven. O Lord, says she then, thou wast with me, and
guided me in the way by which I came. Thou fedst me with the bread of thy
Sacraments; thou clothed'st me with the wedding garment of Charity, thou have
happily conducted me to this MANSION OF GLORY, which is thy HOUSE, o my
eternal Father. What remains o Lord, save that I should protest that thou art
my God for ever and ever. Amen. O God my Lord, my God for ever dear,
Thy hand has been my stay; thy sacred grace,
My surest Guide; and did me upwards rear
To the honor of thy heavenly MANSION PLACE.
Thus then we walk to eternal life, for the accomplishment of which the
Divine Providence ordained the number, distinction and succession of graces
necessary to it, with their dependence of one another.

2. He willed first with a true will, that even after the sin of ADAM all men
should be saved: but upon terms, and by means agreeable to the condition of
their nature endewed with free will, that is to say he willed the salvation,
of all those that would contribute their consent, to the graces and favors,
which he prepared, offered, and distributed to this end.

3. Now amongst these favors, his will was, that VOCATION should be the first,
and that it should be so accommodated to our LIBERTY, that we might at our
pleasure accept or reject it: and such as he saw would receive it, he would
furnish with the sacred motions of PENANCE; and determined to give Charity to
such as should second these motions: to those again that were in Charity, he
purposed to supply with helps necessary to PERSEVERANCE: and to such, as
should make use of these divine helps, he resolved to impart final
Perseverance, and the glorious FELICITY of his eternal Love.

4. And thus we may give a reason of the order which is found in the effects of
PROVIDENCE tending to salvation, descending from the first to the last, that is
from the fruit, which is GLORY, to the root of this fair tree, which is our
Saviors REDEMPTION. For the Divine Bounty does follow MERITS with GLORY,
CHARITY with merits, PENANCE with CHARITY, OBEDIENCE to the first Vocation,
with Penance. The VOCATION with obedience to the vocation, and our Saviors
REDEMPTION with a vocation, upon which Jacobs mystical ladder does rest, as
well toward heaven, it ending in the loving bosom of the eternal Father, in
which he does receive and glorify the Elect, as also toward the earth, being
planted upon the besome, and pearsed side of our Savior, who for this cause
died upon the Mont-Caluarie.

5. And that this continuance of the effects of Providence was thus ordained,
with the same dependence, which they have of one another in the eternal will
of God, the Holy Church, in the preface of one of her solemn Prayers, does
witness in these words: O ETERNAL and Almighty God who art Lord of the
living and dead, and art merciful to all those, whom thou foreseest are to be
thine, by faith and works: as though she had acknowledged, that Glory which is
the increase and fruit of Gods Mercy toward men, was only ordained for
those, whom the Divine wisdom had foreseen, that in tract of time, seconding
their vocation, they should attain a lively Faith, which work's by Charity.

6. Finally all these effects have their absolute dependence of our Saviors
Redemption, who did merit them for us IN RIGOVR OF JUSTICE, by the loving
obedience which he exercised eue^ till death and death of the cross, which is
the source of all the graces which we receive; we who are the Spiritual
graffes ingraffed in his stoke and if being ingraffed we remain in him, we
shall bear without doubt, by the life of grace which he will impart unto us,
the fruit of Glory prepared for us. But if we prove broken sprigges and
graffes upon this tree, that is, if by resistance we break the progress, and
success of the effects of his Clemency it will not be strange, if in the end
we be wholly cut of, and be thrown into eternal fires, as fruitless branches.

7. God, doubtless, prepared heaven for those only, who^ he foresaw would be
his. Let us be his then THEO. by faith and works, and he will be ours by
Glory. Now it is in our power to be his: for though it be a gift of God to be
Gods, yet is it a gift which God denies no body, but offers it to all, to give
it to such as freely do consent to receive it.

8. Nay mark I pray you THEO: how ardently God desires we should be his, since
to this end, he has made himself entirely ours; bestowing upon us his death,
and his life; his life, to exempt us from eternal death; his death, to
possess us of eternal life. Let us remain therefore in peace, and serve God,
to become his in this mortal life; more his, in that immortal.

That we cannot attain to a perfect union with God in this mortal life.
CHAPTER. VI.
1. Rivers do restless ru^ne, and as the wiseman says, return to their
source. The Sea which is the place whence they spring, is also the place of
their final repose; all their motion tend's no further then to unite
themselves to their fountain. O God says S. AUGUSTINE, thou have created my
heart for thy self, and it can never repose but in thee: But what have I in
heaven save thee, o my God, or what else in earth can I desire? yea Lord, for
thou art the Lord of my heart, thou my part and portion for ever. Howbeit the
union which our heart aspires to, never attaines to it is perfection in this
mortal life; we may commence our Loves in this, but never consummat them till
the next world.

2. The heavenly Spouse makes a delicate expression of it, I have found him at
length says she; him whom my heart loves, I hold him, nor will I let him go,
till I have led him into my mothers house, and into her chamber who brought me
fourth. The well-beloued has gotten him then: For he makes her feel his
presence by a thousand consolations: she holds him, these feelings causing in
her strong affections, by which she does hold and embrace him, protesting
never to release him. O no! for these affections turn into eternal
resolutions, yet cannot she persuade her self, that she gives him the marriage
kiss, till she meet with him in her mothers house THE HEAVENLY HIERVSALEM, as
S. PAVLE says. But see, THEO: how this Spouse, thinks even to keep her
beloved at her mercy, as slave in Love, and so lead him at her pleasure,
bringing him to her mothers happy abode, though indeed she her self must be
conducted thither by him, as was REBECCA into SARA'S chamber, by her dear
ISAAC. The heart pressed with love, does still gain ground toward the thing
beloved. And the Spouse himself confesses, that the Beloved has forced his
heart, having tied him with one only heir of her head, acknowledging himself
her prisoner by Love.

3. This perfect conjunction then of the soul with God, shall only be in
heaven, where, as the Apocalypse says, the Lambs marriage-banquet shall be
made. In this mottall life the soul is truly espoused, and betrothed to the
immaculat Lamb, but not as yet married unto him: They have passed their words
and promises, but the execution of the marriage is differred: so that we have
always time, though never reason, to disclame from it; our faithful Spouse
never abandoning us, unless provoked by our disloyalty and unfaithfulness:
But in heaven the marriage of this divine union being celebrated, the tie of
our hearts to their sovereign PRINCIPLE, shall never be undone.

4. It is true THEOTIME that while we expect the kiss of this indissoluble
union, which we shall receive of the Spouse above in glory, he begiues us some
few kisses, by a thousand touches of his gratfull presence: for unless the
soul were kissed, she should not be drawn, nor would she run in the odor
of the Beloued's perfumes: whence according to the original Hebrew Text, and
the 70. Interpreters, she wishes many kisses: Let hi^ kiss me says she, with
kisses of his mouth. But whereas these little kisses of this present life, have
reference to the ETERNAL KISS of the life to come, the holy vulgar Edition,
has piously reduced the kisses of grace, to that of Glory, expressing the
spouse her desires in this wise: Let him kiss me with a kiss of his mouth, as
though she should say, of all the kisses, of all the favors, that the friend
of my heart, or the heart of my soul has provided for me; ah! I do not
breath after, or aspire to any other thing then this great and solemn
marriage-kisse which remains for ever, and in comparison whereof, the other
kisses merit not the name of kisses, being rather signs of the future union
betwixt my beloved and me, then union it self.

That the Charity of Saints in this mortal life does equallise, yea sometimes
pass that of the Blessed. CHAPTER. VII.
1. When after the travails and dangers of this mortal life, the happy
souls arrive at the Port of the eternal, they ascend to the highest and
utmost degree of Love to which they can attain: and this final increase being
bestowed upon them in recompense of their merits, it is distributed unto them,
not only in good measure, but is even pressed and thrust down, and yet does
scatter on every side, as our Savior says: So that the Love which is given
for reward, is greater in every one, then that which was, given for to merit.

2. Nor shall every one in particular only, have a greater love in heaven,
then ever he had in earth, but even the exercise of the least Charity in
heaven, shall be much more happy and excellent, generally speaking, then that
of the greatest which is, has been, or shall be in this frail life: for
above, all the saints do incessantly, without any intermissio^ exercise love;
while hear below, God's greatest servants racked and tyrannized with the
necessities of this dying life, are forced to suffer a thousand and a thousand
distractions, which oftentimes puts them by the practice of holy love.

3. In heaven THEO: the loving attention of the blessed is firm, constant,
inviolable, and cannot perish or decrease; their intention is pure, and freed
from all mixture of any inferior intention* In some, this felicity, to see
God clearly, and love him vnchangably is incomparable. And who would ever
compare the pleasure one might take by sea (if any can be had to live amidst
the dangers continual torments, agitations and mutatio^s, which there are to
be endured) with the content of a royal Palace, where all things are at a
wish, yea where delights do incomparably pass our wishes?

4. There is then more content, pleasure, and perfection in the exercise of
sacred love amongst the heavenly inhabitants, then in that of the pilgrims of
this poor land: some notwithstanding have been so happy in their pilgrimage,
that they passed in Charity diverse of those Saints, who were already possessed
of the eternal Country: for certainly it were strange, that the Charity of a
great S. JOHN, of the Apostles and Apostolical men, were not greater, yea even
while they were detained hear below, then that of little children who dying
in the only grace of Baptism enjoyed immortal glory.

5. It is not ordinary that shepherds are more valiant then soldiers; and yet
the little shepherd DAVID, coming into the Army of ISRAEL, found that every
one was more expert in the use of arms then he, nevertheless he was more
valiant then all they. Nor is it ordinary that mortals have more charity
then the immortal, and yet there have been some mortals, inferior in the
exercise of love to the immortal, who notwithstanding have gone before them in
charity, and habits of love. And as making comparison betwixt hot iron and a
burning lamp, we say, the iron is hotter, yet the lamp is clearer and
lighter: So if we parallel a glorious child with S. JOHN as yet prisoner, or S.
PAVLE a captive, we shall say that the child in heaven has more brightness
and lightness in his understanding, more heat and exercise of love in the
will: yet S. JOHN, or S. PAVLE had even in earth, more fire of Charity, and
heat of love.

Of the incomparable love of the mother of God our B. Lady. CHAPTER. VIII.
1. But what or whersoeuer I speak, my meaning is not to make comparison with
the most Sacred virgin Mother our B. Lady: o God no, FOR SHE IS THE DAVGHTER OF
INCOMPARABLE DILECTION, the only dove, the most perfect spouse. Of this
heavenly Queen, from my heart I pronounce, this loving, and true thought;
that, at least toward the end of her mortal days, her charity passed that
of the Seraphins: for though many Daughters heaped together riches, she
surpassed the all. The Saints and Angels are but compared to stars, and the
prime of those to the fairest of these: but she is fair as the moon, as easy
to be singled and discerned from all the Saints, as the Sun from the stars.
And yet I think further, that as the Charity of this MOTHER OF LOVE excells
that of all the Saints of heaven in perfection, so did she exercise it more
perfectly, yea even in this mortal life, never offending venially, as the
Church esteems; she had then nor change nor stop in the way of Love, but by a
perpetual advancement ascended from Love to Love. She never felt any
contradiction of the sensual appetite; whence her Love as a true SOLOMON
reigned peacebly in her soul, and was exercised at her pleasure: the
virginity of her heart and body, was more worthy and honorable then that of
Angels. So that her spirit not divided or separated as S. PAVLE says, was
occupied in divine thoughts to please her God. And in fine a mothers love, most
pressing, active, and ardent, an unwearied and insatiable love, what could it
not work in the heart of such a mother, and for the heart of such a son.

2. Ah! do not say I pray you, that this virgin was subject to sleep, no,
say not so THEO: for do you not see, that her sleep, is a sleep of Love? so
that it is even her Spouse his will, that she should sleep so long as she
list; ah! take heed I conjure you says he, that you awake not my well-beloued
till she please. No THEO: this heavenly Queen never slept but of love, since
she never gave repose to her precious body, but to reenforce it, the better
thence to serve God, which is a most excellent act of Charity: for as the
great S. Augustine says, Charity does oblige us to love our bodies
conveniently, in so much as they are necessary to good works; as they make a
part of our person; and as they shall be participant of eternal felicity:
Certes a Christian is to love his body, as a living Image of our Savior
incarnate, as issue of the same stock, and consequently of his kindred and
consanguinitie; especially after we have renewed the alliance, by receiving
really the divine body of our Redeemour in the most adorable Sacrament of the
Altar, and when by Baptism, Confirmation and other Sacraments, we have
dedicated and consecrated our selves to the Sovereign Goodness.

3. But for the B. Virgin, o God with what devotion was she to love her
virginal body! not only because it was a sweet, humble, pure body,
obeissant to divine Love, and wholly embaumed with a thousand sacred sweetes,
but also for that it was the lively source of our Sauiour's, and did so
strictly belong unto him, by an incomparable dependence. For which cause, when
she gave her angelical body to the repose of sleep: go to aied she, repose
o TABERNACLE OF ALLIANCE, ARC OF SANCTITY, THRONE OF THE DIVINITY, ease thy
self a little of thy weariness, and repair thy forces, by this sweet repose.

4. Besides dear THEO: do you not know that bad dreams, voluntarily procured
by the days depraved thoughts, are in some sort sins, in so much as they
are dependances and executio^s of the precedent malice? eue^ so the dreams
which proceed from the holy affections of such as are a wake be reputed
virtuous and holy. O God THEO: what a consolation it is to hear S. CHRYSOSTOM
recounting on a certain day to his people, the vehemency of his love toward
them! the necessity of sleep, quoth he, pressing my eyelids, the tyranny of
my love toward you, does excite the eyes of my mind: and even while I sleep
me thinks I speak unto you, for the soul is wont in sleep to see by
imagination what she thought in the day time, so while we see not one an other
with the eyes of flesh, we supply it with the eyes of Charity. O sweet
JESUS, what dreams was thy sacred Mother to have when she sleept, her heart
watching? Did she not dream that she had thee yet folded in her womb, as thou
wa'st for nine months space? or else hanging at her breasts, and pretily
pressing the sacred nible of her virginal dugge? Ah what sweetness was in
this soul! Paraduenture she dreamed, that as our Savior had often sleept in
her bosom, as a tender lampkin upon his mothers flank, so she sleept in his
pierced side, as a WHITE DOVE in the cave of an assured rock: so that her
sleep was wholly like to an ecstasy, according to the operation of the spirit,
though to the body it was a sweet and gracious rest and repose. But if ever
she dreamed, as did the ancient Joseph, of her future greatenesse; when in
heaven she should be clothed with the Sun, crowned with stars, and the moon
at her feet, that is, wholly environed with her sons glory, crowned with
that of the Saints, and the world under her: or else, if as Jacob, she saw the
progress, and fruit of her sons Redemption, for the love of Angels and
men. THEO: who could ever imagine the immensitie of so great delights? o what
confere^ces with her dear child! what deliciousness from every side!

5. But mark I pray you that I neither do, nor will say, that this so
priuileged a Soul of the Mother of God, was deprived of the use of reason in
her sleep. Many are of opinion that Solomon in that rare, yea, and true
dream, in which he demanded and received the gift of incomparable wisdom, did
truly exercise his free will, by reason of the judicious eloquence of the
discourse he made; of his choice full of discretion; and the most excellent
Prayer which he used; and all these without any mixture of impertinences or
distractio^s of mind. But how much more reason is there, that the mother of the
true Solomon, had the use of reason in her sleep, that is to say, as Solomon
himself made her speak, that her heart watched while she slept? Surely it was
a far greater marvel that S. JOHN had the exercise of reason in his mothers
womb. And why then should we deny her a less, for whom, and to whom God did
more favors, then either he has, or shall do for all creaturs besides?

6. To conclud, as the precious stone Abeston does by a perlelesse propriety
conserve for ever the fire which it has conceived: So the virgin-Mothers heart
remained perpetually inflamed with holy love which she received pf her son:
yet with this difference, that the Abestons fire as it cannot be extinguished,
so it cannot be augme^ted; but the virgins sacred flames, since they could
neither perish, diminish, nor remain in the same estate, never ceased to take
incredible increase, even unto heaven the place of their origin: So true it is
that this Mother, is the Mother of FAIR DILECTION, that is, as the most
amiable, so the most loving; and as the most loving, so the most beloved mother
of this only son; who again is the most amiable, most loving, and most
beloved son of this only Mother.

A Preparation to the discourse of the union of the Blessed with God. CHAPTER.
IX.
1. THe triumphant love which the Blessed in heaven do exercise, consists in
the final, unvariable and eternal union of the soul with God. But what is
this union?

2. By how much, more agreeable and excellent objects our senses meet withal,
by so much more ardently and greedily they give themselves to the fruition of
them. By how much more fair, delightful to the veiw, and duly lightened they
are, by so much the eye does more eagarly and lively behold them: and by how
much more sweet and pleasant voices, or music are, the attention of the ear
is more drawn unto them: So that every object does exercise a puissant, yet
amiable violence upon its proper senses; a violence less or more strong,
according as the excellency is less or greater; provided always, that it be
proportionable to the capacity of the Sense which desires to enjoy it: for the
eye which does please it self so much in light, cannot yet support the
extreamitie of it, nor fix it self upon the sun: And be music never so
sweet, if loud and too nigh, it does importune and offend our ears. TRVTH is
the object of our understanding, and consequently takes no other content then
to discover and know the truth of things; as TRVTH is more excellent, so the
understanding does apply it self more deliciously and attentively, to the
consideration of it. What pleasure think you had these ancient Philosophers,
who had so excellent a knowledge of so many fair TRVTHES in nature? Verily
they reputed all pleasurs as nothing in comparison of their well beloved
Philosophy, for which some of them quitted honors, others great riches,
others their country: yea some there were, who deliberatly pulled out their
eyes, depriving themselves for ever of the fruition of the fair e^d agreeable
corporal light, that with more liberty they might apply themselves to the
consideration of the verity of things, by a spiritual light: for so we read
of Democrites. So delicious is the knowledge of truth! Hence it was frequent
with Aristotle, that humane Felicity and Beatitude consists in wisdom,
which is the knowledge of eminent truth.

3. But when our mind, raised above natural lights, begins to see the sacred
truths of faith, o God THEO: what joy! the soul melts with pleasure hearing
the voice of her heavenly Spouse, whom she finds more sweet and delicious the^
the honey of all humane knowledges.

4. God has imprinted upon all things created his trace, gate, or
foote-steppes; so that the knowledge we have of his divine Majesty by
creaturs, seems no other thing then God's trace; and that in comparison of it,
Faith is a veiw of the very face of the divine Majesty, which we do not yet
see in the clear day of Glory, but as it were in the break of day, as it
happened to JACOB near unto the Torrent IABOC: for though he saw not the
Angel with whom he wrastled, save in the weak light of the day break, yet
ravished with contentment he ceased not to cry; I have seen the Almighty
face to face, and my soul has been saved. o how delightful is the holy light
of faith, by which we know by an infallible certitude not only the history of
the beginning of creaturs, and their true use; but even that of the eternal
birth of the great, and sovereign DIVINE WORD, to and for whom, all was made,
and who with the Father and the holy Ghost, is one only God, most singular,
most adorable and blessed for ever Amen. Ah! says S. HIEROME to his Paulina,
the learned Plato never knew this; Eloquent Demosthenes was ignorant of it. How
sweet thy words are to my palace, o God quoth that great king, sweeter then
honey to my mouth! was not our heart burning while he spoake to us in the way,
said those happy pilgrims of Emaus, speaking of the flames of love with which
they were touched, by the word of faith. But if divine TRVT^ES be so sweet,
being proposed in the obscure light of faith, o God what shall they be, when we
shall contemplat them in the light of the noonday of glory?

5. The Queen of Saba, who at the greatness of Salomons renown; left all to
go see him, being arrived in his presence, and having heard the wonders of the
wisdom which he poured out in his speeches; as astonished and lost in
admiration, she cried out, that what she had by hearesay of this heavenly
wisdom was not half of the knowledge which sight and experience had given her.

6. Ah! how fair and grateful are the truths which faith does discover unto
us by hearing, but when arrived in the heavenly Jerusalem, we shall she the
great Solomon, king of glory, seated upon the Throne of his wisdom
manifesting by an incomprehensible brightness the wonders and eternal secrets
of his Sovereign TRVTH, with such light, that our understanding shall see in
presence, that which it had believed here below; ah! then most dear THEO: what
rauishments! what extases! what admirations! what loves! what sweetes! no,
never (shall we say in this excess of sweetness) never could we have
imagined to have seen truths so delightsome. Indeed we believed all that we
were told of thy glory, o great City of God, but we could not conceive the
infinite greatness of the Abisses of thy delights.

That the precedent desire shall much increase the union of the Blessed with
God. CHAPTER. X.
1. THe desire which does preceede fruition, does egg and refine the feeling
of the same, and by how much the desire was more urgent and powerful, by so
much more grateful and delicious is the possession of the thing desired, o
JESUS, my dear THEO: what pleasure will man's heart take to see the face of
the Divinity, a face so much desired, yea a face the only desire of our
souls? Our hearts have a thrist which cannot be quenched by the pleasures of
this mortal life, whereof the most esteemed and purchased, If moderat, quench
us not; if extreme, they stifle us. Yet we desire them always in the
extreamitie, and being so desired they are always excessive, insupportable,
dammagable: For we dye of joy as well as of grief: yea joy is more active to
ruinate us then grief. Alexander having swallowed up, what in effect, what in
hope, this lower world, heard of a caitiue fellow, that there were yet many
other worlds, and like a little child who will cry if one refuse him an aple,
this Alexander whom the world instills the great, more fool notwithstanding
then a little child, began bitterly to weep, because there was no liklihoode
that he should conquer the other worlds, having not as yet got the entire
possession of this. He that did more fully enjoy the world then ever any did,
is yet so little satisfied with it, that he weeps for sorrow that he cannot
have the others, which the foolish persuasion of a wretched Babbler made him
conceive. Tell me I pray you THEO: does he not show that the thrist of his
heart cannot be slaked in this life, and that this world is not sufficient to
quench it! O admirable, yet amiable unrest of man's heart! be still, be still my
soul without all rest, or repose in this earth till thou shall have met with
the fresh waters of the immortal life, and the most holy Divinity, which
alone can allay thy drouth, and cease thy desire.

2. Mean while, THEO: imagine with the Psalmist, how the Heart hard laid at by
the Cry, having now, nor breath nor legs, does plunge himself greedily into
the waters, which he quested, and with what ardour he does press and shut
himself up in that Eleme^t. One would think he would willingly be dissolved
and converted into water, more fully to enjoy this coldenesse: ah! what an
union of our hearts shall there be with God above; where, after these infinite
desires of the true of Good, never assuaged in this world, we shall find the
living and puissant source thereof; Then verily, as we see a hungry child
closely glewed to his mothers breast, and fixed to her dugge, greedely press
this sweet fountain of plesa^t and desired loquor, so that one would think,
that either it would thrust it self into its mothers breast, or else suck,
and draw her breast into his: so our soul panting with an extreme thrist of
the true Good, when she shall meet with that vndrainable source in the
Divinity; o good God! what a holy and pleasing desire shall she feel to be
united and joined to the plentiful breasts of the All-goodnesse, either
altogether to diue into it, or draw it altogether into her.

Of the Union of the Blessed souls with God, in seeing the Divinity. CHAPTER.
XI.
1. When we look upon any thing, though present to us it is not in it self
united to our eyes, but only sends out to them a certain representation or
picture of it self, which is called SPECIES SENSIBILIS, by means whereof we
see. So also when we contemplat, or understand any thing, that which we
understand is not united to our understanding, otherwise then by another
representation, or most delicate and spiritual image, which is called SPECIES
INTELLIGIBILIS. But further these SPECIES by how many windings and changes get
they to the understanding? they aboard the exterior senses, thence pass to
the interior, after to the Fantasy, from thence to the active understanding,
and come at last to the passive, to the end that passing so many sierces, and
files, they might be purified, subtilised, and refined, and of sensible become
intelligible.

2. Thus, THEOTINE we see and understand, all that we see and understand in
this mortal life; yea even things of faith; for, as the Myrrour contains not
the thing we see in it, but only the representation, and species of it, which
representatio^ stayed by the Myrrour produces another in the behoulding eye:
So the word of faith, does not contain that which it announceth, but only
represents it, and this representation of divine things, which is in the word
of faith produces an other, which our understanding, helped by Gods grace does
accept, and receive as a representation of holy TRVTH, and our will is pleased
in it, and does embrace it as an honorable, profitable, lovely, and best
TRVTH: So that the truths signified in Gods word, are by it represented to the
understanding, as things expressed in the Myrrour are by it represe^ted to the
eye; whence the great Apostle said, that to believe, was to see as in a
Myrrour.

3. But in heaven, THEO: o God what a favor! The Divinity will unite it self
to our understanding, without the mediation of any species or representation at
all, but it self will apply and join it self to our understanding, making
it self in such sort present unto it, that that inward presence shall be in
lieu of a representation or species. O true God what a delight shall it be to
man's understanding, to be united for ever to his sovereign object, receiving
not the representation but the presence, not the picture or species, but the
very essence of Divine TRVTH and Majesty. We shall be there as most happy
children of the Divinity, and shall have the honor to be fed with the Divine
substance it self; taken into our soul by the mouth of our understanding; and
that which passes all delight, is, that as mothers are not contented in
feeding their babes with their milk, which is their own substance, ^f they
do not also put the nible of their dugge into their mouths, that they might
not receive their substance in a spoone or other instrument, but even in, and
by their own substance, it serving as well for food, as a conduite to convey
it to the dear little suckling: So God our Father, is not contented to make us
receive his proper substance in our understanding, that is, to make us see his
Divinity, but by an Abisse of his sweetness, himself will apply his
substance to our soul, to the end that we might no longer understand by
species, or representation, but in it self and by it self; so that his
fatherly, and eternal substance, is both SPECIES, and OBJECT to our
understanding. Then these divine promises shall be practiced in an excellent
manner; I will lead her into the solitude, and speak unto her heart, and give
her suck; rejoice with Jerusalem in joy, that you may drink, and be filled
with the dugge of his consolation, and that you may suck and be delighted with
the whole abundance of his glory; you shall be carried to the Pap, and be
lulled upon the knee.

4. Infinite bliss THEOT:! And which was not promised only, but we have
earnest of it in the Blessed Sacrament, that perpetual Feast of Divine Grace:
For in it we receive the blood of our Savior in his flesh, and his flesh in
his blood, his blood being applied unto us by means of his flesh, his
substance by his substance even to our corporal mouth; to the end we might know
that so he will apply unto us, his Divine essence in the eternal Feast of his
Glory. True it is, this favor is really done unto us, even here, but covertly
under SACRAMENTAL SPECIES AND APPARENCES, whereas in heaven, the Divinity
will give himself openly, and we shall see him face to face as he is.

Of the eternal union of the blessed spirits with God, in the vision of the
eternal birth of the Son of God. CHAPTER. XII.
1. O Holy and divine Spirit, eternal Love of the Father and the Son; be
propitious to mine infancy. Our understanding shall then see God, THEO: yes,
it shall see God face to face, contemplating by a view of true and real
presence, the Divine essence it self, and in it, the infinite beauties
thereof, all-power, all-goodnesse, all-wisdome, all-iustice, and the rest of
this Abisse of perfections.

2. The understanding then shall clearly see, the infinite knowledge which God
the Father had from all eternity of his own beauty for the expression of
which in himself, he pronounced, and said eternally, the MOT, the WORD, or
the most singular and most infinite speech or diction, which comprising and
representing all the perfection of the Father, can be but one same God, most
one with him, without division or separation. We shall then also see, that
eternal and admirable generation of the divine WORD and Son, by which he was
eternally borne to the image and likeness of the Father; a lively and
natural Image and likeness, not representing any accidents nor extrinsicall
thing, since in God all is Substance, nor can there be any accident; all is
interior, nor can there be there any exterior thing: but an image representing
the proper substance so lively, so naturally as well essentially as
substantially, that therefore it can be no other thing then the same God with
him, without distinction or difference at all, either in essence or substance,
save only the distinction of persons: for how could it be that this divine
son was the true, liuelily lively, truly natural, image, resemblance, and
figure of the infinite beauty, and substance of the Father, if it did not
represent infinitely to the life and nature, the infinite perfections of the
Father; and how could it infinitely represent infinite perfections, if it were
not infinitely perfect; and how could it be infinitely perfect, if it were not
God; and how could it be God, if it were not the same God with the Father?

3. The son then, the infinite image and figure of his infinite Father, is
one only God, most singular, and infinite with his Father, there being no
difference of substance betwixt them; but only the distinction of persons;
which distinction of persons, as it is wholly necessary, so it is most
sufficient to this, that the Father pronounce, and that the son should be the
word pronounced; that the Father speak, and the Son be the word, or the
diction; that the Father express, and the Son be the image, liknesse, or
figure expressed; and in sum that the Father be Father, and the Son Son,
two distinct persons, but one only Essence or Divinity; so that God who is
sole, is not solitary, for he is sole in his most singular and simple Deity,
yet is not solitary, because he is Father and Son in two persons. O THEO:
what joy, what iubelie in the celebritie of this eternal birth, keept in the
Sple^dour of Saints, keept in seeing it, and seen in keeping it.

4. Mild S. BERNARD as yet a young child at Chatillon upon Seine, on
Christmasse Eve, expected in the Church while they begun the divine Office, and
in this expectation, the poor child fell into a light slumber; meanewhile (o
God what sweetness!) he saw in SPIRIT, yet in a vision very distinct, and
clear, how the Son of God, having espoused humane nature, and becoming a
little child in his mothers most pure entrals, sprung virginally from her
sacred womb, with a heauanly Majesty masked in an humble mildness. As
Spouse who in a royal guise,
From marriage bed does joyful rise.
A Vision THEO; which did so replenish the little BERNARDS lovely heart with
content, iubilation, and spiritual dainties, that he had all his life an
extreme sense of it, and therefore, though after as a sacred Be he daily
culled out of all the divine mysteries, the honey of a thousand sweet and
heavenly consolations; yet had he a more particular sweetness in the
solemnity of the Nativity, and spoake with a singular gust of this birth of
his Master. But alas I beseech thee THE: if a mystical and imaginary vision
of the temporal and humane birth of the Son of God, by which he proceeded
man from a woman, virgin from a virgin, does ravish and so highly content the
heart of a child: what shall it be when our minds lightened with the ^ight of
glory, shall see this eternal birth, by which the Son does proceed GOD
from GOD, LIGHT from LIGHT, a TRVE GOD from a TRVE GOD divinely and eternally;
then shall our minds be joined by an incomprehensible complacence to this
object of delight, and by an unchangeable attention shall remain united to it
for ever.

Of the union of the Blessed with God in the vision of the Holy Ghost's
production. CHAPTER XIII.
1. THe eternal Father seeing she infinite Bounty and Beauty of his essence,
so liuelily, essentially, and substantially expressed in his Son, and the
Son seeing reciprocally that his own essence, Bounty, and Beauty was
originally in his Father, as in their source and fountain: ah can it possibly
be that this Divine Father and his Son, should not mutually love one another
with an infinite love, since their will, by which they love, is infinite in each
of them.

2. Love not finding us equal, does equalize us: not finding us united, does
unite us. Now the Father and the Son finding themselves not only equal and
united, but even one same God, one same Goodness, one same essence, and one
same unity, how much must they needs love one another? not with a love which
passes, as that of intellectual creaturs amongst themselves, or toward their
Creator: for created love is exercised in many and diverse motions, breathings,
unions and ties which do immediately succeed one another, and continue love
with a gratfull vicissitude of spiritual motions. But the divine love of the
eternal Father toward his Son, is practiced in one only breathing mutually
from them both, who in this sort remain united and tied together. I THEO: for
the Bounty of the Father and Son being but one sole singularly one bounty,
common to them both, the love of this Bounty can be but one only love; for
though there be two Lovers, to wit, the Father and the Son, yet seeing there
is only their most singular Bounty common to them both which is loved, and
their most one will which does love, there is thereof but one love, exercised
by one SPIRATION of love. The Father breaths this love, and so does the Son,
but because the Father does not breath this love, but by means of the same
will, and for the same Bounty, which is equally and singularly in him, and his
Son: nor the Son again does not breath this SPIRATION of love, but for
this same Bounty, and by this same will: therefore this SPIRATION of love, is
but one SPIRATION or one only SPIRIT breathed out by two, which Breath.

3. And because the Father and Son who breath, have an infinite essence and
will, by which they breath, and that the Bounty for which they breath is
infinite, it is impossible the SPIRATION should not be infinite; and for as
much as it cannot be infinite without being God, therefore this spirit breathed
from the Father and the Son is true God; and since there neither is, nor can
be more then one only God, it is one only true God, with the Father and the
Son. But moreover, whereas this love, is an act which does proceed mutually
from the Father and the Son, it can neither be the Father, nor the Son,
from whom it proceeded, though it have the same Bounty and Substance of the
Father, and the Son: but must necessarily be a third divine person, who with
the Father and the Son is only God. And for that this love is produced by
manner of SPIRATION, or inspiration, it is called the holy SPIRIT.

4. Now, THEO: the king David describing the sweetness of the frendshipe of
Gods servants, cries out. O God how good a thing it is,
And with a thousand sweetes of Bliss
Does yield a sacred hearts content,
To see in Brothers, hearts consent.
Such sweetes, are like the oiles was spread
Upon the consecrated head
Of Aaron Priest; which flowing down
Upon his beard, his neck, and gown,
Did sweetly all bedewe; and which
With dainty sentes did all enriche.
But o God, if humane friendshipe be so agreeable, lovely, and do spreede so
delicious an odor on them that does contemplate it, what shall it be, my
well-beloued THEOTIME, to behold sacred love mutually exercised betwixt the
eternal Father, and the Son; SAINT GREGORY NAZIANZENE recounts that the
incomparable love which was betwixt him, and SAINT BASILE the Great, was famous
all through Greece: And Tertullian does testify, that the Pagans did admire,
the more then brotherly love, which reigned amongst the primitive Christians. O
what Feast, what solemnity! with what praises and Benedictions is the eternal
and Sovereign Friendshipe of the Father, and the Son to be celebrated? with
what admirations to be honored, and loved? What is there amiable and worthy to
be loved, if not Friendshipe; and if Friendshipe be amiable and worthy to be
loved, what Friendshipe is like to that infinite Friendshipe, which is betwixt
the Father and the Son, who is the same God, in a singular manner with them?
Our heart THEOTIME, will fall into an Abisse of love, through admiration of the
beauty, and sweetness of the love, that this eternal Father, and this
incomprehensible Son do practice divinely and eternally.

That the Light of Glory, shall concur to the union of the Blessed with God.
CHAPTER. XIV.
1. THus shall the created understanding see the Divine essence, without the
means of any species or representation; yet not without a certain excellent
light, which does dispose, eleuate, and strengthen it, to raise it is view so
high, and to an object so sublime and resplenda^t. For as the Owlets sight is
strong enough to behold the gloomie light of a clear night, yet not to see the
light at noonetide, which is too glittering to be seen by so troubled and
weak eyes; so our understanding which is strong enough to consider natural
truths by discourse, yea even the supernatural things of grace, by the light
of faith, is not yet able, neither by the light of nature nor faith, to attain
unto the view of the divine substance, in it self. Wherefore the goodness of
the eternal wisdom determined, not to apply his essence to our
understanding, till he had prepared, reuigorated, and enabled it, to receive a
sight so eminent, and disproportionable to the natural condition thereof, as
is the view of the Divinity: for so the Sun, the sovereign object of our
corporal eyes amongst natural things, does not present himself unto our
view, without sending first his rays, by means whereof we may be able to see
him, so that we see him not but by his light. Yet there is a difference betwixt
the rays which the Sun does cast upon our corporal eyes, and the light
which God will create in our understanding in Heaven: for the Sunn's rays do
not fortify our corporal eyes when they are weak and unable to see, but does
rather, dazzle, waste and blind their infirm sight: whereas contrariwise, this
sacred LIGHT OF GLORY finding our understandings weak and incapable to
behold the Divinity, it does raise, strengthen, and perfect them so
excellently, that by an incomprehensible wonder, they do behold and
contemplate the Abisse of the Divine brightness in it self, with a firm and
straight view, not being dazzled, or repulsed by the infinite greatness of it is
splendor.

2. In like manner therefore as God has endewed us with the light of reason,
by which we may know him as Author of nature; and the light of faith, by which
we consider him as source of Grace: so will he bestow upon us the LIGHT OF
GLORY, by which we shall contemplat him as fountain of Beatitude, and
eternal life: but a fountain, THEOT: which we shall not contemplate a far
off, as we do now by faith, but we shall see it by the LIGHT OF GLORY being
covered, and swallowed up in it, The Duckers says Pliny, who fishing for
precious stones, diue into the water, do take oil in their mouths, that by
scattering it, they might have more day, to see in the waters where they swime,
THEO: the Blessed having diued, and plunged themselves into the Ocean of the
Divine essence, God will pour into their understandings the sacred LIGHT OF
GLORY which will give them day in the Abisse of this inaccessible light, that
so by the LIGHT OF GLORY they may see the LIGHT OF THE DIVINITY.

In God the fountain is
Of Life, and heavenly bliss:
His brightness shall appear
To us in th'-rayon clear
Of his day, which shall be
Our day of IVBILIE.
That there shall be different degrees of the union of the Blessed with God.
CHAPTER. XV.
1. NOw this light of Glory, THEO: shall be the measure of the sight and
contemplation of the Blessed, and according as we shall have less, or more of
this holy splendor, we shall see more or less clearly, and consequently
more, or less happily the most holy Divinity, which as it is beholden and
diversely looked upon, so it will make us diversely glorious. Certes in this
heavenly Paradise, all the SPIRITS see all the Divine Essence, yet no one of
them, nor all of them together, does or can see it entirely. No, THEO: for God
being most singularly one, and most simply indivisible, one cannot see him,
without seeing all: But being infinite without limite, without bounds or
measure at all in his perfection, there neither is, nor can be any capacity
out of himself, who can ever totally comprehend, or penetrate the infinity of
his Goodness, infinitely essential, and essentially infinite.

2. This created light of the visible Sun, which is limited and finite, is in
such sort all seen of all those that do behold it, that it is never totally
seen of any one of them, nor of all together; It is in a manner so with all
our senses. Amongst many that hear excellent music, though all of them hear
it all, yet some hear it not so well, nor with so much delight as others,
according as their ears, are less, or more delicate. MANNA had all tastes to
all that eat it, yet differently, following the diversity of their appetits
who took it, yet was it totally tasted of none for it had more different
tastes, then the Israelits had variety of gusts. THEO: we shall see, and taste
in heaven, all the Divinity, but never any of the Blessed, nor all together,
shall ever see or taste it totally. This infinite Divinity shall still have
infinitely more excellences, then we sufficiency, and capacity: and we shall
have an unspeakable content to know, that after we have satiated all the desire
of our heart, and fully replenished the capacity thereof in the fruition of an
infinite good which is God; nevertheless there will remain in this infinity,
infinite perfections to be seen, enjoyed, and possessed, which his divine
Majesty knows and sees, it only comprehending it self.

3. So fishes enjoy the incredible vastness of the Ocean; but never any fish,
nor yet all the multitude of fishes ever saw all the arms of the Sea, or wet
their sins in all its waters. Birds do sport in the open air, at their
pleasure, but never any bird, nor yet all the flok's of birds together did
ever beat with their wings all the regions of the air, or arrive at the
supreme region of the same. Ah THEO: our souls shall freely, and according to
the full exte^t of their wishes, swime in the Ocean, and soar in the air of
the Divinity, rejoicing eternally, to see that this air is so infinite, this
Ocean so vast, that it cannot be measured by their wings; and that enjoying
without all reserve, or exception, all this infinite Abisse of the Divinity,
yet shall they never be able to equalize their fruition to this infinity,
which remains still infinitely infinite beyond their capicitie.

4. And at this the Blessed SPIRITS are ravished with two admirations, first at
the infinite beauty which they contemplate, secondly, at the Abisse of the
infinity, which remains to be seen in this same beauty. O God how
admirable is that which they see! but o God how much more admirable is that
which they see not! And notwithstanding, THEO, the most sacred beauty which
they see being infinite, it does entirely satisfy and satiate them, and
enjoying it with content, according to the rank which they hold in heaven,
because God's amiable prouididence has so determined it, they convert the
knowledge they have of not possessing, or not being totally to possess their
object into a simple complacence of admiration, in which they have a sovereign
joy to see that the beauty they love is so infinite, that it cannot be
totally known, but by it self: For in this does the Divinity of this
infinite Beauty, or the Beauty of this infinite Divinity consist.

The end of the third Book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK. OF THE DECAY OR RVINE OF CHARITY.
That while we are in this mortal life we may loose the love of God. CHAPTER.
I.
I. WE make not these discourses for those great souls of Election, who^ God
by a most special favor does so maintain, and confirm in his love, that
they run no hazard of loosing it. We speak for the rest of mortals, to whom
the Holy Ghost does address these aduertisements; he that stands, let him take
heed that he fall not; hold what thou have, be careful and labor, that by
Good works you may assure your vocation, in sequel whereof he makes them make
this Prayer, do not cast me from before thy face; do not take from me thy
SPIRIT: and lead us not into temptation; to the end they may work their
salvation with a holy trembling, and sacred fear, knowing that they are not
more constant and strong to conserve Gods love, then was the first Angel, his
followers, and Judas, who receiving it loosed it, and in loosing it loosed
themselves for ever; nor then Solomon who having lost it, holds the whole world
in doubt of his damnation; nor then ADAM, EVE, DAVID, S. PETER, who being
children of Salvation, fell yet for a space from the love, without which there
is no salvation: Alas THEO: who shall then have assurance to conserve sacred
love in the navigations of this mortal life, since, as well in earth as heaven
so many personages of incomparable dignities suffered so fearful shipwrakes.

2. But, o eternal God, how is it possible, will you say, that a soul that
loves God, can never loose it: for where love is it resists sin, and how
comes it to pass then, that sin gets entry there, since that love is strong,
as death; sharp in battle, as hell? how can the forces of death, or hell,
that, is sin, vanquish love; which at least does equalize them in strength,
and does pass them in friends, and right? Yea how can it be that a reasonable
soul that has once relished so great a sweetness as is that of heavenly
love, can ever willingly swallow the bitter waters of sin? children though
children, being fed with milk, with butter and honey, abhor the bitterness
of wormewoode, and Orpin, being ready to fall down with weeping, when they
are constrained to take them. All then o true God, the soul once joined to the
goodness of the Creator, how can she forsake him, to follow the vanity of the
creature?

3. My dear THEO: the heavens them selves stand amazed; their ports do burst
with fear; and the Angels of peace are lost in astonishment, at this
prodigious misery of man's heart, abandoning so amiable a good, to join it
self to things so deplorable. But have you never seen the little marueill,
which every one knows, and yet few knows the reason of it? when a full barrill
is broched, the wine will not run, unless it have air given from above,
which yet happens not to barrels already drawn on; for they are no sooner
open, but the wine runs. Certes in this mortal life, though our souls
abound with heavenly love, yet are they never so full therewith, that by
temptation this love may not depart: but in heaven, when the sweetness of
Gods beauty shall occupy all our understanding, and the delights of his
Goodness shall wholly satiate our wills, so that there shall be nothing which
the fulness of his love shall not replenish; no object, though it penetrate
even to our hearts, can ever draw, or make ru^ne one sole drope of the precious
liquour of our heavenly love. And to think to give air above, that is, to
deceive, or surprise the understanding, it shall no more be possible; for it
shall be immouable, in the apprehension of the sovereign TRVTH.

4. So wine well purified and separated from the lees, is easily keept
harmless when it is tossed and troubled; but that which is upon the lees, is
in continual danger; and as for us, so long as we are in this world, our
souls are upon the lees or tartar of a thousand humors, and miseries, and
consequently easy to be changed, and turned into their love. But being in
heaven, where, as in the great feast described by Isaie, there shall be wine
purified from the dregs, we shall be no longer subject to change, but shall
be inseparably united by love to our sovereign good. Here, in the twielight of
day break, we are affraide, that in lieu of the Spouse, we fall upon some
other object, which may delay, and deceive us; but when we shall find him above
where he takes his repast, and repose, in the clear day of glory, there will
be no occasion to be deceived: for his light will be too clear, and his
sweetness will tie us so closely to his goodness, that we shall not have the
power, to will to untie our selves.

5. We are like to Coral, which in the sea, the place of it is origin, is
pale-greene, weak, bowing, and a pliable shrub: but being pulled out of the
sea as from it is mothers womb, it becomes almost a stone, firm and impliable,
changing it is pale-greene into a lively vermillion; for so we (being as yet
amidst the sea of this world, the place of our birth) are obnoxious to strange
changes pliable upon every occasion, by inspiration, to the right hand of
heavenly love; by temptation, to the left of terrene love. But if, being once
drawn out of this mortality, we shall have changed the pale-greene of our
doubtful hopes, into the lively red of assured fruition, we shall never more
be moveable, but make a settled demoure for ever in eternal love.

6. It is impossible to see the Divinity, and not love it: but here below,
where we do not see it, but only have a glimps of it through the clouds of
faith, as in a myrror, our knowledge is not yet so perfect, as not to leave
entry to the surprises of other objects, and apparent good, which through the
obscurity, mixed with the certainty, and verity of faith, do insensibly
steal in, as little fox cubs and demolishe our flourishing vine. To conclude
THEO: when we have charity, our free will is decked with her wedding garment,
which as she can still keep on, if she please in well doing, so she can put it
of, if she please, in offending.

How the soul waxes cool in holy Love. CHAPTER. II.
1. THe soul is often contristated, and afflicted in the body, yea even to
the forgoing of many of the members thereof, which remain deprived of motion,
and sense, though she never forsake the heart, where she is still entirely,
till the periode of life. So charity is sometimes so quelled, and made to
languish in the heart, that it does scarcely appear in any action, though yet
the remain entire in the supreme region of the soul: And then it is, that
under the multitude of venial sins, as under finders, the fire of holy Love
remains covert, its light being smothered, though not deaded, or extinguished:
for as the presence of the Diamant does hinder the exercise and action of the
Adamants property in drawing iron, and yet does not deprive her of it, having
her operation as soon as the obstackle is removed: so the presence of venial
sins, does in no sort deprive charity of her force and power to work, yet
does it as it were benume, and deprive her of the use of her actiuitie. So that
she remains sterill and barren, without action. Certes nor venial, nor yet
the affection to venial sin, is contrary to the essential resolution of
charity, which is to prefer God before all things; because by this sin, we
love things besides reason, not against reason; we defer a little too much,
and more the^ is convenient to creatures, yet do not we prefer them before
the Creator; we make more delay then is fitting in terrene things, yet do we
not for all that forsake heavenly things; In fine this kind of sin does
impeach us in the way of charity, but does not put us out of it, and therefore
venial sin not being contrary to Charity, it never destroies her either
wholly, or partially.

2. God signified to the Bishope of Ephesus, that he had forsaken his prime
charity; when he says not that he was without charity, but only that he
was not such, as in the beginning, that is that he was not now prompt, fervent,
flourishing, and fruitful; as we are wount to say of him, who was brave,
cheerful and frolic, and afterward becomes harsh, dull, and lowtish, that
he is now the same man he was; for our meaning is not that he is not the same
in substance, but only in his actions, and exercises. And even our Savior
says, that in the later days, the charity of many shall wax cold, that is,
she shall not be so active and courageous, by reason of fear, and grief which
shall oppress men's hearts. Sure it is that concupiscence having conceived does
enge^der sin; but this sin, though sin indeed, does not still beget the
death of the soul, but the^ only when it is complete in malice, and when it
is consummate and accomplished, as S. JAMES says, who in this does establish
so clear a difference betwixt mortal and venial sin, that it is strange
that some in our age have had the impudence to deney it.

3. Howbeit venial sin is sin, and consequently displeasant to Charity,
not as a thing that is contrary to her, but contrary to her operations and
progress, yea her intention, which in so much as we are to direct all our
actions to God is violated by venial sin, which carrying the actions, by
which they are committed, not indeed against God, yet besides God, and his
will: and as we say of a tree rudely dight, and shaker. by a tempest, that
nothing is left, because though the tree be entire, yet is it left without
fruit; so when our charity is shaken by the affections we have to venial
sin, we say she is diminished, and weakened, not for that the habits of love
are not entire in our hearts, but because she is without the works, which are
the fruits.

4. The affection to great sins did in such ^ort make V^RITIE prisoner to
Injustice amongst the Pagan Philosophers, that, as the great Apostle says,
knowing God, they honored him not according to that knowledge; so that, though
this affection did not banish natural light, yet it made it fruitless; so the
affection to venial sin, does not abolish Charity, but it holds her as a
slave, tied hand and foot, hindering her freedom, and action. This affection
glewing us too hard to the enjoying of creaturs, depriues us of the spiritual
priuicie betwixt God and us, to which charity, as true friendshipe does incite
us, and by consequence this affection does make us loose the interior helps
and assistances, which are as the vital SPIRITS of the soul, in default
whereof there follows a certain spiritual Palsy, which in the end, if it
be not remedied, leedes us to death; for to conclude, charity being an active
quality cannot be long without either acting, or dying. She is, say our
Ancients, of the nature of Rachael, who also did represent her; give me, said
she to her husband, children or else I dye: And charity urges the heart which
she has espoused to make her fertile of good works, otherwise she will perish.

5. We are rarely in this mortal life without many temptations; now vile and
slothful hearts, and such as are given to exterior pleasures, not being
accustomed to fight, nor traiened up in spiritual warfare, never conserve
Charity long, but let themselves ordinarily be surprised by mortal sin,
which happens so much more easily, by how much the soul is more disposed by
venial sin to mortal: for as that Ancient, by a daily continuance of
carrying the same Calfe, bore him also when he was grown to be an Ox, custom
having by little and little made the increase of so untoward a burden
insensible: so he that does accustom himself to play for pence, will in the
end play for crowns, pistols, and horses, and after them for all his
substance; he that gives bridle to a small collar, will find himself in the end
furious and insupportable; he that gives himself to lie in jest, is in great
peril to lie calumniously.

6 In fine, THEO: we are wount to say, that such as have a weaklie
complexion, have no life, that they have not an ovnce, or not a handful,
because that which must quickly have end, seems indeed already not to be. And
those drowsy souls which are led with pleasurs, and set upon transitory
things, may well say that they have lost Charity, for though as yet they have
her, they are even upon the point of loosing her.

How we forsake heavenly love for that of Creaturs. CHAPTER. III.
1. THe misfortune to leave God for the creature, happens thus; We love not God
without intermission, because in this mortal life, Charity is in us, as a
simple habit, which as the Philosophers noted, we use when we list and never
against our likeing. When we do not then make use of the Charity which is in
us, that is, when we do not apply our minds to the exercises of holy love,
but keep them busied in some other affair, or else being slothful they
remain unprofitable, and idle, then THEO: they may be assaulted by some bad
object, and surprised by temptation: And though the habit of charity be at
that instant, in the bottom of our hearts, and perform its office, inclining
us to reject the bad suggestion, yet does it not urge or carry us to the
action of resistance, but according as we second it as the manner of habits is;
and therefore leaving us in our freedom it happens often, that the bad objects
having thrown their allurements deeply into our hearts, we join our selves
unto them by an excessive complacence, which after increasing, we can hardly be
quit of it; and as thorns, according to the saying of our Savior, do in the
end stilfe the seed of grace, and heavenly love. So it fell-out with our first
Mother Eve, whose overthrow began by a certain amusement, which she made in
discoursing with the Serpent, taking complacence to hear of her advancement in
knowledge, and to see the beauty of the forbidden fruit: so that the
complacence waxing big with the amusement, and the amusement feeding it self
in the complacence, she found her self at length so entangled, that giving way
to consent, she did commit the accursed sin, to which afterward she drew her
husband.

2. We see doves sometimes touched with vanity swim hither, and thither,
observing the variety of their own plumes; and then the Tercelets, and
Falcons that epsy them, fall upon and sease them, which they could never be
able to do if the dove had flowen out right, having a stronger winge then the
Haulke. Alas, THEO: if we did not stand musing at the vanity of frail
pleasurs especially in the complacence of self-love, but having once got
charity, would be careful to fly straight whither she would carry us;
suggestion, and temptation should never catch us: but because, as doves seduced
and beguiled by selfe-esteeme, we look back upon our selves, and keep our
minds too much conversant amongst creaturs, we often find our selves in our
enemies claws, who bear away, and devour us.

3. God will not hinder that temptation assault us, to the end that by
resistance, our charity may be more exercised, that by fight we may bear away
the victory; and by victory obtain the triumph. But that we have any kind
of inclination to delight our selves in the temptation, this rises from the
condition of our nature, which does so earnestly love Good, that thereby she is
subject to be enticed by any thing that has a show of good; and temptations
hook is still baited with this kind of bait: for as holy writ does teach,
there is either some honorable good in the worlds sight, to move us to the
pride of a wordly life; or a good delightful to sense, to carry us to carnal
concupiscence; or a good able to enrich us, to incite us to avarice and
covetousness of the eyes. But if we keep faith, which can discern betwixt
the true Good we are to pursue, and the false which we are to reject, liuelily
attetiue to its office, without doubt it will be a faithful Sentinel to
Charity, and will give her intelligence of the evil that might approach the
heart, under color of Good, and Charity would suddenly repulse it. But because
ordinarily, we keep our faith either a sleep, or less attentive the^ were
requisite for the conservation of Charity; we are often surprised by
temptation, which seducing our senses, and they inciting the inferior part of
our soul to rebellion, it comes to pass eftsoon that the superior part of
reason yeeldes to the violence of this reuoult, and by committing the sin,
loses Charity.

4. Such was the progress of the sedition which the disloiall Absolon stirred
up against his good Father DAVID; for he laid before the people fair
propositions in appearance, which being received by the poor Israelites, whose
prudence was put a sleep and smothered, he did solicit them in such sort,
that he wrought them to an entire rebellion; so that the monefull David was
constrained to depart from Jerusalem with all his faithful friends, leaving
there none of quality, save Sadoc and Abiathar Priests of the Almighty with
their children: now Sadoc was SEEING that is to say, a Prophet.

5. For so, most dear THEO: self-love, finding our faith without attention,
and drowsy, it presents unto it vain, yet apparent goods, seduceth our sense,
our imagination, and the faculties of our souls, and lays so hard at our
free-wills that it brings them to an entire reuoult, against the holy love of
God, which then as a DAVID departs from our heart, with all his train, that is
with the gifts of the holy Ghost, and the other heavenly virtues, which are the
inseparable companions of Charity, if not her proprieties, and abilities: nor
does there remain in the HERVSALEM of our soul any virtue of importance,
saving Sadoc the SEEING, that is the gift of faith, which by her exercise can
make us see eternal things; and with him Abiathar, that is, the gift of hope
with her action, both which remain much afflicted and sorrowful, yet
maintaining in us the Arch of Alliance, that is, the quality and tile of a
C^RISTIAN, purchased by Baptism.

6. Alas, THEO: what a pitiful spectacle is it to the Angels of peace, to see
the holy Ghost, and his love depart in this manner out of our sinful souls?
verily, I think, if they could weep, they would pour out infinite tears, and
with a mornefull voice, lamenting our mishape, would sing the Threnes which
Jeremy throbed out, when set upon the threshold of the desolate Temple, he
contemplated the ruin of Jerusalem, in the time of SEDECIAS.

Ah! with what grief do I behold
HIERVSALEM; famous of old
For good and honorable men,
Of horror now become a den.
That heavenly love is lost in a moment. CHAPTER. IV.
1. THe love of God which brings us, to a neglect of our selves, makes us
Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem; self-love which pusheth us forwards to
the contempt of God, makes us slaves of the infernal Babylon. True it is we
come by little and little to despise God, but we have no sooner done it, but
presently in a moment, holy charity does forsake us, or rather she does wholly
perish. I, THEO: for in the contempt of God, does mortal sin consist, and
one only mortal sin does banish Charity from the soul, for so much as it
does violate her tie and union with God, which is obedience, and submission to
his will; and as man's heart cannot live divided; so Charity which is the heart
of the soul, and the soul of the heart, ca^ never be wounded, but she is
slain: as they say of pearls, which being conceived of heavenly d^we, do
perish if any drope of salt water get into their shell. Indeed our soul does
not go out of our body by little and little, but in a moment, when the bodies
indispositions are so great, that she can no longer exercise the actions of
life therein: even so at the very instant, in which the heart is so disordered
by passions, that Charity there can no longer reign, she quits and abandons
it: for she is so generous, that she cannot leave to reign, without leaving to
live.

2. Habits gotten by human actions alone, do not perish by one only contrary
act: for a man is not said to be intemperate, for one only act of
intemperance, nor is a painter held an unskillful master, for having once
failed in his art; but as all such habits are gotten by the impression and in
sequel of diverse acts, so we loose them by a long cessation from their acts,
or by many contrary acts. But Charity THEO: which in a moment the holy Ghost
poures into our hearts, as soon as the conditions requisite to this infusion
meet in us; is also in an instant expelled thence, as soon as diuerting our
will from the obedience due unto God, we have accomplished consent to the
rebellion and disloialtie to which temptation incites us.

3. True it is, Charity increases by degrees, and goes from perfection to
perfection, according as by our works, or by the frequenting of Sacraments, we
make it place: yet does it not decrease by a lessening of perfection thereof:
for we never loose any bit of it, but we loose it all. In which it resembles
PHIDIAS his Maister-peece so famous amongst the Ancients: for they say, this
great Grauer, made in Athe^s a picture of Minerua of Iuorie twenty seven
cubits high, and in her Buckler, wherein he expressed the battails of the
Amasons and Giants, he graued his own picture with so great Art, that one
could not take away one jot of it, says Aristotle, without defacing the whole
statue, so that this work though it was perfected by adding piece to piece,
yet in a moment might be destroyed, by removing any little parcel of the
workmans feature. In like manner THE: though the Holy Ghost having infused
Charity into a soul, does e^crease it by adding one degree to another, and
one perfection of love to another, yet so, as that the resolution to prefer
God's will before all things, being the essential point of holy love, and that
wherein the image of eternal love, that is, of the Holy Ghost, is represented,
one cannot withdraw one only piece of it, but presently Charity does wholly
perish.

4. This preference of God before all things, is the dear child of Charity.
And if AGAR being an Egiptian, seeing her son in danger of death, had not the
heart to stay by him but would have left him, saying ah! I am not able to see
this child dye; is it strange then, that Charity the daughter of sweetness
and heavenly delight cannot see her child dye, which is a Resolution never to
offend God? so that still as free will resolves to consent to sin, and
therein kills this holy resolution Charity dies with it, fighing out these
last words: alas no, never will I see this child dye. In fine, THE: as the
precious stone called PRASSIVS, loses its luster in the presence of any
poison; so in an instant, the soul loses her splendor, grace and beauty
which consists of holy love, upon the entry and presence of any mortal
sin; whence it is written, that the soul who sins shall dye.

That the sole cause of the decay and slackening of Charity, is in the
creaturs will. CHAPTER. V.
1. AS it were a most wicked impudency, to attribute the works of holy love
done by the holy ghost, in, and with us to the strength of our will; so were it
a shameless impiety, to lay the defect of love in ungrateful men, on the want
of heavenly assistance and grace. For the holy Ghost cries in every place to
the contrary, that our ruin is from our selves: that our Savior brought the
fire of love and desires nothing but that it should burn our hearts: That
salvation is prepared before the face of all nations, light to lighten the
gentiles, and for the glory of Israel. That the divine goodness would have
none to perish but that all come to the knowledge of truth, that all be saved,
their Savior being come into the world, that every one might receive the
adoption of children: And the wiseman does clearly advertise us. Say not, it
stikes of God: And the sacred Concell of Tre^t, does inculcate divinely to all
the children of the holy Church, that the Grace of God is never awa^ting, to
such as do what they can, inuoking the divine assistance. That God does never
abandon such as he has once justified, unless they abandon him first. So that
if they be not a wanting to grace, they shall obtain glory.

2. In fine THEO: our Savior, is a light which does illuminate every one that
comes into the world. Diverse travelers in a summers day about noone-tyde lay
down to repose in the shade of a tree, but while their weariness and the
coolness of the shadow keeps them a sleep, the Sun advancing himself
toward them, gave just upon their eyes his strongest light, which by the
glitter of his brightness, made transparences, as with small rays, about the
Aple of those sleepers eyes, and by the heat which pierced their eyelids,
forced them by a gentle violence to awake, but some of them being awaked got
up, and advancing, came happily to their lodging, the rest, did not only not
rise, but turning their backs to the sun, and pulling their hats over their
eyes, there spent the day in sleeping, till surprised by night, being yet
willing to make toward their lodging, they straied hither and thither in the
Forest, at the mercy of merciless wolves, and other savage beasts. Now tell
me I pray, THEO: those that arrived, ought they not to asscribe all their
contentment to the sun, or to speak like a Christian, to the sunns Creator?
yes surely: for it was high time, and yet they dreamed not of rising: the sun
did them this good office; and by a gentle warning, of his light and heat,
came lovingly to call them up. It Is true they resisted not his call, but he
also helped them much even in that; for he spread his light fairly upon them,
giving them a glimps of himself through their eyelids, and by his heat as by
his love, opened their eyes, and urged them to see his day.

3. Contrariwise these poor strayers, were they not, to blame to cry in the
wood Alas, what have we done to the sun that he made us not see his light,
as he did our Companions, that we might have arrived at our lodgings, and not
have wandered in these hideous obscurities? for who would not undertake the
sunns, or rather Gods cause, my dear THEO: to answer these unfortunate
wretches. What is it, o you wretches, in a manner, that the sun could do for
you, and did not? his favors were equal to all ye that slept. He essaied you
all with the same light, touched you with the same raie, scattered upon you a
like heat and accursed that you are, though you saw your companions rise, take
their pilgrims stafe to gain way, you turned your backs to the sun, and
would not make use of his light, nor be overcome by his heat.

4. See, see now THEO: what I would say, we are all pilgrims in this mortal
life, almost all of us have willingly slept in sin; God the sun of Justice
darts upon us most sufficiently, yea abundantly the beams of his inspirations,
warmes our hearts with his benedictions, touching every one with the
allurements of his love; ah how chance it then that these allurements allure so
few, and yet draw fewer; ah, certainly, such as first allured, afterward
drawn, do follow the inspiration, have great occasion to joy, but not to
glory in it: Let them joy because they enjoy a great good; yet let them not
glory in it, because it is by Gods pure goodness, who leaving them the profit
of their good work reserues to himself the glory thereof.

5. But touching them that remain in the sleep of sin: o what good reason
they have to lament, sorrow, weep, repent: for they are in a most lamentable
case; yet have they no reason to sorrow, or complain, save of themselves, who
despised, yea rebelled against light: were intractable by inuitations, and
obstinate against inspirations, so that malediction and confusion, ought to
follow their malice for ever; they only being authors of their ruin, only
workers of their damnation. So the Iaponians, complaining to S. ZAV^RIVS their
Apostle, that God, who had had so much care of other nations, seemed to have
forgotten their predecessors, not having given them the knowledge of himself,
by the want whereof, they were lost: The good man answered them, that the
divine natural law was engraven in the hearts of all mortals, which if their
forerunners had observed, the light of heaven had without doubt illuminated
them, as contrariwise, having violated it, they merited damnation. An
apostolical answer of an Apostolical man, and resembling the reason given by
the great Apostle of the loss of the ancient gentiles, whom he calls
inexcusable, for that having known good they followed evil: for it is in a
word, that which he does inculcate in the first of his Epistles to the Romans:
misery upon misery be unto such, as do not acknowledge that their own
misery proceeds from their malice.

That we ought to ackowledge the love we bear to God, to be from God. CHAPTER.
VI.
1. THe love of men toward God takes his being, progress, and perfection
from the eternal love of God toward men. It is the universal Sense of the
Church our mother, who with an ardent jealousy, will have us to acknowledge
our salvation, and the means to it, to proceed from our Saviors mere mercy,
to the end that in earth as in heaven, and to him alone, be honor and glory.

2. What have thou which thou have not received, says the divine Apostle,
speaking of the gifts of knowledge, eloquence, and other the like qualities of
Church men; and if thou have received them, why do thou glory in them, as
though thou hadest not received them? It is true we have received all from God,
but especially the supernatural goods of holy love. And being we have received
them, why should we take glory in them?

5. Certainly if any should extol himself, for having made progress in the
love of God: Alas caitife man, would we say unto him, thou layedst in the
tra^ce of iniquity, having neither force or life left in thee to rise. (As it
happened to the Princely in our parable) and God by his infinite Goodness
ran to thy succor, and crying with a loud voice; open the mouth of thine
attention, and I will fill it: he himself put his fingers betwixt thy lips,
and unlocked thy teeth, casting into thy heart his holy inspiration, and thou
received it; and then being brought to thy senses, he went on by diverse
motions, and different means, strengthening thy heart till at length he infused
into it charity, as thy lively an perfect health.

4. Now tell me miserable creature what did thou in all this, of which thou
can boast? Thou consented, I know it well; the motion of thy will did freely
follow, that of heavenly grace. But what is all this, but to receive the divine
operation without resistance? and what is there in this, save what thou
receiuedst? I poor wrech which thou art, thou receiuedst the reception in
which thou gloriest, and the consent whereof thou vauntest: for tell me, I
pray thee, will thou not allow me, that if God had not prevented, thou had
never perceived his Goodness, nor in consequence, consented to his love? No,
nor yet had thou thought a good thought of him. His motion gave being, and
life to thine, and if his liberty had not animated, excited, and provoked thy
liberty, by the powrefull inuitations of his sweetness, thy liberty had been
for ever unprofitable to thy salvation. I confess thou did cooperate with
the inspiration by consenting, but if thou be ignorant, I will teach thee, that
thy cooperation took being from the operation of grace, and thy free will
together, yet so, that if grace had not prevented and filled thy heart with her
operation, never had it had nor power, nor will, to cooperate.

5. But tell me again I beseech thee, vile and abject man; art thou not
ridiculous, when thou think to have part in the glory of thy conversion,
because thou repulsed not the inspiration? is not this the trick of a robber
or Tyrant, to think to have given life to such as they have not deprived of it?
And is it not a frantic impiety to think that thou gave the holy
efficacy and lively actiuitie to the divine inspiration, because by resistance
thou did not hinder it? We can indeed hinder the effects of the inspiration,
but we can give it none, it takes force and virtue from the Divine Goodness,
whence it proceeds, and not from man's will where it arriueth. Would not a man
be moved to wroth, to hear the Princess of our Parable boast, that it was she
that gave virtue and sovereignty to the cordial waters, and other medecins,
or that she cured her self, because, if she had not received the remedies,
which the king gave her, and poured into her mouth, (at such time, as being
half dead, there remained hardly any sense in her) they had had ^o operation?
Yea might one say to her, ungrateful wretch, thou might have been obstinate
and not have received the remedies, thou might after thou had received
them into thy mouth, have cast them out again, yet is it not true for all
that, that thou gave them force and virtue, for these were their natural
proprieties only thou consented to receive them, and that they might operate;
and yet thou had never consente^d, if the king had not first reenforced thee,
and then solicited thee to take them; never had thou received them, had not
he assisted thee to receive them, opening thy very mouth with his fingers, and
poureing the potion into it: Art thou not then a Monster of ingratitude, to
offer to attribute to thy self a benefit, which by so many titles thou owe
to thy dear Spouse?

6. The admirable little fish, called ECCHINES, REMORA, or STAY-SHIPPE, has
indeed the power to stay or not to stay a ship sailing in the broad sea
under full sail: but it has not the power to hoise sail, to make the shipe
sail, or arrive: it can hinder motion but cannot give it; our free will can
stay or impeach the course of the inspiration, and when the favorable gale of
Gods grace, does swell the sails of our soul, it is in our power to refuse
consent, and thereby to hinder the effect of the winds favor: but when our
soul lancheth out, and happily sails, it is not we that make the gale of the
inspiration blow upon us, nor we that make our sails swell with it, nor we
that give motion to the ship of our heart; but only we receive the gale sent
from heaven, consent to its motion, and let our ship sail under it, not
hindering it by the Remora of our resistance. It is the inspiration then which
does imprinte in our free will the happy and delightful influence whereby it
does not only make us see the beauty of Good, but also does heat, help,
strengthen and move us so delightfully, that thereupon, we incline, and run
freely toward good.

7. The heavens in spring time do prepare the fresh dew-drops, and shewers them
down upon the face of the sea, and the mother pearls that open their shells,
receive them, and they are converted into pearls: But the Mother-pearles which
keep their shells shut, do not hinder the dewes falling upon them, yet do
they hinder their falling into them: Now the heavens, did they not let fall
their dew as well upon the one, as the other pearl? Why did then the one, and
not the other in effect produce the pearl? The heavens were as bountiful to
her that remained sterill, as was requisite to impearle, and beget in her a
fair union, but she hindered the effect of the heavens favor, by keeping
herself close, and covert. And as for her who conceived the pearl and was
left big with dew she has no part in that work which she received not from
heaven, not her very opening, whereby she received the dew; for without the
touches of the mornings rays, which did gently excitate her, she had not risen
up to the tope of the sea, nor yet opened her shell. THEO: if we love God, his
be the honor, and glory, who did all in us, and without whom, nothing was
done; ours be the profit, and obligation: for it is a shareing of his divine
goodness with him, he leaves us the fruits of his benefits, reserues to
himself the honor, and praise thereof; and verily since we are nothing but by
his grace, we ought to be nothing, but to his glory.

That we must avoid all curiosity, and humbly repose in Gods most wise
providence. CHAPTER. VII.
1. Man's mind is so weak, that whem he would look too curiously, into the
causes, and reasons of God's will, he does entangle and wind himself into a
thousand quirks of difficulties, out of which he has afterward much a do to
recouere himself; he resembles smoke; for in mounting it is subtilised, and
in being subtilised, it vanishes. In striving to raise our discourses too high
in divine things by curiosity, we vanish in our thoughts, and in lieu of
arriving at the knowledge of truth, we fall in the folly of our vanity.

2. But of all other things we are most humorous, in that which concerns the
divine providence, in the diversity of the means which he bestows upon us,
to draw us to his holy love and by it to glory. For our temeritie urges us
still to search; why God gives more means to one then to another; why he did
not the miracles amongst the Tyrians, and Sidonians, which he did in Corozain,
and Bethsaida, seeing they would have made as good use of them. In fine why he
draws rather one then another to his love.

3. O THEO: my friend, never, no never, must we permit our minds to be carried
away with a blasting whirlewinde, or think to find a better reason of Gods
will, then the same will, which is soueraignely reasonable, yea the reason of
all reasons, the rule of all goodness, the law of all equity. And although
the holy ghost, speaking in the holy Scripture, gives reason in diverse parts,
of almost all that we can wish to know, touching that which this providence
does, in conducting men to holy love, and eternal salvation; yet in diverse
occasions he shows, that he ought in no wise, renounce the respect which is
due to his will, whose purpose, decree, pleasure, and resolution we are to
adore; in conclusion whereof, as sovereign Judge, and soueraignely just, it is
not reasonable that he should manifest his motives, but it is sufficient, that
he say simply (and for reason) that if we ought charitably to bear so much
respect to the Decrees of sovereign Courts, composed of corruptible Judges of
the earth, and of earth, as to believe that they were not made without motive,
though we know the^ not? Ah Lord God with what a loving reverence, ought we to
adore the equity of thy supreme providence, which is infinite in justice, and
goodness?

4. So in a thousand places of the holy word we find the reason, why God
reproved the Jews, because, says S. PAVLE, and S. BARNABIE, you do reject
the WORD of God, and judge your selves unworthy of eternal life, behold we
turn toward the gentiles; And he that shall consider in tranquillity of heart
the IX. X. and XI. Chap. of the Epistle to the Romans, shall clearly see, that
Gods will did not without reason reject the Jews, nevertheless, this reason
must not be examined by man's wit, which contrariwise is obliged to rest purely
and simply in reuerencing the Divine Decree: Admiring it with love, as
infinitely just and upright; and loving it with admiration, as inpenetrable, and
incomprehensible. So that the divine Apostle concluds the long discourse which
he had made of it. O the profunditie of the riches and wisdom of the knowledge
of God, how incomprehensible are his judgments and how unsearchable his ways!
who does know the thougtes of our Lord, or who has been his Counselor? By
which exclamation he testifies that God does all things with great wisdom,
knowledge, and reason; yet so, that not having entered into the divine
counsels, whose judgments and designs are infinitely placed above our reach,
we ought deuotly to adore his Decrees as most just, without searching the
motives, which he keeps to himself, that so he might keep our understanding
at home, in respect and humility.

5. S. AUGUSTINE in a hundred places does teach us this practice; None comes to
our Savior says he, if not drawn; whom he draws and whom he drawes-not,
why he he draws him and not him, offer not to judge unless thou will err;
hear once and understand. Art thou not drawn, pray that thou may be
drawn. Verily it is sufficient for a Christian living as yet by faith, and not
seeing that which is perfect, but only knowing in part, to know and believe
that God delivers none from damnation, but by his free mercy, through our Lord
JESUS CHRIST; and that he dammes none but by his most just Truth, through the
same Lord I^SVS-CHRIST. But to know why he delivers this party, rather then
that, let him sound who can so great a depth of his judgments, but let him be
ware of the precipice, for these judgments are not therefore unjust because
they are hidden. But why then does he deliver rather this man, then that? We
say again, o man who art thou that answerest God his iudgemets are
incomprehensible, and his ways unknown, and let us add this; Do not look
into things that are above thee; and examine not that which is beyond thy
strength. Now he grants not them mercy, to whom by a Truth most secret and
furdest removed from man's thoughts, he judges it not fit to communicate his
favors and mercy.

6. We see sometimes twins whereof the one is borne alive and receives
Baptism, the other in his birth loose his temporal life, before he be
regenerated to the eternal, and consequently the one is heir of heaven, the
other is deprived of the inheritance. Now why does the divine providence,
follow like birthes, with so different effects? Verily it might be answered
that ordinarily Gods pro^idence, does not violate the laws of nature, so that
one of these twins being strong, and the other too feeble to support the
travel of his delivery, he died before he could be baptized, the other lived;
while the Divine providence would not stop the course of natural things, which
in this occurrence might be the reason, why the one was deprived of Bapptisme.
And truly this is a solid answer. But following the advice of divine S.
PAVLE, and S. AUGUSTINE, we ought not to busy our thoughts in this
consideration, which though it be good, yet does it in no respect enter into
comparison with many others, which God has reserved, and will show us in
heaven. Then says S. Augustine, the secreet shall end why rather the one then
the other was christened, the causes of both being equal, and why miracles were
not done amongst those, who, in case they had been done, had been brought to
repentance, and were done amongst such as were not about to believe. And in
another place, the same Saint, speaking of sinners, whereof God does leave the
on in his iniquity, raising the other. Now why he retains the one and not
the other, it is not possible to comprehend it, nor lawful to make inquests into
it, sith we know it is from him, we stand, and not from him we fall: and
again; this is covered, and removed from manes reach, at least from mine.

7. Lo, THEO: the most saintly way of Philosophyzing in this behalf, and
therefore I have allwaies reputed the learned modesty, and most wise humility
of the Seraphicall Doctor saint Bonauenture admirable, and amiable in the
discourse, which he makes of the reason why the Divine providence does ordain
the Elect to eternal life. Peradventure, says he it is by a foresight of the
good works which will be done by him that is drawn, in so much as they
proceed in some sort from the will: but to be able to declare what good works
they are, which by their foresight move Gods will, I know not perfectly, nor
will I make inquisition thereupon, there are no other reasons, then certain
conueniencies: so that we might assign one, while it were another. Wherefore
we cannot with assurance point out the true reason nor the true motive of Gods
will herein: for as S. Augustine says, notwithstanding that the truth of it
is most certain, yet is it so removed from our thougts that we can speak
nothing assuredly of it, unless it be revealed by him who knows all things;
and whereas it was not expedient for our salvation, that we should have
knowledge of these secreets; but was more profitable we should be ignorant of
them, to keep us in humility, God would not reveal them, yea the holy
Apostle durst not inquire of them, but testified the insufficiency of our
understanding in that matter when he cried out. o depth of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! could one speak more saintly, THEO: of so saintly a
mystery, and indeed they are the words of a most saintly, and prudent Doctor
of the Church.

An exhortation to the affectionat submission, which we are to make to the
Decrees of the divine providence. CHAPTER. VIII.
1. LEt us love then THEO: and adore in humility of SPIRIT, this depth of
Gods judgments, which, as S. AUGUSTINE says, the holy Apostle discouers not,
but admires, when he cries out, o the depth of Gods judgment! Who can count
the sands of the sea, the drops of rain and measure the largnesse of the
Abisse, says that excellent S. GREGORY of Nazianzen, and who can sound the
depth of the divine wisdom, by which all things were created and moderated as
she pleases, and judges fit. For indeed it suffices, that by the Apostles
example we should admire it without sticking in the difficulty and obscurity
thereof. o depth of the wisdom and knowledge of God! o how inscrutable are his
judgments, and how inaccessible his ways! who has known the sense of our
Lord, and who has been his counselor? THEO, the reasons of Gods will cannot
be penetrated by our wit, till we shall see his face, who touches from the one
end to the other powerfully, and disposes all things sweetly, doing all that
he does in number, weight, and measure; and to whom the Psalmist says, Lord
thou have done all things in wisdom.

2. How often does it happen that we are ignorant, why and how the works of
men are done? And yet says the same holy Bishope of Nazianzen, the Artificer
is not ignorant, though we be ignorant, in his Art; nor are the things of this
world, rashly and imprudently done, though we know not the reasons of them.
Entering into a Clok-makers shop, we shall sometimes find a cloak, no greater
then an Oringe, which yet has in it an hundred, or two hundred pieces, whereof
some serve for the style, others to stricke the hour, or give the morning
ALARM; you shall see in it little wheels one turning to the right, another to
the left hand, one above, another below; and the plumbs which with a mesured
pace do balance its motion on every side: and we admire how Art could join
together such a number of minute pieces, with so just a correspondance, neither
knowing what each little piece serves for, nor to what purpose it was made in
that sort, unless the Master tell it us, knowing only in gross, that all is
either for show or to stricke. It is reported that the good Indians will stand
whole days musing upon a cloak, to hear it strike at the time prefixed, and
not being able to guess how it is done, they do not for all that say that it
is without Art or reason, but are taken with love and respect toward their
keepres admiring them as more then mortals. THEO: we see in this manner the
universe, but especially humane nature, a clock composed of so great variety
of actions and motions, that we cannot but be astonished at it. And we know in
general, that these so diversely ordered pieces, serve all either to point out,
as a hand, God's most holy justice, or, as a bell of praise, to sound the
triumphant mercy of his goodness. But to know the particular use of every
piece how it is ordered to the general end or why it is made so, we cannot
conceive, unless the sovereign workman instruct us; Now he conceals his Art
from us, to the end that with more reverence we might admire it, till in heaven
he shall ravish us with the sweetness of his wisdom, where in the
abundance of his love he will discover unto us the reasons, means, and
motives of all that passed in the world, to the advantage of our eternal
salvation.

3. We resemble, says yet again the great Nazianzen, those, who are troubled
with a giddiness or turning of the head, for they think that all ru^nes round
with them topsie turnie, though it be but their brain and imagination, which
turn not the things about them; for so when we meet with any events, whereof
the causes are unknown unto us, we deem the world is governed without reason,
because we are ignorant of it. Let us believe then that as God is the maker,
and father of all things, so takes he care of all things, by his providence,
which does embrace and sustain all the Machine of creatures; But especially
let us believe, that he does rule our affairs, ours, who know him; though our
life be tossed with so great contrariety of accidents, whereof we know not the
reasons, to the end, by chance, that not being able to attain to this
knowledge, we might admire the sovereign reason of God, surpassing all things:
for with us, things easily known, are easily despised; but that which out-tops
our wit, by how much it is more hard to be known, by so much it excites a
greater admiration in us. Truly the reasons of the divine providence were low
placed, if our small wits could reach unto them; they should be less amiable
in their sweetness and less admirable in their Majesty, if they were set at
a less distance with our capacity.

4. Let us cry out then THEO: in all occurrences, but let it be with an
affectionat heart toward the most wise, most puissant, and most sweet
providence of our eternal father. O the depth of the riches, wisdom, and
knowledge of God? O Savior IHESVS THEOT: how excessive are the riches of of
the divine goodness! His love toward us, is an incomprehensible Abisse,
whence he has provided for us a rich sufficiency, or rather a rich abundance
of means proper for our salvation; and sweetly to apply them, he makes use
of a sovereign wisdom, having by his infinite knowledge, foreseen and known
all that was requisite to that effect. Ah what can we fear, nay rather what
ought not we to hope for being the children of a father so rich in goodness to
love and desire to save us, so understanding to provide means convenient: so
wise to apply the^; so good to will; so clear sighted to ordain; and so
prudent to execute.

5. Let us never permit our minds to flutter by curiosity about Gods
judgments, for as little Butterflies we shall burn our wings, and perish in
this sacred flame. These judgments are inco^prehensible, or as S. GREGORY
Nazianzen says, inscrutable, that is, one cannot search and sound the
motives, the means and ways, by which he does execute and finish them cannot
be discerned and known: And though the power of smelling be never so perfect
in us, yet shall we at every turn be at default, not finding the sent: for who
can penetrate the sense, the understanding, and intention of God? Who was ever
his Consellour, to know his purposes, and their motives? or who did ever
prevent him with service? Is it not he contrariwise who does prevent us in the
benedictions of his grace, to crown us with the felicity of his glory? ah,
THEO: all things are from him, as being their Creator; all things are by him,
as being their Governor; all things are in him, as being their Protector; To
him be honor for ever and ever. Let us walk in peace, THEO: in the way of
holy love for he that shall enjoy divine love in dying, after death shall
enjoy love eternally.

Of a certain remainder of love which oftentimes stays in the soul, that
has lost Charity. CHAPTER. IX.
1. THe life of a man who languishing on his deaths bed, by little and little
decaies, does hardly deserve to be termed life, since that, though it be life,
yet is it so mingled with death, that it is hard to say, whether it is a death
as yet living, or a life dying. Alas! how pitiful a spectacle it is THE: but
far more lamentable is the state of a soul, which ungrateful to her Savior
goes hourly backward, withdrawing her-selfe from God's love, by certain
degrees of indeuotion, and disloyalty, till at length having quite forsaken
it, she is left in the horrible obscurity of perdition: and this love which is
in it is declining and which fades, and perishes, is called imperfect love,
because though it be entire in the soul, yet seems it not to be entirely;
that is, it hardly keeps in the soul any longer, but is upon the point of
forsaking it. Now Charity being separated from the soul by sin, there
remains oftentimes a certain resemblance of Charity, which does deceive and
put us into a vain muse; and I will tell you what it is. Charity while it is
in us, produces many actions of love toward God, by the frequent exercise
whereof, our soul gets a habit, and custom of loving God, which is not
Charity, but only an impression and inclination, which the multitude of
actions leaves in our hearts.

2. After a long habit of preaching or saying Mass deliberatly, it happens
often, that in dreaming we utter and speak the same things, which we would
say in preaching or celebrating, so that custom and habit acquired by
election, and virtue, is in some sort, afterward practiced without election, or
virtue, since the actions of such as sleep, generally speaking, have nothing of
virtue, save only an apparent image, and are only the similitudes or
representations thereof. So charity by the multitude of acts which she
produces does impri^t in us a certain facility to love, which she leaves in
us, eue^ after we are deprived of her presence. I remember when I was a young
scholar that in a village near Paris, there was a certain well with an ECHO,
which would repeat the words that we pronounced by it, diverse times. And if
some Idiote without experience, had heard this repetition of words, he would
have believed that there had been some body in the botome of the well, who had
done it. But we had even then known by Philosophy, that none was in the well,
to reiterate our words, but that there were only certain concauities, in some
one whereof our voices were assembled, and not finding through passage, least
they might altogether perish, and not employ the force that was left them, they
produced second voices; and they gathering together in an other co^cauitie,
produced a third, the third a fourth, and so consequetly to the eleauenth, so
that those voices heard in the well, were not now our voices, but resemblances
and images of the same. And indeed there was a great difference betwixt our
voices, and those: For when we made a long continuance of words, we had but
some few of them rendered by the ECHO, shortning the pronunciation of syllables,
which she slightly passed over, with tones and accents quite different from
ours; nor did she begin to form her words, till we had quite pronounced them.
In fine they were not words of a living man, but as one would say the words of
any empty, and vain Rock, which notwithstanding did so well counterfeit
man's voice, whence she sprung, that a simple body, would have been misled and
beguiled by her.

3. Now this is it that I would say when holy CHARITY meets a pliable soul,
wherein she does long reside she produces a second love, which is not a love
of Charity, though it issue from Charity, but it is a humane love which is
yet so like to Charity, that though she leaves behind, this her picture, and
likeness which does so represent her, that one who were ignorant would be
deceived therein; not unlike to the birds on Zeuxis his painted raysins, which
they deemed to be true raysins, so generally had Art imitated nature! And yet
there is a fair difference betwixt Charity, and humane love which she does
beget in us: for the voice of Charity does pronounce, denou^ce, and work in
our hearts Gods Commandments, humane love which remains after her, does
indeed pronounce the commandments, and denounces sometimes all of them, yet
does never effect them all, but some few only: Charity does pronounce, and
put together all the sillables, that is, all the circumstances of Gods
commandments: humane Love always leaves out some of them: especially
straightness, and purity of intention: and as for the tone, Charity takes it
always at an equal hight, sweet and delightful; humane Love takes it still
either to high in terrene things or to low in celestial; and never sets upon
his work, till Charity have ended hers: for so long as charity is in the
soul, she serves her self of this humane love, as of her Creature, and makes
use of him to facilitate her operations; so that in that interim, the works of
this love, as of a servant, belong to Charity his Mistress. But Charity
flitting the actions of this love are entirely his own, not having their
estimation, and worth from Charity; for as Eliseus his stafe, in his absence,
though in the hand of his servant Geizi, who received it from him, wrought no
miracle, so actions done in the absence of Charity, by the only habit of
humane love, are of no value or mirite, to eternal life, though he learned
them of charity, being but her servant. And this comes thus to pass, because
this humane love in the absence of Charity, has not any supernatural
strength, to raise the soul to the excellent action of the love of God above
all things.

How dangerous this imperfect love is. CHAPTER. X.
1. ALas, my THEO: behold I pray you the poor Judas, after he had betrayed his
Master, how he goes to render the money to the Jews how he acknowledges his
sin, how he speaks honorably of the blood of this immaculate lamb. These
were effects of imperfect love, which precedent Charity, now past, had left in
his heart. We descend to impiety by certain degrees, and hardly any arriues
in an instant to the extreamitie of malice.

2. Perfumers, though out of their shops, bear about with them, for a long
time, the sent of the perfumes, which they have handled. So, such as have been
in the Closet of heavenly ointments, that is in holy Charity, hold for a time
after the sent of it.

3. Where the Heart has lodged by night, the morning after there is a fresh
sent or vent of him, toward night it is harder to be took; but as soon as
his strain waxes old, and dead, the hou^des do begin to loose it. When
charity has reigned for a space in the soul, one may find there her rack,
tracestraine, or sent, for a time after she be departed, but by little and
little it does quite vanish, and a man loses all knowledge that ever Charity
was there.

4. I have seen certain young people, well bred up in the love of God, who
putting them selves out of that path remained for some time amidst their
accursed ruin, in whom notwithstanding, one might have seen great marks of
their former virtue, and the habit gotten in time of charity, resisting
present vice, scarcely could one for some months, discern whether they were
out of Charity or not, whether vertious, or vicious, till such time as the
progress did clear, that these virtuous exercises proceeded not from Charity
present, but past: not from perfect, but imperfect love, which Charity had
left behind her, as a sign that she had lodged in those souls.

5. Now this imperfect love, THEO: is good in it self, for being a creature of
holy Charity and one of her retinue, it cannot but be good, and indeed did
faithfully serve charity, while she seiourned in the soul, as it is still
ready to serve, upon her return, nor is it to be contemned, for that it
cannot do actions of perfect love; the condition of its nature being such: so
stars, which in comparison of the sun are very imperfect, are yet
extremely beautiful beheld alone; and having no rank in the presence of the
sun, in his absence they have.

6. Howbeit as this love is good in us, so it is perilous for us, seeing that
oftentimes we are contented with it alone, because having many interior and
exeteriour strokes of Charity, thinking that it is the same which we have, we
fool our selves, with opinion of our own sanctity, while in this vain
persuation, the sins which deprived us of Charity do increase, wax big,
and multiply so fast, that in the end they make themselves Masters of our
heart. If JACOB had not left his perfect Rachell, but had keept still by her
the day of his marriage, he had not been deceived as he was; but permitti^g her
to go into the Chamber without him he was holy astonished in the morning
following, to find only in lieu of her, the imperfect Lia which yet he
believed had been his dear Rachell; But Laban had put that deceit upon him.
Now self love deceiues us in the same manner, how little so ever we forsake
Charity, it thrusts upon us estimation this imperfect habit, and we delight
our selves in it, as though, it were the true Charity, tell some clear light,
manifest unto us, that we are abused.

7. Ah God! is it not a great pity to see a soul flatter her self in the
imagination of Sanctity, remaining at rest, as though she were possessed of
Charity, finding in the end, her Sanctity a fiction, her rest a Letargie, her
joy a madness.

A means to discern this imperfect love. CHAPTER. XI.
1. But you will ask me, what means is there to discern, whether it be
RACHELL or LIA, Charity or imperfect love, which gave me the feelings of
devotion wherewith I am touched? If examining in particular the objects of the
desires, affections and designs which you have for the present, you find any
one for which you would transgress the good will and pleasure of God, by
sinning mortally, it is then out of doubt, that all the feeling facility and
promptitude which you have in Gods service, issue from no other source then
humane and imperfect love: for if perfect love reigned in us, o Lord God! it
would break every affection, every desire, every design, whose object were so
pernicious, and would not endure that our heart, should behold it.

2. But note that I said that this examine must be made upon our present
affections; for it is not requisite, that you should imagine to your self such
as may arise hereafter, since it is sufficient that we be faithful in present
occurrences, according to the diversity of times; and since that every time
has enough to do, with it is own pain and travel.

3. Yet if you were desirous to exercise your heart in spiritual valor, by
the representation of diverse encounters, and assaults, you may profitably do
it, provided, that after the acts of this imaginary valor, which your heart
might have made, you esteem not your self more valliant: for the children of
Ephraim, who did wonders with their bow and arrows, while they were yet
trained up in warlike feats at home, when it came indeed to the push, upon
the day of battle they turned their backs and had not so much as the courage
to bow their arrows, or behold those of their enemies.

4. When therefore we do practice this valor in future occurrences, or such
as are only possible, if we find a good and loyal feeling, we are to thank
God for it: For this feeling is always good, howbeit we are to keep our
selves betwixt a confidence and diffidence, hoping that by Gods grace, we
should do in the occasion, that which we imagined; and yet still fearing, that
following our ordinary misery, peradventure we should perform nothing, but
loose courage; but if the diffidence should wax so excessive, that it seemed
to us, that we should neither have force, nor heart, and thereby we should fale
into despair, upon the subject of imaginary temptations, as though we were
not in Charity, and in Gods grace; then, in despite of our feeling and
discouragement, we were to make resolution of a great fidelity in all
occurrences, even to the temptation which troubles us, hoping that when it
shall happen, God will multiply his grace, redouble his succors, and afforde
us all necessary assistance; and while he gives us not the force for an
imaginary and unnecessary war, he will give it us when it comes to the
deed: For as many have lost courage in the assault, so many have also lost
fear and have taken heart, and resolution in the presence of danger and
difficulty, which in their absence they had never done. And so many of Gods
servants, representing unto themselves absent temptations, have been affrighted
at them, even almost to the loosing of courage, which when they saw present,
they behaved themselves courageously. Finally in the amazements which rise from
the representation of future assaults, when we apprehend that our heart fails
us, it is sufficient that we have a desire of courage, and confidence that God
will bestow it upon us when time shall exact. Nor had SAMSON always his
strength, but it is noted in the Scripture, that the Lion of Tamathas vines,
coming toward him furiously and roaring, the Spirit of God seized him, that
is, God gave him the motion of a new force, and a new courage, and he tore the
Lion in pieces, as a Got: and in like manner when he defeated the thousand
Philistians, which thought to have defeated him in the field of Lechi. So my
dear THEO: it is not necessary that we have always the sense and motion of
courage requisite to surmou^t the roaring Lion, which goes roaring hither and
thither to devour us, this might administer us occasion of vanity and pre
umption. It is sufficiant that we have a good desire to fight valliently, a
perfect confidence that the holy Ghost will assist us with his helping hand,
when occasion shall present it self.

The end of the fourth Book.
THE FIFTH BOOK. OF THE TWO PRINCIPALE EXERCISES OF HOLY LOVE, performed by
complacence and benevolence.
Of the sacred Complacence of Love, and first in what it consists. CHAPTER. I.
I. LOVE, as we have said, is no other thing, then the motion, and gliding of
the heart toward good, by means of the complace^ce which one takes in it; so
that complacence is the great motive of love, as love is the great motion of
complacence.

2. Now this motion is practiced toward God in this manner. We know by faith,
that the Divinity is an incomprehensible Abisse of all perfection,
soueraignely infinite in excellency, and infinitely sovereign in bou^tie. And
this truth which faith teaches us is attentively considered by meditation
beholding the immensitie of goods which are in God, either in gross by
assembling all the perfections; or in particular, by considering his
excellences, one after another, for example his All-power, his All-wisdome, his
All-goodnesse, his Eternity, his Infinity. Now when we have brought our
understanding to be very attentive, to the greatness of the Goods that are in
this divine object; it is impossible but our will should be touched with
complacence in this good, and then we use the libartie and power which we have
over our selves, provoking our own heart, to answer and strengthen this first
complacence, by acts of approbation, and rejoicing. O says the deuote soul
in this case, how fair thou art my well-beloued, how fair thou art, thou art
wholly desirable, yea thou art desire it self! Such is my well-beloued, and he
is the friend of my heart! o daughters of Jerusalem, o blessed be my God for
ever, who is so good: ah! whether I live or die, too happy I am in knowing,
that my God is so rich in all Goodness, that his Goodness is so infinite, his
infinity so good.

3. Thus approving the good which we see in God, and ioying in it: we make an
act of love which is called complacence: for we please our selves in the divine
pleasure, infinitely more then in our own: and it is this love which rendered so
much content to the Saints, when they could meet with the perfections of their
well-beloued, and which caused the^ to pronounce with so much delight, that God
was God; Go to, know said they, that our Lord is God; o God, my God, my God,
thou art my God; the God of my heart; and my God is the part of mine
inheritance for ever. He is the God of our heart by this co^placence, since by
it, our heart does embrace him, and makes him it is own: he is our inheritance,
because by this act, we enjoy the goods which are in God, and as from an
inheritance we have from it all pleasure, and content: by means of this
complacence we drink and eat spiritually the perfections of the Divinity:
for we make them our own, and draw them into our hearts.

4. JACOBS owes drew into their entrals the variety of colors which they saw
in the fountain wherein they were watered, when they were a ra^ming; for in
effect their young lambs were thereupon spotted: so a soul taken with the
pleasing complacence which she takes in considering the Divinity, and in it an
infinity of excellences, she draws the colors thereof into her heart, that
is to say, the multitude of wonders and perfections which she does
contemplate: and makes them her own, by the contentment which she takes
therein.

5. O God what joy shall we have in heaven, THEO: when we shall see the
well-beloued of our hearts, as an infinite sea, whose waters are perfection,
and goodness! Then as Hearts, much pursued and spent, putting their mouths to
a clear and cool fountain, do draw into the^ the coolness of these fair
waters; so our hearts after so many languishments and desires, meeting with the
strong and living source of the divinity, shall draw by their complacence, all
the perfections of the well-beloued, and shall have the perfect fruition of
them by the joy which they shall take in them, replenishing themselves with
those immortal delights: and in this wise the dear Spouse will enter into
us, as into his marriage bed, to communicate his eternal joy unto our souls,
according as he himself says, that if we keep the holy law of his love he
will come, and seiourne with us. Such is the sweet and noble robbery of Love,
who without vncolouring the well-beloued does color it self with his colors;
without disrobing him, inueste it self with his robes; without taking from
him, takes all that he has, and without impouerishing him, is enriched with
all his wealth; as the air takes light, not lessening the original
brightness of the sun, and the Myrror the grace of the countenance, not
diminishing his, that looks in it.

7. They were made abominable like to the things they loved, said the Prophet
speaking of the wicked; so might one say of the good, that they are become
lovely as the things they loved. Behold I beseech you, S. CLARE of Mountfalco
her heart, it was so delighted in our Saviors Passion, and in meditating the
most holy Trinity, that it drew into it self all the marks of the passion,
and an admirable representation of the Trinity: being made such as the things
she loved. The love, which the great Apostle S. PAVLE, bore to the life, death
and passion of our Savior, was so great that it drew the very life, death, and
passion of this heavenly Savior into his loving servants heart; whose will was
filled with it by dilection, his memory by meditation, and his understanding
by contemplation. But by what canall or conduict was the mild JESUS conveyed
into SAINT PAVL^S heart? by the canall of complacence, as he himself
declares, saying: Far be it from me ever to glory, save in the cross of
our Savior JESUS CHRIST: for if you do mark it, betwixt glorying in a
person, and compleasing ones self in the same; taking glory, and taking
pleasure in a thing, there is no other difference, saving that he who glories
in a thing, to pleasure adds honor, honor not being without pleasure, though
pleasure can be without honor. This soul then, had such a complacence, and
esteemed himself so much honored in the divine Goodness, which appears in
the life, death, and passion of our Savior, that he took no pleasure but in
this honor. And it is this that made him say, be it far from me to Glory
save in the cross of my Savior, as he also said that he lived not himself,
but JESUS CHRIST lived in him.

How by holy complacence we are made as little children, at our Saviors
breasts. CHAPTER. II.
1. O God how happy the soul is who takes pleasure in learning to know that
God is God, and that his bounty is an infinite bounty: For this heavenly
spouse, by this Gate of Complacence, enters into her, and suppes with us, as we
with him. We feed our selves with his sweetness, by the pleasure which we
take therein, and recollect our heart, in the divine perfections, by the repose
we take therein: and this repast is a supper by reason of the repose which does
follow it, complacence making us sweetly repose, in the deliciousness of the
good which delights us, and wherewith we feed our heart: For as you know THEO:
the heart feeds of that which delights her, whence in our French tongue we
say, that some are fed with honors, others with riches, as the wiseman
said, that the mouthers of fools are fed with ignorance, and the sovereign
wisdom protests, that he is fed, that is, he is pleased, with no other thing
then to do the will of his Father: In conclusion, the Physicians Aphorism is
true; what is sauorie, nourishes; and the Philosophers what pleases, feeds.

2. Let my well-beloued come into his garden said the sacred spouse, and let
him eat therein the fruit of his Aple-trees. Now the heavenly spouse comes
into his garden, when he comes into the deuote soul. For seeing his delight is
to be with the children of men, where can he better lodge then in the country
of the mind, which he made to his likeness and similitude. He himself does
set in this garden, the loving Complacence which we have in his bounty, and
whereof we feed as likewise his Goodness does take his repast and repose in
our complacence, so that again our complacence is augmented, to perceive that
God is pleased to see us take pleasure in him; in such sort that from these
reciprocal pleasures the love of incomparable Complacence does spring, by
which our soul being made a garden of her spouse, and having from his bounty
the Aple-trees of his delights, she re^ders him the fruit thereof, being that
he is pleased in the complacence, she takes in in him. Thus do we draw Gods
heart into ours, and he disperseth in it his precious Baulme. And thus is that
practiced which the holy Bride spoke with such joy. The king of my heart, has
led me into his closet, we will exult, and rejoice in the, mind full of thy
breasts, more amiable then wine, the good do love thee: for I pray you, THEO:
what are the closets of this king of love, but his papes, which abou^de in the
variety of sweetness and delights: The breasts and duggs of the mother are
the closet of the little infants treasures, he has no other riches then those
which are more precious unto him then gold, or the Topase, more beloved then
the rest of the world.

3. The soul then which does contemplate the infinite treasures of divine
perfections in her well-beloued holds her self too happy and rich, in that
love does make her Mistrisse, by complacence, of all the perfections and
contentments of her dear spouse. And even as the babie does give little ierts
toward his mothers Pape, and hops with joy to see the^ discovered, and as the
mother again on her part does ^resent them unto him, with a love always a
little forwards: even so the devout soul does feel t^^ dauncings and motions
of an incomparable joy, through the content which she has, in beholding the
treasures of the perfections, of the king of her holy love; but especially when
she sees that he himself does discover them by love, and that amongst them
that perfection of his infinite love does excellently shine. Has not this
fair soul reason to cry? O my king, how amiable thy riches are, and how rich
thy loves? ah! which of us have more joy, thou that enioyest it, or I who
reenioye it? we dance with mirth in memory of thy breasts, and thy duggs, so
plentiful in all excellency of deliciousness. I, because my well-beloued
does enjoy it; thou because thy well-beloued does reree^ioy it; for so we do
both e^ioye it, since thy goodness makes thee e^ioye my reenioying, and my love
makes me reenioye thy enjoying. Ah! the just and the good do love thee, and
how can one be good and not love so great a goodness? Wordly Princes keep
their treasures in the closets of their Palaces; their armor in their Castles;
But the heavenly Prince, keeps his treasures in his bosom, his arms within
his breaste; and because his treasure is his goodness, as his weapons are his
loves, his breaste and bosom resembles those of a tender mother, who has two
fair duggs, as two closets, rich with the sweetness of good milk, armed
with as many darts, to subdue her little dear babie, as it makes shoots in
sucking.

4. Nature su^ely lodged the duggs in the bosom, to the end that, the heat of
the heart concocting the milk, as the mother is the child's nourse, so her
heart should be his foster-father, and that milk might be a food of love,
better a thousand times then wine. Note the while, THEOT: that the comparison
of milk and wine, seems so proper to the holy spouse, that she is not content
to have said once, that her spouse his breasts surpasses wine, but she
repeats it thrice. Wine, THEOT: is the milk of grapes, and milk is the wine
of the duggs: for so the sacred spouse says, that her well-beloued, is to her
a grape, but a Cyprine grape, that is, of an excellent odor. The Israelites
says Moses, could drink the purest and best blood of the grape: And JACOB
describing unto his son Judas, the share which they should have in the land
of Promise, prophetised under this figure, the ^r^e felicity of Christians,
saying that our Savior would wash his robe, that is, his holy Church, in the
blood of the grape, that is, in his own blood: Now blood and milk are no more
differrent, then grapes and wine: For as grapes ripening by the suns heat,
chang their color, become a grateful and nourishing wine: so blood tempered
by the heat of the heart, turns fair white, and becomes a fit food for
children.

5. Milk which is a cordial food wholly consisting of love, represents the
mystical knowledge and divinity, that is, the sweet relish which proceeds
from the complacence of love, which the mind receives in meditating the
perfections of the divine Goodness; But wine signifies ordinary and acquired
knowledge, which is squeezed by force of speculation from the press of diverse
arguments and disputes. Now the milk which our souls draw from the breasts
of our Saviors Charity: is incomparably better then the wine which we squeeze
from humane discourse: For this milk flows from heavenly love, which
prepares it for his children, yea even before they yet thought of it: it has a
sweet and amiable gust and the odor thereof puts down all perfumes, it makes
the breath pure and sweet, as of a sucking child: it gives joy, without
insolency; it inebriateth, without dulling: it does not only rear up, but
even revive the senses.

6. When the holy man Isaac embraced and kissed his dear child JACOB, he smelt
the good odor of his garments, and straight perfumed with an extreme
pleasure: o quoth he, behold how the odor of my son is like to the odor of
a flourishing field, which God has blessed: the garment and perfumes were upon
JACOB, but ISAAC had the complacence and reenioying of them. Alas, the soul
which by love holds her Savior in the arms of her affection, how deliciously
does she smell the perfumes of the infinite perfections which are found in him?
with what complacence does she say in herself, behold how the sent of my God
is like the smell of a flourishing garden? how precious are his breasts,
sending out sovereign parfumes? So the Spirit of a great S. Augugustine,
stayed in suspense betwixt the sacred contentments which he had to consider; on
the one side the mystery of his Masters birth; on the other that of the
passion, he cried out ravished in this complacence.

Betwixt two sacred fires I burn,
Nor know to which my heart to turn.
From hence, a Mother does present
A fluent breast, a dear content:
From thence, as from a TRVEST VINE
Does issue blood, in lieu of wine.
That a holy complacence gives our heart to God, and makes us feel a
continual desire in enjoying him. CHAPTER. III.
1. THe love which we bear to God does flow from the first complacence that
our heart takes, upon the apprehension of the divine Goodness, when it begins
to tend toward the same. Now when by the exercise of love we do augment, and
strengthen this first co^placence, as we have declared in the precedent
Chapters, we then draw into our hearts the divine perfections, and enjoy the
Divine Goodness, by the delight we take in it, practicing the first part of
the contentment of love expressed by the sacred spouse, saying: my well-beloued
is mine. But because this complacence of love being in us that have it, is also
in God, in whom we take it, it gives us reciprocally to his Divine Goodness,
so that by this holy love of complace^ce, we enjoy the goods which are in God,
as though they were our own; but because the divine perfections, are stronger
then our Spirit, entering into it, they enjoy it reciprocally, in so much, that
we do not only say God is ours by this co^placence, but that we are his.

2. The herb Aproxis (as elsewhere we have said) has so great a
correspondance with fire, that, though in distance, as oone as it gets into the
aspect of it, it draws the flame, and begins to burn, conceiving fire, not
so much from the heat, as from the light of the fire presented. When then by
this attraction it is united to the fire, if it could speak, might it not well
say, my well-beloued fire is mine, since I drew it to me and enjoy its flames:
but I am also his, for though I drew it to me, it reduced me into it, as more
strong, and noble; it is my fire, and I am its herb, I draw it, and it burns
me. So our heart being brought into the presence of the Divine Goodness, and
having drawn the perfections thereof by the complace^ce it takes in them, may
truly say, Gods Goodness is all mine, since I enjoy his excelle^cies and I
again am wholly his, seeing his delights enjoy me.

3. By complacence, our soul as a Gedeons fleece, is wholly filled with
heavenly dew, and this dew is the fleeces, because it fell upon it; and and
again the fleece is the dewes, because it was steeped in it, and received
virtue from it. Which does more belong to the other, the pearl or the oyster
to the pearl? The pearl is the oysters, because she drew it to her, but the
oyster is the pearls, because it gives her worth and value. Complacence makes
us Possessours of God, drawing into us his perfections; but it makes us also
possessed of God, applying and tying us to his perfections.

4. Now in this complacence, we do glut our soul with delights, in such a
manner, that we do not yet cease to desire to be glutted, and tasteing the
divine Bounty, we desire yet to taste it, in satiating our selves, we would
still eat, and in eating we perceive our selves satiated. The head of the
Apostles, having said in his first Epistle, that the old Prophets had
manifested the graces which were to abound amongst Christians, and amongst
other things our Saviors passion, and the glory which was to follow it, as
well by the Resurrection of his body, as also by the Exaltation of his name:
In the end he concluds that the very Angels do desire to behold the mysteries
of the Redemption in this divine Savior, whom, says he, the Angels do
desire to behold. But how can this be understood that the Angels who see the
Redeemour, and in him all the mysteries of our salvation, do yet desire to see
him? THEO: Verily they see him continually, but with a view so agreeable and
delicious, that the complacence they take in it does satiate them, without
taking away their desire, and makes them desire without removing their
Sacietie, the fruition is not lessened by the desire, but perfected thereby, as
their desire is not cloied but sharpened by the fruition.

5. The fruition of a thing which does continually content, does never fade,
but is renewed, and flourishes incessantly, it is still agreeable, still
amiable; The continual contentment of heavenly lovers, produces a desire
perseuerantly content, as their continual desire, does beget in them, a
contentment perseuerantly desired. The good which is finite, in giving the
possession does end the desire, and in giving the desire does dispossess,
while it cannot at once be possessed and desired: But the infinite Good, makes
desire reign with possession, and possession with desire, finding a way to
saciate desire by a holy presence, and yet make it live by the greatness of
its excellency which does nourish in all those that possess it, a continually
contented desire, and a contentment continually desired.

6. Consider TH^OT: such as hold in their mouth the herb SCITIQVE, for
following report, they are neither hungry, nor thristie, so does it saciate!
and yet do they never loose appetite, so deliciously does it nourish them!
When our will meets God, she reposeth in him, taking therein a sovereign
complacence, yet without staying the motions of her desire: for as she desires
to love, so she loves to desire: she has the desire of love, and the love of
desire. The repose of the heart consists not in immobilitie, but in having
want of nothing: Not, in not moving, but in not having need to move.

7. The damned are in eternal motion, without all mixture of rest: we mortals
who are yet in this pilgrimage, have now motion, now rest, in our affections;
The Blessed have continual repose in their motion and continual motion in
their repose; only God has repose without motion, because he is soueraignely
on substantial and pure act. And though according to the ordinary condition
of this mortal life, we rest not in motion, yet notwithstanding when we make
essaies of the exercises of the immortal life, that is, when we practice the
acts of holy love, we find repose in the motion of our affections, and motion
in the repose of the complacence which we take in our well-beloued, receiving
hereby fore-tastes of the future Felicity, to which we aspire.

8. If it be true that the Cameleon lives of air, wheresoever he goes in the
air, he finds food; and though he stir from one place to another, it is not
to find wherewithal to be satiated, but to exercise himself in his element,
as fishes in the sea. Who desires God in possessing him, does not desire him,
to search him, but to exercise affection, even in the good which he enioyes:
for the heart does not make this motion of desire as pretending the fruition of
a thing not had, since it is already had, but as dilating it self in the
fruition which it has; not to obtain the Good, but to recreate and please it
self therein; not to enjoy it, but to rejoice in it. No otherwise then we
move our selves, and go to some delicious garden, where being arrived, we
cease not to walk and stire our selves, yet it is not to come thither, but
being there to walk and pass our time: we went to enjoy the pleasantness of
the garden; being there, we walk, to please our selves in the fruition of it.
Let not in length of time be found a space,
In which we cease to search t'Almighties face.
We always seek, whom we always love, says the Great, S. AUGUSTINE. Love
seeks whom it has found, not to have him, but to have him still.

9. Finally, THEO: the soul who is in the exercise of the love of complacence,
cries continually in her sacred silence: It suffiseth me that God be God, that
his Goodness be infinite, that his perfection be immence: whether I live, or
not, it little imports me, since that my dear well-beloued lives eternally a
triumphant life: Death it self cannot attristate a heart who knows that its
sovereign Love, lives. It is sufficient for a heart that loves, that he whom
it loves more then it self, is replenished with eternal happiness, seeing
that it lives more in him whom it loves, then him, whom it does animate, yea
that it lives not, but its well-beloued lives in it.

Of a loving condoling, by which the complacence of love is better declared.
CHAPTER. IV.
1. COmpassion, condoling commiseration, or mercy, is no other thing, then an
affection which makes us share in the suffera^ces and griefs of him whom we
love, drawing the misery which he endures into our heart, whence it is called
MISERICORDIA as one would say MISERIA CORDIS: as complacence does draw into
the lovers heart, the pleasures and contentments of the thing beloved. It is
Love that works both the effects, by the virtue it has, to unite the lovers
heart to the beloved, by this means making the good and evil which they have,
common betwixt them. And that which happens in compassion, does much illustrate
that which touches complacence.

2. Compassion takes her grouth from the love whence she proceeds. So we see
mothers do deeply condole the afflictions of their only children, as the
Scripture does often testify. How great was the sorrow of Agars heart, upon
the grief of her Ismael, whom she saw well nigh perish with thirst in the
Desert: How much did DAVID'S soul commiserate the misery of his Absolon: Ah
do you not mark the motherly heart of the great Apostle, sick, with the
sick: burning with zeal for such as were scandalized, with a continual
dolor for the loss of the Jews: and daily dying for his dear spiritual
children: But especially consider how love draws all the pains, all the
torments, trauells, sufferances, griefs, wounds, passion, cross, and death it
self of our Redeemour, into his most sacred Mothers heart. Alas the same
Nails that crucified the body of this divine child, did also crucify the
mothers heart; the same thrones which pierced his head, did strike through the
heart of this entirely sweet mother: she endured the same miseries with her
son by commiseration; the same dolours, by condoling; the same passions by
compassion: to be short, the sword of death which transpearced the body of
this best beloved son did stricke through the heart of this most loving
mother; whence she might well have said, that he was to her a POSIE OF MIRRHE
amidst her breasts, that is, in her bosom, and in the midst of her heart.
JACOB, hearing the sad, though false, news of the death of his dear JOSEPH,
you see how he is afflicted with it: ah! said he, in sorrow I will descend to
hell, that is to say, to Lymbo, into ABRAHAM'S bosom, after this child.

3. Commiseration is also great according to the greatness of their
sufferances whom we love: for how little soever the frie^dshipe be, if the
euells which we see endured be extreme they cause in us great pity. This made
Caesar weep over Pompey; and the daughters of Jerusalem could not stay
themselves from weeping over our Savior; though the greater part of them, did
not much affect him: as also the friends of JACOB, though wicked friends, made
great lamentation, in beholding the dreadful spectacle of his incomparable
misery: and what a stroke of grief was it in the heart of JACOB, to think
that his dear child was dead, of a death so cruel, as to be devoured by a
savage beast? But besides all this, commiseration is much strengthened, by the
presence of the object in misery: this caused the poor Agar, absent her self
from her languishing son, to disburden her self in some sort of the
compassionate grief which she felt, saying: I will not see the child die; as
contrariwise our Savior weeps, seeing the sepulcher of his well-beloued
Lazarus: and beholding his dear Jerusalem; And the good JACOB, was struck
with grief, when he saw the bloody Robe of his poor little JOSEPH.

4. Now, as many causes also do augment complacence. As a friend is more dear
unto us, we take more pleasure in his contentment, and his good does enter more
deeply into our heart: which if it be excellent, our joy is also greater; but
if we see our friend while he enioyes it, our rejoicing becomes extreme. When
the good JACOB knew that his son lived, o God what joy! his heart returned
home, he revived, yea as one would say returned to life. But what is this, he
revived, returned to life? THEO: SPIRITS die not their proper death but by
sin, which seperateth them from God, who is their true supernatural life,
yet die they sometimes by another death: and this happened to IAGOB, of whom
we speak: for love which draws into the heart of the lover, the good and
evil of the thing beloved, the one by complacence, the other by commiseration,
drew the death of the lovely JOSEPH, into the loving JACOBS heart, and by a
miracle impossible to any other power but love, the mind of the good Father
was full of the death of him that lived, and reigned, deceived affection
forerunning the effect.

5. But as soon as he had known that his son was a live, Love who had so
long detained the presupposed death of the son in the good Fathers heart
seeing that he was deceived, speedely rejected this imaginary death, and made
enter in its place the true life of the said son; Thus then he returned to a
new life, because the life of his son entered into his heart by complacence,
and animated him with an incomparable contentment with which finding himself
satisfied, and not esteeming any other pleasure in comparison of this, it
fufficeth me, says he, if my child JOSEPH live. But when with his proper eyes
he experienced his dear child's greatenesse in Gessan, hanging upon him and for
a good space weeping about his neck; ah, now, says he, I will die joyful,
my dear Son since I have seen thy face, and thou do yet live. o God what a
joy, THEO: and how excellently expressed by this old man! For what would he
say by these words, now I will die contented, since I have seen thy face, but
that his content was so great that it was able to render death it self joyful
and agreeable, being the most discomfortable, and horrible thing in the world?
Tell me, I pray you, THEO: who has more sense of IOSEPHES good, he that
enioyes it, or JACOB who reenioyes it? Certainly if good be not good but in
respect of the content which it affords us: the father has as much, yea more
then the Son: for the son together with the dignity of VICEROY whereof he
is possessed, has consequently many cares, and affairs: but the Father does
enjoy by Complacence, and purely possess all that good is, in this his sons
greatenesse, and dignity, without charge, care, or trouble. I will dye Joyful
says he: Alas! who does not see his contentment: if even death cannot trouble
his joy, who can ever chang it? if his content can live amidst the distresses
of death, who can ever bereeue him of it? Love is strong as death, and the
joys of love do surmount the anoyes of death, for death cannot kill, but does
revive them, so that, as there is a fire which miraculously is feed in a
fountain nere Greenoble, as I surely know, and S. AUGUSTINE does attest, so
holy Charity is so strong, that she does nourish her flames and consolations
in the saddest anguishes of death, and the waters of tribulations cannot
extinguish her fires.

Of the commiseration and Complacence of love in our Saviors Passion. CHAPTER.
V.
1. When I see my Savior upon the mount Oliuet, with his soul, sad even to
death; O Lord I^SVS, say I, who could have borne these sorrows of death, in
the soul of life, if not love, who moving commiseration drew thereby our
miseries into thy sovereign heart. Now a deuote soul, seeing this abisse of
sorrow and distress in this Divine lover, how can she be without a holily
loving grief? But considering on the other side, that none of these her
well-beloued's afflictions proceed from any imperfection, or want of force,
but from the greatness of his most dear love she cannot but melt with a
holily dolorous love: so that she cries out, I am black with grief by
compassion, but I am fair with love, by Complacence; the anguishes of my
well-beloued, have changed my hew; for how can a faithful lover see him so
tormented, whom she loves more then her life, without becoming appalled,
withered and dried up with grief? Nomades tents, perpetually exposed to the
outrage of weather and wars are almost still beaten, and covered with dust,
and I open to sorrows, which by commiseration I receive, from the excessive
suffrances of my divine Savior, I am quite covered with anguishe, and split
with grief: but because his griefs whom I love, proceed from his love, as
much as they afflict me by compassion, they delight me by Complacence: For how
must not a faithful lover needs have an extreme co^te^t to see her self so
much beloved of her heavenly Spouse! And hence the beauty of love appears in
the foulness of grief. And though I wear mourning weeds for the Passion
and death of my King, deformed and blacked with grief, yet am I not without an
incomparable delight, to behold the excess of his love, amidst the panges of
his sorrows. And the tents of SOLOMON brodered, and wrought with an
incomparable diversity of work, was never so goodly, as I am content, and
consequently, sweet, amiable, and agreeable, in the variety of the essaies of
love, which I feel amongst these griefs. Love does equalize the lovers: ah! I
see this dear lover, who is a burning fire, in a thornie bush of grief; and
even so I, I am wholly inflamed with love amongst the thornie thickets of
sorrow; I am a Lilly environed with thorns; do not only look upon the
horrors of my pinching griefs, but behold the agreeable beauty of my loves.
Alas this Divine well-beloued lover does suffer insupportable griefs, this it
is that touches my heart, and makes me sound with anguish: but he takes
pleasure in suffering, he loves his torments, and dies with joy, to die with
grief for me: wherefore as I grieve in his grief, so am I ravished with joy
in his love; I do not only sorrow with him, but glory in him.

2. It was this love THEO: that drew the Stigmats upon the loving Seraphicall
S. FRANCIS; and upon the loving Angelical S. CATHERINE of Scienna, the urgent
wounds of her Savior; the loving Complacence, having sharpened the point of
the dolourous compassion, as honnie make the bitterness of Wormewoode more
pearcing and sensible: as contrariwise, the dainty smell of Roses is refined
by the neighberhoode of Garlike, which is planted near the Rose-trees: for so
the loving Complacence, which we have taken in the love of our Savior makes
the compassion which we have of his dolours more forcible; as also passing from
the compassion of sorrows, to the complacence of loves, we take a more ardent,
and high content. Then the grief of love, and the love of grief is practiced;
then the amourous compassion, and dolourous complacence, as another ESAV and
JACOB, striving who should strive more, puts the soul into incredible
conuultions and agonies, and as it were an ecstasy amourously dolorous, and
dolourously amourous. And according to this, the great souls of S. FRANCIS,
and S. CATHERINE, felt incomparable loves: in their dolours, and matchless
dolours in their loves, when they were stigmatized, perceiving love joyful to
endure for a friend, which our Savior exercised in the highest degree upon the
tree of the Cross. Thus is the precious union of our soul with God made,
which as a mystical Benjamin is a child of grief and love together.

3. It cannot be expressed, THEO: how much our Savior desires to enter into
our souls by way of this dolourous Complacence. Alas, says, he, open me the
door, my dear sister, my friend, my dove, my all-faire, for my head is all to
bedewed, and my heirs with the dropes of the night. What is this dew, what
are these dropes of the night, but the pains, and torments of his Passion?
Pearls, (as we have many times said) are no other thing then dewie dropes,
which the nights freshness shewers down upon the face of the sea, received in
the shelles of Oysters, or mother-pearles. Ah! would the divine lover of the
soul say, I am! oden with the pains, and sweat of my passion, which almost
all passed either in the darkness of the night, or in the night of darkness,
which the eclipsed sun caused at the hight of the day. Open then thy heart
toward me, as the mother-pearle does hers toward heaven, and I will pour
down upon thee, the dew of my passion, which shall turn into pearls of
consolation.

Of the Love of Benevolence which we exercise toward our Savior by way of
desire. CHAPTER. VI.
1. THe love which God exercises toward us, is always begun by benevolence
willing and effecting all the good that is in us, in which afterward he takes
complacence. He made DAVID according to his heart by benevolence, because he
found him according to his heart by Complacence. He first created the world for
man and man in the world, indewing every thing with such a measure of goodness
as was proportionable to it out of his pure benevolence; then he approved all
that he had done, finding that all was very good, and by complacence reposed in
his work.

2. But contrariwise our love toward God begins from the complacence which we
have in the sovereign Goodness, and infinite perfection, which we know is in
the Divinity; then, we come to the exercise of benevolence; And as the
Complacence which God takes in his creaturs, is no other thing then a
continuation of his benevolence toward them, so the benevolence which we bear
toward God, is nothing else, but an approbation, and perseuering in him.

3. Now this love of benevolence toward God, is practiced in this sort: we
cannot with a true desire wish any good to God, because his goodness is
infinitely more perfect, then we can either wish or think: Desire is only of a
future good, and no good is future to God, since that all good is so present to
him, that the presence of good in his Divine Majesty, is no other thing then
the Divinity it self. Not having therefore power to make an absolute desire
for God, we do make imaginary and conditional ones, in this manner: I have
said, o Lord thou art my God, who being full of thy own infinite goodness,
can have no want, neither of my riches, nor of any other thing: but if by
imagination of a thing impossible, I could think, thou had need of any
thing, I would never cease to wish it thee, even with the loss of my life,
being, and of all that the world has. And if being what thou art, and which
thou cannot but still be, it were possible that thou could receive any
increase of good, o God, what a desire should I have, that thou had it: In
that case o eternal Lord, I would desire to see my heart converted into
wishes, and my life into sighs, to wish thee such a good: ah! yet would I not
for all this, o thou sacred well-beloued of my soul, desire to have power to
desire any good to thy Majesty; yea I heartily please my self in this thy
supreeme degree of goodness, to which nothing can be added, neither by desire,
nor yet by thought. But if such a desire were possible, o infinte, Divinity, o
Divine infinity, my soul would be that desire, and no other thing then that,
so much would she be desirous, to desire for thee, that which she is infinitely
pleased, that she cannot desire, seeing that her impotencie therein proceeds
from the infinite infinity of thy perfection, which outstrips all desire and
cogitation. Ah! o my God how dearly I love the impossibility of being able to
desire thee any good, since, that ryseth out of the incomprehensible immensitie
of thy abundance, which is so soueraignely infinite, that if there be an
infinite desire, it should be infinitely saciated by the infinity of thy
Goodness, which would convert it into an infinite co^placence. These desires
then by imagination of impossibilities, may be sometimes profitably practiced,
amongst great, and extraordinary feelings and feruours. Thus, as it is
reported, did the great S. AUGUSTINE often behave himself pouring out in
excess of love, in these words. Ah! Lord, I am AUGUSTINE, and thou art God,
but howbeit, if that which neither is, nor can be, were, that I were God, and
thou AUGUSTINE, I would, in changing my condition with thee, become AUGUSTINE,
to the end, thou might be God.

4. It is another kind of Benevolence toward God, when seeing we cannot
advance him in himself, we strive to do it in our selves, that is still more
and more to increase the Complacence we take in his Goodness. And then THEOT:
we desire not the Complace^ce for the pleasure it yealdes us, but purely
because this pleasure is in God: For as we desire not the compassion, for the
sorrow it brings to our heart, but because this sorrow does unite, and
associate us to our well-beloued who greerueth; Nor do we love the complacence
because it brings us pleasure, but because this pleasure is taken in union of
the pleasure, and goodness which is in God, to which to be more united, we
would please our selves in a complacence infinitely greater, by the imagination
of the most holy Queen, and mother of love, whose soul did continually
magnify and exalte God; And to the end that it might be known that this
advancement was made by the complacence which she took in the divine
Goodness, she signifies that her heart leapt with contentment in God her
Savior.

How the desire to exalte and magnify God, does separate us from inferior
pleasures, and makes us attentive to the Divine perfections. CHAPTER. VII.
1. LOVE OF BENEVOLENCE, then causes in us a desire more and more to increase
the co^placence which we take in the Divine Goodness and to effect this
increase, the soul does carefully deprive her self of all other pleasure,
that she may give herself more entirely to take pleasure in God. A religious
man, asked S. GILES, one of the first, and most holy Companions of S. FRANCIS
in what work he could be most agreeable to God: he answered, in singing one to
one, which after explicating; give always, quoth he, all your soul, the only
one to God, who is one. The soul does glide through pleasures, and the
diversity of them does distract and hinder her, that she cannot attentively
attend to the pleasure which she ought to take in God. The true Lover has
scarcely any pleasure, but in the thing beloved. The glorious S. PAVLE reputed
all things as dirt or dung, in comparison of his Savior. And the sacred Spouse
is entirely for her well-beloued. And if the soul that stands thus holily
affected, meet with creaturs never so excellent, yea though they were Angels,
she makes no delay with them, save only to be helped and advanced in her
desire. Tell me then, says she to them, tell me I conjure you: have you not
seen him, whom my heart loves? The glorious Lover MAGDELEN met the Angels at
the sepulcher, who doubtless spoke to her angelically, that is, deliciously,
desirous to appease her grief, but contrariwise, wholly ruthful, she could
take no kind of content, neither in their mild words, nor in the glory of
their garments, nor in the heavenly grace of their gesture, nor in the wholly
lovely beauty of their featurs, but covered with tears, they have taken away
my Master, says she, and I know not where they have put him. And turning
about she saw her sweet Savior, but in form of a Gardener, wherein her heart
cannot be at repose: for full with the love of the death of her master;
flowers she will have none, nor consequently Gardeners; she has with in her
heart the cross, the nails, the thorns, she seakes her crucified Lord: ah my
dear Master Gardener, says she, whether peradventure have you not planted
my well-beloued deseased Lord, amongst your flowers as a Lilly, crusshed and
withered? Tell me quickly, and I will carry him away. But no sooner had he
called her by her name, but wholly melting with delight. o God, says she,
master! Nothing can content her, nor Angels company delight he, no nor yet
her Saviors, unless he appear, in that form in which he had stolen her
heart. The kings could not content themselves, neither in Hierusalems
goodlinesse, nor in the Courts magnificence, nor in the stars splendor:
Their hearts searching the little cave and child of Bethleem. The MOTHER OF
FAIR DILECTION, and the Spouse of most holy Love, cannot stay amongst their
parents and friends, they still walk on in grief, enquiring after the only
object of their delight: The desire to increase holy complacence, cuts of all
other pleasure, to the end it may with more fervor practice that, to which
divine benevolence does excite.

2. Now, more to magnify the sovereign well-beloued, the soul goes still
pursuing his face, that is, with an attention daily more careful and fervent,
she notes every particularitie of the beauties, and perfections which are in
him, making a continual progress in this pleasing inquiry of motives, that
might perpetually press her to a greater complacence in the incomprehensible
goodness which she loves. So DAVID, in many of his heavenly Psalms, does
cote by parcells the works and wonders of God. And the sacred Spouse, rangeth
in her divine Canticles as a well ranked army, all the perfections of her
spouse in their order, to provoke her soul, to a holy complacence, thereby
more highly to magnify his excellency, and withal to win every creature,
to the love of her so lovely a friend.

How holy Benevolence does produce the Divine well-beloueds Praises. CHAPTER.
VIII.
1. Honor, my dear THEO: is not in him that is honored, but in him that does
honor; for how ordinary is it, that he whom we honor is ignorant, nor does
so much as think thereof: how often do we praise such as knows us not, or
do sleep; and yet according to the ordinary estimation of men, and their
manner of conceiving, it seems that to do one honor is to benefit him, and
that in giving him titles and honors we give him much; and we stick not to
say that a man is rich in honor, glory, reputation, praise; though indeed
we know, that all this is out of the party that is honored, who oftentimes
receives no manner of profit thereby, according to a saying, ascribed to great
S. AUGUSTINE, O poor Aristotle thou art praised where thou art not, and where
thou art, thou art burnt. What fruit, I pray do Caesar and Alexander the Great
reap, of so many vain words which a company of vain souls employed in
their praises?

2. God replenished with a goodness which does surpass all praise, and
honor, receives no advantage or surplusage of good, by all the benedictio^s
which we give him, he is neither richer nor greater, more content or more
happy by them: for his happiness, his content, greatness, and riches,
neither are, or can be any other thing, then the divine infinity of his
Goodness. Notwithstanding because, according to our ordinary apprehension
honor is held one of the greatest effects of our benevolence toward others,
and that thereby we do not only not presuppose those that we honor, in any
want, but rather do protest, that they abound in excellency: we therefore
make use of this kind of beneuole^ce toward God, who does not only admit it,
but exact it, as a thing conformable to our condition, and so proper to
testify the respectfull love we bear him, that he has ordained we should
render, and yield all honor and glory unto him.

3. Thus then the soul who has taken a great complacence in God's infinite
perfection, seeing that she cannot wish him any increase of goodness, because
he has infinitely more then she can either wish or conceive, desires at least,
that his name may be blessed, exalted, praised, honored, and adored daily more
and more. And beginning with her own heart she cease not to provoke it to
this holy exercise: and as a sacred Be flies hither and thither, amongst the
flowers of the divine works and excellencies, gathering from them, a sweet
variety of complacences, whereof she works and composeth the honnie of
heavenly benedictions, praises, and honorable confessions, by which as far
as she is able, she magnifies and glorifies the name of her well-beloued;
following the great Psalmist, who having environed, and as it were in Spirit
run over the wonders of the divine goodness, sacrificed upon the Altar of
his heart the mystical Host of the outcries thereof in Canticles and Psalms
of admiration and Benediction. My heart flies here and there
Borne up on fancies winge,
In admirations air
She heauenlily does singe
A Sacrifice of praise:
And on the Harp she plays
A BENEDICITE
To Sions heavenly King.
But, THEO: this desire of praising God, which holy Benevolence does excite in
our hearts, is insatiable: for the soul that is touched with it, would wish to
have infinite praises to bestow upon her well-beloued, because she finds his
perfections more then infinite: so that finding her self to fall far short
of her aim, she adds force to her affection, to praise, at least in some
measure, this most praiseworthy goodness, and these endeauours of Benevolence,
are meruellously augmented by complacence: for according as the soul finds God
good, tasting more and more his sweetness and taking complacence in his
infinite goodness, she would also raise higher his benedictions and praises.
And again, as the soul waxes hot, in praising the incomprehensible
sweetness of her God, she enlarges and dilateth the complacence she takes in
him; and by this enlargme^t she does animate her self more earnestly to praise
him. So that the affection of complacence; and that of praise, by their
reciprocal motions, and incitements, do advance one another with great and
continual increase.

4. So Nightingales, according to Pliny, takes such complacence in their
songs, that by reason of this complacence, for five days and five nights
long, they never leave warbling, forcing themselves to sing better, in despite
one of the other; so that when they chirpe the best, thy take a greater
complacence, and this increase of complace^ce, carries them to force
themselves to a better quauering, augmenting in such sort their complace^ce by
their song, and their song by their complacence, that often they are seen to
fall down dead spliting their weeseells with the violence of singing. Birds
worthy the fair name of Philomele, since they die in this sort, of, and for
the love of melody.

5. O God, THEOT: how the soul ardently pressed with affection to praise God,
is touched with a dolor, greatly delicious, and a delight greatly dolorous,
when after a thousand essaies of praises, she finds herself to come short:
Alas! this poor Nightingale strives still to lance out her accents higher, and
perfect her melody, the better to sing the praises of her well-beloued. By how
much more she praises, by so much she is more delighted in praising; and by
how much greater her delight in praising is, by so much her displeasure is
greater, that she cannot yet more praise him; and yet to find what content she
can in this passion, she uses all endeauours, and amidst them falls in
languishment, as it happened to the most glorious S. FRANCIS, who in the
pleasures he had to praise God, and sing his Canticles of love, shed a great
abundance of tears, and through faintness, let often fall what at such times
he had in his hands: remaining in languishment, as a sacred Philomele, and
eftsoon lost breath, in breathing after his praises who^ he could never praise
sufficiently.

6. But mark a fine similitude upon this subject, drawn from the name which
this loving saint gave his religious; for he called them Cygales, by reason of
the nightly praises they sunge to God. Cygales, THEO: have their breasts set
with pipes, as though they were natural orgaines; and to sing the better they
live only of dew, which they take not by the beak for they have none, but
suck it by a certain weesel they have in the midst of their stomach by which
also they sed out their tunes, with such a noise that they seem to be nothing
but voice. Now this is the state of the sacred Lover; for all the faculties of
her soul are as so many pipes which she has in her breast, to resound the
well-beloued's Ca^ticles and praises. Her devotion in the midst is the tongue
of her heart, according to S. BERNARD, by which she receives the dew of divine
perfections, sucking and drawing them to her, as her food, by the most holy
complacence which she takes in them; and by the same tongue of devotion, she
tunes all her prayers, Praises, Canticles, Psalms, Benedictions, according to
the testimony of one of the most famous spiritual Cygales, that ever was
heard, who sunge thus. Bless Sions King my Soul,
Inflamed with heavenly flame;
My powers, my thoughts and all,
Cease not to speak his name.
For is it not, as though he had said, I am a mystical Cygale, my soul, my
spirits, my thoughts, all the faculties that are met together within me, are
organes. Let all these for ever bless the name, and resound the praises of my
God.

Summing up thine endless glory,
I Will spinne out an endless story,
In singing only which; I Will rest:
And thou Mine Aid shall pleasure take
To hear it for thy Mercies sake
And help a silly heart oppress't.
How Benevolence makes us inuoke all Creaturs to God's praise. CHAPTER. IX.
1. THe heart that is taken and pressed with a desire of praising the Divine
Goodness more then it is able, after many endeauours, goes often times out of
it self to inuit all Creaturs to help it in it is design. As did the three
children in the furnace, in that admirable Canticle of Benedictions, by which
they excite all that is in Heaven, in earth and under the earth to render
thanks to the Eternal God, in Blessing and praising him soueraignely: as also
the glorious Psalmist, wholly moved by a holily irregular passion to praise God,
goes without order leaping from heaven to earth, from thence to heaven again,
inuoking pel-mel, Angels, fishes, mountains, Waters, Dragons, Birds,
Serpents, Fire, Hail, Fogges, assembling by his desires all creaturs; to
the end that they all might conspire piously to magnify their Creator. Some in
their own persons, celebrating the divine praise, others affording matter of
praise, by the wonders of their differrent proprieties, which manifest their
makers power; so that this divine royal Psalmist, having composed a great
number of Psalms, with this inscription Praise God, after he had ru^ne through
all the creaturs, holily inuiting them to bless the divine Majesty, and
passed over a great variety of means and instruments fit to celebrate the
praises of this eternal Bounty, in the end as falling down through
shortenesse of breath, he closes his sacred song with this, Eiaculation. Let
every spirit praise our Lord, that is, let all that has life, nor live, nor
breath but to bless their Creator, following the encouragement he had
elsewhere given. With high and animated strain
Let Us strive to celebrate amain
Even who can best, th- Eternall's fame.
Let shirlest voice awakt by Love,
Bear up the starrie vaults above
The Peeleresse glory of his name.
So the great S. FRANCIS soung the Canticle of the Sun, and a thousand other
excellent benedictions, to inuoke the creaturs to aid his languishing heart,
in that he could not, according to his desire praise the dear Savior of his
heart. So the heavenly Spouse perceiving her self almost to sound amidst the
violent essaies she used in blessing, and magnifying the well-beloued king of
her heart; ah! cried she out to her companions; the divine Spouse, has led me
by contemplation into his wine-celler, making me taste the incomparable
delights of the perfections of his excellency, and I have so moistened and
holily inebriated my self, by the holy complacence which I took in this
abisse of beauty, that my soul languisheth, wounded with a lovingly mortal
desire, which urges me euerlasti^gly to praise a goodness eminent. Come alas
I beseech you to the succor of my poor heart, which is upon the point of
falling down dead. For pity sustain it, and vnderprope it with flowers;
solace it, and enuirone it with aples, or else it will fall in a trance.
Complacence draws the divine sweetes into her heart, which does so ardently
fill it self thereof that it is over charged. But the LOVE OF BENEVOLENCE
makes our heart sallie out of it self, and spend it self in vapors of
delicious perfumes, that is, in all kinds of holy praises. And yet not being
able to do it with the advantage which it desires, o says it, let all
creaturs come and contribute the flowers of their benedictions, their aples of
thankesgiuings, honors, and adorations, so that on every side we may smell
odours poured out to his glory, whose infinite sweetness does pass all
honor, and whom we can never worthily enough magnify.

2. It is this divine passion, that brings out so many sermons; makes the
Zaueriuses the Berzeses the Antonies, with a number of Jesuits, Capucins, and
Religious and other Churchmen of all sorts pass the pikes in India, Iaponia,
Maraig to the end the holy name of JESUS may be known, acknowledged, and adored
through out that vaste nation. It is this holy passion which penns so many
spiritual books, build's so many churches, altars, and pious houses: and to
conclud, which makes so many of God's servants, watch, labor, and die, in the
flames of Zeal which do consume and spend them.

How the desire we have to praise God makes us aspire to heaven. CHAPTER. X.
1. THe soul in Love perceiving that she cannot saciate the desire she has to
praise her well-beloued, while she lives in the miseries of this world, and
knowing that the praises which are given in heaven to the divine goodness, are
sunge in an air, incomparably more delightful; o God, says she, how
praiseworthie the praises are, which are poured fourth by those blessed
spirits, before the throne of my heavenly king; how blessed are their
blessings: o what a happiness is it to hear this melody of the most holy
eternity, where the delicious concurrence of unlike and wholly different
voices, does make these admirable accords, wherein all the parts redoubling one
upon another by a continued succession and an incomprehensible combination and
pursuit, perpetual Allelui'as do resound from every side.

2. Voices which for their sound are compared to thunder, trumpets, or to the
noise of a troubled seas waves: yet voices, which for their incomparable
delight and sweetness are compared to the melody of harpes, delicatly, and
deliciously touched by a most skillfull hand. And voices which do all accord
in one to sing the joyful Pascall Ca^ticle ALLELVIA, praise God, Ame^ praise
God: for know, THEO: that there is a voice heard from the divine Throne, which
cease not to cry to the happy inhabitants of the glorious heavenly
Jerusalem, Praise God o you that are his servants, and you that fear him
great and little, at which all the innumerable multitude of Saints, the quires
of Angels, and men with one consent, do answer in singing with all their
force. ALLELVIA, praise God. But what is this admirable voice, which issuing
out from the divine Throne, does announce the ALLELVIAS to the Elect, if not
the most holy complacence, which being received into the heart makes them feel
the sweetness of the Divine perfections, whereupon a loving benevolence, the
source of heavenly praises, is bred in the^, so that complacence coming from
the Throne, intimates Gods greatness to the Blessed, and benevolence excites
them mutually to pouer out the odours of praise before the Throne. And so by
way of answer they eternally sing ALLELVIA, that is praise God. The
complacence come from the Throne into the heart, and Benevolence goes from the
Throne.

3. O how amiable is this TEMPLE wholly resounding with praise! o what content
have such as live in this sacred Residence, where so many heavenly Philomels
and Nightingails, do sing with strife of love, the Canticles of eternal
delight!

4. The heart then, that in this world can neither sing nor hear the divine
praises to it is liking, falls into incredible desires, of being delivered from
the bands of this life, to pass to the other, where the heavenly well-beloued
is so perfectly praised: and these desires having taken possession of the
heart, do often times become so strong and powrefull in the heavenly Lovers
heart that banishi^g all other desires, they make all terreane things
disgustfull, and render the soul languishing, and loue-sicke; yea sometimes
the holy passion goes so far, as if God permitted, one would die of it.

5. So the glorious and Seraphicall Lover S. FRANCIS, having been long wrought
with this strong affection of praising God; in the end, toward his death,
after he had had assurance by a special Revelation, of his eternal salvation,
he could not contain his joy, but waisted daily, as if his life and soul,
had fumed out like incense, upon the flamme of ardent desires, which he had to
see his Master, incessantly to praise him. So that these flames daily
increasing, his soul left his body, by a force which he made toward heaven:
for it was thought good to the Divine providence, that he should die
pronou^cing these sacred words; O Lord draw my soul out of this prison, to
the end I may praise thy holy name, the just expects me till thou restorest
unto me, my desired repose. Behold, THEO: I beseech you this soul, who as a
heavenly Nightingale shut up in the cage of his body, in which it cannot at
wish sing the benedictions of his eternal love, knows that he could better
record and practice his melodious ditties, if he could gain the air, enjoy
the freedom and society of other Philomels amongst the gaie and flowrie
hillockes of the Land of the Blessed; and thence he cries alas! o Lord of my
life, ah! by thy wholly sweet bounty, deliver my poverty out of the cage of
my body, free me from this little prison, to the end that released from this
bondage I may fly to my dear companions who expect me above in heaven, to
make me one of their Quiers, and enuirone me with their joy, the Almighty
according my voice to theirs, I with them will make up a sweet harmony, of
delicious aires, and acce^ts, singing, praising, and blessing thy mercy. This
admirable Saint as an Orator who would end and conclude all he had said, in
some short sentence, made this the happy periode of all his wishes and
desires, whereof these last words were a Brief. Words to which his soul was
so fixed, that in breathing them, he breathed his last. My God, THEO: what a
sweet and dear death was this! a happily loving death, a holily mortal love.

How we practice the LOVE OF BENEVOLENCE in the praises which our Savior and
his mother give to God. CHAPTER. XI.
1. WE ascend then stepe by stepe in this holy exercise, by the creaturs which
we inuit to praise God, passing from the sensible to the reasonable and
intellectual, and from the Church militant to the triumphant, in which we
raise our selves up to the Angels and Saints, till above them all we have met
with the most sacred virgin, who in a matchless manner does praise and
magnify the Divinity, more highly, holily, and deliciously, then all the
other creaturs together are able.

2. Being two years ago at Milan, whither the veneration of the fresh memory
of the great Archbishope S. CHARLES had drawn me, with certain of our
Churchmen, we heard in diverse Churches, diverse sorts of music: but in a
Monastery of Nuns, we heard a Religious woman whose voice was so admirably
delicious, that she alone, filled our minds with more delight incomparably then
all the rest together, which though otherwise excellent, yet seemed they to
serve only to give luster, and raise the perfection and grace of this singular
voice. So, THEO: amongst all the Quires of men and Angels, the most sacred
Virgine's lofty voice is heard, which raised above all, renders more praise to
God, then do all the other creaturs. And indeed the Heavenly king inuites her
to sing, in a particular manner: show me thy face, says he, my well-beloued,
let thy voice sound in my ears, for thy voice is entirely sweet and thy face
wholly fair.

3. But the praises which this Mother of honor and fair dilection together
with all the creaturs gives to the Divinity, though excellent and admirable,
come yet so short of the infinite merit of Gods goodness, that they carry no
proportion with it: and therefore, albeit they meruellously please the loving
heart's holy benevolence to the well-beloued, yet do they not saciate it.
Wherefore it goes forward and inuites our Savior to praise and glorify his
eternal Father, with all the Benedictions which a Sons love can fournish him
withal. And then, THEO: the soul is put to silence, being able only to
admire. O what a Canticle is this of the Son to his Father! o how fair this
dear well-beloued is amongst all the children of men! o how sweet is his
voice, as issuing from the lips upon which the fullness of grace was poured!
All the others are perfumed, but he is the perfume it self; the others are
embaumed, but he is Baulme poured out: the eternal receives others praises, as
smells of peculiar flowers, but upon the odor of the praises which our Savior
gives him, doubtless he cries out: o these are the odours of my sonns praises,
as the odor of a field full of flowers which I have blessed! I, my dear THEO:
all the Benedictions which the Church militant and triumphant offers to God,
are Angelical and humane benedictions; for beit, they are addressed to the
Creator, yet proceed they from a Creature: but the Sonns, are divine, for
they do not only tend to God, as the others, but they flow from God; the
Redeemour being true God, they are not only divine in respect of their end,
but of their beginning: divine, because they tend to God; divine, because they
issue from God. God prouokes the soul, endewing her with sufficient grace for
the production of other praises; But the Redeemour, being God, produces his
own, himself, and thence they are infinite.

4. He that in a morning for a good space having heard in the neighbor woods
the sweet chaunting of a great company of Canarie birds, Linnets,
Goldfinches, and such like little birds, should in the end hear a Master
Nightingale, who in perfect melody, would fill the air, and ear with her
admirable voice, doubtless he would prefer this one grouie Chaunter, before
the whole Quires of the others. So having heard all the praises which so many
different sorts of of creaturs, in emulation of one another, renders
unanimously to their Creator, when at length one marks that of our Savior,
they find in it a certain infinity of merit, valor, sweetness, which
pass all hope, and expectation of heart: and the soul, as awaked out of a
deep sleep, is then suddenly ravished with extreamitie of the sweetness of
that melody. ah! I hear it; o the voice, the voice of my well-beloued! The
Queene-voice of all voices, a voice, in comparison whereof all the other voices
are but a dume and sad silence. See how this dear friend does spring out, see
how he comes tripping over the mountains, transcending the hills: his voice is
heard above the Seraphins and all other creaturs; he has the sight of a Goat,
to penetrate deeper then any other, the beauty of the Sacred object which he
desires to praise. He loves the melody of the glory, and praise of his
Father, more then all the rest, and therefore he takes his Fathers praises, and
benedictions in a strain above them all. Behold this divine love of the
Beloved, as he is clothed in his humanity, making himself to be seen through
the holes of his wounds, and his open side, as by windows, and as by lattises,
by which he looks upon us.

5. Yes The: Divine Love being seated upon our Saviors heart as upon his
royal Throne, beholds through the passage of his pierced side, all the hearts
of the sons of me^: for this heart being the king of hearts, keeps his eye
still fixed upon hearts. But as those that look through a lattise, do
plainly discover others and yet are not plainly discovered; So the divine love
of this heart, or rather this heart of divine Love, does continually discover
our hearts clearly and looks upon them with the eye of affection, yet do not
we discover him clearly, but only by halfes. For Good God, if we could see
him, as he is, we should die of Love for him, being we are mortals, as he
himself died for us, while he was mortal; and as he would yet die, if he were
not immortal. O that we could hear this divine heart, how it sings with an
infinitely delicious voice, songs of praise to the Divinity! what joy, THEO:
what force would our hearts make, to fly up to heaven, to hear these songs
eternally: and verily this dear friend of our hearts, inuits us unto it. Up,
rise, says he, go out of thy self, take thy flight toward me, my dove, my
most fair, to this heavenly Manor, where there is nothing but joy, and
nothing is heard but praise and benedictions. All there is flourishing, all is
sweet and odoriferous: The Turtle which is the most doleful of all birds, is
heard to sing in that Land. Come my entirely dear beloved, and that thou
may see me more clearly, come in at the same windows by which I behold
thee. Come and consider my heart in the hole of my open side, which was made
when my body, as a ruinous building, was so ruthfully dight upon the tree of
the Cross; come and show me thy face. I see it now, nor do thou show it me;
then, I shall see it, and thou shal't show it me: for thou shal'st see, that I
see thee. Let me hear thy voice; for I will tune it to mine, and so thy face
shall be fair, and thy voice well tuned. O what a delight shall it be unto our
hearts, when our voices being tuned and accorded to our Saviors, we shall
bear a part in the infinitely delicious praises which the beloved Son sings
to his eternal Father.

Of the sovereign praise which God gives unto himself, and how we exercise
BENEVOLENCE in it. CHAPTER. XII.
1. All our Saviors humane actions are of an infinite merit and value, by
reason of the person which does produce them, which is the same God with the
Father, and the holy Ghost, yet are they not infinite by nature and essence.
For as being in a Chamber, we receive not light with proportion to the Sonns
brightness, which streams it out, but according to the greatness of the
window, by which it is communicated; so our Saviors humane actions, are not
infinite, though indeed they be of infinite value; foralbeit they are the
actions of a divine Person, yet are they not produced according to the extent
of his infinity, but according to the finite greatness of his humanity, by
which they are produced. So that, as the humane actions of our sweet Savior,
are infinite compared to ours, so are they only finite in comparison of the
essential infinity of the Divinity. They are infinite in value, estimation,
and dignity as proceeding from a person which is God; yet are they finite by
nature and essence, as being produced of God according to his humane nature and
substance, which is finite, and therefore the praises which are given by our
Savior, as he is man, not being in all respects infinite cannot fully
correspo^d to the infinite greatness of the Divinity, to which they are
directed.

2. Wherefore after the first rauishment of admiration which does take us, when
we meet with a praise so glorious, as is that which our Savior renders to his
Father, we leave, not to auowe, that the Divinity is yet infinitely more
praiseworthy, the^ it can be praised, either by all the creaturs, or by the
very humanity of the eternal Son.

3. If one did praise the Sun for its light, the more he should set a
praising it, the more he should find it praiseworthy, because he should still
discover more and more brightness. And if as it is very probable, it be the
beauty of this light, which provoke the Lark to singe, it is not strange
that as she flies more loftily, she sings more clearly, equally raising her
voice and her flight, till such time as heardly being able so sing any more,
she begins to fall in voice and body, stouping by little and little, as from
her winge, so in her voice. So THEO: as we mount nearer unto the Divinity by
Benevolence to intone and hear the praises thereof, we discover more clearly,
that his praise is still above our notes. And finally, we learn that it cannot
be praised according to the worth save only by it self, which alone can fit
its sovereign goodness with a sovereign praise. Hereupon we cry out, GLORY
BE UNTO THE FATHER, AND THE SON, AND TO THE HOLY GHOST: and that every one
may know that it is not the glory of created praises, which we wish should be
given to God, by this eiaculation, but the essential and eternal glory that
is in himself, by himself, of himself, and which is himself, we add; as it
was in the beginning, so now, and shall be for ever and ever AM^N: As though we
should wish; That God should be glorified for ever, with the glory which he
had before all creaturs, in his infinite eternity, and eternal infinity. To
this purpose we conclud every Psalm and Canticle with this verse, according to
the ancient custom of the Eastern Church, which the great S. HIEROME,
supplicated to the Pope Damasus, that he would establishe it here in the west
to protest, that all the praises of men and Angels, are too low, to reach home
to the Divine Bounties praise: and that to be worthily praised, he himself is
to be his own glory, praise, and benediction.

4. O God what a Complacence, what a joy shall it be to the soul to have her
desire fulfilled, in seeing her Beloved infinitely praise, bless and magnify
himself! But from this Complacence there springs a new desire of praise: for
the soul would gladly praise this so worthy a praise given to God by himself,
rendering him hearty thanks for it, and inuoking again all things to her
succor to come and glorify the glory of God with her, to bless his infinite
blessings, and praise his eterternall praises, so that by this repetition and
redoubling praises upon praises, she engages her self betwixt Complacence and
Benevolence, in a most happy Labirinth of love being wholly drunk up and
drowned in this immense sweetness, soueraignely praising the Divinity, in
that, that it cannot be sufficiently be praised but by it self. And though in
the beginning the soul in love had conceived a certain desire of praising God
sufficiently; yet reflecting upon her self again, she protests that she would
not wish to have power to praise him sufficiently, but remains in a most
humble Complacence, to perceive that the Divine Goodness is so infinitely
praiseworthy, that it cannot be sufficiently praised, save by its own
infinity only.

5. And here, the soul ravished with admiration, sings the song of sacred
silence. Unto thy peerlesse worth
Silence does sing,
Th'Hymne of Admiration
O Sion's King.
For so Isaie his Seraphins, adoring and praising God, vayled their faces and
feet, confessing therein their want of sufficiency, sufficiently to
contemplate or serve him: for our feet, whereon we go, signifies service.
Howbeit they fly with two wings in the continual motion of Complacence and
Benevolence, their Love resting in that delightful unrest.

6. Man's heart is never so much disquieted as when the motion, by which it does
continually open and shut it self is troubled; never so quiet as when its
motions are free, so that the hearts quiet consists in motion. The like it is
with the Seraphins, and Seraphicall men; for their Love reposeth in the motion
of it is complacence, by which it draws God clearly into it self; and in the
motion of Benevolence, by which it does dilate and throw it self into God.
This Love then desires to behold the infinite wonders of God's goodness, yet
it spreeds it is wings over it is face, confessing that it cannot arrive thither.
It would also present some worthy service, yet has it is feet covered to
profess that it has not power to perform it, nor does any thing remain
saving the two wings of Complacence and Benevolence, by which it flies up, and
casts it self upon God.

The end of the fifth Book.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE EXERCISES OF HOLY LOVE IN PRAYER.
A description of mystical Divinity, which is no other thing then prayer.
CHAPTER. I.
I. WE have two principal exercices of our love toward God: the one
affectiue, the other effectiue; or as S. BERNARD calls it, active: By that we
affect God and what he affects; by this we serve God, and do what he
ordaines. That ioynes us to Gods goodness; this makes us execute his will. The
one fills us with complacence, benevolence, motions, desires, aspirations, and
spiritual ardors, causing us to practice the sacred infusions and mixtures ^f
our spirit with Gods. The other does establish in us the solid resolution,
constancy of heart and inviolable obedience requisite to effect the ordinances
of the divine will, and to suffer, admit, approve, and embrace all that comes
from his good pleasure: The one makes us pleased in God, the other makes us
please God: by the one we conceive, by the other we bring fourth; by the one we
place God upon our heart, as an Ensign of love by which our affections are
ordered; by the other we seat him upon our arm, as a sword of love, whereby we
effect all virtuous exploits.

2. The first exercise consists, in Prayer specially in which so many
different inward motions pass, that to express them all is impossible, not
only by reason of their number but also for their nature and quality, which
being spiritual, they cannot but be very secret, and almost hid from our
understanding; the most trained and best sented hounds, are often at default,
loosing the strain and sent by the variety of sleights which the Heart uses,
by dubles making them rune riot, and practicing a thousand shifts to escape
the Cry: and we often times loose the sent and knowledge of our own heart in
the infinite diversity of motions by which it does turn it self into so many
forms, and that with such promptitude, that one cannot discern the footings
thereof.

3. God alone is he, who by his infinite wisdom, sees, sou^ds and penetrats
all the turnings and windings of our hearts, he a far of understands our
thoughts, finds out our traces, our doubles and leapings of; His knowledge
therein is admirable passing our capacity and reach. Certainly if we would
look back upon our own hearts by the reflections and turnings of their
actions, we should light into Labyrinthes, wherein we should find no out-gate,
and it would require an intolerable atte^tion, to think what our thoughts
are, to consider our considerations, to see all our spiritual sightes, to
discern that we discern, to remember that we remember; these would be Mazes
out of which we should not be able to deliver our selves. This treatise then is
most hard, especially to one not greatly conversant in praiere.

4. We take not here the word PRAYER for the only prayer, or demand of any
good thing, pouered out by the faithful before God, as S. BASILE calls it,
but with S. BONAVENTVRE saying that Prayer, generally speaking, comprehendes
all the acts of contemplation; or with S. GREGORY Nissene, teaching that
prayer is an entertainment, or conversation of the soul with God; or else
with S. CHRYSOSTOM, assuring us that Prayer is a discourse with the divine
Magestie; or finally with S. AUGUSTINE, and S. DAMASCENE, terming Prayer an
ascent or raising of the soul to God. And if Prayer be a speech, discourse or
conversation of the soul with God, by it then we speak to God and he again
speaks to us; we aspire to him, and repose in him, and he mutually inspires
us, and reposeth in us.

5. But of what do we discourse in Prayer, what is the subject of our
entertainment? THEO: we speak of God only: for of what can Love discourse
and talk, but of the well-beloued? and therefore Prayer, and mystical
Divinity are one same thing. It is called Divinity, because as speculatiue
Divinity, has God for its object, so this speaks only of God, yet with
three differences: for 1. that, treates of God, as God; but this speaks of
God, as soueraignely amiable; that is, that aims at the Divinity of the
supreme Goodness, and this at the supreme Goodness of the Divinity 2. the
speculatiue treats of God with men and amongst men; the mystical speaks of
God, with God, and in God himself. 3. the Speculatiue tends to the knowledge
of God; and the mystical to the love of God; so that, that makes her scholars
knowing, learned, and Diuins; but this makes hers become fervent and
affectionate lovers of God, and PHILOTHEES, OR THEOPHILES.

6. Now it is called mystical, for that its conversation is altogether
secret, and there is nothing said in it betwixt God and the soul, save only
from heart to heart by a communication in communicable to all, but themselves.
Lovers language is so particular to them selves, that none but themselves
understand ir. I sleep, said the holy Spouse and my heart watches. Ah, hark
how my well-beloued speaks unto me. Who would have gessed, that this Spouse
being a sleep, could yet talk with her Spouse? but where love reigns, the
noise of exterior words is not necessary, nor the help of sense to
entertain and mutually to hear one another. In fine Prayer, and mystical
Divinity is no other thing, then a conversation, in which the soul does
lovingly discourse with God, touching his most amiable goodness to be united
and joined to it.

7. Prayer is a Manna in regard of the infinity of amiable tastes, and
precious delights, which it gives to such as use it: but it is secret,
because it falls before the light of any science in the MENTAL SOLITVDE where
one only soul, treates with one only God. What is she this, might one say
of her, who ascends though the Desert as a cloud of perfumes, of Mirrhe, of
incense, and of all the pouders of Perfumers: and indeed it was the desire of
secrecy that moved her to make this petition to her Spouse: come my
well-beloued, let us go into the fields, let us soiourne in the village: for
this reason the heavenly spouse, is styled Tourtle, a bird which is delighted
in shadie and solitary places, where she makes no other use of her voice, but
for her dear mate, either in life wooeing him, or after his death plaining him.
For this respect in the Canticles, the divine Spouse, and the heavenly Spouse
represent their loves in a continual discourse, and if their friends, men and
women, do sometimes speak in it, it is only by the by, without interrupting
their speech. Hence the Blessed mother S. TERESA of JESUS, found in the
beginning more profit, in the mysteries where our Savior was most alone, as in
the Garden of Oliuet, and where he expected the Samaritaine; for she thought,
he being alone, would with more ease admit her into his company.

8. Love loves to be secret, yea though Lovers have no secret to impart, yet
are they delighted in speaking secretly; and it is partly, if I be not
deceived, because they will speak only to themselves; nor do they think to
speak to themselves only while they speak high; partly for that they do not
deliver common things in a common manner, but by particular ways, and such as
relish the affection, with which they are spoken. Love language for the words
is common; yet in manner, and pronounciation is so particular, that none but
Lovers understand it. The name of a Friend uttered in common, is no great
thing; but being spoken a part, secretly in the ear, it imports wonders. And
by how much more secretly it is spoken, the signification is so much more
delightful. O God what a difference is there betwixt the l^nguage of the
ancient Lovers of the Divinity, Ignatius, Cyprian, Chrysostom, Augustine,
Hilarie, Ephrem, Gregory, Bernard, and that, of less loving Divines: We use
their very words, but with them they were words full of fire, and the sweetes
of Loves perfumes, but with us they are cold, giving no sent at all.

9. Love speaks not only by the tongue, but by the eyes, by sighs,
cou^tenances, yea it makes use of mute silence in lieu of words. My heart has
said unto thee o Lord, my face has sought thee; o Lord I will search after
thy face. My eyes have failed saying, when will thou comfort me. Hear my
prayer, o Lord, and my demand, hear with thy ears my tears. Let not the
aple of thy eye cease to speak, said the desolate hearts of the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, to their own City. Do you mark, THEO: how the silence of
afflicted Lovers speaks by the aple of their eyes, and their tears? Certainly
the chief exercise in mystical Divinity, is to speak to God, and hear God
speak in the bottom of the heart: and because this discourse passes in
secret aspiratio^s, and inspirations, we term it a silent conference. The
eyes speak to the eyes, and the heart to the heart, and none understands what
passes, saving the sacred lovers who speaks.

Of Meditation the first degree of Prayer, or mystical Divinity. CHAPTER. II.
1. THis word is frequent in the holy Scrip. and imports no other thing, then
an attentive, and reiterated thought, apt to bring forth good or evil
affections. In the 1. Psalm, the man is said to be blessed whose will is in
the way of our Lord, and in his law will meditate day and night: but in the 2.
Psalm: why did the Gentiles rage, and people meditate vain things: MEDITATION
therefore is made as well for evil as good ends. Yet whereas in the holy
Scripture, the word MEDITATION is put ordinarily for the attention which we
have to holy things, to the end to stir us up to love them, it has, as one
would say, been canonized by the common consent of Divines, with the word
ANGEL, and ZEAL, as contrariwise the word DEMON or DEVIL, has been defamed
so that now when one names meditation, we understand a holy thing, and that by
which we begin mystical Divinity.

2. Every meditation is a thought, but every thought is not meditation; for we
have thoughts, to which our mind is carried without aim or pretention at all,
by way of a simple musing, as we see flies fly from one flower to an other,
without drawing any thing from them: And be this kind of thought as attentive
as it may be, it can never bear the name of meditation; but must be called a
simple thought. Sometimes we consider a thing attentively to learn it is
causes, effects, qualities; and this thought is named study, in which the
mind, is like locustes, which promiscuously fly upon flowers, and leeues, to
eat them and nourishe themselfes thereupon: but when we think of heavenly
things, not to learn but to love them, that is called, to meditate: and the
exercise thereof Meditation: in which our mind, not as a fly, by a simple
musing, nor yet as a locust, to eat and be filled, but as a sacred Be flies
amongst the flowers of holy mysteries, to extract from them the honnie of
Divine Love.

3. So diverse me^ are always dreaming and busying themselves in unprofitable
thoughts, without knowing in a manner what they think upon; and which is
admirable, they are only attentive for want of attention, and would be rid of
such thoughts. Witness he that said: my thoughts waste themselves,
tormenting my heart. Others there are that study, and by a most laborious
trade, fill themselves with vanity, not being able to withstand curiosity.
But few there are, that meditate, to kindle their heart with heavenly love. In
fine, thoughts, and studies may be upon any subject, but meditation in our
present sense, has reference only to those obiectes, whose consideration
tend's to make us good and deuote. So that meditation is an attentive thought
iterated, or voluntarily entertained in the mind,, to excitate the will to holy
affections and resolutions.

4. Verily the holy word, does admirably well explicate by an excellent
similitude wherein holy meditation consists. Ezechias when he would explicate
in his Canticle, the attentive consideration which he had of his annoyes: I
will cry, says he, like a young swallow, and meditate as a dove: for, my
dear THEO: if ever you took notice of it, the young swallows do gape wide
in their chirping; and contrariwise, the dove, of all the birds, does murmur
with her neb shut and closed, rolling her voice in her weesell and and crope,
nothing passing outwardly but a certain resounding or eccho-like sound, and
this close murmuring, does equally serve her in the expression of her grief
and loves. Ezechias then to show, that in his calamity, he made many vocal
Prayers; I will cry, says he, as a young swallow, opening my mouth, to lay
before God in many lamentable voices; and to testify also that he made use of
holy mental prayer, he adds, I will meditate, as a dove winding and doubling
my thoughts within my heart, by an attentive consideration, to excite my self
to bliss and praise the sovereign mercy of my God, who has brought me back
from deaths gate, taking compassion of my misery. So, says Isaie, we will
roar or rustle like Bears, and meditating we will mourn as Doves, the
rustling of Bears does resemble the exclamations which are made in vocal
prayer, and the mourning of Doves, is compared to holy meditation. But to the
end it may appear that Doves do not only mourn in occasions of grief, but
even of love also and joy, the sacred Spouse describing the natural
springtime, to express the graces of the spiritual springtime: the Turtles
voice, says he, has been heard in our land, because in the spring the Turtle
begins to wax hot with love; which by her more frequent song she testifies:
and presently after, my Dove show me thy face, let thy voice resound in my
ears; for thy voice is sweet, and thy face comely and gracious. He would say
THEO: that the deuote soul is most agreeable unto him, when she presents her
self before him, and meditats to heat her self in holy spiritual love, as
do Doves to stir up their mates to a natural love. So he that had said, I
will meditate as a Dove, putting his conceit into other words: I will recall
to mind, says he, all my years in the bitterness of my soul: for to
meditate, and to recall to mind to the end to move affection, are the same
thing. Hence Moses exhorting the people to recall to mind the benefits
received of God, he adds this reason, to the end you may observe his
commandments, walk in his ways, and fear him. And our Savior himself gave
this command to Iosue: thou shall meditate in the book of the law, day and
night, that thereby thou may observe and do that which is written in it;
which in one of the passages, is expressed by the word MEDITATE, is declared in
the other, by RECALL TO MIND. And to show that an iterated thought, and
meditation, tend to move us to affections, resolutions, and act^ons; it is
said as well in the one as the other passage, that we must recall to mind, and
meditate in the law, to observe and practice it. In this sense the Apostle
exhorts us saying think diligently upon him who sustained of sinners such
contradiction against himself, that you be not wearied, fainting in your
minds. When he says think diligently, it is as though he had said, meditate:
but why would he have us to meditate: the holy passion? not that we should wax
learned, but that we should become patient, and constant in the way of heaven.

5. Meditation is a mystical ruminating (requisite that we might not be found
unclean,) to which one of the pious shepherdesses that follows the sacred
Sunamite inuits us; for she assures us that holy write, is as a precious wine,
worthy to be drunk, not only by the Pastors and Doctors, but also to be
diligently tasted, chewed and ruminated, as one would say: Thy throat, says
she, wherein the holy words are formed, is a best wine worthy of my
well-beloued, to be drunk with his lips, and ruminated with his teeth. So the
Blessed Isaac, as a neat and pure Lamb, toward night went out into the
fields, to recollect, confer, and exercise his Spirit with God, that is, to
pray and meditate.

6. The Be flies from flower to flower in the spring time, not at all
adue^tures, but of purpose; not to be recreated only in the verdant diapring
of the fields, but to gather honey, which having found, she suckes, and lodes
her self with it, thence carrying it to her hyue, she accommodates it
artificially, separating the wax from it, thereof making the comb to reserve
honey for the ensuing winter. Such is the deuote soul in meditation: she
passes from mystery to mystery, not at random, or to solace her self only
in viewing the admirable beauty of those divine obiectes, but deliberatly and
of set purpose, to find out motifes of love, or some heavenly affection; and
having found them, she draws them to her, she relisheth them and lodes her
self with them, and having brought them home, and placed them in her heart,
she selectes that which she finds most proper for her advancement, storing
herself with fit resolutions against the time of temptation. Thus the
celestial Spouse, as a mystical be, flies to the Canticle of Canticles, now
upon the eyes, now upon the lips, cheeks and head hair of the well-beloued,
to draw from thence the sweetness of a thousand passions of love; to this
effect, noting in particular whatsoever she finds rare. So that inflamed with
holy love, she speaks with him, puts interrogatories to him; she harkes
sighs, aspires, admires; as he of his part fills her with delight, inspiring
her, touching and opening her heart, and streaming into it brightness, light
and sweetenesses without end, but in so secret a manner, that one may rightly
say of this holy conversation of the soul with God, as the Holy Text says
of God's with Moises: that Moises being sole upon the tope of the mountain, he
spoke to God, and God answered him.

A description of contemplation, and touching the first difference that there
is betwixt it and meditation. CHAPTER. III.
1. THEO: Contemplation is no other thing; then a loving, simple, and permanent
attention of the mind to holy things, which you may easily perceive by
comparing it with meditation.

2. The little young Bees, are called nymphs until they make honey, and then
they become Bees: so prayer is named meditation, till such time as it have
produced the honey of devotion, and then it is converted into contemplation:
for as the Be flies through the country meades, to prey here and there, and
gather honey, which having heaped together, she takes in its sweetness: so we
meditate, to gather the love of God; but having gathered it, we contemplate
God, and are attentife to his Goodness, by reason of the sweetness which love
makes us find in it: The desire we have to obtain divine love, makes us
meditate, but love obtained, makes us contemplate: for by love we find out a
sweetness so agreeable in the thing beloved, that we cannot satisfy our
minds in seeing and considering it.

3. Behold the Queen of Saba THEO: considering by parcells the wisdom of
Solomon in his answers, in the beauty of his house, in the magnificencie of
his table, in his servants lodgings, in the order that his Courtiours held in
executing their charges, in their apparel, and behavior, in the multitude of
Holocausts which were offered in the Temple, she was taken with an ardent love,
which changed her meditation into a contemplation, by which being rapt out of
her self, she uttered diverse words of extreme conte^tment. The sight of so
many wonders begot in her heart an exceeding love, and that love enkindled a
new desire to see still more, and enjoy his presence with whom she saw them,
whence she cried. O how happy are the servants, who are still about thee, and
hear thy wisdom! In like manner, we sometimes begin to eat to get an
appetite; but our appetite being egged, we continue eating to content it. And
in the beginning we consider the Goodness of God to excite our wills to love
him; but love being formed in our hearts, we consider the same Goodness to
content our love, which cannot be satiated in seeing continually what it loves.
In conclusion, meditation is the mother of love, but contemplation is her
daughter, and for this reason I called contemplation a loving attention; for
children are named after their Father, and not the Father after the child.

3. It is true, THEO: that as the ancient JOSEPH, who was the crown and
Glory of his Father, did greatly increase his honors and contentment and made
him wax young in his old age, so contemplation does crown its Father, which
is love, perfectes him, and gives him the tope of excellency: for love having
moved in us a contemplative attention, that attention breeds reciprocally a
more great and fervent love, which in the end is crowned with perfections, when
it enioyes the thing beloved. Love makes us take pleasure in in the sight of
our well-beloued, and the sight of our well-beloued makes us take pleasure in
his divine love: so that by this mutual motion of love to the sight, and sight
to love, as love renders the beauty of the thing beloved more beautiful, so
the sight of it makes love more lovely and delightful. Love by an
imperceptible power, makes the beauty which we love appear more fair, and
sight likewise does refine love to make it find beauty more amiable. Love
moves the eyes continually to behold the beloved beauty more attentively, and
the sight does force the heart continually to love it more forcibly.

That love in this life takes his origin, but not his excellency, from the
knowledge of God. CHAPTER. IV.
1. But whether has more force, I pray you, love to make us look upon the
well-beloued, or the sight to cause the love thereof? knowledge, THEO: is
required to the production of love; for we never saw; and according as the
attentive knowledge, is augmented, love is also augmented, so there be nothing
to hinder it is actiuitie. Yet it happens often, that knowledge having produced
holy love, Love does not stay within the compass of the knowledge which is in
the understanding, but goes forward, and passes far beyond it; so that in
this life we may have more love, then knowledge of God, whence great S. THOMAS,
assures us that often times the most simple and women abound in devotion being
more ordinarily capable of heavenly love then able and vnd^rstanding people.

2. The famous Abbot S. ANDRIEW of verceill S. ANTHONIES of Padua his Master,
in his commentaries upon S. DENIS, does often repeat that love penetrates,
where exterior knowledge cannot reach; and says that many Bishops though not
very learned, had penetrated the mystery of the Trinity, admiring upon this
passage his scholar S. ANTONIE of Padua, who without wordly knowledge was
endowed with a profound mystical Divinity, who as another S. JOHN Baptiste,
one might have called, a light and burning lamp. The Blessed Brother Gilles,
one of the first companions of S. FRANCIS, said one day to S. BONAVENTVRE, o
how happy you learned men are, for you understand many things, whereby you
praise God: but what can we Idiotes do? S. BONAVENTVRE replied, the grace to
love God is sufficient. No, but Father replied Brother Gilles, can an ignorant
man love God, as well as a learned? yes, says S. Bonauenture, yea more, a
poor fillie woman may love God as well as a Doctor of Divinity: with this
Brother Gilles cried out, falling into a fervor, o poor simple woman, love
thy Savior, and thou shall be as great, as Brother Bonauenture; and upon it,
he remained for the space of three hours in a RAPTVRE.

3. The will perceiues not Good, but by means of the understanding, but having
once perceived it, She has no more need of the understanding, to practice
love; for the force of pleasure which she feels or pretends to feel by being
united to her object, draws her powerfully to love, and to a desire to enjoy
it: so that the knowledge of good, breeds love, but bounds it not: as we see
the knowledge of an injury, moves coler, which if it be not suppressed does in
a manner always exceed the wrong. Passions not following the knowledge which
moved them, but eftsonns leaving it behind them, they make toward the object
without measure, or limite.

4. Now this happens more effectually in holy Love, for so much as our will is
not applied to it by a natural knowledge, but by the light of faith, which
assuring us of the infinite goodness that is in God, gives us sufficient to
love him with all our force. We dig the earth to find gold, and silver,
employing a present labor, for a good, as yet in hope only, so that an
uncertain knowledge, sets us upon a present and certain labor: and as we do
more discover the vain in the Mine, we do more earnestly search more. Even a
cold sent serves to move the Hound to the game, so dear THEO: an obscure
knowledge, shut up in clouds, as is that of faith, does infinitely stir our
affection to love the Goodness which it makes us apprehend: o how true it is,
according to S. AVGVSTIN'S complaint. That the unlearned tear uen out of our
hands, while the learned fall into hell!

5. In your opinion, THEO: whether of the two would love the light more, the
borne blind, who should know all the discourses that the Philosophers make of
it, and the praises they give it, or the plough-man who by a clear sight
should feel, and resent, the delightful splendor of the fair rising sun?
the first has more knowledge of it, but the second more fruition; and that
fruition produces a love, more quick and lively, then the simple knowledge by
discourse: for the experience of Good makes it infinitely more lovely, then all
the knowledge which can be had of it. We begin our love by the knowledge which
faith gives us of God's Goodness, which afterward we relish and taste by
love, and love eggeth our gust, and our gust refines our love, so that as we
see the water role and swell by the winds blastes, as by emulation upon the
encounter, so the taste of good does warm love, and love again the taste,
according to that Oracle of the divine wisdom. Those that shall taste me shall
yet have appetite, and those that shall drink me, shall yet have thrist. Which
of the two I pray you loved God more, OCHAM, held of some to be the most
subtle man that lived, or S. CATHERINE of Genua an unlearned woman? He knew
him better by science, she by experience, and her experience did much advance
her in Seraphicall love, while he with his knowledge remained far remote,
from this so excellent a perfection.

6. We do extremely love Sciences before we yet know them, says S. Thomas,
by the only co^fused and superficial knowledge we have of them: Even so we
must confess, that the knowledge of Gods goodness applies our will to love,
but as soon as she is set on going, her love increases of it self, by the
pleasure which she takes to be united to this sovereign good. While children
have not yet tasted honey and suggar, it is heard to make them receive them
into their mouths: but after they have o^ce felt their sweetness, they do
more affect them then one would wish: still crying for them without measure.

7. We must confess notwitstanding that the will drawn by the delight which
she takes in her object, is more forcibly carried to be united to it, when the
understanding of his side, does in an excellent manner propose unto her the
goodness thereof; for she is then at once both drawn and thrust forward;
thrust by knowledge, drawn by delight, so that knowledge is not of it self
contrary, but profitable to devotion, and meeting together, they do
meruellously assist one another, though it often happens through our misery,
that knowledge does impeach the birth of devotion, for so much as knowledge
does make us swell and wax proud, and pride which is contrary to all virtue
is the total ruin of devotion. Certes the eminent knowledge of those
Cyprians, Augustins, Hilaries, Chrisostomes, Basiles, Gregory's, Bonauentures,
Thomases, did not only much commend, but even greatly improve devotion; as
again their devotion did not only raise, but also extremely perfect their
knowledge.

The second difference betwixt meditation and contemplation. CHAPTER. V.
1. MEditation considers by peece-meale the obiectes proper to move us; but
contemplation beholdes the object it loves, in one simple and recollected
look, and the consideration so united, causes a more lively and strong
motion. One may behold, the beauty of a rich crown two ways, either in
looking upon all the flowers and precious stones wherewith it is wrought and
besett, or else after the consideration of all the pieces in particular, in
beholding the whole piece together, in one sole and simple view. The first
kind resembles meditation, in which, for example, we consider the effects of
God's mercy, to excite us to his love; but the second is like to contemplation,
in which we consider, with one only touch of our mind, all the variety of the
same effects, as an only beauty composed of all these pieces, making up one
sole shine of brightness. We do count, as it were, in meditating the divine
perfections which we find in a mystery, but in conte^plating, we sum up the
total sum: The spouse her companions had asked her who was her well-beloued,
and she makes answer, in an admirable description of all the parts of his
perfect beauty: his hew is white and read; his head of gold, his head heir
as the bude of a Palm tree, as yet not quite spread out, his eyes the eyes of a
dove, his cheeks as little tables, placed at the corner of a garden, his lips
as Lillies perfumed with odours, his hands decked with ringes of Hyacinth, his
legs as Marble pillars: thus she goes meditating this sovereign beauty,
piece by piece, till at length, she concluds by way of contemplation, putting
all the beuties into one, his throat, says she, is most sweet, and he wholly
desirable, such is my well-beloued, and he is my dear friend.

2. Meditation is like to him that smells a Pinke, a Rose, Rosmarie, Time,
Iasmin, or the orange flower, distinctly one after another; but contemplation,
is like to one smelling the sweet water distilled from all those flowers: for
the latter in one smell receives all the sentes together, which the other had
smelt a part, and there is no doubt, but this one smell alone, rising from the
mixture of all these smells, is more sweet and precious, then the smells of
which it is composed being smelt a part one after another. Hence it is that the
heavenly spouse esteems so highly to be seen of his well-beloued with one eye
only, and that her hair is so well tressed, that it seems to be but one
hair: for what is it to behold the Spouse with one eye only, then to behold
him with a single attentive view, without multiplying looks? and what is it to
have her hair thus foulded together, but not to scatter her thoughts in the
multiplicitie of considerations. O how happy are they who having ru^ne over
the multitude of motives which they have to love God, reducing all their looks
to one only view and all their thoughts to one conclusion, do stay their
mind in the unity of contemplation, following the example of S. AUGUSTINE, or
S. BRVNO, pronouncing secretly in their soul, in a continuing admiration,
these words of love. O BOVNTIE! BOVNTIE! BOVNTIE! ever old, and ever, new: and
at the example of great S. FRANCIS, who set upon his knees in Prayer, passed
the whole night in these words. O God thou art my God, and my All, inculcating
the same continually, as reports the B. Brother Bernard of Quintenall, who
himself heard it.

3. See S. BERNARD, THEO: he had by peece-meale meditated all the passion, and
he makes a Nosegay of all the prime points put together of loving grief; and
putting it upon his breast, to change his meditation into contemplation, he
cried out, my well-beloued is to me a Posie of myrrh.

4. But let us see yet more deuotely the Creator of the would, how in the
Creation, he first meditated the goodness of his works one by one severally,
as soon as he saw them produced. He saw, says the Scripture, that the light
was good, that heaven and earth was a good thing, and so the herbs, and
plants, the sun, moon, and stars, the living beasts, and in sum, all
the rest of the creaturs, as he created them one after another, till at length
all the universe being accomplished, the divine meditation does as it were,
turn into Contemplation: for viewing all the goodness that was in his works
with one only glance of his eye, He saw, says Moses, all that he had made,
and all of it was very good. The sundry parts considered severally by manner
of meditation, were good, but beheld in one only look together in form of
contemplation, they were found very good: as many little brooks running
together makes a river, which does carry greater fraightes, then the multitude
of the same brooks severally could do.

5. After we have moved a great many different pious affections by the
multitude of considerations of which meditation is composed, we do in the end
gather together the virtue of all these affections, from which by the confusion
and mixture of their forces, does spring a certain quintesence of affection,
and of affection more active and puissant, then all the affections whence it
proceeds, because though it be but one, yet contains it the virtue and
property of all the others, and is called a contemplative affection.

6. So it is an opinion amongst Divines, that Angels higher in glory have a
knowledge of God and the creaturs, much more simple, then such as are
inferior, and that the SPECIES or ID^AS by which they see, are more
universal: so that, what the less perfect Angels see by diverse SPECIES and
looks, the more perfect see by fewer SPECIES and castes of the eye. And the
Great S. AUGUSTINE, followed by S. THOMAS, says that in heaven we shall not
have these great vicissitudes, varieties, changes and rechanges of thougtes and
cogitatio^s, which pass and repasse from object to object, and from one thing
to another, but with one sole thought we may be attentive to the diversity of
many things, and get the knowledge of them. By how much further water runs from
its source by so much the more it does divide it self and wear out its banks
if it be not kept in by a continual care: and perfections do separate and
deuid themselves, according as they are more remote from God their source; but
approaching nigh him, they are united, till such time as we shall be swallowed
up in this soueraignely singular perfection, which is the necessary unity,
and THE BETTER PART, that which MAGDALEN made choice of, and which shall not be
taken away from her.

That we do contemplate without pain, which is a third difference betwixt it
and meditation. CHAPTER. VI.
1. NOw the simple view of contemplation is performed in one of these three
fashio^s, we do sometimes only eye some one of Gods perfections, as for
example, his infinite Bounty, not thinking of the other ATTRIBVTS, or virtues
thereof: As a Bridegroom, simply staying his eye upon the fair complexion of
his Bride, yet by this means should truly see all her countenance, for as
much as the complexion is spread in a sort, through all the parts thereof, and
should not be attentive, to the feature, grace, or other respects of beauty:
for in like manner, the mind often times considering the sovereign goodness
of the DIVINITY; although withal, it sees the JUSTICE, WISDOM, and POWER,
yet is it only attentive to the GOODNESS, to which the simple view of it is
contemplation is addressed. Sometimes also we do attentively behold in God
diverse of his infinite perfections, yet with a simple view, and without
distinction, as he, who with one glance of his eye passing his view from the
top to the toe of his spouse, richly decked, should attentively in general have
seen all, and nothing in particular; not well discerning what carkanet, or
gown she wore, nor what countenance she had, or how she looked, but only, that
all was fair and comely: For so in contemplation, we often pass over sundry
Divine Greatnesses and perfections in general, with one only touch of
consideration, with out being able to render a reason of any thing in
particular, save only, that all is perfectly good and fair: and finally, we
do at other times consider, neither many nor only one of the divine
perfections, but only some Divine action or work, to which we are attentive;
as for example, to the act of MERCY, by which God pardons sins; or the act of
Creation, or the Resurrection of Lazarus, or Conversion of S. PAVLE; as a
Bridegroom who should not eye his Spouses eyes, but only the sweetness of
the looks she castes upon him; nor take notice of her mouth, but only of the
delight of the words uttered by it. And in this point, THEO: the soul makes a
certain sallie of love, not only upon the actions she considers, but upon
him whence they proceed. Thou art Good o Lord; and in thy goodness, teach me
thy iustifications: Thy throat, that is the word which comes from it, is most
delicious, and thou art wholly desirable. Ah! how sweet are thy words to my
bowels, sweeter then honey to my mouth: or else with S. THOMAS, My Lord my
God; and with S. MAGDELEN RABBONI, ah Master!

2. But take which of these three ways you will, Contemplation has still this
excellency, that it is done with delight, for that it supposes, that God and
his holy love is found, that he is enjoyed, delighted in, saying, I have found
him, whom my heart loves, I have found him, nor will I let him go. In which
it differs from Meditation, which almost always is performed in pain, labor,
and discourse: our mind passing in it from consideration to consideration,
searching in many places, either the well-beloued of her Love, or the love of
her well-beloued. JACOB labors in meditation to obtain Rachel: but in
contemplation he rejoices with her, forgetting his labors. The divine Spouse,
as a shephearde, which he also is, prepared a sumptious banquet, according to
the country fashion, for his sacred Spouse; which he so described, that
mystically it represented all the mysteries of man's Redemption; I came into my
garden, quoth he, I have gathered my myrrh, with all my perfumes, I have eaten
my honie-co^be with my honey, I have mingled my wine with my milk: eat my
friends, and drink, and inebriate your selves my dearest. THE: ha! when was it
I pray you, that our Savior came into his garden, if not when he came into his
mothers purest, hu^blest and sweetest womb, replenished with all the
flourishing pla^tes of holy virtues? And what is meant by our Saviors gathering
of his myrrh, with his perfumes, but to join suffera^ce to suffere^ce until
death, and death of the cross: heaping by that means merit upon merit and
treasurs upon treasurs, to enrich his spiritual children? And how did he eat
his honie-combe with his honey, but when he lived a new life, reuniting his
soul more sweet then honey, to his pierced and wounded body, with more holes
then a honie-combe? And when ascending into heaven he took possession of all
the circumstances, and dependence of his divine glory, what other thing did
he, if not mix the rejoicing wine of the essential glory of his soul, with
the delightful milk of the perfect felicity of his body, in a more
excellent manner then hitherto he had done.

3. Now in all these divine mysteries which contain all the others, there is
sufficient to eat and drink for all the dear friends, and to inebriate the
dearest; some of them do eat and drink, but they eat more then they drink,
and so are not drunk: others eat and drink but drink more the^ they eat,
and those are they that are inebriated. Now to eat is to meditate; for in
meditating a man does chewe, turning his spiritual meat hither and thither
betwixt the teeth of consideration to bruise, break, and digest it, which is
not done without some trouble: To drink is to contemplate, which we do
without pain or difficulty, yea with pleasure, and facility but to be
inebriated, is to contemplate so freque^tly and ardently, that one is quite out
of himself to be wholly in God. O holy and sacred drunkenness, which contrary
to corporal drunkenness, does not alienate us from spiritual, but from
corporal sense, not dulling or besotting us, but Angelizing, and in a sort,
Deifying us; putting us out of our selves, not to abase us, and rank us with
beasts, as does terreane dru^kennesse, but to raise us above our selves, and
range us with Angels; so that we might live more in God then in our selves,
being attentive and busied by love to see his beauty and be united to his
Bounty.

4. Now whereas to attain unto contemplation, we stand ordinarily in need to
hear the word of God, to have spiritual discourse and conference with others,
as had the ancient Ancorets, to read deuote books, to pray, meditate, sing
canticles, conceive good thoughts: for this reason holy contemplation being
the end and aim of all these exercises, they are all reduced unto it, and such
as practice them are called CONTEMPLATIVES, as also the practice it self a
CONTEMPLATIVE life, by reason of the action of our understanding, by which we
behold the verity of the divine Beauty, and Bounty with an attention of
love, that is with a love that makes us attentive, or with an attention which
proceeds from love, and augments the love which we have to love infinite
sweetness.

Of the loving recollection of the SOVLE IN CONTEMPLATION. CHAPTER. VII.
1. I Speak not here, THEO: of the recollection by which such as are about to
pray, use to place themselves in God's presence, entering into themselves, and,
as one would say, retiring their soul with in their heart, there to speak
with God: For this recollection is made by Lous command, which provoking us to
pray, moves us to serve our selves of this means to pray well, so that we
our selves are cause of this retiring of our soul. But the recollection of
which I mean to speak, is not made by lous command, but by love it self:
that is, we do not make it by free choice, it nor being in our power to have
it when we please, not depending of our care: but God, at his pleasure works it
in us, by his holy grace. He, said the B. Mother Saint Teresa of JESUS, who
wrote, that the Prayer of Recollection, is made as when an VRCHIN or TORTIS do
draw themselves together, said well, saving that these beasts draw
themselves up when they please, whereas recollection is not in our will, but
only when it pleases God of his grace to bestow it upon us.

2. Now thus it is done. Nothing is so natural to good, as to draw and unite
unto it self such things as are sensible of it, as do our souls which draw
continually and tend toward their treasure, that is toward that which they
love. Hereupon it falls out sometimes, that our Savior does imperceptibly pour
into the bottom of our hearts, a certain agreeable sweetness in argument of
his presence, and then the powers, yea the very exterior senses of the soul,
by a certain secret contentment do turn it upon that inward part, where the
most amiable and dearest spouse is lodged: For as a young swarm of Bees, while
they are ready to take flight, and chang their country, is recalled by the
soft sound of a basin, the smell of Metheglin, or else by the sent of some
odoriferous herbs, so that they stay by the inticements of these sweetes, and
enter into the hyue prepared for them: So our Savior pronouncing some secret
word of his love, or pouring out the odor of the wine of his dilection more
delicious then honey, or else streaming the perfumes of his garments, that is
some sense of divine consolations in our hearts, and thereby making them
perceive his most grateful presence, he draws unto him all the faculties of
our soul, which gather about him, and stay in him, as in their most desired
object. And as he that should cast a piece of an Adamant amongst many needles,
should instantly see them turn all their points toward their well-beloued
Adamant, and hang upon it: so when our Savior makes his delightful presence
to be felt in the midst of our hearts, all our faculties turn their points
that way, to be united to that incomparable sweetness.

3. O God says then the soul, imitating S. AUGUSTINE whither do I wander
searching thee? o infinite Beauty; I sought thee with out, and thou wast in
the midst of my heart. All Magdalens affections, and all her thoughts were
scattered about the Sepulcher of her Savior, whom she went questing here and
there: and though indeed she had found him, and he spoke to her: yet leaves
she them disperced, because she does not perceive his presence; but as soon as
he had called her by name, behold her gathered together, and laid fast at his
feet: one only word, puts her into Recollection.

4. Propose to your self, THEOT: the most holy Virgin our Lady, when she had
conceived the Son of God, her only Love; the soul of this well-beloued
mother does wholly recollect it self about this well-beloued child; and because
this heavenly friend, was harbored in her sacred entrals, all the faculties of
the soul do gather themselves within themselves, as holy bees into their hyue
wherein their honey was. And by how much the divine greatness was by manner of
speech more restrained and lessened in the virginal womb, by so much her
soul did more dilate it self and magnify the praises of that infinite
clemency, and her Spirit within her body lept with joy (as S. JOHN in his
mothers womb in presence of his God) which she felt. She lanched not her
affections out of her self, since that her loves, her delights were in the
midest of her sacred womb. Now this same contentme^t may be practiced, by
imitatio^, amongst such as having communicated, do perceive by the certainty
of faith, that which neither flesh nor blood, but the heavenly Father has
revealed unto them, that their Savior, is in body and soul present, by a
most real presence to their body and soul in the most adorable Sacrament:
for as the Mother-pearle having received the fresh morning drops of dew, does
shut her self, not only to conserve them pure from all mixture of seawater,
but also for the delight she taks to feel the gracious freshness of this gift
from heaven; so it falls out with diverse holy and deuote souls, that having
received the Blessed Sacrament, which contains all the dew of heavenly
benedictions, their soul shuts it self, and all her faculties are retired,
not only to adore this sovereign king, newly present by an admirable presence
in their breasts, but also for the incredible consolation, and spiritual
refreshing which they receive, to perceive by faith the divine shute of
immortality within them; where you are diligently to note, THEO: that indeed
all this recollection is made by love, which perceiving the presence of the
well-beloued by the baits it castes in the midest of the heart, does gather and
draw all the soul toward it by a most amiable inclination, most sweet
turning, and most delicious winding of all faculties toward the well-beloued,
who draws them unto him by the force of his sweetness, with which he draws,
and ties the heart, as bodies are drawn by material ropes, or bands.

5. This sweet recollection of our soul in her self, is not only made by
the apprehension of Gods presence in the midst of our heart, but even by
placing our selves in any manner in his sacred presence. It happens often
times, that all our interior powers do gather and shut themselves up in them
selves, upon an extreme reverence and sweet fear, which does sease upon us,
in consideration of his sovereign Majesty, who is present with us, and
beholds us; So that, notwithstanding we are distracted, if the Pope, or some
great Prince should appear, we recall our thoughts and reflect upon our
selves, that we may be present to our selves and respective. The blew Lilly,
or flowerdeluce is said to shut it self at the sight of the Suns approach;
because by his brightness it does shut and lock it self up within it self,
in whose absence it remains desplaied, and open all the night. The like
happe^s in this recollectio^ of which we speak: for upon the only presence of
God or feeling we have that he beholds us, either from heaven, or from any
other place out of us, though as then we think not of the other presence, by
which he is in us, our powers and faculties do assemble, and gather together
within us, out of respect to his divine Majesty, which love makes us fear,
with a fear of honor and respect.

6. Verily I was acquainted with a soul, to whom as soon as one mentioned any
mystery or sentence, which put her a little more expressly then ordinary, in
mind of the presence of God, either in confession or private conference, she
would so deeply e^ter into her self, that she could hardly recover her self
to speak and make answer; so that outwardly she remained as one destitute of
life, and all her senses were absorpt, till her Spouse permitted her to
return, which was sometime sooner, sometime later.

Of the repose of a soul recollected in her well-beleued. CHAPTER. VIII.
1. THe soul then being thus recollected within her self, in God, or before
God, does now and then become so sweetly attentive to the goodness of her
well-beloued, that her atte^tion seems not to her to be attention, so purely
and delicatly is she employed; as it happens to certain floods, which glide so
fair and smoothly, that it seems to the beholders, and such as sail, that
they neither see, or feel any motion, because they cannot be discovered to
swell with billows, or waves. And it is this admirable repose of the soul,
that the B. Virgin TERESA of JESUS names prayer of quiet, not far differrent
from that which she also calls the sleep of the powers, if at least I
understand her right.

2 Certes humane Lovers are sometimes content with being hear or within sight
of the party they love, without speaking to him, or discursing alone, either
of him, or his perfections, satiated, as it were, and satisfied to relish this
dear presence, not by reason of any reflection they make upon it, but by a
certain quiet, and rest which the mind takes in it. My well-beloued is to me
a Posie of Myrrh, he shall remain betwixt my breasts: my well-beloued is
mine, and I his, who feeds amongst the Lillies, till the day approach, and
shadows vanish. Show me then o thou friend of my friend, where thou reposest,
where thou lie at Noonetide. Do you see, THEO: how the holy Sunamite is
contented in knowing that her well-beloued is with her, or in her bosom,
Park, or elsewhere, so she know where he is, and thence also she is Sunamite,
wholly peaceable, calm, and at repose.

3. Now this repose becomes sometimes so still that all the soul, and all her
powers are put into a sleep, remaining without motion or action, saving the
will, even which also does no other thing out receive the content, and
satisfaction which the presence of the well-beloued does afforde. And that
which is yet more admirable, is, that the will does not even perceive the
delight and contentment which she receives, enjoying him insensibly, being not
mindful of herself but of him, whose presence yields her this pleasure, as it
happens frequently, that taken by a light slumber, we do only hear
indistinctly what our friends say about us, or perceive imperceptibly how
officious they are toward us, without perceiving we perceive it.

4. Notwitstanding, the soul who in this sweet repose, does enjoy this
delicate touch of the divine presence, though she do not perceive it as an
enjoying, yet does she clearly show how dear and precious this happiness is
unto her, if one offer to deprive her of it, or divert her from it: for then
the poor soul plains, cries out, yea sometime weeps, as a little child
awaked, before he had yet taken his full sleep, who by the grief he resenteth
in being awaked, does sufficiently show, the content he had in sleeping.
Hereupon the heavenly shephearde adiureth the daughters of Jerusalem by their
Roes, and the Hearts of the fields, that they should not raise up the Beloved,
till herself would. That is, that she should rise of her self. No THEO: a
foul thus recollected in her God, would not chang her repose for all the
riches in the world.

5. Such, in a manner was the rest of the most holy Magdalen, when set at her
Masters feet, she heard his holy word. Behold her I beseech you THEO: she is
set in a profound tranquillity, she speaks not, she weeps not, she sighs
not, she groans not, she stirs not, she prays not. Martha full of business
passes and repasseth through the Hall, Marie regardes her not. And what does
she do then? she does nothing, but only hearke^; and what would this say,
she hearkeneth? It is to say, she is there as a vessel of honor, to receive
drope by drope, the myrrh of sweetness, which the lips of her well-beloued
distilled into her heart; And this heavenly Lover jealous of this loue-sleepe
and rest of his well-beloued, chid Martha for offering to awake her. Martha,
Martha, thou art sollicitous, and troubled about many things, and yet one thing
only is necessary, Marie has chosen the better part, which shall not be
taken from her. But what was Mary's portion or part? To remain in peace,
repose, and quiet near unto her sweet JESUS.

6. The well-beloued S. JOHN is ordinarily painted in the last supper, not
only lying, but even sleeping in his Masters bosom, because being set after
the fashion of the East, his head was toward his dear lovers breast; upon
which as he slept, not a corporal sleep, there being no likelihood of that;
so I make no question, but finding himself so near the breasts of the
eternal sweetness, he took a profound mystical sweet sleep, as a child
of love, who locked to his mothers dugges, suckes in sleeping, and sleeps in
sucking. O what a delight it was to this Benjamin, child of his Saviors joy,
to sleep in this sort in his Fathers arms, who the day after, as a Ben-oni
child of grief, recommended him to his mothers sweet dugges. Nothing is more
delightful to the youngling, whether he wake or sleep, then his Fathers
bosom and mothers breasts.

7. Wherefore, when you shall find your self in this simple and pure filial
confidence near our Savior, stay there, my dear THEO: without moving your
self to produce sensible acts, either of the understanding or will: for this
love of simple confidence, and this loue-sleepe which your soul takes in her
Saviors bosom, contains by excellency, all that which you search for hither
and thither to please your gust: It is better even to sleep upon this sacred
breast, then to watch in what other place soever.

How this sacred repose is practiced. CHAPTER. X.
1. Have you never noted, THEO: with what fervor little children do sometimes
cleeue to their mothers duggs being hungry, you shall see them with a low
muttering, hold fast and press the Pap in there mouth, sucking so greedely,
that they even put their mother to pain: but after the freshness of the
milk, has in some sort appeased the coveting heat of their tender stomach,
and the delightful vapors which it sendes to the brain begin to lull them a
sleep, THEO: you shall see them foftly shut their little eyes, and by little
and little give way to sleep, yet without letting go the Pap, upon which they
make no action, saving, a slow and almost insensible motion of the lips, whereby
continually they draw the milk which they let down imperceptibly; and this
they do without thinking of it, yet not without pleasure: for if one draw the
Pap from them before they fall sound a sleep, they awake and weep bitterly,
testifying by the sorrow which they show in the privation, that their content
was great in the possession. Now it faires in like manner with the soul who is
in rest and quiet before God; for she suckes, in a manner, insensibly the
delights of this presence, without discourse, operation, or motion at all of
any her faculties, save the only point of the will, which she moves softly snd
almost vndiscouerably, as the mouth by which the delight and insensible
sacietie she takes in enjoying the divine presence. But if one trouble this
poor little babe, or offer to take from it the Pap for that it seems to
sleep, it will plainly show the^ that though it sleep to all other things,
yet not to that; for it perceiues the discomoditie of this separation, and
greeues at it, showing thereby, the pleasure which it took, (though not
thinking of it;) in the good which it did possess. The B. S. TERESA, having
written that she found this a fit similitude, I thought good to declare it so
to be.

2. But tell me THEOT: the soul recollected in her God, at what I pray you
should she be disquieted? has she not reason to be quiet and remain in rest?
For indeed whom should she search? She has found him whom she sought. What
rests now for her but to say I have sound my dear well-beloued, I hold him,
nor will I let him go. She has no need to trouble her self with the
discourse of the understanding; for she sees her Spouse present, at so clear a
view, that discourse were to her unprofitable, and superfluous. And again
though she should not see by the understanding, she cares not, being content in
feeling his presence by the delight and satisfaction which the will receives in
it. Ah! the mother of God, our B. Lady and Mistress, being with child and not
seeing that divine babe, but feeling it in her sacred womb, ah God! what
content had she therein? and did not S. ELIZABETH, admirably enjoy the fruits
of our Saviors Divine presence without seeing him, upon the day of the most
holy Visitation? Nor does the soul in this repose, stand in need of memory,
her Lover being present; nor yet of imagination. For to what end were it to
represent him in an exterior, or interior picture, whose presence we are
possessed of? So that to conclude, it is the will alone that does softely, and
as it were in gentle shuts, draw the milk of this sweet presence, all the
rest of the soul reposing in the sweetness of the pleasure which she takes.

3. Metheglin is used not only to retire, and recall Bees to their hyues, but
also to appease them: for when they stir up Sedition and mutiny amongst
themselves, with mutual slaughter, and overthrow, their keeper has no better
way then to throw Metheglin amidst this little mutinous people, because the
ingredients thereof smelling sweetly and odoriferously, they are pacified, and
giving themselves to the fruition of of this sweetness, they continue
appeased and calm. O Eternal God, when by thy sweet presence, thou do cast
odoriferous perfumes into our hearts, perfumes which are more delightful then
delicious wine, and more then honey, all the powers of our soul enters into so
delightful a repose, and so absolute a rest, that there is no motion, save
that of the will, which as the spiritual sense of smelling, remains
delightfully engaged, (without reflecting on it) in perceiving the incomparable
benefit of having God present.

Of diverse degrees of this repose, and how it is to be conserved. CHAPTER. XI.
1. THere are some Spirits which are active, fertile, and stirring, in
consideration: others, that are supple and flexible, and such as desire to
taste, what they do, to see and examine each thing that passes in them,
turning their eyes perpetually upon themselves to discover their advancement.
There are yet others, who are not content to be content, unless they feel,
see and sauoure their contentment, and are like to such, as being well covered
against the cold, would not believe it, if they knew not how many garments they
wore; or such as seeing their Closets full of money, would not esteem
themselves rich, unless they knew the number of their crowns.

2. Now all these Spirits are subject to be troubled in Prayer: for if God
daigne them the sacred repose of his presence, they do willingly forsake it,
to note their own comportment in it and to examine whether they have true
content, disquieting themselves to discern whether their quietness, quiet:
so that in lieu of employing themselves sweetly to perceive the sweetes of the
divine presence, they distract their understanding in discoursing upon the
feeling they have; as a Bride that should busy her self in beholding, her
wedding Ring, without looking upon the Bridgroome who gave it her. There is a
fair difference, THEO: betwixt being occupied in God who gives us the
contentment, and being busied in the contentment which God gave us.

3. The soul to whom God gives the holy repose of love in Prayer, must
abstain, as much as she is able, from looking upon her self, or her repose,
which to be conserved, must not be curiously observed; for he that does love it
too much does loose it, and the best manner of loving it, is to love it without
affectation and as a child, who to see where his feet were, had taken his head
from his mothers breast, does with a sudden iert return to it again in a
harmless wantonness. So if we perceive our selves distracted through a
curiosity which we have to know what we do in Prayer, we must restore our
hearts, to the sweet and peaceable attention of Gods presence, from whence we
straied. Yet are we not to apprehend any danger of loosing this sacred repose
by actions of body or mind, which are not done upon lightness, or
indiscretion: for as S. TERESA says, it were a superstition to be so jealous
of this repose, as not to coffe, spit, or breath, for fear of loosing it; since
that God who gives this peace, does not with draw it, for such necessary
motions, nor yet for the distractions and wanderings of the mind which are not
voluntary: and the will having once well tasted the divine presence, does not
cease to relish the sweetness thereof, though the understanding, or memory
should make an escape, and slipe after strange and fruitless thoughts.

4. It is true, the repose of the soul is not then so great as when the
understanding and memory do conspire with the will, yet is it a true
spiritual tranquillity, since it reigns in the will which is the mistress of
all the other faculties. Verily I knew a soul extremely sixed and united to
her God, who yet had her understanding, and memory so free from all exterior
imploiments, that she understood very distinctly all that was said about her,
and did entirely remember it, though she could not answer, or loose her self
from God, to whom she was tied, by the application of her will; but I say she
was so tied, that she could not be withdrawn from this sweet entertainment,
without great grief, provoking her to sighings, which she used in her
greatest consalation and repose: as we see young children murmur, and make
little plaints, when after an ardent desire they begin to suck: or as JACOB
did, who in kissing the fair, and chaste Rachell lancing out a sigh, wept
through the vehemency of the consolation, and tenderness which he felt: so
that the soul, I speak of, having her only will engaged, but her
understanding, memory, hearing, and imagination free, resembled in my opinion,
a little child sucking, who could hear, see, and stir his arms, without
quitting his dear Pap.

5. Howbeit the peace of the soul should be much greater, and sweeter, if
there were no noise made about her, nor occasion given of stirring herself,
either in body or mind: for she would be wholly occupied, in the sweetness
of the divine presence: but not being able wholly to hinder distractions in her
other faculties, in her will at least, she conserues peace, which is the power
whereby she has the fruition of good. And note, that then the will being kept
quiet, by the pleasure which she takes in the divine presence, does not
endeavor to retire the other straying powers, because by undertaking that, she
would loose her repose, separating her self from her dear well-beloued; and
her pains in running hither and thither to catch flitting powers which also
can never be better brought to their duty, then by the will her perseverance
in holy repose: for by little and little, all the faculties are drawn by the
pleasure which the will receives, and of which she gives them certain feelings
as perfumes exciting them to draw near, to participate in the good which she
enjoys.

A continuation of the discourse touching the diverse degrees of holy repose,
and of any excellent abnegation of a man's self pactised therein. CHAPTER. XII.
1. FOllowing that which is said, holy repose has diverse degrees: for
sometimes it is in all the powers of the soul joined and united to the will;
sometimes it is in the will only, and there, sometimes sensibly, at other
times imperceptibly, because it happens now and then, that the soul takes an
incomparable delight, to feel by certain inward touches, that God is present
with her: as it happened to S. ELIZAB^TH, when our B. Lady visited her: and at
other times, the soul has a certain burning delight to be in Gods presence,
which as then she discerns not; as it happened to the pilgrime-Apostles, who
walking with our Savior scarcely perceived the dear delight, with which they
were touched, till such time as they were arrived, and discovered him in the
divine breaking of the bread. Sometimes again, the soul does not only
perceive Gods presence, but hears him speak, by certain inward illuminations,
and persuasions, which are in lieu of words: Sometimes she perceiues him and
speaks to him at once, but so secretly, sweetly and delicatly, that it does
not impeach her holy peace and quiet; so that without being awaked, she wakes
with him, that is, she wakes and speaks to her well-beloued heart with so
sweet tranquillity, and gracious repose, as though she swetely flept. At
other times she hears the Spouse speak, but she cannot speak to him, the
delight she has to hear him, or the reverence she bears him, keeping her in
silence: or else through dryness, and feebleness of mind, having strength to
hear only, not to speak; as it sometimes happens corporally to such as begin
to sleep, or have been wakned by sickness.

2. But finally, sometimes she neither hears, nor speaks to her well-beloued,
nor yet discouers any sign of his presence, but simply knows, that she is in
the presence of God, who is pleased with her being there. Imagine, THEOT: that
the glorious Apostle S. JOHN had taken a corporal sleep in the bosom of his
dear Master at the last supper, and that he had done it by his commandment:
verily in that case, he had been in his Masters presence without perceiving it
in any sort. And mark, I pray you, that there is more care required to place
ones self in Gods presence them to remain there, being once placed: for to
p^^ce ones self there, it is requisite to apply the mind, and render it
actually attentive to the presence (as I have showen in the INTRODVCTION) but
being set in this presence, one keeps himself there by many other means, so
long as we do any thing in God, or for God, either by our understanding or
will; as for example in beholding him, or any thing for love of him; in hearing
him, or such as as speak in his place; in speaking to him, or to any other,
for love of him; and doing any work what soever to honor and serve him: yea
one may continue in God's presence, not only by hearing him, seeing him, or
speaking to him, but also by expecting whether it might please him to look
upon us, to speak to us, or to make us speak to him, yea or yet in doing
none of all this, but in staying simply where it pleases him, and because it
pleases him. But if it please him to accompany this our simple stay, with
some little feeling that wear his, and he ours, o God how precious, and
useful a grace this is for us!

3. My dear, THEO: let us yet take the liberty to frame another imagination:
If a STATVA placed in the galerie of some Prince by the STATVARIE were endewed
with understanding and reason, and could discourse, and talk; and one should
ask it saying, tell me o fair STATVA, why art thou seated in this hole? it
would answer, because my Master placed me there: and if one should reply,
but why staiest thou there, without doing any thing? because, would it say, my
Master placed me not there to do any thing, but to the end I should remain
immouable: but if one should urge it further, saying, but poor STATVA what art
thou the better to remain here in this sort? ah God, would it say; I am not
here for mine own interest, and service, but to obaye and accomplish the will
of my MASTER and MAKER, and this suffiseth me. And if one should yet put
another demand in this sort; go to, tell me then STATVA, I pray, not seeing
thy Master, how do thou then take contentment to content him? no verily,
would it confess, I see him not indeed: for I have eyes not to see, as also
feet not to walk, but I am over ioyed to know that my dear Master sees me
here, and in seeing me here takes pleasure. But if one should continue
discourse with the STATVA and should say unto it; why, but would thou not at
least wish to have motion, that thou might approach nere they maker to afford
him some better service? doubtless it would deny it, and protest, that it
desired to do no other thing, unless it were its Masters desire. Is it
possible then, would one conclude, that thou desin'st nothing but to be an
immouable STATVA in that hollow place? no truly, would that wise STATVA
finally answer, no I desire to be nothing but a STATVA and a STATVA
continually in this hole, so long as my Master pleases, being content to be
hear, and in this nature, seeing it is his conten, t whose I am, and by whom I
am, what I am.

4. O good God, how good a way it is of remaining in Gods presence, to be and
to will to be for ever and ever at his good pleasure; for so, unless I be
deceived, in all occurrences, yea in our deepest sleep, we are more deeply in
the holy presence of God: yea verily, THEO: for if we love him, we fall
asleep, not only at the sight of him, but at his pleasure, and not at his
pleasure only, but even according to his pleasure; And even he himself, our
heavenly Creator and Maker, seems to lay us upon our bed, as STATVA'S in
their places, that we might nestle in our beds, as birds in their nestes. And
at our awaking; if we reflect upon it, we find that God was still present with
us, and that we were in no wise absent, or separated from him. We were there
then in the presence of his good pleasure, though without seeing or perceiving
him; so that we might say with Jacob: Certes I have sleept by my God, and in
the bosom of his divine presence, and providence, and yet knew it not.

5. Now this quiet in which the will works not, save only by a simple
submission to the divine will, praying without any other pretention, then to be
in the sight of God, according as it shall please him, is a quiet soueraignely
excellent, because it has no mixture of proper interest, the faculties of the
soul taking no content in it, nor yet the will, save only in her supreme
point, in which her content is, to admite no other contentment; except that of
being without contentment, for the love of God's content and pleasure, wherein
she reposeth. For in fine it is the top of the ECSTASY OF LOVE, to have ones
will not in his own contentment but in God's, and ones content, not in his
own will, but in God's.

Of the melting and liquifaction of the soul in God. CHAPTER. XIII.
1. HVmide and liquide things do easily receive the impressions, and limits
which one would put upon them, because they have no firmness or soliditie,
which may stay or limite them. Put liquour into a glass, and you shall see it
remain bounded and limited therein, which being round, or square the liquour
shall be the like, having no other limite nor shape then that of the glass
which contains it. With the soul it faires not so in nature, for she has her
proper shapes and limits; she takes her shape from her habits and inclinations,
her limits from her will; and when she is set upon her own inclinations and
will, we say she is hard, that is wilful and obstinate. I will take from
you, says God, your heart of stone, that is, your obstinacy. To chang the
form of stones, Iron, or wood: the axe, hammer, and fire is required. We call
such, hearts of Iron, wood, or stone, as do not easily receive the divine
impressions, but linger in their own will amid'st the inclinations which do
accompany our depraved nature: contrariwise a suple, pliable, and tractiue
heart, is termed a melting, and liquifying heart. My heart, says DAVID
speaking in the person of our Savior upon the cross, is made as melted wax
in the midst of my belly. CLEOPATRA that infamous Queen of Egypt, striving to
outuie Mark ANTONIE in all the excesses and dissolutions of his banquets, in
the end of one of them she made in her turn called for a vial of fine
vinegar, and dropped into it, one of the pearls which she wore in her ears,
valued at two hundred fifty crowns, which being dissolved, melted and
liquified, she took it down, and had yet buried the pearl she bore in her
other ear, in the sink of her villainous stomach, if Lucius Plautus had not
hindered her. Our Saviors heart, the true Oriental pearl, singularly
singular, and priselesse, thrown into the midest of an incomparably bitter
sea, in the day of his passion, melted in it self, dissolved, liquified, and
flowed in grief under the press of so many mortal anguishes, but love,
stronger then death, did mollify, soften, and melt the heart, sooner then the
other passions.

2. My heart said the holy Spoufe was wholly dissolved at my well-beloued his
voice, and what is it to say, it is dissolved, but that it is not contained
with in it self, but is run out toward it is heavenly Lover? God gave order
to Moses to speak to the ROCK, and it should produce water; it is no marvel
then if he himself, with his honey words can melt the heart of his Spouse.
Balm is so thick by nature, that it is not flowing or liquide, but the more
it is kept, the more stife it grows, and in the end becomes hard read and
transparant, yet heat does resolve, and make it flow: Love had liquified and
melted the Spouse his soul, whence the Spouse calls him oil poured-out. And
behold how now her self assures us, she is melted with love; my soul says
she melted as soon as my well-beloued spoke. The love of her Spouse was in her
heart, and breast, as a strong new wine, which cannot be contained within the
piece; For it ouerflowed one every side, and the soul being led by her love,
after the Spouse had said thy breasts are better then wine, streaming out
precious ointments, she adds; Thy name is, oil poured-out: and as the Spouse
had poured out his love and soul, into the heart of the Spouse; so she again
turns her soul, into the Spouse his heart: and as we see a honie-combe
touched with a hot sunne-beame, go out of it self, forsaking its form, do
also flow on that side where the sun touches it; so the soul of this lover
runns that ward where her well-beloued is heard, going out of her self, and
passing the limits of her natural being, to follow him that spoke unto her.

3. But how is this sacred liquifaction of the soul into the well-beloued
practiced? An extreme complacence of the Lover in the thing beloved begets a
certain spiritual impotencie, which makes the soul not find any more power
to remain in her self; And therefore as dissolved Baulme that has no more
firmness or soliditie, she permits her self to slide and run into the
thing beloved: for she neither casts her self by way of iaculation, nor
locks her self by way of union, but lets her self gently glide, as a liquide
and fluent thing, into the Divinity which she loves. And as we see clouds
which thickened by the wind at Noonetide, resolving and turning into rain,
cannot contain themselves, but do fall and shower down, and mix themselves
so inly with the earth which they moisten, that they become one thing with it:
so the soul which, though otherwise in love, remained before in her self,
goes out by this sacred liquifaction, and saintly flowing, and forsakes her
self, not only to be united to the well-beloued, but to be entirely mingled
and moistened with him.

4. You see then dear, THEOT: that the liquifaction of a soul into her God,
is a true ecstasy, by which the soul trenscendes the limits of her natural
behavior, being wholly mixed, absorpt, and engulfed in God. Hence it happens,
that such as attain to these holy excesses of heavenly love, afterward being
come to themselves, can find nothing in the earth, that can content them, and
living in an extreme annihilation of themselves remain much weakened in that
which touches sense; and have perpetually in their hearts the B. Mother Teresa
her Maxim. ALL THAT IS NOT GOD, IS NOTHING. And it seems that such was the
loving passion of the great friend of the well-beloued, who said. I live, now
not I, but JESUS CHRIST in me, and our life is hid with JESUS CHRIST in God.
For tell me I pray you, THEOT: if a drope of Elementarie water, thrown into
an Ocean of live water were living, could speak, and declare it is condition,
would it not cry out with joy. O mortals I live indeed, but I live not I,
but this Ocean lives in me, and my life is hidden in this Abisse.

5. The soul, that runs into God dies not: For how can she die by being shut
up in life? but she lives, without living in her self; because, as the stars
without loosing their light, shine not in the presence of the Sun, but the
Sun shines in the^, and they are hid in the light of the Sun, so the soul
without loosing her life, lives not being mixed with God, but God lives in her.
Such, as I think, were the feelings of the great S. PHILIPPUS NERIVS and S.
FRANCIS ZAVERIVS, when ouercloied with heavenly consolations, they petitioned
to God that he would withdraw himself for a space from them, since his will
was that their life should a little longer appear unto the world, which could
not be, while it was wholly hidden and absort in God.

Of the wound of love. CHAPTER. XIII.
1. All these terms of love are drawn from a certain resemblance, which is
betwixt the affections of the mind and the passions of the body. GRIEF,
FEAR, HOPE, HATRED, and the rest of the affections of the soul, enters not
into the heart, but when love does draw the^ after it. We do not hate evil,
but because it is contrary to the Good which we love. We fear future evil,
because it will deprive us, of the good we love. Though an evil be extreme,
yet do we never hate it, but according to the opposition it has to the good
which is dear unto us. He that does not much affect the Commonwealth, is not
much troubled to see it ruined. He that does not much love God, does also not
much hate sin. LOVE is the first, yea the Source and origin of all the
Passions. And therefore it is LOVE that first enters the heart; and because it
does penetrate, and that well nigh to the very bottom of the will, where his
seat is, we say, he wounds the heart. It is sharp-pointed, says the Apostle
of France, and enters the heart most deeply; the other affections do also
enter, but by the means of love; for it is he that pearcing the heart makes
passage. The only point of the dart wounds, the rest of it does but enlarge
the wound and increase pain.

2. Now if it wound, it does consequently put us to pain. Pomegranats by their
vermillion color, by the multitude of their corns so close set and rancked,
and by their fair crowns, lively represe^ting, as S. GREGORY says, most
holy Charity all read, by reason of her ardour toward God, crowned with the
variety of all virtues, and who alone does bear away the crown of eternal
reward's, but the juice of Pomegranats, which as we know is so delightful as
well to the sound, as sick, is so compounded of sweet and sour, that one can
hardly discern, whether it delights the taste more by it is sweetish tartness
or tarte sweetness. Verily, THEOT: Love is in like sort bitter-sweete, and
while we live in this world, it has never a sweetness perfectly sweet,
because it is not perfect, or ever purely saciated, and satisfied: and yet it
leaves not to be marvelous agreeable, to the tartness thereof, correcting the
Lusshiousnesse of it is sweetness, as the sweetness thereof, sharpens the
delight of it is tartenesse. But how can this be? there have been young men
seen enter into conversation free, sound, and frolic, who not taking care of
themselves, plainly perceived long before they could get clear, that love,
making use of glaunces, gestures, words, yea of the hair of a weak and frail
creature, as of so many darts, had smote and wounded their poor hearts, so
that you shall see them sorrowful, sad, and dismayed. Why I pray you are they
sorrowful? With out doubt, because they are wounded; and who has wounded
them? LOVE: but love being the child of Complacence, how can it wound, and
aggreeue? Sometimes the beloved object is absent, and then, my dear THEO: Love
wounds the heart by the desire which it excits, which while it cannot be
saciated, it does much torment the mind.

3. If a Be had stung a child, it were to sweet purpose to say to him, o my
child, the very Be that stung thee, is the same that makes the honey which
likes thee so well; for it is true, might it reply, her honey is very pleasant
to my taste, but her sting is painful: and while her sting stikes in my
cheake, I shall never be at rest: and do you not mark, that my face is all
swollen with it? THEO: Love is indeed a Complacence, and by consequence very
delightful, so that it leaves not in our heart the sting of desire, for when
it leaves it, there is left with it a great pain: True it is this pain
proceeds from love, and therefore is an amiable, and beloved pain. Hear the
painful, yet lovely eiaculations of a royal Lover. My soul thrisleth after
her strong and living God. Ah! when shall I come, and appear before the face
of my God? my tears have been bread to me night and day while it is said unto
me, where is thy God? And the sacred Sunamite wholly possessed with dolorous
loves, speaking to the daughters, Alas, says she, I conjure you: if you meet
my beloved, tell him my grief, because I languish with the wound of love.
Delaied hope afflicts the soul.

4. Now the painful wounds of love are of diverse sorts, 1. The first touches
that love gives our heart, are called wounds, because the heart that was sound,
entire, and it is own before it loved, being struck with love, begins to
separate and divide it self from it self, to give it self to the beloved
object: nor can this separation be made without pain, seeing pain is no other
thing then a separation of living things that were united. 2. Desire does
incessantly sting and wound the heart in which it is lodged. 3. TAEO: speaking
of heavenly love, in the practice of it, there is a kind of wound given by God
himself to the soul which he will perfect: for he gives her admirable
feelings and incomparable touches of his sovereign goodness, as pressing and
soliciting her to love him, and then she forcibly bears herself up, as to
soar higher, toward her divine object: but lighting short, not being able to
love with proportion to her desire: o God she feels a pain without paragon.
At the same instant that she is powerfully drawn, to fly toward her dear
and well beloved, she is powerfully retained, and cannot fly, as being chained
to the servile miseries of this mortal life, and out of her own impotencie
she wishes the winge of the dove, to fly to her repose, but finds it not. So
that she is roughly tormented betwixt the violencie of her desires, and her
own impotencie: o miserable wretch that I am, said one of those that had
tried this torment, who will deliver me from the body of this death? And then,
if you mark it, THEO: it is not the desire of a thing absent that does wound
the heart; for the soul perceiues that her God is present, he had already led
her into his wine celler, planted upon her heart the banner of love; but
howbeit though already he see her wholly his, he urges her, and from time to
time touches her with a thousand thousand darts of his love, showing her by
new means, how much more lovely he is, then he is beloved. And she who has
not so much force to love, as love to force her self, seeing her forces so
weak in respect of the desire she has to love him worthily, to whose worth no
force of love can reach: alas she finds her self stroock with an incomparable
torment: for in the same measure that she sobbs out more deeply the longings of
her coveting love, the panges of her pain are augmented.

5. This heart in love with God, desiring infinitely to love, sees
notwithstanding that it can neither love, nor desire sufficiently. Now this
unaccomplished desire, is as a dart in the breast of a generous spirit: yet the
pain which proceeds from it is amiable, because, whosoever desires earnestly
to love, loves also earnestly to desire. And would esteem himself the most
miserable man alive, if he did not continually desire to love, that which is so
soueraignely good. Desiring to love he receives delight, but loving to desire,
he is paid with pain.

6. Good God, THEOT: what am I going to say? The Blessed in heaven, seeing
that God is more to be beloved then they love him, would sownd, and eternally
perish with a desire to love him more, if God's holiest will did not impose
upon theirs, the admirable repose which they enjoy: for they so soueraignely
love this sovereign will, that the desire thereof does quiet theirs and God's
contentment does content them, being willing to be limited in their love, even
by that will, whose Goodness is the object of their love. If this were not,
their love would be equally delicious and dolourous: delicious, by the
possession of so great a good; dolourous through an extreme desire of a
greater love. God therefore continually drawing arrows, if we may say so, out
of the quiver of his infinite beauty, wounds the hearts of his Lovers, making
them clearly see, that they do not love him nigh so much, as he is worthy to
be beloved. what mortal soever desires not to love the Divine goodness more,
loves him not enough; sufficiency in this divine exercise, does not suffice
him that will make a stand in it, as though it suffised him.

Of some other means by which love wounds the heart. CHAPTER. XIV.
1. NOthihg does so much wound a loving heart, as to perceive another heart
wounded with the love of it. The Pelican builds her nest upon the ground,
whence serpents do often sting her younglings. Now when this happens, the
Pelican, as an excellent natural Physician, with the point of her beak does
wou^d her poor younglings on every side, to cause the poison, which the
Serpents sting had spread over all the body, to depart with the blood; and to
get out all the poison, she lets out all the blood and consequently, permits
the little troop of Pellicans, to perish in this sort; but seeing them dead
she wounds her self, and spredding her blood over them, she does revive them
with a more new and pure life; her love wounded them, and fourthwith by the
same love, she wounds her self. Never do we wound a heart with the wound of
love, but we our selves are straight wounded with the same. When the soul,
sees her God wounded by love, for her sake; she receives from it a mortal
wound. Thou have wounded my heart, said the heavenly Spouse to the Sunamite;
and the Sunamite cries-out tell my well-beloued that I am wounded with love.
Bees never wound, but themselves are wounded to death. And we, seeing the
Savior of our souls wounded by love for us to death, and death of the cross,
how can we but be wounded with him, yea I say wounded with a wound so much
more dolorously amiable, as his was amiably dolorous, nor can we never love
him, as his love, and death requires. There is yet another wound of love, when
the soul knows well she loves God, and he treates her in such sort, as though
he knew not she loved him; or were diffident of her love: for then my dear,
THEO: the soul is put into an extreme anguish it being insupportable unto
her, to see, or perceive, any appearance that God distrusts in her. The poor S.
PETER found his heart full of love toward his Master, and his Master making
show not to know it; Peter quoth he do thou love me more then these? Ah Lord
said the Apostle, thou know I love thee. But Peter do thou love me,
replied our Savior? My dear Master, said the Apostle truly I love thee,
thou know it. But this so cote Master, to prove him, and as showing a
diffidence of his love: Peeter, said he, do thou love me? Ah Savior thou
woundest this poor heart, who much afflicted cries out lovingly, yet
dolorously, Master thou know all things, indeed thou know well I love
thee. Upon a certain day while a possessed person was exorcised, the wicked
spirit being urged to tell his name. I am, quoth he, that accursed creature
DEPRIVED OF LOVE; and S. CATHARIN, who was there present, suddenly perceived all
her bowels moved and disordered, in only having heard these words, PRIVATION
OF LOVE, pronounced for as the Devils do so hate the divine love that they
quake in seeing the sign of it, hearing it named, that is, in seeing the
cross or be a ra^g the name of JESUS pronounced. So such as do entirely love
our Savior do tremble with grief and horror, when they see any signs, or
seen by word that does bring to mi^d the priuatio^ of this holy love.

2. S. PETER was certain that God who knew all, could not be ignorant how much
he was loved by him: yet because the repetition of this demand; Peter do
thou love me? has some appearance of diffidence, S. PETER is much afflicted in
it: Alas the poor soul that is resolved rather to die then offend her God,
and yet feels not a spark of fervor, but contrariwise an extreme coldness,
which does so benume and weaken all her parts, that she frequently falls into
very sensible imperfections: this soul, I say, THEO: is all wounded; for her
love is exceeding dolourous, to see that God does not seem to see that she
loves him, leaving her as one that appertains not to him; and she apprehe^ds
that amidst her defaults, distractions, and coldness, our Savior does strike
her with this reproach: how can thou say that thou loue'st me, seeing thy
mind is not with me? which is as a dart of sorrow through her heart; but a
dart of sorrow which proceeds from love: for if she loved not, she would not
be afflicted, with the apprehension she has, that she loves not.

3. Sometimes love does wound us in the very memory we have that there was a
time in which we loved not our God. O how late I have loved the ancient and
new beauty, said that Saint who for thirty years was Heretic. Life past
is a horror to his life present, who passed his life past without loving the
Sovereign Goodness.

4. Sometimes love does wound us, with the mere consideration of the multitude
of those that do contemn the love of God; so that hereby we sownd with
grief, as he who said, my Zeal, o Lord, has withered me with grief, for
that my enemies have not kept thy law. And the Great S. FRANCIS, thinking he
had not been heard, wept upon a day, sobed, and lamented so pitifully, that an
honest man over hearing him, ran to his succor, as thinking some had offered
to kill him, and finding him all alone, asked of him, why do thou cry so
heard poor man? Alas, quoth he, I weep, to think that our Savior endured so
much for the love of us, and none thinks of it; and having said thus, he
begun again to weep, and this good man fell also a sobbing and weeping with
him.

5. But howsoever this is admirable in the wounds received from the divine
love, that their pain is delightful; and all that feel it, consent to it,
and would not change this pain for all the pleasures of the world. There is no
pain in Love, or if any, it is a beloved one. A Seraphin on a day holding a
golden arrowe, from the head whereof issued a little flame, he darted it into
the heart of the B. Mother Teresa, and offering to draw it out, this virgin
seemed to have her bowels drawn from her, the pain being so excessive, that
she had only force to cast out weak and small sighs; but yet it was a pain
so amiable, that she desired never to be delivered of it. Such was the arrowe
that God sent into the heart of the great S. CATHARIN of Genua, in the
beginning of her conversion, whence she became another woman, dead to the world
and things created, to live only to her Creator. The well-beloued is a posie
of bitter Myrrh, and this posie is also the well-beloueds, who remains
dearly seated betwixt the breasts of his well-beloued, that is, the
best-beloued of all the well-beloueds.

Of the amourous languishment of the heart wounded with love. CHAPTER. XV.
1. IT is a thing sufficiently known that humane love, does not only wound
the heart, but even weaken the body mortally; because as passions, and the
temperature of the body, has a great power to incline the soul and draw her
after its so the affections of the soul have great force in stirring the
humors, and changing the qualities of the body: but further, love, when it is
violent, does bear away the soul to the thing beloved, with such
impetuositie, and does so wholly possess her, that she is deficient in all her
other operations, be they sensatiue, or intellectual; so that to feed, and
second this love, the soul seems to abandon all other care, all other
exercises, yea and her self too; whence Plato said, that Love was poor,
trent, naked, barefoote, miserable, without house, that it lay without doors,
upon the hard ground always in want. It is poor, because it makes one quit
all for the thing beloved: It is without a house, because it urges the soul
to leave her own habitation, to follow hi^ continually who^ she loves: It is
miserable pale, lean and ruinous, for that it makes one loose sleep, meet
and drink. It is naked, and barefoote, since it makes one forsake all other
affections, to embrace that of the thing beloved. It lies without, upon the
hard ground, because it lays open the heart that is in love, making it
manifest its passions, by sighs, plaintes, praises, suspicions, iealousies: It
lies all along at the gate like a beggar, because it makes the lover
perpetually attentive to the eyes and mouth of the beloved, hanging continually
at his ears, to speak to him, and beg of him some favors, wherewith it is
never saciated. Now the eyes, ears, and mouth are the gates of the soul. In
fine the condition of its life is to be still indigent; for if ever it be
saciated, it leaves to be ardent, and consequently to be love.

2. True it is, THEO: that Plato spoke thus of the abject, vile, and foul love
of worldlings, yet are the same properties found in divine and celestial love;
For turn your eyes a little upon those first Masters of christian doctrine, I
mean those first Doctors of holy Evangelical love, and mark what one of
them, who had labored the most, said, until this hour says he, we do
both hunger and thrist, and are naked, and are beaten with buffets, and are
wanderers; we are made the refuse of this world, and as the dross, or skume;
as though he had said, we are so abject, that if the world be a Pallas, we are
held the sweepers thereof: if the world be an aple, we are the parings. What, I
pray you, had brought them to this state, but Love? It was Love that threw S.
FRANCIS naked before his Bishop, and made him die naked upon the ground: It was
Love made him a beggar all his life; It was Love that sent the great S. FRANCIS
ZAVERIVS poor, needy, torn, up and down amongst the Indians and Iaponians;
It was Love that brought the great Cardinal S. CHARLES, Archbishop of Milan,
to that extreamitie of poverty, amidst the riches which he had by the right of
blood and his dignity, that, as Master Panigaroll the eloquent Orator of
Italy said, he was as a dog in his Masters house, eating a piece of bread,
drinking only a little water, and lying upon a little straw.

3. Let us hear I beseech you the holy Sunamite, who cries almost in this
manner; although by reason of a thousand consolations which love gives me, I be
more fair then the rich Tents of my Solomon, I would say, more fair then
heaven which is the lifelesse Pauillion of his royal Majesty, seeing I am his
living Pauillion; yet am I black, torn, squalled, and spoiled with so many
wounds, and blows, given me by the same Love: ah respect not my heu, for I am
truly brown, because my beloved, who is my Sun, has streamed the rays of
his love upon me, rays which by their light do illuminate, yet by their
heat, I am sunn-burnt, and made brownish, and touching me with their splendor
they have berefte me of my color. The passion of love has done me too much
honor in giving me a Spouse, such as is my King; but the same passion which is
a mother to me, seeing she alone gave me in marriage, not my merits, has other
children which do wonderfully assault, and vex me, bringing me to such a
langour, that as, of one side I am like to a Queen who is beside her king, so
of the other side, I am as a Vineyard-keeper who in a miserable cabinet looks
to a vine, and a vine that is not his own.

4. Truly THEOT: when the wounds and strokes of love are frequent and strong,
they put us into la^gour, and into Lou's well-beloued sickness. Who could ever
describe the amourous langours of a S. Catharin of Sienna, and Genua, or a S.
Angelo Folini, a S. Bernard, a S. Francis. And as for the last, his latter
days were nothing but tears, sighs, plaints, langours, pinings,
Loue-traunces. But in all this, nothing so strange, as the admirable
communicatio^ which the sweet JESUS had with him, of his loving, and precious
pains, by the impression of his wounds, and Stigmats. THEO: I have often
pondered this wonder, and have made this conceit of it. This great Servant of
God, a man wholly Seraphicall, beholding the lively picture of his crucified
Savior, represented in a glittering Seraphin, which appeared unto him upon the
Mount-Aluernus, grew softer then is imaginable, taken, with a sovereign
consolation and compassion: For beholding this bright Myrrour of love which the
Angel could not saciate himself in beholding; alas he sownded with delight,
and contentment! but seeing also the lively representation of the marks and
wounds of his Savior crucified, he felt in his soul the impetuous sword
which stroke through the sacred breast of the Virgin Mother the day of the
Passion, with as much inward grief, as though she had been crucified with her
dear Savior. O God, THEO: if the picture of Abraham fetching deaths blow over
his dear onely-begotten to sacrifice him, a picture drawn by a mortal hand,
had the power to soften, and make weep the Great S. GREGORY Bishop of Nisse
as often as he beheld it, ah! how extremely was the Great S. FRANCIS softened,
when he beheld the picture of our Savior offering himself upon the Cross: A
picture which not a mortal hand, but the Mistress hand of a heavenly
Seraphin, had drawn, and copied out of the original it self, representing so
to the life and nature, the heavenly king of Angels, bruised, wounded, murdered,
crucified.

5. His soul then being thus mollified, softened, and almost melted away in
this dear pain, was thereby greatly disposed to receive the impressions, and
marks of the love and pain of his sovereign lover: for his Memory was wholly
engaged in the remembrance of this Divine Love: his imagination forcibly
applied to represent unto himself, the wounds and wane blows, which his eyes
then saw so perfectly well expressed in the present picture; The Understanding
received from the Imagination infinitely lively Species: And finally love
employed all the forces of the will; to take pleasure in, and conform her
self to the Passion of her well-beloued, whence, without doubt, the soul
found herself tra^sformed into a second Crucified. Now the soul, as the
form, and Mistress of the body, exercising her authority upon, it printed
the pains of the wounds, with which she was struck, in the parts
correspondant to those, wherein her Lover endured them. Love is admirable in
edging the Imagination, to penetrate to the exterior: Labans yewes, while they
were a ramming, had so strong an imagination, that it hit home upon their
Lambkins, with which they were, to make them become white, or motley according
to the rods they beheld in the troughs where they were watered. And women with
child having their Imagination refined by love, imprinte what they list, upon
the child's body. A strong Imagination, makes a man wax white on a night,
disturbing his health and humors. Love then drove out the inward torments of
this great Lover S. Francis, and wounded the body with the dart of sorrow,
with which he had wounded the heart. But love being within, could not well make
the holes in the flesh without, and therefore the burning Seraphin coming to
help, darted the rays of so penetrating a light, that it really printed in
the flesh the exterior wounds of the Crucified, which love had imprinted
interiourly in the soul. So the Seraphin seeing Isaie not daring to speak,
because he perceived his lips defiled, came in the name of God to touch, and
purify his lips with a burning cole taken from upon the Altar, seconding in
this sort his desire. The Myrrhe-tree brings fourth her gum, and first
liquor by way of sweat, and transpiration, but that she may be well delivered
of all her juice, she must be helped by incision. So the divine love of S.
FRANCIS appeared in his whole life in manner of sweat, for all his actions
sauored nothing else but heavenly love. But to make the incomparable abundance
of it plainly appear the divine Seraphin came to give the incision and
wounds. And to the end it might be known, that these wounds were wounds of
heavenly love, they were made, not with iron, but with rays of light! o dear
God, THEO: how loving a pain, and how painful a love was this! for not only
at that instant, but eue^ his whole life after, this poor Saint went pining
and languishing, as being very sick of love.

6. B. PHILIPE NERIVS at fourscore years of age, had such an inflammation of
heart through divine love, that heat making way by the ribbs, did greatly
dilate them, and broke the fourth and fifth, to receive air, and be refreshed.
B. STANISLAVS BOSCA, a young youth of fourteen years, was so assaulted by the
love of his Savior, that diverse times he fell down in a sownd, and was
constrained to apply linen dept in cold water to his breast, to moderate the
violencie of the burning which he felt. To conclude, THEOT: how do you think,
that a soul, who has once a little wishedly tasted divine consolations, can
live in this world so full of miseries, without almost a continual pain and
languishing? That great man of God S. ZAVERIVS has often been heard la^ching
out his voice to heaven, thinking him self all alone, in these terms. Ah my
God, do not for pity, do not bear me down with so great abundance of
consolations; or if through thy infinit^ goodness it will please thee, to make
me so abound in delights, take me to Heaven; for he that has once tasted thy
sweetness, must necessarily live in bitterness, while he does not enjoy
thee. And therefore when God has somewhat largely bestowed his heavenly
sweetes upon a soul, and after withdrawes them, he wounds her by the
privation, and she upon it, is left pining, and sobbing which David. Alas the
day when shall I see,
Thy sweet return my heart shall free
Out of her painful panges.
And with the Apostle: Unhappy man that I am, who will deliver me out of the
body of this mortality?

The end of the sixth Book.
THE SEVENTH BOOK. OF THE UNION OF THE SOVLE WITH HER GOD WHICH IS PERfected
in Prayer.
How love units the soul to God in Prayer. CHAPTER. I.
I. WE speak not here of the general union betwixt God and the soul, but of
certain particular acts, and motions, which the soul recollected in God,
makes by way of Prayer, to be more and more united and joined to his divine
Goodness: for in good-south there is difference betwixt joining and uniting
one thing to another, and thrusting or pressing one thing against, or upon
another; because to join or unite, it is only required that the one be
applied to the other, so that they touch, and be together, as we join vines to
Elmes, and Iasmins to the crosse-barrs of Arbors which are made in gardens. But
to thrust and press together, a strong application must be made, which does
increase and augment the union, so that to thrust together, is to join
strongly and closely, as we see Iuie joined to trees, which is not united
only, but pressed so hard unto them, that it even penetrats, and enters into
their bark.

2. The comparison of little childrens love toward their mother, must not be
left out, by reason of its innocence and purity. Behold then this fine little
child, to whom the mother, being set down, presents her Pape, it casts it
self suddenly into her arms, gathering and foulding all its little body into
her bosom, and lovely breast; and see the mother as mutually receiving it,
close, and as it were, glewe it to her bosom, and joining her mouth to it is,
kiss it. But see again this little babie allured with it is mothers huggings,
how for it is part, it does concur to this union betwixt his mother and it:
For it does also as much as possibly it can, shut and press it self to it is
mothers breast and cheek, as though it would wholly diue into, and hide it
self in this delightful womb whence it was extracted. Now, THEO: in this
case, the union is perfect, which being but one, proceeds notwithstanding from
the mother and the child, yet so, that it has it is whole dep^ndance of the
mother: for she drew the child to her, she did first lock him in her tresses,
pressed him to her breast, nor had the babe such force, as to betake and lock
himself so hard to his mother: yet the poor little on does for his part what
he can, and ioynes himself with all his force to his mothers bosom, not
consenting only to the delightful union which his mother makes, but
contributing with all his heart his feeble endeauours, which are so weak that
they seem rather to be essaies of an union, then an union it self.

3. Thus the^, THEO: our Savior showing the most delightful bosom of divine
love to the deuote soul, he draws her wholly to himself, gathers her up, and
does, as it were, fould all her powers, in the bosom of his more the^ motherly
sweetness, and then burning with love, he thrusts, joins, presses, and
glueth her to the lips of his delights, and to his delicious breasts, kissing
her in the holy kiss of his mouth, and making her taste his dugges more sweet
the^ wine. The soul allured with the delights of these favors does not only
consent, and prepare her self to the union which God makes, but in the strife
of her heart does cooperate, endeavoring more and more to join and lock her
self to the Divine Goodness; yet in such sort that she does ingeniously
acknowledge, that her union, and tie to this sovereign sweetness, is wholly
dependant of Gods operation, without which she could not so much as make the
least essaie imaginable to be united unto him.

4. When we see an exquisite beauty beholden with great ardour, or an
excellent melody heard with great attention; we are wount to say, such a
beauty holds the Spectators eyes glued unto it; such a melody holds their
ears fastened, and that such discourse does ravish the Auditors hearts; what
is it to hold the eyes glued? the ears fastened, to ravish the heart, but to
unite, and closely to join the senses and powers, whereof one speaks to their
obiectes? And the soul is pressed and joined to her object, when she does
intensely affect it, that pressing being no other thing, then the progress and
advancement of the union and conjunction. We make use of this word in our
tongue, in morrall matters: He presses me to do this, or he presses me to
stay, that is, he does not merely use persuation, and entreaty, but does it
even with earnestness, and strife, as did the Pilgrims 1. Emaus, who did not
only petition to our Savior, but even pressed and urged him by force, and
compelled him by a gentle violence to remain in their lodging with them.

5. Now in Prayer, this union is often made, by manner of little, yet frequent
ierts and aduancings of the soul toward God: and if you take notice of little
children united and joined to their mothers breasts, you shall see them ever
and anon pressing and joining themselves, by little iertes which the pleasurs
they take in sucking makes them give: so the heart united to God in Prayer,
makes often times certain surcharges of union by motions which do more
closely press and join it to the divine sweetness. As for example, The
soul having made a long demoure in the feeling of the union, whereby she
sweetly tastes, how happy she is to be Gods; in fine augmenting this union by
a cordial pressing and ierting forwards; I Lord, will she say, I am thine,
all, all, all, without reserve; or else; ah Lord, I am so verily, and will be
daily more and more; or else by way of Prayer. O sweet JESUS, ah! draw me
still more deeply into thy heart, to the end thy love may devour me, and that
I may be swallowed up in thy sweetness.

6. But at other times the union is made, not by iterated ierts, but by way of
a continued insensible pressing and aduauncing of the heart toward the divine
Bounty: for as we see a great and heavy mass of lead, brass, or stone,
though not thrust, does so press, cleeue to, and sink into the earth where it
lies, that at length it is found buried, by reason of the inclination of its
weighty poise, which makes it incessantly tend to the center; so our heart
being once joined to God, if without being distracted it remain in this union,
it sinkes still deeper by an insensible progress of union, till it be wholly in
God, by reason of the holy inclination given it by love, to be continually more
and more united to the sovereign Goodness. For as the great Apostle of France
says, Love is a unitive virtue, that is, it bringes us to a perfect union
with the sovereign Good. And since it is a doubtless truth, that Divine love
while we are in this life, is a motion or at least, an active habit tending to
motion, even after it has attained simple vnio^, it cease not to act, though
imperceptibly still more and more to increase, ad perfect it.

7. So trees that require to be transplanted as soon as that is done, they
sprede their roots, and lodge them deeper in the bosom of the earth which is
their element, and nourishment, nor does any perceive this, while it is a
doing, but only after it is done. And man's heart, transplanted out of the
world into God, by celestial love, if it do earnestly practice Prayer, certes
it will continually extend and join it self to the Divinity, uniting it
self more and more to Gods Goodness, but by imperceptible grouths, whose
progress one can hardly discover while it is doing, but only when it is done.
If you drink any exquisite water, to wit, imperial water, the simple union
thereof with you is instantly made upon your receiving of it; for the receiving
and union is all one in this behalf; but afterward by little and little this
vnio^ is increased by an inse^sibly sensible progress: for the virtue of this
water penetrating the parts, will comfort the brain, sttengthen the heart, and
will disperse its force through the spirits;

8. In like manner, a taste of love, for example that God is good, having got
entry into the heart it does presently make an union, with this Goodness, but
being held a while, as a precious perfume, it penetrats every part of the
soul, poures out and dilats it self in our will, and does, as it were,
incorporate it self with our spirit joining and locking it self more nerely
to each part of us, and uniting us to it. And to it this which the great David
does teach us, when he compares his sacred words to honey: for who knows not
that the sweetness of honey is united more and more to our senses, by a
continual increase of sauorinesse, while holding it a pritie space in our
mouth, or softly swallowing it, the relish thereof does more deeply penetrate
our Taste? And in this wise, the taste of the divine Goodness, expressed in
this word of S. BRVNOS: O BOVNTIE! or by these of S. THOMAS: MY LORD MY GOD! or
these of MAGDALEN: AH MASTER! or these of S. FRANCIS: MY GOD AND MY ALL! this
taste, I say, having been kept a while in a loving heart, it is dilated,
dispersed, and sinkes into the Spirit by an inward penetration, and does more
and more perfume it with it is sent, which is no other thing, then to increase
the union, in the nature of a precious ointment, or Baulme, which falling upon
cotton, does so sink into, and unite it self to it, by little and little,
that in the end one will not easily say, whether the cotton is perfumed, or it
is perfume, or else whether the perfume is cotton, or the cotton perfume. O how
happy is the soul who in the peace of her heart, does lovingly conserve the
sacred feeling of Gods presence: for her union with the divine Goodness shall
have continual, though insensible, increase: and shall thoroughly water the
spirit with infinite sweetness. Now when I speak of the sacred taste of Gods
presence, I do not mean it, of a sensible taste but of that which does
inhabit the top, and Supreme point of the Spirit, where heavenly Love does
reign, and keep his principal exercises.

Of the diverse degrees of the holy union which is made in Prayer. CHAPTER. II.
1. SOmetimes the union is made without our cooperation, save only by a simple
consent, permitting our selves to be united to the Divine Goodness, without
resistance, as a little child in love with his mothers breasts, and yet is so
weak, that he cannot move himself toward them, nor to cleeue to her being
there; only he is glad to be drawn into his mothers arms, and to be pressed,
by her to her breasts.

2. Sometimes we cooperate, when being drawn, we willingly run to second the
force of Gods Goodness, which draws us, and locks us to him by love.

3. Sometimes, we apprehend that we begin to unite and join our selves to God,
before he join himself to us, for that we feel the action of the union of
our part, without perceiving that which God does on his side, which yet
doubtless does always prevent us, though we do not always perceive his
prevention: for unless he united himself to us, we should never unite our
selves to him: he always choseth, and lays hold on us, before we chose or
lay hold one him. But when following his imperceptible touches we begin to
unite our selves unto him, he does often make the progress of our union,
assisting our weackenesse, and joining him self sensibly unto us, in so much
that we feel him enter: and penetrate our hearts with an incomprable delight.
And sometimes also, as he drew us insensibly to the union, he continews
insensibly to aid and assist us. And we know not indeed how so great an union
was made, yet know we well that our forces were not able to effect it, so that
hence we make a clear judgment, that some secret power works insensibly in
us. As Mariners laden with iron, perceiving their shipe sale apace with a
weak gale, do discover that they approach to the Adamant rocks, which draws
them imperceptibly; and see in this sort, a a sensible and perceptible
advancement, caused by an insensible and imperceptible means: for so when we
see our soul still more and more united unto God, as it were by the weak
endeauours of our will, we do easily discern that we have to soft a gale to
sail fast, and that it must needs be that the Adamant of our soul draws us
by the secret influence of his grace: which he keeps from our knowledge, to
the end it might be more admirable, and that without being occupied to discover
his draughts, we might with more purity, and simplicity strive to be united
to his goodness.

4. Sometimes this union is made so insensibly, that our soul neither
perceiues the divine operation in her, nor yet her own cooperation; but finds
the only union insensibly made, to the imitatio^ of Jacob, who found himself
married to Lia without thinking of it; or rather as another Samson, but more
happy, we find our selves netted and tied in the bands of holy union, without
having ever perceived it.

5. At other times we discern the pressing, the union being made by sensible
actions, as well of Gods side, as of ours.

6. Sometimes the union is made by the will only, and sometimes the
understanding has a part in it, because the will does force it after her, and
applies it to its object, making it take a special pleasure to be fixed to the
consideration thereof; as we see, love does endew our corporal eyes with a
profound and peculiar attention, to stay them in the view of what we love.

7. Sometimes this union is made by all the faculties of the soul, who gather
about the will, not to be united to God themselves, not being all capable of
it, but to assist the will to make her union; for if every of the other
faculties, were applied in particular to their own object, the soul working
in them, could not so wholly give her self, to the action, by which the union
with God is made. Such is the variety of unions!

8. See S. MARCIALL (for he was, as they say the blessed child mentioned in S.
MARK) our Savior took him, lifted him up, and held him for a good space in
his arms. O pritie little Marciall, how happy thou art to be laid hold on,
taken up, carried, united, joined, and locked to the heavenly bosom of a
Savior, and kissed with his sacred mouth, without thy cooperation, save only
that thou resisted not the receiving of those divine huggings! Contrariwise S.
SIMEON does embrace, and claspe our Savior hard in his bosom, our Savior
giving no sign of cooperating to this union, though, as the holy Church
sings, the oldman bore the child, but the child governed the oldma^. S.
BONAVENT: touched with a holy humility, did not only not unite himself to
our Savior, but withdrewe himself from his real presence, that is, from the
holy Sacrament of the Altar, when upon a day hearing Mass, our Savior came to
unite himself unto him, bringing the holy Sacrament unto him. But this union
being made, ah God, THEO: think with what fervor this holy soul closed up
his Savior in his heart! Contrariwise S. CATHARIN of Sienna arde^tly desiring
our Savior in the holy communion, pressing and advancing her soul and
affection toward him, he came and joined himself unto her, entering into her
mouth with a thousand benedictions, So that our Savior began the union with S.
Bonauenture; but S. CATHARIN seemed to begin that, which she had with our
Savior. The sacred Spouse in the Canticles, speaks, as though she had
practiced both the sorts of unions; I am wholly my Beloued's, quoth she, and
his returns toward me, for it is as much, as though she had said, I am
united to my dear friend, and he likewise is nere me, to the end that by
uniting himself more and more unto me, he may become wholly mine, my dear
friend is to me a posie of Myrrh, he shall remain betwixt my breasts, and I
will hold him close to my bosom, as a posie of delight. My soul, says
David, has stuck to thee o God and thy right hand has caught and seized me.
But in another place she confesses that she is prevented, saying, my beloved
is wholly mine, and I am wholly his, we make a holy union by which he is joined
to me, and I to him. And yet to show that all the union is made by Gods grace,
which draws us unto it, and by its allurements moves our selves, and gives
life to the motion of our union toward him, she cries out as being wholly
impotent, Draw me: yet to testify, that she will not permit herself to be
drawn as a stone or a slave, but that on her side she will concur, and will
mix her feeble motions to her Lovers powerful drought. we ru^ne says she in
the odours of thy perfumes. And to the end one may know, that she is strongly
drawn by the will, all the powers of the soul will make toward the union,
Draw me says she and we will ru^ne; The Spouse draws but one, and many
runns toward the union. It is the will only that God aims at; but all the
other powers run after, to be united to God with her.

9. The divine shepherd of souls provoked his dear Sunamite to this union:
place me, says he, as a seal upon thy heart, or as a signet upon thy arm.
To imprint a signet well upon wax, one does not only join it, but even
press it hard down: so he desires that we should be united unto him in so
strict and close an union, that we should keep his marks imprinted upon us.

10. The holy love of our Savior does press us; o God what an excellent
exemple of union! He was united to our humane nature by grace, as a vine to the
Elm, to make it in some sort participat of his fruit; but seeing this union
overthrown by Adams sin, he made another more close and pressing union in
the Incarnation, whereby humane nature remains for ever joined in personal
unity to the Divinity: and to the end that not humane nature only, but even
every man might be closely united to his Goodness, he instituted the most holy
Sacrament of the Altar, in which every one might participate, and unite his
Savior to himself really, and by manner of food. THEO: this Sacramental
union does urge, and aid us toward the spiritual union, of which we speak.

Of the sovereign degree of union, by suspension or rauishment. CHAPTER. III.
1. Whether therefore, the union of our soul with God be made perceptibly, or
imperceptibly, God is always the Author thereof; for none can be united to
him, but by going unto him, nor can any go unto him, unless he be drawn by
him, as the Heavenly Spouse does testify, saying, none can come unto me,
unless my Father draws him: which his holy Spouse does also protest, saying,
Draw me, and we will run in the odor of thy perfumes.

2. Now the perfection of this union consists of two points; that it be pure
and that it be strong. May not I go toward a man with intention, to behold
him better, to speak to hi^ to obtain some thing of him, to smell the
perfumes which are about him, to be supported by him? and in that case
certainly I go toward him, and join my self unto him: yet my approach and
union, is not my principal pretention, but I only make that a means and way
to the obtaining of another thing. But if I approach and join my self unto
him, for no other end, then to be near unto him, and to enjoy this
neighborhood and vnio^, it is then an approach of pure and simple union.

3. So, many do approach unto our Savior, some to hear him, as Magdalen; some
to be cured by him, as the sick of the flux; others to adore him, as the
three kings; others to serve him, as Martha; others to vanquish their
incredulity, as S. THOMAS; others to anointe him, as MAGDALEN, JOSEPH,
NICODEMVS; but his divine Sunamite seeks to find him, and having found him,
desires no other thing then to hold him fast, and holding him, never to quit
him; I hold him, says she, and I will never let him go. JACOB, says S. B
RNARD, having fast hold of God, will let him go, so he may receive his
benediction; but the Sunamite will not let hi^ depart, for all the benedictio^s
he can give her; for her aim is not the benedictions of God, but the God of
benedictio^s, saying with David, what is there for me in heaven, or in earth
what can I pretend but thy self? thou art the God of my heart, and my part for
ever.

4. Thus was the glorious Mother at the foot of her sons Cross. Ah! what
do thou search o mother of life, in this Mount of Caluarie, in this place of
death? I am looking, would she have said, my child, who is the life of my
life. And why do thou look him? to be close by him. But now he is amidst the
dolours of death. Ah! it is not mirth I seek, it is himself: and my heart in
love, makes me look all about; to be united unto that amiable child, my
tenderly beloved. In fine the pretention of the soul in this union, is only
to be with her Lover.

5. But when the union of the soul with God is most strict and most close it
is called by Divines, an INHESION, or ADHESION, for that, the soul thereby is
taken, fastened, glued, and nailed to the Divine Majesty, so that she cannot
easily loose, or draw her self back again. Look, I pray you, upon a man
taken, and locked by attention to the delight of a harmonious music, or else
(which is idle) to the fopperie of a game at cards, you would draw him from
it, but cannot, what business soever attend him at home; there is no forcing
him thence, in it, even meat and drink is forgotten. O God, THEOT: how much
more ought the soul that is in love with God to be fastened, and locked, being
united to the Divinity of the infinite Sweetness, and who is taken, and
wholly possessed by this object of incomparable perfection? Such was the soul
of that great vessel of Election, who cried-out: To the end I might live with
God, I am nayld to the Cross with JESUS CHRIST; and with all, he protests,
that nothing, no not death it self, can separate him from his Master. This
effect of love was also practiced between David and Ionathas: for it is said,
that the soul of Ionathas was glued to David's; to conclud it is a famous
AXIOM amongst the Aunciant Fathers, that Friendshipe that can know end, was
never true Friendshipe, as elsewhere I have said.

5. See, I beseech you THEO: the little child cleeuing to, and colling his
mother; if one offer to take him thence to lay him in his cradle, it being
high time, he delays and essaies by all the means he is able, not to forsake
that amiable bosom; and if one make him loose one hand, he claspes hold with
the other, but if one carry him quite away, he falls a crying, and keeping his
heart and his eyes, where he cannot keep his body, with shrikes he pursues
his dear mother, till by rocking he is brought a sleep. So the soul who by
the exercise of union is come to be taken, and fastened to the Divine
Goodness, can hardly be pulled from it by force, and a great deal of pain.
It is not possible to make her loose hold; if one divert her Imagination, she
cease not to apprehend her self taken by the understanding; and if one loose
her understanding, she cleeues by the will, or if yet by some violent
distraction they urge her will to quit her hold from moment to moment, she
returns toward her dear object, from which she cannot be entirely untied, but
she strives all she can to link together again the sweet bands of her union
with him, by the frequent returns which she makes by stelth, experiencing in it
S. PAVLES pain: for she is pressed with two desires; to be freede of all
exterior imploiment, to remain with JESUS CHRIST in her interior and yet to
put hand to the work of Obedience, which the very union with JESUS CHRIST,
does teach her to be requisite.

6. And the B. S. TERESA says excellently, that the union being arrived at
this perfection, as to hold us taken and tied to our Savior, is not
distinguished from a rauishment, suspension, or hanging of the Spirit, But that
it is called only union, suspension, or hanging, when it is short; and when it
is long, Ecstasy or rauishment, because indeed, the soul which is so firmly
and closely united to her God, that she cannot easily be drawn thence, is not
in her self but in God, as a crucified body is not in it self but upon the
cross, or as Iuie grasping the wall, is not in it is self, but upon the wall.

7. But to avoid all equivocation, know THEO: that Charity is a place, and a
place of perfection: and he that is endued with more Charity, is more straightly
united, and fastened unto God. And we speak not of that union which is
permanent in us by manner of habit, be we sleeping, or waking; we speak of
the vnio^ made by action, which is one of the Exercises of love and Charity.
Imagine then that S. PAVLE, S. DENIS, S. AUGUSTINE, S. BERNARD, S. FRANCIS, S.
CATHERIN of Genua, or of Sienna were yet in this world, and were fallen a
sleep, being wearied with their many labors taken for the love of God:
Propose to your self on the other side some good soul, yet not so holy as
they, that were in the Prayer of Union at the same time: I would ask you,
THEO: who is more united, joined, and fastened to God, whether these great
Saints that sleep, or that soul that prays? Certes those are the admirable
lovers; for they have more Charity; and their affections, though in some sort
a sleep, are so engaged, and tied to their Master, that they cannot be
separated from him. But you will say unto me, how can it be, that a soul in
Prayer of Union, even unto Ecstasy, should be less united unto God, then such
as sleep be they never so Saintly? Why mark what I tell you THEO: that soul
is more advanced in the Exercise of vnio^; those in the union it self: these
are united, not uniting themselves, being a sleep: but she is united and is in
the actual practice, and exercise of vnio^.

8. Moreover this exercise of union with God may even be practiced by short and
passing, yet frequent, eiaculations of our heart to God, by way of Iaculatorie
Prayer made to this purpose. Ah JESUS who will give me the grace to be one
soul with thee! In fine Lord rejecting the multiplicitie of creaturs I desire
thine only unity! O God thou art the only unity, and only one, necessary
for my soul! Alas, dear friend of my heart, unite my poor lone soul, to thy
most singular Bounty! Ah thou art wholly mine, when shall I be wholly thine? The
Adamant draws and unites iron unto it; o Lord my Adamant, be my draw-heart,
lock, press and unite my heart for ever unto thy Fatherly breast? Ah since I
am made for thee, why am I not in thee? Dip this drope of Spirit which thou
have bestowed upon me, into the Sea of thy Goodness, from whence it flowed. Ah
Savior I seeing that thy heart loves me why does it not force me to it, I
desiring it should be so? Draw me and I will run seconding thy draughtes, to
cast my self into thy Fatherly bosom, from whence everlastingly I will not
depart.

Of Rapture, and of the first species of the same. CHAPTER. IV.
1. AN Ecstasy is called a Rapture, for as much as God does thereby draw and
rear us up to himself, and a Rapture is termed an ecstasy, in that we do by
it, go and remain, out of and above our selves, to be united to God. And
although the touches by which God draws us be admirably sweet, gustfull and
delicious; yet by reason of the force which the divine Beauty and Bounty
have, to draw unto them the attention and application of the mind, it seems,
that it does not only raise us, but that it does ravish and bear us a way. As
contrariwise, by reason of the most free consent, and ardent motion, by which
the soul ravished, ru^nes after the divine touches, she seems not only to
mount, and eleuate her self, but that she does break out of her self and
cast her self into the very Divinity. It falls out after the same manner, in
the most infamous ecstasy, or abominable Rapture of the soul, who by the
baits of brutall pleasures, is degraded of her spiritual dignity, and placed
below her natural condition; for in so much as she does willingly follow this
accursed pleasure, and does precipitate herself, out of herself, that is, out
of her spiritual estate, she is said to be in a sensual Ecstasy: but for as
much as the sensual baits, and inticements do forceably draw her, and as it
were, traile her into this vile and base condition, she is said to be
ravished, and transported, because these beastly delights do depose her from
the use of reason and understanding with so furious a violence, that as one of
the greatest Philosophers says, a man in this case, seems to be fallen into
the falling sickness, so is the mind swallowed up and as it were lost. O men
how long will you be so made, as to debase your natural dignity, voluntarily
precipitating your selves, and discending to the condition of brute beasts?

2. But my Dear THEO: as touching sacred Ecstasies, they are of three kinds;
the one belongs to the Understanding, the other to the Affection, and the third
to the Action: The one is in Splendor, the other in fervor, the third in the
work: the one is made by admiration, the other by devotion, and the third by
operation. Admiration is caused in us by the approach of an uncouth Truth, which
we neither know, nor yet hope to know: and if the uncouth Truth we meet with,
be accompaned with Beauty and Goodness, the admiratition which proceeds
from it, is vety delicious; So the Queen of Saba finding more true wisdom in
Solomon, then she had imagined, was filled with admiration. And the Jews
experiencing in our Savior more knowledge then ever they had believed, they
were taken with a great admiration. When therefore it pleases the Divine
Goodness to illuminate our heart with some special light, whereby it is raised
to an extraordinary, and sublime contemplation of heavenly Mysteries, then
discovering more beauty in them, then it could have imagined, it falls into
Admiration.

3. Now admiration of pleasant things does closely fix and glue the mind to
the thing admired, as well by reason of the excellent beauty which admiration
discouers unto it, as also by the novelty of this excellency, the
understanding never thinking to have gazed enough, upon that which it never
saw before, and yet is so agreeable to the view: Sometimes also besides this,
God does impart to the soul, a light not only clear, but even increasing in
clearenesse, as the break of the day, and the^, as such as have found a golden
Mine, do still break more earth, still to find more of that wished mettle,
so the understanding does still diue deeper and deeper into the consideration
and admiration of his divine object: for even as admiration was the cause of
Philosophy and the attentive study of natural things, so it was the cause of
Conte^plation, and mystical Divinity; and whereas this admiration being
strong, keeps us without our selves and above our selves by a lively
atte^tion, and application of our understanding to heavenly things, it carries
us co^seque^tly into Ecstasy.

Of the second Species of Rapture. CHAPTER. V.
1. GOd draws men's minds unto him, by his sovereign Beauty, and
incomprehensible GOODNESS, which two excellences are but one Supreme
Divinity, most singularly fair and good together. Every thing aims at GOOD
and FAIR, every thing looks that way, and are stirred and stayed by it; GOOD
and FAIR, is desirable, amiable, and dear unto all; for it, all things do
and will, whatsoever they will or do. And FAIR because it does attract, and
recall all things to it self, the Grecians gives it a name which signifies to
recall. In like manner, light is the true picture of GOOD especially in that,
light does recollect, reduce and turn all things toward it self, whence the
Sun amongst the Grecians is named from a word, which shows that his effect
is to gather together, unite, and assemble things dispersed; as GOODNESS does
turn all things unto it self, being not only the sovereign union, but
soueraignely uniting, since all things desire it, as their Principal
conservation, and last end; so that in conclusion GOOD and FAIR are but one
and the same thing, because all things do covet GOOD and FAIR.

2. This discourse THEO: is almost entirely composed of the words of the Divine
S. D^NIS of Areopagite: and verily it is certain that the Su^ne, Source of
corporal light, is the true picture of GOOD and FAIR: for amongst purely
corporal creaturs, there is neither Goodness, nor Beauty equal to that of
the Sun. Now the BEAVTIE and GOODNESS of the Sun consists in his light,
without which nothing would be FAIR, nothing GOOD in this corporal world: as
FAIR, he lighteneth all, as GOOD he heateth and quickneth all: in so much as
he is FAIR and clear, he draws unto him all the eyes of the world that have
sight; In so much as he is good, and does heat, he gains unto himself all
the appetits and inclinations of this corporal world: for he does extract and
draw up the exhalations and vapors, he touches and makes rise from their
originalls, Plants and living creatures; nor is there any generation to which
the vital heat of this great light does not contribute. So God, Father of
light, soueraignely GOOD and FAIR, by his beauty draws our Understanding to
contemplate him, and by his GOODNESS our wills to love him; as Fair,
replenishing our understanding with delight, he poures his love into our wills;
as Good, filling our wills with his love he excits our understanding to
contemplate him; Love provoking us to Contemplation, and Contemplation to love:
whence it follows that Ecstasies and Raptures depend wholly of love, for it is
love that carries the understanding to Contemplation, and the will to union so
that finally we must conclud with the great S. DENIS, that Divine Love is
extaticall, not leaving Lovers to live to themselves, but to the thing beloved:
for which cause the admirable Apostle S. PAVLE, being possessed of this divine
Love, and participating the extaticall force thereof, with a divinely inspired
mouth, I live, said he, not I, but JESUS CHRIST lives in me, as a true Lover
gone out of himself into God; he lived now not his own life, but the life of
his beloved, as being soueraignely amiable

3. Now these Raptures of love, are exercised upon the will in this sort, God
touches it with the touches of his sweetness, and the^, as a needle touched
with an Adamant, does turn and tend toward the Pole forgetful of its
insensible condition; so the will touched with heavenly love, does lanche out,
and advance it self toward God, leaving all earthly pretentions, and by that
means falls into a Rapture, not of knowledge, but of fruition; not of
admiration, but of affection; not of science, but of experience; not of sight,
but of taste and feeling. It is true as I have already signified, the
understanding enters some times into admiration, seeing the sacred delight
which the will takes in her Ecstasy, as the will often takes pleasure to
perceive the understanding in admiration, so that these two faculties do
enterchang their rauishments: the view of Beauty making us love it, and the
love thereof making us view it. Rarely is a man made hot by the sun beams,
that he is not also lightened; or lightened and not made hot. Love does easily
make us admire; and admiration, love.

3. Howbeit the two Ecstasies of the understanding and will, are not so mutual
but that the one is often found without the other; for as the Philosophers did
better know, then love their Creator; so ordinarily good Christians do more
love then know him, and consequently the abundance of knowledge, is not always
followed with the abundance of love, like as the abundance of love is not still
accompaned with the abundance of knowledge, as elsewhere I have noted. Now if
the Ecstasy of admiration be alone, we are not made better by it, following
that which he said, who was drawn up in Ecstasy into the third heaven: If I
knew, quoth he, all the Mysteries and Sciences, and should want Charity, I am
nothing; and therefore the evil Spirit can put into an Ecstasy, if we may so
say, and ravish the understanding, by proposing unto it wonders which holds it
in suspense elevated above its natural forces, and by such lights he can
afford the will a kind of vain, dainty, nice, and imperfect love, by way of
complacence, satisfaction, and sensible consolation. But to put the will into a
true Ecstasy, whereby it is entirely and powerfully joined unto the divine
Goodness, appertains only to that sovereign Spirit, by whom the Charity of
God is diffused into our hearts

Of the signs of a good Rapture, and of the third species of the same.
CHAPTER. VI.
1. ANd indeed THEO: there have been many in our age, that both themselves and
others with them believed, that they were frequently by the divine power drawn
into Ecstasy, and yet in the end it was discovered, that all was but illusions,
and diabolical amassements. A certain Priest in S. AUGUSTINES time put
himself into Ecstasies when he pleased, by singing, or hearing sunge certain
mournful, and pitiful ditties, and that only to please their curiosity,
who desired to view this Spectacle. But that which is most admirable is, that
his Ecstasy went so far, that he did not feel fire which was applied unto
him, save after he was come to himself; and yet if some spoke with a shrill
voice, he would hear them as from a far off, yet did he not breath. The
Philosophers themselves did acknowledge certain Species of natural Ecstasies,
caused by a vehement application of the mind to the considetion of high things:
Wherefore we must not think it strange if the devil to play the Ape, to
beguile souls, to scandalize the weak, and to transform himself into an
Angel of light, cause Rapturs in certain souls, who are not solidly
instructed in true piety.

2. To the end then, that one might discern Divine Ecstasy from humane an^
^iobolicall; Gods servants have left many documents: But for my part, it shall
suffice for my purpose, to propose unto you two marks of the good and holy
Ecstasy. The one is that the holy Ecstasy does never so much charge, and affect
the understanding as the will, which it does stir up, enkindle, and fill with
a solid affection toward God; so that, if the Exstasie be more fair then
Good; more bright the^ hot; more speculatiue then affectiue, it is very
doubtful, and worthy of suspicion. I do not say, that one may not have
Rapturs, yea Prophetical visio^s without Charity: for as I know well, one may
have Charity without being ravished, or prophesying, as one may also be
ravished and prophecy, without having Charity: but I affirm that he that in
his Rapture has more light of understanding to admire God, then heat of will
to love him, is to stand upon his guard: for it is to be feared that this
ecstasy may be false, and rather puff up the mind then edify, putting him
indeed as another Saul, Balaam, and Caiphas amongst the Prophets, yet leaving
him amongst the reprobate.

3. The second mark of true Ecstasies consists in the third species of
Ecstasies which we touched above; an Ecstasy wholly sacred, wholly amiable, and
which crowns the two others; and it is the Ecstasy of the work and life. The
entire observance of Gods commandment is not within the bounds of man's
strength, yet is it within the the confins of the instinct of man's mind, as
being most conformable to natural light and reason: so that living according
to Gods Commandments, does not put us by our natural inclination, yet besides
God's Co^mandmets, there are certain heavenly inspirations, to the effecting
of which, it is not only requisite that God do raise us above our own
strength, but also he must eleuate us above our natural instincts and
inclinations, because allbeit these inspirations are not opposite to humane
capacity, yet do they exceed it, surmounte it, and are placed above it, in
such sort as we do not then live a civil, honest, and Christian life only,
but a supernatural, spiritual devout, and extaticall life, that is, a life
which in all respects is without the compass, and above the condition of our
nature.

4. Not to steal, not to lie, not to commit luxury, to pray to God, not to
swear, in vain to love and honor ones Father, not to kill; is to live
according to man's natural reason: but to forsake all our fortuns, to fall in
love with Poverty, to entitle and observe her in the quality of a most
delightful Mistress, to repute reproaches, contemptes, abiections,
persecutions, martyrdomes, Felicities, and beatitudes, to contain ones self
within the terms of an absolute chastity, and in fine to live amidst the
world and in this mortal life, contrary to the worlds opinions and MAXIMS,
and against the current of the worlds floode, daily by resignatio^s,
renunciatio^s, and abnegations of our selves, is not to live naturally but
supernaturally: it is not to live in our selves, but with out and above our
selves; and because none is able to raise himself in this manner above
himself, unless the Almighty draw him; thence it is that this kind of life
is a perpetual rauishment, and a continual Ecstasy in action and operation.

5. You are dead, said the great Apostles to the Rodians, and your life is
hidden with JESUS CHRIST in God: Death seperats the soul from the body, and
the confines thereof. What will then these words of the Apostle say, THEO: you
are dead; it is as much as though he had said, you live not in your selves,
nor with in the compass of your natural condition; your soul does not now
live according to her self but above herself. The Phoenix is Phoenix in this,
that by the help of the Sun beams she does annihilate her own life, to
exchang it, for one more sweet and vigorous, hiding as it were her life under
the dead cinders. Silke-wornes do chang their being, of worms, becoming
butterflies; Bees are bred worms, then they turn Nymphs, and creep, and
finally they become flying bees. We do the like, THEO: if we be spiritual:
for we forsake our natural life to live a more eminent life and above our
selves, hiding all this new life in God with JESUS CHRIST who alone sees,
knows, and bestows it. Our new life, is heavenly love, which does quicken and
animate our soul, and this Love is wholly hidden in God, and Godly things with
JESUS CHRIST: for as the sacred Evangelical Text says, after our Savior had
a while showen himself to his Disciples in mounting to heauenwards, at length
he was e^uironed with a cloud, which took him and hid him from their view.
JESUS CHRIST the^ above is hidden in God. And JESUS CHRIST is our love, which
is the life of our soul: Therefore our life is hidden in God with JESUS
CHRIST, and when JESUS CHRIST who is our Love, and co^seque^tly our spiritual
life, shall appear in the day of Judgment, we shall the^ appear together with
him in glory, that is, JESUS CHRIST our Love will glorify us, communicating
unto us his felicity, and brightness.

How Love is the life of the soul, with a continuation of the extaticall life.
CHAPTER. VII.
1. THe soul is the first act and principle of all the vital motions of man,
and as Aristotle expresses it, the PRINCIPLE whereby we live, feel, and
understand; whence it follows, that from the diversity of motions, we gather
the diversity of life's; so that beasts that have no natural motion, are
entirely lifelesse. Even so, THEO: Love is the first ACT or PRINCIPLE of our
deuote or spiritual life, by which we live, feel, and move: and our
spiritual life is such, as are the motions of our love; and a heart that wants
motion and affection, wants love; as contrariwise a heart possessed of love, is
not without Loue-motions. As soon therefore as we have set our affection upon
JESUS CHRIST, we have consequently placed in him, our spiritual life. Now our
Love is hidden in God above, as God was hidden in it, while he was hear
below: Our life therefore is hidden in him, and when he shall appear in
glory, our life, and our Love shall likewise appear with him in God. Hence S.
IGNATIUS, as S. D^NIS reports, affirmed that his Love was crucified, as
though he would have said, my natural and humane love with all the passions
that depend of it, is nailed to the cross: I have put it to death as a mortal
Love, which made my heart live a mortal life: and as my Savior was crucified
and died according to his mortal life, to rise again to an immortal life, so
did I die with him upon the Cross according to his natural love, which was
the mortal life of my soul, to the end I might rise again to the
supernatural life of a love which in that it can be exercised in Heaven, is
also immortal.

2. When therefore we see a soul that has Raptures in Prayer, by which she
goes out of her self and mounts unto God, and yet has no Ecstasies in her
life, I mean, leads not an exemplar life, united to God, by abnegation of
worldly desires, mortification of the will and natural inclinations; by an
interior calmness, simplicity, humility, and above all, by a continual
Charity: believe it, THEO: all these Raptures are exceedingly doubtful, and
dangerous; These are Raptures fit to stir up men to admiration, but not to
sanctify them. For what can it profit the soul to be reared up in rauishment
to God by Prayer, while in her life and conversation she is ravished by
earthly, foul, and natural affections? to be above herself in Prayer, and
below her self in life and operation? To be Angelical in Meditation, and
brutall in conversation? It is to hault on both sides; to swear by God, and
yet by Melchon: In fine it is a true mark that such Raptures and Ecstasies, are
but frauds and delusions of the devil. Happy are they who live a
supernatural and extaticall life, advanced above themselves, alltough in
Prayer they be not ravished. There are many Saints in heaven who were never in
Ecstasy, or Rapture of contemplation: for how many Martyrs, holy men and women,
are mentioned in histories, who never had other privilege in Prayer, then that
of devotion and fervor? But there was never Saint, who had not the Ecstasy
and Rapture of life and operation, ouercomming themselves with their natural
inclinations.

3. And who sees not I pray you THE: that it is the Ecstasy of life and
operation that the great Apostle speaks off, especially when he says, I live
not I, but JESUS CHRIST lives in me: for he himself does expose it in other
terms to the Romans, saying, that our old man is crucified together with JESUS
CHRIST; that we are dead to sin with him, and that we are also risen with
him, to walk in newness of life, and not be any longer slaves to sin.
Behold, THEO: how two men are represented in each of us, and consequently two
lives: the one of the old man, which is the old life; as we say of an Eagle,
who being grown into old age, is glad to drag her plumes, not being after able
to take flight: the other is the life of the new man, which, also is a new
life, as that of the Eagle, who being disburdened of her old feethers which she
had shaken off into the sea, recouers new ones, and being grown young again,
flies in the newness of her forces.

4. In the first life we live according to the old man, that is, according to
the defaultes, weakness and infirmity, contracted by our first Father Adams
sin; and therefore we live to Adams sin, and our life is a mortal life,
yea death it self: In the second life, we live according to the new man, that
is according to the graces, favors, ordinances, and will of our Savior, and
consequently, we live to salvation and Redemption, and this new life, is a
living, vital, and quickening life, but whosoever would attain the new life,
he must make his way by the death of the old, crucifying his flesh with all the
vices and concupicences thereof, interring it in the holy water of Baptism, or
in penance; as Naman did drown and bury in the waters of Iordain, his
leporous and infected old life, to live a new, sound, and spotless life: for
one might well have said of him, that he was not now the old leporous,
stinking, infected Naman: but a new, neat, sound, and comely Naman, because he
was dead to leprosy, but suruiued to health, and integrity.

5. Now, whosoever is raised up again to this new life of our Savior, he
neither lives to himself, in himself, or for himself, but to his Savior, in
his Savior, and for his Savior. Think says S. Paul, that you are truly
dead to sin, but live to God in our Savior JESUS CHRIST.

An admirable exhortation of S. Paul to the extaticall and supernatural life.
CHAPTER. VIII.
1. But finally, me thinks S. Paul, makes the most forceable pressing, and
admirable argument, that ever was made, to urge us all to the Ecstasy, and
Rapture of life and operation. Mark THEO: I beseech you, be attentive, and
ponder the force and efficacy, of the ardent and heavenly words of this
Apostle, ravished and transported with the love of his Master. Speaking then
of himself (and the like is to be said of every one) the Charity, says he
of JESUS CHRIT, does press us, yes THEO: nothing does so much press man's
heart, as love; if a man know that he is beloved, be it of whom it will, he is
pressed to love mutually. But if an ordinary fellow be beloved by a great
Lord, he is yet more pressed; if of a powerful Monarke, how much more is he
pressed? And now I pray you, knowing well that JESUS CHRIST the true Eternal
God Omnipotent, has loved us, even to suffering death for us, and the death of
the cross, is not this o my dear THEO: to have our hearts in the press, to
feel them forceably pressed, and perceive love squised out of them by violence
and constraint, which is so much more violent, by how much it is more amiable
and lovely? But in what sort does Charity press us? the Charity of JESUS
CHRIST, does press us, says his holy Apostle, waighing this matter. But what
does these words (waighing this matter) import? It imports, that our Saviors
Charity does press us then especially, when we do weigh, consider, ponder,
meditate, and remain attentive to this resolution of faith. But what
resolution? mark, my Good THEOT: how he goes engrauing, emplanting, and
forcing his conceit into our hearts. Waighing this, says he; and what? That
if one be dead, and JESUS CHRIST died for all. Certes it is true, if a JESUS
CHRIST died for all, all the are dead, in the person of this only Savior, who
died for them: and his death is to be imputed unto them, since it was endured
for them, and in consideration of them.

2. But what follows out of all this? me thinks I hear that Apostolical
mouth, as a thunder, making an outcrie to the ears of our hearts; It follows
then o Christians, what JESUS CHRIST dying for us, desired of us. And what did
he desire of us, but that we should be conformed unto him, to the end, says
the Apostle, that such as live, should henceforth no more live to themselves,
but to him that died, and rose for them. Dear God, THEO: how powerful a
consequence is this in the matter of Love! JESUS CHRIST died for us, by his
death he has given us life; we do not live but in so much as he died, he died
for us, to us, and in us. Our life then, is no more ours, but his who did
purchase it us, by his death: we are not therefore any more to live to our
selves, but to him, nor in our selves, but in him, nor for our selves but for
him. A young Girl of the I Will of Sestos, had brought up an Eagle, with such
diligence as little children are wont to bestow upon such emploiments: the
Eagle being come to her grouth, began by little and little to find her winge,
and fly at bird's, following her natural instinct, afterward getting more
strength, she seized upon wild beasts, never failing faithfully to bring home
the prey to her dear Mistress, as in acknowledgment of the breeding, which
she had from her. Now it happened upon a day that this young damsel died,
while the poor Eagle was rouing abroad, and her body according to the
coustome of those times, and places, was publicly placed upon the funeral
Pile to be brunt; but even as the flame began to sease hpon her, the Eagle came
in; with a quick flight, and beholding this unlooked for, and sad spectackle,
struck through with grief, she loosed her talons, let fall her prey, and
spread herself upon her poor beloved Mistress; and covering her with her
wings, as it were to defend her from the fire, or for pities sake to embrace
her, she remained there constant and immovable, courageously dying and burning
with her, the ardour of her affection not giving place to the ardour of flames
and fire, that by that means she might become the VICTIME and HOLOCAVSTE of
her brave and prodigious love, as her Mistress was already of death and fire.

3. O THEO: to what a high flight this Eagle moves us! our Savior has bred us
up from our tender youth, yea he formed us, and received us as a loving Nource
into the arms of his Divine Providence, even from the time of our Conception.
Not being yet, thy holy hand did make me;
Scarce borne, into thy arms thy love did take me.
He made us his own by Baptism, and by an incomprehensible love does tenderly
nourish both our body and soul: to purchase us life, he suffered death, and
with his own flesh and blood has fed us: Ah what rests then, my dear THEO:
what Conclusion are we to draw from hence; but only, that such as live, should
live no more to them selves, but to him that died for them; that is to say,
that we should consecrate all the moments of our life, to the Divine Love of
our Saviors death, bringing home to his glory all our preys, all our
conquests, all our actions, all our thoughts and affections? Let us behold,
THEO: this heavenly Redeemour extended upon the Cross, as upon a funeral Pile
of honor, where he died of Love for us, yea of love more painful then death
it self, or a death more pleasant then love it self: Ah do we not
spiritually cast our selves upon him, to die upon the Cross with him, who for
the love of us freely died? I will hold him, should we say, if we had the
Eagles generositie, and will never depart from him; I will die with him, and
burn in the flames of his love; one and the same fire shall consume the Divine
Creator, and the miserable creature. My JESUS is wholly mine, and I am wholly
his, I will live and die upon his breast, nor life nor death shall ever
separate me from him. Thus is the holy Ecstasy of true love practiced while we
live not according to humane reason and bent, but above them, following the
inspiration and instinct of the heavenly Savior of our souls.

Of the supreme effect of affectiue love, which, is the death of Lovers, and
first of such as died in love. CHAPTER. IX.
1. Love is strong, as death; death does separate the soul of him that dies
from the body, and from all earthly things: Sacred love does separate the
Lovers soul from the body, and all earthly things; nor is there any other
difference, saving that death does that in effect, which love ordinarily do
only in affection. I say ordinarily, THEO: because holy love is sometimes so
violent that even in effect, it causes a separation betwixt the body and the
soul; making the Lovers die a most happy death, much better then a thousand
lives.

2. As it is proper to the Reprobate to die in sin; so is it proper to the
Elect to die in the Love and Grace of God, yet in a different manner. The just
man never dies unprovided; for to have perseuered in Christian Justice even to
the end, was a good provision for death. He dies indeed sometimes suddenly,
or a sudden death. For this cause the most wise Church in her Litanies does
teach us not only to demand, to be delivered from sudden death, but sudden
and unprovided death: It is no worse for being sudden, if it be not withal
unprovided. If some weak and common souls, had seen fire from Heaven fall
upon the great S. SIMEON Stilits head, and kill him, what would they have
thought, but thoughts of scandal? yet are we to make no other conceit of the
matter then that this great Saint, having perfectly sacrificed himself to God
in his heart already wholly consumed with love, the fire came from Heaven to
perfect the Holocauste and entirely burn it; for the Abbot Julian, being a
days journey off, saw his soul ascend to Heaven, and thereupon caused incense
to be offered in thanksgiving to God. The Blessed man, Good Cremonius, on a
certain day, set upon his knees most deuotly to hear Mass, rose not at the
Gospel according to custom, whence those that were about him, looked upon
him, and perceived he was dead. There have been in our time most famous men for
virtue and learning, found dead, some in the confession seat, others while they
heard the Sermon: yea some have been seen falling down dead at their going
out of the Pulpet where they had preached with great fervor; and all these
deaths were sudden, yet not unprovided. And how many Good people do we see
die of Apoplexies, Lethargies, and a thousand other ways, very suddenly;
others of madness and frenzy without the use of reason? and all these,
together with children who are baptized died in Grace and consequently in the
Love of God. But how could they die in the Love of God, since they thought not
of God, at the time of their departure?

3. Learned men, THEO: loose not their knowledge while they are a sleep, for
so they would be unlearned at their awaking, and be forced to return to
school. The like it is of all the habits of Prudence, Temperance, Faith, Hope,
and Charity: They are continually in the just man's heart, though they be not
always in action. While a man sleeps, it seems that all his habits sleep
with him, and when he awakes, awake with him. So a just man dying suddenly, or
oppressed by a house falling upon him, killed by Thunder, or stifled with a
catarre, or else dying out of his senses by the violence of a hot Ague, dies
not indeed in the exercise of holy Love, yet dies he in the habit thereof,
wher-vpon the wiseman says, if the iust-man be prevented by death, he shall
be in a place of refreshing: for it suffices to obtain eternal life to die
in the state and habit of love and Charity.

4. Yet many Saints have departed this life, not only in Charity, and with
the habit of heavenly love, but even in the act and practice thereof. S.
AUGUSTINE deceased in the exercise of holy contrition, which cannot be without
Love. S. HIEROM in exhorting his dear children to the love of God, their
neighbors, and virtue. S. AMBROSE in a Rapture, sweetly discoursing with his
Savior, immediately after he had received the holy Sacrament of the Altar. S.
ANTONIE of Padua after he had recited a hymn of the glorious virgin mother and
while he spoke with great joy to our Savior. S. THOMAS of Aquine, joining his
hands, eleuating his eyes toward Heaven, raising his voice very high, and
pronouncing by way of iaculation, with great devotion these words of the
Ca^ticles, (the last which he had expounded,) Come unto me, my dearly beloved,
and let us go toge-into the fields. All the Apostles, and in a manner all the
Martyrs died in Prayer. The Blessed and Venerable Bede, having foreknowne by
revelation the time of his departure, went to Euensong (and it was upon the
Ascension day) and standing upon his feet, leaning only upon the rests of his
seat, without any disease at all, ended his life with the end of the Euensong,
as it were directly to follow his Master ascending unto Heaven, there to
enjoy the bright morning of eternity, which knows no evening. John Gerson
Chancellor of the university of Paris, a man so learned and pious that as
Sixtus Sen^nsis says, one can hardly discern whether his learning
outstripped his pieti^ or his piety his learning, having explicated the fifth
propriety of divine love, recorded in the Canticle of Canticles, three days
after making show of a very lively countenance and courage, expired pronouncing
and iterating by way of iaculatorie Prayer, these holy words drawn out of the
same Canticles? o God thy love is strong as death. S. MARTIN^ as is known,
died so attentive to the exercise of his devotions, that he could not speak
another word. S. Lewis that great king amongst Saints, and great Saint amongst
kings. being infected with the plague, prayed still, and then having received
his heavenly VIATICVM, casting abroad his arms in manner of a Cross, his eyes
fixed upon Heaven, yielded up the ghost ardently sighing out these words with a
perfect confidence of love, ah Lord I will enter into thy house, I will adore
thee in thy holy Temple, and bless thy ^ame. S. PETER Celestine, wholly
possessed with afflictions, which one can scarcely speak off, being come to
the periode of his days, began to sing, as a sacred Nitingale, the last Psalm
making these loving words the close of his life and song. LET ^VERY SPIRIT
PRAISE OUR LORD. The Admirable S. EVSEBIVS, surnamed the stranger, deceased
upon his knees in fervent Prayer: S. PETER Martyr writing with his own finger
and blood the Confession of Faith for which he died, and uttering these words,
Lord into thy hands I commend my Spirit: And the great Iaponian Apostle S.
FRANCIS Zauerius, holding and kissing the image of the Crucifix, and repeating
at every turn of a hand, this Eiaculation of heart. O JESUS, the God of my
heart,

Of some that died by and for divine Love. CHAPTER. X.
1. All the Martyrs THEO: died for the Love of God; for when we say many died
for the faith, we mean not, that they died for a dead faith, but for a lively
faith, that is, quickened by Charity: And the confession of Faith, is not so
much an act of the understanding, and of Faith, as of the will, and of the Love
of God. And thus the great S. PET R conseruing Faith in his heart the day of
his Masters, did yet quit Charity, refusing in words to profess him to be
his Master, whom in heart he acknowledged to be such. But there were yet other
Martyrs who died expressly for Charity alone, as our Saviors great
Forerunner, who was martyred for brotherly correction; and the glorious Princes
of the Apostles S. PETER and S. PAVLE, but especially S. PAVLE was put to death
for having reclamed those women to a pious and pure life, whom that infamous
Nero had wrought to lewdness: The holy Bishops Stanislaus, and S. THOMAS of
Canterbury, were slain for a matter that touched not Faith, but Charity. In
fine a great part of sacred Virgin-Martyrs were put to slaughter for the Zeal
they had to conserve their Chastity, which Charity had caused them to
dedicate to their heavenly Spouse.

2. But there are some of the Sacred Lovers that do so absolutely give
themselves over to the exercises of Divine Love, that holy fire does wast and
consume their life. Grief does sometimes so long hinder such as are afflicted,
from eating, drinking, or sleeping, that in the e^d weakened and wasted they
dye; whereupon it is a common saying, that such died of Grief: but it is not so
indeed; for they died through euacuation, and defect of strength. True it is,
since this faintness took them by reason of grief, we must auerre, that
though they died not of grief, yet they died by reason of grief, and by
grief: so my dear THEO: when the fervor of holy love is great, it gives so
many assaults to the heart, so often wounds it, causes in it so many langours,
so ordinarily melts it, and puts it so frequently into Ecstasies ad Raptures,
that by this means, (the soul being almost entitely occupied in God, not
being able to affo^d sufficient assistance to nature, conveniently to disg^st
and nourish) the sensible and vital spirits beg^n by little and little to
fail, li^e is shortened, and death approaches.

3. O God, THEO: how happy this death is! How delightful is this loue-dart,
which wounding us with the incurable wound of heavenly love, makes us for ever
pining and sick with so strong a beating of the heart, that at length we must
yield to death. How much, do you think, did these sacred langours, and
labors undergone for Charity, shorten the days of the Divine Lovers S.
Catherin of Sienna, S. Francis, Little Stanislaus Bosca, S. Charles, and many
hundreds more who died in their youth? Verily as for S. FRANCIS, from the time
he received his Masters holy Stigmats, he had so violent and stinging pains,
gripes, conuulsions and deseases, that he had nothing left on him but skin
and bones; and he seemed rather to be an Anatomy, or a picture of death, then
one living and breathing.

How some of the heavenly Lovers died even of Love. CHAPTER. XI.
1. All the Elect then, THEO: deceased in the habit of holy love; but further,
some died even in the exercise of it, some again for it, others by it. But
that which belongs to the sovereign degree of love, is, that some die of love;
and the^ it is, that love does not only wou^d the soul, and thereby make her
languish, but does even pearce her through, hitting directly on the midst of
the heart, and so deeply, that it forces the souls depa^ture out of the
body, which falls out in this manner. The soul powerfully drawn by the divine
sweetness of her Beloved, to complie of her part with his dear allurements,
forcibly springs out, and to her power tends toward her desired attracting
friend, and not being able to draw her body after her, rather then to stay
with it in this miserable life, she quits it and gets clear, lonely flying as
a fair dove into the delicious bosom of her heavenly Spouse. She throws her
self upon her Beloved, and her Beloved does draw and force her to himself.
And as the Bridgroome leaves Father and mother to adheare to his dear Bride.
So this chaste Bride forsakes flesh and blood to be united to her Beloved. Now
it is the most violent effect that a love works in a soul, and which
requires a great precedent purity from all such affections as may detain the
soul prisoner either to the world or to the body, so that like as fire having
by little and little separated the Essen^e from its mass, and wholly purified
it, at length it also drives out the QVINT-ESSENCE; even so holy Love having
retired man's heart from all fantasies, inclinatio^s, and assions as far
fourth as may be, does at length urge the soul out, to the end that by that
passage, precious in the sight of God, she might pass to eternal glory.

2. The great S. FRANCIS, who in the matter of heavenly love comes still before
mine eyes, could not possibly escape dying by love, by reason of the manifould
and great langours, Ecstasies and tran^es which his love to God, who had exposed
him to the whole worlds view, as a MIRACLE OF LOVE, would not only have him
die for love, but even of Love. For consider, I beseech you his death.
Perceiving himself upon the point of his departure, he caused himself to be
laid naked upon the ground, where having received a habit for God's sake,
which they put on him, he made a speech to his brethren, encouraging them to
love and fear God, and his Church* made our Saviors passion be red, and then
with an extreme fervor began the 141. Psalm. With my voice I have cried to
our Lord: with my voice I have Prayed to our Lord: and having pronounced these
last words, o Lord bring forth my soul out prison, that I may praise thy holy
name, the just expect me, till thou reward me; he died the 45. year of his
age. Who sees not, I besseech you THEO: that the Seraphicall man, who had so
instantly desired to be martyred, and to die for love, died in the end of love,
as in another place I have explicated.

3. S. MAGDALEN having for the space of 30. years lived in a cave which is yet
to be seen in PROVINCE ravished seven times a day, and borne up in the air by
Angels, as though it had been to sing the seven Canonical hours in their
Quire, in the end, upon a Soneday she came to Church, where her dear Bishop S.
Maximinus finding her in contemplation, her eyes full of tears, and her arms
stretched out, he communicated her, and soon after, she delivered up her
blessed soul, who once a gain for good and all, went to her Saviors feet,
to enjoy the BETTER ^A^^ which she had already made choice off near below.

4. S. BASILE had contracted a strict friendshipe with a Physician, a Jew by
nation and religion, with intention to bring him to the faith of JESUS CHRIST,
which nevertheless he could not effect, till such time, as, decayed by youth,
old age and labors, being upon the point of dying, he enquired of the
Physician, what opinion he had of him, coniuring him to speak freely; which
the Physician refused not, but feeling his pulse, told him, there was no
remedy (quoth he) before the Sun let you will depart this life. But what
will you say, replied the patient, if to morrow I shall be alive? I will
become Christian I promise you, laid the Physician. With this the Saint
prayed to God, and obtained a prolongation of his own temporal life, for the
good of his Physicians spiritual life, who, having seen this Miracle, was
converted, and S. Basile rising courageously out of his bed went to the Church,
and baptized him with all his Family: then being returned to his chamber, and
gotten to bed, after he had passed a good space with our Savior in Prayer, he
holily exhorted the assistants to serve God with their whole heart, and finally
seeing the Angels approach, pronouncing with an extreme delight these words, o
God I recommend unto thee my soul, and restore it into thy hands, he died. But
the poor converted Physician, seeing him thus deceased, colling him, and
melting into tears upon him: o great Servant of God Basile, quoth he, indeed
if thou had list, thou had no more died to day, then yesterday. Who does
not see that this death was wholly from love? And the Blessed S. Teresa,
revealed after her death, that she died with an impetuous assault of love,
Which had been so violent, that nature not able to support it, the soul
departed toward the beloved object of her love.

A wonderful history of the death of a gentleman who died of love upon the
Mount-Oliuet. CHAPTER. XII.
1. BEsides that which has been said, I have light upon a history, which
being extremely admirable, is yet more credible to sacred Lovers; since, as the
holy Apostle says Charity does easily believe all things that is, she does
not easily suspect one of lying; and unless there be signs of apparent
deceit in that which is proposed, she makes no difficulty to believe it: but
especially when they are things which do exalt and magnify God's love toward
man, or man's love toward God; because Charity being the Sovereign Q^eene of
virtues, following the manner of a Princ^sse, who takes co^te^t in things that
are for the renown of her Empire, and dominion. And beit, the relation I am to
make, be neither so much diuulged nor confirmed, as the greatness of the
miracle which it contains would require, yet is it not therefore void of
truth: for as S. Augustine says excellently well: scarcely can we know
miracles, though most famous, even in the places where they are wrought; and
even though such as have seen them relates them, we have difficulty to giu^
credit unto them; yet are they no less true for all this: and in matter of
Religion, well borne souls take more delight to believe those things which
contain difficulty and admiration.

2. A valiant illustrious and virtuous knight, went upon a time beyond ^ee into
Palestin, to visit the holy Land where our Savior performed the work of our
Redemption; and to begin this holy exercise worthily, he first of all
confessed, and communicated deuotely, immediately, after went straight to
Nazareth, where the Angel announced unto the most Sacred virgin, the Blessed
Incarnation, and where the most adorable conception of the Eternal word was
finished, and there this worthy Pilgrim set himself to the contemplation of
the heavenly Boun^ is depth, who daigned to put on man's nature, to recover him
from perdition; from thence he passed to Bethleem, the place of the Nativity,
where, it is not to be spoken, what an abundance of tears he poured forth, in
contemplation of those wherewith the Son of God, the virgins little babe, had
watered that holy stable, kissing and rekissing a thousand times that sacred
earth, and licking the dust, upon which the prime infancy of the Divine child
was received in Bethleem: He went into Berthabara, and from thence to that
little place in Bethania, where calling to mind, that our Savior was there
vnuested to be baptized, he also vnuested himself, and going into Iordaine,
washing himself and drinking the waters thereof, he thought, he saw his
Savior receiving Baptism at his Precursors hand, and the holy Ghost
descending visibly upon him, in the form of a dove, the Heavens remaining
open, from whence, as it appeared to him, the voice of the Eternal Father
issued, saying: This is my beloved Son, in whom I am pleased: From Bethania
he takes his way toward the Desert where he beheld with the eyes of his mind,
the Savior of the world-fasting, fighting, and vanquishing the Enemy,
together with the Angels who served him with admirable food. From thence he
makes toward the Mount THABOR, where he saw our Savior transfigured; thence
to the mountain of SION, where he saw our Savior again, as he apprehended,
upon his knees in the last supper washing the Disciples fe^ ^, and then
distributing unto them his sacred body in the holy EVCHARISTE: he passes the
Torrent of CEDRON, and betakes himself to the Garden of GETHSEMIN^, where with
a most amiable dolor, his heart dissolved into tears, while he proposed unto
himself his dear Savior sweating blood in the extreme Agony which he there
endured; and soon after taken, corded and led to Hierusal^, whither also he
goes, thoroughly to follow the footesteps of his Beloved, and saw him in
Imagination haled hither and thither; to ANNAS; to CAIPHAS, to PILATE, to
HEROD, whipped, buffetted, spit upon, crowned with thorns, presented to the
people, sentenced to death, laden with his Cross, which he carries, and in
carrying it met his dolorous mother, and the daughters of Jerusalem bewailing
him. Finally this deuote Pilgrim mounts unto the Mount Caluarie, where he sees
in Spirit the Cross laid upon the ground, and our Savior quite naked whom
they throw down, and most cruelly nail him to it hand and foot. He goes on,
contemplating how they rear up the Cross, and crucify him in the air, blood
flowing out from every part of his divine body. He looks upon the poor
sacred virgin, tra^spearced with the sword of sorrow, and then again he eyeth
his crucified Savior, whose 7. last words he marks with an incomparable love,
and at the length he saw him dying, soon after, dead. Then receiving the wound
of the Lance, and by that holes passage showing his Divine heart, then taken
down from the Cross, and carried to his Sepulcher, whither still he follows
him sending out a Sea of tea^es upon the ground, which was watered with his
Redeemours blood; he enters into the sepulcher and buries his heart with his
Masters body; afterward rising with him, he goes to Emaus, and sees what
passed between the Master and his two Disciples. In fine returning by the
Mount Oliuet, where the Mystery of the Ascension was accomplished, and there
seeing the last prints and footesteps of his heavenly Saviors feet, falling
groueling upon them, and kissing the^ a thousand, thousand times with the
sighs, of an infinite love, he begun to draw toward him the force of all
his affections, as an Archer the string of his Bow, when he is about to
shoot, then raising himself, and stretching his eyes and hands to heauenward.
O JESUS, said he, my sweet JESUS, I have now no further to search and follow
thee in Earth. Ah then JESUS, JESUS my LOVE, grant unto my poor heart that it
may follow thee, and fly after thee to Heaven; and in these fervent words, he
presently breathed out his sole to Heaven, as a blessed arrow, which he, as a
divine Archer, shot at the white of his most happy Object. But his fellow's,
and servants, who saw this Lover so suddenly fall down as dead, amaised at the
accide^t, ra^ne with speed for the Doctor, who when he came, he found him
quite dead; and to give a certain Judgment of so sudden a death, he made
inquiry, of what complexion, nature and disposit^on the deceased party was,
and he found, that he was of a most sweet and amiable nature, marvelous
deuote, and fervent in the love of God. Whereupon, quoth the Doctor, doubtless
his heart split with excess and fervor of love. And to confirm his judgment
the more, he opened him, and found this generous heart open, with this sacred
Motto engraven in it, JESUS MY LOVE! Love then, played Deaths part in this
heart, seperating the soul from the body, without the concourse of any other
cause. S. Bernardin of Sienna, a learned and pious Author relates this
History, in the first of his Sermons of the Ascension.

3. An other Author also, well near of the same Age, who out of humility
concealed his name worthy to be named; in a book entitled, A MYRROR OF THE
SPIRITVALL, makes mention of an history yet more admirable: for he says that
in PROVINCE there lived a Lord much addicted to the Love of God, and exceeding
deuote to the Blessed Sacrament. Now upon a time being extremely afflicted with
a disease, which caused him continually to render, the Holy Communion, which
was brought unto him, who not daring to receive it, least he might be forced to
cast it up again, he besought the Pastor, to apply it at least to his
breast, and with it to make the sign of the Cross over him; This was done,
and in a moment, his breast inflamed with Divine Love, opened, and drew into it
self the heavenly food, wherein his beloved was contained, and at the same
instant departed life. I must in very deed confess that this history is
extraordinary, and such as would require a more weighty testimony: yet after
the true history of S. CLARE DE MONTE PALCO, which all the world may, even to
this day, see; and that of S. Francis his STIGMATS, which is most certain, my
soul meets with nothing which is hard to be believed amongst she effects of
Divine Love.

That the Sacred Virgin mother of God died of the love of her S^nne. CHAPTER*
XIII.
1. ONe can hardly well doubt, but that the great S. Joseph died before the
Passion and death of our Savior, who otherwise had not commended his mother to
S. John. And how can one imagine, that the dear child of his heart, his
beloved Nurse-child, did not assist him at the hour of his departure? Blessed
are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Alas! how much sweetness,
Charity, and Mercy did this good Foster-father use toward our little Savior
at his ^ntrie into this world: and who can then believe, but at his departure
out of it, that divine child rendered him the like with an hundredfold, filling
him with heavenly delights? Storks are the true representations of the mutual
piety of children toward their parents, and of parents toward their
children: for being flitting birds, they bear their decrepit parents with them
in their journey; as their parents had borne them while they were yet young in
the like occasion. While our Savior was yet a little babe, the great S. Ioheph
his Foster-Father, and his most glorious Virgin Mother, had many a time borne
him, but especially in their journey from Judea to Egypt, and from Egypt to
Judea. Ah who can then doubt, but this holy Father being come to the period of
his days, was reciprocally borne by his divine Nurse-child (in his passage
from this to another life) into Abraham's bosom, to translate him from thence
to Glory in the day of his Ascension? A Saint that had loved so much in his
life, could not die but of love; for his heart not being able to love his dear
JESUS so much as he desired, while he continued amongst the distractions of
this life, and having already performed the duty which he ought to his
nonage, what remained, but that he should say to the Eternal Father, O
Father I have accomplished my charge: and then to the Son, ^ my child, as thy
heavenly Father put thy tender body into my hands the day of thy coming into
this world, so do I render up my soul (...) thine, this day of my departure
out of this world.

2. Such, as I conceive, was the death of this great Patriarch, a man elected
to perform the most dear and loving offices, that ever was, or shall be
performed to the Son of God, save those that were done by the Sacred Spouse,
the true natural mother of the said son: of whom it is not possible to make
a conceit, that she died of any other kind of death, then of love. A death the
most noble of all, and consequently due to the most noble life that ever was
amongst creaturs. A death whereof the very Angels would desire to die, if die
they could. If the primative Christians were said to have but one heart and
one soul, by reason of their perfect mutual love? If S. Paul lived not
himself, but JESUS CHRIST lived in him, by reason of the close union of his
heart to his Masters; whereby his soul was as dead in the heart which it
quickened, to live in the heart of the Savior which it loved? O Good God how
much more true it is, that the Sacred Virgin and her Son had but one soul,
one heart, and one life, so that this heavenly mother in living, lived not, but
her son lived in her. She was a mother the most loving and the most beloved
that ever could be, yea loving and beloved with a love incomparably more
eminent, then that of all the Orders of Angels and men, like as the names of an
only Mother, and an only Son, are names passing all other names in matter
of love; and I say of an only mother, and an only Son, because all the
other sonne^ of men, do divide the acknowledgment of their production betwixt
their Father and mother; but in this son as all his humane birth depe^ds of
his mother alone, who alone, contributed that which was requisite to the virtue
of the holy Ghost for the co^ception of this heavenly child; so to her alone,
all the love which sprung from that production was rendered as due, In such
sort, that this Son, and this mother, were united in an union by so much more
excellent, as her name in love is different, and above all other names: for
which of the Seraphins can say to our Savior, thou art my true Son, and as
such, I love thee? And to which of his creaturs did our Savior ever say, Thou
art my true mother, and as my true mother I love thee? Thou art my true mother,
entirely mine, and I am thy true son wholly thine: And if a loving servant
durst, and did indeed say that he had no other life then his Masters: Alas,
how confidently and fervently might this mother proclaim. I have no life, but
the life of my Son, my life is wholly in his, and his wholly in mine; for there
was not a mere union, but an unity of hearts betwixt this mother and this
son.

3. And if this mother lived by her Sonns life she also died of her Sonns
death: for such as is the life, such is the death. The Phoenix, as the report
goes, grown very aged, gathers together in the top of a mountain, a quantity
of aromaticall woods, upon which, as upon he bed of honor she goes to end her
days: for when the Sun, being at his highest does stream out his hotest
beams, this most singular bird, to contribute the advantage of action to the
Sunns ardour, cease not to beat with her wings upon her bed, till she have
made it take fire, and burning with it, she consumes, and dies in those
odoriferous flames. In like manner, THEO: the virgin Marie having assembled in
her heart all the most amiable Mysteries of the life and death of her son, by
a most lively and continual memory of them, and withal RECTA LINEA receiving
the most ardent inspirations, which her Son, the Son, of Justice, darted
upon mortals, even in the heat of his charity. And further, of her part,
making a perpetual motion of Contemplation: in the end the sacred fire of this
heavenly love, did wholly consume her as an Holocaust of sweetness, so that
she died of it, her soul being altogether ravished, and transported into the
arms of her Sonns love. O death lovingly vital, o Love vitally mortal!

4. Many sacred Lovers were present at our Saviors death: amongst whom such as
did most love, did also most grieve: for Love was then sleeped in grief, and
grief in Love: and all such as were fervent in love toward their Savior,
fell in love with his passion and pain. But the sweet mother who passed all
in love, received a deeper wound from the sword of grief then all the rest.
Her Sonns pain was then a sharp sword which ra^ne through his mothers heart,
it being glewed, joined and united to her sonns in so perfect an union, that
nothing could hurt the one which did not as deeply hurt the other. Now this
motherly heart being in this sort wounded with love, did not only not seek to
have her wound cured, but even loved her wound better then all cures: dearly
conseruing the darts of sorrow which she had received in her heart, because it
was love that shot them at her; and continually desiring to die of the^, as her
son died thereof who, as the holy Scripturs* and all the Doctors do
witenesse, died amidst the flames of Charity, a perfect HOLOCAVST for all the
sins of the world.

That the Glorious virgin died of an extremely sweet and calm love. CHAPTER.
XIV.
1. OF one side it is said that our B. Lady revealed to S. Mathilda, that the
sickness whereof she died, was no other thing then an impetuous assault of
love. Yet S. Brigit, and S. John Damascen do witness, that she died an
exceeding peaceable death; and both are true, THEOTIME.

2. The stars are wonderful delightful to behold, and cast out pleasing
shines, yet if you have noted it, they bring forth their rays, by way of
gatterings, sparklings, and dartings, as though they were delivered of their
light by travel at diverse essays, whether it be that their weak light cannot
keep a continual equality of action, or our f^^ble ^ight cannot constantly
and steaddily behold them, by reason of the great distance: So ordinarily
Saints that die of love, experience in themselves a great variety of
accidents* and symptoms thereof, before they come to their e^d, many sobings,
many assaults many ecstasies, many la^guors many agonies; and one would think
that their Love brought forth their happy death by travel, and (...)
endeavors: which happens by the weakness of their love, which is not as yet
perfectly perfect; so that it cannot continue affection with an equal
steadfastnesse.

3. But in the B. Virgin it was a quite other thing, for as we see the fair
AVRORA increase, not at diverse essays, and ierts, but by a continued
dilatation and increase, which is in a sort insensibly sensible, so that she is
indeed seen to increase her light, yet so softly, that no interruption,
separation, or discontinuation, can be apprehended therein. So God's love did
every moment increase, in the Virginal heart of this glorious Lady, but by a
gentle, smooth, and continued increase, without agitation, toss, or violence
at all: Ah no THEO: we must not admit any forcible agitation in this celestial
love of the virgins motherly heart; for love of it self is sweet, gracious,
peaceable, and calm. And if it do sometimes assault, and make force against
the mind, it is because it meets with opposition. But when the passages of the
soul lie open to it without oppositio^ or co^tradiction, it peaceably makes
progress with an incomparable sweetness. Thus then holy love exercised its
force upon the virginal heart of the Sacred mother, without force or violent
boisterousnesse, because it found therein neither stop nor stay. For as we see
great rivers froth, and flash back again with a great noise in craggie
corners, where the points or shelues of rocks do oppose themselves, and
hinder the waters course: while contrariwise they d^ie smoothly without
violence glid and steel over the plains: So divine Love meeting with many
impeachments and oppositions in humane hearts, as in truth all hearts have
them, though differently, makes force, fighting against naughty inclinations,
beating the heart, thrusting the will forwards by diverse shuggs and sundry
essays, to make way be made to it self, or at least, to ouerpasse the
obstacles. But all things in the B. Virgin did help and second the course of
heavenly love: making in her a greater progress and increase, then in all
other creaturs, yet a progress that was infinitely sweet peaceable and calm.
No, she sownded not with love or compassion at the foot of her crucified
son, though there she had the most hot and stinging fit of love, that ever
heart could think: for though it was an extreme fit, yet was it equally
strong and sweet, powerful and calm, active and peaceable, composed of a
sharp yet sweet heat.

4. I do not deny, THEO: that there were two portions in the B. Virgins
soul, and consequently two appetits: the one according to the Spirit and
superior reason; the other according to sense, and inferior reason: so that
she could feel the oppositions and contrarieties of both the appetits; for
this trouble did even our Savior her son endure. But I affirm that all
affections were so well, ordered and ^anged in this heavenly mother, that
divine Love did most peaceably exercise in her its power and dominion, without
being troubled by the diversity of wills and appetits* or contrariety of the
senses, because the oppositio^s of the natural appetite, and motion of the
senses, did never come to be so much as a venial sin but contrariwise all
these were holily and faithfully employed in the service of divine Love, for
the exercise of other virtues, which for the most part, cannot be practiced but
amongst difficulties, oppositions, and contradictions.

5. Thorne^ in the common opinion, are not only different from flowers but
contrary to them; and it seems, it were better if there were none in the
world; which made S. Ambrose think that but for sin, there had been none at
all. But yet, ^ith there are some, the careful husbandman does fetch profit
out of the^, making there hedges and inclosurs about his closes and springing
trees being their defense and rampire against cattle. So the Glorious virgin
having had a part in all humane miseries, saving such as do directly tend to
sin, she employed them most profitably to the exercise and increase of holy
virtues, of Hope, Temperance, Justice, and Prudence, Poverty, Humility,
Sufferance and Compassion: So that she was so far from hindering, that she did
even assist and strengthen heavenly love by continual exercises and
aduancements. And in her, Magdalen did not trouble the attention wherewith she
received from her Savior the impressions of love, for all Martha's heat, and
solicitude. She has made choice of her Sonn's love, and not any thing does
deprive her of it,

6. The ADAMANT, as every one knows, THEO: does naturally draw Iron unto it,
by a secreet and most wonderful virtue: yet 5. things there are which do
hinder this operation 1. a too great distance. 2. a Diama^t interposed. 3. if
the Iro^ be greesed. 4. if it be rubbed with an onyon 5. if it be too weighty.
Our heart is made for God who does continually allure it, never ceasing to
throw his baits into our hearts. But five things do hinder the operation of
his draughtes. 1. Sin, which puts us at a distance with God. 2. affection to
riches. 3. sensual pleasures. 4. Pride and vanity. 5. self-loue together with
the multitude of inordinate passions, which it brings forth, and are to us an
ouercharging load bearing us down. But none of these hindrances had place in
the Glorious virgins heart. 1. she was perpetually preserved from all sin. 2.
perpetually most poor of heart. 3. perpetually most pure. 4. perpetually most
humble, 5. perpetually a peaceable Mistress of all her passions, and exempt
from the rebellion which self-loue raises against the love of God. And
therefore as Iron if it were quit of all obstacle, yea even of its own weight,
were powerfully, yet softely and with a^ equal draught drawn by the Adama^t,
yet so that the draught should still be more active and forcible, as they came
nearer the one to the other and the motion nearer to its end: So the most holy
Mother, having nothing in her, which hindered her Sonns divine Love, she was
united unto him in an incomparable union, by gentle ecstasies without trouble or
travel; Ecstasies in which the sensible powers ceased not to perform their
actions, without disturbing the union of the mind: as again, the perfect
application of her mind did not much divert her senses. So that this virgins
decease was more sweet then could be imagined, drawn delightfully by the sent
of her Sonns perfums, and she most amiably springing after their sacred
sweetness, even into the bosom of her Sonns Bounty. And albeit this holy
soul, did extremely affect her most holy, most pure, and most amiable body,
yet did she forsake it, without pain or resistance at all: as the Chaste
Judith, who though she maruellously loved the habits of Penance, and widowhood,
forsook them notwithstanding, and freely put them off, to put on her marriage
garments, when she went to be victorious over Holofernes; or as a Ionathas when
for the love of David he did the like. Love had made her feel at the Crosses
foot, the deepest sorrow of death, and therefore it was but reason that at
length, death should possess her of the sovereign delights of love.

The end of the Seventh Book.
THE EIGHT BOOK. OF THE LOVE OF CONFORMITY, BY WHICH WE UNITE OUR WILLS TO
THE will of God, signified unto us by his Commandments, Counsels and
inspirations.
Of the love of Conformity proceeding from holy Complacence. CHAPTER. I.
AS good ground having received the seed, does render it in its season with an
hundred fold, so the heart that has taken complacence in God, cannot hinder it
self from presenting another complacence to God. None pleases us, whom we
desire not to please. Fresh wine does for a time refresh the drinkers, but as
soon as it is heated in the receivers stomach it mutually heats it, and the
more the stomach heat's it, the more it heat's the stomach. True love is never
ungrateful but strives to please the, in whom it is pleased; and thence is
that loving conformity, which makes us such as those that we love. The most
deuote and most wise king Solomon, became fool and Idolater, while he loved
women that were fools and Idolaters, and served as many Idols, as did his
wives. For this cause the Scripture terms those men effeminate that desperately
affect women in quality of women, because Love metamorphiseth men into women,
in manners and behavior.

2. Now this metamorphos^s is made insensibly by the complacence, which having
got entry into our heart, begets another, to present it unto him of whom we
had it. They say there is a little land beast in the Indies, which takes such
a delight to acco^painie fish in the sea, that by often swimming with them it
becomes a fish, and of a beast of the land, a beast of the sea. So by often
delighting in God, we become conformable to God, and our will is transformed
into that of the Divine Majesty, by the complace which it takes therein. Love
says S. Chrysostom, either finds or makes similitude; The example of such as
we love, bears a sweet and imperceptible rule over us, an authority not to
be perceived: It is necessary either to imitate or forsake them. He, that
being taken with the delight of perfumes, enters into the perfumers shop,
receiving thence the pleasure which he takes to smell those odours, perfumes
himself, and going out, communicats to others part of the pleasurs which he
received spreeding amongst them the sent of the perfumes which he had
contracted: our heart together with the pleasurs which it takes in the thing
beloved, draws unto it self the quality thereof: for delight opens the
heart, as sorrow shuts it; whereupon the holy Scripture often uses the word
dilate, insteede of rejoice. Now the heart being opened by pleasure, the
impressions of the qualities whereof the pleasure depends, finds easy passage
into the heart, and together with them, such others as are in the same subject,
though distasteful unto us creep in through the throng of pleasurs, as he that
wanted his marriage garment, got into the banquet amongst those that were
adorned* So Aristotl's scholars were delighted in stutting with him and
Plato's went crooked in the back in imitation of their Master. There was a
certain woman, as Plutarke reports, whose imagination, and apapprehensio^
through sensuality lay so open to all things, that beholding a Blackamors
picture she conceived a child all black by a Father extremely white: and the
fact of Jacobs yewes, will serve for a proof of this. In fine the pleasure
which one takes in a thing, is a certain Herbinger which lodges the qualities
of the thing which pleases in the Lovers heart. And hence it is that holy
Co^place^^^ does tra^sforme us into God who^ we love and by how much greater
the complacence is, by so much the transformatio^ is more perfect: so the
Saints that loved ardently, were speedily and perfectly transformed, love
transporting and translating the conditions and qualities of the one heart into
the other.

3. It is a strange, yet a true thing; put two Luts together which are unison,
that is, of the same sound, and accord, and let one play upon the one of them:
the other, though not touched, will resound to that which is played on; the
conuenie^cie which is betwixt them, as by a natural love causing this
correspondance. We have difficulty to imitate such as we hate even in good
things; not would the Lacedaemonians follow the good counsel of the wicked,
unless some honest man pronounced it after them. Of the contrary side, one
cannot be keept, from co^forming himself to such as he loves. In this sense,
as I think, the great Apostle said that the Law was not made for the Just
man: for in truth, the Just man is not Just, but inso much as he has Love; and
if he have Love, there is no need to press him by the rigor of the Law: Love
being the most pressing Doctor, and Sollicitour, to urge the heart which it
possesses, to obey the will and intention of the Beloved. Love is a Magistrate
which executs his authority, without voicing it, without Pursuiua^ts, or
Sergants, by this mutually complacence, by which as we take pleasure in God, so
also, we desire to please him. Love is the Abridgment of all Divinity, which
made the ignorance of Paul's, Antonies, Hilario^s, Simeons, Francises, so
holily learned, without books, Masters, or Art. By virtue of this holy Love,
the Spouse may pronounce with assurance; My Beloved is wholly mine by the
Complacence wherewith he does please, and feed me; And I by Benevolence am
wholly his, wherewith I pleas^ and feed him. My heart is fed in taking pleasure
in him, and his is fed, in that I take pleasure in him, for him: He feeds me
just as a holy shepherd his dear yewe amidst the Lillies of his perfectio^s;
in which I take pleasure; And I, as his dear yewe, pay him the milk of my
affections, by which I strive to please him. Whosoever does truly feed in
God, desires faithfully to please God, and to conform himself unto him, to
the end he might please him.

Of the conformity of Submission which proceeds from the Love of Benevolence.
CHAPTER. II.
1. COmplacence then draws into our hearts the feelings of divine perfections,
according as we are capable to receive them, (like as the Myrrour receives the
Su^ns picture, not according to the excellency and amplitude of this great and
admirable Lamp, but with proportion to the glass its largnesse and capacity)
and thereby we become conformable to God.

2. But besides this, LOVE OF BENEVOLENCE brings us to this holy conformity by
another means; LOVE OF COMPLACENCE draws God into our hearts; but the LOVE OF
BENEVOLENCE darts our hearts into God, and by consequence all our actions and
affections, most lovingly dedicating and consecrating the^ unto him: for
Beneuole^ce desires that all honor, all Glory, and acknowledgme^t possible
should be rendered unto God, as a certain exterior good which is due to his
Goodness.

3. Now this desire is practiced according to the complacence which we take in
God, as follows. We have had an extreme Complacence to perceive that God i^
soueraignely GOOD, and therefore, by the LOVE OF BENEVOLENCE, we desire that
all the Loves which we can possibly imagine, may be employed to love this
Goodness entirely. We have taken delight in the sovereign excellency of
God's perfection; and thereupon we desire that he should be soueraignely loved,
honored, and adored. We have been ioyed to consider, how God is not only the
first beginning, but also the last end, Author, Conseruour, and Lord of all
things; for which reason we wish that all things should be subject to him by a
sovereign obedience. We see Gods will soueraignly perfect, upright, just,
equal; and upon this consideration our desire is, that it should be the rule
and sovereign law of all things, and that it should be observed, kept and
obayed by all other wills.

4. But note THEO: that I treat not hear of the obedience due unto God, as he
is our Lord and Master, our Father and Benefactour: for this kind of obedience
belongs to the virtue of Justice, not to Love. No, it is not this I speak off
for the present: for though there were no Hell to punish the wicked, nor Heaven
to reward the good, and that we had no kind of obligation, nor duty to God (be
this said by imagination of a thing impossible, and scarcE imaginable) yet
would the LOVE OF BENEVOLENCE move us to render all obedience and submission to
God by election and inclination, yea by a sweet violence of Love, in
consideration of the Sovereign Bounty, Justice and equity of the Divine will.

5. Do not we see, THEO: that a maid by a free choice proceeding from the
LOVE OF BENEVOLENCE, does subject herself to her husband, to whom, otherwise
she ought no duty? Or that a gentleman, submits himself to a foreign
Prince's command or else gives up his will into the hands of the Superior of
some religious Order, which he is content to undertake?

6. Even so is our heart conformed to Gods, when by holy Benevolence we throw
all our affections, into the hands of the divine will, to be turned and
directed by it, to be molded and formed to the good liking thereof. And in
this point the profoundest obedience of love is placed, which has no need of
being spurred by minaces or rewards, nor yet by laws and commandments; for it
preuents all this, submitting it self to God, for the only perfect goodness
which is in him, where by he deserves that all wills should be obedient unto
him, subject, and under his power, conforming and uniting themselves to his
divine intentions, in and through all things.

How we are to conform our selves to the Divine will, which is called the
signified will. CHAPTER. III.
1. WE do sometimes consider God's will as it is in it self, and finding it
entirely holy and good, it is an easy thing for us to praise, bless, and
adore it, and to sacrifice our own, and all other creaturs wills to it is
obserua^ce in this divine Exclamation: THY WILL BE DONE IN EARTH AS IT IS IN
HEAVEN. At other times we consider God's will in the particular effects
thereof; as in the events that touch us, and accidents that befall us; and
finally in the declaration and manifestation of his intentions. And albeit that
God in very deed has but one most singular and most simple will, yet do we
design it by different names, according to the variety of the means whereby
we know it, by which variety also we are diversely obliged to conform our
selves to it.

2. Christian doctrine does clearly propose unto us the Truths, which God
wills that we should believe; the goods that he will have us hope for; the
pains which he will have us to dread; that which he will have us to love; the
commandments which he will have us to observe; and the Cou^cells which he
desires we should follow. And all these are called God's SIGNIFIED WILL;
because he has signified and made manifest unto us, that his will and meaning
is, that all these should be believed, hoped for, feared, loved and practiced.

3. Now for as much as this signified will of God, proceeds by way of desire,
and not by way of absolute will, we have power either to follow it by
obedience, or by disobedience to resist it: for to this porpose God makes three
acts of his will; He wills, that we should have power to resist; he desires
that we resist not; and yet leaves it to us to resist if we please. That we
have power to resist, depends of our natural condition, and liberty; that we
do resist proceeds from our malice; that we do not resist, is according to
the divine Bounties desire. And therefore when we do resist, God contributs
nothing to our disobedience, but leaving our will in the hand of her Liberty,
permits her to make choice of Evil. But when we obey, God contributs his
assistance, inspiration and grace: for permission is an actio of the will,
which of it self is barren, sterill, and fruitless, and is as it were a
passive action, which acts not, but only permits action: desire contrariwise
is an active action, fruitful, fertile, which does excite, inuit and urge.
Wherefore God, desirous that we should follow his signified will, does
solicit, exhort, incite, inspire, aid, and succor. But in permitting us to
resist, he does nothing but simply leave us to our own wills, according to our
free election, contrary to his desire and intention. And yet this desire is a
true desire: for how can one more truly express the desire he has to give
his friend a hearty welcome, then to provide for his sake a good and excellent
banquet, as did the king in the Evangelical Parable; and then to inuit, urge,
and in a manner to compel him by prayers, exhortations, pursuits, to come, sit
down at the table, and eat. Verily he that should by force of arms open his
friends mouth, crame meat into his throat, and make him swallow it, should not
bestow a friendly entertaineme^t upon his friend, but should use him like a
beast, and a crammed Capon. This kind of favor, would be offered by way of
inuitation, remonstrance, and solicitation, not violently and forcibly thrust
upon a man; and thence it is practiced by way of desire, not of absolute will.
Now it goes after the same manner in the signified will of God: for in it, God
does desire with a true desire, that we should do that which he declares; and
to this effect he does provide us of all things necessary, exhorting and
urging us to make use of them. In this kind of favor, one could desire no
more: and as the sunne-beames remain Sunnne-beames notwithstanding that they
are rejected, and repulsed by some obstacle; so God's signified will remains
the true will of God, though it be resisted; true it is, it has not the
effects which it would have, being seconded.

4. The conformity then of our heart to the signified will of God, consists
in this, that we should will that which the divine goodness does signify unto
us to be his intention believing according to his doctrine, hoping according to
his promises, fearing according to his threats, loving and living according to
his ordinances, and aduertissements, to which all the protestations which we
make thereof in the holy Ceremonies of the Church do tend. Hence we stand
while the Gospel is red, as being ready to obey the holy signification of
Gods will contained therein. Hence we kiss the book at the Gospel side, in
adoration of the sacred word which does declare his heavenly will. Hence many
Saints me^ and women carried in the old time in their bosoms the Gospel
written, as an Ephitheme of Love as it is reported of S. CICILE. And indeed S.
MATHEWES Gospel was found upon S. BARNABIES breast written with his own hand.
Whereupon in the ancient Counsels in the midst of the assembly of Bishops,
they erected a Throne, and put upon it the Book of the holy Gospells, which
represented the person of our Savior, king, Doctor, Directour, Spirit of all
the Counsels, and of the whole Church, so much did they reverence the
signification of Gods will, expressed in this holy book. Certes that great
Myrrour of Pastors S. CHARLES, Archbishop of Milau never studied the holy
Scripture, but bare head and upon his knees, to testify with what respect we
are to read and hear the signified will of God.

Of the Conformity of our will to the will which God has to save us. CHAPTER.
IV.
1. GOd has signified unto us so diversely, and by so diverse means, that his
will was that we should all be saved, that none can be ignorant of it; to this
purpose he made us to his own Image by Creation, and himself to our Image and
likeness by his Incarnation; after which he suffered death to ransom and save
all mankind, which he performed with so much love, that as the great S. DENIS
Apostle of France racounteth, he said upon a day to the holy man Carpus, that
he was ready to suffer an other passion to save mankind, and that this would be
pleasant unto him, if it could be done without any man's offense.

2. And although all are not saved, yet is this will the tru^ will of God, who
does work in us according to the condition of our and his nature. For his
Bounty moves him liberally to communicate unto ^^ the succors of his grace,
to bring us to the felicity of his glory: but our nature req^^^ that his
liberality should leave us in liberty to make use of it to our salvation, or
to neglect it to o^r damnation.

3. I have demanded one thing said the Prophet, and it is that which I will
demand for ever, that I may see the delights of our Lord, and visit his
temple. But what are the delights of the sovereign Goodness, but to pour
out and communicate its perfections? Verily his delights are to be with the
children of men to shower his grace upon them. Nothing is so agreeable and
delightful to free Agents, as to do their own will. Our Sanctification is
the will of God, and our Salvation his good pleasure; nor is there any
difference at all betwixt good pleasure and Good liking, or consequently
betwixt good-liking and goodwill: yea the will which God has to advantage man,
is called good, because it is amiable, propitious, favorable, agreeable,
delicious; and as the Grecians after S. PAVLE said, it is a true PHILANTROPIE,
that is, a benevolence, or a will entirely affectionate to men.

4. All the celestial Temple of the Triumpha^t and Militant Church does
resound on every side the delicious Canticles of God's love toward us. And the
Sacred body of our Savior, as the most holy Temple of his Divinity, is wholly
adorned with marks and tokens of this Benevolence; so that in visiting the
Divine Temple, we behold the lovely delights which he takes to do us favors.

5. Let us then a thousand times a day behold this loving will of God, and
grounding ours therein, let us deuotely crie-out. O Bounty infinitely sweet,
how amiable is thy will! How desirable thy favors! Thou created us for an
eternal life, and thy motherly breast swolen in the sacred dugges of an
incomparable love, abounds in the milk of mercy, whether it be to pardon
sinners, or perfect the Just. Ah why do not we then glue our wills to thine,
as a child is locked to the nible of his mothers dugge, to luck the milk of
thy eternal benedictions.

6. TH^O: we are to will our Salvation, in such sort as God will's it, and he
wills it by way of desire; must not we then following his desire incessantly
desire it? Nor does he will it only, but in effect enables us with all
necessary means to attain it: we then, in sequel of the desire we have to
be saved, must not only desire, but in effect accept all the graces, which he
has provided for us, and presents unto us. It is sufficient to say I desire
to be saved, yet it is not sufficient to say, I desire to embrace the means
convenient to the attaining of salvation, but we must with an absolute
resolution desire and embrace the grace which God bestows upon us: for our
will must necessarily correspo^de to God's. And whereas Gods will gives us the
means to save our selves, we ought to receive them; as we ought to desire
salvation, in such sort, as God desires it, and us.

7. But it falls often out that the means to come to Salvation considered in
gross, and in general, are according to our hearts liking, but considered by
peecemeale, and in particular, they are dreadful to us: for have we not seen
the poor S. Peter, prepared to undergo all kind of torments in general, yea
death it self to follow his Master, and yet when it came to the deed doing,
and performance, wax pale, tremble, and at the word of a simple maid, deny
his Master? Every one deemes himself able to drink our Saviors CHALICE with
him, but when indeed it is presented unto us, we fly, and forsake all. Things
proposed in particular, make a more strong impressio^, and more sensibly wound
in the Imagination. And for this reason we gave advice in the INTRODVCTION,
that after general affections, one should descend to particular ones, in holy
Meditation. David accepted particular afflictions as an advancement to his
perfection, when he sunge in this wise. O Lord how good it is for me that thou
have humbled me, that I might learn thy iustifications. So also did the
Apostles rejoice in their tribulations, in that they were held worthy to endure
ignominy for their Saviors name.

Of the conformity of our will to Gods will, signified in his Commandments.
CHAPTER. V.
1. THe desire which God has to make us observe his Commandments is extreme,
as the whole Scripture does witness: and how could he better express it, then
by the great reward which he proposes to the obseruers of his law, together
with the wonderful punishments which he does minace to such as shall violate
the same? This made David cry out, o Lord, thou have very much commanded thy
Commandments to be kept.

2. Now LOVE OF COMPLACENCE beholding this Divine desire, desires to please God
in observing it: The LOVE OF BENEVOLENCE, which submits all to God, does also
submit our desires and wills to this, which God has signified unto us; whence
does spring, not only the observance but even the Love of the Commandments
which David does extol in the 118. Psalm. in an extraordinary strain, which
he seems only to have done upon this occasion. O how thy holy law to me is
dear,
It daily theames my pen, and thoughts does hold!
And how o Lord thy Testimonies bear
Away my heart, as Topase set in gold!
If honey be compared to thy sweet WORD,
Honey turn's gale, and does no sweetes afford.
But to stir up in us the Love of the Commandments, we must co^template
their admirable beauty: For as there are works which are bad, because they
are prohibited; and others prohibited because they are bad: so there are some
that are good, because they are commanded; and orthers; are commanded because
they are Good, and most profitable: so that all of them are exceeding good and
amiable, the commandment enriching with goodness, such as were not otherwise
good, and giving an excess of goodness to such as in themselves were good
without being commanded. We do not receive even that which is good in good
part, being presented by an enemies hand. The Lacedaemonians would not follow a
solid and wholesome advise coming from a wicked person, till it were advised
them again by a good man. Contrariwise, a friends present is always
grateful. The sweetest Commandments become bitter, when they are imposed by a
tyrannical and cruel heart which turns again to be most amiable, being
ordained by Love. Jacobs service seemed a Royalty unto him, because it
proceeded from Love. O how sweet, and how much to be desired is the yoke of
the heavenly Law, established by so amiable a king?

3. Diverse keep the commandments, as sick men take down potions, more
through fear to die damned, then pleasure to live according to our Saviors
liking. But as some persons, have an aduersion from phisike, be it never so
agreeable, only because it bears the name of phisike, so there are some
souls, that abhor things commanded, only because they are commanded. And
there was a certain man found, who having lived in the great town of Paris
for the space of fourscore years, without ever going out of it, as soon as
it was enjoined him by the king that he should remain there the rest of his
days, he went abroad to see the feilds, which in his whole life time before he
never desired.

4. On the other side, the loving heart Loves the commandments, and by how
much more hard they are, by so much they are more agreeable because they do
more perfectly please the Beloved, and are more honorable unto him. It sends
out and sings hymns of joy, when God does teach it, his Commandments and
iustifications. And as the Pilgrim who merrily sings on his way, add's the
pain of singing to that of going, and yet does indeed by this surplus of
pain vnwearie himself, and lighten the difficulty of the way; Even so the
sacred Lover finds such content in the Commandments, that nothing does so much
ease and refresh him, as the gracious load of Gods Commandments. whereupon
the holy Psalmist cries out. O Lord thy iustifications or Commandments, are
delicious songs to me in this place of my pilgrimage. They say that Mules and
horses being laden with figs, do presently fall under their burden, and
loose their strength: More sweet the^ the fig is the law of our Lord: but
brutall man, who is become as a horse or Mule without understanding, loses
courage, and finds not strength to bear this amiable burden. But as a branch
of AGNVS CAS^VS does keep the Traveler that bears it about him from being
weary, so the Cross, Mortification, the yoke, the Law of our Savior who is
the true CHASTE LAMB, is a burden, which does vnwearie, refresh and recreate
the hearts that Love his divine Majesty. There is no pain in the thing
beloved, or if there be any, it is a beloved pain. Pain mixed with love, has
a certain tart-sweetenesse, more pleasant to the palate, then a thing purely
sweet

5. Thus then does heavenly Love conform us to the will of God, and makes us
carefully observe his commandments, as being the absolute desire of his divine
Majesty, whom we desire to please. So that this complacence with its sweet
and amiable violence, does forerunne the necessity of obaying that which the
law does impose upon us, converting the necessity into dilection, and the
whole difficulty into delight.

Of the conformity of our will to Gods, signified unto us by his Counsels.
CHAPTER. VI.
1. A Commandment does argue a most entire and absolute will in him that gives
it. But Counsel does only signify a WILL OF DESIRE: A Commandment does
oblige us; Counsel only incits us: A Commandment makes the Transgressors
thereof culpable; Counsel makes only such as follow it not, less laudable.
Those that violate Commandments deserve Damnation; those that neglect
Counsels deserve only to be-lesse glorified. There is a difference betwixt
commanding, and commending unto ones care; in commanding we use authority to
oblige, but in commending unto ones care, we use curtisie to egg and incite. A
Commandment does impose necessity, Counsel and recommendation incits us to
that which is more profitable. Obedience corresponds to Commandments, belief
to Counsels. We follow Counsel with intention to please, and Commandments
least we might displease. And thence it is, that the LOVE OF COMPLAC^NCE which
does oblige us to please the beloved, does by consequence urge us to follow his
Counsels: and the LOVE OF BENEVOLENCE, which desires that all wills and
affections should be subjected unto him, procurs that we do not only will
that which he ordaines, but also that which he counsels, and to which he does
exhort: like as the Love and respect which a good child bears unto his Father,
makes him resolve to live not only according to the Commandments which he
does impose, but even according to the desires and inclinations which he does
manifest.

2. Counsel is given in favor of him to whom it is given, to the end he might
become perfect: If thou will be perfect, said our Savior, go, sell all that
thou have, give it to the poor, and follow me.

3. But a loving heart does not receive Counsel for his own profit, but to be
conformed to his desire, who gives him Counsel and render him homage to his
will: and therefore he receives not Counsels, but in such sort as God desires,
nor does God desire that every one should observe all Counsels, but such only
as are convenient, according to the diversity of persons, times, occasions,
strength, as charity requires: for she it is, that, as Queen of all virtues,
of all the Commandments, of all the Counsels, and to be short of all laws,
and all Christian works, does give them all, their rank, order, time, and
worth.

4. If thy assistance be truly necessary to thy Father or mother to be able
to live, it is no time then to practice the Counsel of betaking thy self into
a Monastery: for Charity does ordain, that thou go actually to put in
execution the Commandment of honoring, serving, aiding and succouring thy
Father, and Mother. Thou art a Prince, by whose posterity the Subjects to thy
crown, are to be conserved in peace, and assured against tyranny, sedition,
civil wars; and therefore the occasion of so great a good, does oblige thee to
beget lawful successors in a holy Marriage. It is either not to loose
Chastity, or at least, to loose it chastely, while for love of Charity, it is
sacrificed to the public good. Art thou weak and wavering in thy health, and
does it exact great maintenance? do not then voluntarily undertake actual
poverty, for thou art prohibited by Charity. Charity does not only forbid
house-holders to sell and give it to the poor, but does even command them,
honestly to gather together that which is requisite for the education, and
sustentation of their wife, children and servants: as also kings and Princes to
lay up treasures, which being kept together by a laudable frugalitie, not
gotten by tyrannical trikes, do serve for wholesome preservatives against the
visible enemy. Does not S. Paul Counsel such as are married, that the time
of Prayer being ended, they should repair to the well ordered course of their
household affairs?

5. All the Counsels are given to perfect christian people, but not to perfect
every christian in particular. There are circumstances which makes them so
times unprofitable, sometimes perilous, impossible, sometimes hurtful to some
men, which is one of the reasons, why our Savior said of one of the
Counsels, which he would have to be understood of them all. He that can take,
let him take, as though he had said, according to S. HIEROMS expositions, he
that can win and bear away the honor of chastity as a prize of reputation,
let him take it, for it is exposed to such as shall ru^ne valliantly. Every one
then, cannot; that is, it is not expedient for every one, to observe all the
Counsels which as they are granted in favor of Charity, so is she the rule
and measure by which they are executed.

6. Hence it is that upon Charities order, Monks and Religious are drawn out
of their Cloisters, to be made Cardinals, Prelates, Curats yea sometimes they
are even joined in matrimony for a kingdoms repose, as I have already said.
And if Charity make those leave their Cloister, that had tied themselves
thereto by solemn vow, by better reason and upon less occasion, one may by
the authority of the same Charity, counsel many to live at home, to keep
their means, to marry, yea to turn soldiers and go to wars, which is so
perilous a profession.

7. Now when Charity incites one to poverty, and recals another; when she
stirrs up one to marriage and others to continency; when she shuts one up in a
Cloister, and makes another quit it, she is not liable to give any man an
account of her deed: for she has fullness of power in Christian laws, as it
is written. Charity can do all things; she has a complete prudence,
according to that: Charity does nothing in vain. Yet if any will contest, and
demand a reason of her fact, she will bouldly make answer. That it is
needful for her lord: All is made for Charity, and Charity for God. All
must serve her, and she none: no she serves not her well-beloued, whose servant
she is not, but his spouse, whom she does not serve, but Love, for which cause,
we are to take her order, how to exercise Counsels: for to some she will
appoint Chastity, without poverty; to others obedience and not chastity; to
others fasting but not Alms deeds; to others Alms deeds, and not fasting;
to others sollitarinesse, not the charge of a Pastor; to others conversation
and not sollitarinesse. In fine she is a sacred water, by which the garden of
the Church is fertilized; and though she have but one color, without color,
yet the flowers which she makes spring have every one their different color.
She makes the Martyrs redder the^ the Rose; virgins whiter then the Lilly;
some she dies with the fine violet of mortification; others with the yellow of
marriage-care, employing diversely the Counsels, for the perfections of such
souls as are so fortunate as to live under her conduct.

That Gods will signified in the co^mandeme^ts, does move us forwards to the
love of Counsels. CHAPTER. VII.
1. O THEO: how amiable is this Divine will! o how amiable and desirable it is!
o Law wholly of Love, and for Love! The Hebrews by the word peace understand
the collection and perfection of all good things, that is, Felicity: and the
Psalmist cries out, that a plentiful PEACE does abound in those that love the
law of God, and that they stumble not; as though he would say, o Lord what
delights are in the Love of thy Commandments! the heart that is possessed
with the Love of thy law is possessed of all delicious sweetness. Certes the
great king, whose heart was made according to the heart of God, did so inly
taste the perfect excellency of the Divine Decrees, that he seems to be a
Lover caught with the beauty of this Law, as with the chaste Spouse and Queen
of his heart, as appears by his continual praises thereof.

6. When the heavenly Spouse would express the infinite sweetness of her
divine Spouses perfums: thy name, says she unto him, is an ointment poured
forth, as though she said, thou art so excellently well perfumed, that thou
seem to be all perfume, and that thou art more fitly termed oil and
perfume, then anointed and perfumed. So the Soul that loves God, is so
transformed into the Divine will, that it merits rather to be called Gods will,
then obedient and subject to his will: whence God says by Isaie, that he will
call the Christian Church by a new name, which the mouth of our Lord will
pronounce, imprint, and engraue in the hearts of his faithful; and then,
explicating this name, he says, it shall be, MY WILL SHALL BE IN IT; as
though he had said, that such as are not Christians every one has his own
will, in the midst of his heart, but every one of our Saviors true children,
shall forsake his own will, and shall have only one Mistress, regent and
universal will, which shall quicken, govern and direct all souls, hearts and
wills: and the name of honor amongst christians, shall be no other; but THE
WILL OF GOD IN THEM, a will which will rule over all wills, and transform them
all into herself: so that the will of Christians, and the will of Christ, are
but one only will; which was perfectly verified in the primitive Church, when,
as says the glorious S. Luke, in the multitude of the faithful, there was
but one heart, and one soul: for he means not there to speak of the heart
that animats our body, nor of the soul which does animate the heart with a
humane life: but he speaks of the heart which gives our souls a heavenly
life, and of the soul that animats our hearts with a supernatural life; the
singular hearts and souls of true Christians, which are no other thing then
the will of God. Life, says the Psalmist, is in the will of God, not only
for that our temporal life depends of the divine pleasure, but because our
spiritual life, is placed in the observance thereof, whereby God lives and
reigns in us, making us live and subsist in him. Contrariwise the wicked, from
ages, that is, always, have broken the yoke of the Law of God, and have said
I will not obey, whereupon God says, that from their mothers womb, he named
the^ Transgressors and Rebels: and speaking to the king of Tyria, he does
reproach him, that he had placed his heart as the heart of God: for a reuoulting
spirit, will have his heart to be its own Master, and his own will to be
Sovereign, as the will of God. He will not have the Divine will to raig^e over
his, but will be absolute and without controwle. O eternal God do never
permit that! But effect that not my will, but thine be done. Alas we are in
this world not to work our o^ne, but the will of the Bounty which put us
there. It was written of thee o Savior of my soul, that thou did the will
of thy eternal Father, and by thy soul her first humane act of willing at the
instant of thy conception, thou did lovingly embrace this law of the divine
will, and placedst it in the midst of thy heart, there to reign and have
dominion for ever. Ah who will bless my soul with the happiness to have no
will but the will of God!

7. Now when our Love is exceeding great toward Gods will, we are not content
to do the Divine will only which is signified unto us by the Commandments,
but also we put our selves under obedience to follow counsels, which are only
given us, to the more perfect observing of the Commandments, to which they
have a certain reference, as S. THOMAS says excellently well. O how
excellent is his observance of the prohibition of unjust pleasurs, who at once,
does renounce the most just and legitimate delights! How far is he from
coveting another man's Goods who does reject all riches, yea even such, as
holily he might have conserved? How far is he from preferring his will before
Gods, who to perform the will of God, does submit himself to the will of a
man.

8. David upon a day was in his Camp; and the Philistian Garrison in Bethleem:
now he made a wish, saying, o that some would present me with a draught of
water out of the Cisterne which stads at Bethlee^s Port! And behold he had no
sooner said the word, but three brave Caualeers did set out, prepared
themselves for the exploit, passed through the enemies troops, went to the
Cisterne of Bethleem, drew water, and brought it to David; who seeing the
hazard to which these gentlemen had exposed themselves to content his appetite,
he would not drink that water purchased at the peril of their blood and life,
but poured it out in sacrifice to the eternal God. Ah mark I beseech you
THEO: the fervor of these Caualeers to their Masters service and liking! They
fled, and broake the ranks of their enemies with a thousand dangers of loosing
themselves, to complie with one only simple desire, which their king intimated
unto them. Our Savior when he was in this world, declared his will in diverse
occurrences by way of Commandment; in others, he only signified it, by way of
desire: for he did highly commend chastity, Poverty, Obedience and perfect
resignation, the abnegation of ones own will, widdowhoode, fasting, ordinary
Prayer; and what he says of Chastity, that, he that could win the prise,
should bear it away, he said sufficiently of all the other Counsels; At this
desire of his, the most generous Christians, put themselves upon the Course*
and maugre all opposition, restless lust and difficulties, they have arrived
at holy perfection, submitting themselves under the strict observance of the
kings desires, and by this means beareing away the crown of Glory.

9. Verily, as witenesseth the Divine Psalmist, God does not only hear the
Prayers of his faithful, but even their very desire and the mere preparation
of their hearts to pray; so favorable and forward he is to do the will of
those that Love him. And why shall not we then by reciprocation be so jealous
in the point of performing Gods holy will, that we should not only effect his
Commands, but even that also which we know he likes, and wishes? Noble souls
need no other spur to the undertaking of a design, then to know it is the
desire of their Beloved. My soul, said one of them, dissolved when I heard my
beloved speak.

That the contempt of Evangelical Counsels, is a great sin. CHAPTER. VIII.
1. THe words in which our Savior exhots to pretend and tend to perfection,
are so forcible and pressing, that we cannot dissemble the obligation we have
to engage our selves in that design. Be holy, says he, because I am holy. He
that is holy let him be yet more sanctified; and he that is just, let him be
yet more justified. Be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect. For this
cause, the great S. BERNARD writing to the glorious S. GVARINE Abbot of Aux,
whose life, and miracles have left so sweet an odor in this Diocese; the just
man, quoth he, does never say, enough; he does still hunger and thrist after
Justice.

2. Truly THEO: as for temporal goods, nothing does suffice him who is not
sufficed with that which is sufficient: for what can suffice a heart that holds
not a sufficiency sufficient? but touching spiritual goods, he that is
sufficed with that which does suffice, has not that which does su^fice, since
a true sufficiency in divine things, consists partly in desire of abundance.
God in the beginning commanded the earth to bring forth green herbs such as
seedeth, and that every tree should bear fruit, having seed each one
according to his kind.

3. And do not we see by experience, that pla^ts and fruits are not come to
their full groth and maturitie till they begin to seed and have Pipins, whence
other trees and plants of the same kind do spri^g? Never do virtues come to
their perfect stature and ability in us, till such time as they beget in us a
desire of progress, which, as spiritual seed, serves to the production of
new degrees of virtue. And me thinks the earth of our heart is commanded to
bring forth the plants of virtue, which bear the fruits of good works every
one in his kind, and which have the seeds of a desire and resolution to
increase and advance in the way of perfection. And the virtue, that bears not
the seed or Pipin of this desire, is not yet come to her groth and maturitie.
Thou will not then, says S. BERNARD to the sluggard, a better thy self in
perfection? No nor yet grow worse? nor yet that verily. Why then, do thou
desire neither to amend nor pair. Alas poor man thou would be that, which
thou can not be. Even in the wide world there is nothing stable and constant,
yet of man it is said more particularly, that he never remains in one estate.
He must either go forward, or else he goes backward.

4. Nor do I, more then S. BERNARD, affirm, that it is a sin not to
practice the Counsels, no verily THEO: for it is the proper difference betwixt
Commandments and Counsels, that Commandments do oblige us under pain of
sin, Counsel does only inuit us without pain of sin. Yet do I bouldly
auerre that to contemn the pretention of Christian perfection is a great
sin, and yet greater to contemn the inuitation by which our Savior calls us
to it, but it is an insupportable impiety to contemn the Counsels and
means, which our Savior marks us out to the attaining of it. It were an
Heresy to say, that our Savior had not given us good Counsel; and a
blasphemy to say to God, withdraw thy self from us, we will not know thy
ways. But it is a horrible irreuerence done to him, that with so much love and
delight did inuit us to perfection, to say, I will not be holy, or perfect;
nor will I any larger portion of thy Benevolence, nor will I follow the
Counsels which thou give me to fructify therein.

5. We may indeed without offense, not follow the Counsels, for the affection
we bear another way, as for example, it is lawful for a man, not to sell what
he possesses, nor give it to the poor, because he has not the courage to
make so entire a renunciation: It is also lawful to marry, because one loves
a wife, or otherwise has not strength of mind necessary to undertake the
war which must be waged against the flesh. But to make profession that one
will not follow the Cou^sells, nor any one of them, cannot be done without
contempt of him that gives them. Not to follow the Counsel for that one has
an intention to marry, is not evil done, but so to marry as to prefer
marriage before chastity, with heritikes, is a great contempt either of the
Counselor, or of his Counsel. To drink wine, against the Doctors advise
when one is overcome with thrist, or with a desire to drink, is not properly
to contemn the Doctor nor his advise: but to say I will not follow the
Doctors advise, must necessarily proceed from some bad opinion one harbors of
him. Now as concerning men, one may often contemn their Counsel without
contemning them, because to esteem that a man does err, is not to contemn
him. But to reject and contemn Gods Counsel, cannot spring but from a
conceit we have, that he has not Counseled us well, which cannot be thought
but by a Spirit of Blasphemy, as though God were not wise enough, to know, or
good enough to will to give good advise. We may say the same of the Counsels
of the Church, which by reason of the continual assistance of the holy ghost,
which does instruct and conduct her in all truth, can never give evil advise.

A continuation of the precedent discourse: how every one ought to love, though
not to practice the Evangelical Counsels, and yet how every one is to
practice what he is able. CHAPTER. IX.
1. Allthough all the Evangelical Counsels cannot, nor ought not to be
practiced by every Christian in particular; yet is every one obliged to love
them all, they being all very good. If you have the Megrim, and the smell of
muke do anoie you, will you therefore disauowe that this smell is good and
delightsome? If a Robe of gold be not fit for you, will you thence say, that
it is worth nothing? or will you throw a ring into the ^urt, because it fits
not your finger? Praise, therefore THEOT: and dearly affect all the Counsels,
that God has given unto men. O blessed be the Angel of the high Counsel for
ever, together with the Coun^ell he gives, and exhortations he makes to man!
The heart is cheared up with ointments and good smells, says Solomon: and by
the good Counsel of a friend, the soul is calmed. But of what friend, and of
what Counsels do we speak? o God, it is of the friend of friends: and his
Cou^sells are more delight^ull then honey. Our friend is our Savior, his
Counsels are to save us.

2. Let us rejoice, THEO: when we see others undertake the Counsels, which
either we cannot, or ought not to observe: Lets pray for them, bless, favor,
and assist them. For Charity does oblige us not only to love our own good,
but that also, which is good for our neighbor.

3. We may sufficiently testify our love to all the Counsels, if we deuotely
observe such as are suitable to our calling, for even as he that believes an
Article of Faith, before God revealed it in his word, published and declared it
by the Church, cannot misbeleeue the others: and he that observes one
Commandment, for the pure Love of God, is ready to observe the others, when
occasion shall be offered. So he that does love and prize one Evangelical
Counsel, because it came from God, he cannot but love all the others
consequently, being they are also from God. Now we may with ease practice many
of them, though not all of them together; for God delivered many, to the end
every one might observe some of them: nor does there pass a day, wherein we
have not some occasion thereof.

4. Does Charity require, that to assist thy Father or mother, thou should
live with them? conserve notwithstanding a love and affection to your
recollection, let your heart live at your Fathers house, so far forth as is
requisite, to acquit your self of that which Charity does order. Is it not
expedient, your quality considered, that you should conserve perfect
chastity? keep it at least in such sort as you may, without violating
charity. Who cannot do all, at least let him do a part: you are not obliged
to look after him that has offended you; for it is his part to come to
himself and to you to give you satisfaction, since he began the injury and
outrage: yet go, THEO: follow our Saviors Counsel, prevent him in good,
render him good for evil, cast upon his head and heart burning coals, proofs
of Charity, that may wholly burn him, and force him to a reconciliation. You
are not bound by rigor of law, to give alms to all the poor you meet, but
only to such as are in extreamitie. Yet following our Saviors Counsel, cease
not to give to every poor body that you light on, having still a respect to
your own condition, and to the true exigent of your affairs. You have no
obligation to make any vow at all; yet bouldly make some, such as shall be
judged fit by your Ghostly Father for your advancement in Divine Love. You have
free liberty to use wine within the terms of decency; yet following S.
PAVLES Counsel to Timothy, take only so much; as is requisite to comfort your
stomach

5. In Counsels there are diverse degrees of perfections; To lend to such poor
people as are not in extreme want, is the first degree of the Counsel of
Almes-deedes, to give them some what, is a higher; a higher yet to give them
all: but the highest of all to dedicate ones own person to their service.
Hospitality out of the terms of extreme necessity is a Counsel. To
entertain strangers, is the first degree of it; but to stand in common
passages with Abraham, to inuit them, is a degree higher; and yet higher then
that, to seat one self in a place of danger to harbor, aid and waire upon
passengers. Herein the great S. BERNARD of Menthon borne in this diocese did
excel, who being extracted from a noble house, did for diverse years inhabit
the shelues and topes of our Alps, established there a company to serve,
lodge, assist and preserve pilgrims and passingers from the danger of tempests,
who might often perish amidst the storms, snow, and thunder-clapes, were it
not for the Hospitalls which this great friend of God erected and founded upon
two mountains, which taking their names from him, are called, GREAT S. BERNARD,
in the Bishopric of Sion, and LITTLE S. BERNARD, in the Bishoptike of
Thare^tise. To visit the sick, which are not in extreme necessity, is a
laudible Charity, to serve the^, is yet better: but to consecrate a man's self
to their service, is the excellency of that Counsel, which the Clarks of the
visitatio^ of the sick do exercise by their proper institute, and many Ladies
in diverse places, imitating the great S. SANSON, a gentleman and Physician of
Rome, who at Constantinople, where he was made Priest, with a wonderful
charity devoted himself to the service of the sick in a hospital which he
began, and which the Emperor Justinian did raise and accomplish, by the
imitation of S. CATHARINE of Sienna, and Genua, of S. ELIZABETH of Hungary,
and of the glorious friends of God S. FRANCIS, and the B. IGNATIUS of Loyola,
who in the beginning of their Orders, performed this exercise, with an
incomparable spiritual fervor and profit.

6. Virtues have then a certain extent of perfection, and commonly we are not
obliged to practice them in the hight of their excellency. It is sufficient to
go so far in the practice of the^, that we do indeed practice them* But to
make a further passage, and gain ground in perfection, is a Counsel, the acts
of heroical virtues not being ordinarily commanded, but counseled only. And
if upon some occasion we find our selves obliged to exercise them, it is by
reason of some rare and extraordinary exigent, which makes them necessary to
the conservation of Gods grace. The happy Porter of the Prison of Sebastia,
seeing one of the forty which were the^ martyred, loose courage and the crown
of Martyrdom, took his place, without being pursued, and made the 40. of
those glorious and Triumphant Soldiers of Christ. S. ADAVCTVS seeing S. FELIX
led to Martyrdom, and I, quoth he, (none at all urging him) I am also a
Christian as well as he who^ you have in your hands, and worshipe the same
Savior; and with that kissing S. FELIX he marched with him to martyrdom, and
was beheaded. Thousands of the ancient Martyrs did the like; and having it
equally in their power to avoid or undergo martyrdom without offense they
choosed rather generously to undergo it, then lawfully to avoid it. In these,
Martyrdom was an heroical act of force and constancy, given them by a holy
excess of Love. But when it is necessary to endure Martyrdom or to renounce
Faith, Martyrdom it does not cease to be Martyrdom, and an excellent act of
love and valor: yet do I scarcely think it is to be termed an heroical
act, not being elected by any excess of Love, but by force of the law, which
in that case commands it. Now in the practice of heroical acts of virtue, is
placed the perfect Imitation of our Savior, who as the great S. THOMAS says,
had all the virtues in an heroical manner, from the first instant of his
conception, yea I would willingly add more then heroical, since he was not
simply more then man, but infinitely more then man, that is, true God.

How we are to conform our selves to Gods will signified unto us by
inspirations: and first of the truth of the means by which God enspires us.
CHAPTER. X.
1. THe sunne-beames in lightening do heat, and in heating do lighten.
Inspiration is a heavenly raie, which brings into our hearts a burning light,
by which at once we do both see good, and are inflamed with a desire to pursue
it. Every thing that lives upon the face of the earth, is benu^med with winters
cold; but upon the return of the springtime withal heat, they return to
their wonted motion. Beasts of the earth ru^ne more swiftly; birds fly more
quickly, and chaunt more merrily; and plants do put out their leaves and
fruit more pleasantly. Without inspirations our souls would lead an idle,
blasted and fruitless life, but at the arrival of the Divine rays of
inspirations, we perceive a light mixed with a quickening heat, which does
illuminate our understanding, excitate and animate our will, enabling her with
strenght to will and effect the good appertaining to eternal health. God
having formed man's body of the slyme of the earth, as Moses says, he
breathed into his face the breath of life, and man became a living soul, that
is, he became a soul that gave life, motion and operation to the body. And
the same eternal God, does breath and blow into our souls the inspirations of
a supernatural life, to the end that, as says the great Apostle, they might
become quickening Spirits, that is, Spirits that make us live, move, feel and
work the works of grace; so that he who gave us being, gives us also
operation. Man's breath does warm the things it enters into, witness the
Sunamits child, to whose mouth the Prophet Eliseus having laid his, and
breathed upon him, his flesh waxed hot; and it is a Maxim of experience. But
touching the breath of God, it does not only heat, but also give a perfect
light, his Spirit being an infinite light, whose vital breath is called
Inspiration, for so much as by it the Divine Goodness does breath upon us, and
inspire us with the desires and intentions of his own heart.

2. Now God does inspire us by infinite means, S. ANTONIE, S. FRANCIS, S.
ANSELME, and a thousand others, had frequent inspirations by the sight of
crearurs: preaching is the ordinary means: but sometimes, such as the word
profits not, are taught by tribulation, according to the Prophet: vexation
shall give understanding in the Hearing, that is, such as by hearing the
heauely menaces against the wicked, do not amend, shall be taught the truth by
the events and effects, and by the gripe of affliction become wise. S. MARIE
Egip: was inspired by the sight of our Ladies picture; S. ANTONIE by hearing
the Gospel, which is red at Mass; S. AUGUSTINE, upon the relation of S.
ANTONIES life; The Duke of Gandie by looking upon the dead Empress; S.
PACOMIVS by an Example of Charity; The B. Ignatius Loyola in reading the
Saints lives; S. CYPRIAN (not the great Bishope of Carthage, but a layman, yet
a glorious Martyr) was touched in hearing the devil confess his own
impotencie over such as are confident in God. When I was a young youth at
Paris, two scholars whereof the one was a^ Heretic, deboistly passing the
night in the Suburbs of S. James, heard the Carthusia^s ringe to Matins, and
the Heretic aski^g the other why they ru^g, he related unto hi^ with what
devotion they celebrated the Divine office in that holy Monasterie^ o God,
quoth he, how different is the practice of those Religious from ours! They
perform the office of Angels, and we that of brute beasts: and desiring the
day after to see, that which by his companions relation he had learnt, he found
the good Fathers on their forms as a company of marble statues, ranged a long
the wall in their hollow seats, immovable to all action, but singing of
Psalms, which they performed with a truly angelical attention and devotion,
according to the custom of this holy Order; So that this poor youth wholly
ravished with admiration was taken with the exceeding consolation which he
took to see God so well worshipped amongst Catholics, and resolved, which
afterward he fulfilled, to put himself into the Church her bosom, his true
and only Spouse, who had visited him in his inspiration, while he was laid on
the infamous bed of abomination.

3. O how happy are they that keep their hearts open to holy inspirations,
which are never awa^ting to any, so far forth as they are necessary to live
well and deuotely, according to each ones condition of life, and holily to
complie with the duties of their profession: for as God by nature does furnish
every beast with the instincts which are necessary to their conservation, and
to the exercise of their natural qualities; so if we resist not Gods grace, he
bestows on every one of us inspirations necessary for our life, operation and
spiritual conservation. O Lord, said the faithful Eliezer, here I stand at
this fountain, and the daughters of the inahbitants of this City will come
forth to draw water: the young girl then to whom I shall say, let down thy
pitcher that I may drink, and who shall answer, Drink, yea and I will also
give to thy Camells; she it is whom thou have prepared for thy servant Isaac.
THEO: Eliezer gives her only to understand that he himself would drink: but
the fair Rebecca obeying the inspiration which God of his clemency bestowed
upon her, does offer withal to water his Camells. Hence she became holy
Isaac's wife, daughter-in-law to the great Abraham, and grandmother to our
Savior. Certes the souls which are not contented with effecting that which
the heavenly Spouse requires at their hands by his Commandments and Counsels,
but do also promptly complie with sacred inspirations, are those, whom the
Eternal Father has provided for Spouses to his well-beloued Son. And
concerning the good Eliezer, having no other grounds to discern her amongst
the daughters of Haran, a town of Nachor, who was desined for his Masters
son, God reueals it unto him by inspiratio^. When we are at a nonplus, and
humane helps do fail us in our perplexities, God does then inspire us, nor
will he permit that we should err, while we humbly obey: I will say no more
of these necessary inspirations, having often already spoken of them in this
work, as also in the Introduction.

Of the union of our will to Gods in the inspirations which are given for the
extraordinary practice of virtues; and of perseverance in ones vocation, the
first mark of the inspiration. CHAPTER. XI.
1. THere are certain Inspirations which tend only to an extraordinary
perfection of the ordinary exercises of Christian life. Charity toward poor
infirm people is an ordinary exercise with true Christians, yet an ordinary
exercise which was practiced by S. FRANCIS with an extraordinary perfection,
as also by S. Catharine, of Sienna, when she licked and sucked the ulcers of
the Leprous and Cankred; and by the glorious S. JEWS when bare-head and upon
his knees, he served the sick, whereat an Abbot of Cisteau loosed himself in
admiration, seeing him in this posture, handle and dress the running and
cankered wounds of a miserable wretch: as it was also a very extraordinary
exercise, that the holy Monarke should serve the most abject and vile poor
people at table, and eat their leauings. S. HIEROME, entertaining in his
Hospital at Bethleem the Pilgrims of Europe, who fled the persecution of the
Goths, did not only wash their feet, but descended even so low as to wash and
rub their Camels legs, imitating Rebecca whom we lately mentioned, who did not
only draw water for Eliezer, but for his Camells also. S. FRANCIS did not
only practice pouerrie in an extreamitie, as is known to all, but even
exercised simplicity in the like measure. He redeemed a lamb fearing it
should be put to slaughter, because it represented our Savior: he bore a
respect almost to all Creaturs, in respect of their Creator, by an
unaccustomed, yet most prudent simplicity. Now and then he would busy
himself to withdraw worms out of the way, least some in passing, should
tra^ple the^ under their feet, remembering that our Savior had compared
himself to the worm. He called the Creaturs his brothers and sisters, by a
certain admirable consideration, which love suggested unto him. S. ALEXIS, a
gentleman of a noble descent, practiced in an excellent manner the abiection of
himself, living vnkowen for the space of 17. years, in his Fathers house at
Rome, in the nature of a poor pilgrim. All these inspirations were for
ordinary exercise, which notwithstanding were practiced with extraordinary
perfection. In this kind of inspiration, we are to observe the rules which I
gave for desirs, in the Introduction. We must not strive to practice many
exercises at once, and upon a sudden: for it is often a trike of the enemy,
to move us to undertake and begin many desines, to the end that overwhelmed with
the multiplicitie of business, we might accomplish nothing, but leave all
unfinished: yea sometimes he does suggest unto us a desire, to undertake to
begin some excellent work, which he foresees we will not accomplish, to
deturne us from prosecuting a work less excellent, which we had easily
performed; for he cares not how many purposes and onsets be made, so that
nothing be effected. He will not hinder the mystical women, that is the
Christian souls, to bring forth men-children, no more then Pharao did,
provided that their groth be prevented by slaughter. Contrariwise, says the
great S. Hierome, amongst Christians we do not so much note the beginning as
the end. One must not eat so much, that he cannot digest it. The Spirit of
guile stays us in the beginnings, and makes us content with the flourishing
springtime; but the Divine Spirit never moves us to reflect upon our
beginnings, save to attain the end; never to make use of the flowers of the
spring, but with intention, to enjoy the ripe fruits of the Summer, and
Autumn.

2. The great S. THOMAS is of opinion, that it is not expedient, to make many
consultations and long deliberations touching the desire one feels in himself
to enter into a good and well ordered Religion and not without reason: For
Religion being counseled by our Savior in the Gospel, what needs much
consultation? It is sufficient to make one good one, with a few friends, who
are prudent, and conversant in such a business, and such as may assist us to
make a short and solid resolution. But after we have once deliberated and
resolved, as well in this matter, as in any other that appertains to Gods
service, we must be constant and unvariable, without permitting our selves to
be shaken by any apprehe^sion of a greater good; for oftentimes, says the
glorious S. BERNARD the Devil makes us ru^ne the riot, and to draw us from the
effecting of one good, he proposes unto us some other good, that seems
better, which after we have set upon, to divert us from that again, he
presents a third, being willing that we should often begin, so we never come to
an end. Nay one is not even to go from one order to another without very
weighty motifes, says S. THOMAS, following the Abbot Nestorious, cited by
Cassian.

3. I will borrow a fine similitude of S. Anselme writing to Lanzon: As a plant
often transplanted can never take root, nor consequently come to perfection,
and render the wished fruit; so the soul that does transplant her heart from
one desine to another, cannot profit, nor come to the true groth of her
perfection; since perfection is not found in beginnings, but in
accomplishments. Ezechiel's holy beasts went whither the over bearing-furie of
their spirits carried them, nor did they in going look backward, but each of
them went on out right before them: We are to go whither the inspiration
moves us, not turning about, or returning back, but te^ding thither, whither
God has turned our face, without looking over our shoulder. He that is in a
good way, let him work his salvation. It happens sometimes that we forsake the
good, to seek the better, and that having forsaken the one, we find not the
other: Better is the possession of a small treasure already found, then the
pretention of a far greater, which is yet to be sought for. The inspiration
is to be suspected, which moves us to quit a present good which we enjoy, to
purchase a better we know not when. A young Portugaise, called Francis Bassus,
was admirable, not only for Divine eloquence, but also for the practice of
virtue under the discipline of S. PHILIPE NERIVS in the Congregation of the
Oratorie at Rome: Now, he persuaded himself that he was inspired to leave this
holy Society, to put himself in a formal Order, which also he resolved upon;
But the B. PHILIPE being present, while he was received into the order of S.
DOMINIKE, he wept bitterly. Whereupon being demanded by Francis Marie Tauruse,
who was afterward Archbishop of Sienna and Cardinal, why he shed tears? I
deplore, quoth he, the loss of so many virtues: and indeed this young man,
who did so excel in wisdom and piety in the Congregation, after he was
become a religious man, was so inconstant and fickle, that tossed with many
desires of novelty and change, he gave afterward great and grievous scandal.

4. If the Fowler go straight to the Partridge nest, she will come before him
and cou^terfaite her back to be broken, or that she is lame, and raising her
self up as though she would take a great flight, she will tumble down of a
sudden, with show that she is able to do no more, to the^d that the Fowler,
being busied in looking after her, whom he thinks with ease to catch, may not
light on her little ones in the nest, but as soon as he has pursued her a
while, and thinks he is upon the point of catching her, she escapes by flying
away. So the enemy, seeing a man by Gods inspiration undertake a profession
and manner of life most proper for his aduancements in heavenly Love, persuads
him, to enter into some other way, more perfect in appearance; but having put
him out of his first way, he makes him by little and little apprehend the
second way impossible, proposing a third; that so keeping him occupied in the
continual inquiry of diverse and new means of perfection, he may hinder him
from making use of any, and consequently from attaining the end which he seeks
for, which is perfection. Young hounds loose the sent at every double, and
ru^ne counter: but the old and well sented hounds never ru^nes counter, but
keeps still the same sent they are upon. Let every one then, having once found
out Gods holy will touching his vocation, stick to it holily and lovingly,
practicing therein fitting exercises, according to the order of discretion, and
with the Zeal of perfection.

Of the union of Man's will to Gods in the inspirations, which are contrary to
the ordinary Laws: and of the peace and tranquillity of heart, the second
mark of Inspiration. CHAPTER. XII.
1. THus then THEO: we are to behave our selves in the inspirations, which are
no otherwise extraordinary, then in that they do move us to practice
ordinary Christian exercises, with an extraordinary fervor and perfection:
but there are other inspirations called extraordinary, not only because they
make the soul pass the bonds of an ordinary proceeding, but also move a man
to actions contrary to the laws, rules and common customs of the most holy
Church: and which therefore are more admirable then imitable. The holy Damsel
called by the Historians Eusebia the strange, left Rome, her native soil, and
putting her self in man's attire, with two girls more, took shipe to go by
Sea to Alexandria, and thence to the I Will of Co, where finding themselves sure,
they put on again their woman's habit, and returning to Sea, they went to the
town Mylasla in Car^^, whither the great S. PAVLE, who had found her in Co,
and had taken her under his spiritual protection, led her, and where
afterward, being made Bishop, he did so piously direct her, that she erected a
Monastery, and dedicated it to serve the Church in quality of DIACONESSES,
(as in those days they were named) with such fervor of Charity that in the
end she died a Saint, and by a number of miracles which God did by her Relikes
and intercessions, was acknowledged for such. To put on an attire, proper to a
diverse Sex, and in a disguised manner to expose ones self to a journey
together with men, does not only pass the extraordinary rules of Christian
modesty, but is even contrary to them. A certain young man having given his
mother a kick with his foot, touched with a lively repentance confessed it to
S. ANTONIE of Padua; who to imprint the horror of his sin more deeply in
his heart, said unto him, amongst other things, my child, the foot which
served for an instrument of wickedness, would deserve to be cut off for so
great a trespass: which the youth took in so good earnest, that being
returned home to his mother, transported with the feeling of contrition he cut
of his foot: the Saints words had not had such force, according to their
ordinary quality, unless God had added his inspiration thereunto; yea an
inspiration so extraordinary, that it was esteemad rather a temptation, if the
miracle of his reunited foot, caused by the Saints benediction had not
authorized it. S. PAVLE the first Hermit, S. ANTONIE, S. MARIE EGIPTIACA, did
not inhabit the vast wilderness, where they were deprived of hearing Mass,
communicating* and confessing, yea of all direction and assistance being young
people, without a strong inspiration. The great SYMEON STYLITE led a life, that
never mortal creature would have dreamed of, or have undertaken without an
heavenly instinct and assistance: SAINT JOHN Bishop surnamed SILENTIARIVS
forsaking his Bishoprike without the knowledge of any of his Clergy, passed
the rest of his days in the Monastery of Laura, nor was there after, any
news heard of him. Was not this contrary to the rule of keeping a holy
Residence? And the great S. PAVLINE, who sold himself to ransom a poor
widows son, how could he do it following the ordinary laws, since he was
not his own, but by his Episcopale consecration, belonged to the Church, and
the Common? The Virgins and wives who being pursued for their beauty, with
voluntary wounds disfigured their faces, that under the mask of an holy
deformity, they might conserve their chastity, did they not, in appare^ce,
prohibited things?

2. Now the best mark of good inspirations in general, and particularly of
extraordinary ones, is the peace and tranquillity of the heart that receives
them: for though the holy Ghost be truly violent, yet is his violence sweet,
delicate and peaceable; he comes as a blast of wind, and as an heavenly
thunder-clape, but he does not overthrow the Apostles, he troubles them not;
the fear which they had in hearing the noise, was of no continuance, but was
suddenly followed with a sweet assurance. So that this fire, seats it self
upon each of them, where it gives and takes a sacred repose: and as our Savior
is called a peaceabl^ o^ gentle Solomon, so is his Spouse termed Sunamite,
calm, and Daughter of Peace: and the voice, that is, the inspiration of God,
does not in any sort disquiet or trouble, but draws her so sweetly, that he
makes her soul deliciously melt and run into him: My soul, quoth she,
melted when my Beloved spoke; and though she be warlike and Martial, yet is
she withal so peaceable, that in the discord of weapons and wars, she
maintains the concord of an incomparable melody. What can you see, said she,
in the Sunamite, but troops of armed men? Her armies consist of troops, that
is, of concords, and singers, and her troops are armed men, because the
weapons of the Church, and of the deuote soul, are no other thing then
Prayers, Hymes, Canticles, and Psalms. So that servants of God, which had the
most high and sublime inspirations, were the most mild and peaceable that the
world had. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses are enstyled the most mild amongst
men; David is famous for his mildness. Whereas Contrariwise the Evil Spirit
is turbulent, rough, stirring: and those that follow hellish suggestions,
apprehending them to be heavenly inspirations, are commonly easily known,
being disquieted, headie, fierce, enterprisers and sticklers in affairs, who
under the cloak of Zeal, do turn all topce-turnie, censure all the world,
chide every one, find fault with all things; they are a people that will not be
directed, by or condescend to any, they will bear with nothing, but exercise
the passions of self-love under the title of Zeal of Gods honor.

The third Mark of the Inspiration, which is holy obedience to the Church and
Superiors. CHAPTER. XIII.
1. HOly humility is inseparably adjoined to the peace and sweetness of
heart. But I do not term a complementall ranging of words, gestures, and
kissings of the ground, obeissance* inclinations, humility, being done as it
often falls out, without any inward sense of our own abiection, and of the just
conceit we make of our neighbor: for these are but the vain amuseme^ts of a
weak brain, and are rather to be termed fantomes of humility, then humility.

2. I speak of a noble, real, pithie, and solid humility, which makes us
supple to correction, pliable and prompt to obedience. While the incomparable
Simeon Stylite was yet a Nouice at Toledo, he could not be stirred by his
Superiors advise, who sought to reclame him from the practice of so many
strange austerities, by which he was inordinatly cruel to himself, so that at
length he was turned out of the Monastery upon it, as one that was incapable
of the mortificatio^ of the mi^d, and too much addicted to that of the body:
but being recalled again to the Monastery, and become more deuote and prudent
in spiritual life, his behavior was quite other, as in the ensuing action he
declared: for the Hermits which were disperced in the neighbor Deserts of
Antioche, having notice of the extraordinary life which he led upon the
Pillar, in which he seemed to be either an earthly Angel or a neauenly man,
they dispatched a Deputy, with order to speak unto him from them as
follows. Why do thou, Simeon, leaving the high way of perfection, which so
great and holy Forerunners have trodden, follow another, uncouth, and far
different from all that has been seen or heard to this day? Simeon forsake
the Pillar, and sort thy self with others, as well in their manner of life, a^
in their method of serving God, used by our holy Auncesters. In case Simeon,
yielding to their advise, and condescending to their pleasures, should show
himself ready to descend, they had charged the Deputy, to leave him in his
liberty to persevere in his present manner of life, because his obedience,
said those good Fathers, gave assurance, that he enterprised this kind of
life, by the divine inspiration: But in case he should resist, and despising
their exhortations he would follow his own will, they resolved to withdraw him
thence by violence, and force him to forsake his Pillar. The Deputy being come
to the Pillar, he had not so soon performed his Embasie, but the great Simeo^
without delay, whithout reserve, without reply at all, began to descend, with
an obedience and humility worthy of his rare Sanctity. Which when the Deputy
saw, stay said he, o Simeon, remain there, persevere constantly, take courage,
pursue thy enterprise valliantly; thy stay upon this pillar is from God.

3. But mark, I pray you THEO: how these aunciant and holy Ancorets, in their
general meeting, found no surer marks of an heavenly inspiration, in so
extraordinary an occurrence, as was this holy Stylits life, then to find him
simple, sweet, and tractable, under the laws of holy obedience: and indeed
God blessing the Submission of this great man, gave him the grace to persevere
thirty whole years upon the top of a Pillar 36. cubits high, having before
passed 7. years upon others, of 6. 12, and 20. foot high, as also upon the
sharp point of a rock, in a place called Mander. Thus this bird of Paradise,
keeping above without touching the ground, was a a Spectacle of Love to the
Angels, and of admiration to mortals: In obedience all is secure, out of it,
all is doubtful.

4. When God inspires a heart, he moves it first to obedience, but was there
ever a more notable and sensible inspiration, then that which was given to the
glorious S. Paul? and the principal piece of it was, that he should repair
to the City, where he should receive from Ananias his mouth, what he was to
do: This Ananias, a very famous man, was, as S. Dorothie says, the Bishop of
Damas. Whosoever says that he is inspired, and yet refuses to obey his
Superiors, and follow their Counsel, is an Imposture. All the Prophets and
Preachers that ever were inspired, did always love the Church, always adhered
to her Doctrine, always were Proved by her, nor did they ever announce any
thing so constantly as this truth, that the lips of the Priest, should
conserve knowledge, and that from his mouth one was to demand the law; so
that Extraordinary missions are diabolical illusions, not heavenly
inspirations, unless they be acknowledged and approved by the Pastors, which
are of the ordinary mission. For so Moses and the Prophets are reconciled, so
SAINT FRANCIS, SAINT DOMINIKE, and the other Fathers of Religious Orders, were
called to the succor of souls by an extraordinary inspiration: Marry, they
did so much more humbly and cordially submit themselves to the Sacred
Hierarchy of the Church. In fine the three most assured marks of lawful
inspirations, are PERSEVERANCE, against inconstancy and lightenesse; PEACE and
sweetness of heart, against unquietness and solicitude; HVMBLE OBEDIENCE
against obstinacy and humourousnesse.

5. And to conclude all that we have said touching the union of our will with
Gods will which is called signified; almost all the herbs which bear yellowe
flowers, yea Cicorie also which bears blewe ones, do still turn toward the
Su^ne and go about with it, while the HELIOTROPIVM does not only in its
flowers, but even in its leaves also follow this great light; So all the Elect
do turn the very flower of their heart, which is obedience to the
commandments, toward the divine will; but souls taken with holy Love, do
not only eye this divine Goodness by obedience to the Commandments, but even
by the union of all their affections, following this heavenly sun in his
Round, in all that he does Command, Conunsell, and inspire, without reserve or
exception at all: whence they may say with the holy Psalmist, Lord thou have
held my right hand, and in thy will thou have conducted me, with increase of
thy glory thou have received me; as a beast I am become with thee, and I am
always with thee; for as a well broken horse, is easily handled, fairly and
duly brought into any posture by him that rides him; so the Loving soul is so
pliable to Gods will, that he does with her what he pleases.

A short method to know Gods will. CHAPTER. XIV.
1. SAINT BASILE says, that Gods will is made clear unto us, by his
ordinances or commandments, and that then there is no deliberation to be made:
for we are simply to do that which is ordained. So that for all other things,
we have freedom to choose, as we list, what likes us; though we are not to do
all that is lawful, but that only which is expedient: and that finally to
discern securely what is expedient, we are to follow our prudent Ghostly
Father's advise.

2. But THEOT: I am to premonish you of a troublesome temptation, which
crosses the way of such souls as are carried on with a great desire of doing
that which is most according to Gods will. For the enemy at every turn of a
hand, will put them to their wits end, to discover whether they are rather to
do this or that; for example, whether they should eat with their friend, or
no; whether they should wear gray or black clothes whether they should fast
Friday, or Saturday; whether they should recreate, or abstain from it,
consuming therein much time; and while they are busy, and break their heads
to descerne the better, they idly spend the time, in which they might do many
good offices, far more to Gods glory, then their descerning betwixt good and
better, wherein they are musing.

3. We use not to weigh every small piece of money, but such only as are of
importance: Trading would be too troublesome, and would burn too much day, if
we were to weigh pence, farthings, half farthings etc. Nor likewise are we to
weigh, every petty action, to know whether it be of more value then others.
Yea there is often times a kind of superstition in this precise inquisition:
For to what end should a man make difficulty, whether it were better to hear
mass in one Church then another, to spinne then to sow, to give Alms to a man
then to a woman? It is not good service done to a Master, to spend as much
time to consider what is to be done as to do the things which is to be done.
We are to proportion our attention to the consequence of the thing we are to
undertake. It were a superfluous care, to use as long a deliberation about a
journey of one day, as for one of 6. or 8. hundred miles.

4. The choice of ones vocation, the proposition of a business of great
consequence, a labor full of difficulty, or subject to great expenses: the
chang of ones place of abode, election of conuersations, and the like, deserve
a serious ponder ation which accords best with the will of God. But in little
and daily exercises wherein the fault is nether of moment, or irreparable, what
need is there to chant a QVANTA PATIMVR by engaging ones attention in
importune consultations? To what end should I put my self upon the rack, to
learn whether God would rather that I should say the Rosarie or our Ladies
Office, since there can be no such difference betwixt them, that a GRAND-IVRIE
should be impannelled upon it? That I should rather go to visit the sick in
the hospital, then to VESPERAS. That I should rather go to a Sermon, then to
a Church where there are Indulgences; commonly there is no such remarkable
thing in the one more then the other, that the matter requires any great
deliberation: we must walk simply, not subtily in those occurre^ces, and as S.
BASILE, freely do that which licks us best, without wearying out our wits,
loosing our time, and running hazard of disquiet, scruples, and superstition.
Now my meaning is always, where there is no great disproportion betwixt the
two works, and where there occurrs no circumstance more considerable in the
one then the other.

5. And even in matters of moment we are to use a great humility, and not to
think we can fish out Gods will by force of examination, and subtilitie of
discourse; But having implored the light of the Holy Ghost, applied our
consideration to the search of his good pleasure, taken our Directours
counsel, and of two or three spiritual persons more if they cha^ced to be
there we must absolutely resolve and determine in the name of God, never after
to call our choice in question, but deuotely, peaceably and constantly to
undergo and improve it. And albeit that the difficulties, temptations, and the
diversity of events which cross the execution of our design, might make us
doubt whether we had made a good choice; yet must we remain constant, not
waighing all this. Yea we are to consider, that if we had made an other choice,
we had peradventure been an hundred times worse; besides, that we wot not
whether it be God's will that we should be exercised in consolation or
desolation, in peace or in war. The resolution being once holily undertaken,
we are never to doubt of the holiness of the execution; for unless it be our
fault there can be none: to do otherwise is a notable mark of Self-love, of
childishness, or bransicknesse.

The end of the eight book.
THE NINGTH BOOK. OF LOVE OF SVBMISSION, WHEREBY OUR WILL IS UNITED to Gods.
Of the union of our will, to the will of God, which is the WILL OF GOOD
PLEASVRE. CHAPTER. I.
I. NOthing excepting sin, is done but by the will of God, called an absolute
will and of GOOD PLEASVRE, which cannot be hindered by man, and which is not
known, unto us but by the effects, yet being arrived, they make manifest that
God willed and determined them.

2. Let us conside^ in gross THEO: all that has been, is, and shall be; and
ravished with amazement, we shall be forced to cry out with the Psalmist: O
Lord I will praise thee, because thou are abundantly magnified; thy works are
wonderful, and my soul does acknowledge the^ very much; thy knowledge is
become admirable of me, it is made great, nor can I reach to it. And from
thence we pass on to a most holy Complacence, rejoicing that God is so infinite
in WISDOM, POWER, and GOODNESS, which are the three Divine Proprieties,
whereof the world is but a small taste, or scantling.

3. Let us behold men and Angels, and all the variety of nature, qualities,
conditions, faculties, affections, passions, graces and privileges which the
divine Providence has established in the innumerable number, of those heavenly
INTELLIGENCES, and humane creaturs, upon which Gods JUSTICE and MERCY is so
admirably practiced; and we cannot contain our selves from singing with joy
full of respect and loving dread. True Justice and true Judgment, are
The object of my dittie:
Which unto thee I offer dare,
Most just and full of pity.
THEO: we are to take an exceeding complacence to see how God exercises his
MERCY by the sundry benefits which he does distribute amongst men and Angels
in heaven and earth; And how he practices his JUSTICE by an infinite variety
of pains and chastisements: for his JUSTICE and MERCY are equally amiable and
admirable in them selves, since both of them, are no other thing then the same
most singular Goodness and Deity. But the effects of his Justice being
always sharp and and full of bitterness to us, he sweetens them with the
mixture of the effects of his MERCY, conseruing the green Olive amidst the
waters of the Deluge of his just indignation, and giving power to the deuote
soul, as to a chaste dove, to find it in the end, provided always, that like
to the dove, she does lovingly meditate. So death, afflictions, anguishes,
labors, whereof our life is full, which by Gods just ordinances are the
punishments of sin, are also by his mild MERCY, made ladders to ascend to
Heaven, means to increase grace, and merits to obtain Glory. Blessed is
poverty, hunger, thirst, sorrow, sickness, persecution, death: for in truth
they are the just punishments of our faults, yet punishments so seasoned, or to
use the Physicians term, so aromatized with Divine sweetness, benignity and
clemency, that their bitterness, is best beloved. A strange, yet a true thing,
THEO: if the damned were not blinded with the obstinacy, and hatred which they
conceive against God, they would find consolation in their torments, and see
the Divine MERCY admirably dispersed amongst their eternally-tormenting flames.
So that the Saints considering on the one side the torments of the damned so
horrible and dreadful, they praise Gods JUSTICE in it, and cry out, thou art
just o Lord thou art just, and justice for ever reigns in thy judgments. But
seeing on the other side, that these pains, though eternal and
incomprehensible, come yet far short of the crime and trespass, for which
they were inflicted, ravished with Gods infinite MERCY; o Lord, will they say,
how good thou art, since in the very heat of thy wroth, thou can not keep
in the torrent of thy MERCYES, that it stream not its waters into the
devouring flames of Hell. Goodness o Lord has not thy soul forsook,
Even while thy iustest justice, vengeance took
Midst hellish flames, nor could stern ire repress
The torrent of thy wounted graciousnesse.
Thou still pour'st out, and still do enterlace,
Thy wrothfull strokes, with strikes of grace.
And then turning our eyes upon our selves in parcular, and finding in us
diverse interior and exterior goods, as also a greatest number of interior
and exterior pains, which the Divine Providence has prepared for us,
according to his most holy JUSTICE and MERCY: and as opening the arms of our
consent, we do most lovingly embrace all, resting in Gods most holy will and
singing unto him, by way of a Hymn of an eternal repose, Thy will be done in
earth as it is in Heaven: I Lord, thy will be done in earth, where we have no
pleasure, which is not enterlaced with some pain; no Roses without thorns; no
day so clear that is not followed with a night; no summer that was not
vsshered in by a precedent winter: In the earth, o Lord, where consolations are
thin sown, desolations thick: let yet o God thy will be done, not only in
keeping thy Commandments, Counsels, and Inspirations which are to be
practiced by us; but also in the sufferance of afflictions and pains which are
to fall upon us, so that thy will may do by us, for us, in us, and with us,
what is thought good to thee.

That the union of our will to the will of God, is pri^c^pally caused by
tribulations. CHAPTER. II.
1. Pains considered in themselves, cannot indeed be beloved; yet beheld in
their source that is, in Gods will and providence which ordaines them, they are
infinitely amiable. Behold Moses his rod upon the ground, it is a hideous
serpent; look upon it in Moses his hand, it is a rod of wonders. Look
tribulations in the face, they are dreadful; behold them in the will of God,
they are loves and delights. How often does it fall out, that the potion or
plaster presented by the Physician or Apoticarie is loathsome unto us, which
being offered by some friends hand, (Love surmounting our loathing) we receive
with delight? Certes Love does either free labor from all difficulty, or
makes its difficulty delightful. It is reported that there is a river in
Boetia, wherein, the fishes shine like gold, but taken out of those waters, the
place of their origin, they have the naturalll color of other fishes. Even so
afflictions if they be looked upon out of God's will, they bear with them
their natural bitterness; but being contemplated in this eternal will, they
are all gold, lovely and precious beyond conceit.

2. If Abraham had beheld a necessity to slaughter his Son out of Gods will,
think THEO: what panges and conuulsions his poor heart had felt: but seeing
it in Gods GOOD PLEASVRE, it appears all gold, and he does tenderly embrace
it. If the Martyrs had looked upon their torments out of this GOOD PLEASVRE,
how could they have sunge in chains and flames? The truly loving heart, loves
Gods GOOD PLEASVRE, not in consolations only, but in afflictions also; yea it
loves it better upon the cross, in pains and difficulties, because it i^ the
prime effect of Love, to make the Lover suffer for the thing beloved.

3. The Stoics, especially the good Epictetes, placed all Philosophy in
abstaining and sustaining bearing and forbearing: in forbearing and abstaining
from terreane delights, pleasures and honors; in sustaining and bearing
wrongs, toils and disco^modities. But Christian doctrine which is the only
true Philosophy, has three principles upon which it does ground all its
exercises. Abnegation of ones self, which is far more then to abstain from
pleasures: Bearing of the cross, which is far more then to tolerate it:
following of our Savior not only in the point of renunciation of a man's
self, and bearing of his cross, but even in the practice of all sorts of good
works. Yet is there not so much love testified, neither in the abnegation, nor
in the very deed doing, as in suffering. Certes the Holy Ghost in the holy
Scripture puts down the death and passion which our Savior suffered for us,
as the highest strain of our Saviors Love toward us.

4. First to love Gods will in consolations, is a good love, when the love of
God is indeed loved, not the consolation in which it is found: howbeit it is a
love void of contradiction, repugnance and difficulty; for who would not love
a will so worthy in a subject so welcome? Secondly, to Love the will of God in
his Co^mandeme^ts, Cou^sells, and inspiratio^s, is a second degree of love and
much more perfect: for it leads us to the renouncing and quitting of our own
will, and makes us abstain and forbear many pleasures, yet not all. Thirdly
to love sufferances and afflictions for the love of God, is the highest point
of holy Charity: for there is nothing therein to gain our affection, save the
only will of God; Our nature feels a great contradiction in it, and we do
not thereby forsake pleasures only, but we even e^brace pains and torments.

5. Our mortal enemy knew well, what was Love's furthest trial, when he had
heard from the mouth of God, that JOB was just, rightuous, fearing God, hatting
sin, and stable in innocence: he made no account of all this, in comparison
of bearing afflictions, by which he made the last and surest essaye of the love
of this great servant of God, and to have the^ in an extreamitie, he composed
them of the loss of all his goods, and all his children, of the entire revolt
of all his friends, and of an arrogant opposition of his greatest Confederates,
and his own wife: and of an opposition, full of despite, mockery, and
reproach; to which he added the whole collection of almost all humane diseases
namely a cruel, stinking, horrible ulcer over all his body.

6. And yet behold the great JOB, as king of all the miserable creaturs upon
the face of the earth seated upon a dunge-hill, as upon the Throne of misery;
adorned with soars, ulcers, and matter, as with royal robes, suteing them in
the quality of his royalty, with so great an abiection and annihilation, that
if he had not spooken, one should not have descerned, whether JOB was a man
reduced into a dounghill, or the dounghill a corruption in form of a man.
Behold there, I say, the great Job, crying out, If we have received good
things from the hand of God, why shall we not also receive that which is bad? o
God how this word is great with Love! He ponders, THEO: that it was from the
hand of God, that he had received the good, testifying that he had not so much
loved good because it was good, as that it came from our Saviors hand: which
being so, he concluds, that he is lovingly to support adversities, since they
proceed from our Saviors hand, equally to be loved when he distributs
afflictions, and when he bestows consolations. Each one does easily receive
good things, but to receive evil, is a work of perfect Love, which loves them
so much the more, for that they are not amiable, but in respect of his hand
that gives them.

7. The Trauailler that is in fear whether he has hit upon the right way,
walks in doubt, looking about him in the country where he is, and stands in a
muse at the end of almost every field, to think whether he goes not a straie.
But he that is sure of his way, walks on iocundly, boldly and swiftly. Even so
the Love that de^ires to walk to Gods will through consolations, walks still
in fear to take the wrong path, and in steed of loving Gods good liking, to
fall in love with the pleasure which is in the consolation; but the Love that
strikes straight through afflictions toward the will of God, walks in
assurance: For affliction being in no wise amiable in it self; it is an easy
thing to Love it only for his sake that send's it. The hounds in spring time,
are every foot at default finding hardly any sent at all; because the herbs
and flowers do then smell so freshly, that the freshness put down the rowt
or sent of the Heart or hare; In the spring time of consolations, Love is
scarcely acquainted with Gods pleasure, because the sensible pleasure of the
consolation does so allure the heart, that it troubles the attention which it
ought to have to the will of God. S. CATHARINE having from our Savior her
choice of a Crown of gold, or a crown of thorns, choosed this, as better
suteting with Love. A desire of sufferance, says the B. ANGELA FOLIGNY, is an
infallible mark of Love: and the great Apostle cries out, that he glories
only in the Cross, in infirmity, in persecution.

Of the union of our will to the Divine will, in spiritual afflictions by
resignation. CHAPTER. III.
1. THe Love of the Cross makes us undertake voluntary afflictions, as for
example, fasting, watching, haire-shirts, and other tamings of the body,
renounce pleasures, honors and riches: and love in these exercises is very
delightful to the beloved; yet more, when we receive with patience
sweetness, and mildness the pains, torments, and tribulations, by reason of
the Divine will which sends us them. But Love then is at its hight, when we
receive afflictions not with patience and sweetness only, but we do even
cheerish, love and embrace the^, in regard of the Divine will, whence they
proceed.

2. Now of all the essays of perfect Love, that which is practiced by the
repose of the mind in spiritual tribulations, is doubtless the most pure, and
highest. The B. ANGELA OF FOLIGNY makes an admirable description of the
interior panges which sometimes she felt, saying that her soul was tortured
like to one who being tied hand and foot, should be hung by the neck, without
being strangled, but should hang in this estate betwixt death and life, without
hope of help, and neither being able to keep herself upon her feet, nor
assist herself with her hands, nor cry out, nor yet sigh or moan. So it
faires, THEO: the soul is sometimes so ouercharged with interior afflictions,
that all her faculties and powers, are oppressed by privation of all that might
releive her; and by apprehension and impression, of all that might attristate
her. So that at the imitation of her Savior she begins to be troubled, to
fear, to be disamayed, and at length to wax sad with a sorrow like unto that
of one dying. Whence she may rightly say, My soul is heavy even to death:
and with her whole hearts consent, she desirs, petitions, supplicats, that if
it be possible, this Calice may pass, having nothing left her, save the very
supreme point of her Spirit, which cleeuing hard to the Divine heart and will,
says in a most sincere submission, O eternal Father, ah! not mine, but thy
will be done. And, which is diligently to be noted, the soul makes this
resignation amidst such a world of troubles, contradictions repugnances, that
she does even hardly perceive that she makes it; at least it seems to her to
be done so coldly, that it is not done from her heart, nor as it were fitting,
since that which passes there in favor of the Divine will, is not only done
without delight and contentment, but even against the pleasure and liking of
all the rest of the heart; whom love permits to bemoane her self, at least to
moan that she cannot bemoane herself, and to sigh out all the LAMENTATIONS of
JOB and Hieremie: yet with charge, that a sacred peace be still conserved in
the very bottom of the heart in the highest and most delicate point of the
Spirit; and this submissiue peace is not tender or sweet, nor yet in a manner
sensible, though otherwise, sincere, strong, invincible, and full of Love; and
it seems to have betake^ it self to the very e^d of the Spirit, as into the
dungeo^ of the Fort, where it remains corragious; though all the rest be taken
and pressed with sorrow: And by how much the more Love in this case is deprived
of all helps, forsaken of all the aid of the virtues and faculties of the
soul, by so much it is more to be prised for conseruing constantly its
fidelity.

3. This union or conformity to the divine pleasure, is made either by a holy
resignation, or a most holy indifferency. Now Resignation is practiced, with a
certain force and submission: one would willingly live in lieu of dying, yet
since it is Gods pleasure that die we must, we yield to it. We would willingly
live, if it pleased God, yea further, we would willingly that it were his
pleasure to prolong life: we die willingly, yet more willingly would we live;
we depart with a reasonable good will, yet would we stay with a better. JOB in
his afflictions made an act of resignation: since we have received the good,
said he, from the hand of God, why shall we not sustain the the toils and
vexations which he does send us? mark, THEO: how he speaks of sustaining,
supporting, enduring; as it has pleased our Lord, so was it done, our Lords
name be praised. These are the words of resignation and acceptance, by way of
sufferance and patience.

Of the union of our will to Gods will by Ind^fferencie. CHAPTER. IV.
1. REsignation preferrs Gods will before all things, yet does it Love many
other things besides the will of God: but Indifferency passes Resignation:
for it Loves nothing, but merely for the Love of Gods will: in so much that
nothing at all can stir the indifferent heart, in the presence of the will of
God. True it is, the most indifferent heart in the world may be touched with
some affection, while yet it discouers not where the will of God is. Eliezer
being come to the fountain of Hara^, had a full view of the virgin Rebecca,
and without doubt, saw her too too fair and pleasing: howbeit he stayed
himself in an indifferency, till he knew by a sign from God, that the Divine
will had ordained her a wife for his Masters son: for then he presented her
with the eare-iewels, and bracelets of gold. Contrariwise if JACOB had only
loved in Rachel the alliance with Laban, to which his Father Isaac had obliged
him, Lya had been as dear unto him as Rachel, they being does Labans
daughters; and consequently his Fathers will had been as well fulfilled in the
one as in the other. But because beyond his Fathers will he coueted to satisfy
his own liking, taken with the beauty and loveliness of Rachel, he was
troubled to Espouse LYA, yet by resignation, took her against his own liking.

2. But the indifferent heart stands not thus affected, for knowing that
tribulation though she be hard-fauered as another LYA, leaves not for all that
to be daughter and a beloved one to the Divine Pleasure, it loves her as much
as consolation, which yet in it self is more gracious, yea it Loves
tribulation more, for that it sees nothing amiable in it, saving the sign of
Gods will. If pure water only be my desire, what care I whether it be served
up in a golden bolle, or in a glass, since, I am to have the water only; yea
I would rather have it in a glass, because it has no other color then that
of the water, which also I have at a fairer view. What does import whether Gods
will be presented unto us in tribulation or in consolation, since I pretend
nothing in either of them, but Gods will, which appears so much the better, in
that there appears, no other beauty, then that of the eternal pleasure?

3. Heroical, yea more then heroical was the indifferency of the
incomparable S. PAVLE, I am pressed said he, of two sides, having on the one
side a desire to be freede from this body, and to be with JESUS CHRIST, which
is incomparably better: yet on the other side a desire to live for your sake.
Wherein he was followed by the great Bishop S. MARTIN, who being got to the
periode of his life, pressed with an extreme desire to go to God, did yet
testify that he would most willingly remain amongst the trauaills of his
charge, for the good of his flock, so that having ended this Canticle. How
wishfull are thy Tents,
How much beloved,
O dreadful God of Hosts!
My soul is moved
With an extreme desire,
And sense do sownd
To be where joys abound.
My heart leapes, and flesh makes strife
After thee, o God of life.
He fell upon this exclamation. O Lord, if I may yet be serviceable to thy
peoples salvation, I refuse not Labor, thy will be done. Admirable was the
indifferency of the Apostle, admirable that of this Apostolical man. They see
heaven stand open for them, in earth a thousand toils, they are indifferent in
the choice of either, nothing but the will of God can conterpoise their hearts.
Heaven appears no more pleasant then worldly miseries, so Gods GOOD PLEASVRE be
equally in them both. Labors are a heaven to them, if Gods will be found in
the^, and heaven is a Hell if it be not found therein: for as David says,
they desire not any thing in heaven or earth, but that Gods GOOD PLEASVRE might
be accomplished. O Lord what is there in heaven for me, or what can I desire in
earth save thine own self.

4. The indifferent heart is as a balle of wax in the hands of its God, ready
to receive all the impressions of the Divine pleasure. It is a heart equally
disposed to all, having no other object of its will, then the will of its God,
which does not place its affection upon the things that God wills, but upon
the will of God that wills them. Whereupon when it meets with Gods will in
diverse things, it chooses that, cost what it will, wherein it appears most.
Gods will is found in marriage, and in virginity, but because it is more in
virginity, the indifferent heart makes choice of virginity though it should
cost her her life, as it did S. PAVLS dear spiritual daughter S. T^CLA, S.
CECILIE, S. AGATHA, with a thousand others. Gods will is found in serving as
well the poor as the rich, but yet somewhat more in serving the poor; the
indifferent heart will choose that part. God's will is in modesty exercised in
consolations, and in patience practiced in tribulations; the indifferent heart
preferres this, as having more of Gods will in it. To conclud Gods will is the
sovereign object of the indifferent soul. Wheresoever she espies it, she
ru^nes to the odor of its perfumes, directing her course still thither, where
it most appears, without any other respect. She is co^ducted by the Divine
will, as in a beloved string, which way soever it takes, she makes after it:
She would prise hell more with Gods will to boot, then heaven without it. Nay
she would even prefer hell before heaven, if she perceived only a little
more of Gods will in that, then in this. So that if by supposition of an
impossible thing, she should apprehend her own damnation more agreeable to
God, then her salvation, she would quit Heaven and run into Hell fire.

That holy indifferency is extended to all things. CHAPTER. V.
1. Indifferency is to be practiced in things belonging to the natural life,
as in health, sickness, beauty, deformity, weacknesse and strength: in the
affairs of the spiritual life as in honors, place, riches; In the variety
of the spiritual life, as in drinesses, consolations, gusts, aridities: In
actions, in sufferances, and finally in all sorts of events. Job, in his
natural life, was wounded with a most horrible soar that ever eye beheld. In
his civil life, he was scorned, baffled, contemned, and that by his nerest
allie: In his spiritual life, he was oppressed with languors, gripings,
conuulsions, andguishes, darkness, and with all kinds of intolerable
interior aggreeua^ces, as his complaints and Lamentations do witenesse. The
great Apostle does denounce unto us a general indifferency to show our selves
the true servants of God, in wants, anguishes, wounds, in prisons, seditions,
trauailles, in watchings, fastings, in chastity, in knowledge, in
longanimitie, and sweetness, in virtue of the holy Ghost, in unfeigned
Charity, in the word of truth, in the virtue of God, by the arms of Justice,
to the right and left hand, by glory and abiection, by infamy and good name;
as seductours and yet just, as men unknown, and yet acknowledged, as men dying
and yet alive, as chastised and yet not slain, as sorrowful, and yet still
continually ioyefull, as needy and yet enriching many, as having nothing and
yet possessing all things.

2. Note I pray you, THEO: how the life of the Apostles, in their bodies, was
afflicted with wounds: in their hearts with anguishes: in their civil life, by
infamy and prisons; and in all these o God what indifferency they had! Their
sorrows are joyful, their poverty rich, their death lively, their dishonours
honorable: that is, they are joyful to be sad, content to be poor, reenforced
to live amongst the dangers of death, and glorious to be disesteemed; for such
was the will of God.

3. And whereas the will of God was better known in sufferances, then in the
acts of other virtues, he ranks the exercise of patience in the front, saying,
let us appear in all things the servants of God, by great patience in
tribulations, in wa^ts in anguishes: and then toward the end, in chastity, in
Prudence, in longanimitie.

4. In like manner our heavenly Savior was incomparably afflicted in his
civil life, being condemned as guilty of Treason against God and man, bet,
buffetted, scourged; and in his natural life tormented with an extraordinary
ignominy, dying in the most cruel and sensible torments that heart could
think. In his spiritual life, enduring sorrows, fears, amazements,
anguishes, succourlesnesse, interior oppressions, such as never was or shall
be. For though the supreme portion of his soul did soueraignely enjoy
eternal glory, yet would not Love let glory spread its delights, neither in
his sense, imagination or inferior reason, but left the whole heart exposed in
this sort, to the mercy of sorrow and distress.

5. Ezechiel had a vision of a picture of a hand, which took him by an only
lock of his head-haire, and hoist him up into the air. In like manner our
Savior reared up into the air upon the Cross, seemed to be held in his
Fathers hand, by the very extreamitie of the Spirit, and as it were, by one
hair of his head, which being touched by the sweet hand of his eternal
Father, received a sovereign abundance of Felicity, all the rest being drunk
up in sorrow and grief. Whereupon he cries out, My God, why have thou forsaken
me?

6. They say, that the fish termed the Lantern of the Sea, in the midst of
the tempest, thrusts her tongue out of the water, which is so bright, shining
and clear that she serve the mariners for light-houses, or Beacons; so in the
midst of passions wherewith our Savior was beset, all the faculties of the
soul were swallowed up, and buried in the torment of such a number of pains,
excepting only the point of his Spirit, which being free from all pain,
remained bright and light with glory and felicity. O how blessed is the Love
which reigns in the top of a faithful soul, while it is tossed upon the
billows and waves of interior tribulations.

Of the practice of the loving indifferency, in things belonging to the
service of God. CHAPTER VI.
1. Scarcely can we discover the Divine pleasure but by the events, and as long
as it is unknown unto us, we must adheare close to the will of God which is
already declared and signified unto us: but as soon as the Divine Majesty's
pleasure appears, we must presently and lovingly submit our selves unto it.

2. My mother, or my self (all is one) are sick in bed, what do I know,
whether it be his will, that death should ensue? verily I am ignorant of it;
yet know I well, that in the interim, till the event arrive, he has ordained
by his signified will, that I use means convenient for the cure. I will
therefore faithfully do mine endeavor, not omitting any thing that I can well
contribute to that effect. But if it be the Divine pleasure, that the remedies
should not prevail against the disease which brings death with it; as soon as
I shall have intelligence thereof by the event, I will lovingly yield to it, in
the point of my heart maugre all the opposition of the inferior powers of my
soul. I, Lord, will I say, it is my will, because thy GOOD PLEASVRE is such:
so it has pleased thee, and so it shall please me, who am the most humble
servant of thy will.

3. But if the Divine pleasure were declared unto me, before the event thereof,
as was the manner of his death to the great S. Peter: to the great S. PAVLE his
shakles and prisons: to Hieremie the ruin of his dear Jerusalem: to David
the death of his son: then I were at the same instant to unite my will to
Gods, in imitation of the great Abraham, and with him, if we had such a
command, we were to undertake the execution of the eternal Decree, even in the
slaughter of our own children. O admirable union of this Patriarch^ to the
will of God, who believing that it was the Divine pleasure that he should
sacrifice his child, willed and enterprised it so courageously! Admirable that
of the child, who so meekely submited himself to his Fathers sword, to have
Gods will performed, at the price of his own blood.

4. But note here, THEO: a mark of the perfect union of an indifferent heart
with the Divine pleasure: behold Abraham with the sword in his hand, his arm
extended, ready to lend death's-blow to his only dear Son: this he did to
please the Divine pleasure: and see at the same instant an Angel, who of the
part of the said Pleasure, suddenly stops him, and presently, he waighes his
blow, equally ready to sacrifice or not to sacrifice his son, his life and
death being all one to him, in the presence of Gods will. When God gives him
order to sacrifice his Son, he is not sorrowful; when he dispenses with the
order given, he is not joyful. All is one to this resolute heart, so Gods will
be done.

5. Yes, THEO: for God oftentimes to exercise us in this holy indifferency,
inspires us with high designs, which yet he will not have accomplished and as
then we are boldly, courageously and constantly to set upon and pursue the
work to our power; so are we sweetly and quietly to submit our selves to the
event of our entreprise, such as it pleases God to send us. S. JEWS by
inspiration, passed the Sea, to conquer the holy Land, the success answered
not his expectation, he sweetly submitted himself to it. I do more esteem
the tranquillity of this submission, then the magnanimity of his enterprise.
S. FRANCIS went into Egypt to convert the infidels, or amongst the infidels to
die a Martyr, such was the will of God, yet he returned without performing of
either, and that was also Gods will. It was also the will of God, that S.
ANTONIE of Padua both desired Martyrdom, and obtained it not. The B. Ignatius
of Loyola, having with such pains put on foot the Company of the name of
JESUS, whereof he saw so fair fruit, and foresaw much more in the time to
come, durst yet promise himself, that, though he should see it dissolved,
which was the sharpest displeasure that could befall him, with in half an
hour after he would be resigned and appease himself in the will of God. John
Auila, that holy and learned Preacher of Andalusia, having a design to erect a
company of reformed Priests for the advancement of Gods glory, wherein he had
already made a good step, as soon as he saw that of the Jesuits on foot,
which he thought did suffice for that time, he presently stopped his design,
with an incomparable meecknesse and humility. O how happy are such souls, as
are courageous, and forceable in the enterprises to which God inspires them;
and withal tractable and facile in giving them over, when God does so dispose.
These are marks of a most perfect indifferency, to leave of doing a good,
when God pleases, and to return in the half way, when Gods will, which is
our Guide, does ordain it. Jonas was much to blame, to suspect that God did
not accomplish his Prophecy upon the NINIVITS; Jonas performed Gods will, in
denouncing unto the Niniuits their overthrow, but he let his own will and
interest enter into the work, whereupon seeing that God did not fulfill his
prediction according to the rigor of the letter, he was offended, and murmured
unworthily. Whereas, if Gods will had been the only motive of his actions, he
would have been as well content to have seen it accomplished, in remission of
the pain which the Niniuits had merited, as in punishments of the fault, which
the Niniuits had committed. Our desire is that the things which we undertake, or
have a finger in, should succeed well, but there is no reason, that God should
do all that we desire. If Gods will be that Niniuie should be threatened, and
not thrown down, since the threat is sufficient to correct, why should Jonas
find himself ageeeued in it?

6. But if this be so, we are then to affect nothing at all, but abandone our
business to the mercy of the events. Pardon me, THEO: we are to omit nothing,
which is requisite to bring the work, which God has put into our hands to a
happy issue; yet upon condition, that if the event be contrary, we should
lovingly and peaceably embrace it: for we are commanded to be jealous in that
which appertains to God's glory, and to our office: but we are neither
obliged, nor charged with the event which is not placed within our reach. Take
care of him, was it said to the Groom of the stable, in the Parable of the
poor man, who lay half dead betwixt Jerusalem and Hierico: It is not said,
as S. Bernard remarkes, cure him, but take care of him. So the Apostles, with
an unspeakable affection, preached first to the Jews, though they foresaw that
in the end they they should be forced to leave them, and betake themselves to
the Gentiles. It is our part to plant and water carefully, but it belongs to God
only, to give increase.

7. The great Psalmist makes this prayer to our Savior, as in an exclamation
of joy, and with presage of victory. O Lord, for thy beauty and comeliness
sake, bend thy bow, march prosperously and get on horse back; as though he too
would say, that by the arrows of his heavenly Love, shot into humane hearts,
he made himself Master of man, to handle him at his pleasure, not unlike to a
horse well trained up. O Lord thou art the Royal MASTER OF THE HORSE, who can
turn the heart of thy faithful Lovers into all postures, sometimes giving
them full bridle, they run at full speed in the enterprises to which they
were inspired; and again, at thy pleasure, thou stopest them in the midst of
their careere, and at the hight of their speed.

8. But further, if the enterprise begun by inspiration, do perish by his
fault, into whose hands it was put in trust, how can one say then, that a man
is to submit himself to Gods will? for some will say unto me, it is not Gods
will that hinders the event, but my fault, which is not caused by Gods will. It
is true, my child, thy fault was not caused by Gods will; for God is not
Author of sin: yet it is also true, that it is Gods will that thy fault, is
followed with the defect and ouerthow of thy design, in punishment of thy
fault: for though his goodness cannot permit him to will thy fault, yet can
his Justice permit the pain due to it. So God was not the cause that David
offended, yet he inflicted upon him the pain due to his sin. Nor was he the
cause of Saul's sin; Marry he was cause that in punishment of it, the
victory perished in his hands.

9. When therefore it happens, that in punishment of our fault, our holy
designs have not good events; we must equally by a solid repentance detest
the fault, and accept the punishments thereof.

Of the indifferency which we are to have in our Spiritual advancement.
CHAPTER. VII.
1. GOd has ordained that we should employ our whole endeauours to obtain the
holy virtues. Let us the^ forget nothing which might help our good success in
this pious entreprise: but after we have once planted, and watered, let us then
know for certain, that it is God, which must give groth to the trees of our
good inclinations and habits. And therefore, from his Divine Providence we are
to expect the fruits of our desires and labors. And if we perceive not the
progress and advancement of our hearts in devotion, such as we would desire
it, let us not be troubled at it, let us live in peace, let a smooth calm
always reign in our hearts. It belongs to us, diligently to labor our heart,
and therefore we must faithfully attend to it: But touching the plenty of the
croppe or haruist, let us leave the care thereof to our Lord and Master. The
Husbandman is never reprehended that the harvest is not plentiful; but only
that he did not carefully till and sow his ground. Let Us not be troubled to
perceive our selves continually NOVICES in the exercise of virtue: for in the
MONASTERY OF A DEVOTE LIFE, every one holds himself a continual NOVICE; and
there, the whole life, is the year of PROBATION, there being no more evident
argument, not only that we are NOVICES, but that we are even worthy of
expulsion and reprobation, then to esteem and hold our selves PROFESSED. For
according to the Rule of this Order, not the solemnity, but the performance of
the vows, makes the Nouices Professed; nor are the vows ever performed, while
there remains yet something to be done for their performance; nor is the
obligation of serving God, and going on in his love ended, but with the end of
life. I but, will some say unto me, if I know that it is by my own fault, that
I profited not in virtue, how could I but be grieved and disquieted? I have
said the same in the Introduction to a deuote life, but I do willingly
iterate it, because it can never be said sufficiently, one must be sorry for
faults committed, with a settled, constant, and calm repentance, but not with
such an one as is distempered, turbulent, or disencouraging. Are you sure that
your backwardness in virtue was caused by your fault? go to then, humble your
self before God, implore his Mercy, fall prostrate before the face of his
goodness, and demand pardon, confess your fault, cry him mercy, even in your
Ghostly Fathers ear, to obtain absolation: But this being done remain in
peace, and having detested the offense, embrace lovingly the abiection, which
you feel in your self, by reason of delaying your advancement in virtue.

2. Alas, THEO: the souls in Purgatory, are there doubtless for their
sins, and for sins which they have detested, and do highly detest: but as
for the abiection and pain which remains, to be tied to that place, and to be
deprived for a space of the beloved Love of heaven, they endure it with Love,
and deuotely pronounce the Canticle of the Divine Justice; Thou art just o
Lord, and thy judgments are rightuous. Let Us therefore expect our advancement
with patience, and in steed of disquieting our selves that we have so little
profited in the time past, let us diligently endeavor to do better in the time
to come.

3. Behold, I beseech you this good soul, she has much desired and endeauored
to infranchish her self of choler, wherein God has assisted her: for he has
quite delivered her from all the sins which proceed from choler, she would
die rather then utter one only injurious word, or to let slipe any show of
hatred. And yet she is subject to the assaults, and first motions of this
passion, which are certain iertings, stirrings, and sallies of an angry mind,
termed in the Caldaicall Paraphrase, SHRVGGINGS, saying shrugge, but sin not:
whereas our sacred version says; Be angry, but sin not; which in effect is
the same thing: for the Prophet would only say, that if anger surprise us,
stirring up in our hearts the first shruggings of sin, we should be careful
not to let our selves be carried further into the passion, for so we should
offend: and though these first stirrings and shruggings be no sin, yet the
poor soul that is often set hard at by them, does trouble, afflict and
disquisquiet herself, reputing her sorrow a sacrifice to God, as though it
were the Love of God that provoked her to this sorrow. And yet, THEO: it is not
heavenly Love that causes this trouble; it never being offended but at sin;
it is Self-love that desires to be freed from the pains and toils, which the
assaults of anger draws upon us. Nor is it the offense that offends us in
these stirrings of anger, there being none at all committed: it is the pain we
are put to in resisting, that disquiets us.

4. These rebellions of the sensual appetite, as well irascible, as
concupiscible, are left in us for our exercise, to the end we might practice
spiritual valor in resisting them. They are they Philistians, against whom
the true Israelits are still to fight, but shall never put them to flight; they
may weaken them but never quite overthrow them. They live with us, and never
die but with us. They are truly execrable and detestable, as being bred by
sin, and fed of sin, whence, as we are termed earth, because we take our
descent from earth, and to earth run back again, so this rebellion is named
sin by the great Apostle, as being issue of sin and drawing still that
wayward, though it never makes us guilty, unless we second, and obey it;
whereupon the same Apostle does exhort us, that we permit it not to reign in
our mortal body, to be subject unto it. He prohibits us not to feel: but
only not to consent to it. He does not ordain, that we should hinder sin to
enter into us, but he commands, that it should not reign in us: It is in us
when we feel the rebellion of the sensual appetite, but it does not reign in
us, unless we give consent unto it. The Physician will never give order that
the sick of an ague should not be dry, for that were too great a folly,
marry he will tell him, that though he be dry, he must abstain from
drinking. No man will be so mad, as to bid a woman with child, long for no
extrauagant things, for it is not in her power; well may one desire her to
discover her longings, to the end that if she longes for hurtful things, one
might divert her imagination, least the fantasy might get dominion over her
heart.

5. The sting of the flesh, forerunner of Satan* did rudely treat the good S.
PAVLE; to have in^^ted him into the precipice of sin: The poor Apostle
endured this as a shameful and infamous wrong: and thereupon termed it a
boxing or buffetting, and petitioned to God to be delivered of it: but he heard
from God, Paul my grace is sufficient for thee: for virtue is perfected in
infirmity; whereat this holy man submitting himself, willingly, then quoth
he, will I glory in mine infirmities, that the virtue of Christ may dwell in
me. But take notice, I beseech you, that there is sensual rebellion even in
this admirable vessel of Election, who in running to the remedy of Prayer,
does teach us, that we are to use the same arms against the temptations we
feel. Note further, that God does not always permit those cruel reuoults in
man, for the punishment of sin, but to manifest the force and virtue of the
Divine assistance and grace. Finally mark, how we are not only not to be
disquieted in our temptations and infirmities, but are even to glory to be
infirm, that thereby Gods virtue may appear in us, sustaining our weeknesse,
against the force of the suggestion and temptation: for the glorious Apostle
calls the stingings and shooting of the impurities which he endured, his
infirmities, and yet he says he glories in them; for be it that he felt them
by his misery, yet through Gods mercy he consented not to them.

6. Certes, as I have already said, the church condemned the error of
certain Solitarists, who held, that we might be perfectly delivered, even in
this world, of the passion of Anger, Concupiscence, Fear, and the like. It is
Gods will we should have enemies; and it is also his will that we should
repulse them. Let us the^ behave our selves courageously betwixt the one and
the other will of God, enduring with patience to be assaulted, and endeavoring
with courage by resistance to make head against the assaults.

How we are to unite our will with Gods, in the permission of sin. CHAPTER.
VIII.
1. GOd does soueraignely hate sin, and yet he does most wisely permit it to
leave reasonable creaturs free in their actions, according to the condition of
their nature, and to make the good more commendable, while having power to
transgress the law, they do not for all that transgress it. Let us therefore
adore and bless this holy permission. But since the Providence which does
permit the sin, does infinitely hate it, let us also detest and hate it,
desiring with all our heart, that sin permitted, may not be committed: And in
sequel of this desire, let us make use of all the means possible to hinder
the birth, groth and reign of sin, imitating our Savior therein, who never
ceaseath to exhort, to promise, to menace, to prohibit, to command, and
inspire us, to turn our will from sin, so farreforth as is possible, without
depriving us of liberty. But when the sin is once committed, let us
endeauore what we are able, to have it blotted out; as our Savior, who assured
Carpus, above mentioned, that if it were requisite he was ready to suffer death
again to deliver one only soul from sin. But if the Sinner wax obstinate,
let us weep, THEO: moan, pray for him together with our Savior, who having
all his life time shed an abundance of tears upon sinners, and such as did
represent the^, died in the end, his eyes full of tears, his body goarie with
blood, lamenting the loss of sinners. This affection touched David so to the
quick, that he fell into a trance upon it, I have sownded, says he, for
sinners abandoning thy law. And the great Apostle protest's that a continual
sorrow possesses his heart for the obstinacy of the Jews.

2. Yet be sinners never so obstinate, let us never desist to aid and assist
them: for what do we know, but they may do penance and be saved? happy is
he that can say to his neighbor, as did S. Paul, I have neither ceased night
nor day to admonish every of you with tears; and therefore I am clear of your
blood; for I have not been sparing, in denouncing unto you, Gods good pleasure
in every behalf. So long as there remains any hope, that the sinner will
amend, which always remains as long as life; we must never reject him, but
pray for him, and assist him as far forth as his misery will permit.

3. But lastly, after we have wept over the obstinate, and performed toward
them the good offices of Charity, in essaying to reclame them from perdition,
we must imitate our Savior, and the Apostles, that is, we must remove our mind
from thence, and place it upon other objects, and employments, more to the
advancement of Gods glory. We were first, said the Apostles to the Jews, to
announce the word of God unto you, but whereas you reject it and make your
selves unworthy of the reign of JESUS CHRIST, we will betake our selves to the
Gentiles. The kingdom of God, says our Savior shall be taken from you, and
shall be given to a nation that will make some profit of it. Nor can one
indeed spend much time in bewailing some few, without loosing time fit and
necessary, to procure the salvation of others. It is true indeed, the Apostle
says, that the loss of the Jews is a continual corrasiue unto him, yet he
spoke it in no other sense, then we say, that we praise God continually, for
we mean no other thing thereby, then that we praise him very frequently, and
in every occasion: and in the same manner, the glorious S. Paul, felt a
continual grief in his heart, caused by the Jews reprobation, for that in
every occasion he bemoaned their mishape.

4. For the rest we must for ever adore, Love and praise God's revenging and
punishing JUSTICE, as we love his MERCY being both daughters of his goodness.
For as he is good, yea soueraignly good, he makes us good by his grace: by his
JUSTICE he punishes sin, because he hates it, and he hates it, for that
being soueraignly good, he hates the sovereign evil which is iniquity. And
in conclusion note, that God does never otherwise withdraw his MERCY from us,
then by the just venga^ce of his punishing JUSTICE, nor do we ever escape the
rigor of his JUSTICE, but by his justifying MERCY: and howsoever whether he
punish or gratify us, his good pleasure is worthy of adoration, love, and
everlasting praise. So the Just, who sing the praises of Gods MERCY, for such
as have wrought their own salvation, shall rejoice, even in seeing Gods
vengance: The Blessed shall with joy approve the Sentence of the Reprobats
damnation, as well as that of the Elects salvation. And the Angels having
exercised their Charity toward those that they had in keeping, shall remain
in peace, while they see them obstinate, yea even damned. We are therefore to
submit our selves to the Divine will, and kiss the right hand of his MERCY,
and the left hand of his JUSTICE, with an equal Reverence.

How the purity of Indifferency is practiced in the actions of holy Love.
CHAPTER. IX.
1. THe most excellent Musician of the University, and one that had a
skeelfull hand upon the Lute, became in time so deadly deaf, that his hearing
served him for nothing, yet ceased he not for all that to sing, and to handle
his Lute marvelous delicatly, by reason of the perfect habit which he had
therein whereof his deafness did not deprive him; But taking no pleasure in
his song, nor yet in the sound of his Lute, as being deprived of his hearing,
he could not perceive the sweetness and delight of it; so that he neither
sung nor played, save only to content a Prince, whose native subject he was,
and whom he infinitely desired to please, as having an infinite obligation unto
him, for his breeding from his childhood. Hence he took an incomparable
delight to delight him: and when his Prince made show to be delighted in his
music, he was ravished with delight. But it happened sometimes that the
Prince, to make trial of this loving Musician's love, gave him order to sing,
and presently upon it, leaving him there, went a hunting: yet the desire which
this Chaunter had to accomplish his Masters desires, made him continue his
music as attentively as though his Prince had been present; though in very
deed he had no content in his own song: for he neither had the pleasure of
the Melody, whereof his deafness deprived him, nor the content of pleasing
his Prince, who being absent could not enjoy the sweetness and pleasure of
the air which he sung. My heart to sing, is ready and disposed,
A hymn in honor of thy name composed:
My soul and spirit ardently essays
To sing thy praise.
Up then my glory up, and quit thy rest,
In Harp and Psaltere let our lord be bles't.
Man's heart is the true Chaunter of the Canticle of sacred Love; himself the
HARP or PSALTER: Now ordinarily this Chaunter is his own auditorie, taking a
great pleasure in the Melody of his song; I mean, our heart loving God, does
taste the delights of this Love, and takes an incomparable contentment, to love
so lovely an object. Mark* I pray you THEO: what I would say. The Little
young Nightingales, do first essaie a beginning of song, by imitating the old
one, but having got skill, and passing Masters, they sing for the pleasure
which they take in their own song, and do so passhionatly addict themselves
to this delight, as I have said in an other place, that by striving to send
out their voice, their weseele bursting, they send out their life. So our
hearts in the beginning of devotion, love God that they may be united, and
become grateful unto him, and imitate him in that he has loved us for all
eternity: but by little and little being formed, and exercised in holy Love,
they are imperceptibly changed, and in lieu of loving God, to please God, they
begin to Love him for the pleasure they take in the exercises of holy Love, and
insteede of falling in Love with God, they fall in Love with the Love they
bear him, and stand affected to their own affections, not taking any more
pleasure in God, but in the pleasure they take in his Love; contenting
themselves with this Love, because it is theirs, that it is in their heart,
whence it proceeds: for though this sacred Love be called the Love of God,
because God is loved by it, yet it is also ours, we being the Lovers that Love
by it. And hereupon we come to chang; for insteede of loving this holy Love for
that it tends to God, who is the beloved; we Love it because it proceeds from
us, who are the Lovers. Now who does not see, that in so doing we do not seek
God, but turn home to our selves, loving the Love, in lieu of loving the
beloved; loving, I say, the Love, not by reason of Gods good pleasure and
liking, but for the pleasure and content we draw from it. This Chaunter who in
the beginning sung to God, and for God, does now rather sing to himself and
for himself, then for God. And the pleasure he takes in singing, is not so
much to please Gods ear, as his own. And for as much, as the Canticle of
Divine Love is of all, the most excellent, he also Loves it better, not by
reason of the Divine excellency which is exalted therein, but because its air
is more delicious and agreeable.

A means to discover when we chang in the matter of this holy Love. CHAPTER. X.
1. YOu may easily discover this THEO: for if this mystical Nigti^gale sing to
please God she will sing the song, which she knows to be most grateful to the
Divine Providence: but if she sing for the delight which she her self takes in
her melodious so^g, she will not sing the Ca^ticle, which is most agreeable to
the heavenly Bounty; but that which likes herself best, and from which she
thinks to draw the most contentment. Of two Canticles which are both Divine,
the one may be sung, because it is Divine: and the other, because it is
pleasing; Rachell and Lya, were equally Jacobs wives, but he Loves the one
only in the quality of a wife: the other, in that she was beautiful. The
Canticle is Divine, but the motive which moves us to sing it, is the spiritual
delight which we pretend therein.

2. Do you not see, will some say to this or that Bishop, that it is Gods
will that you should sing the Pastoral song of his Love, amongst your flock,
which he commands you thrice to feed in virtue of holy Love, in the person of
the great S. Peter, the first head of Pastors? What will you answer me? That
at Rome, or Paris there is more spiritual delight, and that there, one may
practice Divine Love with more comfort. O God it is not then to please thee
that this party desires to sing, it is for the pleasure he takes in it; He
seeks not thee in his Love, but the contentment which he receives in the
exercise of the same love. Religious men would sing the Pastors song, and
married men that which belongs to the Religious, and all this say they, to
Gods greater glory. Ah, you deceive your selves my friends, do not say that
you do it to Gods greater glory. O God no! it is done for your own greater
content; which you prefer before Gods. Gods will is equally, and almost still
more in sickness, the^ in health. Wherefore if we Love health better, let us
never say, that we do it to serve God the better: for who sees not, that it
is health that we look for in Gods will, not God's will in health.

3. It is hard, I confess, to behold long together and with delight, the
beauty of a Myrrour, without casting an eye upon a man's self, yea without
taking a complacence in himself; yet is there a difference betwixt the
pleasure which one takes in beholding the Myrrour, by reason of its beauty,
and the complacence one takes to see himself in it: It is also without doubt
very hard, to love God, and not withal Love the pleasure which we take in his
Love: yet is there a fair difference betwixt the pleasure which one takes in
loving God for his beauty, and that which he takes in loving him because his
Love is delightful unto him. Now, our strife must be purely to find out in God
the Love of his beauty, not the pleasure we take in the beauty of his Love.
He that in praying dece^nes that he prays, is not perfectly attentive to his
Prayer: for he diuerts his attention from God, to whom he prays, and turns it
upon the Prayer, which he makes unto him. The very solicitude we have, not to
be distracted, is often times a maine distraction: Simplicity in spiritual
actions is most commendable. Desire you to behold God, do so then, and be
attentive to that: for if you go to reflect and bring your eyes backwards upon
your self, to see how you look when you look upon him, it is not now him
that you behold, but your own gesture, your self. He that prays fervently,
knows not whether he prays or not; for he thinks not of the Prayer which he
makes, but of God, to whom he makes it. He that is in the heat of sacred Love,
does not turn his heart upon himself, to look what he is doing, but keeps
it hard set, and bent upon God, to whom he applies his Love. The heavenly
Chaunter takes such pleasure in pleasing God, that he has no pleasure in the
melody of his voice, but only in respect that God is pleased in it.

4. Why, in your opinion Theo: did Amon the son of David Love Thamar so
desperately, that he even thought to die for Love? Do you think that it was
her that he loved? You shall see that he did not: for as soon as he had
glutted his execrable lust, he cruelly kick'ed her out of doors, and
ignominiously rejected her. If it had been thamar that he loved, he had never
done this; for Thamar remained still Thamar: but whereas it was not Thamar that
he loved, but the brutall delight which he took in her, as soon as he had got
what he sought for, Thamar was outragiously bet, and brutally treated by him.
His pleasure was placed upon Thamar, but his Love was set upon the pleasure,
not upon Thamar. So that the pleasure being ended he could also willingly have
procured an end of her. THEO: you shall see some praying, as you would think,
with great devotion and fervor in the practice of heavenly Love: but stay a
little, and you shall discover whether it be God indeed that he loves. Alas,
as soon as the delight and satisfaction which he took in Love shall depart,
and a dryness shall arrive, he will quite leave of all, and pray only
cursarily by fits. Now if it had been God indeed that he loved, why would he
have left loving him, since God is still God: it was therefore God's
consolation that he loved, not the God of consolation. Truly there are diverse
that take no delight in Divine Love, unless it be canded in the suggur of some
sensible sweetness, and they do willingly play the children, who, if they
have a little honey spread upon theit bread do lick and suck off the honey,
casting the bread away: for if the delight could be separated from the Love,
they would reject Love, and lick up the delight only. Wherefore following
Love for Love of the delight, when they meet not with delight, they forsake
Love. And, o God, to what eminent danger are those people exposed, either to
return back again as soon as they miss those gusts and consolatio^s, or
else to be occupied in vain delight far remote from true Love, and to
mistake the honey of Heraclea for that of Narbone?

Of the perplexity of the heart in Love, which doubts whether it please the
Beloved. CHAPTER. XI.
1. THe Musician which I mentioned being fallen sick, took no delight in his
own music, save only that now and the^ he perceived his Prince attentive to
it, and please himself in it, O how happy is the heart that Loves God without
pretense of any other pleasure then a strife to please God: for what more dear
and perfect pleasure can a soul ever take, then that which is taken in the
Divine pleasure? Yet this pleasure to please God, is not properly Divine Love,
but the fruit thereof, which may be separated from it, as the Lemmon from the
Lemmon tree. For, as I have said, our Musician did continually sing, without
reaping any contentment of his song, whereof his deefenesse made him incapable:
and often also did he sing, without having the pleasure to please his Prince,
who after he had given him Order to begin, would withdraw himself, or go a
hunting, neither taking leisure nor pleasure to hear bim.

2. O God, while thy benign look does testify unto me that thou art pleased
in the song of my Love, ah how I am comforted! for is there any pleasure
comparable to the pleasure of pleasing thee? But when thou turns thine eyes
from me, not daigning me a feeling of the delightful favor, of the
complacence which thou take in my song, good God what panges my soul
endures: without leaving off for all that ^^^ally to Love thee, and continually
to sing the Hymn of thy Love, not for any delight she finds in it; for she
finds none at all, but for the pure Love of thy will.

3. I have seen a sick child of that disposition that he would courageously
have eaten wha^ his mother presented him (though with an incredible loathing)
for a pure desire he had to give her content: In this case, he eat his meat
without taking any pleasure in it, yet not without a pleasure of a higher rate
and rank, which was the pleasure of pleasing his mother and in perceiving her
content. But another who without seeing his mother, by the mere knowledge he
had of her desire, took all that was brought to him by her order, he eat
without any pleasure at all: for he neither had the pleasure of eating, nor yet
the contentment to see his mother pleased, but did it only purely and simply
to do her will. The contentment of our Prince who is present with us, or of
any party that we Love earnestly, makes watchings, pains, and trauailles
delicious, and begets in us a Love of peril. But nothing is so discomfortable,
as to serve a Master that knows it not, or at least if he know it, yet gives
no sign that he takes it in good part; Love must be strong in this occurrence,
because it runs alone without being sustained by any pleasure or pretention.

4. Thus it comes to pass often times that we have no consolation in the
exercise of holy Love, for that, being like deaf singers, we hear not our
own voices nor e^ioye the melody of our so^g; yea further, we are pressed
with a thousand fears, frighted with a thousand false Alarmes, which the
Enemy gives round about our heart; suggesting, that peraduenturs, we are not
in grace with our Master, and that our Love is fruitless, yea that it is
false and vain, since it brings forth no comfort. And then, THEO: we labor
not without pleasure only, but with an exceeding distress, being neither able
to discover the profit of our labors, nor his contentment, for whom we labor.

5. But that which in this case does augment our difficulty, is, that even the
Spirit and highest part of Reason cannot all assuage our grief for this poor
superior portion of Reason being beset round about with the suggestions of the
enemy, she is even all in tears, and has her hands full in keeping the GUARD,
least sin by surprise might get consent: so that she can make no SALL^^ to
disengage the inferior part of her Spirit. And albeit she have not lost heart,
yet is she so desperately set at, that though she be not guilty of fault, yet
is she not free from pain: for that her grief might be full, she is deprived
of the general consolati^n, which does ordinarily accompany us through all
the other calamities of this life, to wit, hope that they will not be of long
continuance, but will have an end; so that the heart in these spiritual
troubles, falls into a certain impotencie of thinking to see an end of them,
and consequently of hoping to be eased of its burden. Faith indeed which
resides in the top of the Spirit, assures us that these troubles will have end,
and that one day we shall enjoy expected repose: But the lowdnesse of the
shoutes and outcries which the Enemy makes in the rest of the soul about the
inferior Reason's Quarter, will scarely permit the advice and Remonstrance of
Faith to be heard. And we have our Imagination filled with this heavy presage.
Alas I shall never be joyful.

6. O God, my dear THEO: now it is, that we are to show an invincible courage
toward our Savior, serving him purely for the Love of his will* not only
without pleasure, but even floting in the midst of sorrows, horrors,
astonishments and assaults; as did his glorious mother, and S. JOHN upon the
day of his passion, who amongst so many blasphemies, sorrows and deadly
disasters, remained constant in Love; yea even in tha^ instant in which our
Savior, having drawn all his holy joys to the very top of his Spirit, left
no joy or consolation at all in his heavenly cou^tina^ce; and when his eyes
languishing and covered with the dark veil of death, did only cast upon them
a look of sorrow, as did the Sun send out beams of horror, and daunting
darkness.

How the soul amidst the^^ interior anguishes, knows not the Love she bears
to God, and of the Lovely death of the will. CHAPTER. XII.
1. THe night before the great S. PETER was to suf^er, Martyrdom, an Angel
came to the Prison and filled it with splendor, awaked S. PETER, made him
arise, girt himself, put on his shoes and clothes, freede him of, his bonds
and shackles, drew him out of Prison, and led him through the first and second
guard, till he came to the iron gate in the high way toward the town, which
opened at their coming: and having passed a street, the Angel left the
glorious S. PETER in full liberty. Behold a great variety of very sensible
actions, and yet S. PETER who was at the first awaked, did not apprehend that
which was done by the Angel, was done indeed, but esteemed in ^n imaginary
vision. He was awake, and yet did not think so; he put on his clothes and
shoes, not knowing that he had done it; he walked, and yet thought he walked
not; he was delivered, and believed it not: And all this, because the wonder of
his deliverance was so great* and it did engage his heart in such sort, that
though he had sense and knowledge enough to do what he did, ye^ had he not
enough to discover that he did it really, and in good earnest; He saw indeed
the Angel, but could not discern whether it was a true and natural vision.
Whereupon he took no consolation in his delivery, till such time a^ coming
to himself: Now, quoth he, I know for certain, that God has sent his Angel,
and has delivered me out of Herod's hands, and from all the Jews expectation.

2. Now, THEO even after the same manner it goes with a soul which is
ouercharged with interior anguishes, for be it that she has the power to
believe, to hope and Love her God, yet her distress does possess her and make
head against her so desperately, that she ca^ get no time to make a retreat
into her own quarter, and see what is done at home. Whereupon she is conceited
that she has neither faith, Hope, nor Charity* but only the shadows, and
fruitless impressions of the said virtues; which she apprehends in a manner
without apprehending them, and as strangers, not as the Familiars of the soul.
And if you will but take notice of it, you shall find our souls always in
this estate, when they are fiercely set upon by some violent passion: for they
perform many actions, as though they were in a dream, with so little feeling,
that they can scarcely believe that the passage is real. Which moved the
Psalmist to express the greatenesse of the Israelits consolation in their
return from Babilon's Captivity in these words. VVhen't pleased great Sions
king to grant
Us freedom from our thrall,
We s^em'd to dream; so were we took
With thoughts extaticall!
And as the holy latin version following the Seauentie has, we were made as
men comforted, that is, the admiration of the good which befell us was so
excessiuely great, that it hindered us from feeling the consolation which we
received, and it seemed to us, that we were not truly comforted nor had any
true consolation, but only in a figure, and a dream.

3, Such are the feelings of the soul which is tossed in the midst of
Spiritual anguishes, which do exceedingly purify and refine Love for being
stripped of all pleasure by mediation, whereof she might be joined to God, she is
joined and united to God immediately, will to will, heart to heart without the
least mediation of content, or any other pretention. Alas, THEO: how the poor
heart is afflicted, when being as it were abandoned by Love, it looks round
about, and yet seems not to find it. It is not found in the exterior senses,
thy not being capable of it; nor in the Imagination, which is cruelly tortured
by sundry onsets; nor in the understanding, distracted with a thousand
obscurities of strange discourses and apprehensions; and though at length it be
found in the top and supreme region of the Spirit, where it does still reside:
yet does the soul mistake it, and conceiues that it is not it; because the
thickness of darkness and distress does not permit her to taste the
sweetness thereof. She sees it without seeing it; meets it, but does not
know it; as though it passed in a dream only ^^r in a Type. In this sort
Magdalaine having met with her deare-Maister, received no comfort from him, for
that, she did not apprehend that it was he indeed, but a Gardener only.

4. But what is the soul to do that finds her self in this case? THEO: she
wots not how to behave herself amidst so many vexations; nor has she any
strength left, but even permits her will to die in the hands of Gods will,
imitating her sweet JESUS, who being come to the top of the pains of the
Cross, which his Father had ordained, and not being able any further to resist
the extream^tie of his torments, did like the Heart, who, when he is ru^ne out
of breath, and oppressed by the hounds, yielding himself up into the huntsmans
hands, with tears trickling down, sends out his last brayings: for so this
Divine Savior, near unto his death, and giving up his last breath, with a
loud voice and abundance of tears; Alas quoth he, o Father into thy hands I
comme^d my Spirit: This was the last word, THEO: and that by which the beloved
son, gave a sovereign testimony of his Love toward his Father. When
therefore all fails us, when our extreamities are grown to their hight; this
word, this disposition, this rendering up of our soul into our Saviors hands,
can never fail us. The son commended his soul to his Father in this his
last, and incomparable anguish. And we, when the conuulsions of spiritual
pains shall bereave us of all other sort of solace, and means of resistance,
let us commend our soul into the hands of the eternal son our true Father,
and making our hearts in a quiet submission stoop to his good pleasure, let us
make over our whole will unto him.

How the will being dead to it self, lives entirely to Gods will. CHAPTER.
XIII.
1. WE speak with a singular propriety of the death of men, in our French
tongue: For we call it an OVERPASSING, and the dead themselves OVERPASSED,
intimati^g, that DEATH amongst men, is but a PASSAGE from one life to another,
and TO DIE, is no other thing but to OVER PASS the confines of this mortal
life, to arrive at the immortal. True it is our will can no more die then our
soul, yet does she sometimes out go the limits of her ordinary life, to live
wholly in the Divine will. Then it is that she neither cann, or will desire any
thing at all, but gives her self over totally and without reserve to the good
pleasure of the Divine providence, moistening, and incorporating her self with
this good pleasure, that she is not seen, but is hid with JESUS CHRIST in God,
where she lives: not she, but the will of JESUS CHRIST in her.

2. What becomes of the brightness of the stars, when the Sun appears in
our Horison? certainly it does in no wise perish, but is drunk up, and spent
in the Suns singular light, with which it is happily mixed and allied. And
what becomes of man's will when it is entirely delivered up to God's pleasure?
It does not altogether perish, yet is it so drunk up, and dispersed in the
will of God, that it appears not, nor has it any other will, then the will of
God. Propose unto your self, THEOT: the glorious and never sufficiently
praised S. Jews, who embarkes himself to sail beyond Sea: and behold the
Queen his dear wife ebarking her self together with his Majesty; now if one
should have demanded of this brave Princess, Madame whither do you tend? she
would without doubt have replied, I go whither the king goes; but if one
should have demanded again saying: but do you know, Madame, whither the King
Goes? She would also have made answer, he told me in general, howbeit I care
not for knowing that, desiring only to accompany him. And if one had replied,
why then Madame, you have no design in this journey; No, would she have said,
I have no other but to be with my dear Sovereign and husband. Why, but might
one have said unto her, he goes into Egipte, to pass into PALESTINE, he will
lodge at DAMIETA in ACREA, and in many places besides; do not you intend
Madame, to go thither to? To this she would have made answer: no in truth I
have no intention, save only to keep my self near my King, as for the
places whither he goes, they are all indifferent to me, nor do they enter into
my thoughts, but in so much as he shall be there; I go without desire of
going, for I affect nothing but the Kings presence. It is therefore the King
that goes, he that designs the journey; but as for me, I go not, I follow
only: I desire not the journey, but the only presence of the King: to go or
to stay, and all sorts of contrariety, being indifferent to me.

3. Certes if one demand of a servant that is of his Masters train, whither
he goes: he is not to answer that he is to go to such or such a place, but
only that he is to follow his Master; for he goes no where upon his own
accord, but at his Masters pleasure only. In like manner, THEO: a will
perfectly resigned to God's, is not to have any will of her own, but is simply
to follow God's. And as one in a Shipe, does not move by his own motion, but
leaves himself to be moved by the Motion of the Vessel in which he is, so the
heart, that is embarked in the divine pleasure, ought to have no other will
then that of permitting it self to be conducted by the Divine will. And then
the heart does not, as before, say, thy will be done not mine, for there is
now no will to be renounced; but it pronounces these words, Lord, I put my
will into thy hands, even as though it had not its will in its own disposing:
but at the disposition of the Divine providence; So that it is not properly in
this manner that Servants follow their Masters* for albeit the journey be
undertaken at their Masters pleasure, yet is their following performed by
their own particular will, by a will notwithstanding that is follower,
servant, subject, and thraule to the will of their Master. So that as the
Master and servant are two, so the will of the Master and the will of the
servant are also two. But the will which is dead to her self, that she may
live to Gods, is without any particular will, remaining not only conformable
and subject, but even annihilated in herself to be converted into Gods: as one
might say of a little child, who has not yet got the use of his will, to Love
or desire any thing, save the use of his dear mothers breasts: for he
decernes not of which side he would rather be, or any other thing else, except
only to be betwixt his mothers tresses, with whom he esteems himself one
same thing; never troubling himself how he should conform his will to his
mothers: for he perceiues not his own, nor does he think, he has any, leaving
all the care to his mother, to go, to do, and to will what she judges
profitable for him.

4 It is truly the highest perfection of our will, to be thus united to our
sovereign good, as was his, who said: o Lord thou have conducted and led me
in the way of thy will: for what would he have said, but that he had made no
use of his own will to conduct himself, but simply left the conduct and
command thereof to the will of God.

An explanation of that which has been said touching the decease of our will.
CHAPTER. XIV.
1. IT is credible that the most sacred virgin our Lady, received so much
content in carrying her little JESUS betwixt her arms, that delight beguiled
weariness, or at least made it delightful: for if a branch of AGNVS CHASTVS
can solace and vnwearie Trauaillers, what solace did not the GLORIOUS MOTHER
receive in carrying the immaculate LAMB of God? And though she permitted him
now and then to ru^ne a foot by her, weelding him by the hand, yet was it not,
that she would not rather have had him ha^ging about her neck and breasts; but
it was to teach him to form his steps, and walk alone. And we, THEO: as the
little children of the heavenly Father, may walk with him in two sorts: for we
may either take the steps of our own will, which we conform to his, holding
always in the hand of our obedience his Divine intention, and following it
wheresoever it shall lead us, which God requires at our hands by the
signification of his will: for since his will is that I should do his
ordonance, his will is also that I have a will to do it. God has signified
unto me that his will is, I should keep holy the Saboth day, since therefore
he will have me to do it, he will also that I have a will to do it, and for
this end that I have a will of mine own, by which I follow his, by
correspondance and conformity. But we may also walk with our Savior, without
any will of our own, by casting our selves simply upon the Divine pleasure, as
a little child in his mothers arms, by a certain admirable kind of consent,
which may be termed UNION, or rather unity of our heart with Gods. And this is
the way that we are to endeavor to comport our selves in GODS WILL OF GOOD
PLEASVRE, for so much as the effects of this WILL OF GOOD PLEASVRE, do
proceed purely from his Providence and do come unto us without our labor.
True it is we may desire their coming, according to Gods will, and this is a
good desire; yet we may also receive the events of Heavens good pleasure, by a
most simple tranquillity of our will, while willing nothing, we do in
simplicity of heart give way to all that God would have done in us, on us, or
by us.

2. If one had asked the sweet JESUS when he was carried in his mothers arms,
whither he went too! might he not with good reason have answered, I go not,
it is my mother that goes for me. And if one had said to him, but at least do
not you go with your mother? might he not reasonably have replied: no, I do
not go, or if I go whither my Mother carries me, I neither go with her, nor
by mine own steps, but by my mothers, by her, and in her: But if one had yet
gone further with him, saying; surely o most dear Divine child, thy will is
that thy sweet mother should carry thee: no verily might he have said, I
will none of all this; but as my entirely good mother walks for me, so she
wills for me. I leave her the care as well to go, as to will to go for me,
where she likes best. and as I go not hut by her gate; so I will not but by
her will: And from the instant I was first in her arms, I never gave my
attention either to will or nill, turning all other cares over to my mother,
save only the care to live in her bosom, to suck her sacred Pappe, and to
keep my self close joined to her amiable neck, loving to kiss her with
kisses of my mouth. And be it known unto you, that while I am amongst the
delights, of these holy huggings which surpass all delights; I apprehend my
mother as a tree of life, and my self in her, as the fruit; that I am her own
heart in the midst of her heart, or her soul in the heart of her heart, so
that as her gate serves both her and me without my touching the ground; so her
will serves us both without producing any act of my will, about the business
of going and coming. Nor do I ever take notice whither she go fast or
fairly, hither or thither, nor do I make any inquiry whither she tends,
contenting my self with this, that go she whither she please, I go still
locked up in her bosom, close laid at her sugared dugges, where I feed as
amongst Lillies. O Divine child of Marie, permit my poor soul to take this
strain of Love! But go then o most amiable dear little babe, or rather go
not, but stay still so holily glewed to thy sweet mothers breast, go always
in her, and by her, or with her, but never without her while thou remainest a
child; o how blessed is the womb that bore thee, and the dugges that gave thee
suck! The Savior of our souls was endewed with the use of Reason, from the
instant of his Conception in his mothers womb, and could make all these
discourses: yea even the glorious S. JOHN his Forerunner from the day of his
holy Visitation. And though both of them, as well in that time, as in their
infancy, were possessed of proper liberty to will or not to will; yet did
they defer the care of that which concerned their exterior government to
their mothers, to do and will for them what was requisite.

3. Such should we be, THEO: pliable and tractable to Gods good Pleasure, as
though we were very wax, not giving our thoughts leave to wander in wishing
and willing any thing, but leaving it to God to will and do all for us
according to his goodness throwing upon him all our solicitude, because he
has care of us, as the holy Apostle says; and note that he says: All our
sollicitudes that is, as well those which concern the events, as those, which
pertain to willing or not willing: for he will have a care of the issue of our
affairs, and of willing that which is best for us.

4. Mean while let us affectionatly imploye our cares to bless God in all his
works, by Jobs example, saying; our Lord gave, and our Lord has taken away:
the name of our Lord be blessed. Lord I will will no events, but will let them
be willed for me, even as thou shall please: yea in lieu of willing the events,
I will bless thee, in that thou have willed them. O THEO: what an excellent
employment of our will is this, when she leaves willing and choosing the
effects of Gods good pleasure, to praise and thank him for such effects.

Of the most excellent exercise a man can make in the interior and exterior
troubles of this life, In sequel of the indifferency and death of the will.
CHAPTER XV.
1. TO bless and thank God in all the events that his providence ordaines, is
in very deed a most holy exercise: yet if while we leave the care to God to
will and do in us, on us, and with us, what pleases him, without attending to
that which passes, though indeed we feel it, we could divert our heart, and
apply our attention to the Divine goodness and sweetness, blessing God not
in the effects or eue^ts which he ordaines, but in himself, and in his own
excellency, we should certainly perform a far more eminent exercise. In the
time that Demetrius laid Seige to Rhodes; Protogenes, who was in a little
house in the Suburbs, ceased not to work, and that with such assurance and
repose of mind, that though the enemies sword hung still in a manner over his
head, yet performed he that excellent MAIST^R-PEECE, and admirable Satyr,
making himself merry with playing upon a pipe. O God how worthy souls are
those, that in all kinds of accidents, keep still their affections and
attentions upon the eternal goodness to honor and Love it eternally?

2. The daughter of an excellent Physician and Surgeon, being in a continual
Ague and knowing that she was tenderly beloved of her Father, said to one of
her friends, I endure a great pain, yet think I of no remedies: for I know
not what would be apt to work the Cure. I might wish for one thing, while an
other were more convenient. Were it not therefore my fairest way to leave all
this care to my Father, who knows what to do, can, and will do all that is
required for my health? I were to blame if I should trouble my self to think
of it, since he will be careful enough to think of it for me: I should err
to desire any thing, since he is dilligent enough to desire all that ca^ be
profitable for me: I will therefore expect only till he will that which he
deames fit, and will not otherwise busy my self then in fixing mine eyes upon
him when he comes nigh me, to testify unto him my filial affection, and to
discover unto him my perfect confidence; and with this she fell a sleep; till
her Father judging it fit to let her blood, provided things requisite for it,
and coming toward her, even as she awaked, after he had asked her, how she
found herself after her sleep, he demanded whether she would not like well to
be let blood for her health; Father, said she, I am yours, I know not what I
should desire for my cure; it belongs to you to will and do for me whatsoever
you shall judge convenient: for my part, it suffices me to Love and honor you
with my whole heart, as indeed I do: with this they take and bind her arm,
and her Father himself lanceth the vein; But while he is doing the deed, and
the blood springs out, the loving girl never once looked upon her lanced arm,
nor yet on the blood that issued out of the vein, but keeping her eyes fixed
upon her Fathers face, she said only now and then with a low voice; my Father
Loves me tenderly, and I am entirely his: And when all was done, she thanked
him not, but only repeated again, the former words of her filial affection
and confidence.

3. But tell me now THEO: my friend, did not this girl testify a more solid,
and attentive love toward her father, then though she had she^en her self
much sollicitous in begging his help to her cure, in looking how they opened
her vein, or how the blood span out, and in using a great deal of ceremony
in rendering him thanks? certainly none can make any doubt of it; For in
taking upon her the care of her self, what had she gotten, but an unprofitable
anxitie, especially her father having care enough of her: what had looking upon
her arm profited her, but have been an occasion of horror? And what virtue
had she practiced in thanking her father, save that of gratitude? Did she not
better then, to occupy her self wholly in the Demonstrations of her filial
affection, which is infinitely more delightful to her father then all other
virtues.

4. Mine eyes are always to our Lord, because he will deliver our feet from
the snare. Art thou fallen into the snares of adversity? ah look not upon
this mishape, nor upon the Gyues wherein thou art caught? look upon God, and
leave all to him, he will have care of thee, throw thy thoughts upon him, and
he will nourrish thee. Why do thou trouble thy self with willing or nilling
the events and accidents of this world, since thou art ignorant what were best
for thee to will, and that God will will for thee, without thy trouble, all
that thou art to will for thy self. Expect therefore in peace of mind the
effect of the Divine pleasure; and let his willing suffice thee, since he can
never cease to be good: For so he gave order to his well beloved S. Catharine
of Sienna, Think of me quoth he to her, and I will think for thee. It is a
hard thing to express to the full, this extreme indifferency of man's heart,
which is so reduced to, and dead in the will of God: for it is not to be said,
me thinks, that she does submit herself to Gods submission, being an act of
the soul declaring her consent, nor is it to be said that she does accept or
receive it; for as much as accepting, or receiving are certain actions, which
in some sort may be termed passive actions, by which we embrace, and take what
soections, befalls us: nor yet are we to say, that she permits; permission
being an action of the will, and consequently a certain idle empty wish, that
will indeed do nothing, but only let it be done. And therefore, me think,
the soul in this indifferecie, that wills nothing, but leaves God to will
what he pleases, is to be said to have her will in a simple expectation;
since that to expect, is not to do, or act; but only to remain exposed to
some ever. And if you mark it, the expectation of the soul is altogether
voluntary, and yet an action it is not, but a mere disposition to receive
whatsoever shall happen: and as soon as the events are once arrived and
received, the expectation becomes a co^tentment or repose; Marry till they
happen, in truth the soul is A PVRE EXPECTATION, indifferent to all that it
shall please the Divine will to ordain.

5. In this sort did our Savior express the extreme submission of his humane
will to the will of his eternal Father. The Almighty, says he, has opened
mine ear, that is, he has declared unto me his pleasure, touching the
multitude of torments which I am to endure, and I, says he afterward, do
not gainesaie or withdraw my self* what would this say, I do not gainesaie,
or withdraw my self, but this, my will is in a simple expectation, and is
ready for all that God shall send; In sequel whereof I deliver up and
abandone my body, to the mercy of such as will beat it, and my cheeks to
such as will make them smart, being prepared to let them exercise their
pleasure upon me. But mark, I pray you THEO: that even as our Savior, after
he had made his Prayer of Resignation in the Garden of Oliuet, and after he was
taken, left himself to be handled and haled by those that crucified him, by an
admirable surrender made of his body and life into their hands. So did he
resign up his soul and will, by a most perfect indiffere^cie, into his
eternal Fathers hands. For though he cried out. My God, My God, why have thou
forsaken me? Yet was that, to let us understand, the real anguish and
distress of his soul, but in no wise to impeach the most holy indifferency,
of which it as possessed; as shortly after he showed, concluding all his life
and passion in these incomparable words. Father, into thy hands I commend my
Spirit.

Of the perfect stripping of the soul united to Gods will. CHAPTER. XVI.
1. LEt us represent unto our selves, THEO: the sweet Jesus in Pilats house,
where for the Love of us, he was turned out of his clothes by the soldiers, the
Ministers of death; and not content with that, they take the skin with them,
tearing it with the blows of rods and whipps, as afterward his soul was
bereft of his body, and his body of life, by the death which he endured upon
the Cross. But three days being once ru^ne over; the soul by the most holy
Resurrection, did reinuest her glorious body, and his body its mortal skin,
wearing sundry garments, now resembling a Gardener, now a Pilgrim, or in some
other guise, according as the salvation of man, and the glory of God required.
LOVE did all this THEO: and it is LOVE also that entering into a soul to make
it happily die to it self, and live to God, which does bereave it of all
humane desires, and self-esteeme, which is as closely fixed to the Spirit, as
the skin to the flesh, and strips her at length of her best beloved affections,
as were those which she had to spiritual affections, exercises of piety, and
the perfection of virtues, which seemed to be the very life of the soul.

2. Then, THEO: the soul may by good right cry I have put of my garment, and
how can I find in my heart, to resume them again? I have washed my feet from
all sorts of affections, and can I ever be so mad as to soil the^ again? I
came naked out of the hand of God, and naked will I return thither, God gave
me many desires and God has taken them away, his holy name be blessed. Yea
THEO: the same God that made us desire virtues in our beginning, and which
makes us practice the^ in all occurrences, he it is, that takes from us the
affection to virtues, and all spiritual exercises, that with more
tranquillity, purity and simplicity, we should affect nothing but the Divine
Majesty's good pleasure. For as the fair Judith reserved indeed, her costly
festival robes in her Cabinet, and yet placed not her affection upon them, nor
yet ever wore them in the time of her widowhood, save only when by God's
inspiration, she went to overthrow Holofernes: so though we have learnt the
practice of virtue, and the exercise of devotion, yet are we not to affect
them, nor reinuest our heart therewith, save only so far forth, as we
discern it to agree with God's good pleasure: And as Judith wore still
moorning weeds, except only in this occasion, wherein Gods will was that she
should be in pomp, so are we peaceably to remain vested in our misery and
abiection, amidst our imperfections and infirmities, till God shall exalt us to
the practice of excellent actions.

3. One cannot long remain in this nakedness void of all affection:
Wherefore following the advice of the holy Apostle, as soon as we have turned
off the garments of the old Adam, we are to put on the habits of the new man,
that is to say, of JESUS CHRIST: for having renounced all, yea even the
affection to virtues, neither desiring of these nor of other things a larger
portion, then may bear proportion with God's will; we must put on again
diverse affections, and peradventure the very same which we have renounced, and
resigned up: yet are we not therefore to resume the^, for that they are
agreeable, profitable, honorable and proper to content our Self-love; but
because they are agreeable to God, profitable to his honor, and ordained to
his glory.

4. Eliezer carried eare-jewels, bracelets, and new attire, for the maid whom
God had provided for his Masters son, and in effect he presented them to the
virgin Rebecca, as soon as he knew it was she. New garments are required to
our Sauiour's Spouse. If for the Love of God she has bereft her self of the
ancient affections which she had to Parents, Country, Father's house, and
allie, she must take a span new affection, loving every of these in their
rank, not now accorcording to humane considerations, but because the heavenly
Spouse does will, command and intend it so, and has established such an order
in Charity. If one have once put off his old affection to spiritual
consolations, to exercises of devotion to the practice of virtues, yea to his
own advancement in perfection; he must put on another new affection, by loving
all these graces and heavenly favors, not because they perfect and adorn our
mind, but for that our Saviors name is sanctified in them, his kingdom
enriched, his good pleasure glorified.

5. So did S. PETER vest himself in the Prison, not at his own election, but
at the Angels command. He puts on his girdle, then his Sandales and afterward
the rest of his garments. And the glorious S. PAVL^ bereft in a moment of all
affections, Lord, quoth he, what will thou have me do? that is, what is thy
pleasure I should affect, since throwing me to the ground, thou have deaded me
to mine own will? Ah Lord plant thy good pleasure in the place of it, and
teach me to perform thy will, for thou art my God. THEO: he that has forsaken
all for God, ought to resume nothing, but according, to Gods pleasure: he feeds
not his body, but according to Gods ordinance, that it may be serviceable to
the Spirit; all his study is to assist his neighbor and his own soul,
according to the Divine intention; he practices not virtues, as being
according to his own heart, but according to God's.

5. God commanded the Prophet Isaie to stripe himself naked; which he did,
going and preaching in this sort for three days together, as some hold, or for
three years together, as others think, and then, the time prefixed him by God
being expired, he resumed his clothes. Even so are we to turn our selves out
of affections little and great, as also to make a frequent examine of our
hearts, to discover whether it be willing to vnuest it self, as Isaie did his
garments, as also to resume in their time, the affections necessary to the
service of charity; to the end we might die with our Savior naked upon the
cross, and rise again with him, in newness of life. Love is as strong as
death to make us quit all; it is magnificent, as the Resurrection, to adorn us
with honor and glory.

The end of the ninth book.
THE TENTH BOOK. OF THE COMMANDMENT OF LOVING GOD ABOVE ALL things.
Of the sweetness of the Commandment, which God gave us, to love him above
all things. CHAPTER. I.
1. MAN is the perfection of the Universe, the Spirit the perfection of man,
Love the Spirits, and Charity the perfection of Love. Whence the Love of God,
is the end of perfection, and the Excellency of the universe. In this THEO:
does consist the hight and primacie of the Commandment of Divine Love, called
by our Savior, the first and greatest Commandemet. This Commandment is as a
Sun, giving luster and dignity, to all the holy laws, to all the Divine
^ordonances, and to all the holy Scripturs. All is made for this heavenly Love,
and all tends to it: Of the sacred Tree of this Commandment, all consolations,
exhortations, inspirations, and even all the other Commandments, have
dependence as it is flowers; and eternal life, as it is fruit: and all that
tends not to eternal Love, tends to eternal death. O great Commandment,
whose perfect practice remains even in the everlasting life, yea it is no
other thing then life everlasting.

2. But mark, THEO: how amiable this law of Love is! ah Lord God, was it not
sufficient that thou should permit us this heavenly Love, as KABAN permitted
JACOB to Love RACHEL, without daigning farther to inuit us to it by
exhortations, and urge us to it by thy Commandments? Nay more, o Divine
Goodness! to the end that neither thy Majesty, nor our misery, nor any other
pretext at all, might delay our love to thee, thou do command it us. The
poor APELLES could neither abstain from loving, nor yet adventure to love the
fair COMPASPE, because she appertained to ALEXANDER the Great; but when he had
once leave to love her, how much did he hold himself obliged to him that did
him the grace! He knew not whether he should more love the fair COMPASPE
granted him by so great an Emperor, or so great an Emperor, who had granted
him the fair COMPASPE. O sweet God, THEO: If we could understand it, what an
obligation should we have to this Sovereign good, who does not only permit,
but does even command us to love him! Alas my God, I know not whether I ought
more to love thine infinite Beauty, which so great a Bounty has ordained
that I should love; or thy Divine Bounty, which ordaines that I should love so
infinite a Beauty! O Beauty how amiable thou art, being granted unto me by a
Bounty so immense! O Bounty how amiable thou art, in communicating unto me so
eminent a Beauty!

3. God at the day of Judgment will imprint, after an admirable manner in the
hearts of the damned, the apprehension of their loss: for the Divine Majesty
will make them clearly see the Sovereign Beauty of his face, and the
Treasures of his Bounty: and upon the sight of this Abisse of infinite
delights, the will, desires with an extreme violence to cast her self upon
him, to be united unto him, and enioy^ his Love: But all in vain; she shall be
as a woman, who in the panges of childbirth, after she have endured violent
pains, cruel conuulsions, and intolerable panges, dies in the end without
being delivered. For as soon as the clear and fair knowledge of the heavenly
Beauty, shall have penetrated the understandings of those unfortunate
wretches; the Divine Justice, shall in such sort deprive the will of her force,
that she can in no wise love this object, which the understanding shall propose
unto her, and make clear to be so amiable; and this sight which should beget
in the will so great a Love, in lieu thereof, shall engender an infinite
desolation, which shall be made eternal, by a memory of the Sovereign
Beauty they saw, which shall for ever live in these lost souls; a memory
void of all good, yea full of vexations, pains, torments and endless
desperations; For so much as in the soul shall be found both an imposiblitie,
yea and a dreadful and everlasting auersion and repugnance to love this so
wishfull an Excellency. So that the miserable damned shall live for ever in a
desperate rage to know so soueraignely amiable a perfection, without all hope,
of ever being able to enjoy or love it: because while they might have loved it
they would not: they shall burn, with a thrist, so much more violent, by how
much the remembrance of this source of waters of eternal life, shall more egg
their ardour: they shall die immortally, as dogs, of a famine by so much more
vehement, by how much their memory shall more sharpen the insatiable cruelty
thereof, by calling to mind the heavenly banquet, of which they were deprived.
The damned souls in foming rage,
Shall wither up and dry away:
And nothing shall their grief assuage,
What ere their daring hearts essaye.
I dare not affirm for certain, that the view of Gods Beauty, which the
damned shall have, in the manner of a flash of lightning, shall be as bright as
that of the Blessed; yet shall it be so clear, that they shall see the son
of man in his Majesty; they shall see him whom they pierced; and by the view
of this glory, shall learn the greatness of their loss. Ah, if God had
prohibited man to Love, what a torment would that have been to generous hearts:
what pains would they not undertake to obtain permission to Love him? DAVID
entered into a very dangerous Combat, to gain the kings daughter, and what did
not JACOB do to espouse RACHEL? and the Prince SICHEM to have DINA in
marriage? The damned would repute them selves Blessed, if they could entertain
a hope ever to Love God: And the Blessed would esteem themselves Damned, if
they harbored a thought, that they should ever be deprived of this sacred Love.

4. O Good God, THEO: how gustfull is the sweetness of this Commandment,
seeing that if it pleased the Divine will to give it to the damned, they would
in a moment be delivered of their greatest misfortune, and since the Blessed
are not Blessed but by the practice of it! o heavenly Love how lovely thou art
in the fight of our souls? And blessed be the Bounty of God for ever, who so
earnestly commands us to Love him, though his Love be otherwise most to be
desired, and necessary to our Happiness, and that without it, we must
necessarily be unhappy.

That this Divine Commandment of Love tends to Heaven, yet is given to the
faithfu^l in this world. CHAPTER. II.
1. If the law be not i^posed on the just man because he preventing the laws,
and without the la^es solicitation, does perform Gods will by the instinct of
Charity, which reigns in his soul; how free are we to esteem the Blessed in
Heaven from all commandments, since that from the possession of the Bounty
and Beauty of the Beloved, in which they are, a sweet yet inevitable
necessity to Love for ever the most holy Divinity, does stream out and run
upon their hearts? We shall Love God above, THEO: not as being tied and obliged
by the law, but as being allured, and ravished with delight, which this so
perfectly an amiable object shall yield unto our hearts. Then the force of the
Commandment will cease, to the end it may give place to the force of
contentment^, which shall be the fruit and crown of the observance of the
Commandment We are therefore ordained to the contentment which is promissed us
in the immortal life, by means of the Commandment given unto us in this our
mortal life, in which truly we are strictly bound to observe it, because it
is the fundamental law, which the KING JESUS delivered to the Citizens of this
militant HIERVSALEM, whereby they may merit the BVRGVERSHIP, and joy of the
triumphant HI^RVSALEM.

2. Certes above in heaven, we shall have a heart free from all passions, a
soul purified from all distractions, a Spirit infranchised from
contradictions, and forces exempt from opposition, and therefore we shall Love
God, with a perpetual and never interrupted affection, as it is said of the
four sacred beasts, which representing the Evangelists, do incessantly praise
the Divinity. O God what a joy, when we being established in those eternal
Tabernacles our Spirits shall be in this perpetual motion, in which they shall
enjoy the so much desired repose of their eternal dilection. Happy, who in
thy Mansion live,
And in all Seasons praises give!
But we are not to aim at this Love so exceedingly perfect in this life of
death, for as yet we have neither the heart, nor the soul, nor the Spirit, nor
the forces of the Blessed. It is sufficient for us to Love with all the heart
and force which we have. While we are little children, we are wise like little
children, we speak like children, we Love like children, but when we shall
come to our perfect groth above, we shall be quit of our infancy, and Love God
perfectly. Yet are we not for all this, THEO: during the infancy of our
mortal life, to leave to do our best, according as it is commanded, since it
is not only in our power, but is also most facile, the whole Commandment
being of Love, and of the Love of God, who as he is soueraignely good, so is he
soueraignely amiable.

How, notwithstanding, that the whole heart is employed in sacred Love, yet one
may Love God diversely, and also many other things together with him. CHAPTER.
III.
1. HE that says all, excluds nothing, and yet a man may be wholly Gods, wholly
his Fathers, wholly his mothers, wholly his Princes wholly his co^mon-wealth's,
his children's, his friend's: so that being wholly every on's, yet he is wholly
to all: which happens, for that the duty by which a man is wholly on's, is not
contrary to the duty, by which a man is wholly an others.

2. Man gives himself wholly by love, and with proportion to his love he
bestows himself. He is therefore in a sovereign manner given to God, when he
loves the Divine Bounty Soueraignely. And having once made this kind of
donation of himself, he is to love nothing that can remove his heart from God.
Now never does any love take our hearts from God, save that which is contrary
unto him.

3. SARA is not offended to spy ISMAEL about her dear ISAAC, while his
dalliance with ISMAEL is not to slight or disparage her: nor is God offended to
see other loves live in us besides his, while we do conserve for him, the
reverence, and respect due unto him.

4. Verily, THEOT: in heaven, God will give himself wholly to all and not by
halfs, since he is a WHOLE, that has no parts, yet will he give himself
diversely, and with varieties, equal to the variety of the Blessed, for though
he give himself wholly to all, and wholly to each one, yet will he never give
himself totally, neither to any one in particular, nor to all in general. And
we shall give our selves to him, according to the measure in which he gives
himself to us: For we shall see him indeed face to face, as he is in his
Beauty; and shall love him heart to heart, as he is in his Bounty: yet all
shall not see him with an equal brightness, nor love him with an equal
sweetness: but every one shall see and love him, according to their
particular portion of glory, which the Divine Providence has prepared for
them. We shall equally all have the fullness of Divine Love; marry that
fulness shall be unequal in perfection. The honey of Narbone is sweet, and
so is also that of Paris: both of them are full of sweetness, but the one of
a sweetness, better, finer, and more vigorous; and though both of them be
entirely sweet, yet is neither of them totally sweet. I do homage to my
Sovereign Prince, as also to him that is next unto him. I present therefore my
loyalty as well to the one as to the other of them, yet do I present it to
neither of them totally. For in that which I exhibit to my Sovereign, I do
not exclud that which is due to his va^sall next to him, nor do I in this
includ that. Wherefore it is no wonder, if in Heaven, where these words THOU
SHALL LOVE THE LORD T^Y GOD WITH ALL THY HEART, shall be so excellently
practiced, there be great differences in love, since we see such diversity even
in this mortal life.

5. THEO: not only of such as love God with all their heart, some love him
more, and some less, but even one and the same does often pass himself, in
this sovereign exercise of loving God above all things. Appelles did at
sometimes handle his Pencell better then at others, sometimes even out striping
himself: For though commonly he put all his art and all his attention to draw
out ALEXANDER THE GREAT, yet did he never employe it so totally and entirely
that he had not yet other tricks of art, by which though he neither put to it
more skill, nor more affection, yet he did it more lively and perfectly: He
always employed all his wit to the good performance of this Table of
ALEXANDER, because he used it without reserve, yet sometimes he did it with
more grace and felicity. Who knows not that we make progress in this holy
Love, and that the end of Saints is crowned with a more perfect love, the^
their beginning.

6. Now according to the phrase of holy Scripture; to do a thing with all ones
heart, imports only, to do it willingly and without reserve. O Lord says
David I have sought thee with all my heart, Lord hear me, and the holy WORD
testifies, that he had truly followed God with his whole heart: and yet not
withstanding all that, it affirms also that Ezechias had not his equal
amongst all the kings of Judah, neither before nor after him; that he was united
to God, and straied not from him: Afterward treating of JOSIAS, it says,
that he had not his fellow amongst all the kings either before or after hi^,
that he returned to God with all his heart, with all his soul, with all his
force, according to the whole law of MOSES: nor did there any that followed
him, rise like unto him Mark then I pray you THEO: mark how DAVID, EZECHIAS,
and JOSIAS loved GOD with all their hearts; and yet not all three with an
equal dilection, because some of them had not their like in this Love, as the
Sacred Text witnessed. All the three loved him; each of them with all their
heart, yet did nere a one of them seperatly, nor all three jointly, Love him
totally, but every one in his particular way: so that as all the three were a
like, in this, that they gave their whole heart, so were they unlike, in their
manner of delivering it: yea there is no doubt at all but that DAVID taken a
part, was far different from himself in this Love; and that with his second
heart, which God created pure and clean in him and his right Spirit, which he
renewed in his bowels by holy Penance, he sung the Canticle of Love far more
melodiously, then ever he had done, with his first heart and Spirit.

7. All true Lovers are equal in this, that all give all their heart to God,
and with all their force, but unequal, in the diversity of giving it, whence
one gives all his heart with all his force yet less perfectly then the others.
Some gives it it all by Martyrdom, all by virginity, all by purity, all by
action, all by contemplation, all by a pastoral function; and though all give
it all, by the observance of the Commandments; yet does some one give it with
less perfection then the others.

8. Eue^ so JACOB himself, who was called the HOLY-of-GOD in DANIEL, and who^
God protests that he loved, confesses ingeniously that he had serve LABAN
with all his strength: and why did he serve LABAN, but to obtain RACHEL, whom
he loved with all his forces? He serves LABAN with all his forces; he serves
GOD with all his forces: he Loves RACHEL with all his forces, he Loves GOD with
all his forces: yet Loves he not RACHEL as GOD, nor GOD as RACHEL: He Loves GOD
as his God above all things and more then himself; he Loves RACHEL in quality
of a wife, and as himself: he Loves God with an absolute and soueraignely
supreme Love; and RACHEL with the cheifest nuptial Love. Nor is the one of
the Loves contrary to the other, since that of RACHEL does not violate the
privileges and sovereign advantages of the Love of GOD.

9. So that our Love to God, THEO: takes its worth from the eminency and
excellency of the motive, for which, and according to which we Love him, in
that we Love him for his sovereign infinite goodness, as God, and according
as he is God. Now one drope of this Love, is better, of more force and value,
then all the other Loves that can ever enter into the hearts, or amongst the
Quires of Angels. For while this Love lives, it reigns and bears the Scepter
over all the affections, making his will prefer God, before all things
indifferently, universally, and absolutely.

Of two degrees of perfection, in which this Commandment may be kept in this
mortal life. CHAPTER. IV.
1. While the great king Solomon, enjoying as yet the Spirit of God, composed
the sacred Canticle of Canticles, he had according to the permission of those
ages, great variety of dames and damsells dedicated to his Love in diverse
conditions, and qualities. For 1. there was one that was his singularly dear
and wholly perfect one, most rare, as a singular dove, with which the others
entered not into comparison, and for this reason she was called by his own name
SVNAMITE. 2. There were sixty, which next to her, had the first rank of
honor and estimation, and were called Queens. Besides which, there were
thirdly Fourscore Dames, which were not indeed Queens, yet were companions
of his Royal bed, in quality of honorable and lawful friends. 4. and lastly,
there were young damsells without number, reserved in expectation, as a
seedeplat, to succeed in the places of the former, when they should fall into
decay. Now, by the IDEA of that which passed in his Palace, he described the
diverse perfections of souls, who in time to come, were to adore, Love, and
serve the great PACIFICALL KING JESUS CHRIST, our Savior; amongst which there
are some, who being newly freed from sin and resolved to Love God, are yet
Nouices, Apprentises, tender and feeble: So, that they Love indeed the Divine
sweetness, yet with such mixture of other different affections, that their
sacred Love, being as yet in its Nonage, they Love together with our Savior,
many superfluous, vain, and dangerous things. And as a PHOENIX newly hatched
out of her sinders, having as yet her plumes tender and nice, and having on her
first downs, can only essay a short flight, in which she is rather said to
hop then to fly; so these tender and dainty young souls, newly borne of the
ashes of their Penance, cannot as yet take a high flight, and sore a above in
the air of holy love, being held captives by the multitude of wicked
inclinations, and depraved customs in which the sins of their life past had
left them. They are yet living, quickened, and feathered with Love, yea and with
true Love too, else had they never forsaken sin; yet with a Love as yet
feeble, young, and environed with a number of other Loves, and which cannot
produce fruit in such abundance, as otherwise it would do, if it had the full
possession of the heart in its hands.

2. Such was the Prodigal Son, when quitting the infamous ca^panie, and
custody of swine, amongst which he had lived, he returned into his fathers
arms half naked, all to be dabed, durted, and stinking of the filth, which he
had contracted in the company of those unclean beasts. For what is it to
forsake the swine, but to reclame ones self from sin? and what is it to
return all ragged, tattered, and stinking, but to have our affections engaged
in the habits and inclinations which tend to sin? yet was he possessed of the
life of the soul which is Love. And as a Phoenix rising out of her ashes he
finds himself newly risen to life. He was dead, quoth his Father, and is
returned to life, he is revived. Now Salomons Friends, were called young
daughters in the Canticles for as much as (having tasted the odor of the
Spouse his name, which breathes nothing but Salvation and Mercy) they Love him
with a true Love, but a Love, which is as themselves, in its tender age: for
even as young girls do Love their husbands well if they have them, yet leave
not off much to affect their toys, triffles, and companions with whom they
were wont desperately to loose themselves in playing, dancing and fooling; in
busying themselves with little birds, little dogs, squirills, and the like
bables: So the young and Nouice-soules have truly an affection to the sacred
Spouse, yet admit they with it a number of voluntary distractions and
encumbrances: so that loving him above all things, they do yet busy
themselves in many things which they Love not like him, but besides him, out of
him, and without him: for as small irregularities in words, in gestures, in
clothes, in pastimes, and fond tricks, are not, properly speaking, against the
will of God; so are they not according to it, but out of it and without it.

3. But there are certain souls who having already made some progress in
the Love of God, have also cut off the affections they had to dangerous things,
and yet do entertain dangerous and supersluous Loves: because they Love with
excess, and Love that which God ordaines they should Love, with a Love too
nice and passionate. It stood with Gods pleasure that ADAM should love EVE
tenderly, yet not in that degree of tenderness, that to content her, he should
have violated the order given him by his Divine Majesty. He loved not then a
superfluous thing, nor a thing in it self dangerous, but he loved it
superfluously and dangerously. The love of our Parents, friends and
Benefactours, is in it self according to GOD, yet we may affect it with
excess; as we may also our vocations, be they never so spiritual; and our
exercises of devotion (which yet we ought so greatly to affect) may beloved
inordinatly, to wit, if we prefer them before obedience, or a more general
good; or in case we love them in quality of LAST END, being the only means
and furtherances to our final pretention, which is DIVINE LOVE. And those
souls which Love nothing, but that which God would have them to Love, and yet
do exceed in the manner of loving, do truly Love the Divine Goodness above
all things, yet not in all things: for the things, which not only by
permission but even by command they are to Love according to God, they do not
only Love according to God, but for other causes and motives, which though
indeed they be not contrary to God, yet are they out of him; so that they
resemble the Phoenix, who hauning gotten her first feathers, and beginning to
wax strong, does forthwith hoist her self up into the open air, yet is not
long able to continue flight, but is forced to light often upon the ground, to
take breath. Such was the poor young man, who having from his tender age
observed Gods Commandments, desired not his neighbors goods, yet affected his
own too tenderly. So that when our Savior gave him Counsel to give them to
the poor, he became sad and melancholy. He loved nothing but that which he
might lawfully love, but he loved it with a superfluous and too obliging an
affection. It is plain therefore, THEO: that these souls love too ardently
and with superfluity, yet love they not the superfluities, but only the thing
which is to be loved. And herevpo^ they do enjoy the marriage bed of the
heavenly Salomo^, that is unions, recollections, and the reposes of love,
whereof we spoke in the 5. and 6. book: Marry they do not enjoy them in
quality of Spouses, because the superfluity with which they affect good
things, hinders them from a frequent entry into these Divine Unions with the
Spouse, being busied and distracted in loving that out of him and without him,
which they ought not to Love but in him and for him.

Of two other degrees of greater perfection, by which we may Love God above all
things. CHAPTER. V.
1. NOw there are other souls that neither Love superfluities, nor yet with
superfluity, but love only that which God will, and as he will; Blessed
souls, who love God, their friends in God, and their enemies for God, they
Love many things together with God, but none at all, save in God and for God:
It is God that they Love, not only above all things, but even in all things
and all things in God, resembling the Phoenix grown young again, and come to
her perfect strength, which is never seen but in the air, or upon the tops of
mountains that touch upon the air; for so these souls Love nothing but in
God; though indeed they Love many things with God, and God with many things.
S. LVKE recounts that our Savior invited a young man to follow him, who
indeed loved him dearly but he had also a great affection to his Father, and
therevpo^ had a mind to return home to him. But our Savior out of this
superfluity of Love, and excited him to a Love more pure, that he might not
only Love our Savior more then his Father, but that he should not even Love
him at all, but in our Savior. Leave the care of burying the dead to the dead,
as for thee, (who have met with life) go and preach the Kingdom of Heaven.
And these souls, as you see THEOT: having so great a connection with the
Spouse, they merit to participate of his rank, and to be Queens, as he is
King; being they are entirely dedicated to him without division or separation
at all, having no affections out of him, or without him, but only in him, and
for him.

2. But above all these souls, there is yet one Onely-one, who is the Queen
of Queens, the most loving, the most Lovely, and the most beloved of all the
Friends of the Divine Spouse, who does not only Love God above all things, and
in all things, but even Loves nothing but God in all things; so that she Loves
not many things, but one only thing, which is God himself: And whereas it is
God alone that she loves in all that she loves, she Loves him indifferently
in all things, according as his good pleasure may require, out of all, and
without all. If it be only HESTER that Assuerus loves, why should he more
Love her being perfumed and decked, then in her ordinary attire? If it be my
Savior only that I Love, why should I not as much affect the Mount Caluarie,
as the Mount Thabor, since he is as well in the one as in the other? and why
should I not as cordially pronounce in the one as in the other, IT IS GOOD FOR
US TO BE HERE. If I Love my Savior in Egypt, without loving Egypt: why shall I
not Love him in Simon the Leporous his banquet without loving the Banquet, and if
I Love him amidst the blasphemies which are poured upon him not loving the
blasphemies, why shall I not Love him perfumed with Magdalens precious ointment
without either affecting the ointment or the sent thereof? It is a true sign
that we Love only God in all things, when we Love him equally in all things,
since that he being in himself immutable, the mutabilitie of our Love toward
him, must needs proceed from some thing that is not himself. Now, the sacred
Lover, Loves her God no more with the whole world to boot, then though he were
all alone without the world: because all that is out of God, and is not God, is
as nothing to her. An entirely pure soul Loves not even Heaven, but by reason
that her Spouse is loved therein: but a Spouse so soueraignly beloved in his
Heaven, that if yet he had no Heaven to bestow, he would neither appear less
amiable, nor be less beloved of this generous loving heart, who cannot Love
the Heaven of her Spouse, but only her Spouse of Heaven, and who puts no less
price upon Caluarie while her Spouse is there crucified, then upon Heaven where
he is glorified. He that waighes one of the little bullets of S. Clare of
Monte-falco, finds it as heavy, as all the three together. So does perfect
Love find God as amiable all alone, as together with all the creaturs for as
much as the creaturs are only loved in God, and for God.

3. Souls in this degree of perfection are so thin sown, that each of them
are called their Mothers only one, which is the Divine Providence, and each of
them is called the only dove, because she only loves her mate; she is termed
perfect, for that by love she is made the same thing with the Sovereign
Perfection whence she may say in a most humble truth; I am not, but for my
beloved, and he is wholly turned toward me. Now there is none save the most
Blessed Virgin our Lady, that is perfectly arrived at this hight of
excellency, in the love of her dearly beloved: For she is a DOVE so
singularly singular in Love, that all the rest being compared to her, are
rather to be termed Dawes then Doves. But let us leave this Peerless Queen
in her matchless eminency. There have yet been other souls, that have found
themselves so happy in the state of this pure love, that in comparison of
their companio^s, they might take the rank of QVEENES of only DOVES, of
perfect FRIENDS of the SPOUSE. For I pray you THEO: in what degree must he
needs have been, who from his very heart sung to God, To what in Heaven but
thee can I aspire?
Or what in earth but thee, can I desire?


And he that cried out. I do esteem all things as dung that I may gain JESUS
CHRIST: did he not testify that he loved nothing out of his Master, and that
out of all things he drew arguments of his Masters Love? And what could be the
feeling of that great Lover, who sighed all the night, my God is my all. Such
was S. AUGUSTINE, S. BERNARD, the two S. Catharins of Sienna and Genua, and
diverse others, by whose imitation every one may aspire to this divine degree of
Love. O rare and singular souls, which resemble not at all the birds of this
world, no, not the Phoenix her self, though so singularly rare; but are only
represented by the bird, who for her excellent beauty, and nobleness, is
said not to be of this world, but of Paradise, whereof she bears the name:
for this dainty bird disdaining the earth, does never touch it, but lives
above in the air; yea even when she is forced to vnwearie her self, she will
only cleeue by the small twigs of trees upon which she hangs in the air, out
of which, or without which, she can neither fly nor repose. And even so these
great souls, do not in very deed Love the Creaturs in themselves, but in
their Creator, and their Creator in them. But if they cleeue to any creature
by the law of Charity, it is only to repose in God, the only and final aim
of their Love. So that finding God in the Creaturs, and the Creaturs in God,
they Love God indeed not the Creaturs; as they that fishing for Pearls find
them in their shelles, do esteem their fishing made for pearls only.

4. For the rest, I do not think, that there was ever any mortal Creature,
that loved the heavenly Spouse with this matchless Love so perfectly pure,
except the Virgin who was his Spouse and Mother both together; but
contrariwise, as touching the practice of these four differences of Love, on
can hardly be any long time without passing from one of them to another. The
Souls which as young wenches, are as yet entangled in diverse vain and
dangerous affections, are not sometimes without having the most pure and
excellent touches of Love: but being but glimpse and passing lightnings, one
cannot thereupon rightly say, that such souls are got out of the state of
young girls which are Nouices and Printises. It happens also sometimes, that
the souls that are in the degree of only and perfect Lovers, do much relent
and wax cold, yea even to the committing, and falling into troublesome venial
sins: as may be gathered by many bitter contentions stirred up amongst Gods
great servants; yea even amongst some of the Divine Apostles, who as we cannot
deny fell into some imperfections, by which notwithstanding Charity was not
violated, yet the fervor thereof was troubled. Howbeit whereas ordinarily
those great souls loved God with a Love perfectly pure, we are not to deny
that they were in the state of perfect Love. For how often do we see, that good
trees though they never bring forth any venomous fruit, yet do they produce
raw and unripe ones, corrupted with misseltoe or moss: So the great Saints
never fell into mortal sin, yet fell they easily into fruitless actions and
such as are green, bitter, harsh, and ill tasted. And as even in these
circumstances we must confess that those trees are fruitful, otherwise they
could not be called good, so are we in no sort to deny, that some of their
fruit was fruitless. For who ca^ deny that the misseltoe and moss of trees,
is an unprofitable fruit? and who can also deny that small angers, and minute
excesses of joy, of laughter, of vanity, and of other the like passions, are
unprofitable and unlawful motions? and yet the Just man brings them forth
seven times a day, that is, very often.

That the Love of God above all things is common to all Lovers. CHAPTER VI.
1. Though there be so sundry degrees of Love amongst true Lovers, yet is
there but one Commandment of Love only, which does generally and equally
oblige every one with a wholly like and entirely equal obligation, though it be
differe^tly observed, and with an infinite variety of perfections, there being
peradventure, was few souls found in earth as Angels in Heaven, perfectly
equal in Love: seeing that as one star differs from another in brightness,
so shall the Blessed in their Resurrection, where every one sings a Canticle of
Glory, and receives a name, known to none but to him that receives it. But
what degree of Love is it, to which the Divine Commandment does equally,
universally and continually oblige all?

2. It was a piece of the holy Ghosts providence, that in our ordinary version
which his Divine Majesty has canonized and sanctified by the Council of
Trent, the heavenly Commandment of Love, is expressed in the word DILECTION
rather then by the word LOVE; for albeit that DILECTION be a kind of Love, yet
is it not a simple Love, but a Love of choice and election, which sense the
word it self carries, as the glorious S. THOMAS does note: for this
commandment does inioyne us a Love chosen out of thousands, like to him to
whom it is due, who as the beloved Sunamite marks him out in the Canticles, is
one elected out of thousands. It is Love that is to have power over all our
affections, and is to reign over all our passions: and that which God exacteth
of us is, that of all our Loves, his may be the most cordial, bearing rule
over our heart; the most affectionate, possessing our whole soul; the most
general, applying all our powers; the highest, replenishing our whole heart;
and the most solid, exercising all our strength and prowise. And whereas by
this we do choose and elect God, for the Sovereign object of our soul, it is
a Love of Sovereign Election, or an election of Sovereign Love.

3. You are not ignorant, THEO: that there are diverse species of Love: as for
example, there is a fatherly Love, a brotherly Love, a filial Love and a
nuptial Love; a Love of society, of obligation, of dependence, and an hundred
more, which are all different in excellency, and so proportioned to their
objects, that scarcely can they be applied, or appropriated to any other. He
that should affect his Father, with the Love of a brother only, should come
short of his duty. He that should Love his wife in quality of a Father only,
he should not love her sufficiently. He that should love his Lackey as his own
child, would be esteemed impertinent. Love is as honor: for as honor is
diuersified according to the diversity of excellencies to which it is
attributed; so Loves are diverse, according to the diversity of the GOOD which
is loved. Sovereign honor is due to Sovereign Excellency; and Sovereign
love to the Sovereign Good. The love of God is a love without comparison,
because the goodness of God is incomparable. Hark Israel, Thy God is the sole
Lord, and therefore thou shall love him with thy whole soul, thy whole
understanding, thy whole strength: For God is the only Lord, and his goodness
is infinitely above all goodness: and he is to be loved with a love which is
eminent, excellent and puissant beyond all comparison. It is this supreme
love, that places God in such esteem amidst our souls, and makes us repute
it so great a happiness to be gracious in his sight; that we prefer him
before, and love him above all things. Now THEOT: do you not plainly see, that
he that loves God in this sort, has dedicated his whole soul and strength to
God, since for ever and in all occurrences, he will prefer Gods honor before
all things; keeping himself in a readiness to forsake the whole world, to
preserve the love which is due to the Divine Goodness. And in sum, it is the
love of Excellency, or the Excellency of love, which is commanded to all
mortals in general, and each one of them in particular from their first use
of reason. A love sufficient for every one, and necessary for all that will be
saved.

An illustration of the former chapter. CHAPTER. VII.
1. WE do not always clearly know, nay not at all certainly, at least by a
certainty of Faith, whether we have the true love of God, requisite to our
salvation, yet have we diverse marks thereof, amongst which the most assured,
and in a manner infallible is seen in the opposition, which the love of
creaturs makes against our designs of God's love: For in that occurrence, if
Divine Love reign in the soul it makes appear the force of the credit and
authority which it has over the will, showing by effects not only that he
has no Master, but that he has even no equal, repressing and prostrating
all opposition, and making his intentions be obeyed. When the accursed company
of hellish spirits, reuolting from their Creator, essayed to draw to their
faction the troops of the Blessed Spirits; the glorious S. MICHAEL encouraging
his fellow soldiers to the loyalty which they ought to their God, cried (Marry
after an Angelical manner) with a loud voice through out the streets of the
Heavenly Jerusalem. WHO IS LIKE TO GOD? And in this word he overthrew that
Traitor Lucifer with his route, who equalized themselves to the Divine
majesty, and thence, as it is said, S. MICHAELS name was imposed, since that
MICHAEL imports no other thing then WHO IS LIKE TO GOD? And when the love of
created things, would draw our hearts to their PARTY, to make us disobedient
to the Divine Majesty, if the great divine love be found in the soul, it
makes head against it, as an other MICHAEL, and makes good the powers and
forces of the soul to Gods service; by this word of assurance, WHO IS LIKE TO
GOD? What beauty does there appear in creaturs, which ought to draw man's
heart to a rebellion against the sovereign bounty of God?

2. As soon as that holy and brave gentleman Joseph, perceived that the love
of his Mistress tended to the ruin of that which was due to his Master: ah
quoth he, be it far from me, that I should violate the respect which I owe to
my Master, who reposeth so much trust in me? how can I then admit this crime,
and sin against my God? mark THEO: mark how there are three loves in the
lovely Joseph's heart: for he loves his Mistress, his Master, and God; but as
soon as his Mistresses love rises up against his Masters, he suddenly
forsakes it, and away he runs; as he would also have forsaken his Masters,
if he had found it contrary to God's. Amongst all the loves God's is so to be
preferred that is, one must always stand prepared in mind to forsake them all
for that alone.

3. SARA gave her maid AGAR to her husband ABRAHAM, to the end that he might
have children by her, following the lawful custom of those times: But Agar
having conceived, did greatly contemn her Mistress SARA: till then, scarcely
could one discern whether ABRAHAM bore more affection to SARA or AGAR; for
AGAR was as well his bedfellowe as SARA, yea with fertility to boot; but when
the God Abraham came to make comparison between his loves, he made manifest
which was the stronger: for no sooner had Sara made her complaint that she was
contemned by Agar, but he told her, thy chamber maid Agar is in thy power, do
upon her what thou think good. So that from thence forth Sara did so afflict
the poor Agar that she was constrained to retire her self. Divine Love does
willingly permit that we should have other loves; nor can we sometimes easily
discover which love is the chief in our heart: for this man's heart of ours,
does oftentimes most eagerly draw the love of creaturs into the bed of his
Complacene, yea it happens withal, that he makes more frequent acts of his
love toward creaturs, then toward his Creator: while yet Divine love in him
leaves not to excel all the other loves, as the events make clear, upon the
Creaturs oppositions to their Creator; for then he takes sacred loves part,
submitting unto it all his affections.

4. There is great difference betwixt the bulk and value of things created.
One of Cleopatras pearls was more worth then one of our highest rocks, marry
this is greater, the one has bulk, the other worth. It is made a question,
whether the honor which a Prince atchiues in wars by feats of arms, or that
which he merits by justice in time of peace be greater; and me thinks, that
military glory is bigger, the other better: even as of instruments, drumes
and Trumpets make more noise; Luts and virginalls more melody: the sound of
the one is stronger, the other sweeter, and more spiritual. An ounce of Baulme
gives not so strong an odor, as a pound of Spickenard oil, howbeit the smell
of baulme, is always better and more pleasing.

4. True it is, THEO: you shall see a mother so busy about her child, that it
might seem, she had no other love but that, having eyes only to see it, mouth
to kiss it, breast to give it suck, care to bring it up and one would think
that her husband were nothing to her, in respect of her child: but if she were
to make choice, whether she would loose; one would then plainly see, that she
more esteems her husband, yea and that though the Love of her child was more
tender, more pressing and passionate, yet that the other was more excellent,
forceable and better. So when a heart Loves God in respect of his infinite
Goodness, though with never so little a portion of this excellent love, it
will prefer Gods will before all things, and in all the occasions that shall
be offered, it will forsake all, to conserve himself in grace with the
Sovereign Goodness, without being hindered by any thing at all. So that,
though this divine Love, does not always so sensibly urge and soften the
heart, as do the other Loves: yet in the occurrences, it performs so high and
excellent actions, that one of them only, is better than ten millions of the
others. Conies are incomparably sertile, Elephants never have more then one
calfe: yet this one only young Elephant is of greater price the all the
Rabbets in the earth. Our Love toward creaturs, does often abound in the
multitude of productions: but when sacred Love does its work, it is so
eminently purfect, that it surpasses all: for it causes God to be preferred
before all things without reserve.

A memorable history wherein is more clearly seen in what the force and
Excellency of holy love consists. CHAPTER. VIII.
1. HOw great an extent then, o my dear THEO: ought the force of this sacred
love of God above all things to have? It is to surpass all affections, to
vanquish all difficulties, and to prefer the honor of God's Beneuole^ce
before all things, yea I say before all things absolutely, without exception
or reservation at all; and, I say, with a greatest care, because there are
men, who would courageously forsake their goods, honors, yea life it self for
our Savior, who yet will not leave for his sake things of far less
consequence.

2. In the reign of the Emperors VALERIANVS and GALLVS there lived in
Antioche a Priest called SAPHRICIVS, and a secular man named NICEPHORVS, who by
reason of their long and exceeding great familiarity were esteemed brothers:
and yet it fell out in the end, I know not upon what occasion, that this
friendshipe failed, and according to custom, was followed with a deeper
hatred, which reigned for a time betwixt them, till at length NICEPHORVS
acknowledging his fault, made three diverse essays to be reconciled unto
SAPHRICIVS, to whom, now by one of their common friends, now by another, he
signified in words all the satisfaction and submission, that heart could have
wished. But Saphricius in no wise answering to his inuitations, did still
repulse the reconcilement, with as great inhumanitie, as Nicephorus besought it
with humility; In so much that the poor Nicephorus, apprehending that in case
Saphricius should see hi^ prostrate at his feet begging pardon, he would be
more touched to the heart with it; he goes and finds him out, and courageously
casting himself groueling at his feet: Reverend Father, quoth he, ah pardon
me I beseech thee for the bowels of our Savior JESUS: but even this humility
was disdaigned and rejected together with his former endeavors.

3. Mean while, behold a hot persecution arose against the Christians, in
which, Saphricius with others being apprehended, did wounders in suffering a
thousand thousand torments for the Confession of his Faith, but especially when
he was rudely turned and tossed in an instrument made of set purpose, after the
manner of a Press, without ever being quailed in his constancy; whereat the
Governor of Antioche being extremely irritatated, he adjudged him to death,
whereupon he was publikly led out of prison, toward the place where he was to
receive the glorious crown of Martyrdom which Nicephorus had no sooner
understood, but suddenly he ran and having met his Saphricius, throwing
himself upon the ground, Alas cried he with a loud voice, o Martyr of
JESUS CHRIST pardon me; for I have offended thee: whereof Saphricius taking no
notice, the poor Nicephorus getting again before him by a shorter passage,
set upon him a new with the like humility, coniuring him to pardon him, in
these terms, o Martyr of JESUS CHRIST, pardon the offense which I have
committed against thee being a poor man subject to offend: for lo a crown is
already bestowed upon thee by our Savior whom thou deneyedst not, yea thou
have confessed his holy name in the face of many witnesses. But Saphricius
continuing in his insolency, gave hi^ not one word in answer; but only the
Executioner admiring the perseverance of Nicephorus; never, quoth he to him,
did we see so great an Ass; this fellow is going even at this instant to die;
what have thou to do with his pardon? To whom Nicephorus answering, thou
know not quoth he, what it is I demand of this Confessor of JESUS CHRIST,
but God kowes. Now in the interim Saphricius arrived at the place of execution,
where yet again Nicephorus hurling himself upon the grownd before him; I
beseech thee, quoth he, o Martyr of JESUS CHRIST, that it would please thee to
pardon me: for it is written ask and it shall be granted you. Words which
could not at all bow the flintie and rebellious heart of the accursed
Saphricius, who obstinatly denying mercy to his neighbor, was himself
deprived, by the just judgment of God, of the most glorious Palm of
Martyrdom: for the Headsman commanding him to put himself upon his knees,
that he might behead him, he begun to be daunted, and to condition with him,
making, in the end, this deplorable and shameful submission. Ah, for pity do
not behead me, I will submite my self to the Emperors ordonance, and
sacrifice to the Idols. Which the poor good man Nicephorus hearing, with
tears in his eyes he begun to cry: Ah my dear brother, do not, do not I
beseech thee, transgress the law, and deny JESUS CHRIST: Forsake him not, for
love, loose not the crown of glory which with so great pains and torments
thou have atchiued. But alas this miserable Priest, coming to the Altar of
Martyrdom there to consacrate his life to the eternal God, had not called to
mind what the Prince of martyrs had said: If thou carry thy offering unto
the Altar, and remember that thy brother has somewhat against thee, leave thy
offering there, go and be reconciled unto thy brother, and the^ come, and
present thine offering. Wherefore God rejected his present, and withdrawing his
mercy from him, permitted that he lost not only the sovereign felicity of
Martyrdom, but even fell headlong into the misery of Idolatry; while the
humble and meek Nicephorus, perceiving this crown of Martyrdom vacant, by
the Apostasy of the obdurate Saphricius, touched with an excellent and
extraordinary inspiratio^, put fair for, ^^ying to the officiers, and the
headsman, I am a christian my friends, I am in truth a Christian, and do
believe in JESUS CHRIST, who^ Saphricius has denied; put me therefore I
beseech you in his place, smite of this head of mine. At which the officers
being wonderfully astonished, they carried the tidings to the Emperor; who
gave order for Saphricius his liberty, and that Nicephorus should be put to
death: which happened the 9. of Feb: about the year 260. of our Savior as
Metaphrastes and Surivs recounteth. A dreadful history, and worthy diligently
to be pondered in the behalf we speak off: for did you not note, my dear
THEO: the Courageous Saphricius, how bold and fervent he was in the defense of
his faith, how he suffered a thousand torments, how constant and immovable he
was in the confession of our Saviors name, while he was roled and crushed in
that press like machine; how ready he was to receive death's blow, to fulfill
the highest point of the Divine law, preferring God's honor before his own
life. And yet because on the other side he preferred the satisfaction which his
cruel heart took in hating Nicephorus before the Divine will, he came short
of the goal, and while he was upon the point of attaining and gaining the
prise of glory by Martyrdom, unprofitably strumbling and falling into
Idolatry broke his neck.

4. It is therefore true, my THEO: that it is not enough for us, to love God
more then our own life, unless we also love him generally, absolutely, and
without reserve, more then all we do or can love. But you will say unto me,
did not our Savior design the furthest point of our Love toward him, in
saying that a man could not have a greater charity, then to expose a man's life
for his friends? It is true indeed, THEO: that amongst the particular acts,
and testimonies of Divine Love, there is none so great, as to undergo death
for Gods glory: yet it is also true, that it is but only one act, one only
testimony; which indeed is the Master piece of Charity; but besides it,
Charity exacts many things at our hands, and so much more ardently and
instantly, as they are acts more easy, common and ordinary amongst all the
Lovers, and more generally necessary to the conservation of Divine Love. O
miserable Saphricius, durst thou be bold to affirm that thou loued'st God as
thou ought, whilst thou do not prefer the will of God before the
passion of hatred and ranckour entertained in thy heart against the poor
Nicephorus? To be willing to die for God is one and the greatest, but not the
only act of Love which we owe to God. To will this act only, with excluding
the others, is not charity, but vanity. Charity is not fantastical, which
yet she would be in the highst degree, if being resolved to please the Beloved
in things of greatest difficulty, she would permit one to displease hi^ in
matters of of less moment. How should he die for God, who will not live
according to God?

5. A well ordered mind that is resolved to die for a friend, would also
without doubt undergo all other things: for he that has once despised death,
ought not to set by other things. But the mind of man is weak, inconstant and
humorous: whereupon he does often rather choose to die then to undergo far
slighter pains; willingly changing life, for a friuelous, childish, and
extremely vain contentment. Agripina having learned that the child which she
bore, should indeed be Emperor, but yet that he would put her to death. Let
him kill me, quoth she, provided that he reign: mark, I pray you the
disorder of this foolishly loving mothers heart: she preferr's her sonn's
dignity, before her own life. Cato and Cleopatra choosed death rather, then
to see their enemies exult and glory in having them: And Lucrecia found it
easier to precipitate herself impetuously upon death, then unjustly to be
branded with the shame of a fact, whereof she seemed not guilty. How many are
there that would willingly embrace death for their friend, who yet would not
live in their service, or yet accomplish their other desires? Such there are as
will lay open their life to danger, who yet will not open their purse. And
though there be many found, who engage their life for their friends defense,
yet scarcely is there one found in an age, that will engage his liberty, or
loose an ounce of the most vain and unprofitable reputation, or renown in the
world, be it for never so dear a friend.

A Confirmation of that which has been said by a notable comparison. CHAPTER.
IX.
1. YOu know THEO: of what nature Jacobs loves toward Rachel were, and what
did not he do to testify their greatenesse, force and fidelity, even from
the hour he had saluted her at the head of the fountain? For from thenceforth
never did he cease to die of love for her; and to game her in Marriage he
served seven whole years, with an incredible desire; conceiving yet in
himself that all this was nothing, so did Love sweete^ the pains which he
supported for his beloved Rachel, whereof being after frustrated, he served yet
other seven years space to obtain her, so constant, loyal and courageous was
he in his affection! And having at length obtained her, he neglected all other
affections, yea and had in a manner in no esteem even Lia her service, though
his first Spouse, a woman of great merit, worthy to be cherished; and of the
neglect whereof even God himself took compassion, so remarkable it was.

2. But all this being done, which was even sufficient, to have brought down
the most disdainefull wench in the world, to the love of so loyal a Lover, it
is a shame verily to see the weakness which Rachel made appear in her
affection to Jacob. The poor neglected Lia, had no tie of Love with Jacob save
her only fertility, whereby she had made him, a father to four Sonn's; the
eldest whereof named RVBEN, being gone forth into the fields, in the time of
wheat-haruest, he found Mandragores, which he gathered, and after, his return
home presented to his mother. Which Rachel espying, said, give me part of thy
Sonns Mandragores: she answered do thou think it a small matter, that thou
have taken my husband from me, unless thou take also my Sonn's Mandragores?
Go too, said Rachel for thy Sonn's Mandragores, let him sleep with thee this
night. She accepted the condition, and when Jacob returned at even from the
field, Lia went out to meet him and said, with joyful cheer, this night
thou art mine my dear Lord and friend, because with wages I have hired thee,
for my Sonn's Ma^dragores: and with this, up and told him, the compact which
had passed betwixt her and Rachel. But from Jacob, believe it, there was no
words heard, being struck with a maisement, and having his heart seized with
the weakness and inconstancy of Rachel who for a thing of nothing had
forsaken, for a whole night the honor and content of his presence. For speak
the truth, THEO: was it not a strange and vain lightness in Rachel, to
prefer a company of little Aples before the chaste loves of so loving a
husband. If it had yet been done for Kingdoms, for Monarkies: but to do it
for a poor handful of Mandragores! THEOTIME, what conceit frame you of it?

3. And yet returning home to our own bosoms, ah good God, how often do we
make elections infinitely more shameful and wretched? The great S. AUGUSTINE
upon a time took pleasure leasurely to view and contemplate Mandragores, the
better to discern the cause why Rachel had so passionatly coueted them. And he
found that they were indeed pleasing to the view, and of a delightful smell,
yet altogether insipide and without gust. Now; Pliny recounts, that when the
Surgeo^s orders that such as they are to cut should drink the juice of them,
to the end they might not feel the smart of the lance, it happens often that
the very smell does work the operation, and does sufficiently put the patient
into a sleep. whereupon the Mandragora is held a bewitching Plant, which does
inchant the eyes, sorrows, and all kind of passions by sleep. For the rest he
that smells the sent of them too long turns deaf; and he that drinks too much
of them, dies without redemption.

4. THEOT: could pompes, riches and terreane delights, be better represented?
they have a gaining outside; but ah he that bites this aple, that is, he that
sounds their natures, finds neither taste nor contentment in them.
Nevertheless they do so inchant and bewitch us with the vanities of their
smell; and the renown which the Sonn's of the world give them, does benumme
and put those into a deep sleep which do attentively linger in them; or such
as receive them in too great abundance. And alas these are the Mandragores,
the Chimera's and fantomes of pleasurs for which we cast off the love of the
heavenly Spouse. And how can we then truly say that we love him since we
prefer so frivolous vanities, before his grace?

5. Is it not a deplorable wonder to see a DAVID, so noble in surmounting
hatred, so generous in pardoning injuries, and yet so impotently injurious in
matter of Love, that not being satiated with the unjust detaining of a number of
wives, he must needs yet wrongfully usurp and take away by rape, the poor
Vrias his wife. Yea and by an insupportable treachery, put to slaughter her
poor husband, that he might the better enjoy the Love of his wife? Who would
not admire the heart of a SAINT PETER, which was so bravely bold amidst the
armed soldiers, that he of all his Masters troop was the first and only man
that drew and laid about him; and yet a little after so cowardly amongst
unarmed women, that at the word of a wench, he denied and detested his
Master; And how can it seem so strange to us that Rachel could sell the chaste
embracements of her Jacob for Aples of the Mandragore, since that Adame and Eve
forsook even grace for an Aple, and that too, presented by a Serpent.

6. In fine, I will tell you a word worthy of note. Heretics are Heretics and
bear the name of such, because of the Articles of Faith they choose at their
gust and pleasure what likes them best, and those they believe, rejecting and
disauowing the others. And Catholics are Catholics, because without choice or
election at all, they embrace with an equal assurance, and without reserve,
all the faith of the Church. Now it happens after the same manner in the
Articles of Charity; It is an herasie in sacred love, to make choice of Gods
Commandments, which to observe, and which to violate. He that said thou shall
not kill, said also; thou shall not commite adultery. It is not then for the
love of God, that thou killest not, but it is some other motive, that makes
thee rather choose this commandment then the other. A choice that hatcheth
heresy in matter of Charity. If one should tell me, that he would not cut my
arm, out of a love to me, and yet would pull out mine eyes, break my head, or
ru^ne me quite through; ah, should I say, with what face can you tell me that
it is in respect of my Love, that you wound not mine arm, since you make no
difficulty to pull out mine eyes; which are no less dear unto me? yet since
you ru^ne me quite through the body with your sword, which is more perilous
for me? It is an Axiom that good comes from an entire cause, but evil from
each defect; That the act of Charity be perfect, it must proceed from an
entire, general and universal Love, which is extended to all the Divine
Commandments. And if we fail in any one Commandment, love cease to be
entire and universal; and the heart wherein it harbers, cannot be truly
called a loving heart, nor consequently a truly good one.

That we are to Love the Divine Goodness, soueraignely more then our selves.
CHAPTER. X.
1. Aristotle had reason to say that GOOD is indeed amiable, but principaly
every ones proper good to himself; so that the Love which we have to others,
proceeds from the love of our selves: for how could a Philosopher say
otherwise, who did not only not Love God, but hardly even ever spoke of the
Love of God? howbeit the Love of God, does preceede all the Love of our selves,
yea even according to the natural inclination of the will, as I declared in
the first book.

2. Certes the will is so dedicated, and if we may so say, consecrated to
goodness that if an infinite goodness were clearly proposed unto it, unless
by miracle, it is impossible that it should not soueraignely love it; yea the
Blessed are ravished and necessitated, though yet not forced to love God, whose
sovereign beauty they clearly see, which the Scripture does sufficiently
show, in co^paring the contentment which does fill the hearts of the happy
inhabitants of the heavenly Jerusalem, to a torrent or impetuous floode, whose
waters cannot be kept from spreeding over the neighbor plains.

3. But in this mortal life, THEO: we are not necessitated to love
soueraignly, because we see him not so clearly: In Heaven where we shall see
him face to face, we shall love him heart to heart that is, when we shall all
see the infinity of his beauty, every one in his measure, with a soueraignely
clear sight: so shall we be ravished with the love of his infir it goodness,
in a soueraignely strong rauishment, to which we neither would if we could, nor
can if we would make any resistance: But here below, when we behold not this
Sovereign Bounty and Beauty, but only enter view it in our obscurities; we
are indeed inclined, and allured, yet not necessitated to Love more then our
selves, but rather the contrary, and albeit we have a holy natural
inclination to love the Divinity above all things, yet have we not the
strength to put it in execution, unless the same Divinity infuse holy
charity supernaturally into our heart's.

4. Yet true it is, that as the clear view of the Divinity, does infallibly
beget in us a necessity of loving it more then our selves; so the enterview,
that is, the natural knowledge of the Divinity, does produce infallibly, an
inclination and pronenesse to love it more the^ our selves: for I pray you
THEOT: since the will is wholly addicted to the love of GOOD, how can it in any
degree know a sovereign GOOD, without being more or less inclined to love it
soueraignely? Now of all the Good's which are not infinite, our WILL wills
always in her affection, that which is nighest to her, but above all, her
own: But there is so little proportion betwixt an infinite, and finite GOOD,
that our will having knowledge o^ an infinite GOOD is without doubt put in
motion, inclined and incited to prefere the friendshipe of the Abisse of this
infinite goodness, before all other love, yea even the love of our selves.

5. But principally this inclination is strong, because we are more in God,
then in our selves; we live more in him then in our selves, and are in such
sort, from him, by him, for him, and to him, that we cannot in very deed hit
of what we are to him, and he is to us, but we are forced to cry out. I am
thine Lord, and am to belong to none but to thee; my soul is thine, and ought
not to live but by thee; my will is thine, and ought not to love but for thee;
my Love is thine, and is only to tend to thee. I am to love thee as my first
PRINCIPLE, since I have my being from thee; I am to love thee as mine end and
Center, since I am for thee; I am to love thee more then mine own being,
seeing eue^ my B^EING, does sublist by thee; I am to love thee more then my
self, since I am wholly thine, and in thee.

6. And in case there were, or could be some Sovereign GOOD whereof we were
independent, yet so as that we could unite our selves unto it by love, we
should even be incited to love it more then our selves, seeing that the
infinity of it is sweetness, would be still Soueraignely more powerful to
allure our will to it is love, then all the other, yea even our own proper
GOODS*

7. But if by imagination of a thing impossible, there were an infinite
goodness, whereof we had no dependence at all, and wherewith we could have no
kind of union, or communication: we should yet verily esteem it more then our
selves: For we should plainly know, that being infinite, it were more
estimable and amiable then we: and consequently that we should make simple
wishes to be able to love it. Yet properly speaking we should not love it, since
that love aims at vnio^; and much less can we have Charity toward it, since
that Charity is a Friendshipe, and Friendshipe cannot be unless it be
reciprocal, having for it is grownd-worke COMMVNICATION, and UNION for it is
end. This I say, for certain chimericall and vain wits, who upon impertinent
imaginations, do role melancholy discourses up and down their mind, to their
own maine vexation. But as for us THEOT: my dear friend, we see plainly that
we cannot be true men, without having an inclination to love God more then our
selves: nor true Christians, without practicing this inclination. Let us love
him more then our selves which is to us more then all, and more then our
selves, Amen, for true it is*

How holy Charity brings forth the love of our neighbor. CHAPTER. XI.
1. AS God created man to his own Image and likeness, so did he ordain a
love for man, to the image and resemblance of the love which is due to his own
Divinity. Thou shall love, says he, thy Lord, thy God with all thy heart, it
is the first and greatest commandment: And the second is like unto this, Thou
shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Why do we love God, THEO: The cause why
we love God, says S. BERNARD, is God himself: as though he had said, we
love God because he is the most sovereign and infinite Goodness. And why do
we love our selves in Charity? surely because we are the Image and liknesse of
God. And whereas all men are indewed with the same dignity, we love him also
as our selves, that is, in quality of the most holy and lively Image of the
Divinity: for it is in that quality, THEO: that we belong to God in so strict
an aliance, and so amiable a dependence, that he makes no difficulty to be
called Father, and to call us children. It is in this quality that we are
capable to be united to his Divine essence, by the fruition of his sovereign
bounty and felicity. It is in this quality that we receive his grace, that
our spirits are associated to his most holy spirit, and made in a manner
participa^t of his Divine nature as S. LEO says. And therefore the same
Charity which produces the acts of the love of God, produces withal the
acts of the love of our neighbor. And even as Jacob saw but one ladder which
reached from Heaven to earth, by which the Angels did as well descend as
ascend, so we see that one same charity extends it self both to the love of
God and our neighbor, raising us to the union of our spirit with God, and yet
brining us back again to a peaceable and quiet ^ocietie with our neighbors.
Yet with this difference, that we love our neighbor, in that he is created to
the Image and likeness of God, to have communication with the Divine bounty,
participation of grace, and fruition of glory.

2. THEO: to love our Neighbor in Charity is to love God in man, or man in
God; It is to love God for his own sake, and the creature for the love of him.
The young Tobie accompained with the Angel Raphael, having met with Raguel his
Father to whom yet he was unknown. Raguel had no sooner set his eyes upon him,
says the Scripture, but turning himself toward his wife Anne; look look
quoth he how much this young man does resemble my cosen: and having said thus,
he said unto the^, whence come you youths, my dear brethren? at which they
replied: We are of the Tribe of Nephtali, of the Captivity of Niniuie, and he
said unto them; do you know my brother Tobie? yes Sir, we know him, replied
they: and Raguel beginning highly to commend him, the Angel said unto him;
Tobie of whom you speak, is this youths own Father; with that Raguel stepped
toward him and kissing him with many tears, and ha^ging upon his neck,
blessing have thou my son, quoth he, because thou art the son of a good and
most virtuous man: and the good woman Anne his wife and Sara his daughter,
began to weep through tenderness of affection. Do not you note, how Raguel,
embraced the little Tobie, cherished, kissed and wept with joy upon him, whom
he knew not. Whence proceeded this Love but from old Tobie his Father, whom
this child did so much resemble? Blessing hasie thou, quoth he, but why? not
truly because thou art a good youth, for that as yet I know not, but because
thou art son and like to thy Father, who is a very good man.

3. Ah good God THEOT: when we see our neighbor created to the Image and
likeness of God, ought we not to say one to another. Observe and see this
creature, how it resembles the Creator, ought we not to cast our selves upon
it, cherishe it, and weep over it with love? ought we not to bless it a
thousand and a thousand times? And why this? For the love of it? no verily: for
we know not whether it be worthy of love, or hatred in it self; but wherefore
the^? O THEO: for the love of God, who has framed it to his own similitude
and likeness and consequently has endowed it with a capacity to be partaker
of his goodness, in GRACE, and GLORY. For the love of God, I say, from whom
it is, whose it is, by whom it is, in whom it is, for whom it is, and whom it
resembles in a most particular manner. Whereupon the divine love does not only
often times command the love of our neighbors, but it self produces it, and
poures it into man's heart, as his resemblance and Image: for even as man is
the Image of God, so the sacred love of man toward man, is the true picture of
the heavenly love of man toward God. But this discourse of the love of our
neighbor requires a whole Treatise a part, which I beseech the Sovereign
Lover of men, to inspire into some of his most excellent servants, since the
top of the love of the Divine Goodness of the heavenly Father, consists in
the perfection of the love of our brothers and companions in earth.

How love produces Zeal. CHAPTER. XII.
1. AS Love rends toward the Good of the thing beloved, either by taking
delight in it being obtained, or in desiring and pursuing it not being
obtained. So it brings forth hatred by which it flies the evil which is
contrary to the thing beloved, either in desiring and striving to be quit of
it, being already present, or in absence, by essaying to divert and hinder its
approach. But if evil can neither be hindered to approach, nor be removed, love
at least leaves not to make it be hated and detested. When love therefore is
seruent, and is come to that hight, that it would take away, remove, and divert
that which is opposite to the thing beloved, it is termed Zeal. So that in
proper speech, Zeal is no other thing then love in its ardour, or rather the
ardour that is in love. And therefore, such as the love is, such is the Zeal
which is in ardour. If the love be good the Zeal is Good, if bad, the Zeal is
also bad. Now when I speak of Zeal, I mean to speak of jealousy too: for
jealousy is a SPECIES of Zeal, and unless I be deceived, there is but this
only difference between them; That Zeal has a respect to all the Good of
the thing beloved, with intention to remove the contrary evil from it: but
jealousy eyes the particular good of friendshipe, to the end it might repulse
all that does oppose it.

2. When therefore we ardently set our affections upon earthly and temporal
things, beauty, honors, riches, Place: That Zeal, that is, the ardour of
that Love, ends ordinarily with envy: because these base and vile things, are
so little, limited, particular, finite, and imperfect, that being possessed by
one, another cannot entirely possess them. So that being communicated to
diverse, each one in particular has a less perfect communication of them. But
when we love in particular to be ardently beloved, the Zeal, or ardour of this
Love turns into Jealousy; because humane frie^dshipe, though otherwise a
virtue, has this imperfection, by reason of our weakness, that being divided
amongst many, every ones part it less. Whereupon the ardour or Zeal we have
to be beloved, will not permit corriualls and companions: which if we apprehend
we have, we presently fall into the passion of Jealousy, which indeed does in
some sort resemble envy, yet is far an other thing. 1. Envy is always
unjust, but jealousy is sometimes just, so that it be moderate: for have not
such as are married good reason to look that an others shareing with them do
not cause their friendship's decrease? Envy makes us sorrowful that our
neighbor enioys a like, or a greater good then we, though he diminish not that
which we have one jot. But jealousy is in no wise troubled at our neighbors
good so it touch not upon our coppie-hold: for the Jealous man would not be
sorry that his companion should be beloved of others, so it were not of his
own Mistress. Yea properly speaking, a man is not jealous of Competitours,
till he apprehend that he himself has already atchiued the friendshipe of
the party beloved. And if there be any passion that preceedes this, it is not
jealousy but envy. 3. We do not presuppose any imperfection in the party we
envy, but quite contrary we apprehend that he has the good which we do
envy in him. Marry we presuppose that the party whereof we are jealous, is
imperfect, fickle subject to corruption and change. 4. Jealousy proceeds from
love, envy comes from the defect of Love. 5. Jealousy never happens but in
matter of Love, but envy is extended to all the subjects of good; to honors,
to favors to beauty. And if at any time one be envious of the affection which
is borne to another, it is not for love, but for the profit that is in it. The
Envious man is not a whit troubled to see his fellow in grace with his Prince,
so that he be not in occurrences gratified and preferred by him.

That God is Jealous of us. CHAPTER. XIII.
1. GOd says thus: I am thy Lord thy God, a jealous God. Our Lord is called
Jealous. God is jealous then, THEO: but what is his jealousy; verily upon the
first sight, it seems to be a jealousy of Concupiscence such as is a husbands
over his wife: for he will have us so to be his, that he will in no sort have
us to be any others but his. No man says he can serve two Masters. He
demands all our heart, all our soul, all our spirit, all our strength; for
this very reason he is called our spouse, our souls his Spouses; And all sorts
of separations from him, are called fornication, Adultery. And indeed it is
high reason that this great God, singularly good, should most entirely exact
our whole heart: for our heart is but little, and cannot store us with love
enough, worthily to love the Divine Goodness; is it not therefore convenient,
that since we cannot afford him such a measure of Love as were requisite, that
at least we should afford him all we are able? The GOOD that is soueraignely
lovely, ought it not to be soueraignely loved? and to love soueraignely is to
love totally.

2. Howbeit Gods jealousy of us, is not truly a jealousy of concupiscence
but of SOVEREIGN FRIENDSHIPE: for it is not his profit, that we should love
him, but ours. Our love is unprofitable to him, but to us gainefull; and if it
be agreeable to him, it is because it is profitable to us: For being the
Sovereign GOOD, he takes pleasure to communicate himself by love, without any
kind of profit that can return to him thereby, whence he cries out, making his
complaint of sinners by way of jealousy. They have forsaken me, me that am the
fountain of living water; and have dug unto themselves Cisterns, broken
Cisterns that are not able to hold water: mark a little THEO: I pray you, how
this Divine Lover does delicatly well express the nobility and generositie of
his Jealousy: they have left me, says he, me that am the Source of living
water: I complain not that they have forsaken me, in respect of any damage
that their reuoult can draw upon me: for what worse is a living spring, that
men will not draw water at it? will it therefore leave to glide and slide over
the earth? but I am sorry for their misfortune, that having left me, they have
busied themselves about wells without water. And if by supposition of an
impossible thing, they could have light upon some other fountain of living
water, I should easily endure their departure from me, since I pretend nothing
in their love, but their own good: but to forsake me to perish; to fly from
me to fall headlong, is that which does astonish and offend me in their folly:
It is then for the love of us, that he desires that we should love him, because
we cannot cease to love him, but we begin to be lost, nor withdraw any part of
our affection from him, but we loose it.

3. Put me, said the Divine shepherd to the Sunamite, put me as a seal upon
thy heart, as a seal upon thy arm; The Sunamits heart was full of the
heavenly Love of her dear Spouse, who though he possess all, yet is he not
content in that, but by a holy distrust of jealousy he will be set upon the
heart which he possesses, and will have her sealed up with himself, least any
of the love due to him might escape out, or any thing get entry, which might
cause a mixture: for he is not satisfied with the love, in which the Sunamite
is complete unless she be also unchangeable, purely and only his. And that he
may not only enjoy the affections of our heart, but also the effects and
operations of our hands, he will also be as a seal upon our right arm, that
it may not be streched out, or employed, save in the works of his service. And
the reason of the Divine Spouse his demand is that as death is so strong, that
it separats the soul from all things, yea even from her own body; so sacred
love which is come to the degree of Zeal, does divide and put the soul at a
distance withal affections, and does purify her from all mixture: for as much
as it is not only as strong as death, but it is withal sharp, resolute,
stife, and pitilesse in punishing the wrong done unto it, in the admittance of
Competitors together with it, as Hell is violent in punishing the damned: And
even as Hell full of horror, rage, and cruelty, admits no mixture of love, so
does jealous love tolerate no mixture of another affection, striving that the
whole should be reserved for the Beloved. Nothing is so sweet as the Dove, yet
nothing so merciless as he in his jealousy toward his hen. If ever you took
notice, THEO: you have seen that this mild bird, returning from his flight,
and finding his mate amongst her companions, he is not able to suppress in
himself a certain sense of distrust, which makes him churlish and humourous,
so that at their first accosting, he circles about her, with a sour and out
faceing countenance* trampling upon her, and beating her with his wings though
he have otherwise assurance that she is loyal and sees her snowie white in
innocence. Upon a certain day S. CaTHARINE of Sienna was in a Rapture, which
did not bereeue her of her senses, and while God was showing her wonders, a
brother of hers passed by, and with the noise he made diuerted her, so that she
turned toward him, and eyed him one only moment. This little distraction,
which did on the sudden surprise her, was neither sin, nor disloyalty, but
an only shadow of sin, and an only resemblance of disloyalty: and yet the
most holy mother of the heavenly Spouse, did so earnestly chide her for it, and
the glorious S. PAVLE did so confound her in it, that she thought she should
have melted away in tears. And David reestablished in grace by a perfect love,
how was he treated for the only venial sin which he had committed in taking
a List of his People?

4. But THEO: he that desires to see this Jealousy put down in a delicate and
excellent expression, let him read the Instructions which the Seraphicall S.
CATHARINE of Genua made in declaration of the proprieties of pure Love, amongst
which she does instantly inculcate and press this which ensues: That perfect
Love, that is, Love which is come to the perfection of Zeal, cannot endure any
mediation, interposition, or the mixture of any other thing not even of God's
gifts, yea it is in this hight of rigor, that it permit's not even the love of
Heaven, but with intention to love more perfectly therein the Goodness of him
that gives it: So that the Lamps of this pure Love have neither oil, week,
nor smoke, but are all fire and flame, which no worldly thing can extinguish.
And such as carry these burning Lamps in their hands, have the saintly fear
of holy Spouses, not the fear of adulterous women. Both fear indeed, but
differently, says S. AUGUSTINE, The chaste Spouse fears the absence of her
Spouse; The adulrous the presence of hers. That fears his departure, this his
stay: That is so deeply in Love, that it makes her jealous, this is not
annoyed with jealousy, because she enioyes not Love; This fears to be
punished, but the punishment which that fears, is, that she shall not beloved
enough; yea rather in very deed, she fears not, not to beloved, as is the
custom of the Jealous, who love themselves, and will needs be beloved; but
her fear is that she loves not him enough whom she sees so loue-worthy, that
none can love him to the worth and according to the large measure of love which
he merit's, as before I have faied. Wherefore her Jealousy, is not a IEALOVSIE
OF PROPER INTEREST, but a pure Jealousy, which proceeds not from any
concupiscence, but from a noble and simple frie^dshipe: A Jealousy which
extends it self to our neighbor, together with the love whence it issues:
for since we love our neighbor as our selves, for Gods sake; we are also
jealous of him, as of our selves, for God's sake, so that we would even die
least he might perish.

5. Now as Zeal is an inflamed ardour, or an ardent inflammation of Love, it
has also need to be wisely and prudently practiced; otherwise under the
cloak of it, one may violate the terms of modesty and discretion, and easily
slipe out of Zeal into anger, and from a just affection, to an unjust passion;
wherefore this not being the proper place to put down the marks of Zeal, my
THEO: I advise you that for the execution thereof you have always recourre to
him whom God has given you, for the direction of your deuote life.

Of the Zeal or Jealousy which we have toward our Savior. CHAPTER. XIV.
1. A certain Caualeere gave order to a famous Painter to draw him out a horse
running, and the Painter having represented him as in a curuet, with him upon
his back, the Caualeere began to storm, whereupon the Painter turning the
picture vpside down be not angry Sir, quoth he, to change the postures of a
horse in his Carriere, into a horse in his curuet, a man is only to turn the
Table vpside down He that desires to discover, what jealousy or Zeal we are
to exercise toward God, he is only to express to life the jealousy we have
in humane things, and then turn it vpside down; for such will it be, as that
which God for his part requires at our hands.

2. Imagine THEO: what comparison there is betwixt those who enjoy the light
of the Sun, and those who have only the glimps of a Lamp: they are not
envious or jealous of one an other: for they plainly see, that that great
light is abundantly sufficient for all; that the ones fruition does not impeach
the others; and that nones possession in particular is less for that all in
general possesses it, then though each one possessed it a part. But whereas
the light of a La^pe is little, short, and insufficient for many, each one
desires to have it in his chamber, and he that has it, is envied at by the
rest: The good of humane things is so bare and beggarly that as it is more
communicated to one, it is less communicable to others; and thervpo^ it is
that we are stirred, and do storm when we have any Corriualls or fellows.
But God's heart is so abundant in love, his goodness so infinitely infinite,
that all men may possess him without lessening any ones possession: this
infinity of goodness, can never be drayned, though all the hearts of the
universe be furnished with it: for when all shall be brime full, his infinity
remains always entire without any diminution. The Sun does no less shine
upon a rose together with a thousand millions of other flowers, then though it
shined but upon that alone. And God does no less pour his love into one
soul, albeit with it he love an infinity of others, then though he loved her
only: the force of his Love, not decreasing by the multitude of rays which it
streams out, but remaining full of his immensitie.

3. But wherein then consists the Jealousy and Zeal which we ought to have
toward the Divine Goodness? THEO: their office is: first to hate, fly,
hinder, detest, reject, to set upon, and overthrow, so far forth as one is
able, all that is opposite to God to wit to his will, to his Glory, and the
sa^ctifying of his name. I have hated iniquity, said David, and have had
those that thou hate in abomination. O Lord, did not I hate them? and did not
I pine away because of thine enemies? My Zeal has made me sownd, because my
enemies have forgotten thy words. In the morning I killed all the sinners that
were upon the face of the earth, that I might ruinate, and banish all the
workers of iniquity. See I pray you THEO: with what a Zeal this great king
is animated, and how he imployes the passions of his soul in the service of
holy Jealousy! He does not simply hate iniquity, but has it in abomination,
upon the sight of it he withers ^ith distress; he falls into sownds and
trances, he pursues it, defeats and banisheth it. So P INE^S pushed forwards
with a holy Zeal, did holily run through that impudent Israelite, and brazen
faced Madianite which he found in the infamous commerce of their beastliness:
So the Zeal which consumed our Saviors heart, made him cast out all that
bought and sold and presently revenge the irreuerence and profanation which
they committed in the Temple.

4. Secondly Zeal makes us ardently jealous of the purity of souls, which
are the Spouses of JESUS CHRIST, according to the holy Apostle to the
Corinthians, I emulate you with the emulation of God, for I have despoused you
to one man to present you a chaste Virgin to JESUS Christ. Eliezer had been
extremely stung with Jealousy, if he had perceived the chaste and fair
Rebecca, whom he conveyed to be espoused to his Masters son, in any danger
of being dishonored; and doubtless he might have said to this holy Damsel I
am Jealous of you, with a jealousy which I owe to my Maister's respect: for I
have despoused you to one man, to present you a chaste virgin to my Master
Abraham's Son. So would the great S. PAVLE say to his Corinthians: I was
sent from God to you: souls, to treat the marriage of an eternal union,
between his son our Savior, and you, and I have despoused you unto him, to
present you as a chaste virgin to this heavenly Spouse. Behold why I am
emulous, not with mine own emulation but with the emulation of God, in whose
behalf I have treated with you. It was this Jealousy THEO: that caused this
holy Apostle daily to fall down in trances and die: I die daily, quoth he, for
thy glory. Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is scandalized and I am not
burnt? Mark, say the Ancients, mark what love, what care and what jealousy
a brood Hen does show to her chickens, (for our Savior esteemed not this
comparison unworthy o^ his Gospel) the Hen is a very Hen, that is, a creature
without courage or generositie at all, while she is not yet a mother, but in
her mothershipe she puts on a Lions heart. Always her head is up, always her
eyes watchful, still throwing them on every side, at the least appearance of
danger toward her young ones: No enemy appears, upon whom she dares not throw
her self in the defense of her dear brood, for whom she has a continual
solicitude, which makes her still ru^ne up and down clocking and repining.
And if any of her chickings come to die, what grief? what anger? Such is the
jealousy of Parents for their children, of Pastors for their flocks, of
brothers for their Brothers. What was the Zeal of the Children of Jacob, after
they had know that DINA was violated? what was the Zeal of Job, upon the
apprehe^sion and fear he had that his children should offend God? what was the
Zeal of a S. Paul for his brethren according to flesh and blood, and his
children according to God, for whose sake he desired to be branded with
ANATHEMA and excommunication? what the Zeal of a Moses toward his people,
for whom he is willing, in a certain manner to be rased out of the book of
life.

4. In humane jealousy we are afraid least the thing beloved, should be
possessed by some other: but our Zeal to God, makes us especially fear, that
we are not wholly possessed by him. Humane jealousy makes us apprehend that we
are not beloved enough; Christian jealousy, that we love not enough, whereupon
the sacred Sunamite cried out, o the beloved of my soul, show me where thou
lie in the midday, least I begin to wander after the flocks of my
companions. Her fear is that she is not entirely her sacred sheppheards, or
that she might be hindered, though never so little, by such as strive to be his
Competitors. For she will by no means permit that wordly pleasures, honors,
or exterior riches should prepossesse the least bit of her love, which she
has wholly dedicated to her dear Savior.

An advise for the direction of holy Zeal. CHAPTER. XV.
1. Whereas Zeal is an ardour and vehemency of love, it stands in need of
prudent conduct, otherwise it will violate the terms of modesty and
discretion: not that divine Love, though never so vehement, can be excessive in
it self, nor in the motions and inclinations, which it gives to our hearts,
but because it makes use of the understanding in the execution of its designs,
ordering that it should find out the means whereby they might have good
success, and that it should have boldness or anger in a readiness, to
encounter and surmount difficulties, it happens very frequently, that the
understanding proposes, and makes us undertake too sharp and violent courses;
and withal, that anger or boldness being once set on foot, and not being
able to contain themselves within the bounds of reason, bear a way the heart
to disorder; so that Zeal by this means being exercised indiscretly and
inordinatly, becomes hurtful and blame worthy. DAVID sent JACOB to lead his
army, against his disloyal and rebellious Son ABSALO^, with special charge
that they should not touch him, but in all occurrences they should have a
special care to save his life: But JACOB being set to it and being hot in the
pursuit of the victory, with his own hand slew the poor Absolon, never
thinking of the charge which the king gave him: even so Zeal does imploye
choler against the evil, yet with express order, that in distroying
wickedness and sin, if it be possible, it save the sinner and the wicked;
but being once in hot blood, as a strong headed and stirring horse, runs away
with his rider out of the Listes, without stop or stay while breath lasts.

2. The good man of the house, which our Savior describs in the Gospel, knew
well that hot and violent servants are wont to out run their Masters
intention: For his servants presenting themselves unto him, to weed up
darnell, no quoth he, I will not least together with weeds you pull up corn.
Verily, THEO: Anger is a servant, who being strong, courageous, and a great
undertaker, does indeed at the first onset perform a great deal of work,
but with all is so hot headdie, inconsiderate, and impetuous, that it does
never any good at all, but ordinarily it draws with it many discomodities. Now
it is not good husbandry, say our husbandmen to keep Peacokes about the
house; for though they free it of spiders, yet do they so spoil their couers
and tiles that their profit is not comparable to the great waste they make.
Anger was given as a help to reason by Nature, and is employed by Grace in the
service of Zeal, to put in execution it is designs; yet is it a dangerous
help, and not greatly to be desired: for if it get strength it becoms
Mistress, defeating Reason's authority, and the loving laws of Zeal: and if
it turn weak, it does no more then Zeal would perform all alone; how
soever, it gives still a just occasion of fear, that waxing strong; it might
impare the heart and Zeal, making them slaves to its tyranny, even as an
artificial fire which in an instant is kindled in a building, and which one
knows not how to extinguish. It were an act of dispare to put a stranger
compaine into a Fort in garrison, who by that means might become stronger.

3. Self Love does often deceive us, and makes us runne-counter, practicing our
proper passions under the name of Zeal, Zeal has sometimes of old made use
of Anger: and Anger often times makes use of the name of Zeal in counterchange
to keep its shameful disorder covered under it. And mark, that I say, it
makes use of the name of Zeal; for it can make no use of Zeal it self, since
it is the property of all virtues, but especially of Charity whereof Zeal is
a depe^dance, to be so good, that none can abuse it.

4. Upon a day there came a notorious sinner, and threw himself at the feet
of a good and worthy priest, protesting with a great deal of humiliatio^ that
he came to find a cure for his desease, that is, to receive the holy absolution
of his faults: a certain MONK called DEMOPHILVS, apprehending in his
conceit, that this poor penitent came too nigh the high Altar, fell into so
violent a fit of choler, that falling upon him, he kicked and pushed him thence
with his feet, wronging the good priest in an outrageous sort, who according
to his duty, had mildly admitted the poor penitent: And then running unto the
Altar, he took away the most holy things there, and carried them thence,
least, as he would make men think, the place should have been profaned by the
sinners approach: Now having finished this specious maister-peece of Zeal, he
stayed not yet there, but made a great matter of it to the great S. DENIS
AREOPAGITE, in a letter which he wrote touching it, whereof he received an
excellent answer, worthy of the Apostolical spirit, wherewith this great
Disciple of S. PAVLE was animated: for he made him clearly see that his Zeal
had been indiscreete, imprude^t and impudent withal: because though the Zeal
of the honor due unto holy things be good and laudable, yet was it practiced
against reason, without consideration, or judgment at all, since he had used
pushing with his feet, outrage, injury, and reproach, in a place, in a
circumstance, and against a person that he was to honor, love, and respect, so
that the Zeal could not be good, being so disorderly practiced. But in this
very answer, the same Saint recounts another admirable example of a great
Zeal proceeding from a very good soul, whom yet the excess of Anger, which
Zeal did excite in her, had blemished and spoiled.

5. A Pagan had seduced and made a Christian of CANDIE newly conuerred to the
Faith return to Idolatry: CARPVS an eminent man for purity and sanctity of
life, and who as it is very probable, was the Bishope of Candie, conceived so
deep a wroth against it, that he had never in his time endured the like, and
let himself be so far carried away with this passion, that being risen at
midnight to pray according to his custom, he concluded in him self that it
was not reasonable, that wicked men should any longer live, with great
indignation beseeching the Divine Justice, to strike down at once these two
sinners, the Pagan seductour, and Christian seduced. But note, THEO: how God
corrected the bitterness of the passion, which carried the poor CARPVS beyond
himself. First he made him as another S. STEPHEN behold the heavens open, and
our Savior JESUS CHRIST seated upon a great throne environed with a multitude
of Angels, who assisted him, in humane shape; then he saw below, the earth
gaping open, as a horrid and vast gulf, and the two sinners to whom he had
wished so much evil upon the very edge of this Precipice, quaking, and well
nere falling down in a trance for dread being upon the point of tumbling in,
drawn on the one side by a multitude of Serpents, which rising out of the
gulf, wrapped themselves about their ledges, tickling them with their tails,
and provoking their fall: and the other side a company of men did push and
iogge, to rush them in; so that they seemed to be eue^ already swallowed up by
this precipice: Now consider, my THEO: I pray you, the violencie of CARPVS his
passion: for as he himself afterward recounted to S. D^NIS, he made nothing
of beholding our Savior and the Angels, ascending to Heaven, so was he taken
with gazing upon the daunting destresse, of those two miserable wretches; being
only troubled, that they were so long a perishing, and thereupon endeavored
himself to precipitate them: which seeing he could not so quickly perform, he
fumed in himself, and cursed them, till at length lifting up his head toward
Heaven, he espied the sweet and most co^passionate Savior of our souls,
moved with an extreme pity and compassion of that which passed, rising from
his Throne, and descending to the place where the two poor miserable wretches
were, stretch toward them his helping hand, as also the Angels round about
them did, catching hold of them to hinder them from falling into this dreadful
Gulf, and in Conclusion the amiable and mild JESUS, turning himself to the
stormy CARPVS: hold CARPVS, said he, henceforth beat upon me; for I am
ready to suffer o^ce more for ma^s salvation, and it should be pleasant unto
me, if it could be performed, without the offense of other men; as for the
rest, advise with thy self, which thou likest better; to be in this gulf
together with these serpents, or to live with Angels, who are so great friends
to men. THEO: the holy man CARPVS had just reason to be zealously moved at
these two men, and his Zeal had but rightly raised his stomach against them,
but being once moved, he left reason and Zeal behind him, over running the
bounds and limits of holy love, and consequently Zeal which is love in its
heat; Anger changed the hatred of sin into the hatred of the sinner, and the
most mild Charity into an outrageous cruelty.

6. Some there are of that disposition, that they think one cannot be very
Zealous unless they be very angry, thinking that nothing is done well,
unless all be spoiled, whereas contrariwise true Zeal rarely makes use of
choler; for as we never apply the lance, and the fire to sick, but in mere
extreamities; so holy Zeal does not imploie choler but in extreme necessities.

That the examples of diverse saints which seemed to exercise their Zeal with
Anger, make nothing against the advice of the precedent Chapter. CHAPTER. XVI.
1. IT is true indeed, my dear THEO: that MOSES, PHINEES, HELIE, MATHATIAS,
and diverse great servants of God, made use of choler, to exercise their Zeal
in sundry remarkable occurrences; yet note also I pray you, that those were
great personages, who could well manage their choler, not unlike to that brave
Captain of the Gospel, who said to his soldiers, go, and they went; come,
and they came: but we, who are in a manner all but a kind of poor people, we
have no such power over our motions: our horse is not so well broken, that we
ca^ both spur, and make him stope at our pleasure: Old and well trained
hounds do come in, or fall off according to the huntsmans call, but vntrayned
young hounds, do disordely fly out. The great Saints, that have trained up
their passions in a continual mortification by the exercise of virtue, can at
every turn of a hand turn and wind their passions, giving the scope or
gathering the^ up at their pleasure: But we who have unbridled passions, young,
or at least mistaught, we cannot give bridle to our anger, but at great peril
of disorder, for having once gotten head, one cannot restrain, and order them
as were fitting.

2. S. DENIS talking with that DEMOPHILVS, who would have given the name of
Zeal to his rage, and fury; he that would correct others, quoth he, must
first beware, that anger do not turn reason out of the power and Dominion
wherein God has established it over the soul, and that it do not stir up a
reuoult, sedition, and confusion within our selves; so that we do in no sort
approve your impetuosities, to which you were pricked forward with an
indiscreet Zeal, though you should a thousand times repeat PHINEES and
HELIE: for the like words did not please JESUS CHRIST, being spoken to him by
his Disciples, who were not yet made partakers of this sweet and benign
spirit. PHINEES, THEOT: seeing, a certain accursed Israelite offend God with a
Moabite, slew them both: HELIE foretold the death of OCHOSIAS, who wrothfull at
this presage, sent two Captains one after another with fifty men a piece, to
take him: and the man of God made fire descend from heaven which devoured them.
Our Savior on a day passing through Samaria, sent into a town to take up his
lodging, but the inhabitants knowing that our Savior was a Jew by nation, and
that he went to Jerusalem, they would not lodge him; which S. JOHN and S.
JAMES seeing they said unto our Savior, shall we command the fire to
descend, and burn them? And our Savior turning toward them, chid them,
saying, you know not what spirit moves you to this, the Son of man, came not
to distroye souls, but to save them: This it is then, THEOT: that S. DENIS
would say to DEMOPHILVS, who alleged the example of PHINEES and HELIE: for S.
JOHN and S. JAMES, who would have imitated PHINEES and HELIE in making sire
descend from Heaven upon men, were reprehended by our Savior, who gave them to
know, that his Spirit and Zeal was sweet, mild, and gracious, which rarely
made use of wroth or indignation, but only in some circumstances, where there
was no other hope left to prevail. S. THOMAS of Aquine that great Star of
Divinity, being sick of the desease whereof he died at the Monastery of
Fossanoua, of S. BERNARDS order, the Religious besought him to make them some
short exposition upon the CANTICLE OF CANTICLES to the imitation of S. BERNARD,
and he answered them: Dear Fathers, give me a S. BERNARDS Spirit and I will
interpret this divine Canticle as did S. BERNARD; so verily, if one should
say to one of us small, miserable, imperfect and wretched Christians, serve
your selves of Anger and indignation in your Zeal, as did PHINEES, HELIE,
MATHATHIAS, S. PETER and S. PAVLE: we ought to reply, give us the Spirit of
perfection, and pure Zeal, with the interior light which those great Saints
had, and we will arm our selves with choler as they did; It is not a common
performance to discern when and in what measure we are to be angry.

3. Those great Saints were immediately inspired by God, and therefore might
boldly imploye their anger without peril; for the same Spirit, which did
embolden them to this exploite, did also govern the raynes of their just
wroth, least they might out raye their prefixed bounds. An Anger that is
inspired or excited by the holy Ghost, is not now the anger of a man, and it is
man's wroth that we are to be ^ware of, because, as S. JAMES says, it works
not God's Justice. And indeed when those worthy servants of God made use of
anger, it was in so sollemne occurrences, and upon so inordinate crimes, that
there was no danger that the punishment should pass the fault.

4. Are we, think you, to take liberty to injury sinners, to blame nations,
to control and censure our Conductors and Prelates; because S. PAVLE once calls
the Galatians senseless; represents to the Candiots their lewd inclinations,
and resisted the glorious S. PETER his Superior in his face? Certes every one
is not a S. PAVLE, to know how to do those things in the nicke: But hot,
harsh, presumptuous and reproachful spirits, following their own inclinations,
humors, auersions, and the high conceits they have of their own sufficiency,
draw the veil of Zeal over their iniquity; and under the name of this sacred
fire, permit themselves to be burnt up with their proper passions. It is the
Zeal of the health of souls, that makes the Prelatshipe be sought after, if
you will believe the ambitious man; that makes the Monk ordained for the
Quire, course about; if you will give credit to his disquieted spirit; that
causes all those censures and murmuratio^s against the Prelates of the Church,
and te^porall Princes, if you will give ear to the arrogant. You shall hear
nothing from him but Zeal; nor yet see any Zeal in hi^, but only opprobrious
and railing speeches hatred and ra^core, disquiete of the heart and tongue.

5. Zeal may be practiced three ways: first in exercising high actions of
Justice to repel evil; and this belongs only to public officers, to
correct, censure, and reprehend in the nature of a Superior, as Princes,
Prelates, Magistrates, Preachers: but whereas this office is worshipful, every
one will undertake it, every one will have a fingar in it. Secondly, one may
use Zeal in actions of great virtue, for the good example of others, by
suggesting the remedies of evil, and exhorting men to apply them, by working
the good that is opposite to the evil which we desire to banish, which is a
thing that belongs to every one, and yet it has but few undertakers. Finally
the most excellent use of Zeal is placed in suffering and enduring much to
hinder or divert evil, and scarce will any admit this Zeal. A specious Zeal
is all our ambition: upon that, each one willingly spends his talant, never
taking notice, that it is not Zeal indeed which is there sought for, but
glory, ambition's satisfaction, choler, churlishness and other passions.

6. Certainly our Saviors Zeal did principally appear in his death upon the
Cross, to distroy death and sin in men: wherein he was soueraignly imitated
by that admirable vessel of election and dilection, as the great S. GREGORY
Nazianzen in golden words represents him: for speaking of this holy Apostle, he
fights for all, says he, he poures out prayers for all, he is Zealously
passionat toward all, he is inflamed for all, yea he dared yet more for his
brethren according to flesh, so that if I may dare also to say it, he desires
through charity, that they might have even his own place, nere our Savior. O
excellency of an incredible courage and fervor of Spirit? He imitats JESUS
CHRIST, who became a curse for our Love, who put on our infirmities, and bore
our deseases. Or that I may speak a little more soberly, he was the first
after our Savior that refused not to suffer and to be reputed wicked in their
behalf. Eue^ so then, THEO: as our Savior was whip't, condemned, crucified as
man, devoted, bequeathed, and dedicated to bear and support all the reproaches,
ignominies and punishments due to all the offenders in the world, and to be a
general sacrifice for sin being made as an ANATHEMA, forsaken and left of
his eternal Father; so according to the true doctrine of this great Nazianzen,
the glorious Apostle S. PAVLE desired to be laden with ignominy, to be
crucified, left abandoned and sacrificed for the sins of the Jews, that the
curse and pain which they merited might fall upon him. And as our Savior did
so take upon him the sins of the world and became a curse, was sacrificed for
sin, and forsaken of his Father, that he ceased not continually to be the
well-beloued Son in which his Father pleased himself: So the holy Apostle
desired indeed to be a curse, and to be separated from his Master, to be left
alone to the mercy of the reproaches and punishments due unto the Jews; yet did
he never desire to be deprived of Charity and the grace of God, from which
nothing could separate him, that is, he desired to be used as one separated,
from God, but he desired not in effect to be separated* or deprived of his
Grace; for this cannot be piously desired. So the heavenly Spouse confesses
that though love be strong as death, which makes a separation betwixt the body
and the soul. Yet Zeal which is an ardent love, is yet stronger; for it
resembles Hell, which separats the soul from our Saviors sight; but it was
never said, nor can ever be said, that Love or Zeal was Like to sin, which
alone separats from the grace of God. And indeed how could the ardour of Love
possibly make one desire to be separated from grace, since Love is grace it
self, or at least cannot consist without grace? Now the Zeal of the great S.
PAVLE was in some sort practiced by the little S. PAVLE, I mean S. PAVLINE,
who to deliver a slave out of bondage became himself a slave, sacrificing his
own liberty, to bestow it upon his neighbor.

6. Happy is he, says S. AMBROSE, who knows the government of Zeal! The
Devil will easily scofe at thy Zeal, if it be not according to science, let
therefore thy Zeal be inflamed with Charity, adorned with science,
established in constancy. True Zeal is the child of Charity, as being the
ardour of it: Wherefore, like to Charity, it is patient, benign, not
troublesome nor contentious, not envious or spightfull, but rejoicing in Truth.
The ardour of true Zeal resembles that of the huntsman, being dilligent,
careful, active, industrious and eager in the pursuit, but without choler,
anger, or trouble: for if the huntsman's labor were cholerike, harsh and
wayward, it would not be so earnestly loved and affected. Zeal in like manner
has extreme feruours, but such as are constant, solid, sweet, laborious,
equally amiable and infatigable; whereas contrariwise, false Zeal is
turbulent, confused, insolent, arrogant, choleric, wavering, no less
impetuous then inconstant.

How our Savior practiced all the most Excellent acts of Love. CHAPTER. XVII.
1. Having spoken at large of the acts of Divine Love, that you may more easily
and holily conserve the memory thereof, I present you with a collection or
abridgement of it. The Charity of JESUS CHRIST does press us, says the
great Apostle: Yea truly, THEO: it does force, or use a violence against us by
its infinite sweetness, which shines in the whole work of our Redemption,
wherein appeared the benignity and love of our Savior toward men. For what
did not this Divine Lover do in matter of Love? 1. he loved us with a LOVE OF
COMPLACENCE, for his delights were to be with the children of men, and to draw
man to himself beco^ming man. 2. he loved us with a LOVE of BENEVOLENCE
enriching man with his divinity, so that man was God. 3. he united himself
unto us in an inco^prehensible coniunctio^, whereby he adhered, and joined
himself so nearly indissolubly, and infinitely to our nature, that never was
any thing so straightly joined and pressed to the humanity, as is now the most
sacred Divinity, in the person of the Sonno of God. 4. he ran wholly into us,
and as it were, dissolved his greatness to bring it down to the form and
figure of our littleness, whence he is instyled a Source of living water, dew
and rain of Heaven.

5. He was in ecstasy, not only in that, as S. DENIS says, by the excess of
his loving goodness, he became in a certain manner out of himself, extending
his providence to all things, and being in all things; but also, in that, as
S. Paul says, he did in a sort forsake, and empty himself; drayned his
greatness and glory; deposed himself of the Throne of his incomprehensible
Majesty, and, if it be lawful so to say, annihilated himself, to stoop
down to our humanity, to fill us with his Divinity, to replenish us with his
goodness, to raise us to his dignity, and bestow upon us the Divine being of
the children of God. And he, of whom it is so frequent written, I LIVE SAID
OUR LORD, pleased afterward according to his Apostles language to say, I
live, now not I, but man lives in me, man is my life, and to die for man, is my
gains, my life is hidden with man in God. He that did inhabit in himself,
lodges now in us: and he that was living from all eternity in the bosom of
his eternal Father, becomes mortal in the bosom of his temporal mother. He
that lived eternally by his own Divine life, lived temporally a humane life:
And he that from eternity had been only God, shall be for all eternity man
too: so did the love of man ravish God, and draw him into an Ecstasy!

6. Sixthly how often by love did he admire, as he did the Centurion, and the
Cananee? 7. he beheld the young man who had till that hour keept the
Commandments and desired to be taught perfection. 8. he took a loving repose
in us, yea even with some suspension of his senses, in his mothers womb and in
his infancy. 9. he was wonderful tender toward little children, which he
would take in his arms, and lovingly dandle a sleep; toward MARTHA and
MAGDALEN, toward Lazarus over whom he wept, as also over the City of
Jerusalem. 10. he was animated with an incomparable Zeal, which, as S. DENIS
says, turned into jealousy, turning away so far as he could all evil from
his beloved humane nature, with hazard, yea with the price of his blood,
driving away the Devil the Prince of this world, who seemed to be his Corriuall
and Competitor.

7. He had a thousand thousand languors of Love: for from whence could those
Divine words proceed; I have to be baptized with a baptism, and how am I
straitened until it be dispatched? The hour in which he was baptized in his
blood was not yet come, and he languished after it, the love which he bore
unto us urging him thereunto that he might by his death, see us deliuer^d from
an eternal death. He was also sad, and sweat blood of distress in the garden
of Oliuet; not only by reason of the exceeding grief which his soul felt in
the inferior part of reason; but also through the singular love which he bore
unto us in the superior portion thereof, sorrow begetting in him a horror of
death, yet love, an extreme desire of the same; so that there was a hot
combat, and a cruel agony, betwixt desire and horror of death, unto the
shedding of much blood, which streamed down upon the earth as from a living
source.

8. Finally THEO: this Divine Lover died amongst the flames and ardours of
Love; by reason of the infinite charity which he had toward us; and by the
force and virtue of Love, that is, he died in Love, by Love, for Love, and of
Love: for though his cruel torments were sufficient to have killed any body;
yet could death never make a breach in his life, who keeps the keys of life
and death, unless Divine Love, which has the handling of those keys, had
opened the Port to death to let it sack that Divine body, and dispoyle it of
life. Love not being content to have made him mortal only, unless it had
made him die withal. It was by choice, not by force of torment that he died.
No man does take my life from me, says he, but I yield it of my self and I
have power to yield it, and I have power to take it again. He was offered,
says Isaie, because he himself would and therefore it is not said that his
Spirit went away, forsook him, or separated it self from him; but
contrariwise that he gave up his Spirit, expired, rendered up the Ghost, yielded
his Spirit up into the hands of the eternal Father; so that S. ATHANASIVS
remarketh, that he stooped down with head to die, to the end he might consent,
and bend toward deaths approach, which otherwise durst not have come near him:
and crying out with a loud voice, he gave up his Spirit into his Fathers
hands, to show, that as he had strength and breath enough not to die, so had he
so much Love, that he could no longer live, but would by his death revive
those, which without it could never eschew death, nor pretend for true life.
Wherefore our Saviors death was a true sacrifice, and a sacrifice of
Holocaust, which himself offered to our Savior to be our Redemption: for
though the pains and dolours of his Passion were so great and violent, that
any but he had died of them, yet had he never died of them, unless he himself
had pleased, and unless the fire of his infinite Charity had consumed his
life. He was then the Priest himself, who offered up himself unto his Father,
and sacrificed himself in Love, to Love* by Love, for Love, from Love.

9. Yet beware of saying, THEOTIME, that this death of Love in our Savior,
passed by way of rauishment: for the object which his Charity had to move him
to die, was not so amiable, that it could force this heavenly soul thereto,
which therefore departed the body by way of ecstasy, driven on and forced
forwards by the abundance and force of Love, even as the Myrrhetree is seen to
send forth her first juice by her only abundance, without being strayned or
pressed, according to that which he himself said, as we have noted. No man
takes my life away from me, but I yielded it of my self. O God THEO: what
burning coals are cast upon our hearts to inflame us to the exercise of holy
love toward our best Savior, seeing he has so lovingly practiced them
toward us who are his worst servants! The Charity then of JESUS CHRIST does
press us.

The end of the Tenth Book.
THE ELEAVENTH BOOK. OF THE SOVEREIGN authority which sacred love holds over
all the virtues, actions and perfections of the soul.
How much all the virtues are aggreeable unto God. CHAPTER. I.
1. Virtue is of it is own nature so amiable, that God does favor it,
wheresoever he finds it: The Paga^s, though they were enemies to the Divine
Majesty, did now and the^, (...) certain civil and moral virtues, which
were not by their nature, placed above the forces of a reasonable spirit. Now
you may think, THEOT: how small a matter this was: for though these virtues
made a great show, yet in effect they were of little worth, by reason of the
lowness of their intention that practiced them; who labored in a manner for
no other thing then honor, as S. AUGUSTINE says, or for some other
pretention of light consideration, as for the entertainment of civil
society, or by reason of some weak inclination they had to good, which
meeting with no great contradiction, carried them o^ to minute actions of
virtue, as for example, to mutual salutations, to aid their friends, to live
moderatly, not to steal, to fidelity toward ones Master, to pay hirelings
wages. And nevertheless though this was so slender, and full of diverse
imperfections God took it in good part at those poor peoples hands, and
recompensed it largely.

2. The midwiues whom Pharao commanded to kill all the male children of the
Israelits, ^ere without all dispute Egyptians and Pagans; for making their
excuse, that they had not executed the Kings pleasure; The hebrow women, said
they, are not like Egyptians; for they know how to receive the child; and
before we come unto them, they are delivered: an excuse which had not been to
the purpose, if these midwiues had been Jews; besides that it is not credible,
that Pharao would have granted so sharp a Commission to Iewish-women, against
Iewish-women, being of the same nation and religion, and with all Josephus does
witness they were indeed Egiptians. And be it they were Egiptians and Pagans,
yet did they fear to offend God by so barbarous and unnatural a cruelty, as
had been the Masacre of so many little children which the divine sweetness
took so well at their hands, that he built them houses, that is to say, he
made them become fruitful in children, and in temporal riches.

3. NABVCODONOZOR king of Babylon, had waged a just war against the town of
Tyrie, which the Divine Justice would chastise, and God signified to Ezechiel,
that in recompense thereof he would deliver up Egypt into the hands of
NABVCODONOZO^ and his army. Because says God, they have labored for me;
hence adds S. HIEROME in his commentaries, we learn that in case the Pagans
themselves do any Good, they are not unrewarded by God's Judgment. So did
DANIEL exhort NABVCODONOZOR an Infidel, to redeem his sins by alms, that
is, to ransom himself out of the temporal pains due unto his sin, which
hung over his head. Do you see then THEO: how true it is, that God does
esteem virtues though practiced by persons otherwise wicked? If he had not
approved the mercy of those Midwiues, and the justice of the Babilonian wars,
would he have taken the pains, I pray you, to have rewarded them? And if
Daniel had not known, that notwithstanding Nabucodonozors infidelity, his
almes-deedes were agreeable unto God, why would he have counseled him them?
Certes the Apostle assures us that Pagans who have no faith, do naturally
perform that which belongs unto the law, and in doing so, who can doubt but
they do well, or that God does make account of it. Pagans understood that
marriage was good and necessary, they saw that it was convenient to have their
children brought up in sciences, in love of their countries, in civility, and
they did so. Now I leave it to your consideration, whether this was not
grateful unto God, since to this end, he indewed them with the light of
reason, and a natural propention.

4. Natural reason is a good tree, which Gods own finger planted in our
soul, the fruits that spring from it, cannot otherwise be then good; yet in
truth in comparison of that which springs from grace they are of a very low
rate, though not of no value, since God put a rate upon them, bestowing in
respect of them temporal rewards, as he rewarded the moral virtues of the
Romans, according to S. AUGUSTINE, with the great extention and glorious
reputation of their Empire.

5. Sin without question, makes the soul sick, whence she is not able to
perform great and powerful operations, though little ones she can: for all
the sick man's actions are not sick; he speaks, he sees, he hears, he
drinks. The soul in sin, can do good works, which being natural, are
rewarded with natural rewards; being civil, they are paid with civil and
humane money, that is, with temporal commodities. The sinner is not in the
state of the diuills, whose wills are so drunk up, and incorporated in evil
that they can will no good at all. No THEO: the sinner in this world is not in
this estate. He is thereby indeed wounded to death in the way betwixt
Jerusalem and Ierico, but as yet is not dead: for, says the Gospel, he is
left half alive, and as such he can produce actions half a live: it is true he
can neither walk, nor rise, nor cry for aid, no not so much as speak, save
only languidly, by reason of his faint heart; yet can he open his eyes, stir
his fingers, sigh, make some little complaints, which are weak actions,
notwithstanding all which he might have been found miserably lying dead in his
own blood, had not the merciful Samaritaine poured his own honey and wine
into his wounds and carried him to a lodging, where he gave charge that he
should be dressed and looked too, at his cost.

5. Natural reason is deeply wounded, and half slain by sin, so that being
so at under, it cannot observe all the Commandments, which notwithstanding it
apprehends to be convenient. It knows its duty; but cannot acquit it self
thereof. It Is eyes has more light to discover the way, then its legs has
strength to undertake it.

6. The sinner may indeed here and there observe some of the Commandments,
yea all of them for some small time, while there is not presented unto him high
subjects, in which commanded virtues are to be practiced, or some violent
temptation of committing a prohibited sin. But that a sinner should sieve long
in his sin, whithout adding to it new ones, is not a thing that can be done,
but by God's special protection. For man's enemy is hot, stirring, and in
perpetual action to precipitate him; and when he sees that occasion of
practicing ordinary virtues do not occur, he stirrs up a thousand
temptations to make him fall into forbidden things; at which time NATVRE
without GRACE cannot warrant it self from falling: for if we overcome, it is
God gives us the victory through JESUS CHRIST, as S. PAVLE says, watch and
pray, that you enter not into temptation. If God had said only WATCH, we
should apprehend our own power sufficient, but adding PRAY, he shows, that
if he keep not our souls in time of temptation, in vain shall they watch who
keep them.

That Divine Love, makes the virtues more agreeable to God by excellency then
they are in their own nature. CHAPTER. II.
1. SVch as study Husbandry, do admire the fresh innocence and purity of
the little strawburie, which though it lie upon the grownd and is continually
crept upon by serpents, Leazards, and other venomous beasts, yet receives it
no impression of poison, nor is infected with any venomous quality, which is a
sign, that it has no affinity with poison. Such are the moral virtues,
THEO: which though they be in a heart that is low, earthly, and greatly
labored with sin, yet are they not infected with the malice thereof, being
of so free and innocent a nature, that they cannot be corrupted by the Society
of iniquity, as even ARISTOTLE himself said, that virtue was a habit which
none could abuse. And though the virtues, which are so good in themselves, be
not rewarded with an eternal Laurel when they are practiced by infidells, or
by such as are not in the state of grace, it is nothing strange, since that the
sinful heart from whence they proceed, is not capable of an eternal good,
and was otherwise auerted from God; and since that none is to have part in that
celestial inheritance which belongs to the sonns of God, but such as are in
him, and his adoptiue brothers; besides that the Covenant by which God
promisseth heaven, has referrence to such only as are in his grace, and that
the virtues of sinners have no worth nor value, save that of their own nature,
which by consequence cannot raise them to the merit of supernatural rewards,
so called, for that Nature withal her appurtina^ces, can neither give, nor
merit them.

2. Howbeit, the virtues which are found in the friends of God, though they be
only moral and natural in themselves, are yet dignified and raised to the
worth of holy works, by reason of the hearts excellency which produces them.
It is one of the properties of friendshipe, to make the friend, and all that is
good and honest in him, grateful. Friendshipe does pour out its grace and
favor upon all the actions of the beloved, that are any ways capable of them.
A friends tartness is sweet, and the sweetes of an enemy are bitter. All the
virtuous actions of a heart that loves God, are dedicated to God: for the heart
that has given himself, how has not he given all that depends of himself?
He that gives the tree without reserve, gives he not also the leeues, flowers,
and fruit? The just man shall flourish like the palm tree, and shall be
multiplied as the Ceder of Lybanus, they are planted in the house of our Lord,
and shall flourish in the courts of the house of our God, sithence the just
man is planted in the house of God, his leeues, his flowers and his fruit do
there increase, and are dedicated to the service of his Majesty. He is as a
tree planted nigh to the streams of waters, which shall give his fruit in his
time: his very leaves shall not fall, and all things whatsoever he does shall
prosper: not only the fruits of Charity, and the flowers of the works which
she ordaines, but even the very leaves of moral virtues do draw a meruellous
felicity from the love of the heart which produces them. If you graffe in a
Rose tree, and put a grain of musk in the clift of the stoke, all the roses
that spring from it, will smell of musk. Cleeue your heart then by holy
penance, and put the love of God in the clift, afterward ingraffe in it what
virtue you please, and the works which spring from it, shall be all perfumed
with Sanctity, without taking any further care thereof.

3. Though the Spartans had heard an excellent sentence from the mouth of some
wicked man they never judged it fit to receive it, till it were first
pronounced again by some good man, And therefore to make it worthy of
acceptance, they only made it be uttered again by a virtuous man. If you
desire to make the humane and moral virtues of an EPECTETES, a SOCRATES, a
DEMADES become holy, cause them only to be graced by a truly Christian mouth;
that is by one that is in charity. So God did first respect ABEL, and then his
offerings; so that his offerings had their worth and dignity in the sight of
God, from the goodness and piety of him, that offered them. O the sovereign
Goodness of this great God? who does so love his Lovers, who does cherish
their weakest endeauours, and does excellently enrich them, be they never so
weak; Honoring them with the Title and quality of HOLY! Ah, it is in
consideration of his beloved Son, whose adoptiue children, he will honor,
sanctifiing all that is good in them, their bones, their hairs, their
garments, their graves, yea the shadow of their bodies: Faith, Hope, Charity,
Love, Religion, yea even sobriety, courtisie, affability of heart.

4. Wherefore my dear brethren, said the Apost: be constant and stable,
abounding in every good work, knowing that your Labor is not without reward
in our Lord. And mark THEO: that every virtuous work, is to be esteemed the
work of our Lord, yea though it were eue^ practiced by an infidel: for his
Divine Majesty said unto EZECHIEL, that NABVCODONOZOR and his army had
labored for him, because he had waged a lawful and just war against the
Tyrians, suffiently showing therein, that the justice of the unjust is his,
tends and belo^gs unto him, though the unjust who work that Justice, are
neither his nor do tend and belong unto him: for as the great prince and
Prophet JOB, though of Pagan extraction and an inhabitant of the land of Hus,
did for all that belong to God; so moral virtues, though they proceed from a
sinful heart, do notwithstanding belong to God. But when the same virtues are
found in a truly christian heart, that is, in a heart endowed with holy love,
then they do not only belong to God, and are not unfruitful in him, but
become fruitful and precious before the eyes of his goodness. Give a man
Charity, says S. AUGUSTINE, and all things are profitable unto him; deprive
him of Charity and all the rest profits him not. And to them that love God all
things cooperate unto Good, says the Apostle.

That there are some virtues which divine Love does raise to a higher degree of
excellency, then others. CHAPTER. III.
1. But there are some virtues, which by reason of their natural alliance and
correspondance with Charity, are also much more capable to receive the
precious influence of sacred Love, and consequently, the communication of the
dignity and worth of the same. Such are Faith and Hope, which together with
Charity, have an immediate reference to God; and Religion together with
penance and Devotion, which are employed to the honor of his Divine Majesty.
For these virtues have naturally so great a reference to God, and are so
capable of the impressions of heavenly love, that to make them participate in
its Sanctity, they need only to be by it; that is, near a heart which loves
God. So to make grapes taste like Olives, it is but planting the vine amongst
the Oliue-trees, for by their only neighborhood, without ever touching one
another, these plants do mutually enterchange favors and properties; so
great an inclination, and so strict a conueniencie is there betwixt them.

2. Certes, all flowers, except those of the tree called the Pensive Tree and
others that are monstres in nature, all I say, are gladded, displayed, and
embellished at the Suns approach, by the vital heat which they receive from
his rays. But all yellow flowers, and especial that, which the Grecians term
HELIOTROPIVM, and we, TVRNE-SOLE are not only gladded and pleased with his
presence but even follow his beams allurement, by an amiable winding about, to
look and turn themselves toward it, even from the rising to the setting. So
all virtues do receive a new luster, and an excellent dignity, by the
presence of holy Love: but Faith, Hope, the Fear of God, Piety, Penance, and
all the other virtues, which of their own natures do particularly tend unto
God, and to his honor do not only receive the impression of Divine love,
whereby they are elevated to a great value, but they hang wholly toward him,
associate themselves with him, following and serving him in all occasions: for
in fine, my dear THEO: the holy word does attribute a certain saving,
sanctifying force and propriety, to Faith Hope, Piety, Fear of God, to
Penance, which is an evidence, that those virtues are of great price, and being
practiced by a heart in Charity, they become more fruitful, and holy by
excellency, then the others, which of their own nature have not so great an
agreement with heavenly Love. And he that cries, if I had all Faith even in
such a measure that I could transport mountains, and should want charity, I
am nothing, does sufficiently show, that with Charity, this faith would be
very fruitful. Charity then is a virtue without compare, which does not only
adorn the heart, wherein she is, but with her mere presence does also bless
and sanctify all the virtues which she meets therein, embalming and perfuming
them with her celestial odor, by means whereof they are raised to a high
rate in the sight of God; which yet she performs far more excellently in
Faith, Hope, and other virtues which of them selves do naturally tend to
piety.

3. Wherefore, THROUGH: of all virtuous actions we ought most carefully to
practice those of Religion, and Reverence toward divine things, those of
Faith, of Hope, and the most holy Fear of God; taking occasion often to speak
of heavenly things, thinking, and sighing after eternity, frequenting the
Church and Divine service, making pious lectures, observing the ceremonies of
christian Religion: for sacred Love is fed according to its hearts desire in
these exercises, and does in greater abundance stream out its graces and
proprieties upon them, then it does upon those virtues which are purely
natural; like as the heavenly rainebow makes all the plants upon which it
lights odoriferous, but the Asphalatus incomparably more then all the rest.

That Divine Love does yet more excellently sanctify the virtues, which are
practiced by his ordinance and Commandment. CHAPTER IV.
1. THe fair RACHEL after an earnest desire of issue, with her dear JACOB,
was by two means made fertile, whence also she had children of two sundry
kinds: for in the beginning of her marriage, seeing she could have no children
of her own body, she made use of her servant BALA, as it were by love, which
she drew into her society by the exercise of the functions of marriage, saying
unto her husband, I have here my handmaide BALA, take her in wedlock, and
company with her, that she may bear upon my knees, and I may have children of
her, and it fell out according to her desire: For she conceived and brought
forth many children upon RACHELS knees, who received them as though they had
been truly her own, since they were begotten by two bodies whereof JACOBS
belonged to her by the right of marriage, BALA'S by the duty of service, and
again because the generation was effected by her order and will. But she had
afterward two other children without her command or order, which were
conceived, begot, and sprung from her own body, at her own bent to wit,
Joseph, and the beloved Benjamin.

2. I must tell you now, THEOT: that Charity and holy love, a thousand times
more fair then Rachel, married to man's heart, does incessantly wish to produce
holy operations. And if in the beginning she her self cannot bring forth of her
own extraction, by the sacred union which is singularly proper unto her, she
calls the other virtues, as her faithful handmaids, makes them companions with
her in marriage, commanding the heart to make use of them, and beget holy
operations of them, yet operations which she does adopt and repute her own, as
being produced by her order and commandment, and of a heart which belongs unto
her, since, as we have formerly declared, Love is the Master of the heart, and
consequently, of all the acts of other virtues, made by his consent. But
further heavenly Charity, has two acts which are her own issue properly, and
are of her own extraction, the one is EFFECTIVE LOVE, who as another JOSEPH
using the fullness of regal authority, does subject, and range the troops of
our faculties, powers, passions and affections, to Gods will, that it might be
loved, obeyed and served above all things, by this means putting the great
celestial commandment in execution. Thou shall love thy LORD thy GOD with all
thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy Spirit, with all thy strength: The
other is AFFECTIVE OR AFFECTIONATE LOVE, who as a little Benjamin, is
exceedingly delicate, tender, pleasing, and amiable; but in this, more happy
then Benjamin, that Charity his mother dies not in his birth, but, as it were
gains a new life, by the delight she takes in it.

3. Thus then THEOT: the virtuous actions of the children of God, do all
belong to Charity; some of them because they sprung from her own womb;
others, because she sanctifies them by her quickening presence; and finally
others, by the authority and comma^de which she exercises over the other
virtues, whence she made them spring. And these, as indeed they are not so
eminent in dignity, as the actions which do properly and immediately issue
from Charity, so do they incomparably pass those, which take their whole
sanctity from the presence, and Society of Charity.

4. A great General of an Army having gained some renowned bataile, will
without doubt have all the glory of the victory, and not without reason; for
he himself will have fought in the forefront of the army essaying many brave
feats of arms, he will have rancked his troops, ordained and commanded all
that was done, so that he is esteemed to have done all; either for that he
himself fought in his own person; or by his conduct and command of others.
And albeit some friendly Succors cume at unawares, and fall in with them, yet
is not the General deprived of the whole honor, for though thy received not
his commands, yet did they observe them, and follow his intentions. But yet,
after one have attributed all the honor in gross unto him, a distributio^
thereof is made to every part of the army in particular, in relati^g what the
VANT GUARD, the BODY, and the REARE-GARD had done, as the French, the Italians,
the Germans, the Spaniards behaved themselves, yea, we praise this and that
particular man, that honored himself in the battle. So my dear THEOT.
amongst all the virtues, the glory of our Salvation, and victory over Hell,
is ascribed to Divine Love, who, as Prince and Commander of the whole army of
virtues, contriues all the plotes, by which we gain the triumph: For Sacred
Love has his proper actions, which issue and proceed from himself, by which
he works wonders of arms upon our enemy; and with all, he rangeth, commands,
and orders the actions of other virtues, which thence are termed, ACTS
COMMANDED OR ORDAINED BY LOVE. And in case, some virtues produce their
operations without his order, so they observe his intention, which is God's
honor, he will still aduowe them to be his own* yet notwithstanding, though
we say in gross with the holy Apostle, that Charity suffers all, believes
all, hopes for all, supports all, and finally that she does all, yet do we
distribute in particular the praises of the salvation of the Blessed to other
virtues, according as they did excel in each one: for we say, some were saved
by Faith, others by Almes-deedes, by Temperance, by Prayer, Humility, Hope,
Chastity: others for that the acts of these virtues, did more notably shine in
them. Yet still after we have extolled these particular virtues, we must
ascribe all their honor to sacred Love, whence they derive all their sanctity.
For what other thing would the glorious Apostle say, inculcating that Charity
is benign, patient, that she believes all, hopes for all, supports all, but
that Charity ordaines and Commands Patience to be patient, Hope to hope, Faith
to believe. True it is, THEOT: that together with this, he intimats also, that
Love is the soul and life of all the virtues; as though he would have said
Patience is not patient enough, nor Faith faithful; that Hope was not hopeful
enough, nor mildness sufficiently mild, unless Love do animate and quicken
them. The same thing, this same Vessel of Election gives us to understand
when he says, that without Charity nothing does profit him; and that he is
nothing: for it is as though he had said, that without Love a man is neither
patient, mild, constant, faithful nor confident, in such sort as is required
to be Gods servant, which is the true and wishfull being of man.

How sacred love does spread it is worth through all the other virtues, which by
that means are perfected. CHAPTER. V.
1. I Have seen, says PLINY, a tree at TYVOLY graffed in all the fashions,
that one can graffe, which bore all sorts of fruit, for upon one branch there
were nuts, cherries upon another, upon a third raysins, figues, pome-granades,
aples and generally all kinds of fruit. This was admirable, THEO: yet more
admirable to see in a Christian man heavenly Charity, whereupon all virtues
are graffed in such sort, that as one might have said of this tree, that it
was a Cherri-tree, an Aple-tree, a Nut-tree, a pom-granad-tree; so may one say
of Charity, that she is patient, mild, generous, just: or rather, that she is
Patience, mildness, and Justice it self.

2. But the poor Tree of Tyuoly was not of long continuance, as the same
PLINY does witness: for these diverse productions did presently dry up its
HVMIDVM RADICALE, that it withered away, and dyed; whereas contrariwise
Charity is fortified and made strong, to produce abundance of fruit in the
exercise of all the virtues, yea as our holy Fathers have observed, she is
insatiable in her desires of bringing forth fruit, and never cease to press
the heart wherein she inhabits, as Rachel did her husband, saying give me
children or else I die.

3. Now the fruits of graffed-trees, do always follow the graffe: For if the
graffe be of an aple-tree, it will have aples, if of a cherri-tree, it brings
forth cherries, yet so as the fruit does always taste of the stock. In like
manner, THEOT: our acts take their name and SPECIES from the particular virtues
whence they sprung, but they draw the taste of their Sanctity from holy
Charity, which is the root and source of all Sanctity in man, and as the
stock does communicate it is taste to all the fruit which spring from the
graffe, yet so as that every fruit reserues the natural property of the
graffe whence it sprung: even so Charity, pouers out in such sort her
excellency and dignity upon the acts of other virtues that she does not
deprive them of the particular worth and goodness which they have by their
own natural condition.

4. All fllowres loose their luster and grace amidst the nights obscurity; but
the Sun in the morning making them again visible and agreeaable, does not
yet make their beauty and grace equal; and though its light be equally spread
over them all, yet does it make them bright and glittering with inequality, as
it finds them more or less capable of its brightness. And let the Sun shine
never so equally upon the Violet and the Rose, yet shall it never make that so
fair as this, or make a Marigold as gracious as a Lilie. Howbeit if the Sun
should shine clearly upon the Violet, and throw a mist only upon the Rose,
then without doubt the Violet would be more agreeable to the view the^ the
Rose. So, my THEO: if one with an equal Charity should suffer the death of
martyrdom, and another the hungar of a fast, who does not see that this fast
shall not be so much prized as this Martyrdom? No, THEO: for who dare be bold
to affirm, that Martyrdom is not more excellent in it self then fasting?
Which being more excellent in it self, and Charity not depriving it of its
natural excellency, but perfecting it, does consequently leave it in the
advantages which it naturally has over fasting. Surely none in his right
senses will equalize nuptial chastity to virginity, nor the good use of
riches, to the entire abnegation of the same. Or who will also dare to say;
that Charity accompaning these virtues does deprive them of their properties
and privileges; since it is not a virtue which does destroy and impouerish,
but does a better, qu^cken, and enrich all the good that she finds in the
souls, which she rules; yea so far is she from bereauing the other virtues
of their natural preeminences and dignities, that contrariwise, having this
quality to perfect the perfections which she meets withal, as it finds
greater perfections, it does great lier perfect them; like as suggar does so
season conserved fruits with its sweetness, that sweetening them all, it
leaves every of them different in relish and sweetness, as they have a diverse
taste in their own nature. Nor does it ever render the Peech, and the Nut, so
sweet and pleasing, as the Appricot and the Myrabolan plumme.

5. True it is notwithstanding, that if the Love be ardent, powerful, and
excellent in a heart, it will also more enrich and perfect all the virtuous
works which shall proceed from it. One may suffer death and fire for God
without Charity, as S. PAVLE presupposes and I declare elsewhere; by better
reason may one suffer them having a little charity. Now I say, THEO: that it
may come to pass, that a very little virtue may be of greater value in a
soul, where sacred Love does fervently reign, then Martyrdom it self, in a
soul where Love is languishing, feeble and slow. As the least virtues in our
B. Lady, in S. JOHN, in other great Saints, were of greater price before God,
then the greatest of diverse inferior Saints: as many little eiaculations of
Love in Seraphins, are more inflamed, then the greatest in the Angels of the
last orders; as the singing of a young Nightingale, is incomparably more
harmonious, then that of the finest Goldfinch.

6. PIRCIVS toward the end of his days painted only in little forms, and
trifeling things, as Barbar's and Cobler's shops, little Asses laden with
grass, and the like triuiall toys; which he did, as PLINY conjectures, to
lay his great renown, whence in the end he was called the Painter of small
wares; and yet the greatness of his art did so appear in his small works,
that they were sold at a higher rate, then others greatest peaces. Even so
THEO: the little simplicities, abiections and humiliations, in which the great
Saints took so great content to hide themselves, and put their hearts into
Harbor against vain glory, having been practiced with a great excellency of
the Art and ardour of heavenly Love, were found more grateful in the sight of
God, then the great and illustrious works of diverse others which were
performed with little Charity and devotion.

7. The sacred Spouse does wound her Spouse with one of her head hairs, of
which he makes so great account, that he compares them to the flocks of the
Goats of GALAAD; and has no sooner commended the eyes of his deuote Lover,
which are the most noble parts of the face, but presently he falls a praising
her head hair, which is the most frail, vile an abject. That we might learn
thereby, that in a soul taken with holy Love, actions that seem very poor
are highly agreeable to the Divine Majesty.

Of the excellent worth which holy Love bestows upon the actions which issue
from it self, and to those which proceed from other virtues. CHAPTER. VI.
1. But you will ask me what this worth is which holy Love bestows upon our
actions? o God THEO: I Verily I should not dare to speak it, if the Holy Ghost
himself had not declared it in express terms, by his Apostle S. Paul, who
says thus: That our tribulation which is presently momentarie and light,
works above measure exceedingly an eternal weight of glory in us. For the
love of JESUS let us ponder these words. Our tribulations which are so light
that they pass in a moment work in us the solid and stable weight of glory:
I beseech you behold these wonders! Tribulation produces glory; lightness
gives weight, moments work eternity. But what is it that can enrich these
fleeting moments, and light tribulations with so great worth? Scarlet and
purple, or fine crimson violet, is a precious, and royal cloth, yet not, by
reason of the woole, but the die. Christian works are of that worth, that
Heaven is given us for them: but THEO: it is not, in that they proceed from
us, and are the woole of our hearts, but because they are died in the blood of
the son of God, I mean, for so much, as our Savior does sanctify our
works by the merits of his blood. The twigge of a vine united and joined to
the stock, being not forth ^ruit in it is own virtue, but in virtue of the
stock. Now we are united by Charity unto our Redeemour, as members to their
head, and thence it is that our fruit and good works drawing their worth from
him, do merit life everlasting. AARONS rod was withered, and incapable of it
self to bring forth fruit; but as soon as the name of the high priest was
written upon it, in one night it brought out leaves, flowers, and fruit. We, in
our selves are withered bows, unprofitable, fruitless, not being sufficient
to think any thing of our selves as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of
God, who has made us meet and fit ministers of his will; and therefore as
soon as by holy Love, the name of our Savior the high Bishop of our souls,
is engraven li^^ our souls, we begin to bear delicious fruits for life
everlasting. And as seeds which of them selves do only bring forth unsavory
Melons, would bring forth sugared and musked ones, if they were steeped in
sugared or musk't water; so our souls which of themselves are not able to
project one, only good thought toward God's service, being watered with holy
love, by the holy Ghost, which does inhabit us, they produce sacred actions,
which do tend, and do carry us to immortal glory. Our works as proceeding
from our selves are but miserable reeds, yet these reeds become gold by
Charity, and with the same we survey the Heavenly Jerusalem, which is given
us by that measure: for as well to man as Angels, glory is distributed
according to Charity and her actions. So that men and Angels measure is one,
and the same; and God both has, and will reward every one according to his
works, as all the holy Scripture does teach us, which assigns us the felicity
and eternal joys of Heaven, in reward of the labors and good works which we
have practiced in earth.

2. A magnificent reward, and such an one as does savor of the Masters
greatness whom we serve, who in truth THEO: if so he had pleased, might most
justly exact our obedience and service without proposing unto us any prize or
reward at all, since we are his by a thousand most legitimate titles, and that
we can do nothing that is worth any thing but in him, by him, for him, and
dependently of him. Yet did not his Goodness so dispose, but in consideration
of his son our Savior, he would deal with us at a set price, receiving us
at wages, and engaging himself by his promise unto us, that our hire, yea an
eternal one, shall answer to our works. Nor is it, that our service can
either be necessary, or profitable unto him; for when we shall have
accomplished all his commands, we are yet to profess in a most humble truth,
or a most true humility, that indeed we are most unprofitable and unfruitful
servants to our Master, who by reason of his essential superabundancie of
riches, can have no profit by us, but converting all our works to our own
advantage and commodity, he makes us serve him with as little profit to him,
as much profit to our selves, who by so small labors, gain so great rewards.

3. He was not then bound to pay us for our service, if he had not passed his
promis for it: yet do not think, THEO: that he would so manifest his
goodness in this promise as to forget to glorify his wisdom, yea
contrariwise, he did most exactly observe the rules of equity, mixing
comeliness with liberality in an admirable manner: for though our works are
indeed very small, and in no wise, for their quantity, co^parable to Glory,
yet in regard of their quality they are very proportionable thereunto, by
reason of the Holy Ghost, who by Charity dwelling in our hearts, works them
in us, by us, and for us, in so exquisite a manner, that the same works that
are wholly ours, are more wholly his, since, as he does produce them in us, so we
again produce them in him; as he does them for us, so we do them for him; as
he operats them with us, so we cooperate them with him.

4. Now the holy Ghost does dwell in us, if we be lively members of JESUS
CHRIST, who hereupon said unto his Disciples. He that abids in me, and I in
him, he brings forth much fruit, and it is, THEO: because he that abids in him,
is made partaker of his divine Spirit, who is in the midst of man's heart, as a
living fountain of water springing up unto life everlasting: so the holy oil
which was poured upon our Savior, as upon the head of the Church militant and
triumphant, does spread it self over the society of the Blessed, (who as the
sacred beard of this heavenly Master, is continually fastened to his glorious
face) and does drope upon the company of the faithful, who, as clothes are
joined and united by love to the Divine Majesty; the one and the other troop
being composed of natural brethren; having hereby occasion to cry out; Behold
how good and how pleasant a thing it is, for brethren to dwell in one: as
ointment on the head, which ran down upon the beard, the beard of Aaron,
which ran down upon the hemme of his garment.

5. Our works therefore as a little corn of mustard, are in no sort comparable
in greatness, to the tree of glory which they produce, yet have they the
vigor and virtue to work it, for that they proceed from the holy ghost, who
by an admirable infusio^ of his grace into our hearts, makes our works his, and
yet withal leaves them our own, since we are members of one head, whereof he
is the Spirit; and ingraffed in a tree, whereof he is the sape: and whereas he
does in this sort act in our actions, and we after a certain manner do
operate or cooperate to his operation, he leaves us to our part, all the merit
ad profit of our services and good works, and we again leave him all the
honor and praise thereof; acknowledging that the beginning, the progress, and
the end of all the good we do, depends of his mercy, by which he has come
unto us; and has prevented us; he came into us, and assisted us, he came with
us, and conducted us; finishing what he had begun. But o God, THEO: how
merciful is this Bounty unto us in this division, we render him the glory of
our praises, alas, and he gives us the glory of his possession. In sum, by
these light and passing labors, we obtain goods permanent for all eternity.
Amen.

That perfect virtues are never one without the other. CHAPTER. VII.
1. The heart is said to be the first part of a man, which receives life by
the union of the soul, and the eye the last; as contrariwise, in a natural
death, the eye begins first to die, the heart the last. Now when the heart
begins to live before the other parts be animated, life is feeble, tender, and
imperfect: but still as it gets further possession in the other parts of the
body, life is more vigorous in each part, but particularly in the heart; and
we see that life being interressed in any one of the members, it is weakened in
all the rest. If a man's foot or arm be agreeued, all the body is disseased,
stirred, troubled, and changed. If our stomach pain us, the eyes, voice, and
countenance are sensible of it. Such is the agreement amongst all the parts of
man, for the enjoying of this natural life.

2. All the virtues are not gotten in an instant, but one after another; as
reason, which is as the soul of our heart, rids it self now of one passion,
now of another to moderate and govern them: and ordinarily this life of our
soul, takes it is beginning in the heart of our passion, which is Love, and
branching it self over all the rest, it does even quicken the very
understanding by contemplation: as contrariwise, moral or spiritual death
makes its entry into the soul by the consideration (Death enters by the
windows, says the sacred Text) and its last effect is to distroy the good
Love, which once perishing, all our moral life is dead in us; so that though
me may indeed have some virtues separated from others, yet are they but at
most languishing, imperfect and weak virtues, since that reason which is the
life of our soul, is never satisfied or at ease in a soul, unless it occupy
and possess all the faculties and passions of the same; and being once
agreeued or hurt in any one of our passions, or affections all the rest loose
their force and vigor and strangly do pine away.

3. Mark, THEO: all the virtues are virtues, by the proportion or conformity
they have to reason: and an action cannot be named virtuous, if it proceed not
from the affection, which the heart bears to the decency and beauty of
reason. Now if the love of reason do possess and animate the mind, it will be
obedient to reason in all occurrences, and consequently will practice all the
virtues. If JACOB loved RACHEL, in respect that she was Laban's daughter, why
did he despise LIA, who was not only the daughter, but even the eldest
daughter of the said LABAN? But because he affected RACHEL, by reason of her
beauty, he could never equally love the poor LIA, though a fruitful and wise
maid, not being so fair in his eye. He that loves a virtue for the love of
the reason and decorum that shines in it, he will love them all, since he will
find the same motive in the^ all: and he will love each of them more or less,
as reason shall appear in them more or less resplende^t. He that loves
Liberality, and not Chastity, shows sufficiently that he loves not
liberality for the beauty of reason, for that is more radiant clear in
Chastity, and where the cause is more strong, the effects ought also to be the
like. It is therefore an evident sign, that that heart is not carried to
liberality by the motive, and in consideration of reason: whence it follows
that that Liberality which seemed to be a virtue, is but an appearance, since
it proceeds not from reason, which is the true motive of virtues, but from
some other stranger-motiue. It is sufficient for a child to be borne in
marriage, to bear the name, (in the eye of the world) Arms, and titles of his
mothers husband: but to have his blood and nature, he must not only be borne
in marriage, but of the marriage: Actions have the name, Arms, and
recognoiscence of virtue, because being borne of a heart endowed with reason,
we apprehend them to be reasonable; yet have they neither the substance nor
vigor of virtue, when they proceed from a strange and adulterate motive, not
from reason. It may happen then, that a man may have some virtues, and not all:
but they shall either be virtues newly springing and as yet tender, as flowers
in blossom, or else perishing and dying virtues, as faiding flowers: for in
Conclusion virtues cannot have their true grouth and integrity, unless they
be all together, as all Philosophy, and Divinity assures us: What Prudence I
pray you THEO: can an intemperate, unjust, and cousening knave have, since he
makes choice of vice and forsakes virtue? And how can one be just, without
being Prudent, constant and temperate: Justice being no other thing, but a
perpetual, strong and constant will, to render to every one his own, and the
science by which right is done, is called IVRISPRVDENTIA; and that to give each
one his own, we must lead a wise and modest life, and remove the disorders of
intemperance in us, thereby to render to our selves what belongs unto us? and
the word VERTVE, does it not signify a force and vigor properly belonging
unto the soul, even as we attribute such or such a virtue or propriety to
herbs, or precious stones?

4. But is not Prudence it self imprudent in an intemperate man? Force without
Prudence, Justice, and Temperance, is not force, but a madness: and Justice is
unjust in a gilefull man, who will not use it; in the intemperate man who
permits himself to be carried away with passion, and in the imprudent man who
is not able to discern between right and wrong. Justice is not Justice,
unless it be strong, Prudent, and temperate: nor is Prudence Prudence, unless
it be temperate, just, and strong: Nor Force, Force, unless it be just,
prudent, and temperate: neither is Temperance, Temperance, unless it be
prudent, strong and just. In fine virtue, is not perfect virtue, unless it be
accompanied with all the rest.

5. It is true, THEOT: that one cannot exercise all the virtues at once;
because the occasions are not all presented at once, yea there are virtue, which
some of God's greatest Saints had never occasion to practice. For S. PAVLE the
first Heremit, for example, what occasion could he have to exercise the
pardoning of injuries, Affability, Magnificence, and mildness? Howbeit such
souls, stand so affected to the rightnesse of reason, that though they have
not all the virtues in effect, yet have they them all, in affection, being
ready, and prepared, to follow and obey reason in all occurrences, without
exception or reserve.

6. There are certain inclinations which are esteemed virtues, and are not so,
but favors and advantages of nature. How many are there, who naturally are
sober, simple, mild, still, yea even chaste, and honest? Now all these seem to
be virtues, and yet have no more the merit thereof, the^ bad inclinations are
worthy of blame, till we have given free and voluntary consent to such
natural humors. It is no virtue to be a man of little meat by nature, yet to
abstain by choice, is a virtue. It is no virtue to be silent by nature, though
it be a virtue to bridle ones tongue by reason. Many there are, who apprehend
that they have the virtue, while they cxercise not the contrary vice: One that
was never assaulted, may truly vaunt that he never was a runne-away, yet has
he no ground to boast his valor. He that was never afflicted may well praise
himself for not being impatient, yet can he not brag of his Patience: So
many think they have virtues who have only good inclinations: and whereas
those inclinations are one without another, they think that virtues may be so
too.

7. Certes S. AUGUSTINE shows in an Epistle which he wrote to S. HI^ROME, that
we may have some sorts of virtues, without having all the rest, and that yet we
can have no perfect ones but we must have them all. But as for vice, we may
have some, without having other some, yea it is even impossible to have them
all together; so that it follows not that he that has lost all the virtues
has by consequence all the vices, especially since almost every virtue has
two opposite vices, which are not only contrary to the virtue, but even to
one another. He that by rashness lost his valor, cannot at the same time be
taxed of cowardice: nor can he, who lost liberality by his prodigality, be at
the same time condemned of nigardlinesse. CATILINE, says S. AUGUSTINE, is
sober, vigilant, patient in suffering cold, heat, and famine: so that both he
and his Accomplices deemed that he was marvelous constant: but this constancy
wanted prudence, since it made choice of bad, in lieu of good; it was not
temperate: for it gave bridle to villainous beastlinesses; it was not just since
he made a Conspiracy against his own Country, it was not therefore a
constancy but an obstinacy, which to deceive fools, bore the name of
constancy.

How Charity contains all virtues. CHAPTER. VIII.
1. THere flowed a River out of the place of delights to water the terrestiall
Paridice, and thence divided it self into four heads. Now, man is in a place
of delights, where God makes the flood of reason and natural light stream
out, to water all the Paradise of our heart; and this flood brancheth it self
out into four heads, that is, it makes four streams, according to the four
regions of the soul; for 1. natural reason does stream out prudence upon our
practical UNDERSTANDING, (as it is called, whose office it is to discern what
actions we are to do, or to fly) which does incline our mind wisely to judge
of the evil, that we are to avoid and eschew; and the good we are to pursue
and do. 2. it makes Justice ru^ne over our will, which is a continual and
firm will to render to every one his own. 3. over the Concupiscible Appetite,
it makes Temperance flow, which moderats the passion it lights on therein. 4.
it spreds Force over the Irascible Appetite, which does bridle, and maniage all
the motions of Anger. Now these four rivers thus divided, do afterward
divide themselves into diverse others, that all humane actions might be duly
fashioned to natural honesty and felicity. But besides all this, God, to
enriche Christians with a special favor, he makes a supernatural fountain
rise up upon the very top of the superior part of the spirit, which is called
Grace, and does indeed comprehend faith and Hope; yet it consists of Charity,
which does purify the soul from sin, and then does adorn and embellish her
with a most delightful beauty; and finally does spreed her waters over all
the faculties and operations thereof, to endow the understanding with a
celestial Prudence, the will with a holy Justice, the concupiscible Appetite
with a sacred Tempera^ce, and the Irascible Appetite with a denote Force, to
the end that man's whole heart might tend to the supernatural honesty and
felicity, which is a union with God. And if these four streams or floods of
Charity, do meet with any one of the four natural virtues in the soul,
they bring it to their obedience, mixing themselves therewith to perfect it; as
perfumed water does perfect natural water being mingled together. But if holy
Charity poured out in this manner, meet with none of the natural virtues in
the soul, she alone does all their operations, as occasion requires.

2. Thus heavenly Love finding sundry virtues in S. PAVLE, S. AMBROSE, S.
DENIS, S. PACOMIVS, poured upon them a delightful light, reducing them all to
his service. But the Divine Love, finding no virtue at all, in S. MARIE
MAGDALENE, S. MARIE EGIPTIACA, the good Thief, and a thousand the like
penitents who had been great offenders, did the office and work of all the
virtues, beco^ming patient, sweet, humble, and liberal in them. We sow great
variety of seeds in Gardens and cover them with earth, as burying them; till
the Sun prevailing makes them rise again, and as one would say, does
resuscitate them, in the production of their leaves, and fruit, which have new
seed, every one in his kind; so that one only heavenly heat, does cause all
the diversity of productions, by means of the seed which it finds hid in the
bosom of the erath. Verily, my THEO: God has sown in our hearts the seeds of
all virtues, which are yet so covered with our imperfections and weakness,
that they did not at all, or at least scarce appear, till the vital heat of
holy Love, came to quicken and resuscitate them, by them producing the actions
of all virtues. So that as Manna contained in it self the sundry tastes of
all meats, and left a relish thereof in the Israelits mouths; even in like
manner heavenly Love comprehends in it self the diverse perfections of all the
virtues in so excellent, and high a sort, that it produces all the actions, in
time and place, according to their occurrences. IOSVE did valliantly defeat
God's enemies, by his good command over the armies which were put in his hands.
But Samson defeated them yet more gloriously, who by his own hand slew
thousands with the iawe bone of an ass. IOSVE by his command and good order,
making use of the valor of his troops, wrought wonders: But SAMSON by his
own force alone, wrought wonders. IOSVE had the strength of many soldiers
under him but SAMSON had it in him, and could alone perform as much, as IOSVE
together with many soldiers. Holy love is excellent in both these ways: for
finding some virtues in a soul (and ordinarily it finds at least Faith, Hope,
and Penance) it quickens, commands, and happily imployes them in God's service:
and for the rest of the virtues which it finds not, it performs their work
all alone, having more strength alone, then they have all together.

3. The great Apostle does not only say, that Charity gives us Patience,
Benignity, Constancy, Simplicity: but he says, that Charity it self is
patient, benign, constant: And it is the property of the supreme virtues
amongst men and Angels, not only to direct the inferior virtues in their
operations, but also to be able themseues to do what they command others. The
Bishope gives the charge of all the Ecclesiastical functions; to open the
Church, to read, exercise, preach, baptize, sacrifice, communicate and absolve
therein; and he himself also ca^ do, and does all this, having in himself an
eminent virtue which comprehends all the inferior virtues. So S. THOMAS, upon
that which S. PAVLE assures us, to wit, that Charity is patient, benign,
strong; Charity says he, does do and accomplish the works of all the
virtues. And S. AMBROSE writing to DEMETRIAS, calls Patience and the rest of the
virtues, members of Charity. And the glorious S. AUGUSTINE says, that the
Love of GOD comprehends all the virtues, and does all their operations in us:
hear his words, That we say that virtue is divided into four, (he means the
four Cardinal virtues) we say it, in my opinion, by reason of the diverse
affections which proceed from Love. So that I would make no doubt to define
those four virtues thus: Temperance is a Love which gives it self entirely
unto God: Fortitude is a Love which does willingly support all things for Gods
sake: Justice is a Force which serves God only, and therefore disposes justly
of all that belong unto man: Prudence is a Love that makes choice of things
proper to unite it self unto God, and reject such things as are contrary to
it. He therefore that has Charity, has his soul invested with a fair
wedding garment, which like unto that of JOSEPH, is wrought with the variety
of virtues: or rather it has a perfection which contains the virtue of all
the perfections, and the perfection of all the virtues: whence Charity is
patient and benign: She is not envious, but bashful; she commits no leuities,
but is prudent; she is not puffed up with pride, but is humble; she is not
ambitious or disdainefull, but amiable and affable; she is not eager in
exacting that which belongs unto her, but free and condescending. She is not
irritated but is peaceable. She thinks of no evil, but is gentle; She does
not rejoice in evil, but in the truth, and with the truth; she suffers all,
she easily believes all the good which one can tell her, without all
headiness, contention, or diffidence: She has a firm hope of her neighbors
good without ever distrusting to procure his salvation, she sustaines every
thing, expecting in peace that which is promised her: And in conclusion,
Charity is that pure inflamed gold, which our Savior cou^selled the Bishope
of Laodicea to buy, containing the price of all things, and which ca^ do, and
does all things.

That virtues have their worth from sacred Love. CHAPTER IX.
1. Charity is then the band of perfection, since in it all the perfections of
the soul are assembled and contained, and without it, one cannot only not
have the full assembly of virtues, but even not so much as the perfection of
any one of them. If the cemente and mortar which should tie together the stones
in the wall be awanting, the whole edifice goes to wrake. Were it not for the
nerves, muskles, and sinews, the whole body would be entirely defeated: and
without Charity the virtues can never stand together. Our Savior does still
tie the performance of the commandments to Charity. He that has my
Commandments, says he, and does observe them, he it is that loves me: He
that loves me not, keeps not my C^mmandements. He that loves me, will observe
my words: which, the disciple whom our Savior loved repeating; he that
observes the Commandments of God, says he, the Charity of God is perfect in
him; and this is the Charity of God, that we keep his Commandments. And he
that had all virtues, would keep all the Commandments: for he that loved the
virtue of Religion, would keep the three first Commandments: He that had
Piety, would observe the fourth: He that had the virtue of mildness and
gentleness, would observe the fifth: by the virtue of Charity, one would
observe the sixth: by Liberality, one would avoid the breach of the seventh:
by Truth, one would effect the eight: by frugalitie and purity, one would
observe the ninth, and tenth. And if without Charity we cannot keep the
Commandments, much less can we without her, have all the other virtues.

2. True it is, one may have some one virtue, and live some small time without
offending God, though he want Charity: But even as we sometimes see trees
rooted out of the ground, grow as it were, yet fadingly, and for a short time;
so a heart separated from Charity, may indeed bring forth some acts of
virtue, but that cannot continue for any long time.

3. All virtues separated from Charity are imperfect, since they are not able
without it, to arrive at their end, which is Beatitude. Bees in their birth,
are little groubs and worms, without feet wings, form or fashion: in tract
of time they change and become little flies; but afterward waxing strong, and
being come to their groth, then they are said to be perfect and accomplished
Bees, as being furnished of all necessaries to fly abroad and make honey.
Virtues have their beginnings, their progress, and their perfection; and I do
not deny but without Charity, they may both be borne, and grow, but that
they should come to their perfection and bear the name of formed, fashioned,
and accomplished virtues, is a work of Charity, which gives them the force to
fly home to God, to gather up his mercy, the honey of true merit, and the
sanctification of the heart wherein they are found.

4. Charity is amongst the virtues, as the Su^ne amongst the Stars, she
distributs to them all their luster and Beauty. Faith, Hope, Fear and Penance
do ordinarily come before as Herbingers to take up her Lodging in the soul;
and upon her arrival they with all the train of virtues, do obey and wait
upon her; and she with her presence does animate, adorn and quicken them all.

5. The other virtues, can mutually aid and excite one another in their
labors and exercises: for who sees not, that Chastity does call upon and
stir up sobriety; and that obedience does move us to liberality, Prayer,
and humility? Now by this communication which they have amongst themselves,
they participate one of another perfections: for Chastity kept by obedience,
has a double dignity, its own, and that of obedience; yea it has even more
of the dignity of obedience then of its own: for, as ARISTOTLE says, he
that robs, to the end he may commite fornication, is more a Fornicatour then
a Thief, because fornication was his affection's only aim, he made use of
stelth only as of a passage thither: even so he that keeps his chastity
through obedience is more obedient then Chaste, since he makes Chastity serve
obedience: howbeit from the mixture of Chastity and obedience a perfect and
accomplished virtue cannot issue, being they both want their last perfection
which is Charity; so that if it were possible, that all the virtues were put
in one man, and that he wanted only Charity, this assembly of virtues,
should indeed be a most perfect, and complete body in all its members, as
Adams was, when God with his omnipote^t hand had formed him of the slime of the
earth: yet should it be a body, wanting motion, life and grace, till God
breathed into it the breath of life, that is, holy Charity, without which
nothing does profit us.

6. For the rest, the perfection of divine Love is so sovereign that it does
perfect all the virtues, and can receive no perfection from them; no not by
obedience it self which yet is that, which is most able to give perfection to
the rest: For although love be commanded, and that in loving we exercise
obedience, yet so, that love draws not its perfection from obedience, but from
the goodness of that which it loves, love not being therefore excellent
because it is obedient, but because it loves an excellent Goop. Truly in
loving we obey, as also in obeying we love; but that this obedience is so
extremely lovely, is because it tends to the excellency of Love, nor does its
excellency consist in this, that in loving we obey, but in this, that in
obeying we love. So that even as God is as well the last end of all that is
good, as the first beginning: eue^ so Love that is the source of every good
affection, is likewise the last end and perfection thereof.

A digression upon the imperfection of the Pagans virtues. CHAPTER. X.
1. THe ancient SAGES of the world, made of old, glorious discourses in the
honor of moral virtues, yea even in the behalf of Religion; but that which
Plutarke observed in the Stoics, is yet more proper for the rest of the
Pagans. We see ships, quoth he, which bear famous inscriptions. Some are
called VICTORY, others THE VALOVROVS, others THE SVNNE, yet are they not for
all that, exempt from their subjection to the winds and waves: So the Stoics
bragged that they were exempt from passions; that they were without Fear,
Grief or Anger; being people immovable, and unvariable, yet are they in
effect subject to troubles, disquiets, boisterousnesse and other impertinences.

2. I beseech you for Gods love THEO: what virtues could those people have, who
voluntarily, and of set purpose overthrew all the laws of Religion. SENECA
wrote a book against Superstition, wherein he reprehe^ds the Paga^ impiety
with a great deal of liberty: But this liberty says S. AUGUSTINE was found
in his writings, not in his life, since he advised that in affection one should
reject superstition, yet practice it in action, for mark his words: Which
superstitions the Sage shall observe, as commanded by the law, not as grateful
to the Gods. How could they be virtuous, who, as S. AUGUSTINE relates, were of
opinion that the wiseman was to kill himself, when he could not, or ought not
longer to endure the calamities of this life, and yet would not profess that
calamities were miserable, nor miseries full of calamities, but maintained that
the wiseman was continually happy, and his life blessed? o what a blessed
life, says S. AUGUSTINE, which to fly, we fly to death? If it be blessed,
why do you not remain in it? So that Captain of the Stoics (who was so
greartly extolled amongst those cruel and profane people, for having slain
himself in Vtica, to avoid a calamity which he reputed unworthy of his life)
performed it with so little true virtue, that, as S. AUGUSTINE says, he did
not testify that he had a courage that would eschew dishonor, but a weak
soul, which had not the heart, to expect adversity. For if he reputed it a
dishonorable thing to live under Caesar's command, why had he commanded to hope
in Caesar's mercy? why did he not advise his son to die with him, if death
were better and more honorable then life? He killed himself then, because he
either enuyed Caesar the glory to have power to pardon him, or for that he
apprehended it a disgrace to live under a Conqueror that he hated: wherein he
may be commended for a stout and big heart, yet not for a wise, virtuous and
stayed Spirit. The cruelty which is exercised out of choler in cold blood, is
the most cruel of all: it is the like in despair; for the most slow,
deliberate, and resolute, is the lest excusable, and the most desperate. And as
for LVCRECIA (that we may not forget the valor of the less vallourous Sex)
Either she was chaste, when TARQVINIVS did force and violate her, or she was
not: If LVCRECIA was not chaste, why is the chastity of Lucrecia commended? If
Lucrecia were chaste and unspotted in that occurrence, was it not an unworthy
fact in Lucrecia, to murder the innocent Lucrecia? If she were adulterious,
why so much extolled? If honest, why was she slain I But she dreaded dishonor
and reproach from such as might have thought that the dishonor which she
suffered by force, while yet she lived had been willingly suffered, if she had
after daigned to live. She was afraied the world would judge that she complied
with the sin, if that which was villanously committed against her, had been
patiently supported by her. And must we then to avoid shame and reproach, which
depends upon the opinion of men, oppress the innocent, and kill the just? must
we maintain honor at virtues ^ost and reputation, with hazard of injustice?
Such were the virtues of the most virtuous Pagans toward God, and toward
themselves.

3. Touching the virtues that belong to our neighbors, even by their laws
they trod them shamefully under foot, yea the principal of them, Piety: For
Aristotle the greatest wit amongst them, does pronounce this most horrible and
violent sentence. Touching the exposing, that is, the abandoning of children,
or their education, let this be the law: that nothing is to be kept, that is
deprived of any member; touching other children, if they be prohibited by the
laws and customs of the City to forsake their children, and that the numbers
of any ones children do so increase on him, that he has more by half then
his means will keep, he is to prevent, and to procure an aborsement. Seneca,
that so renowned a wise man, we kill monsters, says he, and such of our
children, as are manke, weaklings, imperfect, or monstrous we reject and
abandone. So that it is not without cause, that Tertullian does reproach the
Romans with the exposing of their children to the mercy of the waters, to the
cold, to famine, to dogs, and this also not by the extreamitie of want: for as
he says, the Presidents and Magistrates themselves practiced this unnatural
cruelty. o good God, THEO: what kind of virtuous men were these? And what was
their wisdom, who taught a wisdom so cruel and brutall? Alas, said the
great Apostle, thinking themselves wise, they became senseless, and their
foolish heart has been darkened, and delivered up into a reprobate sense. Ah
what a horror it is, that so great a Philosopher should advise aborsement! It
is a forerunning of manslaughter, says Tertullian, to hinder a child
conceived to be borne, and S. Ambrose reprehending the Pagans for this
barbarousnesse, they deprive by this means, says he, their children of life,
before they are yet possessed of it.

4. And if the Paga^s have at any time practiced any virtues, it was most
ordinarily, in regard of wordly glory, and consequently they had only virtue
in action, but neither the motives nor inte^tion thereof; nor is virtue true
virtue, unless it have a right intention. The Pagans force was built upon
humane avarice, says the Council of Aur: but the strength of Christians is
established by heavenly charity: The Pagans virtues, says S. AUGUSTINE, were
not true, but only resembled Truth; as not having been practiced to their true
end, but for pretentions that vanish away. FABRITIVS shall be less punished
then CATAZINE, not that he was good, but because this was worse; Not that
FABRITIVS had any true virtues, but because he was not so far distant from
them. So that the Pagans virtues at the day of Judgment will be a kind of
defense to them, not that they can be saved thereby, but that they may be less
damned: one vice was blotted out by another amongst the Pagans, one vice making
place to another, without leaving any place at all to virtue. And out of vain
glory only, they repressed avarice, and many other vices, yea sometimes
through vanity, they despised vanity; whereupon one of them who seemed to be
least vain, trampled with his feet Plato's finely made bed* what do thou
DIOGENES, said PLATO unto him? I tread under foot Plato's pride, quoth he; It
is true, replied PLATO, thou treadst upon it, but with another pride. Whether
SENECA was vain, may be gathered out of his last words: for the end crowns
the work, and the last hour judges all: o what vanity! being at the point
of death, he said unto his friends, that be could not till now sufficiently
thank them, a^^ that therefore he would leave them a Legacy, part of that
which was most gracious and excellent in him, and which, if they carefully
kept, they should receive great honor by it; adding, that this magnificent
Legacy, was no other thing, then the picture of his life. Do not you mark,
THEO: how his last breathing stink of vanity? It was not the love of
honesty, but the love of honor which pricked forward those wise worldlings to
the exercise of virtue, and indeed their virtues were as different from true
virtues, as the honor of honesty, and the love of merit is different from
the Love of reward. Those that serve their Prince for their own interest, do
ordinarily perform their duty with more solicitude, ardour, and feeling; but
such as serve out of Love, do it more nobly, generously, and therefore more
worthily.

4. Carbunckles and Rubies are called by the grecians by two contrary names,
to wit (...), and (...), that is, of fire and without fire, or else, inflamed,
and without flame. They call them fiery, of fire, burning coals, or Carbunkles,
because in light and splendor they resemble fire; but they are called without
flame, or if we may so say, vnflamie, because their light is not only no
ways hot, but they are not even capable of heat, there being ^o fire that
can heat them. So did our old F^rthers term the Pagan virtues, VERTVES, and
^OT-VERTVES both together; Virtues, because they carried the luster and
appearance of virtues, NOT-VERTVES, because they wanted not only the vital
^eate of the Love of God, which alone could perfect them, but they were not
even capable of it, because they were in subjects wanting faith; there being in
those times, says S. AUGUSTINE, two Romans famous for their virtue, CAESAR
and CATO; Cato's virtue came much nearer to the true virtue, then Caesar's did:
and having said in some passage, that the Philosophers who were destitute of
true piety, had yet shined in the light of virtue, he does vnsaie it in the
first book of his Retractations, esteeming that, too great a praise to be
given to imperfect virtues, as those of the Pagans were: which in truth, are
like unto shining night worms, that shine only by night, and the day being
come, loose their light. For even so those Pagan virtues are only virtues in
comparison of vice, but in respect of true Christian virtues, do not at all
deserve the name of virtue.

6. Yet whereas they contain some good, they may be compared to green Aples;
for both their color, and that substance which is left them, is as good as
that of entire virtues, but the worm of of vanity which is in the midst of
them, spoils all; and therefore he that would make profit of them, must culle
out the good from the bad. I will easily grant, THEO: that CATO had a resolute
courage, and that this resolutnesse was laudable in it self, but he that would
make profit of his example, it must be in a just and laudable subject, not by
slaughtering himself but by suffering death, when true virtue shall exact it:
not by the vanity of glory, but by the glory of verity: as it happened to
our Martyrs, who with invincible courages, did so many miracles of constancy
and resolution, that those CATO'S, HORACES, SENECA'S, and LVCRECE'S, are in
comparison, worthy of no consideration, witness those LAVRENCES, VINCENTS,
VITALISES, ERASMVSSES, EVGENIASE'S, SEBASTIANS, AGATHAS, AGNESES, CATHARINS,
PERPETVAS, FELICITES, SYMPHOROSAS, NATALESES, and a thousand thousand others,
who make me daily admire the Admirours of Pagan virtues: not so much in that
they do inordinatly admire the imperfect virtues of the Pagans, as for that
they do not admire the most perfect virtues of the Christians: virtues a
thousand times worthy of admiration, and they alone are worthy of imitation.

How human actions are without worth, being without Gods Love. CHAPTER. XI.
1. THe great friend of God ABRAHAM, had only by SARA his principal wife, his
most only dear Isaac, who also, was his only universal Heir: and though he
had Ismael by AGAR, and diverse other children by CETVRA his servants and less
principal wives, yet bestowed he upon them certain presents only and
Legacies, whereby to put them off and disinherite them, because not being
allowed off by his chief wife, they could not be his successors: Now they
were not allowed, because, as for the children of CETVRA, they were all borne
after SARA'S decease; and concerning Ismael, though his mother Agar, conceived
him by the permission of SARA her Mistress, howbeit, perceiving her self with
child, she despised her, and brought not forth this child upon her knees, as
Bala brought forth hers upon Rachel's. THEO: the only children, that is, the
only acts of holy Charity are God's Heirs, Coheires with JESUS CHRIST; and
the children, or the acts of which the other virtues conceive and bring forth
upon her knees, by her command, or at least, under the wings and favor of her
presence: But when moral virtues, yea even supernatural virtues, do produce
their actions in the absence of Charity, as they do amongst Schismatikes,
according to S. AVGVSTINS relation, and sometimes amongst evil Catholics,
they are of no value toward the purchase of Paradise, no not even Alms
deeds, though we should distribute therein all out Substance to the poor: Nor
yet Martyrdom, though we should deliver our body to the fire to be burnt. No
THE: without Charity, says the Apostle, all this were worth nothing, as we
will more amply show hereafter. Now again, the will does sometimes prove
disobedient to her mistress which is Charity in the production of moral
virtues, to wit, when as by pride, vanity, temporal respects, or by some
other bad motive, the virtues are turned out of their own nature: and then
those actions are rejected, and banished, out of ABRAHAM'S house, and from
Sara's company, that is, they are deprived of the fruit and privileges of
Charity, and consequently are left without worth or merit. For those actions,
strayned in that sort, with bad intentions, are indeed more vicious then
virtuous, having only virtue on their outside, their interior belonging to
vice, which serves them for a motive, witness the fastings, offerings, and
other actions of the Pharisie.

2. But furthermore, as the Israelits lived peaceably in Egypt, during Joseph's
life time and the life time of LEVI, and presently after the death of LEVI,
were tyrannically reduced into servitude, whence the Jews took their
Proverb. ONE OF THE BROTHERS BEING DECEASED, THE OTHERS ARE OPPRES'T, as it is
registered in the Hebrews great Chronology, which was published by the learned
Archbishop of Aix Gilbert Genebrard whom to his honor I name with consolation,
whose scholar I was, though an unprofitable one while he was the king's reader
at Paris, and explicated the Canticle of Canticles; so the merits and and
fruits as well of moral as Christian virtues, do in a most sweet
tranquillity subsist in the soul, while sacred Charity lives and reigns
therein; but as soon as heavenly love dies, all the merits and fruits of other
virtues do also die upon it, and these are they which the Divines call DEAD
WORKS, for that having been borne alive under charities protection, and as
another Ismael, in Abraham's house, they do afterward loose life and the right
of inheritance, by the disobedience and rebellion which proceeded from their
mother, the will

3. O God THEO: what a misfortune it is, if the just man forsake his Justice,
and turn to iniquity, his works of justice shall be no longer held in
memory; he shall die in this sin, says our Lord in Ezechiel; so that
mortal sin, does ouerthowe all the merit of virtues: for touching those
which are practiced while sin reigns in the soul, they are borne so dead
that they are unprofitable for ever to the pretentio^ of life everlasting; and
as for those that were practiced before the sin was committed, that is while
sacred love lived in the soul, their value and merit does perish and die just
upon its arrival, not being able to conserve life after Charities death who
gave them life. The Lake which profane authors do commonly call Asphalitus,
and sacred authors MARE-MORTVVM, has so heavy a curse put upon it, that
nothing that is put into it can live; when the fish of Iordaine do come near
it, they die, unless they speedily return back against the stream: The
trees upon the brims of it, produce nothing alive and though their fruit be in
appearance, and autward show like to the fruits of other countries; howbeit when
on pulls them, they are found to be skin and core, being full of ashes which
fly away in the wind. These be the marks of infamous sins, for the
punishment whereof, this Country which was peopled with three populous Cities
was of old converted into a pit of filth and corruption; and nothing was deamed
better to represent the mischeife of sin then this abominable Lack which had
its origin from the most execrable disorder that could be committed by man's
body. Sin therefore, as a dead and mortal sea, kills all that comes near
it; nothing is found living in the soul which it possesses, nor all about it.
O God, THEO: nothing: for sin is not only a dead work, but is withal so
infections and venomous, that the most excellent virtues of the sinful soul
do produce no living action; And though the actions of sinners have oftentimes
a great resemblance with those of the just man, yet are they indeed barks
only stuffed with wind and dust, when they are truly looked into, and are
rewarded of God only by some present benefits, which are bestowed upon the^ as
upon the chambermaids children, yet are they such barks, as neither are, nor
can be so tasted and relished by the Divine Justice, as to be rewarded with an
eternal crown: they die upon the trees, and cannot be conserved in the hand
of God, being void of true worth, as it is said in the Apocalypse to the
Bishop of Sardis, who was reputed a living tree, by reason of diverse virtues
which he practiced, and yet dead he was, for that being in sin, his virtues
were not true living fruits, but dead barks; glorious to the eyes, but no
ways sauorie to the palate, so that we may all cast out this true voice
following the holy Apostle; without Charity, I am nothing, nothing does profit
me: and with S. AUGUSTINE say; Give Charity to a heart, and all does profit,
deprive it of Charity, and nothing does profit it, I mean toward life
everlasting: for as we have said, the virtuous works of sinners are profitable
to our temporal life. But my dear THEO: what does it profit a man to gain
all the world temporally, if he loose his soul eternally.

How holy Love returning into the soul, does revive all the works which sin
had slain. CHAPTER. XII.
1. THe works then of a sinner, while he is deprived of Charity, are not
profitable to eternal life; and thereupon they are called dead works: whereas
contrariwise the good works of the just man, are said to be living: for that
the Divine Love does animate and quicken them with its dignity. And if
afterward they loose their life and worth by sin, they are held to be works
that are deaded, extinguished or mortified only, but not quite dead,
especially in the Elect: for as our Savior, speaking of the little Tabitha
Iarus his daughter, said she was not dead, but slept only, because she
continued dead so small a time till she was resuscitated, that it seemed rather
to be a sleep then a true death. So the works of the just man, but especially
of the elect, who by the commission of sin dies, are not called dead works,
but only deaded, mortified, stounded or put into a trance, because, upon the
next return of holy Love, they either ought, or at least may revive and
return to life again. Sinn's return, depriues the soul and all her works
of life; the return of Grace does restore life to the soul and all her
actions. A sharp winter does dead all the plants of the fields, so that if it
continued still, they would still continue in the state of death. Sin, the
sad and daunting winter of the soul, does quayle all the holy works that it
finds there in, and if it did always continue, never would any thing recover
either life or vigor. But as in the return of the pleasant spring, not only
the seeds which are sowe^, by the help of this delightful and fruitful
season, do gratefully bud and blossom, every one in his kind, but even the
old plants, which the rigor of the winter past had bitten, withered and
deaded, wax green, and do resume new force, virtue and life. So sin being
blotted out, and the grace of Divine Love returning into the soul, the new
affections, which this spring of grace does bring, do blossom, and bring
forth ample merits and blessings; but the works that are dried up, and
withered by the rigor of the winter of sins over passed, as being delivered
from their mortal enemy, resume their force, wax strong, and as risen from
the dead, they flourish a new, and store up merits for the eternal life. Such
is the omnipotency of Divine Love, or the Love of the Divine omnipotency. If
the impious turn away himself from his impiety and shall do judgment and
justice, he shall viuificate his soul; convert and do penance for all your
iniquities, and iniquity shall not be a ruin unto you, says our Lord. And
what is that, iniquity shall not be a ruin unto you, but that the ruin which
it made shall be repaired? So besides a thousand courtisies that the prodigal
son received at his Fathers hands, he was reestablished, even with advantage
in all his ornaments, graces, favors, and dignities which he had lost. And JOB
that innocent picture of a penitent sinner did in the end receive the double of
that which he had. Verily it is the Council of Tre^ts desire, that we should
encourage the penitents that are returned into favor with God almighty, in
these words of the Apostle. Abound in every good work, knowing that your
labor is not unprofitable in our Lord; for God is not unjust to forget your
work, and the Love which you have showen in his name. God then does not forget
the works of those, who by sin having lost love, recouers it again by
penance. Now God is said to forget our works, when they loose their merit
and sanctity by sin committed, and he remembers them, when they return to
life and vigor by the presence of holy Love. So that amongst the faithful, it
is not necessary to the reward of their good works, (as well by the increase
of grace and future glory, as by the enjoying of life everlasting in effect)
that one fall not into sin; but it is sufficient according to the Council of
Trent, that one depart this life in God's grace and charity.

2. God has promised an eternal reward to the works of a just man, but if the
just man turn from his justice by sin, God will no longer remember the
justice and good works which he has done. But yet if this poor fallen man,
do afterward rise and return into Gods grace by penance, God will think no
more of his sin, and not remembering his sin, he will turn mindful of his
former good works, and of the reward which he promised them, since sin, which
alone had blotted them out of the divine memory is wholly raised out,
abolished, annihilated: so that in that case God's Justice does oblige his
Mercy, or rather his Mercy, does enforce his Justice, to look a new upon their
precedent good works, eue^ as though he had never forgotten the^, otherwise the
sacred penitent had not dared to say to his Master; render unto me the joy
of thy salvation, and confirm me with thy principal spirit; for as you see he
does not only require a newness of heart and spirit, but he pretends, to have
the joy rendered unto him, which sin had bereft him off. Now this joy is no
other thing then the wine of heavenly Love which does rejoice man's heart.

3. It fares not alike with sin in this behalf, as with the works of
charity: for the just man's works are not blotted out, abolished, or
annihilated by the commission of sin, but are only forgotten: marry the
sins of the wicked are not only forgotten but are even raised out, clenged
abolished, and annihilated by holy penance: whereupon the sin that is
committed by the just man, does not cause the sin that was once pardoned, to
live again, because it was entirely annihilated: But when love returns into
the penitent soul, it makes her former good works return to life again,
because they were not abolished but only forgotten. And this oblivion of the
works of the just man who has forsaken his justice and charity, consists in
this, that it made them unprofitable, while sin made him incapable of eternal
life, which is their fruit; and therefore as soon as by the return of
Charity, he is rancked again with the childen of God, and thereby made
capable of immortal glory, God recals to mind his ancient good works, and
they become again fruitful. It were not reasonable that sin should have as
much power over Charity, as Charity has against sin: For sin is an issue
of our infirmity, Charity proceeds from God's power. If sin abound in
malice to ruinate us, Grace does superabound to work the reparation: and God's
Mercy, by which he blots out sin, does raise it self continually, and
becomes gloriously triumphant over the rigor of Judgment whereby God had
forgotten the good works which went before sin. In this sort, in the
corporal cures which our Savior did by miracle, he did not only restore
health, but withal added new benedictions, making the cure far pass the
desease, so bountiful is he to man.

4. I never saw, red, nor heard that waspes, oxebees, flies, and such other
little hurtful creatures, being once dead, did revive and return to life,
again; but that the virtuous and harmless honey Be can rise again, it is a
common report, and I have often red it. It is said, (these are Plinies words)
that if one keep the dead bodies of the drowned bees all the winter with in
the house, and expose the^ to the sun beams the spring following, covered
over with ashes of the figue tree they will rise again, and be as good as
ever. That iniquities and sinful works ca^ return to life, after they have
once been drowned and abolished by penance, truly my THEO: never, for as much
as I know, did the Scripture, or any Divine say it; yea the contrary is
authorized by holy writ, and by the common consent of Doctors. But that good
works, which, like unto the sweet Be, do compound the honey of merit, being
drowned in sin, can afterward regaine life, when covered with the ashes of
penance, they are exposed to the sun of grace and Charity, is held and
cleartly taught by all the Divines: nor are we to doubt but that they become
profitable and fruitful, as before. When Nabuzardan destroyed Jerusalem, and
Israel was led in captivity, the holy fire of the Altar was hid in a well,
where it was turned into mud, but this mud, being drawn out of the well and
exposed to the sun, after their return from Captivity, the dead fire
kindled again, and the mud was turned into flames. When the just man is made
slave to sin, all the works of his life, are miserably forgotten, and turned
into dirt, but being delivered out of Captivity, to wit, when by penance, he
returns into grace with heavenly Charity, his former good works are drawn
out of the well of oblivion, and touched with the raves of heavenly mercy, they
return to life, and are converted into as clear flames as ever, to be
sacrificed on the sacred Altar of the divine approbation, and to be restored
again to their wonted dignity, price, and value.

How we are to reduce all the exercise of all the virtues, and all our actions
to holy Love. CHAPTER. III.
1. BRute beasts though they know not the end of their actions, do indeed
tend to their end, but pretend it not: for to pretend, is to tend to a thing by
purpose, before we tend to it in effect. They cast, as it were, their actions
toward their end, yet forecast they not, but follow their instinct, without
election or intention. But man is Master in such sort over his humane and
reasonable actions, that in them all, he proposes some end, and can direct
them, to one, or many particular ends, as he pleases: for he can change the
natural end of an action, as when he swears to deceive another, whereas
contrariwise the end of an oath, is to hinder deceit. He can also add another
end, to the natural end of an action, as when, besides the intention of
succouring of the needy, which is the end of Almes-deedes, he adds the
intention of obliging the needy to render him like for like.

2. Now we add sometimes a less perfect end, the^ is the end of our actio^;
sometimes we add an end of equal or like perfection, sometimes also an end
that is more high and eminent: for besides the assistance of the poor, which
is the principal e^d of Almes-deedes, may not one pretend 1. to gain his
affection, 2. to edify his neighbor, 3. to please God, which are three diverse
ends, whereof the first is the least, the second is not much better, the third
far exceeding the common end of alms deeds? So that as you see, we have
power diversely to perfect our actions, according to the variety of motives,
ends, and intentions which we have in doing them.

3. Be good Exchangers says our Savior. Let us be careful therefore, THEO:
not to change the motives, and ends of our actions but for our profit and
advantage, and to do nothing in this trafike, but by good order and reason.
Behold for example, this or that man, who takes upon him public service, and
withal pretends honor, if his pretention be more to honor himself then to
serve the common wealth, or whether his pretention be equal in them both, he
does amiss, and is indeed ambitious. For he overthrows the order of reason,
in either preferring or equalizing his own interest with a public good: But
if his principal e^d be the public good, and yet withal he have a desire
thereby to advance the honor of his family, verily one knows not how to
blame him; not only because both his pretentions are honest, but are also well
ordered. Some will communicate at Easter, that they may not be blamed by their
neighbors, and withal to obey God, who can doubt but they do well? But if
they communicate equally, or more to avoid blame, then to obey God, who can
also doubt but they do impertinently in equalizing or preferring, humane
respects, before the obedience which they owe to God. One may fast in Lent,
either by Charity to please God, or by obedience, because it is a precept of
the Church; or else for sobrieties sake, or out of diligence to study better,
or through prudence, to spare somewhat for some other necessity; by chastity
to the end I might tame my body; or out of religion, the better to pray. Now
if I please, I may make a collection of all these intentions, and fast for them
all together: But in this case, there must be good government used, to order
these motives. For if I fast rather out of a sparing humor, then for obedience
to the Church: rather that I may study well, then to please God: who does not
see that I confound right, and order, preferring mine own interest before the
obedience due to the Church, or Gods pleasure? To fast to spare, is good: To
fast to obey the Church, is better, to fast to please God is best: and though
it seem that of three goods, one cannot compose a bad thing; yet he that
should displace them, preferring the worse before the better, should without
doubt co^mite a blame worthy disorder.

4. He that inuites but one of his friends, does in no wise offend the rest:
but if he inuit them all, and yet give the greatest respect to the least,
drawing the most honorable to the lowest end, does he not offend both those and
these? these because he does depresse them against reason: those, because he
makes fools of them. So to do an action for one only reasonable motive, be
it never so little, reason is not offended at it; but he that will have many
motives, he is to rank them according to their qualities, otherwise he
sins: for disorder is a sin, as sin is a disorder. He that desires to
please both God and our B. Lady does excellent well; but he that would please
our Blessed Lady, as much, or more then God should commit an insupportable
disorder; and one might say to him, as was said to Cain, Though you offered
well, yet you divided ill, leave off, you have sinned. Every end must have its
right place. And consequently the end of loving God, the sovereign place.

5. Now the sovereign motive of our actions, which is that of heavenly love,
has this sovereign property, that being more pure, it makes the action which
proceeds from it more pure; so that the Angels and Saints of Heaven love
nothing for any other pretention, then for the love of the Divine goodness,
and with intention to please. True it is, they exercise a most ardent mutual
love amongst themselves, as they also love us, and the virtues, but all this,
purely to please God. They follow and practice virtues not for that they are
fair and delightful, but because they are agreeable to God: They love their
own felicity, not because it is in them, but for that it pleases God. Yea
verily they love the Love, with which they love God; not because it is in the^,
but for that it tends to God; not because it is gustfull to themselves, but
because it is pleasant to God; not because they enjoy and possess it, but
because God gives it them, and delights himself in it.

The practice of that which has been said in the precedent chapter. CHAPTER.
XIV
1. LEt us strive therefore, THEO: to purify all our intentions, and since we
may, if we list, grace all the actions of virtue with the sacred motives of
Divine Love, why shall we not do it rejecting, as occasion requires, all kind
of vicious motives, as vain glory, and proper interest? and Let us consider
all the good motives, which we may have to undertake the present action, that
we may choose the motive of holy Love, which is the most excellent of all, to
water, moisten all the other with it: for example, if I desire vallourously to
expose my self to the danger of war, I may put it in execution, in
consideration of diverse motives; for the natural motive of this action, is
that of strength and valor, which moves us reasonably to undertake dangerous
exploits: yet besides this I may have diverse other motives, as that of obeying
the Prince, whom I serve; the love of the common wealth; that of magnanimity,
which makes me delight my self in the greatness of this action. Now coming
to the deed doing, I put my self upon the foreseen peril, for all these
motives together. But to raise them all to the degree of Divine Love, and
perfectly to purify them, I will pronounce in my soul from my very heart, o
eternal God, who art the most dear Love of my affections, if valor,
obedience to my Prince, Love of my Country and magnanimity were not agreeable
unto thee, I would never follow their motions which now I feel: but whereas
these virtues are delightful unto thee, I embrace this occasion of putting
them in practice: and will no otherwise second their instinct and inclination,
then because thou love, and willest them.

2. You see plainly, THEO: how by this reflection of our mind, we perfume all
those other motives with the odor and sweetness of holy Love, since we do
not merely follow them as they are virtuous motives, but in quality of
motives that are desired, embraced, beloved, and cherished of God. He that
steaks wherewithal to be drunk, is more a drunkard then a thief, according
to Aristotle. And he then that does practice valor, obedience, love toward
his country, and magnanimity to please God, he is more a Divine Lover, then
either valliant, obedient, good Patriote, or magnanimous, because his whole
will in that exercise does aim at, and fall upon the Love of God making only
use of all these motives, to arrive at this end. We are not wont to say, we
go to Lions, but to Paris, while we pass only by Lions to Paris: nor do we
say we go to singe, but to serve God, while we go not to sing but to the end
to serve God.

3. And if it chance that at sometimes we are touched with particular motives,
as for example, if we should love Chastity, by reason of its singular and
delightful purity, presently upon this motive, we must pour out that of holy
Love, in this sort. o most seemly and delicious candor of chastity, o how
lovely thou art, since thou art so beloved of the Divine Goodness; and then
turning toward the Almighty. Ah! Lord I demand only one thing of thee, it is
that which I aim at in Chastity to see and practice thy good pleasure in it,
and the delights thou take therein. And as often as we set upon the practice
of any virtue, we must eftsons say from our heart, yes eternal Father I will
do it, because so it was pleasing unto thee from all eternity. In this sort
we are to animate our actions with Gods good pleasure, loving the decorum and
beauty of virtues principally, because they are agreeable to God: For my,
dear THEO: there are some men who impotently affect the beauty of certain
virtues, not only without loving Charity, but even with contempt of Charity.
Origin and Tertullian did so affect the purity of Chastity, that in it, they
violated the greatest laws of Charity, the one choosing to commit adolatrie,
rather then to endure an horrible vilanie, whereby the Tyrans sought to defile
his body, the other separating himself from the most chaste Catholic church
his mother, to establish the Chastity of his wife more according to his own
fantasy. Who knows not that there were certain beggars at Lions who, to
extol beggarie excessiuely, turned heretics, and of beggars became
vagabund-rogues? who is ignorant of the vanity of the ENTHOVSIASTES,
MESSALIENS, EVCHITISTES, who forsook Charity, to brage of their Prayer? And
were there not Heretics, who to exalte charity toward the poor, depressed
Charity toward God, ascribing man's whole salvation to Almes-deedes, as S.
Augustine does witenesse? Notwithstanding that the holy Apostle cries out, that
though a man give all his goods to the poor, and have not Charity, it profits
him nothing.

4. God has planted the Standart of charity upon me, says the sacred
Sunamite. Love, THEO: is the Standart in the army of virtues, all of it is
ordered to love, it is the only colors under which our Savior, who is the
true General of the army, makes them all sight. Let us therefore draw all the
virtues to the obedience of Charity: Let us love the virtues in particular,
but principally because they are agreeable to God: Let us love the more
excellent virtues in a more excellent manner, not in that they are excellent,
but because God loves them more excellently: So will holy Love viuificate all
the virtues, making them all loving, lovely, and more then lovely.

How Charity contains in it the gift of the holy Ghost. CHAPTER. XV.
1. THat man's heart might easily follow the motions and instincts of reason to
attain the natural felicity which it could pretend by living according to
the laws of honesty, it is requisite to have. 1. Temperance, to repress the
insolent motions of sensuality. 2. Justice, to render to God, our neighbor,
and our selves what is due. 3. Fortitude, to va^quish the difficulties which
occur in doing good, and avoiding evil. 4. Prudence, to decerne what means
are most proper to come unto good, and to virtue. 5. Science, to know the true
good, to which we are to aspire, and the true evil, which we are to fly. 6.
Understanding, thoroughly to penetrate the first and maine grounds, or
principles of beauty, and the excellency of honesty. 7. and finally,
Wisdom, to contemplate the Divinity, the prime fountain of all good. These
are the qualities whereby the mind is made mild, obedient, and pliable to the
laws of natural reason, which is in us.

2. In like manner the holy Ghost which dwells in us, to make our soul
supple, pliable, and obedient to his heavenly motions, and divine inspirations,
which are the laws of his Love, in the observance whereof consists the
supernatural felicity of this present life, he bestows upon us seven
proprieties and perfections, almost like to those seven which we now spoke off,
called in in the holy Scripture, and amongst the Divines, GIFTS OF THE HOLY
GHOST.

3. Now, they are not only inseparable from charity, but all things
considered, and properly speaking, they are the prime virtues, proprieties, and
qualities of Charity. For first, Wisdom, is in effect no other thing, then
the love which tastes, relisheth and experie^ceth, how sweet and delicious
God is. The 2. Understanding, is nothing else, then Love attentive to consider
and penetraet he beauty of the truths of Faith, to know thereby God in
himself, and then, falling from that hight, to consider him in his creatures.
3. Science, on the other side, is no other thing, then the same Love, which
keeps us hard to the knowledge of our selves and the creatures, to make us
reascend to a more perfect knowledge of the service which we owe to God. 4.
Counsel is also Love, in so much, as it makes us careful, attentive, and
dexterous in choosing the means, proper to serve God piously. 5. Fortitude is
Love encouraging and animating the heart, to put in execution that which
Counsel determined should be done. 6. Piety is the Love which does sweeten
labor, and make us cordially, agreeably, and with a filial affection, imploye
our selves in things, which please God, our Father. And 7. to conclud Fear is
no other thing then Love, in so much as it does make us fly and avoid that
which is distasteful to the Divine Majesty.

4. So, THEO: Charity shall be another Jacobs ladder unto us, consisting of
the seven gifts of the holy Ghost, as of so many sacred steps by which,
Angelical men shall ascend from earth to Heaven, to be united to the bosom of
the Almighty; and whereby they shall descend from Heaven to earth, to lend a
helping hand to their neighbors, to lead them to Heaven. For in asce^ding,
upon the first step, Fear makes us forsake evil; upon the 2. Piety incites
us to do good; upon the 3. Science makes us decerne the good which we are to
do, and the evil which we are to fly; upon the 4. Fortitude does encourage
us, against all the difficulties which occur in our enterprise; upon the 5.
we make choice of convenient means by Counsel; upon the 6. we unite our
understanding to God to behold and penetrate the draughtes of his infinite
beauty; and upon the 7. we join our wills to God to taste and experienee the
sweetness of his incomprehensible goodness: for upon the top of this ladder,
God bending toward us, gives us the kiss of Love, and makes us suck the
sacred dugges of his delight, better then wine.

5. But if after we have delightfully enjoyed these favors of love, we desire
to return into the earth, to gain our neighbor to the same happiness; from
the chief and highest step, where we have filled our will with an ardent
Zeal, and have perfumed our souls with the perfumes of Gods Sovereign
Charity, we must descend to the second step, where our understanding is
englightened with an incomparable light, and makes provision of the most
excellent grounds and Maxims, to glorify the Divine Beauty and Bounty. From
thence we pass to the third, where, by the gift of Counsel, we advise by what
means we may instill the gust, and true estimation of the Divine sweetness
into our neighbors heart. Upon the 4. we take heart, by the means of holy
Fortitude, to surmount the difficulties, which might cross this design. Upon
the 5. by the gift of Science we begin to preach, exhorting all men to follow
virtue, and fly vice; Upon the 6. we strive to plant piety in them, that
acknowledging God for their loving father, they may observe him with a filial
fear. Upon the last step, we terrify them with Gods judgments, so that mixing
the fear of damnation with a filial respect, they do with more fervor
forsake the earth, to asce^d to Heaven with us.

6. Mean while Charity comprehends these Seven gifts, and is like to a fair
Lilly, whose flowers are whiter then snow, beset in the midst with fine little
Hamma^s of the gold of wisdom, which beat into our heart the gusts, and
loving tastes of the goodness of the Father, our Creator: of the Mercy of the
Son, our Redeemour: and of the sweetness of the Holy Ghost, our Sanctifier.
And I place, as you see, this double Fear upon the two lowest steps, to
reconcile all the traditions, with the holy and sacred vulgar Edition: for it
is not without mystery that the word FEAR is repeated twice; but to show,
that there is a filial gift of Fear, which is no other thing the^ the gift of
piety; and a gift of servile Fear, which is the beginning of our journey,
toward the sovereign wisdom.

Of the loving fear of sp^uses, a continuation of the discourse already
begune. CHAPTER. XVI.
1. AH! Brother IONATHAS said DAVID, thou wast dear to me, above the love of
women: as though he had said, thou did deserve a greater Love, then that of
wives toward their husbands. All excellent things are rare. Propose to your
self, THEO: a spouse with a Columbine heart, which has the perfection of
marriage-Loue, the Love thereof is incomparable; not only in excellency but
also by reason of a number of singular affections and qualities which do
accompany it: it is not merely chaste, but shamefast too: it is strong, but
gracious with all: It is violent, and yet tender: it is ardent, but
respectfull: generous yet fearful: bold, but obedient, and all its fear is
mixed with a delicious confidence. Such truly is the fear of a soul, endowed
with the excellency of Love: For she has such assurance in the goodness of
her spouse, that she fears not the loosing of him; indeed she is afraid,
that she shall not sufficiently enjoy his divine presence, and that some
occasion may make him absent himself though for an only moment. She is
confident enough never to displease him, but she fears she shall not love him
so much as love requires: Her Love is too courageous, to entertain the lest
suspicion, of ever falling into disgrace with him; but she is withal
apprehensiue and fearful, that she shall not be united unto him, so much as
she desires: yea the soul does sometimes arrive at such a desire of
perfection, that she does not fear but she shall be sufficiently united unto
him, Love assuring her the continuance thereof: but she fears that this union
is not so pure, simple, and attentive as her Love makes her wish. It is this
admiring Lover, who desires not to love, the gust, delights, virtues, and
spiritual consolations least she might be though never so little diuerted from
the singular love which she bears to her beloved; protesting that it is
himself, not his benefits which she looks for, and crying out to this
purpose, ah! show me my Beloved, where thou feedest, where thou lie at
midday; least I might roue after the pleasures, which are out of thee.

2. With this holy fear of heavenly Spouses, were touched those great souls
of S. PAVLE, S. FRANCIS, S. CATHARINE of Genua, and others who would not admit
any mixture in their Loves, but endeavored to make them so pure, simple and
perfect, that neither consolations, nor virtues themselves, might be enterposed
betwixt their heart and God, so that they might say, I live, not I, but
JESUS CHRIST lives in me: my God is my all, that which is not God is nothing to
me, JESUS CHRIST is my life: my Love is crucified, and others the like
extaticall words. Now the love of new beginners or appre^tises, proceeds from
true love, but from a love which is as yet tender, feeble, and beginning only:
Filial fear proceeds from a constant and solid love, and which already
tends to perfection: but the fear of a Spouse, springs from the excellency
and perfection of Love already acquired, but as touching servile and
mercinarie fears, they proceed not from love at all, but ordinarily they
preceede Love, and serve it as Herbingers, as we have already said, and are
oftentimes very profitable servants. Howbeit, THEO: you shall often see a good
Lady, who, not willing to eat her bread in idleness, resembling her, whom
Solomon does so much extol, will work in silk upon fine white Satine with a
goodly variety of colors, to make a piece of embroderie, consisting of many
rare flowers, which afterward she will richly raise with gold and silver fitly
suited* the work is wrought with the needle, which she uses all through to lay
her silk, silver, or gold: yet is not the needle put into the Satine to be
left there, but only to draw in after it, and make way to the silk, silver
and gold: so that these being once laid upon their grounds, the needle is
drawn out and taken thence. Even so the Divine Goodness about to place a
great variety of virtues in man's soul, and afterward to raise them with his
sacred Love, he makes use of the needle of servile and mercinarie Fear, which
commonly do first prick our hearts. Yet is it not left in it, but still as
the virtues are placed and lodged in the soul, mercenarie and servile Fear
departs, according to the saying of the beloved Disciple, That perfect Charity
casteh out Fear. I verily THEO: for the fear of being damned, and of loosing
Heaven is dreadull and full of anguish: and how can it then stand with holy
Love which is wholly sweet and delightful.

How servile Fear remains together with holy Love. CHAPTER. XVII.
1. And albeit that the Lady we spoke off will not leave her needle in her
work after it be once perfected, yet as long as there remains any thing to
be done about it, if any other occurrence hinder her, she will leave the needle
sticking in the Pincke, the Rose, or Paunsie which she embroders, to find it in
a readiness when she returns to her work. In like manner THEO: while the
Divine Providence is about the embroderie of virtues, and the work of Divine
Love in our souls, there is always a mercinarie or servile love left in the^,
till Charity being come to perfection, does take out this pricking needle, and
put it up as it were in her Clue. In this life therefore wherein our Charity
shall never come to that perfection, that it shall be exempt from peril, Fear
is always necessary, and even while we dance for joy with Love, we must
tremble with apprehension by Fear. In Fear advise of what thou take in hand,
Serve, and rejoice in him that reigns above,
Rejoice in him, yet joyful firmly stand
In lowliness of heart, in trembling love.
Our great Father ABRAHAM sent his servant ELIEZER to choose a wife for his
only son ISAAC: Eliezer went and by divine inspiration made choice of the
fair and chaste REBECCA whom he carried away with him. But this witty Damsel
forsook ELIEZER, as soon as she met with ISAAC, and being conducted into
SARAS chamber, she remained his spouse for ever. God does often send servile
Fear, as another ELIEZER, (and Eliezer, is interpreted God's assistance) to
treat the marriage betwixt it self and sacred Love. And though the soul be
brought under the conduct of Fear, it is not that Fear means to espouse her;
for in effect, as soon as the soul meets with Love, she units herself unto
him, and quits Fear.

2. Yet as ELIEZER after his return remained in Isaac his house, at his and
Rebeccas service, so Fear having led us to holy Love, it remains still with
us, to serve both Love and the loving soul as occasion serves. For though the
soul be just, yet she is often set upon by extreme temptations, and Love as
courageous as it is has enough to do, to sustain the assault by reason of
the disadvantage of the place wherein it is, which is the variable heart of
man, subject to the mutiny of the passions. In that case therefore THEO: Love
employes Fear in the fight, making use of him to repulse the enemy. The brave
Prince IONATHAS, going to give a charge upon the Phylistians, amidst the
obscurity of the night, would have his Esquire with him and those that he
killed not, his Espire killed. And love enterprising some difficult thing,
makes not use of his proper motives only, but also of the motives of servile
and mercinarie fear; and the temptations which Love overthrows not, Fear
defeates: If a temptation of Pride, avarice or some voluptuous pleasure make
head against me; Ah! shall I say, it is possible, that for things so vain, my
soul would quit the grace of her well-beloued? but if this will not serve,
Love will call Fear to his aid: ah do thou not see miserable heart, that by
seconding this temptation, the horrible flames of Hell do wait upon thee? and
that thou loosest the eternal inheritance of heaven? a man makes use of all
things in extreamities: as the said IONATHAS did, when passing the sharp
Rocks, which were betwixt him and the Phylistians he did not only make use of
his feet, but as well as he could, scrambled, and ramped with his hands. Even
therefore as the Mariners, who lanch out under a favorable gale, and in a fit
season, do yet never leave behind them their cables, ankers, and other
necessaries against storms and tempests: so though the servant of God enjoy
the sweet repose of holy Love, he must never be unprovided of the Fear of
Gods judgments, to help himself therewith amongst the outrages and assaults
of temptations: besides that as the skin of an aple, which in it self is of
small estimation, is yet very useful for the conservation of the aple which it
covers; so servile fear, which in it self is but of a mean condition in
respect of Love, is yet very profitable to its conservation, during the dangers
of this mortal life. And as he that presents a Pomegranade, does only present
it in respect of the grains and juice contained with in it, and yet gives it in
the pille, as a certain dependence of it; Even so, though the holy Ghost,
amongst his sacred gifts bestows a loving Fear upon the hearts of his
friends, that they may fear God in piety, as their Father and Spouse, yet
does he also add to that, a mercinarie and servile Fear, as an accessarie to
the other, which is more excellent: so Joseph presenting his Father with many
loades of the riches of Egypt, gave him not only the treasures, but withal,
the asses that brought them.

3. Now albeit that mercinarie and servile Fear be very necessary for this
mortal life, yet is it unworthy of any part in the immortal, where there
shall be an assurance void of Fear, a Peace without opposition, a repose free
from care; yet shall the services which this servile and mercinarie Fear made
Love, be there rewarded; so that these Fears, though as another Moses and
Aaron they enter not into the LAND OF PROMIS, yet shall their posterity and
works enter: and as for a Filial, and the Fear of Spouses, they there shall
have their rank and place, not to cause any diffidence or perplexity in the
foul, but to make her admire and reverence with submission the
incomprehensible majesty, of this omnipotent Father, and this Spouse of glory.

The Love to God we bear
Is full of purest Fear:
His Fear and Majesty
Dures for eternity.
How Love makes use of natural servile, and mercinarie Fear. CHAPTER. XVIII.
1. Lightnings, Thundrings, Thunderbolts, tempests, Inundations, Earthquakes,
and other sudden accidents, do excite even the most indeuote person to fear
God, and nature preventing discourse in those occurences, does drive the heart,
the eyes, yea the very hands to heauenwards, to inuoke the assistance of the
most holy Divinity, according to the common sense of mankind, which is, says
Titus Liuius, that such as serve the Almighty, do prosper and such as
contemn him, are afflicted. In the storm which enda^gered JONAS, the
Mariners were struck with a great fear, and each of them fell suddenly a
crying to God. They were ignorant says SAINT HIEROME, of the Truth, yet they
knew there was a Providence, and believed that it was by the judgment of
Heaven, that they were in this danger, as the Malteses, when they saw S. PAVLE
invaded by a viper, after he had escaped shipwrake, believed that it happened
by the Divine vengeance. And indeed Thunders, Storms Thunderbolts are called
the Almighties voice by the Psalmist, saying further, that they make his words
because they Proclaim his Fear, and are as Ministers of his Justice. And
again, wishing that the Majesty of God would become dreadful to his enemies;
lighten lightening, says he, and thou shall disperse them: shoot out thine
arrows and thou shall destroy them: where he terms Thu^derbolts the arrows
and darts of God. And before the Psalmist, Samuels good mother had already
sung, that eue^, Gods enemies would fear hi^ if he would thu^der over the^
from Heaven. Certes PLATO in his GORGIAS, and else where, does witness that
there was some sense of Fear amongst the Pagans, not only in regard of the
chastiments, which the sovereign Justice of God does practice in this world,
but also in respect of the punishments which he exercises in the other life,
upon their souls that have incurable sins so deeply is the instinct of
fearing a Deity engraven in man's nature.

2. But this fear being practiced by way of a sudden motion or natural
feeling, is neither to be commended nor condemned in us, since it proceeds not
from our election: yet is it an effect of a best cause, and cause of a best
effect; for it comes from the natural knowledge which God has given us of his
Providence, and gives us to understand what dependence we have of the
sovereign omnipotency, moving us to implore his aid, and being in a
faithful soul, it does much advance her in goodness. Christians (amidst the
astonishments which Thunder, Tempests, and other natural dangers cause in us)
inuoke the sacred name of JESUS and MARIE, make the sign of the Cross,
prostrate themselves before God, and exercise many good acts of Faith, Hope,
and Religion. The Glorious SAINT THOMAS of Aquine, being naturally subject to
start when it thundered was accustomed to say, by way of Iaculatorie Prayer
the Divine words, which the Church has in such esteem! THE WORD WAS MADE
FLESH. Upon this fear then Divine Love does make diverse acts of Complacence,
and Benevolence. I will bless thee o Lord, for thou art wonderfully magnified:
Let every one fear thee o Lord; o you great ones of the earth, understand,
serve our Lord in fear, and rejoice in him with trembling.

3. But there is another fear, that takes it is beginning from Faith, which
teaches us, that after this mortal life, there are punishments dreadfully
eternal, or eternally dreadful, prepared for such, as in this world have
offended the Divine Majesty, without a perfect reconciliation before their
decease: That at the house of death, the soul shall be judged by a particular
Judgment, and that at the end of the world, all shall rise and appear together
to be judged again in the Universal Judgment: For these Christian truths,
THEOT: do strike the hearts of those that do deeply ponder them with an
extreme horror, and indeed, how could one represent unto himself those
eternal honors without foming, and quaking with apprehension? Now when these
feelings do take such root in our soul, that they drive and banish thence
the affection and will to sin, according as the holy Council of Trent
speaks, they are very wholesome. We have conceived thy fear o Lord, and have
brought forth the Spirit of Salvation: I say has it. That is thy wrothfull
face tertified us, and made us conceive and bring forth the Spirit of Penance,
which is the Spirit of Salvation, so did the Psalmist say, my bones enjoyed no
peace, but trembled before the face of thy anger.

4. Our Savior who even came to establish the law of Love amongst us, cease
not to inculcate unto us this fear; fear him, says he, who has power to
throw the body and soul into hell fire: The NINIVITS did penance upon the
threat of their own subversion and damnation, and their penance was agreeable
to God: to be short, this fear is comprised amongst the gifts of the holy
Ghost, as many aunciant Fathers have noted.

5. But if Fear do not deter our will and affection from Sin truly it is
bad, and like to that of the devils, who cease to do mischief only through
a fear they have to be tormented by the Exorcisme, without ceasing to desire,
and will mischeife, which is their meditation for ever; Like to that of the
miserable gallie-slaue who would even eat the Captains heart, though he dares
not stir from the Oar least he might be beaten; Like to the Fear of that
great old Maister-heretike, who confessed that he hated God, because he did
punish the wicked. Certes he that loves sin, and would willingly commit it,
maugre Gods will, though in effect he will not commit it only least he might
be damned, has a horrible and detestable fear: for though he have not the
will to come to the execution of sin, yet does he entertain the execution of
it in his will, since he would do it, if fear withheld him not, and it is as
it were by force, that he effects it not.

6. To this Fear one may add another, less malicious indeed, yet no less
unprofitable, as was that of the Judge FELIX who hearing Gods judgments spoken
off was stricken into amazeme^t, yet did he not for all that give over his
avarice: and that of BALTASAR, who in seeing the prodigious hand, that wrote
his condemnation upon the wall, was so astonished, that he looked agaste* the
joints of his back bone were disioynted, his knees with shaking dashed one
against another, nor would he yet do penance: and to what purpose is it to
fear evil, unless by fear, we resolve to eschew it?

7. Their Fear then, that do as slaves observe the Law of God, to avoid Hell,
is good indeed; but much more noble and desirable is the mercinarie fear of
Christians, who as hirelings do faithfully labor, yet not principally for any
love they bear their Master, but to be rewarded with the reward promised. O
that the eye could see, that the ear could hear, or that it could enter into
the heart of man, what God has prepared for those that serve him! Ah what an
apprehension would one have to violate Gods commandments, least he might loose
those immortal rewards! What tears, what sobbs would one cast out, when by
sin one had lost it! Yet should this Fear be blame worthy, if it contained
in it, the exclusion of holy Love; for he that should say, I will not serve
God, for any love I will have toward him, but only to attain the reward he
promises, should commit blasphemy, in preferring the reward, before his
Master, the benefit before the Benefactour, the inheritance before the Father,
and his own profit before God almighty, as we have more amply showen in the
second book.

8. But finally, when we fear to offend God, not to avoid the pains of Hell,
or the lose of Heaven, but only, for that, God being our good Father we owe
him honor, respect, obedience, the^ our Fear is filial, because a well borne
child does not obey his Father in respect of the power he has to punish his
disobedience, or because he might disinherite him, but purely because he is his
Father; In such sort, that though his Father were old, impotent and poor, he
would not serve him with less diligence, but rather, as a pious Storke, would
assist him with more care and affection: Even as JOSEPH, seeing the good man
IACO^ his Father, old, in want, and brought under his scepter, ceased not to
honor, serve, and reverence him, with a more the^ filial te^dernesse, and
such as his brothers having taken notice, apprehended that it would even work
after his death, and thereupon they made use of it to obtain pardon at his
hands, saying, your Father commanded us that we should tell you thus from him;
I beseech thee to forget thy brothers crime, and the sin and malice which
they practiced against thee: which having heard, he began to weep, so did his
filial heart melt at the representation of his deceased Fathers wish and will.
Such then do fear God with a filial affection, as do fear to displease
him, purely and simply, because he is their most sweet, most benign and most
loving Father.

9. Howbeit though this filial fear be joined, mixed, and tempered with the
servile fear of eternal damnation, or with the mercinarie Fear of loosing
Heaven, it is yet grateful to God and is called a BEGINNING FEAR, that is a
fear of such as are beginners, and Apprentises in the exercise of divine Love.
For as young youths, at their first beginning to ride a horse when they
perceive him rise a little high before, do not only cleeue close to hi^ with
their knees, but do also catch hard hold of the saddle bole with their hands,
yet after they have been a while trained up with it, do only keep themselves
close together; even so Nouices and Prentises in Gods service, finding
themselves lost amidst the assaults which the enemy makes against them in
their beginnings, do not only make use of filial, but also of mercinarie and
servile Fear, and hold themselves as well as they ca^, that they might not
fall from their pretentions.

How sacred Love contains the 12. fruits of the holy Ghost, together with the
8. beatitudes of the Gospel. CHAPTER. XIX.
1. THe glorious S. PAVLE says thus; Now the Fruit of the holy Ghost is
Charity Joy, Peace, Patience, Benignity, Goodness, Longanimitie, Mildness,
Modesty, Faith, Continency, Chastity. But mark, THEO: how this holy Apostle
showing these 12. fruits of the holy Ghost, puts them for one only fruit: for
he says not, the fruits of the holy Ghost, are Charity, Joy etc. but only
the fruit of the Holy Ghost, is Charity, Joy. And behold the secret of this
manner of speech. The Charity of God is poured forth into our hearts, by the
holy Ghost which is given us. Certes Charity is the only fruit of the holy
Ghost, but because this one fruit has an infinity of excellent proprieties,
the Apostle about to represent some of them, by way of a scantling, he speaks
of this only fruit, as of many, by reason of the multitude of proprieties
which it contains in its unity, and speaks again of all these fruits as of
one only, by reason of the unity, in which it is comprised in this variety.
So he that should say that the fruit of the vine, is ripe grapes, green
grapes, wine, aqua vitae, the liquour that does rejoice the heart of man, the
drink that does comfort the stomach, would not say that they were fruits of
diverse SPECIES: but only, that though they be but one only fruit, yet has it
many different proprieties, according as it is diversely used.

2. The Apostle therefore would say no other thing, but only, that Charity
is the fruit of the holy Ghost, which is joyful, peaceable, patient, benign,
good, longanimous, sweet, faithful, modest, continent, chaste, that is to
say, that the Divine Love does give us an inward joy and consolation,
together with a great peace of mind, which in adversity is conserved by
Patience, and which makes us benign and gracious in succouring our neighbor,
by a cordial goodness toward him, a goodness which is not variable, but
Constant and perseuerant, giving us a courage of great extent, by means
whereof, we become mild, affable and condescendant to all, supporting their
humors and imperfections, and standing perfectly loyal unto them, testifying
a simplicity accompanied with confidence, as well in our words as actions,
living modestly and humbly, cutting off all superfluities, and disorders in
meat drink, apparel, bed, play, pastimes and such other voluptuous desires
by a holy continency, repressing especially the inclinations and seditions of
the flesh, by a dilligent chastity, so that our whole man may be occupied in
holy Love as well interiourly by Joy, Peace, Patience, Longanimitie,
Goodness, and Fidelity, as also exteriously, by benignity, mildness,
modesty, continency, and Chastity.

3. Now Charity is called a fruit in so much as it does delight us, and in so
much as we do enjoy its delicious sweetness, as being a true aple of
Paradise, gathered from the tree of life, which is the holy Ghost, graffed in
our humane hearts, and dwelling in us by his infinite mercy. But when we do
not only rejoice in this heavenly Love, and enjoy its delicious sweetness,
but even place all our glory therein, as in the crown of our honor, then it
is not a fruit only delightful to our palate but it is a beatitude and a most
wishfull felicity, not only because it assures us the felicity of the next
life, but even in that it does enrich us in this life, with a contentment of an
inestimable price, a contentement which is so strong, that all the waters of
tribulation, and the floodes of persequution cannot extinguish it, yea it is
not only not extinguished, but it waxes rich amidst poverty, is advanced by
abiections, and humiliations, rejoices in tears, gains strength by being
forsaken by Justice; and by being deprived of the help thereof, while begging
for it, it is deneyed of all: compassion and commiseration do recreate it,
while it is environed with the injurious and need: It is delighted in the
renunciation of all sorts of sensual and earthly delights, to obtain the
purity and cleanenesse of heart, the use of its valor is to lay a sleep
wars, iarrs and dissentions, and to spurn temporal aduancements and
reputation, by all kinds of sufferance it waxes strong, and holds, that its
true life consists in dying for the well-beloued. So that in a word, THEO:
holy Charity is a virtue, a Gift, a Fruit, and a Beatitude; as it is a virtue,
it makes us obedient to exterior inspiratio^s, which God has given us by his
Co^ma^deme^ts and Cou^sells, in the execution whereof, all virtues are
practiced, whence Charity is the VERTVE OF VERTVES.

4. In quality of a gift, Charity makes us manigable and tractable by
interior inspirations, which are as Gods secreete Commandments and Counsels,
in the execution whereof the 7. gifts of the holy Ghost are employed, so that
Charity is the GIFT OF GIFTS. As it is a Fruit it gives us an extreme gust
and pleasure in the practice of a deuote life, which is felt in the 12. fruits
of the holy Ghost, and thence it is the FRVIT OF FRVITS. In quality of
Beatitude, it makes us repute the affronts, calumnies, rebukes, reuilings which
the world heaps upon us for greatest favors, and singular honors; and
withal makes us forsake, renounce and reject all other kinds of glory, save
that which comes from the beloved Crucifix, for which we glory in the
abiection, abnegation and annihilation of our selves, admitting of no other
mark of Majesty, then our crucified Maister's crown of thorns, his scepter
of a Reed, his robe of scorn which they put upon him, and the Throne of his
Cross, upon which the sacred Lovers had more content, joy, glory and
felicity, then ever Solomon had in his Iuerie Throne.

5. So is Love often times represented by the Pomegranate, which taking
proprieties from the Pome-granate-tree, may be said to be it is virtue, as also
the gift thereof which out of Love it offers to man; and its fruit, since that
it is eaten, to refresh m^ns taste, and finally it is as it were its glory and
Beatitude, bearing the crown and diadem.

How divine Love makes use of all the passions and affections of the soul and
reduces them to her obedience. CHAPTER. XX.
1. Love is the life of our heart; and as the cou^terpoise gives motion to all
the moveable parts of a cloak, so does Love give all the motion the soul has:
All our affections follow our Love, and according to it we desire, we rejoice,
we hope, we despair, we fear, we take heart, we hate, we fly, we sorrow, we
fall into choler, we triu^phe. Do not we see men who have given up their heart
as a prey, to the base and abject Love of women, that they have no desires but
according to this Love, they take no pleasure but in it, they neither hope nor
despair but for this subject, they neither dread nor enterprise any thing but
for it, they are neither disgusted with, nor fly from, any thing save that
which does divert them from, this, they are only troubled at that which does
deprive them of it, they are never angry but out of jealousy, never glory
but in this infamy.

2. The like may be said, of covetous misers and glorie-hunters; for they
become slaves to that which they love, and have neither heart in their breast,
nor soul in their hearts, nor affections in their souls save only for this.

3. When therefore Divine Love does reign in our hearts, it does in a kinglike
manner bring under, all the other Loves, and consequently all the affections
thereof, for as much as naturally they follow love; this done it does tame
sensual Love, and bringing it to subjection, all the sensual passions do
follow it. For in a word, this sacred Love, is the sovereign water, of which
our Savior said, he that shall drink of this water shall never thirst. No
surely, THEO: he that has Love in a certain abundance he shall neither have
desire, dread, hope, courage, nor joy, but for God, and all his motions shall
be quieted in this only celestial Love.

4. Divine Love and self love are in our hearts, as JACOB and ESAV in the
womb of REBECCA; there is a great antipathie and opposition betwixt them, and
do continually press on upon another in the heart. Whereat the poor soul
gives an outcrie, alas wretch that I am, who will deliver me out of the body
of this death, that the only Love of God may peaceably reign in me Howbeit we
must take courage putting our trust in our Saviors word, who promises in
comma^ding, and commands in promising victory to his Love: and he seems to
say to the soul, that which he caused to be said to REBECCA; two nations are
in thy womb, and there shall be a division betwixt two people in thy
intrailles, the one shall surmount the other, and the elder shall serve the
younger: for as Rebecca, who had only two children in her womb, whereof two
people were to descend, was said to have two nations in her womb; so the
soul having two loves in her heart, has consequently two great troops of
motions, affections and passions: and as Rebecca her two children, by the
contrariety of their motions, made her suffer great conuulsions and pains of
the womb; so the two loves of our soul^, puts our heart as it were into
trauaill. And as it was said of Rebeccas two children, that the elder should
serve the younger; so was it ordained that of these two loves of our heart, the
sensual should serve the spiritual, that is self-love should serve the Love
of God.

5. But when was it, that the eldest of tha^ people which was in Rebecca's
womb served the you^gest? Surely it was only when David overcame the Idumeans
in war, and that Solomon ouerruled them in time of Peace. When shall it then
be, that sensual love shall serve Divine Love? It shall then be, THEO: when
armed Love, being arrived at Zeal, shall by mortification subject our
passions, but principally when above in heaven, Blessed Love shall possess our
whole soul in peace.

6. Now the means whereby Divine Love is to subject the sensual appetite, is
like to that which JACOB used, when for a good presage and beginning of that
which was afterward to come to pass, ESAV coming out of his mothers womb,
JACOB held him by the foot as it were to trample upon, to suppliant, and keep
him under, or as they say, to keep him tied by the foot, after the manner of
a Hawk, such as ESAV was in qualilitie of a hunter, and as he was a fierce
man: For so holy Love, perceiving some passion or natural affection to rise in
us, must presently catch it by the foot, and order it to his service. But what
is it to say, take it by the foot? it is to bind it, and bring it down to a
r^solution of serving God. Do not you see how Moses transformed the serpent
into a rod, by taking her only by the tail! even so by bestowing a good end
upon our passions, they turn virtues.

7. But what method are we then to observe, to order our affections and
passions to the service of Divine Love? Methodicall Physicians, have always
this APHORISIME in their mouths, That contraries are cured by their
co^traries; t^^ Alchymists have another famous sentence contrary to this,
Saying, that like are cured by their like. Howsoever we are certain that two
contrary things make the light of the stars disappeare, to wit the obscurity
of nightly foggues, and the greater light of the sun; and in like manner, we
do fight against passions; either by opposing contrary passions, or greater
affections of the same sort. If any vain hope present it self unto me, my way
of resistance may be, by opposing unto it this just discouragement, O
senseless man upon what foundation do thou build this hope? do thou not
see that the great one to whom thou do aspire, is as near to his grave as
thy self? Do thou not know the instabilitie, weakness, and imbecillitie of
the spirit of man? To day his heart, in whom thy pretentions are, is thine, to
morrow, another carries it away from thee, upon what then is this hope
grounded? Another way of resisting this hope is, to oppose to it another more
strong; hope in God, o my Soul, for it is he that delivers thy feet out of
the snares; never did any hope in him, and was confounded, throw thy thoughts
upon eternal and permanent things. In like manner, may one fight with riches
and temporal delights, either by the contempt they merit, or by the desire
of such as are immortal, and by this means sensual and earthly Love, shall
be ruinated by heavenly Love; either as fire is extinguished by water, by
reason of its contrary qualities, or as it is extinguished by heavenly fire,
by means of its qualities more strong and predominant.

8. Our Savior makes use of both the ways in his spiritual cures. He cured
his Disciples of their wordly Fear, by imprinting in their hearts a Fear of a
superior rank. Fear not those, said he, who kill the body, but fear him,
who can throw the body and the soul into Hell fire: When he would another
time cure the^ of an abject joy, he assigned them one more high; do not
rejoice, quoth he, that the evil spirits are under you, but that your names
are written in Heaven; and himself also rejects joy, by sorrow; woe be to
you that laugh, for you shall weep. Thus then does the Divine Love supplant
and bring-vnder the affections and passions, turning them from the end to which
self love would swaye the^, and applying them to its spiritual pretention.
And as the rayne-bow touching the herb ASPAIATHVS does deprive it of its own
smell, and gives it another far more excellent; so sacred Love touching our
passions takes from them their earthly end, and bestows a heavenly one in its
place, the appetite of eating is much spiritualized, if before the practice
thereof we put upon it the ^otiue of love. Ah Savior! It is not to content my
palate, nor yet to saciate this appetite, that I go to table, but according to
thy Providence, to sustain this body which thou have given me, subject to
this misery; I Lord, because so it was thy pleasure. If I hope for a friends
assistance, may not I say, the manner of thy establishment of our life, o
Lord, was such, as that we should stand in need of one another help, comfort
and consolation: and because so it pleases thee, I will use this or that man,
whom thou have joined unto me in friendshipe to this purpose. Is there some
just occasion of Fear? It is thy will o Lord, that I should fear, that I may
use convenient means to avoid this inconueniencie, I will do so, o Lord,
since such is thy good pleasure. If fear be excessive, ah God our eternal
Father, what is it that thy children and the chickes, which live under thy
wings can dread? Well, I will use the means convenient to eschew evil, but
that being done, Lord, I am thine, save me, if it be thy pleasure, and that
which shall befall me, I will accept, because such is thy good pleasure. O holy
and sacred ALCHIMIE, o heavenly PROTECTION POVDER by which all the mettalls of
our passions, affections, and actions are converted into the most pure gold of
heavenly Love.

That sadness is almost always unprofitable, yea opposite to the service of
holy Love. CHAPTER. XXI.
1. ONe cannot graffe an Oak upon a Peare-tree, of so contrary an humor are
those two trees; nor can anger, choler and despair be graffed in Charity, at
least it would be a hard piece of work. We have seen Anger already in the
discourse of Zeal; as for despair, unless it be reduced to a man's just
defense, or at least to the feeling which we ought to have of the vanity,
feablenesse, and inconstancy of wordly favors, assistances, and promises; I
see not, what service Divine Love can draw from it.

2. And as concerning sadness, how can it be profitable to holy Charity,
seeing that joy is rancked amongst the fruits of the holy Ghost, adjoining
unto Charity. Howbeit the great Apostle says thus; The sorrow that is
according to God, works penance unto salvation that is stable, but the sorrow
of the world works death: there is then a sorrow according to God, which is
profitably practiced either by sinners in Penance, or by the good, by way of
compassion for the temporal miseries of our neighbors; or by the perfect, in
deploring, bemoaning and condoling the spiritual calamities of souls. For
DAVID, S. PETER, MAGDALENE, wept for their sins: AGAR wept when she saw her
son almost dead of thirst. Hieremie upon the ruins of Jerusalem: Our
Savior over the Jews; and his great Apostle groans out these words, many
walk of whom I have often told you, and I tell you again with tears, who are
enemies to the Cross of JESUS CHRIST.

3. There is a sorrow of this world, which does also proceed from 3. causes:
For. 1. it comes sometimes from the infernal enemy, who by a thousand sad,
melancholy, and troublesome suggestions, does obscure the understanding;
weaken the will, trouble the whole soul, and like to a thick mist does stuff
the head and breast with a rume, and by this means makes a man draw his breath
with difficulty, and does perplexe the poor trauailler; so the evil spirit
filling man's mind with daunting thoughts, depriues it of the facility of
aspiring to God, and does possess it with an extreme vexation and
discouragement, to bring it to despair and perdition. They say there is a
fish named a sea-toade, or a sea-diuell by surname, who by moving and stirring
the mud, does trouble the water round about her, to hid her self in it, as in
an amboush, wherein as soon as she perceiues the poor little fishes, she
falls upon them, spoils and deuoures them: whence peradventure came the common
proverb, of fishing in a troubled water. Now, the devil of Hell, uses the
same slight with the Devil of the Sea: For he makes his Ambushe in the midst
of sorrow, who after he has troubled the soul with a multitude of loathsome
thoughts, cast hither and thither in the understanding, he makes a charge upon
the affections, bearing them down with distrust, ielousies, auersions,
disgustes, grieves, superfluous apprehensions of sins past; adding withal a
number of vain, bitter, and sullen subtilities, that all reasons, and
consolations might be rejected.

4. Sorrow 2. does sometimes proceed from a man's natural condition, when a
melancholy humor does abound in us; and this is not vicious in it self, yet
does our enemy make great use of it to co^triue and plot a thousand
temptations in our souls for as the Spyder does hardly weaue her w^be save in
cloudie and close weather; so this wicked Spirit, finds never so fit a time to
lay the snares of his suggestio^s in sweet, benign, ad cheerful spirits, as
he does in sullen, sad, and pesi^e hearts: for he does easily trouble them with
way^ardnesse, suspicio^; hatred, sloth, and with a spiritual nu^nesse.

5. Thirdly and lastly, there is a sorrow which the variety of humane cha^ces
does bring upon us. What joy ca I have said Tobie, not being able to see the
light of heaven. So was JACOB sorrowful upon the news of the death of his
Son IOS^P^, and DAVID for the death of his Absalo^: and this is common as
well to the good as the bad, but in the good it is moderated by submissio^ and
resignatio^ to the will of God, as is seen in Tobie, who redred thanks to the
Divine Mai^stie, for all the adversities wherewith he was afflicted: and in
^OB, who blessed the name of God in the^: and in Daniel who turned his sorrows
into songs: Now contrariwise in worldlings, the same sorrow is an ordinary
dish with the^, and is changed into loathsomenesse, despair, madness: for
they rese^ble Apes and Mo^kies, which are still peevish, sad and sottish in the
wayning of the Moon, as again in the new of the Moon they hop, dance, and
do their apish tricks. The worldling, is froward, harsh bitter, and
melancholy in the ebb of his terreane prosperities, but while they flow, he
is almost continually in his brauado's iocund, and insolent.

6. Certes the sorrow of true Repentance is not so much to be termed sorrow, as
a dislike, sense or detestation of sin: a sorrow which is never either harsh
or peevish: a sorrow which does not benume the mind, but makes it become
active, prompt and diligent: a sorrow which does not abate the heart, but does
reliue it by prayer, and hope, and makes it make the stirrings of the fervor
of devotion: a sorrow which in the hight of its bitterness, does produce the
sweetness of an incomparable consolation, following the Precept of the great
S. Augustine. Let the penitent sorrow continually, but let him also continually
rejoice therein. Sorrow, says Cassia^, which does work solid Penance, and
the wishfull repentance, whereof a man does never repent him, is obedient,
affable, humble, mild, sweet, patient, as issuing and descending from
Charity; so that extending it self to all the pain of the body, and
contrition of the heart, it is in a certain sort, joyful, quickened and
stre^gthned with the hope of profit, it retains all the sweetness of
affability and longnanimitie, as enjoying the fruits of the holy Ghost recited
by the holy Apostle: now the fruits of the holy Ghost are, Charity, Joy,
Peace, Longanimitie, Goodness, Benignity, Faith, Mildness, Continency. Such
is true Repentance, and such the good sorrow, which is not properly, sad or
melancholy, but only attentive and addicted to detest, reject, and hinder the
malice of sin for the time past, and time to come. And indeed we meet often
with Penetents sollicitous, troubled, impatie^t, mournful, sour, groaning,
disquiet, harsh, and melancholy, which are in the end found to be fruitless,
and are not follow^d with any true amendment, because they proceeded not from
the true motives of the virtue of Penance, but from natural and self-love.

7. The sorrow of the world works death, says the Apostle; THEO: we must be
therefore careful to avoid and reject it a^cording to our power: if it be
natural, we are to keep it back, by withstanding its motions, and by
diuerting them by exercises proper for that end, and by using the remedies and
manner of living which the Physicians shall advise. If it proceed from
temptation, we must fully disclose our heart to our Ghostly Father, who will
prescribe us the means to overcome it, according to that which we have
delivered touching this point, in the fourt^ Part of the Introduction to a
deuote life. If it be accidental, we must have recourse to that which is said
in the eight book, to the end we may see how delightful temptations are to the
sonns of God, and that the greatenesse of our hopes in the eternal life to
come, all almost do make all the passing events of this mortal life, of no
consideration.

8. For the rest, amongst all the melancholies which can happen unto us, we are
to make use of the authority of the superior will, to do all that it is able
in the behalf of divine Love. Certes there are actions which have so great a
dependence of the corporal disposition and complexion that it is not in our
power to do them at our pleasure: for the melancholy man cannot for his
heart, keep neither his eyes, speech nor countenance in the same grace and
sweetness, which they would have, if he were quit of this bad humor: yet may
he well, though not with a grace, speak gracious, good and courtious words,
and may do on despite of his inclination, by force of reason, what is
convenient in words, and in the works of Charity, sweetness, condescendance.
It is pardonable in a man not to be continually iocund, for a man is not
Master of mirth, to have it when he list; but he that is not continually
gentle, tractable and condescendant is not excusable; for it is always in the
ability of our will, nor is there any other thing required thereunto, but a
resolution to surmount the contrary humor and inclination.

The end of the eleauenth book.
THE TWELFTH BOOK. CONTAINING Certain aduises for the progress of the soul
in holy Love.
That our progress in holy Love does not depend of our natural complexion*
CHAPTER. I.
I. A Famous religious of our age has written that our natural disposition
does much conduce to contemplative Love, and that such as are of an affectiue
and loving nature, are most proper for it. Now I suppose his meaning is not,
that sacred Love should be distributed to men or Angels, in sequel, and yet
much less in virtue, of their natural conditions; nor that he would say,
that the distribution of divine Love is made to men, according to their
natural qualities and abilities: for this were to belie the Scripture, and to
violate the ecclesiastical rule, by which the Pelagians were declared
Heretics.

2. For my part, I speak in this Treatise of supernatural Love, which God out
of his goodness does pour into our hearts, and whose residence is in the
supreme point of the Spirit; a point which is above all the rest of our soul,
and is independent of all natural complexion; and withal, though the souls
that are inclined to Love, have on the one side a certain disposition, which
make the^ more proper to love God, yet one the other side, they are so subject
to set their affection upon lovely creatures, that their inclination puts them
i^ as much danger of being diuerted from sacred Love, by a mixture of other
Loves, as they have a facility in desiring to Love God: for the dang^r of
loving amiss, is annected to the facility of loving. It is true that souls
of this composition being once well purified from the love of c^^atures, they
work wonders in sacred Charity, Love finding a great case to dilate it self
in all the faculties of the heart: and from thence proceeds a delightful
sweeteness^, which appears not in those whose souls are p^euish, harsh,
melancholy, and churlish.

3. Nevertheless if two parties, the one whereof is loving and sweet, the
other harsh and ^oure by nature, had an equal Charity, they would love God
equally, yet not both alike. The heart naturally sweet, would love more
easily, more amiably, more sweetly, though neither more solidly, nor yet more
perfectly; but the love that should spring up amongst the brambles and
repugnances of a harsh and dry nature, would be more brave and glorious, and
withal more delightful and gracious, like to the other.

4. It imports not much then, whether one have a natural inclination to love,
when supernatural love is handled, by which one works only supernaturally.
Only this, THEO: I would willingly cry out to all men, o mortals if you have
hearts addicted to love, alas why do you not pretend celestial and Divine
Love! But if you be harsh and hard hearted, alas poor peop^^, since you are
deprived of natural Love, why do you not aspire to supernatural Love, which
shall be lovingly bestowed on you by him, who so holily calls you to love him?

That we are to have a continual desire to love. CHAPTER. II.
1. LAy up treasures in heaven, one treasure is not sufficient to the liking of
this Divine Lover, but he desires we should have it in such abundance, that
our treasure should be composed of many treasures, that is to say, THEO: that
we are to have an insatiable desire of Loving God, adding continually love upon
love. What is it that does so much press the Bees to increase their honey, but
the love they bear to it! o heart of my soul, who art created to love the
infinite good! what love can thou desire, but this love, which is the most to
be desired of all loves? Alas, o soul of my heart, what desire can thou
love, but the most lovely of all desires? o Love of sacred desires! o desires
of holy Love! o how much have I desisired to desire your perfections!

2. The disgusted sickman has no appetite to eat, yet has he an appetite to
have an appetite: he desires no meat, yet he desires to have a desire. THEO:
to know whether we love God above all things is not in our power, unless God
himself reveal it unto us; yet we may easily know whether we desire to love
him; and perceiving the desire of holy love in us, we know that we begin to
love. It is our se^suall and animal part which couets to eat, but it is our
reasonable part that desires this appetite, and because the sensual part does
not always obey the reasonable part, it happens that we desire an appetite,
and yet have it not.

3. But the desire of loving and love depend both of the same will: Wherefore
as soon as we have framed a desire of loving, we begin to have some Love; and
ever as this desire increases, love also increases. He that desires Love
ardently, shall shortly love with ardour. o God THEO: who will make us so
happy, as that we may burn with this desire, which is the desire of the poor
and the preparation of their heart whom God does willingly hear! He that has
no assurance to love God, is a poor man, and if he desire to love him, he is a
beggar, but a beggar, in that bleessed beggarie, of which our Savior has
said, Blessed are the poor of spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven.

4. Such an one was S. AUGUSTINE, when he cried out, o to love! o to walk! o
to die to a man's self! o to come to God! Such S. FRANCIS, his saying, let me
die of thy Love o thou friend of my heart, who have daigned to die for my Love,
Such S. CATHARINE of GENVA, and S. TERESA when as spiritual Does panting and
dying with the thirst of Divine Love, they sighed out this voice, ah Lord! give
me this water.

5. Temporal couituousnesse by which we do greedily desire earthly riches, is
the root of all evil; but spiritual avarice, whereby one does incessa^tly
sigh after the pure gold of Divine Love is the root of all good. He that does
desire to Love well, does search it well; and he that does search it well, does
find it well; and he that has found it out, he has found the source of life,
whence he shall draw the salvation of our Lord. Let us cry night and day,
THEO: come o holy Ghost, fill the hearts of thy faithful, and kindle in them
the fire of thy Love. o heavenly Love! when will thou fill my soul?

That to have the desire of sa^red Love, we are to cut of all other desires.
CHAPTER. III.
1. Why do hounds, think you THEO: more ordinarily loose the sent or strain
of the game they run, in the spring time then in other times? it is, as the
Hunters and Philosophers say, because the grass and flowers are then in their
vigor, so that the variety of smells which they send out, does so fill the
hounds sense of smelling, that they can neither take nor follow the sent of
their game, amongst so sundry ^ents which the earth does euaporate. Certes
those souls that do abound still in desires, designs, and proiects, do
never desire the holy celestial love as they ought, nor can perceive the
delightful strain, and sent of the Divine beloved, who is compared to the
Roe, or to the little Faune of the Do.

2. Lilies have no season, but grow soon or late, as they are deeper or less
deep set in the ground: for if they be thrust three fingers only into the
ground, they will presently flourish, but if they be put 6. or 9. fingers into
the earth, they come up later proportionably. If the heart that pretends Divine
Love, be deeply engaged in terreane and temporal affairs, it will bud late,
and with difficulty: But if it have only so much to do with the world, as
its condition requires, you shall see it blosome timely in Love, and send out a
delicious odor.

3. For this cause the Saints betook themselves to deserts, that being freede
from worldly solicitudes, they might more ardently bestow themselves in the
exercise of holy Love: Hence the sacred Spouse shut the one of her eyes, to
th'ed that she might fix the sight of the other alone more setledly, and
withal aim more directly at the very midst of her Beloued's heart, which she
desires to wound wit^ love. And for this same reason, she keeps her hair so
plaited and foulded together in tresses that she seems to have one only hair
which she makes use off, as of a chain, to bind and bear away her Spouse his
heart, whom she makes a slave to her Love.

5. They that desire for good and all to love God, shut up their understanding
from worldly discours^s, to imploye it more fervently in Divine meditations,
and do gather up all their pretentions into that only one pretention of only
loving God. Whosoeu^r he be that desires any thing, which he desires not for
God, does in that, less desire God.

5. A Religious man d^manded of B. Giles, what he could do most grateful to
God, and he answ^red him, by singing one to one, that is, one only soul, to
one only God. So many desires and Loves in our heart, are as many children
upon one d^gge, who while they can not all suck at once, they thrust to it,
now one, now another, by emulation, making it in the end wax withered and
dry. He that aims at heavenly Love, must carefully reserve his times, his
spirit, and affections for it.

That our lawful occasions do not hinder us to practice Divine Love. CHAPTER.
IV.
1. CVriositie, ambition, disquiete together with inaduertance and
inconsideration of the end for which we are in this world, are cause that we
have a thousand times more impediments then affairs; more hurrying up and
down, then work; more lets then business: And these are the MAZES, THEOT:
that is, she witless, vain, and superfluous undertakings into which we run
our selves, which do hinder the love of God, not the true and lawful
exercises of our vocations. DAVID and after him S. L^WIS, in the press of his
perils, toils, and trauaills which he endured, as well in peace, as in wars,
did not cease to sing from his heart.

What do the Heavens admire
Sau^ God, that I desire?
To what, save God, beneath
Can heart aspire* or breath?
2. S. BERNARD loosed not a foot of the progress which he desired to make in
holy Love, though he were in the Courts and Armies of great Princes, where he
labored to bring matter of sta^e to the service of Gods glory; he changed his
habitation, but he changed not his heart.

3. And to use his own words, these changes passed in him, but were not caused
by him, since that though his employments were much different, yet were all
imployements indifferent to him and he different from them all, not receiving
the colors of his affairs, and couersations, as the CAMELION, those of the
place where she is; but remaining still wholly united to God, still white in
purity still read with Charity, still full of humility.

4. I am not ignorant THEOT: what the wise man's counsel is. He flies the
Ca^pe, the Court, and Courtly strife
Who seakes to sow the seeds of holy life:
Virtue we see, does cause the souls increase,
Faith and Piety daughters are to peace.
And the Israelites had good reason to excuse themselves to the Babylonians,
who urged them to sing the sacred Canticle of Sion. Ay me! but in what music
shall we sing
In this sad s^yle, and ruthful banishment,
A Sions song to Sions heau^nly King,
A Sions song, of heavenly wonderment?
But do not you also mark, that those poor people were not only amongst the
Babylonias, but were even their Captives. Whosoever is a slave to Courtly
favors, issues in law, and honor in wars, o God, all is past with him, he
has no leisure to sing the Hymn of heavenly Love. But he that is only in the
Court, in wars, or in the Sessions-houses because his duty calls him th there,
God is his aid, and the heavenly sweetness is as an EPITHEME upon his heart,
to preserve him from the plague which reigns in those places.

5. While the plague pestered the Milaneises, SAINT CHARLES never made
difficulty to frequent the infected houses, and to touch the infected persons.
Yet THEO: he only frequented and touched them, so far forth as the
necessity of Gods work required, nor would he for a world have thrust
himself into danger without necessity, least he should have committed the
sin of tempting God. So that he was never touched with any infection, Gods
Providence conseruing him, who reposed so pure a confidence in ^t, that it had
no mixture either of fear or forwardness. In like manner, God takes a
special care of those who go not to the Court, Sessions, or war, but only
to complie with the necessity of their duty; and in that case, a man is
neither to be so scrupulous, as to abandone good and lawful affairs, by not
going; nor yet to be presumptuously pushed forwards with a desire of going
thither, or staying there, without the express necessity of his duty and
affairs.

A delightful example upon this subject. CHAPTER. V.
1. GOd is innocent to the innocent, Good to the good, cordial to the
cordial, tender toward such as are tender, and his love makes him often times
use certain sacred and dainty devises toward the holy souls, which out of a
loving purity, and simplicity behave themselves as little children about him.

2. Upon a day S. FRANCISCA was reciting our Ladies office, and as it commonly
happens, that if there be any business to be done all the day long, it
presses most in the time of Prayer; This good Lady was called in her husbands
name about a household affair, and four sundry times thinking to go on with
her office she was called from it again, and constrained to leave off in the
same verse, till at length this blessed affair, for which they had so
importunely interrupted her prayer, being finished returning to her office, she
found the verse which she had so often left off by obedience, and begun
again by devotion, all written in fair golden letters. Which her deuote
Companion Madame Vannocie swore she saw written by the Saints dear Angel
guardian, to whom also S. PAVLE did afterward reveal it.

3. O what a sweetness is this, THEOT: of the heavenly Spouse, toward this
sweet and filial lover! We see notwithstanding that every ones necessary
employments according to their vocation, does ot diminish Divine Love, but does
even increase it, and as it were do gild^ the deuote work. The Nightingale
loves her own melody no less when she makes her rest's, then when she sings.
Deuote hearts love not Love, less when they are distracted in exterior
necessities; then when they pray. Their silence, their speech, their action,
and their contemplation, their employments and their rests, do in them equally
sing the Hymn of their Love.

That we are to imploye all the occasions that are presented, in the practice
of Di^ine Love. CHAPTER. VI.
1. THere are some souls that make proiects unto themselves to do excellent
services to our Savior, by eminent actions, and extraordinary sufferances:
but actions and sufferances, whole occasion is not present, nay nor
peradventure never will be present; and upon this they apprehend that they have
done a great matter in love, in which yet they are often deceived. As it
appears by those, who, as they themselves think, embrasing in desire great
future crosses, do vehemently fly the burden of such as are present, though
lesser. Is it not a fearful temptation to be so valiant in imagination, and
so cowardly in execution?

2. Ah God preserve us from those imaginary feruours, which do often bread a
vain and secreete self esteem in the botome of our hearts. Great works light
not always in our way, but every moment we may practice little ones with
excellency, that is with a great Love. Behold this Saint, I beseech you, who
bestows a cup of cold water upon the ouerheated passinger, he does but a small
matter in outward show, but the intention, the sweetness, the Love, with
which he does give life to his work, is so excellent, that it turns this
simple water into water of life, and life everlasting.

3. The Be does pickle upon the Lilie, the Flower-deluce, the Rose; yet they
get as ample a prey upon the little minute Rosmarie flowers, and Thyme, yea
they draw not only more honey from thence, but even better honey for in these
little vessels the honey is locked up more closely, yea and is better kept
therein, Certes in the low and little works of devotion, Charity is not only
practiced more frequently, but ordinarily more humbly too, and consequently
more fruitfully, and holily.

4. These condescendances to others humors these supportations of the clownish
and troublesome actions and behauiours of our neighbor, these victories over
our own humors and passions; these renounciations of our lesser inclinations,
these endeauours against our own auersions and repugnances, this hearty and
sweet acknowledgment of our own imperfections, the continual pains we take
to keep our soul in an equality, this love of our own abiection; the gentle
and gracious acceptance which we make of the contempt and censurs of our
condition, our life, couersation and actions, THEO: all these things are more
profitable to our souls, then we can conceive, so that holy Love have the
husbanding of them, but we have told Philothie this already.

That we must have a care to do our actions very perfectly. CHAPTER. VII.
1. Our Savior, as the ancients report, was wount to say to his, be skil^ull
exchangers. If the pistol be nor good gold, if it want weight, if it be not
bet to lawful coin, it is cast back as not current: if a work be not of a
good SPECIES, if it be not adorned with Charity, if the intention be not
pious, it shall not be admitted amongst the good works. If I Fast, but yet out
of sparingnesse, my fast is not of a good SPECIES; if it be out of temperance,
and yet I have some mortal sin in my soul the work wants weight; for it is
Charity that gives poise to all that we do: if it were only through
conversation, and to accommodate my self to my companions, the work is not
stamped with an approved intention; but if I fast out of Temperance, and be in
God's grace, and that I have an intention to please his Divine Majesty, by
this Temperance, tha shall be current money, fit to augment in me the treasure
of Charity.

2. To do little actions with a great purity of intention, and with a will
addicted to please God, is to do them excellently, and then also they do
greatly sanctify us. There are some that eat much and yet are still lean,
thin, and languishing, because their power of disgestion is not good; others
there are who eat little, and yet are always in good plight, and vigorous,
because their stomach is good. Even so there are some souls, that do many
work^s, and yet increase but little in Charity, because they do them either
coldly and negligently; or by an natural instinct and inclination, more then
by Divine inspiration, or heavenly heat; and contrariwise others there are who
do but few good works, marry they do them with so holy a will and intention,
that they make a wonderful advancement in charity, they have but a few
Talents, yet they husband them so faithfully, that their Master does largely
rereward them for it.

A general means whereby to apply our works to Gods ser^ice. CHAPTER. VIII.
1. All that we do, and whatsoever we do in word or deed, let it all be done
in the name of JESUS CHRIST, whether you eat, or you drink, or you do some
other thing, do all to the glory of God, these are the words of the Divine
Apostle which as the great S. THOMAS says, in explicating them, are
sufficiently practiced, when we have the habit of holy Charity, whereby though
we have not an express and set purpose to do every work for the love of God;
yet is that intention covertly contained in the union, and communion which we
have with God, by which all the good we can do, is dedicated together with our
selves to his Divine Goodness. It is not necessary that a child which lives
in his Fathers house and under his directions, should declare that all that he
gets is gotten to his Father; for since his person belongs to his Father, all
that depends of it will also belong unto him. It is sufficient also that we be
Gods children by Love, to make all that we do, be entirely directed to his
glory.

2. It is true then THEO: as I have said elsewhere, that even as the
Oliue-tree set near unto the vine, does impart unto it its savor, so Charity
being near the other vertu^s, it does communicate unto them her perfection:
Yet true it is also, that if one engraffe a vine upon an Oliue-tree, it does
not only more perfectly leave in it its taste, but makes it also participat of
its sape. Nor be you content to have Charity, and together with it the
practice of virtues, but endeavor that it may be by it and for it that you
practice them, that they may be rightely ascribed unto it.

3. When a Painter does hold and lead an apprentise his hand, the strokes that
he makes, are principally attributed to the Painter, because though the
Prentise indeed contributed the motion of his hand, and the application of his
Pensell, yet the Master also for his part, did so mingle his motion with that
of the Apprentises, that giving the impression therein, the honor of
whatsoever is good in the stroke, is especially ascribed to him, though yet the
Prentise is also praised, by reason of the pliablenesse with which he
accommodated his motion, to his Masters direction: o how excellent virtuous
actions are, when Divine Love does imprint his sacred motion upon them, that
is, when they are done by Loves motive, but this happens differently.

4. The motive of Divine Love does pour fourth a particular influence of
per^ection, upon the virtuous actions of those that have in a special manner
dedicated themselves unto God, to serve him for ever. Such are Bishops and
Priests, who by a Sacramental consecration, and by a spiritual Character,
which cannot be blotted our vow themselves as stigmatized and marked servants
to the perpetual service of God. Such are Religious who by their vows either
solemn or simple, are sacrificed unto God, in quality of living and
reasonable Hosts. Such all those that do betake themselves to pious
Congregations, dedicated for ever to Gods glory. Further such are all those
that of let purpose, do procure in themselves, deep and strong resolutions to
follow the will of God, making for this end a recollection for some days that
they may stir up their soul by diverse spiritual exercises to the entire
reformation of their life, a holy method, and ordinary amongst the ancient
Christians; but since, almost quite left of till the great servant of God
Ignatius de Loyola, brought it into use again, in the time of our Fathers.

5. I know well, that some are of opinion that this general oblation of our
selves does not extend its v^rtue, and bear its influence upon the actions
which we practice afterward, but so far forth, as in the exercise of them,
we apply the motive of Love in particular, by dedicating them in a special
manner to the glory of God. Yet do all confess with SAINT BONAVENTVRE, who
has the general approbation of all in this behalf, that if I have determined
in my heart to give an hundred crowns for Gods sake, though afterward I make
the distribution of this sum at leisure, having my mind distracted and
without attention, yet is all the distribution made through Love, because it
proceeds from the first project which Divine Love made me make of giving the
whole.

6. But I pray you T^EO: what difference is there betwixt him that offers an
hundred crowne^ to God, and him, that offers to him all his actions truly there
is none at all, but that the one offers a sum of money, the other a sum of
actions. And why I pray shall they not then be does esteemed to make the
distribution of the parcells of the sum, in virtue of their first purpose,
and fundamental resolutions? And if one that distributs his crowns without
attention, be not deprived of the influence of his first purpose, why shall not
the other in the distribution of his action^ enjoy the fruit of his first
intention? He that purposely has made himself a loving servant of the Divine
goodness, has by consequence dedicated all his actions to the same goodness.

7. Grounding upon this truth, every one should once in his life make a good
recollection, thereby to clean his soul from all sin, and upon it, to make
an inward and solid resolution to live wholly to God, as we have given
instructions in the first part of the Introduction to a deuote life. And
afterward at least once every year, to make a survey upon ones conscience,
and a renouation of the first resolution, which we have put down in the fifth
part of the same book, to which in this behalf I remit you.

8. Certes SAINT BONAVENTVRE does auoutch, that a man that has gotten so great
an inclination and custom of well doing, that he does it frequently without
any special intention, loses not the merits of such actions, which are
enriched by Love, from whence they spring, as from their root and original
source of thire blessed habit, facility, and promptitude.

Of certain other means, whereby we may apply our works more particularly
to the Love of God. CHAPTER. IX.
1. When the Pea-hen hatcheth her eggs in a white place, her young ones are
also white. And when our intentions are in the love of God, when we project
some good work, or undertake some certain vocation, all the actions which do
issue thence take their worth, and derive their nobility from the Love whence
they descended: for who does not see, that the actions which are proper to my
vocation, and requisite to my design, do depend of this first election and
resolution which I made.

2. Yet THEO: one must not stay there; but to make an excellent progress in
devotion, we must not only in the beginning of our conversion, and after^ards
once every year, address all our life and actions to God, but we must even
offer them unto him every day, following the morning exercise which we have
taught Philothie; for in this daily renewing of our oblation, we spread the
virtue and vigor of our love upon our actions, by a new application of our
heart to the Divine glory, by means whereof it is still more and more
sanctified.

3. Besides this, let us an hundred and an hundred times a day, apply our
life, to Divine Love, by the practice of iaculatorie prayers, eleuations of the
mind, and spiritual retreats: for th^s^ holy exercises casting and bearing up
our minds to G^d do also in the end draw all our actions thither: and how
should it come to pass I pray you, that a soul which does every moment dart
up herself at the Divine Goodness, and which does incessantly breath words of
Love, to the end she may keep her heart continually lodged in the bosom of her
heavenly Father, should not be thought to do all her good works in God, and
for God?

4. She that saie^h ah Lord, I am thine, my beloved is wholly mine, and I am
wholly his; My God thou art my all. O JESUS thou art my life: ah who will do me
the favor, that I may die to my self, to the end I may live only to thee. O
to love! to go! to die to a man's self! o to live to God! o to be in God! o
Lord whatsoever is not thy very self is nothing to me. She, I say, does she
not continually dedicate her actions to her heavenly Spouse? o how blessed is
the soul, who has once stripped, and perfectly resigned herself into the
hands of God Almighty, whereof we spoke before, for afterward, she will only
need one little sight and view of God, to renew and confirm her stripping,
resignation, and oblation, together with her Protestation that she will have
nothing but God, and for God; and that she neither loves herself nor any other
thing in the world, but in God, and for the Love of God.

5, The exercise then of continual aspirations is very proper for the
application of all our works to Love. But principally it is abundantly
sufficient for the small and ordinary actions of our life; for as for
heroical works and matters of consequence, it is expedient, if we intend to
make any great profit, to use the ensuing method, as I have already given a
touch elsewhere.

6. Let us in these occurre^ces eleuate our heart and spirit to God, let us
bury our consideration, and exte^de our thoughts into the most holy and
glorious eternity; let us behold, how in it, the Divine goodness did tenderly
cherish us, preparing all convenient means for our salvation and progress in
his Love, and in particular, the commodity to do the good which does at that
present, present it self unto us; or to suffer the evil which befalls us.
This done, displaying, if we may so say, and eleuating the arms of our
consent, let us embrace, dearly, fervently, and most lovingly, as well the
good which presents it self to be done, as the evil which we are to suffer,
in consideration that God willed it so from all eternity, to please him, and
to obey his providence.

7. Behold the great S. CHARLES, when his Diocese was infested with the plague;
he lifted up his heart to God, and beheld attentively, that in the eternity of
Gods Providence, this scourge was determined, and prepared for his flock, and
that the same Providence had ordained, that in this their scourge he should
take a most tender care to serve, solace, and cordially to assist the
afflicted, since that in this occurrence, he chanced to be the Ghostly Father,
Pastor, and Bishope of that Province. Whereupon representing unto himself the
greatness of the pains, toils and hazards which he was necessarily to
undergo in that behalf, he sacrificed himself in spirit, to Gods good
pleasure, and dearly kissing this his Cross, he cried from the botome of his
heart, to the imitation of SAINT ANDREW, I salute thee o precious Cross, I
salute, thee o blessed tribulation; o holy affliction how delightful thou art,
since thou did issue from the loving breast, of the eternal Father of mercy,
who willed thee from all eternity, and did ordain thee for my dear people
and me! O Cross, my heart wills thee, since the heart of my God has willed
thee; o Cross my soul does cherish and embrace thee, with her whole affection?

8. In this sort are we to undertake affairs of greatest consequence, and the
sharpest tribulations, which can befall us. But if they prove to be of long
continuance, we must from time to time, and very frequently, iterate this
exercise, that we may more profitably continue our union to Gods good will and
pleasure, pronouning this short, yet wholly Divine Protestation of his Son,
yes o eternal Father! I will it with all my heart, because so it was pleasing
in thy sight, o God, T^EOTIME, how rich this practice is?

An exhortation to the sacrifice which we are to make to God of our free will.
CHAPTER. X.
1. I add to the sacrifice of S. CHARLES, that of the great Patriarch Abraham,
as a lively image of the most strong and loyal love, that could be imagined in
any creature.

2. Certainly he sacrificed the strongest natural affections that possibly he
could have, when hearing the voice of God which said unto him, Leave thy
country and thy friends and thy Fathers house, and go into the land which I
will show unto thee, he presently departed, and with speed put himself upon
the way, without knowing whither he was to go; the love of his dear country,
the delightful conversation of his near allie, the pleasures of his Fathers
house did not stagger him, he departs with an ardent boldness, and goes
whither it shall please God to codduct him. What an abnegation, THEO: what
renunciation was this? one cannot perfectly Love God, unless he forsake the
affection to momentarie things.

3. But this was nothing in respect of that which he did afterward, when being
twice called by God, who, seeing his promptitude in answearing, said unto him.
Take ISAAC thine only son: whom thou love, and go into the Land of
vision, where thou shall offer him in Holocaust, upon one of the mountains
which I will show unto thee; for behold this great man, how he suddenly
departs with his so much beloved, and so worthy to be beloved Son, goes three
days journey, comes to the foot of the mountain, leaves there his servant and
ass, lodes his son Isaac with wood necessary to the holocaust, reserving
himself to carry the sword and fire; and as he ascends the mountain, his
tender child said unto him, Father, and he answered him, what would thou
child? Look, said the child, behold the wood and fire, but where is the
victime of the holocaust? To which his Father replied, God will provide the
victime of the Holocaust, my child; and in the mean while, they arrived at the
top of the designed mountain, where Abraham presently erected an Altar, lays
the wood in order upon it, binds his Isaac, and puts him upon the funeral
Pile; extends his right hand, lays hold of, and draws out his sword, lifts up
his arm, and as he was ready to dispatch the blow, to sacrifice the child,
the Angel cried from above, Abraham, Abraham, who answers, I am here Lord,
and the Angel said unto him; do not kill thy son, it is sufficient, now I
know thou fear God, and have not spared thy son for my sake. Upon this
Isaac is untied, Abraham takes a Rame which he sound hanging by the horns in
the brambles, and sacrificed him.

4. THEO: he that sees his neighbors wife to covet her, has already
committed adult^rie in his heart; and he that binds his son to sacrifice him,
has already sacrificed him in his heart. Behold then, for Gods love, what a
Holocaust this holy man offered in his heart! an incomparable sacrifice, a
sacrifice that one cannot fully estimate, nor yet praise to the full. O God who
is able to discern, which of the two loves was greater, Abraham's, who to
please God, sacrificed his son so amiable, or the child's, who to please God
is willing to be sacrificed, and to that end permits himself to be bound, and
extended upon the wood, and as a tender lamb, peaceably attends deaths blow,
from the dear hand of his good Father.

5. For my part I prefer the Father for his longanimitie: yet dare I with all
boldly give the prize of magnaminitie to the son: For on the one side, it is
indeed a miracle, yet not so great a one, that Abraham already old and
accomplished in the science of loving God, and frotified by the late vision and
word of God, should give this last essay of loyalty, and love, toward a
Master whose sweetness and providence he had so often perceived and tasted.
But to see Isaac in the Spring of his age, as yet a mere Nouice and Appre^tise
in the art of loving God, offer himself upon the only word of his father, to
the sword and the flame, to become a Holocaust of obedience to the Divine will,
is a thing that passes all admiration.

6. Yet of the other side, do you not see THEOT: that for the space of three
days, Abraham does toss and turn in his soul the bitter thought, and
resolution of this sharp sacrifice. Do you not take compassion of his
Fatherly heart, when ascending alone with his son, the child, more simple
then a Dove said unto him, Father where is the victime? and he answered him,
God will provide for that my son. Do you not think that the sweetness of
the child carrying the wood upon his shoulders, and piling it afterward upon
the Altar, made his fathers bowels melt away with tenderness? o heart which
the Angels admire, and God magnifieth! O Savior I^SVS, when shall it then be
that having sacrificed unto thee all that we have, we shall also offer up unto
thee all that we are? When shall we offer unto thee, our freewill the only
child of our soul? when will it be, that we shall extend and tie it upon the
Altar of thy Cross, of thy thorns, of thy lance, that as a little Ewe, it may
be a grateful victime to thy good pleasure, to burn and die in the flame, and
with the sword of thy Divine Love.

7. O Freewill of my heart, how good a thing were it for thee to be bound and
extended upon the Cross of thy Heavenly Savior? How desirable a thing it is
to die to thy self, to burn for ever a Holocaust to the Almighty? THEOT: our
Freewill is never so free, as when it is slave, subject to the will of God, nor
ever so a slave, as when it serves our own will. It never has so much life,
as when it dies to it self, nor ever so much death, as when it lives to it
self.

8. We have freedom to do good or evil; yet to make choice of evil, is not
to use, but to abuse our freedom. Let us renounce the accursed liberty, and
let us for ever subject our free will to the rule of heavenly Love, let us
become slaves to Love, whose servants are more happy then kings. And if ever
our soul should offer to imploye her liberty against our resolutio^s of
serving God for ever and without reserve; o in that case for Gods sake, let us
sacrifice our freewill, and make it die to it self, that it may live to God.
He that in respect of self love will keep it in this world, shall loose it in
respect of eternal Love in the other world; and he that for the love of God
shall loose it in this world, shall co^serue it for the same love in the next.
He that gives it liberty in this world, shall find it a slave in the other,
and he that shall make it a servant to the Cross in this world, shall find it
free in the next, where being drunk up in the fruition of the Divine goodness,
liberty will be converted into love, and love into liberty, but liberty of
an infinite sweetness, without violence pain, or repugnance at all: we shall
unchangeably love the Creator and Savior of our souls.

Of the motives we have to holy Love. CHAPTER. XI.
1. SAINT BONAVENTVRE, Father Granado, Father Lowis of Po^t, Stella have
sufficiently discoursed upon this subject. I will only sum up, the points
which I have touched in this Treatise.

2. The Divine Goodness considered in it self, is not only the first motive
of all, but withal the greatest, the most noble and most puissant: For it is
that which does ravish the Blessed and crown their Felicity. How can one have
a heart, and yet not love so infinite a goodness? This subject is in some sort
proposed in the 1. and 2. chap. of the 2. book, and from the 8. chap. of the
3. book to the end, and in the 9. chap. of the 10. book.

3. The 2. motive is that of Gods supernatural Providence, creation, and
conservation, toward us, according as we have said in the 3. cha. of the 2.
book.

4. The 3. motive is that of Gods supernatural Providence over us, and of the
Redemption which he prepared for us, as it is explicated in the 4. 5. 6. and 7.
chap. of the 2. book.

5. The 4. motive is to consider how God does practice this Providence and
Redemption, giving every one the grace and assistance which is requisite to
their Salvation, which we handle in the 2. book from the 8. chap. and in the
3. book from the beginning till the 6. chap.

6. The 5. motive is the eternal glory, provided for us by the divine
goodness, which is the accomplishment of Gods benefits toward us, and is in
some sort touched from the 9. chap. to the end of the 3. book.

A profitable method whereby we may employ these methods. CHAPTER. XII.
1. NOw to receive from these motives a profound and powerful heat of love,
we are, after we have once considered one of them in common, to apply it in
particular to our selves: For example: O how amiable this great God is, who out
of his infinite goodness gave his son for the whole worlds redemption? alas
I, for all in general, but also for me who am the first of offenders! Ah, he
has loved me! yea I say, he has loved even me, yea even me my self, such as
I am; and delivered himself to death for me.

2. Secondly we must consider the Divine benefits in their first and eternal
source. O God, T^^O: what love can we have sufficiently worthy of the infinite
goodness of our Creator, who from all eternity determined to create,
conserve, govern, redeem save, and glorify all in general and in
particular? Ah what was I then, when I was not? my self I say, who now being
some thing, am yet but a simple and poor worm of the earth; while yet God
from the Abisse of his eternity, thought thoughts of benediction in my
behalf? He considered and designed, yea determined the hour of my birth, of
my baptism, of all the inspirations that he would bestow upon me; in a word,
for all the benefits which he would do and offer me; alas is there a
sweetness like to this?

3. Thirdly we must consider the Divine benefits in their second meritorious
source; for do you not know, THEO: that the high Priest of the law, wore upon
his back and bosom the names of the children of Israel, that is, the precious
stones, upon which the chief of the Israelites were engraue^? Ah behold JESUS
our High Priest, and consider him from the very instant of his conception, how
he bore us upon his shoulders, undertaking the charge, to redeem us by his
death, and death of the Cross. o THEO: THEO: this soul of our Savior knew us
all by name and surname: but especially upon the day of his passion, when he
offered his tears, his prayers, his blood and life for all, he breathed in
particular for thee these thoughts of love. Ah my eternal Father, I take upon
me and to my charge, all poor THEO: sins, to undergo torments and death,
that he may be freed from them, and that he may not perish but live. Let me
die, so he may live; let me be crucified, so that he may be glorified, o the
sovereign Love of JESUS his heart, what heart can ever bless thee, so
deuotely as it ought.

4. So within his fatherly breast his Divine heart foresaw, disposed, merited,
and obtained, all the benefits which we have, not only in general for all,
but also in particular for every one; and his sweet dugges provided for us the
milk of his motions draughtes, inspiratio^s, and sweetness, by which he does
draw, conduct and nurish our hearts to eternal life. Benefits do not in ^^ame
us, unless we behold the eternal will, which ordaines them for us, and the
heart of our Savior that merited them for us, by so many pains, especially in
his death and passion.

That the Mount of Caluarie is the true Academie of Love. CHAPTER. XIII.
1. NOw in final conclusion, the death and Passion of our Savior, is the
sweetest and yet most violent motive, that ca^ animate our hearts in this
mortal life. And it is the very truth, that mystical Bees, make their most
excellent honey, within this Lyon's wou^d; of the Tribe of Judah, but chered
rent and torn upon the Mount of Caluarie: and the children of the Cross
glory in their admirable Problem, which the word vndersta^ds not. O^t of all
devouring death, r^se the life of our consolation, and out of death which is
the strongest of all things, the honey sweetness of our love did issue. O
JESUS my Savior, how amiable is thy death, since it is the sovereign effect
of thy Love.

2. And indeed above in heavenly glory, next to the motive of the divine
goodness known and co^si^er^d in it self, that of the death of our Savior,
shall be the most powerful to ravish the hearts of the Blessed with the love
of God: in sign whereof MOSES and HELIE in the Transfiguration, which was a
scantling of glory, spoke with our Savior of the Excess, which he was to
accomplish in Jerusalem: but of what excess, if not of that excess of Love,
by which life was forced from the Lover to be bestowed upon the beloved? So
that in the eternal Canticle, I imagine that joyful acclamation will be
iterated each moment.

L^ue JESUS, live, whose death does prove,
What is the force of heavenly love.
3. THEO, the mount Caluarie is the mount of Lovers. All love that begi s not
from our Saviors Passion, is frivolous, and dangerous. Accursed is death
without the Love of our Savior. Accursed is Love, without the death of our
Savior. Love and death are so mingled in the passion of our Savior, that one
cannot have the one in his heart without the other. Upon Caluarie one cannot
have life without Love, nor love without the death of our Redeemour. But out of
that, all is either eternal death, or eternal Love; Christian wisdom,
consists in making a good choice, and to assist you in that, I vndertook^
this Treatise, my TH^O: While this short day does last,
Make choice, o man thou may,
To live eternally;
Or else for ere to dye.
It is the Heavens Decree
There should no middle be.


O eternal Love, my soul does desire and make choice of thee eternally, ah
come o holy Ghost, and inflame our hearts with thy Love, Either love or die,
die or love: To die to all other Love, to live to that of JESUS, that we may
not eternally die; but that living in thy eternal love, o Savior of our
souls, we may eternally singe VIVE JESUS. I love JESUS, live JESUS whom I
love, I love JESUS, who lives and reigns for ever and even. Amen.

4. These things THEO: which by the grace and help of Charity, have been
written to your Charity I beseech GOD they may take root in your heart, that
this Charity may find in you, the fruits of holy works, not the leaves of
praises. Amen. God be blessed. Thus I shut up this whole Treatise, in the words
with which S. AUGUSTINE ended his admirable sermon of Charity, made before an
illustrious assembly.

The end of this present Treatise.
ERRATA.
Page: Lin: Faults Co^rect^^ 9 28 it being desired if being desired 28 7
H^rodiadas Herodias 45 16 this in this 51 22 Alliance Covenant 58 23 expired
breathed out 63 33 Principale pr^nciple 64 9 souls soul 88 33 peace piece 128
8 her herself 169 14 or where 188 21 begiues gives 109 4 light, a True God
Light, true God 209 18 their his 237 28 Seeing a Seer 266 17 owes ewes 293 11
deseased deceased 332 3 for for we never love that which 334 8 uen heaven 359
14 exterior interior 381 27 Pallas Palace 393 32 And to it this And this is
it 430 1 Masters Masters Passion 461 12 Epthitheme E^itheme 479 19 Pipins
Kernells 546 18 at and 568 30 to Gods submissio^, to God, submissio^ 592 24
Sau^our out Savior brought him out 603 6 God good 660 13 honey oil 694 7
Charity Chastity 788 17 word world


