THE FRENCH HERALD SVMMONING ALL TRVE Christian Princes to a general Croisade,
for a holy war against the great Enemy of Christendom, and all his Slaves.
UPON THE OCCASION OF the most execrable murder of HENRY the great. TO THE
PRINCE.

LONDON Printed by E. Allde for Matthew Lownes, and are to be sold at his shop
at the sign of the Bishops head in Paul's Churchyard, 1611.

TO THE PRINCE.
SIR,
THis Herald, whose very phrase bewraies him enough to be french, though he
never spoke his own french yet; and who rather chose, upon, so urgent a
necessity, to speak ill and in a strange language, then not at all; now most
rightly presents himself first unto your highness: because as well by your
merit, as by your fortune, you are one of the chiefest (if not even the first)
upon whom he calls for the performance of the greatest, most Christian and
most royal duty that ever was yielded, to the greatest person deceased, to the
greatest persons living. It is no less then the cause of God, no less then
the cause of the Gods; seeing, Princes are styled so, by him that only is so,
and who, by a most excellent fashion, above all other men, after his own Image
made them so: And what a more godly ground for all Christians to take the
cross on them, against him that under a gaudy show of many false crosses, the
more crossely because closely, crosses the only and true Cross of Christ?
Wherein, if it be not your self (under the happy auspices of your glorious
father, or rather he himself by you) then I see no General in the world,
when our Christian Army must come into the field. An other reason I have more
especially and wholly to apply to your highness, that which is intended to many;
A most special and holy zeal to your Princely service, which even eight
years ago, brought me into your Country, and still working in my heart, now
enforces me rather to give you a small touch thereof, how mean soever, then it
should be longer hid from you, how much I am

YOUR HIGHNESS Most humble, most obedient, and most ready to be commanded
servant,

THE FRENCH HERALD Summoning all truly Christian Princes to a general
Croisado, for a Holy War, against the great Enemy of Christendom, and all
his Slaves.
WHo shall give me an yron-voice, that I may sound out to the four corners of
the Earth the greatest piece of infamy, the strangest, the wonderfullest
treachery, the rarest treason which ever was since the foundations of the world
were laid? But alas! who will believe my report? And now to repeat that which
the very Infamy thereof, long since has made so famous through all Nations, Is
it not in some sort most needles? Oh that it were so! But since so great, so
pregnant, so extraordinary a cause, has not yet produced conformable effects;
Needs, needs I must remember you, as though you knew it not, or had forgotten
it, That that King, that King of France, that great King of France, that
mighty, that tryumphant, that victorious, that famous Monarch, that
Thrice-great HENRY, honor of his time, horror to his enemies, that faithful
one to his friends, is (alas shall I say is, when he is no more, or if he be
yet, is nothing but a very nothing) dead, o mischief! twenty years before his
time, in the strength of his age, in the current of his glory, in the beginning
of a new course for more and more victories, in the very time when most we
needed him. He is dead, but ( o Lord) how is he dead? It is a great thing when
a King, even a mean King, dies; a thing that shakes often the deepest
foundations of his Kingdom, sometimes of his neighbors: a thing where of all
the world will speak and think much, though dead even leasurely and by the
ordinary way. But when a great King, and such a great one as our great HENRY
(If ever the like have been, or shall be) comes to an untimely end, not by that
easy course of Nature, but suddenly snatched and violently plucked away from
his own, from the very arms of his own, by the base and desperate attempt of
a mad beast; who not able, not daring to endure the beams of his royal face,
gives him his death before from behind; It is a case so strange, so rare, so
unheard of, that if there can be any such wonder, it were only not to wonder
at it: and would to God we might pass no further. We wonder at the furious
fashion of Lions, even if tame, or when we look upon them through their grates;
we wonder at the roaring of the waters even a far off: But if we see them
once let loose, and enraged upon us, If the streams ouerflowing their banks
have once covered our champions, and we be carried away by the currents,
swimming between the apprehensions of a weak hope and the pangs of a deadly
Shipwreck; Then leave we wondering and begin fearing, by so much more fearful
as the former wonder was great and full of it self.

Who shall give me an yron-voyce that I may thunder out, the most high, the
most lamentable complaint that ever was heard in the world, since our loss is
the greatest that ever was in the world? Alas! not the Lions, not the fiercest
beasts of Afric, but the infernal Furies, the enchained spirits of the
bottomless pit, the Dogs, the Wolves, the Tigers, the Lions, the Vipers, the
Serpents, the Dragons of hell, are let loose upon us, walk and wander among
us, under the shape and name of Frenchmen to work our mischief; for french
must needs be that hand that must kill France, though Strangers thrust it on:
as though they could find no where else, so much boldness, or so much desperate
wickedness. Alas! not one river, not many, but a whole Ocean of miseries has
overwhelmed our whole land, now that royal mound, now that brazen wall, now
that sacred trench is broken; which withheld it from swelling against us. What
poor hope now (if fear may be so termed) but of a huge if not a general
flood of woes? Terror and death enuiron us round about, which could not enter
upon us but by that gap. And we are left swimming together and among the
direfullest monsters of the deep in such a heavy case, as those which the
merciles, mouth of the sea will spare, shall not escape their hungry bellies:
And yet, Frenchmen, there is a small spark left us, of a better hope, if we
can be wise.

Who shall give me an yron-voyce that I may break into their minds, whose ears
the sound of my doleful complaint has pierced? That I may stir them up, no
longer to a silent wonder, no longer to a melting compassion; but to a bloody
anger, and no less pittiles then just revenge; of so wonderful, so pitiful,
so wrongful a treason? The so miserable loss I say, of so great a King; a
loss, alas! I cannot say it enough, so great, so public, so general, so
universal, so far and wide extending it self, even to those that think
they have no interest in it, even to those that believe they have gained by it,
That we may boldly affirm, all the world, known and unknown, subjects and
strangers, friends and foes, yea his greatest enemies, and who so trecherously
furthered his end; have lost in him: for where they thought to escape his
victorious hands, which had no further end of Glory, then the sweetness of his
wonted clemency; they must needs fall into ours, who more fierce now then
otherwise we had been, not as a Lioness, not as a Tygresse, robbed of their
dear young ones, but as dear children traitorously deprived of their dearest
father, will never grant them that pardon, which they might easily have
obtained at his hands.

Cursed, o cursed and dismal day, wherein we see the face of our France so
sorrowful, so glad but the day before; our Queen so pitifully lamenting, the
day before so gloriously crowned; our Court so deeply mourning, the day before
so highly rejoicing; wherein, o mischief, we see a great King dead, which not
only the day before, but even the same, and many after, made the furthest
parts of Europe to tremble at his greatness, that could not so distinctly have
heard the bruit of his fall. Cursed once more, o cursed, no more worthy to be
called day, but black and dismal night, where Frenchmen lost their King,
France her father, the Church her son, the Nobility their master, the
people their protector, the whole world his ornament; wherein the greatest
person of the world, was most unluckily murdered by the least, the best by the
worst, the most honored by the most infamous.

And thou o eternal stain to the French name, scandal of mankind,
abomination to the times, execrable Fury let out of hell to commit so heinous
a parricide; remain, o sempiternally remain in the deepest of thy dark
dungeon, thou incarnate devil for ever and ever accursed; And may thou never
come out of those flames wherein thou art so deservedly tormented, but only to
receive the last doom of thy everlasting and dreadful damnation.

But thou, oh my dear Country, heretofore so glorious, now a shameful and
bloody Stage of so pitiful a Tragedy, will thou ever be a fruitful mother of
traiterous King-killers? must cruel Africa yield unto thee both in quantity
and quality of monsters, which now of late thou bring forth, who never
before did bear any? will thou never have a King but with this prouiso, thou
shall kill him with a knife? Good Lord! what an oversight, what a blindness in a
Prince otherwise so sharp-sighted, to have seen a like blow given to his next
Predecessor, yea to have received himself another upon his own face, besides
so many other desperate attempts, which he might have reckoned for so many
warnings; and yet make no more use of other men's mis-haps, nor of his own
feeling?

The knife of that perfidious in- Clement (alas must I again bring to memory
those sacrilegious caytifs?) was yet scarce dry from the blood of the last
VALOIS, when that of desperate Chastell was dyed in the blood of the first
BVRBON; and the same was yet reaking hot, when this sauadge Bedlem imbrued his
in the best blood of his heart: Ah wretch! what have thou done? o Guard where
were you? French men whereof dreamed you? Cresus had but one son, and he dumb,
yet seeing the life of his father indaungered, he could cry aloud Save the
King. Nature at that extremity untied the strings of his tongue; and a silly
childs affection, stronger then the very destinies, could effect with a simple
word, and against many, that which so many men, so many Frenchmen (truly
unworthy of so great a Prince) could not with-stand, neither with tongue nor
hand, opposing themselves against the weak attempt of one only. And yet
France lackes not a million of white souls, which would rather have wished
that impious steel red-hot in their own bowels. But no man can save where God
has once decreed to destroy; and surely we must look for no less, since he
has taken to himself that valiant instrum^et, which was able to prevent our
destruction.

Celestial gardians, and thou o mighty Angel, which had so happily led him
through so many dangers, returned him victorious out of so many battles, why
did ye not put by that blow, like the former? had ye so faithfully kept him
hitherto, now to give him over to the fury of this enraged beast? Lord! how the
measure of our sins must needs have been heaped up and running over, since
thou thoughtst it fit to strike us with so mighty a thunderbolt of thine anger?
Lord! how much is that man void of judgment, who knows not this to be a
judgment of thine own, most justly given out against the fulness of our
iniquities?

Poor Prince! but more poor people! we had been so often threatened with a
blow from heaven; now alas, now it is burst out upon our miserable heads! who
told it not, who heard it not, that thou should dye when thy Gallery should
be at an end? Who red not the to true and no less unhappy predictions, that
expressly said thou should receive a wound behind? how many most
unfortunate, most unlucky Cassandraes, had written unto thee upon the murder
of thy predecessor, that thou might take it as a looking-glass and a lesson;
and the consideration of his so untimely death, might be the preservation of
thine own life? yet all that could not so work, but that noble courage of
thine, enemy to all mistrust, thine own goodness to-to accessible, thine own
easiness have been so many knives to pierce thy bosom.

If death had found this great king in his bed, and by a natural way, it is an
ordinary thing, which scarce one would wonder at; If he had found it in a
battle, least of all; for there even most he sought it, which then most fled
before him: But to be murdered in his own Paris, in his Caroche, in the midst
of his nearest servants and by a base Pedant, not by one, but by two several
wounds, with a short knife (as though it had been at his full choice) It is so
wonderful and so prodigious an event, and so far from all likelihood, that
hitherto belief can scarce lay hold of it: me thinks yet I am in a dream, or
for a while enchaunted when I remember it; and that mine eyes and ears (only
deceived for the time by some strong illusion) will presently be freed of their
error, and I shall see my King again.

How is so great a Monarch, the fear and terror of his Enemies, and who upon
the preparation of so great an Army held the whole world at a bay; How is so
great a Monarch, passed even in a moment from this world to another? He that
had but the day before crowned his Queen! he that was the day after to lead
her tryumphant into Paris! he that was immediately to march forth with that
fearful Army, which threatened to stamp all his Enemies to powder! Good Lord!
how many high dissignes overthrown? how many threads cut with that of his life?
and what a wretched Remora stays now a great ship? He was so full of life and
vigor, he had so many friends and so many means, so many men and so many
horses, so many arms and so many cannons, besides so much courage and valor,
so much judgment and dexterity, so much resolution and wisdom, so much
experience and readiness, in war, in state, Camp, Counsel, and every where;
as it is impossible to discern, whether he was more valiant or more wise, more
polliticke or more martial, being a like excellent and perfect every way. And
all that could not help, but a forlorn wretch, a man of nothing, a nothing
and not a man, has stayed the course of so great, so mighty and so matchless
a Monarch, to whom even the most dreadful elements had yielded, and who sent a
trembling Ague into the hearts of all those, who were conscious to have deserved
his anger.

At Melun he shunned the attempt of Barriere; At Fontainebleau that of a
Spanyard, who would have rewarded him with a treacherous death, even when he
healed him of the Kings evil: At Paris that of a mad fellow yet living, and
whom he would never suffer to be punished, so naturally was he given to
compassion and clemency. Al these attempts, though missing indeed, together with
that which really, and effectually, did beat out his very teeth, were
sufficient to provide him against this last and fatal blow. But alas, that to
brave mind could never learn how to fear. And yet the very day of his death,
had he some secret feeling of his end; He lay down twice or thrice upon his
bed against his custom, and rising again as often, kneeled and prayed heartily
to God that morning, as if he had foreknowne it would be his last.

For that morning he was entreated not to stir abroad, and forewarned by a
learned Astronomer, (called La Brosse) that that day was dangerous to him: but
he, trusting his own goodness, and after so Christian a preparation, resolved
to any thing his maker would lay upon him, made so small account thereof, as
going after noone to the Arsenall, even he refused to take any Guard.
Nevertheless an hour before, he could not well frame with himself, if he
would go or tarry; being divided between the withdrawing counsel of his good
Angel, and the impulsive force of his destiny; a thing altogether unusual to
the promptnes of his wit, never before having ben seen to stagger upon any
occasion: At last his courage and our mischance got the upper hand. When he
received the blow, he was reading a letter from the Archduke, who offered him
passage for his Army, and to defray all charges through his Country; And in the
very feeling of his joy, our sorrow ouertooke him. Oh! how far was he in the
world when he went out of it? But sure, those cruel blows were more against
our selves then against him* and God in his wrath took that inestimable jewel
from us, whose worth we never rightly valued. Yet O Lord, stay here at the
least; we, indeed, are worthy of a sharper punishment, but altogether unable to
bear it; Give us leave now to lament for our worthy Prince, for whom forgive
us, o father, if perhaps our sorrow be more then is due to any mortal.

And yet, dear Country men, thus far may we joy in our sorrow, and thank
God for many comforts which cannot easily be taken from us; we suffer a great
loss indeed, and most senceles and stony were we, if we should not feel it;
But, I pray you, look over me with me, both the fortune and nature of our
state. Whenever any new line of our Kings has been about to set up it self
by his own strength, these great changes have never ben without great troubles,
and some extraordinary great conuulsion: For as in the natural, so in the
Politic body, as a chief bone cannot be broken without much violence, but
when it comes once to knit again, there grows a certain hardness and
callosity, more strong then ever the bone it self was: So, when after such
aebreach the Kingdom has once taken root, and ben well established, the
father ever left it surer to his fonne, and a fonne, greater then his father.
above whom as per excellentiam, he always got the surname of great indeed. We
had but three lines since our stories began to be written by our own men; for
in those times our forefathers more careful to do, then curious to speak,
rather gave then took occasion of writing: So that if even those, that most
would have concealed it, had not ben forced to tell it us, we should have
known nothing of our selves before Faramond. But look how soon came in our
first Clovis? but the second after Merouee, from whom the first line took
name; and how justly deserved he the surname of great; if in that golden age of
simplicity those swollen titles had been in use? And afterward was not our
Charles great indeed; the second of the second line, to which even in double
respect he gave name? Now in the third, was not our Robert, both King and
surnamed great, even during his fathers reign, who (never so worthy) had but a
sorry surname; as though his son had been the very soul of the Kingdom, and
the father could not truly be a King without him. And howsoever the accession
now of Bourbon to the Crown, cannot rightly be termed the change of a line,
no more then that of Valois (being just both alike, after the successiue
decease of three brethren, without heir male, successively Kings after their
father) but only the ingrafting of a native bud upon his own stock; yet the
example may hold, because it is a new branch and name: and more, especially
because one brave Prince, was more stood against, more powerfully and more
passionately, then ever any of all those before, or even all they together. He
had wonderful small means when he came to the crown, and no better friend but
Dieu and son droit, with his own sword; he was of a religion contrary to that
which was formerly professed in his kingdom: he had not only the bodies, but,
which is worse, hearts, minds, and souls, strongly preoccupated, and wholly
bent against him: all which oppositions he must needs overcome one by one: And
howbeit in the end he settled his affairs, and was a better Catholic then the
Pope himself, yet the weak faith of some incredulous souls could not as yet
well receive it; and the wily craft of those deceitful Foxes, or rather
ravenous Wolves, accustomed to make advantage as ill of silly men's weakness, as
of desperate wretches resolutions; and whose wide claws nothing escapes, be
it never so hot or cold, light or heavy, dissembling their own knowledge, did
foster and further the others unbelief, and made away to make him away.

Yet his virtue and strength are not dead, but with a fame and a name which can
never dye, and is able still to win battles, as a new Scanderbeg after his own
death, He has left us a successor, who as another Phoenix sweetly raised out
of those Ashes, and rising upon our darkened Horizon, as a new Sun in his
Oryent, faithfully promises to dry our moystned eyes, and clear up all the
mists of our sorrows. And as a Great one said once, since more adore the Sun
rising then declyning; no doubt but this new Planet, now so happily beginning
to shine upon our heaven, shall one day be saluted and worshipped by many more
subjects, then that whose course was of late so unhappily shortened.

And indeed, if we may judge of the fruit by the flowers, his buds are so many,
and so fair already, that when it shall once please God to spread them, they
cannot but exceed the most perfect beauties, and even the very Gold of his own
Lillies. Nothing can be imagined greater then the motions of that young Prince;
and me thinks I see already in him a picture in little of that worth of his
father, which does promise, I know not how much, more in this hopeful
abridgement then in the original: as though God reviving in him not only all
those former virtues, would ad to his number some other more, as yet to the
world unknown. It is wonderful to see him at this age, send out so many
lively sparks of that powerful Genius within him, saying already such things,
as would contend in excellency with all those old sayings of Plutarch; as
though he would put to school again those famous men that fatherd them:
taking it of the father as well as his kingdomee. For who was there in the world
more quick more sharp; and of a more present wit then he, who could put down
at his pleasure the most solid judgments, by the readiness of his answers? This
young son of his is active, stirring, courageous, as he was; so delightful,
as one would never be weary to look upon him; Of such a natural towardness to
al his exercises, as you would think Art can teach him no more; Of a man-like
fairenes, and drawing already to be a man before men's expectation; through
which manly lineaments yet shines a royal greatness. It was a sorrowful Essay,
yet very comfortable to all his subjects in that public desolation, to see his
gracious fashion at the Parliament, sitting the first time on his royal Throne
of Justice, assisted with the Queen his Mother, Princes, Peers and Officers
of his Crown; and to hear him speak with such a Majesty as did gainsay his
Age, and ouer-reach our reason: yet all that, nothing like to his fair
presence, to his royal countenance, at his happy coronation, as though months
had been years, for his prentiship, and he had perfectly learned to be a King,
before he be a man.

He is carefully trained up, under the vigilant care of a wise mother, who
could give a good proof even in the brunt of this general mischance, and in
every action since, how well her great mind was fitted to the greatness of her
charge; And will not be less blessed in the government of this Empire, and in
bringing up our lawful king in all virtues meet for his great rank, then in
the bringing him into the light of this world: A Princess indeed most
accomplished in every thing, and whose heroycall quallities surmount the
ordinary feeblenes of her sex, beyond proportion.

He is seconded with two young brethren, who as two strong Pillars of the
Realm, shall without wearynes faithfully lend their shoulders to the weight of
his charge. He has three fair Princesses to his Sisters, whose happy marriages
will strengthen more and more the firmnes of his Scepter; Besides so many great
and ancient alliances of his fathers approved friends, whose only name will
suffice to beat down the power of such enemies, as would rise against him. He
has a mighty Army at hand at all times, many treasures to maintain it, and
many brave Generals to command it; which, like so many thunders, are ready to
fall upon all that would offend him. So that if any had but the least known
thought thereof, I do not say of his subjects only, but even among his
greatest Enemies, he should sooner be crushed with the force of the blow, then
hear the noise of it.

Away therefore, go and hide your selves for shame, ye vain bablers, black
souls, infamous remnants of the League, infernal matches of our civil fires,
poisoned springs of all our miseries; be never seen, be never heard in the
world with your Syren-Songs, that our enemies are moved with pity through the
strange cruelty of our accident, and that although their hatred were yet in his
heat, it will now be cooled in the depth of our mischief; as though we were
ready to call for their mercy, as though it were in their hands to be good to
us, and fear had taken such impression in our hearts, as France were glad to
kneel to the next Conqueror. O God! what a base slackenes, what a feigned
faintnes, what an open treason? and yet you dare mis-call it Policy and skill
of State; Good Lord! what a hurtful Policy, to show weakness in this great
body, where there is none? when rather (if there were any) it were true skill
to conceal it. And how far is that from emboldning us, by the very weakness
of the enemy himself; who by that vnhapy remedy wherewith he was constrained to
put by for a time his evil to come, has so basely uncovered his shame, and
bewrayed the sores of his estate? All their safety was set upon the point of a
bad knife, which if it had missed our Kings royal bosom, our swords could not
have missed their execrable breasts, unless they had prevented us with cutting
their own filthy throats.

O brave Frenchmen, Those that in the sharpest of their sickness, in the
extremity of their weakness and irresolution, carried the fire and the sword
into the very heart of Cleue-land, bravely to succor their friends; should they
not be able in the best of their health, in the height of their strength, and
when the state has taken firm root and form; should they not be able now
more bravely to defend themselves against their Enemies? Nay, but there is
another reckoning to be made. If we may ever smell out, that this mischievous
blow has been sent us by any one in the world, either from the East, the West,
or the South, (the North we need not fear, it is to white and to pure to use
such black remedies and has no cause thereof) We must, we ought, and we will
dye, men, women, children and all, in our revenge; we will go and fetch them
down from the very tops of their hills, search them into the deepest holes of
the earth, if they run and hide themselves thither; we will pull them out,
to their deserved slaughter: If not, we will rather destroy our whole seed,
then leave a generation which might remember and reproach to our taynted
memory, that we were such Traitors to our King and to our selves, as to wincke
at such an injury. For if we be so faint-harted, as to suffer those attempts
upon our Princes, without making merciless vengeance, to light as quickly upon
the Authors heads, we are gone for ever; there are no more French in France,
no men, no Monarchy, none of that ancient freedom and franchise, from whence
we derive our name; there is no France in the world. They will boast we
complain, but dare not say who has hurt us. They will pronounce sentence of
death in their own Chaires at their pleasure against our dearest Kings, they
will send to kill them when they list, and all our straightest guards, and all
the cruellest punishments we can invent, shall not be able to keep them: For
the earth will never cease to bring forth murderers, so long as it brings
forth gold, or religious arguments; nor our enemies to set them against us, so
long as they stand in fear of our greatness.

What must we do then in so lamentable a case? Take only a fearful
punishment of that cursed caytiue? Make even with the ground the infamous den
wherein he was borne; lay waste the unhappy soil that brought him forth; cut
down the trees of so hurtful a shade; sow all the ground over with salt, and
leave no re^nant, no memory of all that cursed brood, most justly punished, to
have any part in so portentuous a monster. Alas! and yet this has not ben
done; and yet it were but a small suplice, and a sorry revenge, far far
inferior, far far unanswerable to our great ruin: It were only to whip the
clothes, as the Persians used, and to punish the instrument, without passing to
the cause, as one that would break the sword and forgive the murderer. Do
you believe if we had spared him, he would ever have refrained the like
attempt, since even amidst the rack and tortures, and in the apprehension of a
direful death, he had been so powerfully taught and persuaded, as he stood fast
to his damned resolution? what think you then of them that set him on work,
but that loosing such an Instrument (as they were well content) their loss is
so little, their profit so great, as they will ever most gladly venture like
losses, for like gains.

Once more what must we do then? stay till that furious serpent, only cut by
the tail, return more fierce then before, to sprinckle our Louure afresh with
the blood of France? Ah! let us rather dye, or bruise a thousand times his
mischievous head, then fall into the like extremity again; and rather kill al
in revenge of the present outrage although there were none henceforth to be
feared.

SIR, I must needs speak unto you the first, though the youngest; you have the
first, the greatest, and the nearest interest in the quarrel: And I am your
most humble and faithful Subject. Of al abominations in the world, treason is
most to be abhorred; The king your father has often seen al christendom wholly
bent to his ruin, ready to ouerwhelme him; and yet cold that never stop the
current of his victorious fortune. But now as he was going, as a mighty
whirlwind to overthrow al his enemies, there he is stopped by one only Traitor;
who showed to truly (as Augustus said) that there is nothing so dangerous, as
the resolution of a coward: A coward indeed, but such a one as having no
particular quarrel, that might cast him into so high an extremity, must needs
be moved to it by some higher powers. If that may ever be found (Sir) and if it
were possible that the feeling loss of such a Father (to whose blessed memory
all your subjects daily sacrifice their dearest tears, all your Allies their
hottest sighs, and generally all honest men their deepest mourning) could not
move you to take Arms against the Authors of our mis-haps; the mere
reputation of your kingdom, the safety of your own life ought to do it: And
let not the consideration of your vnder-age hinder so just a war. Your own
father scare exceeded your years, when he began to be a soldier; when both he
and the Prince of Conde, in regard of their youth, were called the Pages of the
Admiral. Do not venture your life in an imaginary peace, more then in open
war; your life, I say, no less is the mark they aim at. The noble examples
of your predecessors, yet recent and before your eyes, the best hart-blood of
your so loving father, yet hot-smoking up to your own nostrills, challenges
that duty of you.

Open or suspected Enemies, our Kings have always laughed at; but secret and
hidden ones ever made us to weep: and better it were to have a million in an
open battle before you, then one alone lurking in a corner. And better yet
seek a noble death in the midst of all dangers, through a thousand spears
and as many muskets, then daily look for it in fear and suspicion.

Suspicion, Sir, is not the Element of the kings of France; They cannot be mued
up all day in their closets, without taking the air but at a window, or
speaking to their people through a reed; They cannot live but free, ever
abroad, ever on horseback; fighting is more pleasing to them, and less
dangerous then playing. They can dye in Tiltings, never in Battles; in their
own Cities, in their Chambers, and with a violent death; never in war, but
by sickness or a natural course. True it is, few kings dye in war also, for
few go thither; but the kings of France have sought it in the remotest
Afric, carried it into the very heart of Asia, ever returning victorious, and
triumphing over their utmost extremities: while death durst never be so bold as
to assail them but by the ordinary way. There have been some sick, some
prisoners, some dead; Never any one killed, much less overcome; yet was it not
for want of ve^turing through the hottest perils; Never any Princes went more
freely, nor further into them: But it was, that they have ever ben invincible,
and, as it were, immortal, when they stood upon their guard. But were it not
so, and that our kings free and far from all mistrust and harm, could live
altogether safe, and out of the shot of all treacherous designs; into what
contempt, I pray you, would fall the blood of France, in times past so honorable
among all nations, if they should but once see that it durst not revenge it
self against those that caused it so traitorously to be shed? If this should
not nerely touch it, what would? and what injuries would it revenge hereafter,
if this were now so lightly passed over? would it not belie it self, and with
it self the public voice of the world, afirming that never any offered it
disgrace or injury, without dear repentance? And would it not harten his
enemies, to continue their mischievous blows, if they saw the whole vengeance
light upon one only, the inferior and weaker instrument?

Our King Frauncis the great, had no other ground for that bloody war he made
against the Emperor, but only the revenge of a servant of his, Merueilles; The
death of that man alone cost the lives of an hundredth thousand, and shook the
very foundacions of Europe. And now shall the death of the greatest king that
ever wore the Crown of France, be so meanly regarded, so slightly past over,
even by his own feruants, by his own son; without more feeling, without
more stirring, then for a glass broken? And shall all posterity see the story,
and our Nephews read therein, without blushing at the impassibility of their
Fathers? What would so many Nations say, which do so honorably esteem of the
French name, if they should see us drink up such a shame? What would we say,
our selves, to the sacred ghost of that famous Prince, if (as once that of
Achilles to the Greeks) it returned and would reproach us, we sacrificed nothing
upon his Tomb? Will we say it is want of money? The Bastille is heaped full with
it; want of men? France ouerfloweth with them; want of friends? Never any King
had more or better; want of Arms and munition? Never storehouse was better
furnished, both for quantity and goodness. What want we then, but that rare
King has most abundantly left it us to revenge his death?

Ah, Sir, I can well tell what we want; nine or ten years more and nothing
else: and you should have had them for us, if that unhappy wretch had not so
untimely prevented the natural death of your healthful father: But what? Did we
never beat our Enemies, even under younger Kings then your self? what then
under the infant Clotaire, whom our Queen his mother carried hanging on her
breast, in his swaddling bands, at the forefront of the battle, crying aloud
Frenchmen, this is your King? She was a Queen indeed, and he a king
nevertheless, though young; nor those old French, daunted ever the more. And
yet by the way, I would wish you to note, that this young King, this sucking
babe, being scarce four months old when he won battles, was the first
afterward, who for his greatness, valor, and worth, got the glorious surname of
great among his French, though yet in those days of a general goodness, they
were more ready to nich-name their kings for one only vice, then to honor
them for many good qualities; so rife were these, so scarce, those. What? and
under Lewis your own Ancetor, whose happy name you carry, as well as his
Scepter? Did not he succeed in this same State, and very near at the
selfsame age as your self? And did he leave to chastise his Enemies abroad,
his rebels at home, and afterward to undertake upon Palestine and Egypt; Then
coming back into France, make a new journey into Afric? yet found he at
his entry to the Crown, all his kingdom in trouble (never more quiet then at
this present;) his Princes and great ones divided from him, united against him,
(which do not devise any thing now, but general union, and your service;) and
did nevertheless most happily overcome all those difficulties, his kingdom
being not so great as yours by much, nor his renenue, the tenth part of that
which you possess. Do you think, Sir, that that brave Prince, which so
valiantly undertook so great wars, as far from his interest as from his
limits, would have demurred upon the revenge of so high an injury? Foraine
examples would even shame our own, being so fair and so worthy of imitation;
as among many, I cannot here deny due place to one most famous and very near
our case. Philip of Macedon a great Captain and a great king, as our eyes have
seen our great HENRY, having conquered all Greece, as he, France; is
murdered, even as he, in his own chief City, in a public rejoicing, and
upon the very instant when he was to execute the greatest enterprise he ever
had in hand. His son Alexander the great, yet a child (for so Demosthenes
calls him) ascended upon the Throne of Philip as our LEWIS, upon that of HENRY;
but he feels it shake under his feet; sees Greeks and Barbarians up against
him on every side, his Counsel dismayed wish him to leave off the affairs of
Greece, and quietly compound the rest. Nay, says he, but if I be perceived to
shrink at the beginning, I shall ever have my hands full of them: and following
this brave resolution, ouer-throwes the Barbarians in a great battle,
ouer-runnes all Greece, like a fire, and destroys the Empire of the Persians,
the greatest then in the world, with a small Army of thirty thousand men at the
first, and a stock of thirty Talents. Yet with so small means never would go
out of the Haven, but he would requite old servants and get new; giving all
away save hope, which he only kept for himself: And when he had endeludged the
world with a general inundation of blood, yet is not contented if Jupiter from
heaven do not assure him, the death of his father is fully revenged, and his
Manes fully appeased.

And you, Sir, who have more Captains, then he Soldiers; more Millions then
he Talents; more stedfastnes in your estate, more obedience in your subjects,
more love in your Nobility, more wisdom in your Counsel, then ever Alexander
had; with so many advantages, will you not resolve your self to the execution
of that vengeance? will you not steel your self in that resolution? and will
you rather be faint-harted at this first trial? will you winck at your Fathers
murder? and tarry till another knife, forged (perhaps) upon the same Anuile,
send you the same way, tell his doleful Shadow, that for contemning the
revenge of his death, you your self lost your own life? Oh! let me rather
loose mine eyes then see it, rather my senses, rather my understanding, rather
all, then feel it, or at any time come to the knowledge thereof! This puts me
out of frame, this kills me, when in the fit of this burning Ague, in the
sharpnes of this pain, those who but yesterday armed them selves for some
Duch, come and tell me now, we must not speak of war for the Kings death: for
what else then Countrymen? for a foot of ground, for Cleves, or Iuliers, which
are none of ours?

I never spoke of Naples, Millan, and Navarre, which are ours indeed; there
they stand still, and there shall we ever find the^. But where shall we recover
that great HENRY, who has been taken, and so traitorously taken from us? Yet if
we had lost him in war, where the heat of the fight spares none; Patience;
Arms are doubtful, and oft-times number surmounts valor: But to have him
murdered in cold blood, in a full peace, and before the eyes of all the world;
and that we durst not, and that we should not revenge it, it would be the
shamfullest and greatest dishonor that ever happened unto us, to cover, darken,
kill, and bury for ever, the whole French name, and what-soever glorious we
have done heretofore. Moreover, we do never so sensibly esteem of other men's
losses, as of our own; All those pieces, were indeed lost for us, not by us,
they were taken from our Fathers upon some color of right, at least right of
war, which as our Brennus was wont to say, is the most ancient and universal
Law; The grief thereof is past long since: But if any would encroch now but
one foot of land upon our Borders, in what an other sort would we stir for it,
then for all those kingdoms? And will we not stir for the death of our
Kings? who would not without fear undertake against their sacred lives, if
we valued them cheaper then their Lands? Yet have we a kind of comfort in
those losses; they were so deerly sold, that the possessors dare not much
boast of it: And shall we not make them pay more deerly for the pricelesse life
of our dear Prince? Shall they laugh it out to our faces, whilst we sit basely
weeping? And shall not their insolency sharpen our anger? O French-women, and
no more French men, if that might ever be reproched unto us! But now, what
relation, what proporcion, of the loss of some land, to the loss of a King,
and of such a King as he was? Nevertheless, who knows not but the least of
those pieces, has often set all Christendom in fire and blood, our Kings
themselves not sparing their own lives for them?

Again, I never spoke in the young days of your Majesty's reign; Then we
could not choose but greatly be amazed at the greatness, at the suddennes of our
blow, and somewhat yield to the fury of the storm; Then were we rather to look
to assure our selves then to trouble others, rather to defend then to assail,
and panting under the weight of our ruin, take hold (as it were) for a time,
of that hand that had drawn it upon us; as not knowing, or rather not seeming,
or rather not striving, to know our enemies. But now, since there is nothing
to be apprehended, since in their lowest degree of weakness and misery, they
had no further end then only to take him away, esteeming they had gotten
enough, if we might but loose him, as to his perpetual glory they feared him
alone, more then all France besides; or else thinking that he being gone, all
things would go away after him, and of themselves be turned vpside down; Since
it pleased God in his divine mercy to confound their thoughts, showing them,
and us, and all the world, that he can scourge and have pity, wound to death
with one angry hand, having the other still ready to apply the plaster, and
against all hope, to heal; that he can kill and make alive, bring down to the
grave and raise up again; since we are now as strong, and as strongly settled
as ever in your fathers time, if not more; Why should we not speak boldly? Why
should we not point at our enemies with the finger, and call them by their own
names? Why should we not go, and yet more boldly fall upon them all?

There is no more doubt, no more difficulty, who has forged that parricidious
steel; we know, alas! now we know to much their doctrine and practice; and
cannot say worse against them then they have written themselves. Time was, and
in King Henry the thirds time it was, when we feared only secret confessions,
private conferences, hidden chambers of Meditacion; All these works of darkness
were as yet done in the dark, and could catch none but some weak and
brain-sicke souls. But now, Time is, that he that can transform himself in an
Angel of light, has set an open school thereof, and sent his black Doctors,
thorough all nations (more safely to deceive) falsely carrying the sweet name
whose person they persecute, because when he put them out of hell he told them
A Jesus ite: Now it is publicly taught, and as a thirtenth article of faith,
maintained and commanded to be added to the Creed, under pain of eternal
damnation. And if we do not at last open our eyes, if we do not set our
selves against it, if we let it cool any longer, and not put it down in hot
blood, Time shall never be nor so good, nor so fit, as it is now. Mariana was
the first who was bold to reduce it in art, and precepts, in three set books,
De regis destructione; And though many, almost as pestilent as he, both of his
own nation and Society, both before and after him, have written upon that
unhappy subject, as Ribadeneyra, Toledo, Valencia, Vasquez, Azor, Sa, and
others; yet because, with them, he that can work most mischief, is worthy of
the highest title, this most unworthy villain shall go in the forefront,
since he without them, and above any of them, or rather above all them, has
wrought most villainy, and killed so great a King: That execrable monster could
not be borne very far from Afric; And Inde prima mali labes. Yet, because
Spain shall not be disgraced alone, by breeding such royal Dragons, such
venomous Basiliskes, which kill not men simply but kings; not with their sight
(being not otherwise so resolute, or religiously minded as to venture so near)
but with their breath only and a far off; And whose infectious stinck can
still murder, not during their lives only, but a thousand years after their
death, very far from those old Prophets, whose dead carkases did raise others
to life: There is no Nation in the world, but has a share in the shame,
Germany, even honest Germany, that golden Latium of old Saturnus, and who has
kept herself more unspotted of this newer world, will acknowledge she has no
small part therein; There you shall find one of those, doting indeed, and yet no
less proud, and yet no less wicked, serpents, who dares not only vomit his
venom against kings, but inueighing against them, usurp even their very title
and phrase, as in a kind of comparison, or as if he would play the king
himself; But oh! how far come thou short, impudent Gretzerus? No Iebuzit
but one only Araunah could ever bring forth a Royal Gift; and far better
had thou done to keep thy self within thine own rank, and adding the
most crooked letter of the Alphabet, and most like thy serpent-like dealing, to
thy title, more fitly call it, Basiliscon Doron. But God would not have thee
both wicked and wise at once; for when thou have broke thy head at the very
head and first word of thy book, it is not enough, but thou must needs break
thy neck also in thy foolish dedication, to such a one as thou never saw, to
such a one as thou shall never see (for that great soul being departed
penitent, no doubt, but where she is, Gretzerus there shall thou hardly come)
finally, to such a one as shall never hear of it; and if she should, could
never but greatly abhor to be cogged from here below, and persuaded to make
a party there above for the Loyolists, and Cabalise with the blessed Virgin,
with S. Brigid, S. Andrew (and why not S. George to?) with a high hand to carry
from God such things, as she now upon better information knows most to be
eschewed. Together and of the same feather, you have there one Becanus, the
more wicked because the more witty; so apt are these monster-men to turn to
ill uses the very blessings of God. A little lower there is Carolus Scribanius,
who most justly ashamed of his traiterous name, has been feign to feign another
in his Ample Theater of dishonor, yet never forgetting herein the ambitious
pride natural to the society, in taking of the best when they choose: One, who
as though he were not able of himself to be wicked enough, therein is he more
wicked, that he praises the wickedest. Poland, Sweth-land, Trans-siluania,
Bohemia, at their own cost, will contribute to the public shame, those by
whom they have received, and still receive so much smart, though some have
paid dear enough for it. And after these farther countries, the remotest part
of that famous Island, penitus toto orb remota will not be ashamed to stake her
penny ( Haies and Hamilton) though not a penny worth, to the common reproach of
Nations. But belike, her sister would be too proud, if she could not name for
herself, or rather against herself, red-hatted, or rather red-harted, Allens,
Campion, Heart, Parsons, Creswell, Hall, Tesmond, Gerrard, Hammond, all bloody
or fiery Traitors, and their superior in all, Garnet. And now, Sir, among all
them, perhaps you think your France will escape free; But alas! shall we not
find within our own bowels, one Kakodemono-zannes, apoligising for this
Garnet, and Franciscus Verona for Ian Chastell? both which, we know whence they
are, but since they themselves condemn their own deeds, by counterfeiting
their names, and therein (the only thing they have done well) in some sort
redeem their Countries shame; let them dye for ever, unknown indeed and
unnamed; let those that have any part in them, disclaim it; let them perish in
their blood, and let me not have their names within my lips. But oh! but we
have such as glory in their own infamy, those cursed ones that call evil,
good, and good, evil; who least they and their villainies should not be known
enough by their writings, have preached it openly, from Town to Town before
all the world, and shamelessely taught it with a brazen face in their public
lessons; to show that France owes nothing to the rest in treason and
wickedness. But because holy father Cotton was come of late, as it were with a
blast of his sweet breath, and in a sheet of paper, to gainesay and disanull
all his predecessors mis-doings, and seem to recover the honor of the society
(though if his Amphibologious Equivocations be rightly tried, he speaks as
traitorously as any of them all) yet, least they should take to much hold of
him, and interpret his double meaning in the better part; or rather to check
him as a false brother, and one that had yielded to much to the time; Behold,
out of Italy the great Iebuzit Cardinalised, the great Cardinal shortly to be
Papised; who not contented with that which he has formerly written (as well he
might, for any new thing he says) but because it was only done by the way,
and among his other controversies (a load to big for any man to carry) comes
out now, as the Triarij in that great Army of forlorn hopes, with a book by
it self and of set purpose, sounding and denouncing from the Vatican to al
Princes, they are subject to the Pope in temporalibus. True it is that in
Atheus tOrtus that is, he himself, had first made the way before him; but it
was under an obscure name, and that could not carry great weight: But since the
Chapleine was so bold, as to undertake no less then a great king for his
share, to write against; Do you think, Sir, that his Illustrissime, Lord and
Master, has it against Barclay only? No, no, poor Barclay is but the
poorest part of his book; yet his son takes it in hand as his fathers cause;
and, I am sure, will not leave the Cardinal unpaid. Neither is it against the
king your brave father; They have his heart fast, and have don as some
Barbarians were wont; They have executed him first, and then comes forth this
sentence of death against him: But there is nothing more to be had of him, but
your self; your self, Sir, It is against your self directly that this book
is written, against all kings alive, against al kings yet unborn; The hawks
of a Cardinal, will not fly for less, then at the birds of Paradise. And
you, holy father, oh! is it after that manner you will have your sons hearts?
Sure, sure, that great father of mankind, of whom you pretend your self so
wrongfully to be the general Vicar, did never mean it so, when he said, My son
give me thy heart. But you, sweet child, since you see two Barclaies, two
private men, and none of them a Protestant, nor nothing near; the one,
undertake it so virtuously against the Pope, upon no other particular offense,
but the mere love of the truth; the other, follow it so dutifully, against
Pope, Cardinal and all, only as his fathers quarrel, which yet is no such
matter; you, I say, which are so great, so noble, so ancient, and so mighty a
king, will you not revenge your fathers death? will you not revenge your own
quarrel, against one that was but a Cardinal five years ago? one, that was
but a base priest once? It is he, It is he, that speaks in that book, it is
he that made it; Bellarmin is unworthy of your anger; He is but a mean
instrument, he is but a slave, and dares not do otherwise then his master bids:
The Pope himself, the great Lord, the great God, of al, and not Acquaviva, a
slave too, has viewed it, corrected it, allowed it, caused it to be printed at
his own charges, and under his own nose, least there should be any fault in
the print. To what end then, tarry any longer? what will you have more? when
they have killed you also, you shall no more be able to take revenge; Take it
while you can, and while you may.

Yet am not I of those hot-burning spirits (though a strong Protestant, I
confess) that would set Rome all in blood and fire; and dig up her foundacions
a thousand fathomes under the ground. I would have Rome reformed, not Rome
ruyned. And what can the poor walls do withal for the inhabitants sins? Yea,
I will vnparcially deal with the Pope, and with more kindness then he dares
look for at any Protestants hand. Let every Prince, according to the law of
God, of Nature, and of Nations, establish a good and holy Patriarch within his
own dominions, to whom all his Church men shall answer, and to none else
without, and he answer for them; Let the Bishop of Rome reduce himself, or be
reduced, to that estate, wherein he was when the Council of Nicea did grant
it him, and then let him have the precedence of al our Patriarchs, as the
ancientest; Let him keep still the keys of his own gates, as an
ecclesiastical Prince; yea and the sword within his own scabberd, as a
secular Prince to; And let him draw it when he list, and flourish with it, in
his own territories. I am sure this is the best, this is the shortest, way to
reform many abuses, which the reasonabler sort auow are crept into the
Church; the surer way to reconcile that wilful diversity of opinions, which
has so long distracted the hearts and minds, yea and the bodies, of Frenchmen,
into several factions; bringing your two flocks again into one fold, and
under a shepherd of your own: And there shall not be a Huguenot in France.

For the Iebuzits (which I will never grace with their usurped name) If you will
not deal with them, as all Christian Princes did once, and at once, and upon
far lesser reasons, with the poor knight-Templers: If you will not renew that
wise sentence of your father, pronounced against them with his own mouth, yet
full of blood when they did beat out his teeth; and rather imitate his hurtful
clemency, that called them again to strike at his heart: If you will not follow
the laudable example of that grave Senate and Commonwealth, whose Catholicity
none can call in question: Then at least, at least, and for a great work of
supererogation, and transcendency of kindness, let them be brought under a new
General of our own Nation, let them take a new oath to him, he to your
Patriacrh, your Patriarch, to your self; and so let it be severally through al
Nations, without having any thing, either to meddle or correspond one with
another.

But Sir, the Tyrant is in such and so long a possession of his usurped power,
as he will think these most equal conditions, unjust; and there is no hope of
all this to take effect, without the sword: If fair means would do it, the
better; It is written Beati pacifici, and most happy be they indeed. But if
peace cannot be had with peace; If an uncertain, but honorable, war be to be
preferred to a certainly dangerous, but dishonorable, peace; To the sword then,
in Gods name and to the fire, if need be: And blessed, o thrice-blessed be the
war and war-makers, whose end is, so happy and desired a peace. But all the
fire that can ever be kindled, all the blood we can ever shed, will not give us
our king again; True, but let us be wise, after the blow at least, since we
have received so mighty a one; That which can not bring back HENRY, may
preserve LEWIS; you shall make your own life sure, by revenging the death of
your father; and yield unto whom you owe your self, the justice you owe to
all. So Caesar made sure his own Statues by setting up again those of Pompey.

And if any crooked soul, or weak mind, will still wilfully contend, that
you are young, and your affairs engaged to other ends; Once more for all I
answer, whatsoever they be, they cannot, they must not, they ought not, to
admit other or more convenient and necessary ends, then those of your honor,
life, and safety, wherein all ours is included, and with yours and ours, that
of all Christendom. For your person, I have showed, you are great, both for
your age, and Kingdom, favored besides of heaven and earth in so just a
quarrel; namely of other Princes your good friends and neighbors, all touched
in this murder.

KIng, you o most mighty, most wise, most excellent, King of yonder fortunat
Islands, which by nature (as so many little worlds) most fortunate in
themselves, are yet more fortunate by your government: Bright morning-starre of
humane learning, holy Oracle of heavenly wisdom, purified light of the finest
and most refined judgments; unto whom there is not any crowned head at this
day, living, but will and must needs stoop in acknowledgement of superiority;
Thrice worthy Monarch, whose name I need not otherwise set down, since even
those that most are loath, must needs acknowledge you by your own marks. Do you
not really, and feelingly lament for our loss? Do you not above all take it in
deed as your own? Have I not often heard you tell it to others? Have you not
often told it to my self? Alas! and so very well you may; Our brave father your
dear brother was taken but in exchange; It was but his lot to go before; The
enemies did, and yet at this time do, pretend no less against your life. You
know it of old by the blessed miscarrying of their hellish plots; and you
knew it of late, even by himself, who more careful of his friends safety then
of his own (as though he had done enough to warn you) was since negligent in
garding himself: Monarch, o double Monarch, equally over souls, by that worth
which makes you a king, though you had not ben borne so, as over bodies by right
of blood: Time is now past writing; forbearance, longanimity, clemency, pardon,
and all pen-worke are now out of season: the sword, the sword must cut the
knots of this business. They make themselves worthy to write against you, who
are most unworthy you should look upon them: And while you strive to cut their
tail, contrary to the weakest Serpents, their venom lies in the head. They get
a name by being overcome by so famous an Adversary, and yet live. They dare
bite you again, they dare ruffle your honor, who were better to be ruffled by
a hangman, a most fit decyder of their quarrels. Alarm, Alarm, He himself
has thrown into the Tiber his most lawful weapons (as too kind) setting all
his rest upon Paul's sword, but S. PAVLS sword, even that sword of the spirit is
ours, and will not cut for him. His sword is but vain imaginary, blunt,
broken, borrowed, though very hurtful. Yours is your own, even the royal,
even the real, and sharp sword of the just revenge of God, which shall break
his asunder like brittle glass: and that scepter of iron, which the son of
the Almighty has put into your hands, shall crush his in pieces, as a Potters
vessel. On, on, sword against sword, let us try which cuts best.

Even the greatest, even the best part of Christendom, and all the honest
Catholics and not papists will follow you; who look for nothing else but to
see somebody in the field to break the first ice. Now they grieve, now they are
ashamed, to have been so long nusled up in so many gross errors, now they
confess them; now they begin to see somewhat clear; and where they had of old
an Aegiptian darkness before their eyes, they have now but cobweb-lawnes, which
yet God will remove in his good time. Long since have many great and learned
men, earnestly longed for reformation in their own Church; who yet affirm
they cannot hope for so great a good, unless the Tyranny of Rome (for so they
stick not to call it) be put down. And I might name a great person among
them, a true Catholic, Apostolic, and not Roman, of whose worth, and great
virtue, not only his own country, to whom it has been most beneficial, but
even Germany, Italy, Flanders, and by reflection, Spain, finally England it
self, takes an honorable notice of, with whom talking not long ago after a
free opening of the soars of their Church, (which he could not well conceal,
otherwise he would) he told me a common saying of his, to show how freely and
honestly soever he acknowledges the simple truth, he is not cracked in his own
belief and religion, That he thanks God with all his heart, that having had
great dealings at Rome and Geneua, and great friends of both sides, yet God
has ever kept him, in that truest and surest middle, that he ever was a good
Catholic and nor a Huguenot or a Leaguer. I answered him, good my lord, oh!
would to God we were all catholics, after your fashion: and for me, if I were
borne so, I would scarce believe I could change my religion for a better.

Come then, come out, most noble king, come out by so much the sooner as you
see the matter easy; you have so many men and so many means; you are the only
Monarch in the world, who can set up as many and as good, both horse and foot,
of his own subjects, without begging supply, either of Albanians or Ruyters,
of Landsknechts or Suytzers. And yet, need you not much trouble your self; you
need not stir out of your royal Whitehall; There we will send you the news
of the ruin of your Enemies: Your arms are long enough to chastise them all a
far off; most especially your right Arm, the son of your thigh, the flower
of your strength, the excellency of your dignity and power. Let Us but have him,
let him but have himself, and he will come to us; let him go for the public
good of all Christendom, for your interest, for his own: We have none else to
be the head of our Croisado.

ANd you, young Sun, rising to all glory and happynes, hope of the earth, joy
of the sea, eye of the world, wonder of minds, love of hearts, sweet comfort
and delight of mankind; my most noble, my most brave Prince, all heart; God
forbid I should forbid learning, and less in a Prince then in any private man,
and where it may easily be gotten without hinderance to further and more
necessary ends. But thus much I dare say, with their good leave, who are more
wise then I; As times stand now, as urgent occasions require, you are learned
enough for a Prince; and if any Prince in the world ever had less need of
learning it is your self: you shall never want it, as long as you give up your
self wholly to be ruld, as a second wheel, as an inferior Globe, by that first
Motor, by that heaven of wisdom, by that matchles Father of yours, which has
learning enough for you both. And let it not grieve you needs to yield unto him
in that kind; It is a wonder scarce seen in many ages, to see a king learned,
a wonder that was never seen but once, to see a king so learned as he. Our
great and our first Frauncis had scarce more learning then you, and yet did not
leave to be a great king, and yet did not leave to be called the great father
and restorer of learning. And that great Prince also for whom we now mourn,
was he not a great Captain and a great King, though not a great Scholar? True
it is, he ever favored true learning where he found it, without any acception
of persons, no not of his rebels if they would be reconciled. And even in his
latter days (greedy of Apolloes bays, as of the palms of Mars) had he not
undertaken (I dare say, by the Council of a great Cardinal, for all Cardinals
are not Iebuzits) to build in every City a great College and free-schoole for
all kind of learning; and to that end hire and gather to himself all the
famous learned men of Christendom? Which royal design our wise Queen now
most advisedly following, there is a mighty great one already building in
Paris, which, even by anticipation, some call the Cut-throte of Jesuits. It is
enough for a Prince (though otherwise not so extremely learned himself) if
only he favor learned men; and so he shall be sure never to want learning at
his need. Once more, far be it from my thoughts, to diswade learning in a
Prince, I know he can scarce favor learned men, if he have no learning
himself; And great Alexander with his brave Grecians, great Caesar with his
brauest Romans, tell me, the Soldier who has it and manages it well, has a
more easy, a more open, a more ready way, and a greater advantage over him that
has it not, to be a better Soldier; the Captain, a valianter Captain; the
Prince, a greater Prince. But that it is not so essentially individual, and
unseparably incident to a King, as without a great abundance thereof, he
cannot be a great king indeed, and truly perform the duties of his great
charge, It is only that which I stand upon; A thing whereof the contrary has been seen in every age; And our own fathers, and we our selves, can yet
remember the same.

Do not therefore mold any longer among your books, no not among your tiltings
and fained combats, though otherwise in peace, honorable, delightful,
needful; To horse, to horse, the quarter is broken, the bloody Trumpet has
sounded; True and mortal war is open. They have killed your valorous
Godfather, who missed to kill your self; yea even him who by mutual agreement
was appointed to be your second father by your first, if the unhappy blow had
lighted upon him: so assured were these two great Princes, and greater friends,
that their lives were sought. It is time, it is high time to put on your
Armor, and make your Enemies and ours, justly to feel the smart which so much
they fear, and by so unjust means seek to prevent. Our young LEWIS will not
be long after you, and though he can not yet accompany you hand in hand, (as he
would, if we would let him) in the thickest throng of the enemies, to scatter
and overthrow them, both upon a couple of their best Gennets, both in like
Armor, both in huge mighty feathers, all black with their burnt blood at the
coming out of the battle, white before for your mutual love and faith; yet
he will not be far off, He will visit you in your Camp if need be; And will
even glory and joy, to lend his tender hand to gird your sword when you go
out, meet you on horseback when you come in, bring you victorious under your
Tent again, and weeld your bloody sword after the battle, as if he thought by
that to enter into part of your glory, as the profit must needs be common.

The noble presidents of your royal Ancetors, yea in the very time of their
thickest darkness ought to move you. Do you not among many hear the mighty
voice of that brave Coeur de Lion, a French man by father and mother, and the
first Prince, orderly born English, since the conquest? How strongly does he
call upon you? How far went he to conquer the holy land? How many dangers,
how many troubles, how many pains, did he pass and overcome? But now, since
it is Gods pleasure, the holy land is by two third parts nearer then it was
then; A most fit, a most holy, a most easy subject of your conquest. And will
you not take the cross on you to go thither, now in this shining brightness of
the Gospel? There is no more a do but go and take possession. And what land
now in the world, more sacer, more holy, then holy Rome, which has been so much
watered by so much holy blood of so many Saints and Martyrs? Behold, and why else
does she call herself Romala Santa, he Padre Santo, or his holiness?

GReat men, if you be but, men and not worthy of a higher title, whose brains
harbor so much wisdom; whosoever breasts, so much temperance, justice and
faithfulness, virtues so rare now adays, anywhere else; which have wrought in
the world the only miracles of these latter times; fauorits of heaven, spirits
of lead, of brass, of hard steel, purer then the very gold, seauenty times
refined in the furnace; who (as it were) fetching every year, by thousands,
whole ships laden with a new wisdom out of India, are wiser then their
ancient Gymnosophists: you that shaking off a most cruel, and yet more unjust
yoke, are risen from a base and servile bondage, now to be equal with Princes,
by your own hands making your selves such as you would be, and setting a most
lawful bound to your high desires (as though anything besides your selves were
not worth your ambition) were contented to have but your own selves; Generous
Helots, far better and more noble then your proud Lacedaemonians. If ever you
did kindly and faithfully help us at our need; If ever our great king did
Kindly, faithfully, and gratefully, help you again at yours, if virtue live
even after death, and a loyal love grounded upon the same to so royal a
friend: Come, come, join hands with us; Our case, our cause is your own; your
strong bull work, the Rampire of Christendom, has been most unluckily thrown
down; Ere it be long, the enemy will give you a furious, if not treacherous,
assault. And even though you would, though you could, forbear love to others,
yet show now your wisdom for your selves, if ever you had any. You also
peereles couple of Princely brethren, both flourishing in age, much more in
worthy and warlike deeds; you great, not Citty-razer, as the other was, but
Citty-rayser, strong Nestor, wise Ajax, the honor of arms, the love of
Soldiers; now without controversy the first Captain in the world: your task
is not yet at an end: To the field, to the fire, to the sword once more, as
glorious as I have seen you many times; the sickness is more sharp then ever, it
is in relaps. And you martial Henry, Henry, does not your heart rise, at that
great name? Do you not remember who gave it you? as though our great HENRY
would not grace with it other then great Princes, and such as he fore-knew,
would be most worthy of the same. Henry, if yet you remember his personal
kindness to you; Henry, if yet you have a drop of French blood, of that right
noble blood of that high: Admiral your Grandfather, in his time the Captain
of Captains: And after these high respects, if private ones may take place, If
yet you remember these innocent plays, but still sauouring of war or
learning, whereby we were wont to recreate and stir up your mind, while you
were a child; If yet you remember your many promises, so kindly made to me
since you are a man; Up, up, I lay down al particular pretentions, I claim
all for the public; Come and avenge the death of your royal Godfather, and
withal, remember your own father was killed so: And that a traiterous
murderer even before you saw, did for ever bereave you of the sight of that
most excellent Prince, who had given you the power of seeing; and whom to have
seen, so many eyes would have thought themselves most happy.

Imperial Princes, right honest Sycambrians, our ancient Brethren, from whom
when we departed, with dint of sword to get us a new habitation, happy we, if
we had not left our integrity and plainenes behind, or rather had kept as well
as you, that which indeed we brought with us! Happy souls, blessed remnant of
the golden age, if ever you pitied our hard case, who thinking to conquer
other men's lands, lost our own minds, and were overcome even by those we
overcame; If there remain in you any spark of that ancient love which once made
us all Germans, when we lived under the same heaven: But if old respects serve
not, if that fervent love our most Christian King did so lately witness unto
you, who set up so great an army, endangered his whole estate, ventured his
own life, lost it, even in your quarrel, and for your sakes; if the help we
brought you at so fit a time, if the never enough lamented damage we suffer
yet, and shall suffer longer, for your occasion, can be of some effect in your
noble hearts: Come, come, and let us all gather, as one man, to revenge our
common loss, and prevent the common evil; for though otherwise the loss must
still be of our side, yet look how much your dearest honor remains engaged
therein. And you brave Ernest of Brandenburgh, Illustrious Prince, whose
princely aspect told me once you were such, when most you would have hid it,
and for your better concealment, made me an hundred times sit at the upper end
of your table, while I told you as often, I was scarce good enough to wait at
it: Nevertheless did it, though with a willing kind of shame and unwillingness,
when you commanded me once for all, it must needs be so. If ever you loved our
nation in general, If ever most especially you admired, and protested
affection to that hart-rauishing Prince, as many times as I brought you to the
sight of him, as a private Gentleman, If ever you repeated at night with love
and passion, that which you heard, that which you saw of him that day: Ernest,
I earnestly beseech, Ernest, I earnestly adjure you, And with you, and in you,
and by you, all your most noble house, and those of your princely name, Come
out to revenge the public injury; And let me see you at the forefront of our
Croisade; No Princes have such an interest in this quarrel, nor among them,
any so much as your self.

VVOrthily worthy, and all praiseworthy Heroes, True remnant of those old
everliving Trojans, who invincible to all force, had never dyed, if subtilty
and treason, the worse, because masked with Religion, had not surprised their
simply-honest souls, and sooner burned their bodies, then overcome their
minds; you that now trenched within your own waters, (as it were for fear of
an other such accident) where also never any body could come to hurt you, no
body can; And even when that great Deluge of the Goths spread it self round
about you, were left to your selves, safely swimming in your land-no-land, or
rather so many Islands; Sacred Ephores, sharp-sighted Areopagits, grave Senate,
who not to have one King, subject in a deadly stroke to wound all his subjects,
have a Prince, as it were in name only, but are so many Kings your selves, and
Kings indeed, since you command Kingdoms; which yet you should command in no
less quantity, then once that ancient Monarcichall Commonwealth, (a part of
your Type) seeing your MarTial power, is no less then theirs, if your Marcial
equity had not made you as moderate, as they were greedy; Truly sons of Mars
in deed, for valor; Truly children of Marc, for piety; and again, of Mercury,
for industry and riches. If ever you remember that ancient alyance between
both our States, If ever you remember the recent love and true friendship of
the fourth his offers and endeauours to you, and for you, when the third and
the fifth seemed to plott your ruin; If you have, even of late, felt the sharp
stings of that Tyrannical ambition; seen and felt traiterous murders within
your own bowels, though not against your King (when you have none) yet against
your best men, and those that most soundly have maintained your Kingly
authority; If the innocent wounds, of that learned wise, and good Padre Paolo,
yet alive in spite of their heart; If the holy ashes, yet almost hot, of that
happy martyr, your worthy Fulgentio, burned in yonder hilly City, for that
quarrel, though upon other far fetched, feigned and most false pretenses; If
the royal blood of your greatest, of your best friend, cry yet aloud
Vengeance, Vengeance, in your ears: Come, come, brave and wise men, shake
hands with so many and so great Princes, Be none of the last to take the Cross
on you; The matter is of State, not of Religion: And let not that stain, for
the first time, be cast on your spotles name, that you once forsook your
friends, even fighting for your quarrel, as much as for theirs; that you once
forsook your own selves. And when was such a thing ever seen, either in you
or others? Come, come, I say, you shall be still as good Catholics, as you
were before, if not better; They tremble already for fear, They are ours; And
though they cannot stand against us, and though (thanks be to God) we have no
need of more help, having equity, strength, valor, riches, and all advantages
of our side, yet we call, yet we summon you, not to exclude you of your part of
the glory.

Conclusion, to the young King of France.
NOw Sir, if any will yet grudge, saying, I take to much upon me, and that
yourselfe and all those great Princes are wise, and ready enough in that which
concerns them, without need either of my counsel or summoning. First I say,
I pray God, in this sense, I may be a needles Herald indeed, and you gather
your selves without calling, though otherwise truth be ever truth, well
beseeming and to be followed, in any man's mouth. For the rest, I am neither a
Councellor, nor worthy to be so, but a silly worm, and poor Soldier as once I
was, I am a piece, not only of your State, but of the Christian Commonwealth;
and as a feeling (though unprofitable) member of that great body, interessed
in the loss of so excellent and needful a head: by so much the more as I ever
preferred the public good, before my private welfare; the honor of my Country,
before my particular advancement; and the life of my Sovereign and of all good
Christian Kings, above mine own, and all others of my nearest and dearest
kindred: who yet being already crosse-signed, and the least of an hundred
thousand which are ready to crosse-signe themselves for so lawful and so
general a cause, when either by this my summoning, or some other more
effectual means, I see a just army in the field, am most ready to embrace
again my ancient profession, which I had forsworn; to scowre my old weapons,
rusty with our ^ong peace, which I thought never to use again; And taking in
hand my sharpest spear of all, most boldly venture my life, as far as any;
most happy to be lost in this quarrel, the right quarrel of God and Gods
anointed.



