THE CHRONICLE AND INSTITVTION OF THE ORDER OF THE SERAPHICALL FATHER S.
FRANCIS.

CONTAINING His life, his death, and his miracles, and of all his holy
disciples and companions.

SET FORTH First in the Portugal, next in the Spanish, then in the Italian,
lastly in the French, and now in the English tongue.

THE FIRST TOME.



AT S. OMERS, By JOHN HEIGHAM, Anno 1618.

With permission of Superiors.

TO THE MOST RELIGIOUS ENSIGNE-BEARERS OF S. CLARE; THE ENGLISH POOR CLARES
IN GRAVELINGE, THE AVTHOR WISHES VICTORIOVS TRIVMPH.
NAturalists amongst other elaborate curiosities of nature not unworthy
moralyzinge report of the Salamander, that contrary to the inclination of
other beasts her life is cherished by the fire, which by reason of its
furiouse violence to others is termed Elementum implacabile, an element with
all most impossibility to be assuaged: whence may be plausably verified the
Phisicia^s proverb that. The same drugge cures and kills, understanding
according to the diversity of the patients malady. Noe marvel then most,
Reverend mother, and Religiously devoted Sisters, if I after my long experience
of your almost Salamander like life, by dedicatinge this book to your
Religious vewe, should ad fresh coals to kindle or rather cherish your long
since kindled fire of Devotion (wherein you live contrary to those in the world
of your Sects.) And noe meruell if therein I should give you a receipte composed
of diverse poisons (for so they are to Heresy) since I see they are peculiar
restoratiues and infallable Antidotes to your sores, for what sooner cures a
longing, then to satisfy the appetite with the thing lo^ged for? which earnest
desire or longinge it pleased you (Right worthyly Religious) to manifest by
your zealous importuninge me to prevail with a third, that could and would
undertake the Translation of this work ^ro^ French wherein it was impressed to
our vulgar tongue, for your more facile and pleasant reading of the lives of so
famous worthies who are indeed as exemplars, or so many plattformes for
direction of your allreadie initiated journey. Which being with much
difficulty obtained, and after long expectation finished by the great pains
of an extraordinary deuot^ of your order, and particularly of your covent,
whose will it also is that by reason you were only in cause of the Translation,
and through your entreati^ only it was provided for in the impression, that the
whole volume of his labors ^hold be shadowed under your matronadge. I have not
therefore enforced you to foster a strange feture, but (...) to which your
selves are mothers, neither have I done it making mine own head my counsel
house, but with advise of the Authore and other benefactours of the work,
since therefore ye have daigned to begett it, be contented to conserve it
against what difficulties the world shall oppugn it. Ye have for your
encouradgment heerin infallably assurance of infinitely redoubled merit For as
casuists hold, whatsoever is produced to public use, by how much it is a
cause of further good or hurt to the imbracer of it, in equal measure is the
increase of merit or demerite to the Setter forth, and therefore it is thought
of Calvin (whom our country rules) that accidentally, by how much his heresy
increases, his torments increase; ye therefore on the contrary, either
respectinge your own merit by being more then semie authors, and patronesles
of a work of so great expectance, or else merely examore amic ^ia, as
Philosophers tea me it, reflecting one the good of others for Non n^b s nati
sumus, we are not borne to our selves, ye have reason to accept it under your
shelter: To this end ye have an Anthem in the office of our holy Father S.
Francis instituted by reason of a divine oracle, wherein it was revealed to him,
that he should not only be sollicitous for himself, but studdie the good of
others; S. Paul witnesses of him self that he could be contented to loose
heaven that he might win it for others; here is a miraculous charity, yet ye
are not driven to that extremity, but by being a means of others arrival
into heaven, ye increase your own joys. Again; neither let the title of
patronesses deterr you, as if it sauoured of the world which ye have
abrenunciated, or as if it did not correspond with your Religious simplicity
which ye have embraced; for the great affinity of the work with your truly
simple dispositions, of it self did challenge you; For if either you respect
the subject, it is a Chronicle of SS. wherein nothing cann be expected but
mere simplicities; Again it is of S. Francis SS. who was a mirror of
simplicity; if you respect the method in the handlinge it is fitted to the
matter, as your selves will soon experience: Your office therefore in
matronizinge, is but with your wonted simplicity to offer the transtatours
labors to god almighty for success: Wherein I would entreat you to offer
up me as your devoted servant,

CLA. FRA.

TO THE READER.
THE multitude of books which now adays are printed with purity and elegancie
of tongues and languages, are so abundant, that it causes many to reject the
reading of such as they ought to have always in hand for edification and
profit of their souls, and not for curiosity, in regard that though al good
and true doctrine, ought to be highly esteemed as the nourishment of the soul
(the food wherofis, the intellectual understanding of the truth:) yet ought
the discret and Christian Reader to consider how different is the fruit
collected of one book, before an other, that with the greater profit he may
dispose of his hours, and keep his cogitations employed, and that as books
increase, so may augment in him discretion and judgment of reading them: that
so he may of each of them gather some fruit. And certainly I admire that, since
when we see avenimous beast we are terrified and tremble, for fear of his
poison: how we are so senceles, as with delight to read heretical or dissolute
books, considering that they corrupt good manners, and induce to vices and
vanities: which are also most subtle venime, whereto making the least approach,
it takes such root in us, and does afterward so budde forth, that
empoysoning our souls, it becomes incurable. And which is yett worse, we
permit our selves easily to be infected, because the scope and discourse of
such books are pleasing unto us, as being conformable to our appetite and to
our lascivious inclination: and thus according to the custom, presenting
poison under a sweet or alluring bayte. And therefore if the studious and
careful Christian, desire to observe any due course in his reading, since it so
much imports him, let him understand, that next to the doctrine of faith,
and the counsels of holy scripture, no other can ever so much advance him to
purchase virtues, and hate vices, as the frequent and ordinary reading of the
conversation and life of the holy servants of almighty God, considering with
all that is a natural thing, that to attempt a difficult and dangerous
enterprise, we are therein much more induced by example then by any persuasions
of whom soever: though we acknowledge them to be certainly true. None could be
found that would resolve joyfully to embrace the virtue of poverty, humility,
chastity, fasting, and other penite^tiall labors, if he knew not that others,
not only with words exteriourly, but really with worckes have embraced the
same: Neither was it for any other cause, that our Lord JESUS Christ would
personnaly come into this world, but by example to show us the way of our
salvation, and his holy will, because the examples and aduertissementes of his
faithful servants, would not suffice to retire us from our evil conversation
and way, and to setle us in his, no not the precepts which he had given in the
first written law. But when he began to walk this way, how many were there
that would accompagny him, very seriously serving him even till their death,
and this only for his love? The Church therefore knowing right well the glory
that redoundeth to almighty God, and the fruit which men gather by the memory
of the life of our lord JESUS Christ and of his saints, does every day
propose and set them before our eyes, in the divine office, in the sacrifices
and solemnities, that it should not be tedious unto us to follow and imitate
them whom we praise, and whose memory we honor, and that likewise we should
not esteem it labourious to walk that way, which alone conducteth us to
eternal life. Hereof may thou consider (devout Reader) what use, almighty
God makes of his elect, in favor of us, because we are (says S. John)
coadiutors to the salvation of souls, we may hence also conceive how greatly
we are obliged to the trueseruantes of God, who have so put themselves to
pains in the exercise of virtues, that they have left the way open, that such
as seek it may find it, and by their examples have taught us which it is, and
with whath force and industry we may attain unto true glory. Those of former
ages guided only by natural light, did use exceeding diligence, to induce and
animate themselves by the examples of their famous predecessors, using them as
so many spurs unto vertrue, to the end they might in no time be defective in
the obligation they had both to their native country, and to their own honor:
and indeed the milk where with they nourced their children in their public
schools, was the generous acts of their ancestors, which were red unto them
in poemes, and orations, that by means of those examples, the children might
be affected to virtue, and enflamed with desire of glory, although it was more
vain then virtuous. This is of such force, that even at this present, many of
our Christians following the same practice, cause their children to spend the
most entiere part of their age, in committing to memory, the heroyicall acts
of the ancient Grecians and Latins. But would to God that too many did not
employ and wast all their life in this study, and that many others were not
more affected to Homer, Cicero and Virgil, then to JESUS Christ. O extreme
indignity of Christians.! deserving sharp reprehension and eternal punishment,
in regard that they glory to be imitatours of the superstitious Gentiles, who as
they wanted faith, and the true light illuminating the heart of Christians, so
was not their virtue true and solid, but exterior and vain. And although that
in that time of obscure darcknes, they gave to men some sparckle of light, some
little knowledge of virtue, more with words then with effect, these Pagans
nevertheless persiste in obscurity even in the clear day of the true light of
our lord JESUS Christ, the sovereign truth and perfection, and are unworthy to
be honored in comparison of true Christians, who being illuminated with the
light of faith, can easily discern, judge and condemn the world with his
unwise adherentes: because as the Apostle S. Paul Says, the spiritual man 1.
Cor. 20
knows and judges al things: Pagans on the contrary, glorying and
esteemning themselves wise with their eloquence, become sottish and ignorant,
as having attributed and given unto creatures, that which appertayned only to
the Creator: but they whose cogitation and confidence is more settled and
grounded on the divine will and doctrine then humane, and do follow celestial,
not earthly Philosophy: such, I say shall only arrive to heaven, whence first
descended their knowledge, they cannot err, being taught by the eternal
wisdom, neither shall they ever want glory, even among mortal people, though
they have with all possibility shunned the same, but shall be illustrious to all
the world. For though antiquity have exceedingly honored great ambitious
persons, that desired to leave some memory and renown of themselves in this
world after their death: yet our holy mother the Church does far more exalt
and make more glorious our Saints continually in the predications, feasts,
and solemnities, which for them and in their honor are celebrated; besides
that we believe that they live and gloriously reign in heaven, in the
contemplation of their Lord. So that the true servants of God are blessed
among Angels, and honored among men, as eminent saints, as great they are,
and worthy of all reverence. Altars are every where consecrated, and churches
bult in their names, their images are honored, their words and works are
highly commended and preached, their relics are reverenced and worshipped on
earth, their souls glorified in heaven, and the miracles and excellent works
both ancient and modern, which our lord in them, and by them has wrought, are
with exceeding great glory admired. Our Lord even in this world recompenceth
his elect, who not in appare^e, but in effect are virtuous and holy, and
incorruptedlie conserve their faith to their Creator. When was there ever
found in any time among the ancient naturalistes, such constancy, such faith,
temperance, magnanimity, sweetness, mercy, justice, fortitude, and loyaulty, as
has bin found in our Christians, who by no kind of threats or fair speeches
of Tyrants, could be induced, to leave their obedience unto God, could never
be corrupted by any promise or recompense, nor have bin inclined by any kind
of flatteries or favors, but persisting firm and constant in the truth, have
nothing esteemed nor feared the terrible and horrible torments, were they
never so barbarous, nor in the extremity of them, or death it self, but have
always remained immovable and invincible in true virtue and piety, not
desiring revenge or detriment to the persecutours or executioners, but pardon
and salvation, praying unto God for them. And all this, not at their death
only, but even in their life. For there is no kind of virtue, wherein the
saints have not excelled, some in purity of virginity, others in continency,
with great labor subiecting the flesh to the spirit, that even on earth
leading a life more angelical then humane, they might purchase eternal glory
in heaven: others renouncing kingdoms, estates, and dignities, others
distributing their goods among the poor, much more highly esteeming the piety
of God, and charity to their neighbor, in a base and submissiue poverty, then
any other temporal thing: to thend that being disburdened of the care of these
transitory riches, they might with more ease, study to purchase those of
heaven: and in the end, for so much as, where they knew it to concern the
honor, glory, or service of God, they have not spared to permit their bodies
to be tormented after what sort soever: they have bin therefore so pleasing
unto his majesty, that he has granted them power to cure the diseased, to
cast out devils, to raise the dead, to foretell future things, to understand
and explicate the divine mysteries, and finally to do such things, as the
divine might can only do. Let then the eminency of Kings, Princes, and of
all qualities of wealthy people ancient and modern be confounded, since they
are, and ever more have bin vanquished and surmounted by us (poor and feeble)
in honor and knowledge. Let the subtilty of Philosophers be whist and silent,
since these who have truly reposed their faith in almighty God, shall know and
find the sovereign good. I conjure thee therefore, gentle Reader, by the love
which thou owe to JESUS Christ our Redeemer, to represent before the eyes of
thy spirit, the glory and eternal riches, which the least of the servants of
our Redeemer JESUS Christ shall in the most blessed kingdom of heaven
perpetually enjoy: and with the same eyes afterward to behold all the goods of
the earth united together, paragonizing them with those of these Religious,
there will not so much as one only thought abide within thee, until thy heart
has quite contemned them* and as records Cicero, if all the Empires of the
earth, in comparison of heaven and of the moon, be so little that no esteem
should be had of them, because between them there is no proportion, how much
less will they appear, being opposed to the Imperial heaven, the blessed
country of the Phil. 3.
elect, where according to S. Paul, our conversation is? It is then very
reasonable, that the life of this Saint be seriously read, to the end to
imitate him, yea before many other, since hereof we learn how we may pourchace
the true eternal goods or riches, which according to the promises of God, we
expect and hope for. To this end it is that our Creator does daily renew and
regarnish his Church, with new examples of his saints, that Christians
becoming weak and feeble, might resume force to meritt their salvation, in
serving almighty God from the bottom of their heart. For in them is
represented unto us the virtue of faith, the life of JESUS Christ and together
with it, the imitable life of his saints. He will that there be seculer
Preistes, Religious of the order of S. Hierome, S. Augustine, S. Benedict, S.
Bernard, S. Dominick, S. Francis and others: that in them we might always have
before our eyes, his life and Passion. Since then so pious a lesson or reading
produces such fruit, thou may well persuade thee (good Reader) how
profitably shall be employed the time, the paper, and labor, which is spent in
writing the chronicles of them that have bin true imitatours and
representations of the life of our Redeemer JESUS Christ. How well in like sort
their time shall be spent that employ their eyes and understanding in this
lesson, not only to square out a Religious life to such as desire to embrace
it, but even to learn what ought to be the life, what the comportmentes of
true Christians, that with their works desire at least to appear such: by
reason that the kingdom of heaven must be attained by a combatt to Matthew. 11*
be made, and by force of arms, which is an enterprise of valerous Champions
or warryers: and this forcible wrestling is not to be made against mortal and
humane creatures, according to the Apostle, but against Ephesians. 6.
wicked spirittes, as subtle and malicious, as they are potent and puissant.
If thou will know them, thou shall here find their extreme audacity
discovered, their fraudulent delusion published, their offensive armors
manifested, and their assaults repulsed. If then thou be inclined to warlike
exercise, thou shall here observe most noble prowesses and heroical acts
against the devils, subdued by the champions of JESUS Christ: If thou take
content in honors, thou shall here see how highly the true freindes of God are
honored in earth and in heaven, yea and feared in hell. If thou affectest
science, of these thou shall learn, the true knowledge of the frauds and
deceiptes of the world, and especially true wisdom, which is, first the
knoledge of God, then of thy self: If thou apply thee to the active or
contemplative life, thou shall here find a great experience of moral virtues,
and of contemplations more then humane, of communion and divine union: breifely
if thou make profession of Christianity as thou ought, thou shall here
clearly see figured in two tables, what it is to be a Christian, and with what
parts he ought to be qualified that makes profession thereof. And that in the
doctrine and in the examples of saints, two things are necessary to our
salvation: so that thou shall here find a remedy very proper and convenient to
all they desires, and for all thy necessities. Now writing the life and
examples of the Friar Minors the especial servants of God, by them, I mean
the disciples of the holy Father S. Francis, and of those holy Fathers that did
imitate him, who are the principal parties of this history, they point out
unto us the true rule and observance of the tree instituted by the said Father
S. Francis, procuring many in these days to blush at their faults and
transgressions. Other Religious persons shall in like sort make their
benefitt hereof, since all Religious, touching their profession, are a like,
Besides, every other Christian may gather some fruit hereof, if he will bestow
the labor to receive it, as all have equally graces and favors of God, by the
worthy merittes of his saints, Francis, Antony, and others: when with them
they study to seek the love of God and their neighbor. Our Fathers then
deserve praise and gratitude of our parts for having so well conserved the
memory of these glorious saints, with a fervent desire to further souls,
though they have not labored to publish their lives, in a lofty and polished
style, with a connection of choice words, as the precise and curious would
desire; But they considered that the devout Reader leaving the flowers and
leaves, would only take hold of the fruit. Now to content and satisfy the
Readers, when they shall light on such things as are not vulgar, which they
shall find in these chronicles: I have bin willing here to insert and add the
names of the Authors, whom in this present history I have principally used,
and this for greater light and direction: who are these ensuyinge.

The legend of Brother. Leo, Br. Angelus, and Br. Rufinus, all three companions
of S. Francis. The legend of Brother Thomas of Cellano. The legend of Brother
Leonard of Bessa. The great and little legend of S. Bonauenture. The Flowers of
the Religious of S. Francis, and his companions. The ancient chronicles, that
breifely treat of the most memorable matters of the order. Vrbertin Casal, in
his book entitled Vita Christi. The monumentes. The historical mirror of
Br. Vincent of the Order of the Preachers. The ancient memorial of the order.
The history of S. Anthonius Archbishop of Florence. Master Aluaro of the
lamentations of the Church. The legend of S. Antony, S. Clare, and other
saints. The legend of the five Martyrs of Marocco, of S. Cross of Coimbra.
The book of Conformities.
THE PREFACE WHEREIN IS DECLARED THE intention of the Holy Ghost in the
institution of the holy Order of the Friar Minors.
IT is with great reason, that learned men writing books of histories or
doctrine for the public good, do ordinarily accompany them with certain
introductions, which we call proemes or prefaces, to discover their intention
to the Readers, which wanting they cannot have perfect knoledge, nor reap much
fruit of what they read. Though in deed, for the Readers to remain only
deprived of these fruits and benefittes, were a less inconvenience, and in
some sort supportable, if they did not some times conceive evil impressions,
that induce them to contemn the good doctrines and profitable examples which
they read: and this proceeds of their ignorant temerity, which causes them
to condemn things worthy of praise, and falsely to censure that which they
understand not, which vice as is it reprehensible, so is it detrimentall and
detestable in all kind of doctrine, but especially in the sacred scriptures
and lives of saints: And therefore we see that God, in all his worckes, would
prepare men as it were by certain proemes, that they might understand them,
and expect them with such intention as he meant to perform them, as when he
purposed to renew the world, by means of the universal deluge, he conferred
thereof with the just Noe an hundred and twenty years before, commanding him
the edifice of the arck, to thend that worck might be known, not only to those
that then lived, but also to such as should succeed them afterward Neither did
he upon any other consideration defer to give children to the Patriarch
Abraham, but that he should the better understand, and with greater reverence
receive the grace which was figured unto him in his son Isaac. I am of
opinion that for the same respect he was forty days in giving the law to the
people of Israel, bountifully imparting unto them many notable favors in the
mean time, and with such excellent miracles delivering them from the servitude
of Egypt, that they might by these means dispose the^ to acknoledge him alone
for God, and completely to observe his law. I may also infer the like of the
forty years that he entertained that people in the desert, that it was unto
them as it were a disposition the more deerly to prise and estimate the so much
desired land of promise. For this self same cause did God use Prophets among
his people, were it to thereaten them with punishment and chasticementes, or to
give them hope of the benefittes and favors which he intended unto them, or to
teach them the manner to demand and meritt his grace. And finally all the old
testament, the sacrifices, ceremonies, and mysteries, have bin nothing else but
as a certain proeme or preface of the new, that it might be desired and hoped,
understood by them, and received by us according to the true light of the holy
Ghost, and not with a humane and fallacious spirit

Intending therefore to imitate those divine and humane examples, it seemed to
me expedient to add a preface to this worck, that the readers might dispose
them to read it with a good intention, and avoid the enormous vice of
ingratitude, not duly receiving the divine graces: and that also they might
receive thereof a beneficial fruit. Which I have found so much more necessary
to this worck, as the holy Ghost in the institution of the Order of the Freer
Minors, is more remote from the ordinary intention and discourse of the world:
for Mounting above the common obligation of the precepts, he has designed it
to a degree of perfection more high then the Evangelical Counsels. It is not
needful not with standing, that I search far to find the proeme requisite to
discover and manifest unto you the intention of the holy Ghost and the
eminency of this Order, since him self seems to have disigned it both in the
old and new testament. We read in the prophet Jeremy, that when the Hebrew
people were obstinate in their sins, and that they opened not their ears to
the words, which on the part of the almighty, were by the Prophets preached
unto them, God said to Jeremy: Go to the house of the children Icrem. 35.
of Rechab, and conduct them with thee to the temple, and give them wine to
drink. Whereto Jeremy obeyed, and having brought the Rechabites to the
temple, in to the house of one of the principal Officers, before him and many
others, he offered them wine in cups or vessels, and bid them drinck. But they
answered him: Know Jeremy that we have never drunck wine, nor will we drinck
any, because we have bin forbidden it by Ionadab the son of Rechab our
Father, who commanded it unto us in these terms: You Rechabites shall never
drink wine, nor your children, you shall not build houses, you shall not sow,
you shall not plant vignes, nor possess any, but you shall dwell all your
life, in tents and pauillions that you may live many days on the earth,
wherein you are pilgrims: And in this sort do we observe it, obeying that
which our father has commanded us. The Rechabites having given this answer
to Jeremy, he had incontinently the spirit of God, that said unto him:
Jeremy go to the people of Judah, and of Jerusalem, and thus speak unto them
O obdurate and obstinat people, will ye never obey my law, and follow my
commandementes? the words of Ionadab the son of Rechab are they of more
force then mine? He would that his children and their posterity should never
drinck wine, and to obey their father, they have not dranck any, and you would
never obey my commandementes. I will therefore send you a punishment worthy of
your rebellion, according as I have threatened you: but I will not cease to
favor the Rechabites, because they have obeyed the commandments of their
father. A figure doubtless most express, so far forth as the ancient estate
would permit it, and so particular for the Religion of the Friar Minors of the
B.Fa.S. Francis, that it has little need of farther exposition then to be red
and conferred with the express words of his rule, which are these. The Friar
Minors have not any thing proper, neither house, nor place, nor what soever
other thing, but let them live in this world as pilgrims and strangers, and
let them serve God, who has redeemed us in poverty and humility and seek
almose with out shame or dishonor: considering that our lord Jesus Christ
would be poor for us. Now by the lively example of this Order, and by the so
great austerities and strict observations; our lord reprehendeth the frenzy
and folly of the Christians; who forgetful of the poverty of our Redeemer
Jesus Christ, and of his servants, do ruin themselves by avarice, by
delicacies and dissolutions. We hope that God will never permit us to want
perfect Religious of this Order, that shall admonish us of our duty by their
example, before the eyes of his divine Majesty.

But S.John the Evangelist and Prophett in his revelations does more
particulerly demonstrate the time and estate of the glorious Fa. S. Francis and
his holy disciples, saying: And I saw, when the Angel had opened the sixth
seal, there was made a great earthquake, and the sun became black as it were
sackcloth of hair: (which is a garment made of the hair of a horse and of
very gross woll) and the whole moon became as blood: and the stars from
heaven fell upon the earth. After these things I saw four Angels standing
upon the four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth that
they should not blow upon the land, nor upon the sea, nor on any tree. And I
saw an other Angel ascending from the rising of the sun, having the sign of
the living God: and he cried with a loud voice to the four Angels to whom it
was given to hurt the earth and the sea, saying, hurt not the earth and the
sea, nor the trees, till we sign the servants of our lord in their
foreheades. This Prophecy occording to the testimony of Vbertinus, was
preached by S. Bonauenture at Paris in a Provincial chapter, as already
verified in the Person of the holy Father S. Francis, adding that he was by
divine revelation assured, that S. John the Evangelist in this passadge, had
his eye on S Francis, and on his sacred Religion. The same is affirmed by
Brother John of Parma, who was a right holy and Religious man, and famous by
many miracles that God wrought by him.

But for the more easy intelligence hereof, it must be understood that by the
seven visions of S. John in his Apocalipse, are signified the seven ages or
estates of the Church. The first age was, of the foundation thereof, made by our
Lord JESUS Christ and his Apostles in Jury which began at his preaching, and
continued till the Martyrdom of the Apostles. This was figured by the first
vision of the seven Churches, in the first and second chapter. The second age
was of the confirmation of the faith, with the blood of the martyrs shed
thorough all the world by Pagans and Idolators, which began at the persecution
of Nero, figured by the second vision of seaue^ seals, in the 5. chapter. The
third age was doctrine, in the same being declared the mysteries of our faith,
and all heresies clearlie refuted. It began in the time of the Emperor
Constantin, who assembled the Council of Nice, against the heresy of Arius,
figured by the third vision of the seven trompettes, in the seventh chapter.
The fourth age was solitary and Eremeticall life, performed with long and great
austeritie of life and contemplation of spirit, till the time of S. Antony,
figured in the fourth vision of the woman clothed with the sun, in the
twelueth chapter. The fifth age was when the holy Church began to abound in
temporal riches, as well Religious as Clearkes, it began in the time of
Charles the great, figured by the fist vision of the seven golden vessels, in
the fifteenth chapter. The sixth age of the renouation of Evangelical life, is
of the war against the sects of Antechrist, performed by the voluntary
poor, who possess not any thing in this life, it began in the Seraphicall
Father S Francis, author and institutor of the Friar Minors, figured by the
sixth vision of the abominable and puissante woman of Babylon, in the
seventeenth chapter. The seventh age shall be hereafter, both in a merueillous
repose, and participation of war, which is to come in earth, and shall
shortly come in perfection in the general resurrection of all the saints of
God: it shall have his begymning in death before the coming of our Redeemer
JESUS Christ to judge, it is figured in the twentieth chapter of the Apocalypse,
when the dragon shall finally be condemned, and the elect glorified.

So that in the first age did flourish the perfection of Prelacie and the
Pastoral care of the Church, those were the holy Apostles. In the second
flourished the estate of Martyrdom, by the combatt and triumph of the Champions
of JESUS Christ. In the third flourished the Voice of Preachers and Doctors,
the trompett of the divine wisdom. In the fourth the sanctity and ornament of
contemplative life, in those that lived and led an Evangelical and celestial
life on earth. In the fifth florishhed the zeal of justice, by which one
discendeth to a commune and less perfect life in the zealous and just
institutors of Reguler estates. In the sixth flourished the estate of the
imitation of JESUS Christ, reformed by the Church in the true imitators of
Evangelical life. In the seventh afterward shall flourish the taste and swetnes
of the glory which God shall communicate unto his elect, for the wearysome,
labors which one shall have voluntarily and affectionatly suffered here on
earth, as far forth as humane infirmity, shall have ability to support, and
God shall be pleased to inspire into us. And our Lord has ordained these estates
and these ages, according to the necessities of the holy Church against his
ennemies the devils, and against wicked men their followers, who together
maintain ancient war against his Church, though tolerated by God for the
greater glory of the elect: for none shall be crowned but he that courageously
combatteth. So was the first estate against the carnal, and gross
intelligences and ceremonies of the Jews. The second against the idolatry of
the Pagans. The third against the Arrians and other heretics. The fourth
against the carnal and detestable sect of Mahomet. The fifth against the life
of loose Christians dishonoring themselves. The sixth against the pestiferous
poison of Antechrist. The seventh against the army of devils and their
sectatours, who in these latter days shall trouble the Church more then ever.
We ought nevertheless to conceive, that though the said estates be thus
separated, and each one have his particular property, yet the one participating
of the quality and property of the other, they come in a certain manner to
entermingle together: by reason that there ever have bin, and shall be in the
Church of God, Prelates, Martyrs, and Confessors, all affectionate and perfect
imitatours of JESUS Christ. It is a matter well worthy exceeding deep
consideration to weigh with what profound wisdom, these Estates have bin
ordained by the holy Ghost.

First our Lord JESUS Christ, as chief and foundamental stone of his Church,
together with his glorious Mother, his Apostles and primitive Church,
constituted and founded the first estate; out of which was afterward to issue
all perfection in the ensuying Estates. In which arose the first battle, our
Redeemer JESUS Christ, opposing against the ungrateful Sinagogue, possessed of
the devil, wherein as our Captain he entered the field of combatt for us and
fighting valerously, got a glorious victory, leaving to the world a new manner
of fight, to vanquish our ennemies, and to attain an eternal and immortal
glory in heaven: and as he was true God and Lord of all, it was expedient,
that, to the confusion of the ungrateful Sinagogue, and for the greater
manifestation of his omnipotency, and clemency, by mean of his Apostles
preaching, he should be known to be the true Redeemer and Lord of all the
world and of all nations. But whereas they were all Idolators, and addicted to
most abominable vices, by persuasion of the devils, whom they served, the
valliant combat of the champions of JESUS Christ was necessary (I mean the
holy Martyrs) to bring idolatry and infernal vices to ruin. At the end of
which conflict the world was to acknoledge JESUS Christ, as it began to do
under the Empire of Co^stantin, when it pleased God, to give some peace and
repose to his Church. And because a more clear knoledge of the faith of the
most sacred Trinity, and of the divinity and humanity of JESUS Christ was
expedient, the order and dignity of Doctors, illuminated by the holy Ghost,
did then flourish. In like sort also, because our spirittes cannot arrive to the
depth of the mysteries of faith, and that many presume over much on the
subtilitye and force of their wit, many (particulerly of the Grecians) did by
divine permission justly fall into error, therefore the want and necessity of
Doctors did grow and increase, who obtained glorious victories over the
heretics. And because the knoledge of divine things, does little or nothing
avail, if the life be not conformable to the doctrine, in the fourth estate
which was little different in time from the third of the Doctors, did flourish
that merueillous, celestial and angelical life, of Hermites in the deserts
specially of Arabia, Palestine and Egypt, very commodious and convenient
places, where, with great abstinence, watchinges, prayers, disclplines,
contemplations, and other pious exercises, they did subject the flesh to the
spirit, which they held perfectly united with God. But by reason that the
malice and infirmity of humane nature cannot long support and endure such a
sublimity and excellency of life: and considering that the fall from so emin^t
an estate draws together with it a consequence of enormous sins, a coldness
of the love of God, and sometimes Apostasy: the same succeeded, together with
heresies that branched out, so that there was yet need of violent
chasticementes. And therefore were the Christians sharply afflicted and
chasticed, by no less cruel then barbarous nations, such as were the
Hungarians, Goths, Vandales, Lombardes and other, yea we yet see the order and
abominable sect of the barbarous Mahomet, by reason of false Christians and
heretics, to ruin, bring to servitude and sclauery a great part of the
Christian Provinces. This was the fourth war whereby, in regard of the extreme
coldness of the devotion of Christians, the Church was greiuously afflicted. Yet
did not God therefore leave his Church destitute of holy personnages, under
whom in so miserable a time, she was supported, as in the dialogues of S.
Gregory does manifestly appear.

Now our Lord JESUS Christ defending his Church, he assembled and retired the
purest and most entier part thereof, into this part of the world which we call
Europe, in the time of Charles the Emperor and king of France, by whose mean
God secured, and settled in tranquillity the estate of his Vicar at Rome, the
capital city of the Empire, and gave peace to the Church, the said Emperor
attempting great enterprises, and obtaining glorious victories over the
Barbarians, Pagans, and Sarrazins. In that fifth estate, humane infirmity was
with very great reason condiscended unto, and to that effect was instituted a
more lardge and tolerable life, to the end that such as were not capable of the
hight of Martyrdom, or of contemplation, might nevertheless find place of
favor with God, in a mean or indifferent estate, ecclesiastical persons
possessing their temporal goods peaceably as did the seculers: And because
many could not, even in that mean estate, so strictly contain themselves as
to live virtuously according to their duty, God raised against them holy men
and zealous of his honor, that should reprehend and check their vices and
dissolutions: which caused them to raise rebellion and persecution even against
their own Prelates, and so Christians abusing the benefitt of peace and
temporal prosperity, the Ecclesiastical no less then the seculers, loosed
the reins to infinite vices, as to avarice, simonie, usury, violence, discord,
and adultery, without any remorse of conscience or fear of God: so that
retayning as it were the only name and faith of Christians, they in other
respects lived merely as Pagans. This carnal and licencious life took such
root, that all memory of spiritual life and the imitation of the life of
JESUS Christ seemed to be utterly extinguished and raced out of men's hearts,
and therefore it was expedient for him to reform the Church by renewing the
memory of his most sacred life. It ought not to seem strange not with
standing, that the divine providence which sweetly and prudently governs al
things, would grant to his Church, estates and temporal riches: for the same
has bin expedient for diverse considerations, and principally to demonstrate
that JESUS Christ is the almighty Creator and Governor of all, that to him all
creatures owe service, and that with all things and of all, he may be served
in his Church, against the heresy of the Manicheans: besides, it is to make
appear, that the new testament does not reprove the estate and quality of
Princes, nobles, and rich persons, though himself being in the world, did
choose an estate of life in poverty, crosses, and humility.

Thirdly he would that Ecclesiastical Prelates should possess titles of
honor, dignities and temporal richesse, that the potent of the world might
learn of them the manner to humble themselves, to be liberal, gracious and
affable to their subjects, to execute justice exactly toward the guilty, and
sometimes to show mercy: to the end also that the rich might learn not to
employ their goods in worldly and transitory vanities, nor much less in
pleasures and contentmentes of the flesh, but to bestow them in charitable uses
of piety, of mercy, and of a moderate and temperate life: for of all this, did
the Prelates of that time, by their exceeding charity, abstinence and
liberality, give a right worthy example, distributing the patrimony of JESUS
Christ, among his poor.

Fourthly, that the imitation of the life of JESUS Christ, might be better
known and more readily embraced in poverty, crosses and contempt of all
transitory things, men having by experience seen, how many evils and sins
succeeded in his Church, by mean of honors and temporal richesse, and that
even the blinded worldlinges might be assured that the state of life which
himself did choose in this life* is most secure and most perfect. Fifthly, and
finally, to condescend unto the imperfection and infirmity of many, that being
incapable of the excellent and Apostolic poverty, wrought their salvation by
this more large way: whence may be conceived that God has always ordained the
estate of his Church, according as he knew it most expedient for his elect, so
that whereas the Church has bin enriched with temporalities it was by the most
prudent counsel of the holy Ghost. This magnificence of richesse and
temporal estate, avails much for trial of Prelates and Ecclesiastical
persons, for by the same appears whither they be humble in honors,
temperate in abondance, and amiddest their flowing substance, poor in regard
of their will. But alas! few by this trial have proved such: for contrary
wise they have become licencious, and have converted that into intolerable
transgression, which was given unto them for inducement to exercise themselves
in all piety and virtue.

Now this fall, toward the end of this latter age and estate of temporal
prosperity, is merueillous punctually declared by S. John in the fifth chapter
of his visions, where he introduces the Angel speaking to the fifth Church of
Sardis: Thou art esteemed to live, but thou art dead. Then by way of threats
he says, that in regard of the great euels and little good which she did, if
she did not amend, she should in short time be punished and damned. And in the
opening of the fifth seal, it is said, that the saints out of great zeal
required vengeance on sinners: and at the sound of the fifth trompett it is
said, that a star (thereby being understood the principal of the estate of
the Church, seculers and ecclesiasticals) fell as upon the earth with so greedy
a desire of terrestrial things, that the pittes of the bottomless depth did
open, as if he would say, all kind of sins and vices (as are pride, avarice,
cruelty, murders, and other infinite enormities) did, by their evil example,
ouerflow the earth: and upon that occasion, the name of God has bin from that
time blasphemed, and many heresies have thence succeeded, and likewise war
between kingdoms and peoples one against an other, schisms and discord
among Prelates one against another, and between Prelates and their subjects,
and all this to the great scandal of Christians, which did so much exceed the
other precedent disasters, in regard that it was domestical proceeding of the
chief spiritual and temporal persons of the Church.

In the dregs of this fifth age, was all the Empire of Federic the second, a
violent persecuter of the Church and of the Prelates, in so much that he
brought the Sarrazins into Italy, and there planted them, who by their
incursions committed a great murder of the Christians, saccagementes, ruins,
and burninges of Churches and monasteries, to satiate their barbarous
infidelity. The sun was then obscured, to wit our holy Father the Pope, who
was deprived of the reverence from each one due unto him, and the moon became
bloody by the persecutions, imprisonmentes, and death of the Cardinals and
Prelates, that were so much afflicted by the said Emperor Federic, and his
adherentes. And the stars fell from heaven, that is, many ecclesiastical
persons, betraying the Church of JESUS Christ, adhered to the Emperor. The
devils therefore, ministers of the wrath of God, made ready themselves to
revenge such and so many enormities over the world, in all the four parts of
the earth, and to this purpose they induced men to unwonted sins, laboring
to prevent with punishment the divine mercy: and doubtless if our Lord JESUS
Christ had not favored his Church, by a new birth and reformation of spirit,
she could not have avoided an horrible chasticement. God omitted not to
reveal, to his vicares on earth, and to many faithful Catholics, for their
consolation, this necessity, and the remedy he intended to the same. He
manifested invision to Pope Innocent the third, the Church of S. John Lateran
as ready to fall, but that it was supported and sustained by the shoulders of
two poor men. So when afterward the glorious Father S. Francis, and after
him S. Dominick came to demanded permission of the said Pope to institute their
Orders in the Church, he knew by illumination of the holy Ghost, that they were
the two poor men whom he had seen in his dream or vision, supporting the
said Church: and therefore was he the more easily induced to accord their
requests. So that the Church was at that time filled with brutish people,
that were all sclaues to their concupiscences, and as terrestiall serpents,
full of avarice, and with other cruel and horrible monsters, having their face
and conversation utterly deformed and corrupted, with infinite vices: but
particulerly with hypocrisy and heresy which then reigned.

Albeit that God as jealous of the honor of his Espouse, was exceedingly moved
and offended at so many enormities, yet did he not therefore in his greatest
fury, omit to show his mercy: for in the mids of his Church he raised the
Orders of begging Friars, flowing with men of famous sanctity, that should
root out avarice, banish allurements and carnal pleasures, reject honors and
terrestrial dignities, shame hypocrisy, defend truth, stir up the fire of
charity, reform other perverse habitudes, and imitating and following the
exampe of JESUS CHRIST, should boldy reprehend the evil deportements and abuse
of some in the Church, should by the word of God awaken and induce the people
to penance, should with admirable virtue confound the malice and great errors
of mischeuous heretics, and by their instant and seruent prayers, should
appease the just wrath of God. Among whom as it were being figured by Enoch
and Elias, S. Francis and S. Dominick particulerly, were ordained and deputed
to this employment. And as S. Antonine in his history recounteth, the holy
Father S. Dominick in spirit saw God exceedingly moved against the world,
which he intended to punish. But, that the glorious Virgin demanded pardon for
the Church, presenting unto him two men, who by the divine providence were
already deputed to preach penance to sinners, to move them to amendment,
which were the glorious Father S. Francis and S. Dominick, by whose prayers God
was appeased: and it happened afterward, that these holy Fathers entering into
the Church of S. Peter at Rome, did in spirit know one an other to be Brothers
and companions, designed to this affair: wherefore in great charity they
mutually embraced one an other.

These two origines and institutors of two perfect rules in the Church of JESUS
CHRIST, were, to wit S. Dominick, as a clear Cherubim, that with the
resplendent light of wisdom, and predications, spread the wings of his
doctrine over cloudy obscurities of the world, which by this his so great
splendor, did give light and discover the errors of heretics, and conducted
the hearts of the faithful in the secure way of true peace. And the blessed S.
Francis, as an other Seraphim, ascending out of the east, purged with that
kindled fiery coal, JESUS CHRIST crucified, and entierly enflamed with the
fervor of heavenly love, he scattered this divine fire over the world, both
the one and the other leaving to their beloved disciples, the said Properties,
though in each of them, and in certain of their perfect and legitimate issue,
the splendor of science, and the fervor of charity, were merueilous well
connexed together. But by reason that all the evils of that time proceeded of
the unbridled greedines and abondance of temporal substance, and with all,
that men did employ and glutt themselves in vanities, and in loathsome
sensualities: the holy Father S. Francis touched with the holy Ghost, would
cut off even by the very root, and far remove from himself and his Order
all temporal richesse, as a reformer of this fifth age, and as one whom the
holy Ghost had deputed to begin the sixth age and the sixth estate of the
Church, proposing to the eyes of all Christians, the life of JESUS CHRIST
crucified, not written or read in paper, but engraven by the industriou^ labor
of these perfect imitatours: as far forth as humane infirmity could imitate
the same. It may in verity be affirmed, that S. Francis was formed of God, as
the first man, who after the first five days of his works, was with a mature
counsel made the sixth after his image and similitude: so likewise
JESUS CHRIST in the sixth age of his Church formed S. Francis, according to his
image, and in similitude of his life and cross, in as much as human
fragility did permit And this was done for a new augmentation of his elect. He
was likewise figured by the Angel, of whom we have formerly spoaken, that he
cried with a loud voice unto the four Angels, to whom was commanded to hurt
the land and the sea, in these words: Do not any hurt, till we have signed
the servants of God in the forehead: that is, till we have raced out the
accursed signs and characters of the beast, which are the vices and sins of
men, and have imprinted, not only in their hearts by penance, but even in their
lives, the signs of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, which is the holy Cross, the true
sign of the elect: which office is conveniently applied unto S Francis, as to
him that carried the title, seal, and figure of the life and passion of our
Lord JESUS CHRIST, as well in following the steps of his conversation in the
hight of contemplation, as in excellent and miraculous works, as also in the
singular privilege of the communication of his most sacred stigmates.

Who can ever explicate or conceive, with what resemblance the holy Ghost in
the life of this holy man, has represented unto the Church, the life, cross,
humility, and perfection, wherein our Lord JESUS CHRIST ought to be imitated?
And it was doubtless expedient for the great necessities of the Church. When our
Redeemer JESUS CHRIST came (as S. Augustine says) the world was in extreme
necessity, it is therefore very reasonable that we yield him infinite thanks, he
having releiued us against so many disasters. But who is he, I pray you, that
had not bin ruyned and over whelmed by the violent torrent of the malice and
sins of the world, if the cross of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and his divine
aucthority had not with such burning fervor bin preached in the mids of the
world? for we now relying there upon, are firm in God, and secure against the
violence of malice and enormitie. The estate of the world was so wretched and
miserable, that there was need of a divine redress, by whose aucthority man
might be induced to voluntary poverty, to continence, charity, justice,
concord, and true piety, with all other excellent virtues, which are the way to
eternal salvation, and the end of Christian profession. It seemed then that in
the fifth age, the world was returned in manner to the like necessity, as it
was in before the coming of JESUS CHRIST, so deeply had it buried in
forgetfulness the good which he had procured it: for it did again wallow in his
former ancient iniquities, in such sort that the charity of God was as it were
constrained to be once again crucified before the eyes of ungrateful men, who
seemed to have forgotten that incomprehensible benefitt, not for the Redemption
of sins, for his passion sufficied for infinite worlds, but to renew in the
memory of men, the way to heaven, which is no other then the cross and
passion. And it not being expedient to reiterate the same, because JESUS
CHRIST, as glorious and immortal, is no more capable of death, his divine
wisdom found this mean, lively and effectually to represent in his servant,
the standard of the cross, his passion, and his wounds, to renew them in the
memory of men, that they might follow the perfection of the Evangelical
estate, which himself by his most holy life had taught us.

This servant elected for so great a mystery, was the glorious Father S.
Francis, in such necessity deputed to make a spiritual renouation in the
world, of the life of JESUS CHRIST, represented to the eyes of the faithful in
his person, and in the perfect Religious of his Order. And in regard that the
life of JESUS CHRIST and his perfection does particulerly shine, as the
gospel teaches us, in the passion and the cross, that is in most profound
humility, in most strict poverty without any mixture of temporal substance, in
fervor of charity and compassion of sinners, in worckes of our salvation,
austere and difficult, but especially in interior perfection of charity,
wherewith our Lord JESUS CHRIST, our head conioyneth and unites us with God:
and for better perfomance of this union, he counsaileth us the renunciation of
temporal richesse, and the abdication of proper liberty and sensualities. The
holy Father S. Francis walked this way of the Counsels of JESUS CHRIST, ill
understood of the world, and instituted a rule and direct path tending to
perfection and to union with God, wherein walking himself, and teaching more
by effect then by words, he showed to the world the true way of penance and
salvation.

According therefore to the opinion of S. Bonauenture, may be observed three
merueillous effects, wherefore God sent S. Francis into this world. The first
was, to preach penance, as an other forerunner of JESUS CHRIST, in the desert
of poverty, because Christians had already forgotten it, and therefore he
insinuated unto them the necessity they had thereof, by reason of the blindness
that their enormous sins had procured the^. The first name also that this
holy Religion had, was Preachers of penance, which title and ministry was
given them by Pope Innocent the third, in the first confirmation of the Order:
therefore was it that S. Francis did institute the third Order, called of
Penitents. The second matter he was to be employed in by the holy Ghost, was,
for himself and his disciples by profession and rule to renouate the
Evangelical life and perfection, the which to effectuate he instituted with
the spirit of JESUS CHRIST, and ordained the rule of the Friar Minors, which he
being desirous to found with exceeding deep foundations of humility, he would
that his Brethren should be called Minors, that is the least of all other. Many
holy Fathers have flourished in this Order, who have bin glorious in sanctity
and doctrine, as S. Antony, S. Bonauenture, S. Lewis the bishop, S. Benardine,
and many other Confessors and Martyrs of JESUS CHRIST. S. Francis did also
institute the Apostolical rule and life of S. Clare and her Disciples, who by
their sanctity and example, drew an innumerable multitude of Virgins that
espoused themselves to JESUS CHRIST. Finally the third thing that this
Seraphicall saint was to attempt, was to teach all faithful Christians,
voluntarily to take up and carry on their shoulders the cross of our Savior
JESUS CHRIST, demonstrating unto them that with poverty and the cross, they
should gain and get possession of true incorruptible richesse, and with
labor should attain true repose that with humility is gotten true glory, and
with the familiarity and frequent communication which is had with our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, is purchaced his love and amity. The stigmates also and wounds
of our Redeemer were imprinted in this glorious S. Francis, not only in his
soul, but even visibly in his body, that the carnal might have no excuse of
not following JESUS CHRIST crucified in his servant Francis. Now out of these
obligations which this holy Father had, as out of a new spirit of JESUS CHRIST
there proceeded in him that nouelty of so merueillous worckes, in all sorts of
virtues, as those excesses of humility and contempt of himself, the austerity
of discipline, wherewith he afflicted his body, the great fervor he had of the
salvation of his neighbor, whereby he entierly employed both himself and his
to reform Christians, and to reduce them into the way of obedience unto God
and his law. These things are understood of few, and also of few prised
according to their worth, by reason that they seem co^temptible to earthly
eyes, yea me^ shun and jest at the^, because the sensual man guided only by
natural light, co^ceiueth not the things that are of God. The devout Christian
then, ought now to demand humbly of this sovereign God, as of the author of
this worck, the light of his grace, whereby being freed of humane iudmentes and
conceiptes, he may understand, taste, and gather the 1. Col. 2.
fruit of the spirit of JESUS CHRIST, so bcuntifully communicated to S.
Francis and to his true children, for the reformation, assistance, and comfort
of his elect, and of all true Christians.

The sum of that which is contained in each of these Ten books.
IN the three first are written the life, works, death, and miracles of the
holy Father S. Francis: these first three books make the first volume.

In the fourth book, are recorded the Martyrdomes of many of his disciples.

In the fifth, the doings and miracles of S. Antony of Lisbone, called of Padua.

In the sixth, the conuersations of many other disciples of S. Francis.

In the seventh, the exemplar life of the blessed Br. Giles, his third
disciple.

In the eight, the life of S. Clare, and the beginning of her Order.

In the ninth, the institution of the Rule and Order of Penitentes, called the
third Order of S. Francis.

In the tenth and last, is treated and discoursed of diverse things, happened
and worthy to be observed in the first time of the said Religion of the Friar
Minors.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES OF THE FRIAR MINORS.
Wherein is treated of the conversion, life, and actions of the Seraphicall
Father S. Francis.
Englished out of French by F. C.
Of the Birth, Education and natural incl nation of S. Francis.
THE I, CHAPTER,
THE grace of our Savior JESUS CHRIST has appeared unto us, in these later
days particulerly in his servant Francis, to whom the Father, of mercy and
light, would by his benignity impart such benedictions, and so excellent
favors, that, as by the discourse of his life appears, he did not only draw
him out of the darckenes of the world, to setle him in the true light, but he
made him great, in the merits of the perfection of all virtues. And having
extraordinarily communicated unto him many note-worthy mysteries of the cross,
he merueillously elevated and exalted him in his holy Church, wherein he gave
him a right eminent place and The birth of S. Francis.
degree. This great servant of God Francis, was borne the year of grace 1182,
in the city of Assissium, situate in the valley of Spoletum in Italy. His
Father was a rich Merchant, of an honest family, called Mariconi: his name was
Peter Bernardone, taking for his name the proper name of his father the grand
father of the said Francis, called Bernardone de Mariconi: his mother was
called Pica, who was a very pious and honest woman, who procured him in his
baptism to be called John, but his Father afterward at his Confirmation,
would that he should chaung his name, and was called Francis. Some affirm that
he was called Francis, because he had with exceeding facility learned the
French tongue. Before his birth, his mother endured very much being many days
in labor of delivery, in mean while there came a poor pilgrim to the door
of the house, who having received an almose, said to him that brought it; cause
that woman who endures such throws of travail, to be carried into a stable,
and she shall be incontinently delivered. He was borne in a stable.
Which being done, she was instantly delivered, and for that respect there was
built in that place a chapel, where in memory of the birth of this S. the
history of this miracle was depeinted: whom our Lord IESVSCHRIST would in
regard of his birth in a poor and contemptible place, make like unto himself.
This chapel is now called S. Francis the little. Francis was nourtured and
educated of his parents, as their S. Francis his youth.
eldest son. And having in short time learned the French tongue, though it be
very difficult, they putt him to learn Latin, as most universal in ail Europe
(for to merchantes it is of no small importance to know many tongues) which
having learned, and being of age capable to manadge affairs, he trained him to
his trafique, both in his city and abroad. And though he where busyed and
employed in the vanities and folies of the world, yet was it not possible for
the devil to corrupt his good and natural inclination, which God (who had
sowed the same in him as in a good ground) did always conserve in his heart.
And therefore, albeit in his youth he haunted and conuersed with his equals, and
with them did honestly spend his time in diverse recreations; yet did he never
permit his pleasure so much to prevail, but that as an other Joseph, he most
carefully preserved the inestimable treasure of his chastity. Yea negotiating
with merchants, for the most part true ministers of avarice, yet had he not for
all that, so set up his rest and desire on transitory ri chesse and silver, as
that thy could hinder him from the exercise of the virtues of mercy toward
the poor, to whom he always showed a What a great almose-giuer he was.
natural inclination and compassion to assist and releive them; which was a
particular grace, that God had given him, as an infallible note that he was of
his especial elect; which augmenting and growing in him even from his tender
yonth, made him so mild and merciful, that he could not deny the poor any
thing they demanded him, particulerly when the party in necessity did mention
in his request the love of God. Notwithstanding it one day chanced that being
earnestly employed, he could not attend to give an almose to a poor man that
demanded it for the love of God. His business being ended, this true servant of
God, calling to mind that he had denied a poor man, he sharply checked and
reprehended himself, titling himself, ill nourtured, discurteous, inhumane
and cruel, saying that if a friend, or an other man of honor had sent to ask
him any thing, he should have neglected and laid aside all business to give him
content and service; and yet he had not done so in Godds cause; and therefore he
hastened to find out that poor man, to whom having given an almose, he asked
him pardon. And to the end he might not thenceforward prove forgetful in the
like accident, he again confirmed his vow, that as far forth as should be
possible unto him, he would never deny that which should be demanded him for
the love of God; and perseuering even till death in this vow, he continually
increased in divine graces: whereupon he asfirmed, that being seculer, he never
heard word of the love of God uttered, but that it molified and moved his heart.
Francis then being yet young and worldly, was mindful of God in this sort,
wherein many that esteem themselves good Christians and very spiritual do not
any way remember him, considering that often times for a little almose demanded
of them by a poor creature, they feel interiourly an anxiety thereof, and do
with choler disdaynfully reject him. This was the A. B. C. wherein S. Francis
exercised himself, with the greatest of the house of God, and therefore he
merited to obtain of his divine majesty, mercy and favor; for in that respect
are the merciful called blessed. So was he naturally liberal, remote from
avarice, perhaps more then he ought, doing it The good nature of S. Francis.
to be esteemed and honored. Therefore did the young men of his estate much
affect and honor him, and in their sportes and recreations did ordinairily
make him their captain, because he did voluntarily and freely spend in
music, bankets, garments and other youthful folies. But one day considering
these vanities, he thus discoursed, with himself: Since thou art so free and
liberal toward men, of whom thou can expect no other recompense but a
little vain glory, how much more reasonable were it for thee to show this
liberality toward God in his poor people, to whom that which thou
possessest does appertain, and who does afterward so bountifully and
abondantly accept and recompense the same? In this sort moving himself, he
thenceforward employed in almose and other charities, as much or more then in
vanities. Francis had besides, a natural sweetness in his conuersations
accompanied with such a benignite and patience, as made him grateful and
amiable to each one: by reason that his good parts and conditions Predictio^
of his sanctity.
gave hope of some worthy matter in him. There was then in Assisium, a very
simple man but esteemed to be inspired of God, who meeting the young man
Francis, did always cast his cloak on the ground and spread it where he was
to pass, saying before all the world: It has bin thus ordained: as if he
would say of God, that the young Francis is worthy of all honor and reverence.

He was prisoner.
There being continual war between the city of Assisium and Perusia, he
was one day with many other of his fellow-cittizens taken prisoner by the
enemies, and they were all conducted to Perusia, where they remained prisoners
for a year, till the cities were at accord. In this his imprisonment he
showed a right worthy proof of his magnanimity, being amiddes so many
afflictions and discomfortes, so constant, temperat, and merry, that his
companions did admire theratt, and often reprehended him for it: but he with
alacrity answered them: What thinck ye, you my companions? What countenance
would you have me to carry? Tell me I pray you, if we have cause of sorrow,
since we shall in this respect from henceforward be more honored of the world.
Thus did he comfort and encourage them all in the prison, and even served them;
for the servant which they had, being expulsed as seditious, he voluntarily
served them in every thing, and was unto them a greatfull companion. By reason
of these acceptable dispositions, his conversation and accointance was desired
and sought of every one, and by this mean he was in manner constrained to do
many vain things that were little pleasing unto him. So did he very
unprofitably consume and wast his age and time, his goods and graces of nature,
till about the five and twentieth year of his age, though God had endued him
with so many prerogatives and rare conditions, not to abuse them, but to employ
them entierly in the praise and glory of his divine majesty: for though he did
always keep and preserve alive this sparckle of the love of God in his heart,
yet did not the youthful Francis (as being over much possessed with a care to
augment and conserve his wealth, and to enjoy his recreations) understand the
celestial secrett of his great and divine vocation, which was, with reiection
of earthly conuersations, to employ himself merely to contemplation of
celestial things, and to attain and aspire unto them. And in deed he could
not know them, till he felt himself touched by the severe hand of God, which
having sharply stricken him in his body, did by a long disease afflict him, and
purged and illuminated him interiourly, thereby to loose him from the bonds of
the devil, the world, and the flesh.

Of his first vocation, from his seculer to a spiritual life, by many
apparitions and visions from God.
THE II. CHAPTER.
THe servant of God Francis being cured of his foresaid corporal sickness, and
confirmed in his soul by new purposes and new His extreme charity.
feruours, having occasion to walk into the feildes, he met in the way a man
that in his countenance and comportment seemed a gentleman, but was for the
present in miserable estate, poor, ragged and in shameful condition. Francis
beholding him, immediately represented unto his memory our most noble, but
poor king, JESUS CHRIST being in the world, of whom he had so strong an
apprehension, as if he had seen him before his eyes, and thence he conceived
such a compassion of this poor man, that calling him aside, he putt off his
garments wherewith he was attired and clothed him therewith. The night
following, he saw in an imaginary vision sleeping, a fair lardge hall full of
very rich armures, all signed with the cross, and God for whose love he had
given his clothes A vision which he had.
to the poor man, showing them unto him, who most assuredly promised him to
give all the armures which he saw to him and his, if he would undertake the
triumphant standard of the cross, and courageously follow him. Francis
awaking, interpreted this vision to be of temporal cheualry, wherein all
Christianity was then earnestly exercised, for the conquest of the holy land,
the Christians being there unto induced by the bulle of the Croisadoe, wherein
the Pope granted plenary indulgence to all them that would undertake so
Catholic an entreprise: called Croisadoe, because all the horse and foot men
did wear for devise or badge, the cross on their cassakes and mandillians.
Now Francis having formerly had some desire to serve God in this voyage,
resolved and prepared himself there unto, having conceived a full joy, and
hope, to become a famous and honored Captain, as God (according to his own
interpretation) had promised him. Being therefore demanded of diverse whence
proceeded that his exceeding joy, and the extraordinary contentment which he
exteriourly discovered; he answered them, that it was out of a firm*
assurance which he had, in short time to become great. Having then compleately
furnished himself with armours, servants, horses, and whatsoever seemed
necessary, he hastened to Apulia to find out an Earl who was elected one of
the principal heads of the enterprise, supposing that serving him, he might
after some worthy exploytes of arms, be honored at lenght with the Order of
knight hood: but the first night after he was departed, he heard the voice of
God, that finally said unto him: Francis, who can more benefit thee, or better
advance thee, the Master, or the servant? a rich man, or a poor? He answered,
without question, the master, and he that is rich. The voice replied: Why then
leauest thou the Lord, for the servant; and for a very poor man, God that is
most rich? Francis thereto as an other S. Paul, thus said: O my God, what will thou then that I do? Return (answered the voice) to thy contry, for the
first vision which thou had, signified a spiritual worck. and not a
terrestrial, which is to be accomplished in thee, not by humane favor, in no
sort, but by divine disposition. Francis then being thus changed, thee next
morning full of joy and assurance, he speedily turned his journey toward his
contry, beginning to feel in himself that contentment which perfect obedience
and resignation of ones self to God, does cause and procure to the spirit,
with hope that his divine majesty would give him understanding of his further
pleasure. And thenceforward withdrawing himself from worldly companies and
entanglements, his endeavor and cogitation was only devoutly to beseech the
divine clemency, to make him worthy to know wherein he should employ himself
for his service. For although by the continual use of his frequent and daily
devotions, he felt to increase in himself the flame of divine desires, and
that by reason of his affection to the celestial Hiotusalem, he thenceforward
contemned whatsoever could detain him from it, and that he already desired to
be entierly exercised in the service of God: he nevertheless did not yet
understand in what mannr he should be therein employed, he only by an interior
inspiration conceived, that God revealed unto him that this spiritual affair
was to be enterprised and begun, by contempt of the world, and that the
cheuarly of JESUS CHRIST began by victory over ones self. Being then thus
retired into a solitary place, and by continual prayers and sighinges,
demanding the grace of JESUS CHRIST to be directed into the true way, he heard
a voice proceeding from a Crucifix that said: Francis, if thou will know my
will, it is requisite that thou hate and abhor whatsoever thou have to this A
Crucifix speaks unto him.
present vainly affected and desired: which if thou do, thou shall feel a
new taste and sweetness, in that which heretofore seemed to thee bitter and
insupportable; and that which did accustom to content thee, thou shall
disdain. Francis having heard this lesson of JESUS CHRIST, and often
interiourly reflecting thereon, he chanced one day as he traveled one the
plain of Assissium, to meet a poor leaper, wheratt he was at the first
apprehension afflicted, beholding him with disdain and contempt, but
incontinently remembering the purpose and resolution he had already made, to
embrace perfection, and that to be a champion or warryer of JESUS CHRIST, it
was necessary for him to overcome himself, alighting from his horse, he ran to
embrace and kiss the leaper, and having given him a liberal almose, he mounted
again on his He kisseth a Leaper.
horse, and looking about all that plain he could no more set eye one that
leaper: wherefore being replenished with joy and fear together, he gave
thanckes to God, and perseuering in continual prayer, tears, and sighinges,
he merited to be heard in his pious devotions. Being one day in prayer, as in
regard of his great fervor, he was entierly as it were swallowed up in God,
JESUS CHRIST crucified appeared unto him, by whose sight, his soul al melted
into compassion, and the dolours God appears unto him.
of the passion of our Savior did so pearce his bowels and his interior, that
as often thenceforward as that dolourous passion was represented to his memory,
could he with his utmost endeavor scarcely suppress his tears and sighs, as
himself a little before his death recounted. This man of God then Francis by
this vision felt imprinted Matt. 16.
in his heart those words of JESUS CHRIST. If any man will come after me, let
him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. And from that hour,
he was clothed with the spirit of the love of God, of patience, humility, and
piety, by which divine love, esteeming no more, but rather contemning all his
temporal goods, and what soever he could ever expect of the world, he
perceived and felt in his soul, that God had discovered unto him a hidden
treasure of infinite worth, for the fruition whereof, burning as it were, and
rapt out of himself, he determined to sell all that he had, and to distribute
the price thereof amongst the poor, making by this mean an exchange, of Matt.
13.
worldly traffic for an Evangelical traffic, which procures true
celestial richesse. In this manner did God draw this his servant from profane
houses and shoppes of merchandise, an other Matthew from danger of unjust
exactions; and disposed him to follow his steps, rejecting al other
possession, to enjoy the most precious pearl of Evangelical perfection,
whichwith his utmost possibility he sought, found, and purchased. And in
testimony and assurance of a true, quiet, and full possession thereof, our
Redeemer JESUS CHRIST made him a contract thereof written on the parchement of
his own flesh, signed and sealed by the hand of the seller himself JESUS
CHRIST, with the seal of his most sacred wounds: which he did to bannish from
the world by mean and example of this his most devout servant, the enormous
and intolerable banckes and vsuries, and the frauds in traffikes too commonly
practiced in the world, to the end to further poor Christians in a desire of
buying the said precious and celestial pearl, by the traffike of penitence,
of virtues, and of the glorious following and imitation of JESUS CHRIST.

Of his laborious endeauours to separate himself from the world.
THE III. CHAPTER.
FRancis being very careful, and often consulting with himself how he might
become more poor, to please JESUS CHRIST, renouncing the world, and forsaking
whatsoever thereof appertayned unto him with distribution thereof unto the poor,
there being no person to counsel him in this matter, but his Savior JESUS
CHRIST, his divine goodness omitted not to visitt him further by his holy grace:
For departing out of the city of Assisium, with intention to seek some
solitary place, to mediate and perform his devotion, he past by the side of a
Church of S. Damian, which by reason of extreme antiquity was even ready to
fall. He being touched by the holy Ghost entered in, and falling on his knees
before the image of the Crucifix, he felt his soul replenished with an
admirable consolation of the holy Ghost; wherefore with an extreme fervor he
thrice iterated this prayer unto God: O high and glorious God, my A worthy
prayer of the S.
Lord JESUS CHRIST, illuminate and lighten the obscurities of my heart, give me,
if it please thee, a right faith, an assured hope, a perfect charity, a
knowledge of thee my God, in such sort that he may ever perform thy true and
holy will, Amen. Beholding afterward the Crucifix with a serious attention,
his eyes filled and his face bathed with tears, he heard with his corporal
ears a voice addressed unto him from the Crucifix, which three several times
thus spoke unto him: Go Francis, and repair my house, that is ready to fall:
This so merueillous voice did exceedingly terrify him being A Crucisix
speaks again unto him.
alone in the Church: whereupon utterly amazed, and feeling in himself the
force and virtue of those words, he fell into a sound, but retourning at
lenght to himself; he incontinently prepared to obey and to reestablish that
material Church, wherein he had presented his said prayer, not as yet
understanding the sense of the words of God to be, that he should repair that
other Church, redeemed by his precious blood. So that rising from the ground
and signing himself with the holy Cross, he returned to the city, where he
assembled all the merchandise that his Father had committed to his charge to
traffike, and sent it to Foliginum, where he sold it all, and the horse also
whereon he rode, then hastened to the said He sells his fathers merchandise to
repair a Church.
Church of S. Damian, there to accomplish that which he supposed God had
commanded him. In which place having offered his devotion, he saw the Priest
that served there, to whom he presented all the money he had, to rebuild and
repair that church, and to releive the poor: besides, he humby besought him
that he would for certain days receive him into his company. The priest
answered that he would willingly entertain his person; but would not accept
his money, in regard of his Father and his kindred: and therefore the true
mispriser of richesse castinto a windoe that there he saw against a wall, the
pursse wherein his money was, which he there left in contempt as base earth,
regarding nothing but to unite himself with God, in the company of that Priest.
His Father understanding all this, full of indignation and anger against him,
labored to find him out: but Francis getting aduertisment thereof, as yet a
fresh soldier of JESUS CHRIT, fearing the threats of his Father, and to give
way to his choler, hid himself in a cave, where he continued certain days,
with abondance of tears continually praying God to vouchsafe to deliver his
soul from the hands of those that persecuted him; and that his holy will
would so much favor him, as being to effect the pious desires which he had
vouchsafed to inspire unto him. After he had a certain time continued his
prayers, he began to condemn himself of little courage, and therefore expelling
all fear, he arose out of the cave, and went to Assisium, armed with the
magnanimity and virtue of the most high, to tread under foot the serpents of
worldly persecution, S. Francis reputed a fool of his companions.
whereby the devil thought to enforce his retire. His fellow citizens seeing
him utterly disfigured, as if he had bin bereaved of his senses, said that he
was mad, and the little children followed him, casting stones and dirt at him,
and crying after him in the streets, as if he had bin a fool. But the servant
of JESUS CHRIST in regard of all that, lost not his courage, nor altered his
purpose for whatsoever he iniustly endured, but went peaceably, as if he had
bin deaf, blind and insensible, respecting little or nothing to be reputed a
fool in the world, provided that he might afterward prove wise with JESUS
CHRIST in heaven. Now his Father hearing these cries, and seeing his eldest
son thus abused, he ran as a roaring Ill entreated of his own Father.
lion, not to deliver him from those contemptible reproaches, but himself to
treat him more disdainfully then all the rest, as if he had bin no longer his
Father. In such sort that he conducted him to his own house, where having
extremely iniuried and beaten him, he caused him to be chayned, and so shutt
into a chamber, using him himself as if he had bin a fool, thincking by these
torments to reduce him unto his former estate. But so far was the true servant
of JESUS CHRIST from being any way terrified, or withdrawn from his former
pious resolution, that on the contrary he became thereby more firm and
constant, and more accustomed to support all; calling often to his mind that
worthy saying of the Gospel: Blessed are they that suffer persecution for
justice, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven; and that which our redeemer
himself said: If any man come to me and hates Luc. 14.
not his Father and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters,
yea and his own life besides: he cannot be my disciple. The which speculation
was then most exquisitely practiced by God, in the person of his servant
Francis, who was not only derided of his freindes and kindred, but much more of
his Father himself. It might doubtelesse be esteemed a heart of flint Treated
as atheife
or steel, that was not moved to compassion to see him so tormented by his
own Father; and that admired not the cruelty of the one, and the patience of
the other. But glorious Francis who had his spirit united with JESUS CHRIST,
by whom he was comforted, did in the mean time thus encourage himself, that
by these strokes of the hammer of affliction, God would forge of him a
merueillous and admirable vessel, baked and purged in the fournace of most
panifull crosses and labors, to dilate and amplify his glory and to renew his
memory on earth. Certain days then after young Francis was committed to
prison, his father upon occasion of his affairs being gone out of Assisium,
his mother who was not pleased with that her husband had done, conceiving a
natural compassion of her son, went to see him, and with the gentle and
sweet speeches of a mother, endeavored to persuade him to obey his father,
accompanying her words that were of them selves sufficiently pregnant and
effectual, with abondance of tears. This certainly was no sclender assault
and combatt to the new champion, whose mother could nothing prevail in that
she desired: for he let her know that his obligation was more to God then to
his father or mother, and besides, that he was resolved to follow the
inspiration which he had received of the holy Ghost: Then he turned his speech
to his mother her self, exhorting her to acknoledge the great benefitt which
she had received of God, in that he called her son to his service, and that
therefore she ought to be thankful unto him. This woman at length over comme
with the reasons of her child, and desperate of force ever to supplant his
firm resolution and constantie, and with all touched with a motherly His
mother sets him at liberty.
compassion, loosed his chains, and imparting unto him her benediction she
dismisses him. Francis finding himself at liberty, saluted his mother, and
prayed her to be no more afflicted in his regard, and then returned to the
fore said Church to give thanks to the Sovereign Redeemer for what soever had
happened unto him. But his father being returned, and not finding his son in
the place where he left him, having greiuously checked and iniuried his wife
for dismissing him, he ran utterly enraged into the said Church with resolution
to procure his banishment out of his contry, as a dishonor unto him, if he
should persist in his former resolution. The victorious Francis presented
himself before his Father, to intertaine him graciously, notwithstanding he
preceiued him to be extreme furious, and with an assured and joyful
countenance said unto him: Father; I fear not at all your threats, your
beatinges, your fetteringes, nor all you torments: for I am ready to endure
such persecution as you desire to inflict on me for the love of my God. Which
his father having heard, and knowing well that he should never move nor stagger
his stable and constant resolution, he then thought at least to redeem and
recover the money which his son had received for his merchandise, and to that
end sought information of the Priest how it was employed: but in the mean His
father having his money is appeased
while he seemed to perceive a great purse upon a window, whereto goeing near,
he found that it was his money; which having seized on, it much appeased his
fury, the burning thirst of his avarice being somewhat moderated by the
application of this medicine.

How the servant of Jesus Christ Francis renounced his father, not only
touching his due, but even restored unto him all the garments wherewith he was
clothed, disapparelling himself even to his shirt, and this in presence of
the bishop of Assisium.
THE IIII. CHAPTER.
THe terrestrial father of the glorious Francis being not yet satiated with
the cruelties inflicted on him, would tempt the son of grace in temporal
abilities, seeking to constrain him to render and renounce the dew portion
which of his father he was to have, and to this effect conducted him before the
bishop of the city. Now the father thus proceeded for fear that being dead,
his son should distribut the part of his succession among the poor. S.
Francis understanding it, went very willingly before the bishop, as a true
lover of poverty and obedient child, without expecting further summoning, and
without^ any consideration of the matter, and there he did not only most
readily renounce his paternall succession, but even putt off the garments
wherewith he was clothed, to his very shirte, in presence of the bishop and
diverse others, without blushing any thing theratt, being mindful of our most
gracious JESUS CHRIT, who for us was nailed naked unto the cross.! Then he
made a little bundle of his clothes, and delivered S. Francis is naked to
render his clothes to his father
the same to his father, saying: Till this present I have called you father,
and have reputed you so in this world; but from hence forward I may securely
say; Our Father which art in heaven; to whom I have given in custody my
treasure, and in him have reposed all the hope of hereditary succession. The
bishop seeing so strange a specctacle, nothing resting on the body of poor
Francis but his hair cloth, and preceiuing on the other side that the father
supported and endured to see his son naked without any compassion of his
heart: considering with all in the son such an extraordinary fervor, with so
admirable and excessive patience: he reputed him the true servant of God, and
therefore arising and standing up, he with gracious sweetness received him into
his arms, and as a pious Pastor, covered him with his own gown, and
commanded his servants to bring him a garment; whereupon they brought him an
old base coat of a poor labourer, which Francis gratefully received, without
expecting any other, and requiring that there might be brought him a pair of
Cicers, he so The first religious habit of S. Francis.
fashioned the same, that it covered a man in form of a Cross. A right
heroical act, worthy of very great consideration, and merueillous to see after
what manner the world (the true soldier of the devil, our cruel ennemie)
reduces to nothing those that desire truly to serve God, leaving them even
naked without wherwithall to cover them. We ought here to consider, how
necessary it is for the good and virtuous to mesprise the wealth of the world,
and not to fear the inconveniences thereof, to disburthen them of the weight of
the earth, with the greater alacrity to carry the burden of our Redeemer, and
finally in a certain sort to disnaturalize them selves, forsaking father, and
mother, and worldly kindred, to become citizens of heaven. Thus was the servant
of the most mighty Monarque, dischardged of his terrestrial father to follow
our naked JESUS CHRIST crucified whom he loved; and so armed with the armours
of the cross, he recommanded his soul to the tree of life, by the virtue
whereof he secured himself from the tempestuous sea of this world.

Of the exercises wherein the servant of Jesus Christ Francis, thence forward
employed himself.
THE V. CHAPTER.
THis contemner of the world being then freed of the chains, and deliured of
the threats of his Father, went into the desert, that there alone, and in
silence, he might hear the secrettes of the divine word. And as he walked on
a mountain, singing the praises of God in the French tongue, he was assaulted
by certain thieves, who rudely examined him what he was and what he sought
there: to whom he answered as a Prophett: I am an herald of the great king.
They disdayining this answer, came near S. Francis was beaten of thieves.
and beat him; and after many threatening words, they cast him into a ditch of
snow that was there, saying: Thou shall now lie there as a caitife herald of
the great king. But Francis they being retired, came out of the ditch, and
filled with exceeding contentment, began again to praise God: after he had a
long time walked, he came to a Monastery, where as a poor beggar, he demanded
almose for the love of God, which he received. Thence he went to the city of
Agubio, where being known unto an ancient friend of his, courteously entertained
him into his house. And in regard that he was so naked, this friend covered him
with a poor cloak, which served him two years, carrying a staff in his
hand, as an hermit, with shoes on his feet, and girt with a lether belt,
which made him esteemed to be Religious of the Order of S. Augustine. Now this
affectour of humility desirous to lay a firm and stable foundation to his
spiritual edifice, exerciced himself in the active life, to wit in works of
charity toward his neighbor, entertayninge his life with much austerity and
mortification. For having vanquished and trodden under foot the love of S.
Francis serves leapers. Esaye 53.
himself, and transferred it unto his neighbor, his affection was entierly,
reposed and settled in Jesus Christ, by reason that whiles he was yet worldly,
he abhorred the access of leapers, but now enflamed and ennamoured of JESUS
CHRIST who (Isay) was contemned in the world, and vlcered as a leapar, so that
he seemed no more to be a man. That he might the more pefectly subject his will
to the spirit, he entierly applied himself to the service of leapers, often
visiting them in their own houses, traueilling to get almose for them,
kissing their He demanded almose for them.
hands, their feet, and face; breifely, for the love of Jesus Christ he
assisted and served them with exceeding diligence, yea sometimes the better to
conquer himself, cleansed and purged their filthy loathsome vlceres and ill
sauouring soars, with an extreme fervor and devotion, as if he had bin newly
sent of God into the world as a rare Physician for the mortal wounds of
sins. Sometimes also he laid his Admirable mortificatio^s of saint Francis.
mouth on the earth, amiddle the dust, that accustoming himself to contemptes
and reproaches, he might subject the pride of the flesh to the law of the
spirit, and might procure to be a peaceable and perfect possessour of
himself, by which exercise he obtained of God so great virtues as he had
incredible puissance, to cure spiritual and corporal diseases. I will here to
this purpose set down one miracle, among diverse others which shall be recorded
in this history in their place. There was a man of the Dukedom of Spoletum
that had on his face a most hideous and perilous soar, that had already
consumed and eaten one Hecureth one of an ulcer in kissing it
of his jaws, and a great part of his mouth, and whereas no remedy could be
procured to his infirmity, he vowed to go to Rome to visitt the sepulchers of
the holy Apostles, to crave their intercession, and to implore the mercy of
God, that he would be pleased to deliver him of that so greuious and loathsome
disease. Now as he returned to his house, having accomplished his vow, he met
the blessed Francis on the way, before whom this diseased inclined himself to
kiss his feet, by reason that his countenance was exceeding venerable: But the
humble servant of God not permitting it, stepped back. The diseased arising, the
imitatour of Jesus Christ embraced him, and kissed his face; which having
performed with a merucillous compassion, at the very instant that horrible
vlcere and the mouth being kissed, were incontinently cured. I know not in deed
which of the two is more admirable, either His charity toward the poor
the profound humility of the S. in kissing the wound, or the excellency of his
virtue in worcking such a miracle. He did not exercise this charity only
toward leapers; but did also extend such liberality to all poor peole, that
sometimes leaving himself half naked to cover the^, he desired besides to
give his own person, and espetially to poor preistes, He labored to keep the
churches and their ornaments in decency. How he affected poverty.
whom he assisted with great piety and reverence. He was likewise very zealous
and careful of the orname^tes of Altars and of Churches, so that he did often
make them clean and decent with his own hands, that by them God might be
served with more honor and reverence. To this glorious Saint, poverty seemed
the most precious thing in the word, all his ambition was to possess the same,
in this respect only was he envious if an other were poorer then himself.
Goeing on to offer his devotions at S. Peter's in Rome, among a great multitude
of poor that were there at the door, he espied one most wretched and
miserable, almost naked and uncovered, of whom he had such compassion, and was
so enflamed with the love of poverty, that puttning off his own garment he
gave it to the poor Creature, and clothed himself with the others rags,
and took such content therein', that he remained all that day with those poor
people, with exceeding alacrity, rejoicing in poverty, in contempt of the glory
of the world, learning by such and the like worckes of charity, first to
practice and perform, and then to teach, following the steps of his true
master JESUS CHRIST, whose life and doctrine he should practice and teach to
mortal men. Being one day of the winter so poorly clothed, that much of the
nakedness of his body appeared, and hearing the holy mass, a Brother of his by
chance met him there, who scoffinglie asked him if he would sell him for six
pence of his sweat. The servant of God joyfully answered, I have sold it all
at a good price to my God and lord. He might doutles affirm it with good
reason, considering he was continually busied in works of charity toward his
neighbor, and in exercises of humility, surmounting the nature of his senses,
yet without omitting mental conversation with JESUS CHRIST crucified: for more
commodious fruition whereof, he frequented hermitages and solitary places,
employing his time in prayer and weeping: neither would he thence depart til he
had learned some extraordinary fashion of fasting.

How S. Francis repaired three Churches.
THE VI. CHAPTER.
THis glorious Saint was so well grounded in the virtue of simplicity and of
the charity of JESUS CHRIST, that calling to his mind what had bin
miraculously commanded him by the Crucifix, which was, that that he should
reestablish his Church, supposing that he meant the said Church of S. Damian,
he returned, as an obedient servant, to Assisium, purposing by alms to
execute and accomplish that, which he could not do with the money of his
fathers merchandise, and this his dessigne had good success. For seeking over
the city (where he was already known to be the servant of God) he found money
among his freindes and kindred, and matter requisite for the building of the
said Church. So associating him self with the Priest that served there, he
began the said reparation: wanting nether masters, nor worckmen to this effect,
he nevertheless without intermission employed his own person therein, that his
body being already weakened, by continual fastes and ordinary abstinences,
might be more subjected and chasticed, as well by carrying burdensome stones,
as by the mortification he endured, in demanding of them, to whom he had
formerly given. Thus by the grace of God and the devotion of the faithful, he
so well endeavored, that he accomplished the reparation of the said Church: in
which labor the said Priest perceiving how painfully he employed himself for
so holy an enterprise, always reserved something to refectionate and releive
him. But the humble servant of God could not long endure that, as being
desirous to serve, and not to be served of any. Whereupon he said once in
himself: Is it convenient that thou have always a priest to He will not live
but by almose.
serve thee? Is that the way of poverty which thou seek? and then he
resolved to be no longer served, by priest or other person, and when he would
eat, he took a dish and went to the doors with other poor people to demand
almose for the love of God: and with them did there eat what was given him. And
albeit this was at the beginning very sharp and difficult unto him, yet in the
progress it was so pleasing and contentfull, that he afterward affirmed to his
Religious, that he never eat with so good an appetite as then. Being one day
invited to eat with a Prelate; he would eat nothing but what he had brought
with him of almose given at the doors. Saint Francis having finished the
reparation of the Church of S. Damian, went to repair an other of S. Peter
farther off from the city, and by Herepaireth the Church of S. Peter.
the same means that he used in the former, he in short time accomplished this
also. After that he went to Porticella, very near to Assisium, where was a
Church dedicated to the Virgin Mary, which was so abandoned, that there was no
person had c^ardge thereof, nor did any service therein. He for the great
devotion he had to the Queen of heaven remained therein; and incontinently
began to thinck of repayring it; and being there often visited by the Angels
(conformably to the title of the Church which was S. Mary of Angels) he the
more And that of our lady of Angels.
willingly stayed there, and affected that place above all other, because
therein he began humbly, proceeded and fought valiantly; and there ended most
blessedly. There by divine revelation did he begin the foundation of the rule
and order of the Friar Minors, which was not without mystery, but by
disposition of the divine providence, which governed him, instructed and
directed him in all his dessignes: So that this worthey servant of God,
repaired three material Churches, of S. Damian, S. Peter, and S. Mary of
Angels; and all this before the institution of his Order, and his preaching of
the gospel, as well that from these sencible things he might attain to
intellectual, and from lesser matters by course and order to great; as also
that what he should do might first be revealed unto him by the mystery of
sensible* things; to the end it might appear, that as he had reestablished
three Churches, so also that of JESUS CHRIST should be by him renewed and
repaired, according to the form, rule, and doctrine which he would give him,
as we see apparently to have succeeded in the three exercises or warfares (if
you will) which are the three Orders which saint Francis institued in the world.

Of the second vocation to the estate of Evangelical perfection, and how he
began his rule.
THE VII. CHAPTER.
THe worthy of God having chosen for his residence the Church of the mother of
JESUS CHRIST, and therein perseuering in continual fervent devotions,
beseeching her to be his advocate, his prayers were of such efficacy, that by
the merittes of the glorious virgin, he was also found worthy to conceive and
produce the spirit of verity and of Evangelical poverty. For as he one day
devoutly heard the mass of the Apostles, where the gospel is read wherein our
lord JESUS CHRIST prescribes the^ the form of the Eua^gelicall life, Mat. 10.
when he sent them to preach over the world to this purpose saying: Do not
possess gold, nor silver, nor purses, not a scripp for the way, neither two
coats, neither shoes, neither rod. And into what soever How he took
occasion to begin his first rule.
place you shall enter salute it, saying: the peace of God be in this house. S.
Francis hearing this, cried out with more then a natural voice; That is it
which I seek, that is it which the interior of my heart desires; and the^ was
he replenished by the holy spirit of JESUS CHRIST with such a virtue, that it
did not only tra^sforme him into the said for* me and rule, in consent and
desire: but even in operations and effects: for immediately he putt of his
shoes, he rejected his staff and wallet. He cast away the money which remained
unto him of almose, and contenting himself with one only garment or coat,
rejected even the lesser belt wherewith he was girded, and used a cord, being
more careful then to conform himself perfectly to the Apostolical life.
Upon this Evangelical lesson, in this week and on this day, which was the
year of our lord, one thousand two hundred and eight, in the month of October
and feast of S. Luke, this blessed S. began the rule of The first institution
of the order of Friar Minors Ephesians. 2.
the Friar Minors, being then twenty seven years of age, two years from his
conversion being expired, the twelueth year of Pope Innocent the third: a
worck proceeding verily from the holy Ghost by the gospel of JESUS CHRIST,
not from any humane spirit though God for an instrument would use his most
faithful servant, as founder of so glorious a fabric, who, as a prudent
Architect, laid the foundation of his Order with violent floudes of tears,
with most fervent prayers, with worckes of mercy, of penance, and of
retirednes and conjunction unto God, never wearied nor desisting, till the holy
Ghost had given him the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, which is that
sovereign and stable corner stone JESUS CHRIST, on whom the whole edifice
being gounded* and referred unto, it increased in this holy temple 1. Cor. 3.
Matthew. 7.
of God, upon whom the S. did not build his order with the chafe of vain
titles, or of temporal possessions, nor with the dirty dregs of worldly and
perishable things: but with purified gold which is the Evangelical spirit,
and with precious stones, which are the Apostolical Counsels: by means
whereof it was then securely guarded against the force of wind, waters and
tempests, the furious ennemies thereof. He began thenceforth to be like unto
Helie by divine inspiration, zealous of the truth, of the glory of God, and
his neighbors salvation; inducing many to follow and embrace the way of
perfection, and moving each one to patience. His discourses were no more vain
and ridiculous, but replenished with the virtue of the holy Ghost, and such as
penetrated the heart of the hearers, and were of such efficacy, that they
terrified the audience in regard of their sins, so that they were penitent
thereof, and the hearts of the obstinate, they softened and mollified. Thus did
he convert sinners, and confirm the good in the right way of their salvation.

Of the two first disciples of S. Francis.
THE VIII. CHAPTER.
THe virtue of this worthy servant of God being dilated and diuulged in many
places, as well in regard of the verity of his simple doctrine, as for the
sanctity of his life, many gentlemen were desirous to endeavor also in
penitential practices to imitate him. The first was a rich and honorable
citizen of Assisium, called Bernardus Quintualle, very famous for his
prudence, who having long time considered the extraordinary change of life of
S. Francis, how he contemned the world, and with what constancy and patience
he supported injuries, and that the more contemptible he was reputed, the more
appeared his pleasure and content therein, never showing the least appearance of
will to chaung his holy purpose; he esteemed and resolved A Gentleman desireous
to know with what spirit S. Francis was moved, and proved him.
with himself at lenght, that the same could be no other but a worck of God;
nevertheless he thought to prove and try him, and to that end, after many
prayers to supp with him, he conducted him to his house: where being set at
the table (more covered with spiritual, then corporal food) they discoursed
of many notable matters. Now the hour being come of taking their rest, the
honorable Bernard conducted the S. together with him into a chamber where there
were two beds, and each of them took one to lodge in: but the said Bernard,
that desired to prove some thing of this S. did subtly feign himself
incontinently to sleep: which the S. beleeiuing, rose a lite after from his
bed, fell on his knees, and directed his countenance and hands toward
heaven, entierly enflamed with divine love, and being so on his knees, he began
to pray with these words: Deus meus and omma. My God and althinges; O my God
whose are all things, O my God who art all my The prayer of S. Francis.
good. Quintaualle heard only those words which the S. often repeated, pouring
out abondance of tears, it seeming unto him that his spirit received
exceeding consolation thereof, without ever uttering any other word that he
could understand. The servant of God persisted till the morning in this prayer,
wherein his spirit was elevated in ecstasy, considering the great mercy which he
had received of the divine majesty, and that he vouch-safed to use him for his
service in this world, as he had understood by revelation; Whereupon conceiving
the importance of the affair, he acknowledged his insufficiency and
impotencie; and therefore incessantly played God to grant him perfection
requisite to the enterprised worck, that he might serve him according to his
desire. Then with exceeding affection he said: Thou art my God, and all my
hope: all my force, my richesse, my life, my joy, my satisfaction, and all that
ever I can desire; I possess no other thing but thee. It is thou that have
begun to favor me with thy grace: grant also, my most sweet Lord, that I
persevere therein, and that therewith* I be guided to my desired end. And
hereupon persisting in the profound consideration of himself, with a
merueillous humility reputing himself to be nothing, he cast him into the
arms of the divine and celestial love, where he felt in his soul that sweet
communication of the grace of God. The foresaid Bernard having then seen and
heard thus much by means of a lamp, which he had left burning in the chamber,
and knowing all to be true, the day appearing, and the holy man rising from his
prayer, Bernard spoke unto him in this sort: O Francis, tell me I pray thee,
what ought the servant to do, to whom the master having imparted many
commodities behoufull for his use, he would no longer make use of them. The S.
made answer unto him saying. He ought to restore them to the party that
bestowed them on him. Bernard replied: it ought doubtless so to be; and
therefore, Francis my friend, I will for the love of God distribute the
temporal substance which till this present I have enjoyed, having received
them as his gift, and this I will do by your advise; for I will obey and
follow you in this, and in every other thing that you shall command me. Which
the S. understanding, full of joy thus answered him: Bernard, this worck is of
such difficulty, that before it be An other occasion of the first rule of S.
Francis.
enterprised, we must take counsel of God, and affectionatly beseech him to
make known unto us his will, and how we may accomplish the same; and at the
instant they went together to the Church of S. Nicolas, and in the way a Canon
named Petrus Catanio associated himself unto them, who likewise desired to
follow the S. Being then arrived at the Church, and having heard mass and
offered their devotions, S. Francis coming to the Priest, prayed him to make
the sign of the Cross on the missal, and then to open it, and the priest
obeying, at the openning of the missal they lighted on the gospel taken out
of the 19. of S. Matthew: If thou will be perfect, go, sell the things that
thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven. At
which Council the S. exceedingly rejoiced, and for it thancked God many times.
And as a perfect servant of the most blessed Trinity, he demanded of God that
he would vouchsafe by three several testimonies to confirm the rule which
they should undertake; and so they opened the book the second time, and
lighted on the text of the same S. Matthew in the tenth chapter: Goeing
thorough the world, you shall not carry any thing with you, neither silver, two
coats, shoes, nor staff: and this having confirmed them, they the third time
opened the Missal, and found a text of the same S. Matthew in the sixteenth
chapter: If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross, and follow me. S. Francis then tourning to his two new champions,
said unto them: My Brethren, you have now heard our rule, and theirs that will
adhere Br. Bernard Quintaualle gives his substance to the poor to become a
Friar Minor.
unto us. If therefore you desire to be perfect, you must presently putt in
execution what you have heard. Whereupon the said Bernardus Quintaualle got
license of S. Francis to go to his house, where he sold all his substance, and
distributed it to the poor, without reserving any thing whatsoever. So making
himself worthy of the divine vocation, he merited to be the first disciple of
this holy Father. The Canon afterward did as much; for having renounced his
Canonry, he gave all the rest to the poor; therefore he also was worthy to be a
Son of this holy Father. S. Francis the sixteenth of April of the year
1209. gave to them both his habitt. Upon this occasion there are some of
opinion that the Order of the Friar Minors began on that day, because, say
they, this word Order, signifies no other thing, but a congregation of
certain persons united together. As also Brother Peter Catanio.
The S. with his two disciples departed from Assisium, and went into a solitary
place, where he labored to instruct them, and to exercise them in poverty,
humility and prayer, the true and solid ground worckes and foundations of
Religious.

How Brother Giles was the third disciple of S. Francis, then other foures and
of the revelation which S. Francis had, that his, and his disciples sins were
pardoned, and that his Order should augment to a great number.
THE IX. CHAPTER.
THese tow disciples were tripled by an other of Assisium named Giles, who was
not in the town, when Bernard and the Canon sold their substance, and
distributed the same to the poor to follow S. Francis: But at his return
understanding by his parents and kindred, the resolution of those his two
freindes who gave an amazement to each one, he resolved also to associate
himself unto them in the service of God: and to this effect he left his kindred,
and Giles miraculously finds S. Fran.
not knowing where S. Francis then was, falling on his knees he most
affectionately prayed God to favor him so much as that he might find him. A
little after which prayer, he miraculously arrived in short time where those
three great and true contemners of the world were. As soon as S. Francis saw
him, he was ready to embrace him; but Giles falling to the ground, and reputing
himself unworthy of such a favor, besought him with abondance of tears, to
favor him so much as to admit him into his society. The holy Father seeing
the humility, the faith, and devotion of a man so note-worthy, said unto him:
My deerly-beloued Brother, acknowledge the great mercy which God shows you,
to receive you this day for his servant. Then he comforted him, and exhorted
him to persevere in the vocation whereunto God had called him: And conducting him
to his compagnions, he said unto them: Our God has this day given us a good
Brother. They then very affectionatly and desiredly embraced him, rejoicing
together with him at the secure acquisition and election of the good which he
had made: Then they went together to prayer, and next to dinner: afterward S.
Francis called Giles unto him to take him with him to Assisium to get an
habitt: in the way they chanced to meet a very poor woman that asked them an
almose. S. Francis having nothing to give her, turned to Giles and said:
Brother give your cloak to this poor woman, for the love of God; and he with
so ready a will obeyed, that he seemed to see that almose to ascend unto heaven,
so great was the contentment He received afterward
he conceived therein. Now eight days after the foresaid two had taken the
habitt, which was S. Georges day, Giles also received the same, having first
distributed his goods to the poor, and so the third place was possessed by
this man of God, worthy of glorious memory, famous the habit of the Order of S.
Fran.
and renowrned by the exercise of his virtues (as S. Francis foretold.) And
albeit he was of nature very simple, and had not studied, he was
notwithstanding so elevated to the sublimity of most high contemplation, that
one might truly affirm of him, that he led a life more Angelical then
humane, as in his history we shall recount. The holy Ghost a little after sent
four other disciples unto S. Francis, Four other are received into the said
Order.
so that they were seven in number, and yet but one in will. Now to give a
beginning to some devotion, S. Francis ordained that to each Canonical hou^e
of the service of our Lord (except the masle,) they should say thrice the
Pater noster. Brother Giles said, that the reason why S. Francis ordained so
short a prayer, was, because he would not have their devotion restrained by the
obligation of their constitutions: but that the prayers and services of each
one, should proceed of the fervor of devotion. S. Francis thus living with his
companions in continual prayer and abstinence in that hermitage, being one day
retired into a place a part, and very remote from his disciples to offer his
prayer and bitterly to lament his former life (which had not bin without
offense against God) and demanding pardon of the sovereign God, not only for
himself, but for his companions also, he was filled with an vnspeakcable
contentment by the holy Ghost, who assured him that his prayers were heard; and
affirmed that the infinite bounty had granted to him and to all his disciples,
a plenary indulgence and remission of all their sins even to the utmost
minute. And immediately in faith and confirmation hereof he was ravished and
abso^pt with a merueillous light and knowledge, which opening his spirit gave
him clearly to understand what God had wrought in him and in all his. Having
then thus known the divine will, he sought to encourage his simple company,
telling them that they should not be dejected in regard of their small number,
but should proceed in hope: because, as the divine Majesty had revealed unto
him, they should multiply in great number, and should perform great matters in
the world, notwithstanding their, and his own simplicity; and should after
possess the eternal kingdom in the next: with which words all his Brethren
were exceedingly comforted.

How S. Francis began to send his Religious over the world: what succeeded them
in the way, and how they were miraculously reunited.
THE X. CHAPTER.
Unity joined it self to the number of seven, which signisieth perfection,
to demonstrate even exteriourly, how well these new champions of JESUS CHRIST
were united in charity: this was an other that took the habitt of S. Francis,
whose name with the others shall hereafter be recorded; so that they were now
eight with the S. who, as a pious Father, having assembled them, discoursed
unto them of the kingdom of God, of contempt of the world, of the abnegation
of their proper will, and of mortification of their own flesh: then he
discovered unto them that his intention was they should divide themselves, and
travel over the four quarters of the world, because, not content with that
little number, which then his poor and sterile simplicity had regenerated in
God, he desired also to renew the birth of al Christians, inducing them to
contrition and tears of repentance. He therefore enjoined his dear Religious
children, to prepare them selves to go to denounce and publish peace to men,
and to preach unto them penance, to obtain remission of their sins: which he
did That the Friar Minors ought to be trauailling over the world.
in these words: Be you patient in supporting iniuryes, vigilant and assiduous
in prayer, courageous in travails, modest in your speches, grave in your
deportmentes, and thanckfull for the grace and favors which you shall receive.
These deerly beloved disciples understanding his holy aduertismentes, being
replenished with the holy ghost, and desirous to obey their Pastor, especially
where it concerned the salvation of Christian souls, coupled themselves two
together, and fell all seven at the feet of the S. whom they honored as
their true father, and demanded his benediction. But causing them to arise, he
embraced them with a fatherly charity: then gave them the benediction of the
father of mercies: using to each of them those words of the Prophett David:
Cast your care Psalm. 54.
on our Lord, and he will provide for you. He accustomed to use this speech to
all the Religious that he sent under obedience. And knowing well that he was to
serve for pattern and good example to the world, to do that first which he
intended to teach; he took for companion one of the seven Religious: and then
took leave of the rest, having yet precede^tly divided the^ in form of a
cross: that is, sending two of the^ toward the east, two toward the west,
two toward the south, and two toward the north, each one went with his
companion on his way, rich and well clothed with divine grace: but with habitts
torn, patched and tussed up, bare-foote, and as it were all naked and
destitute of all te^porall prouisio^s: preaching thorough the world, more by
worckes then by word, giving example of humility, patience, and poverty. They
wanted no laborious accidents, being afflicted in many places, and in diverse
manners. For of What the good Religious endured in this first obedience.
that which we find recorded of two, we may collect the exercises of the rest.
The West was alloted unto Brother Quintaualle, who being with his companion
arrived at Florence, and not finding where to lodge, the night being come,
they settled them selves against a wall, under a penthouse, the master whereof
refusing to lodge the^ by reason of the strange fashion of their habitt,
fearing that they were some lewd persons and thieves, they all the night
endured much cold, yea in great extremity in regard of the sharpnes of the
season: nevertheless they continually prayled God: In the morning they went very
early to mass, praying with devotion. Now the mistress of the house under
whose roufe they had slept the night, being present at that mass, knew them
to be those whom neither her husband nor her self would entertain for a
nights lodgeing. She then said to her self: These men doubtless are no thieves
as my husband did conjecture, for they seem to be holy persons. These
Religious in the mean time were beheld of each one for the nouelty of their
habitt, but much more when they refused the money which one present offered them
for an almose. Eor thereby were they known to be voluntarily poor for the love
of JESUS CHRIST. And therefore the man and woman that before refused to
entertain the^, by prayers conducted them to their house, by whom they were
exceedingly edified, as well by example of their life, as by the pious and
heavenly discourses wherewith they induced them to have care of their souls.
Thus did these Religious pass Florence: The inconvenience of the night which
they endured was little in regard of that which befell them afterward: for both
in respect of the strange form of their habitt, and for the austerity of their
life, they were most commonly iniuried and buffeted, because almost every one
treated the^ as senceles or distracted persons. Some gave them ta^tes and
mockes, others cast dirt at them, some pulled them by the cappuce, others
caused children with clamours to follow them. These injuries were not only
procured them by the malice of idle persons, but also by the subtilty and
inducement of the diuill, who thought by these ignominies to terrify them, and
make them desist from their holy resolution. But they being armed with the
grace and patience of JESUS CHRIST, did not, only support the extremity of
hunger, cold, and disgraces, but even did not by any exterior sign appear to
be moved withal. So far also were they from replying to them that abused
them, that receiving their persecutions as a great favor, they ordinarily
prayed to God for them: in such sort that these remonstrances of patience and
charity having bin by certain weighed and considered, their virtue and
sanctity did consequently appear. They therefore repenting to have offended
them, repaired unto them as to holy personnages humbly to require pardon:
virtue being of such force and efficacy, that albeit for a time it be resisted
and contemned, yet in the end it does always conquer and triumph over the
enemies thereof. Some certain time being spent after the separation of these
good Religious, their compassionate Father being unable any longer to endure
and support this ircksome absence: had a vehement desire to recollect his
deerly beloved children: S. Fran. obtameth of God speed^ly to see his Religious
so far remote one from an other.
But the difference and distance of the places where they were being such as it
could not be don but by the divine providence, the saint fell to his devotion,
and prayed God that, as he had sormerly assembled certain Israelites very
distantly separated and dispearced, so he would also now vouch-safe to unite
and assemble his deerly beloved Brethren. After a short time he miraculously
knew the approbation of his prayer: for without any humane diligence or
industry, they were all, as S. Francis had desired present in one very place:
which was not without an exceeding astonishment unto his Brethren, who admired
the divine providence. The holy Father entertained his children with incredible
joy: they then began among them selves to recount what they had endured in
their travail, and what was the fruit of their labors amongst the faithful
Christians. Thus did these new Apostles in very short time begin to exercise
the^ selves in the service of God, by the footesteppes of his holy disciples.
About that time, four other honorable gentlemen did adhere unto them, so that
they were eleven, whose names were these: Brother Bernard Quintaualle, Brother
Peter Catanio, Br. Giles of Assisium, Br. Sabadin, Br. Morigo the less, Br.
John Capelle, Brother Phillip the long, Br. John of S. Constant, Br. Barbarus,
Br. Bernard of Veridant, and Br. Angelus Tancredas of Riete.

Of the first rule that S. Francis ordained.
THE XI. CHAPTER.
S. Francis perceiving his disciples to aproach to the Apostolical number,
began to write down the form and rule of life which they should observe,
whereto for foundation he gave the observance of the gospel, thereto adding
certain other points necessary for such as live in Congregation, and this to
the end the professors of his rule should not vary and differ in any thing
from the intention and will of our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, as well in his
Precepts as Councels: which rule is this ensuying, having since that time bin
augmented by S. Francis, as in his proper place shall appear.

THE FIRST RVLE OF THE HOLY FATHER S. FRANCIS.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

This is the life that Brother Francis presented to Pope Innocent the third,
who condiscended thereunto with his own mouth, and consirmed it to him and his
Religious, present and to come: and therefore the said Brother Francis (and
whosoever shall be principal of the said Order or Religion) promises obedience
and reverence to the Pope, and his successor.

The form of the rule instituted by the holy Father S. Francis, and confirmed
by Pope Innocent the third.

Of the three principal vows, of chastity, obedience, and poverty.
THE I. CHAPTER.
THe life and rule of the Friar Minors is thus; That they live chastely under
holy obedience, and not possessing any thing in propriety: That they follow the
life and doctrine of JESUS Matt. 19. Matt. 16. Luc. 14. Matt. 19.
CHRIST who says: If thou desire to be perfect go, and sell what thou
have, and give it to the poor, for doing so thou shall purchase treasure in
heaven: If any man desire to come after me, let him renounce his proper will,
let him take up his cross and follow me: and he that will come after me, and
forsakes not father, mother, wife, children, and hates not himself for my
love, cannot be my disciple. Besides; whosoever shall forsake Father, mother,
brothers and sisters, wives, children, and all his earthly substance for my
love, shall receive an hundred fold, and purchase eternal life.

Of the manner of admitting the Brethren into the Order; and of clothing them,
and of the habit of the Friar Minors.
THE II. CHAPTER.
When any one by divine inspiration shall be disposed to enter into this
Religion, let him be benignely received by the Superior of the Brethren: and
having proved him to be stable in this purpose, let him send him to his
Minister Provincial: and let the Brethren in the mean while be wary not to
entermedle in any sort with their worldly affairs. Now he being presented to
the Provincial (who shall graciously entertain him) after he shall have
diligently examined his will, and the cause inducing him to desire his entrance
into this Religion, let him seriously expose unto him the manner of life of
the Brethren. Which don, he ought by pregnant persuasions to exhort him,
without lawful impediment to sell all his substance, before he dispose of his
life, and let him give it to the poor, if he think good; but let the
Brethren Ministers be very respective that in treating this matter, they do
not persuade or induce him in any sort whatsoever to give any money to
themselves or to their Covent: Nevertheless if perhaps the Covent or the
Brethren have need of any thing that he has, and he offering it, and desiring
of himself to give it, they may receive it, as if he distributed it in almose
to any other poor, and no otherwise, provided yet that this gift be not money.
This being performed, I mean his substance being distributed to the poor, or
as God shall inspire him, and returning to the Covent, the Minister Provincial
shall then give him the habitt of probation, The capperon is a piece of cloth
which the nouices wear on their breasts from the neck to the cord.
which he shall wear one year. This habitt shall be such: two coats without
cappuce, and the cord: And the year of probation ended, his profession shall be
procured, and when he shall have submitted himself to holy obedience, he may
not be permitted to enter into any other Religion, nor to be disobedient to the
Pope. And if there be any, that for some lawful impediment, cannot distribute
his substance for the love of God, it shall suffice that he renounce and
abandon it, in whatsoever other manner. Let it not be permitted that any be
received against the ordonnance and constitutions of the Church. All those that
have promised obedience, must have one coat with the cappuce, and an other
without it, if it be needful, and a cord to gird him, and the linen
breeches. All the Brethren must be clothed with course cloth, and they may
pach it with sack cloth and other rude pieces, because our Lord says in the
gospel: They that are clothed sumptuously, dwell in the Courts of Princes:
for, though they be called hypocrites, let them Matt. 11.
not yet omit to do that which they ought for the service of his divine
majesty, and for the salvation of their souls, and let the^ not in this world
seek precious garments, that they may hereafter find better in heaven.

Of the divine service, and of fasting.
THE III. CHAPTER.
ANd because our Lord in one place says: This kind of devil cannot be cast
out but by virtue of fast and prayer. And in an other: Marc. 9. Matt. 6.
When ye fast be not mela^cholie, as hypocrites: let the Brethren therefore that
shall be Preistes, say the divine service, and praise God, a^ Preistes ought to
do; and for the living and dead, let them say that which is accustomed to be
said; and besides for the defectes and negligences of the Bethren, let them
every day say the Psalm Miserere, and one Pater noster, and for the Religious
deceased, a De profundis and a Pater noster. They may possess books necessary
for their divine service. The lay Brothers that can read, may have a Psalter,
but they that cannot read, may not have nor keep any books: but let them
every day for their mattins say the Credo, with twenty five Pater nosters and
Gloria Patri, and so much, at the third, sixth, and ninth hour; at Euensong
the Credo and twelve Pater nosters, at Complin, the Credo, with seven Pater
nosters and the Requiem aeternam; then for the defectes and negligences of the
Brethren, every day three Pater nosters. All the Brethren as well Clerks as the
lay, shall be obliged to fast from Alsainctes to Christmas, and from the
Epiphanie, when our Lord JESUS CHRIST began to fast, until Easter: At other
times, they shall not be bound to fast by this rule; the fridayes excepted they
may indifferently eat of all meats that shall be given them, according to the
permission of the Gospel, and Luc. 10.
the Constitution of holy Church.

How the Ministers ought to govern themselves in dispencing with the Religious
concerning their obedience.
THE IV. CHAPTER.
IN the name of God, all the Brethren that are elected ministers, and are
servants to the other Brethren, ought to appoint the places and Couentes where
they shall judge most convenient to dwell: they must often visit the^, and
admonish them to observe and accomplish their profession promise, vow, and
oath: and let them spiritually constrain them to satisfy this obligation:
and let all my other blessed Brethren humbly and diligently obey them in
whatsoever shall concern their salvation, and shall not be contrary to this
rule: and let them live together with such charity that they proceed not
against the word of God, where he says: Matt. 20.
Do unto men that which you would have men do unto you, and do not that
which you would not they should do to you, Let the Ministers and servants,
remember that which our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST says: I am not come to be
served, but to serve: so that the souls of the Brethren being given them in
chardge, they ought to Hebr. 13.
have a very respective care of them, that none do perish by their fault and
evil example, and that they render not account for them to God, at the
terrible judgment.

Of fraternall correction in offenses: that the Ministers ought not to give
scandale, and that they may not have dominion of any thing.
THE V. CHAPTER.
Hebr. 10.
YOu that are Ministers, have a special guard and care of your souls, and of
those of your Brethren: For it is a very terrible and fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the liung God, moved to anger. And if any of you, command
the Brethren any thing, against the rule and this form of life, or against
conscience, know ye that if he do it not, he is not obliged under obedience.
Let all the Brethren that are subject to the Minister, the servant of his
Brethren, observe his actions with great diligence and consideration. And if
they perceive any of their Ministers to proceed according to the flesh, not
according to the spirit, or our rule, if he amend not after the first
admonition or correction, let him be notified unto the Father General, and
the servant of this confraternity, as incorrigible, at the Chapter of
Penticost, without contradiction or delay. If among the Brethren where they
shall live, there be any that will not proceed according to the spirit, and
our profession, let the Brethren in whose company they shall be, admonish,
advise, and with humility mildly reprehend him, even to the third time: But if
after the third admonition he do not amend, let them inform the Minister
Provincial, or bring him to his presence with the first opportunity: And the
said Minister shall proceed therein as God shall inspire him. Let all the
Brethren, as well Ministers, servants, as others be very respective not to be
angry, passionate, or troubled for the sin or evil example of the other
Brethren: For the devil seeks no other thing but to damn many, by the sin
of one; but let the^ consider how they may spiritually assist him, because
they that are in health need not a Physician, Note this word. Matt. 9. Luc. 12.
but they that are diseased. It is prohibited to all the Brethren and Ministers
of this Order, to be capable of enjoying possessions, dominion or seignurie;
for, as our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST says: The Princes of the world, have
command over them: let us be careful that it be not so among us; but he that
seeks and desires to be greatest, let him be the least, and servant to all
others. Let not any Brother do or speak evil of an other: but let them
reciprocally serve and obey each other, with a spiritual charity of the
spirit, according as their necessity shall require; for that is the holy and
true obedience of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. And let all the Brethren, of what
degree soever they be, know, that if they err from the precepts of God, and
are disobedient as the Prophett says, they are accursed for their sin whiles
they are Psalm. 1^8.
out of obedience. And if they persevere in the commandementes of God, as they
have promised in the observance of their Evangelical profession, let them
rest assured that they are blessed of God.

What recourse the Brethren may have to their Ministers and that no Brother may
be called Priour.
THE VI. CHAPTER.
THe Brethren that shall not be able to observe our form of life in the places
whither they shall be sent, let them as soon as they can, have recourse to
their Minister Provincial, and let them inform him of their necessity. The
Minister Provincial, shall then endeavor to provide for them, and shall do
what in the like accident he would should be done to him. Let not any Brother
be called Priour: but let all generally with one accord be called Brothers,
and when there shall be need, let on wash an others feet, to exercise humility.

Of the manner to serve and provide for the house, and to be employed in
lawful exercises that redound to the common good, and that the Brethren may
not have Covent, nor Church as properly their own.
THE VII. CHAPTER.
IN what place soever any of the Brethren shall reside, for the service of
others, they shall not undertake the offices of men of the Chamber to be keeper
or disposer of the wine or victual provision, nor in any sore accept of other
chardg in the house where they shall dwell: to the end they neither breed nor
procure scandal or detriment to their souls: but let them be inferior and
subject to all that shall be in the said house. And the Brethren that shall be fit
to labor and perform any thing, let them be employed in the art and exercise
they know, provided that it be not contrary Psalm. 127 ^. These. 3.
to the salvation of their souls, since the Prophett says. Because thou shall
eat of the labors of thy hands, thou shall be blessed: and the Apostle also:
he that will not work, let him not eat. Let each one therefore with charity
exercise the art and office wherein he shall be employed, and for recompense of
the manual worckes they shall do, they may receive things necessary to their
life, provided that it be not money: and if any thing be further needful unto
them, let them demand it in almose as other poor people do. It shall be
permitted them to possess instruments and tools necessary to the trade and
art wherein they are skillful: S. Hier.
But let all the brethren be respective to be ever employed in some good and
commendable art, because it is written. That a man ought to be always busied
in some good worck, that if the devil come to tempt him, he find him well
employed. And in an other place it is said, that idleness is a capital ennemie
to the soul, and therefore the true servants of God ought to be exercised in
prayer or in some other good work. Let the Religious be very careful not to
appropriatt to themselves any place where they shall dwell, or any other, be it
an hermitage, or whatsoever other place, nor let them maintain it as theirs,
and if any come to visitt them, be it friend, ennemy, thief, or murderer, let
them graciously receive him. When the said Brethren shall dwell near one to an
other, let them often charitably visitt each other, and let them spiritually
honor one an other without any murmr, but let them be joyful and content
in our Lord, let them with modesty show themselves gracious exteriourly and
interiourly.

How strictly it is forbidden to the Brethren to receive money, and in what
manner they are to be punished for it.
THE VIII. CHAPTER.
GOd gave this commandment to his Apostles: Be you intentive and keep your
selves from all kind of malice and avarice, as also from settling your
thoughts and affections on this life, and being over careful to purchase the
things of the world. And therefore no Brother in whatsoever place he be, either
to make his residence, or to travail, or for any other occasion whatsoever,
may have money in any manner or fashion that can happen, nor less may he
receive it for recompense of his labors; breiflely, no Brother may touch or
possess money for any necessity that may befall him, unless it be to releive
the urgent need of the sick Brethren: because we must no more esteem money,
then stones or thorns; to the end that, since we renounce and abandon all our
temporal substance in this life, we do not afterward for so small a matter
make shipwreck of the eternal kingdom. If peradventure we chance to find
money in some place, let us no more regard then dirt: because whatsoever is in
the world, is mere vanity. But if it should happen, which God forbid, that any
brother receive money, excepting upon the aforesaid necessity of the sick, let
him be reputed by the Confraternity, for a false Religious, and thief, as he
that takes a purse, if he be not truly penitent. Let not the Brethren in any
manner in the world receive money or cause it to be received, nor much less
let them demand or procure it to be demanded by a third person in any sort
whatsoever, nor let them go in company of men that demand it for them. But
the Brethren may, in the houses and places whither they shall go, exercise
other services that shall not be contrary to our Religion and rule, with the
benediction of our Lord. They may demand almose, for the leapers only, whom
they know to be in great necessity; but let them be very wary of money, and
let them likewise take keed not to search the world, for any occasion of
unlawful gain that may be presented.

Of the manner of demanding almose, and of their ordinary diet and refection.
THE IX. CHAPTER.
Let all the Brethren labor to imitate the pouetty and humility of our
Redeemer JESUS CHRIST: and let them remember that nothing is necessary in the
world, but, as the Apostle says, to have wherewithal to releive and cover us:
wherewith we ought to content us, and seek no more. We must rejoice when we
converse with poor and base persons, that are contemned of the world, but
especially with the diseased, leapers, and poor begars thorough the streets.
When it shable necessary to go to demand almose at the doors, let the^ go
without any fear or shame, calling to mind that the son of Almighty God,
presented his countenance as a hard stone to the blows and affrontes of the
world, and he was nothing ashamed, to be poor and a stranger, and to live upon
almose, together with his most sacred mother the virgin Mary. And if men deny
almose, and return disgraces to the brother that shall demand it, let him
thanck God sor it, and pray for them: because he shall receive, says JESUS
CHRIST, great honor, of the shame that men shall procure him, and let him
know, that the iniuryes and scorns which shall be don him, shall not be imputed
as a fault to him that shall receive them, but to him indeed that shall offer
them: likewise that almose is a rent and obligation due to the poor, which our
Lord JESUS CHRIST has merited, purchaced and left unto us. And the Brethren
that travail in seeking almose, shall have great recompense thereof, besides
that they procure a meritt to them that give it; for whatsoever men do in this
world shall dissolve to nothing, excepting almose, and worckes don in charity,
for which they shall receive of God an eternal recompense. Let each Brother
with all assurance discover his necessity to his fellows, that they may
comfort him with good words, and actually assist him according to their
abillity: and let each of them love and cherish his Brothers, as the mother
loves and cherishes her own child, in what God shall give him grace and
faculty, to assist him. He that eats not, let him not contemn him that
eats; and he that eats, let him not the more esteem of him that eats
not. If any necessity happen, it shall be permissable to all the Brethren where
they shall reside, to eat of all humane things, as God said of David, who did
eat the bread that was permitted to Preistes only to eat. Let the Brethren
remember that which JESUS CHRIST says: Beware of chardging and ouerburdening
your heart with two much drincking and eating, for fear that sleep
incontinently surprise you, and that sloth be occasion that in the latter day
you be intercepted in the snares of death; the which before the entrapping of
each man living shall nevertheless have diuerses effects, according as they
shall find the soul disposed, either to life or to death, the one and the
other eternal. But in time of manifest necessity, let the Brethren behave
themselves as their need shall import, as our Lord shall better instruct them,
because necessity is not subject to law.

In what manner the sick Brethren ought to be served.
THE X. CHAPTER.
IN any place where a Brother shall fall sick, let him not be left alone, but
let there be always one or more, if need require to serve him, as they would
desire to be if they were in his place: if upon necessity there be no Brother,
let care be taken to leave some charitable person to atte^d and serve him in
his sickness: and I pray the sick Brother, that what soever may happen unto him,
he always give thancks unto God, and be content to be such as God would have
him to be, either alive or dead: that he continue in sickness or recover his
health: because all they whom God has predestined to eternal life, are
ordinarily by him instructed and diciplined, with the rod of his afflictions
and sickness, with a spirit of compunction and bitterness, as he says in the
third of the Apocalipse; I chastise and correct him whom I Jove. And if the
sick be disquieted and passionat against God or the Brethren, or have an over
greedy affection to physic, desiring and procuring beyond reason, to free his
ffesh which has so little time to live, and the which is ennemy to the soul;
the said sick Brother must not esteem the same to proceed of a good ground,
but let him assure and repute himself to be carnal: for he does not seem to
be of the number of the true servants of God, since he more affects the body
then the soul, considering that he strives to worck more therein, then the
Physician finds for his cure.

That the Brethren ought mutually to love each other, that they ought not to
calumniat any person, nor in any sort to murmr.
THE XI. CHAPTER.
Let the Brethren be wary not to accuse any of malice or to calumniat him, and
let them not be contentious among themselves or with others, let them also
shun perfidiousnes and disloyalty, but let them be careful to perform
their exercises in the grace of God with silence, and let them not maintain
quarelsome disputes, neither among them selves nor with others: but rather that
they first yield, and say: We are unprofitable servants, answearing always
with humility, and being very careful of growing into passion: For men that
maintain their choler against their neighbor, are obliged to render account
thereof at the judgment of God: and he that shall vpbraid his neighbor with
contemptible words, shall be condemned to the fire of hell. Let them therefore
love one an other, as our lord teaches us, when he says: My children, this is
the precept I give you, that you love one an other, as I have loved you. Now
the truest manner of mutual love, according to the Apostle, is known by
words, by worckes, and in verity. Let them not curse any person, let them
not murmr, nor let them not speak ill of any, for it is written: The
murmurers and detracters are abhorred of God. Let them be modest, showing
themselves gentle and tractable to all, not judging nor condemning any man;
and, as our lord says, consider not the little sins of others, but rather
with a bitterness and contrition of your soul observe your own, and endeavor
to enter by the straight gate, because our lord says, the way is straight, as
also is the gate that gives* entry to eternal life, and there are few that
find it and enter theratt.

That the Brethren ought to be wary not to behold nor converse with women.
THE XII. CHAPTER.
Let all the Brethren in whatsoever place they reside, very respectively
forbear wanton lascivious aspectes, and lewd and dangerous conuersations with
women. When it shall be necessary, let none presume to speak alone with a
woman, excepting the Preistes, who may speak modestly unto them, when they
give them any penance or any spiritual counsel, and let no woman, in what
soever manner, be received to obedience by any Brother what soever, to whom it
shall be yet permitted to counsel her spiritually, to do penance where she
will. And let us all carefully preserve ourselves, with exceeding warines and
diligence; for God has said, that what man soever shall behold a woman to
couett her, he has already sinned withher in his heart, because it is not
lawful for us to behold that, which is not lawful for us to desire.

Of the punishment of the Brethren that shall fall into the sin of the flesh.
THE XIII. CHAPTER.
IF any Brother, by instigation of the devil, committ the sin of the flesh,
let him utterly loose and be deprived of the habit, which by his offense and
lewdnes he shall have defiled, and where of by his finne he shall have deprived
himself: let him be utterly expelled the Religion, and let: him go to do
penance for his sin.

Of the manner the brethren ought to observe trauailling thorough the world.
THE XIIII. CHAPTER.
When the Brethren thall travail through the world, they must not, nor may
not carry any kind of provision, nor wallet, purse, money, nor staff, and into
what soever houses they shall enter, they shall say: The peace of our lord be
in this house, and being entertained in any place, they may there repose, and
eat and drink of what shall be presented unto them. And if they shall be abused
in words or effects, by any one, let them not be moved therewith, yea if one
should give them a buffet on the one cheek, let them turn the other; if any
one would disapparell them, let the^ not hinder it, yea if one should
violently rob them of their coat, let them not ask it again, but let them
believe that all this arriueth unto them by the providence of God.

That the Religious may not have any horses.
THE XV. CHAPTER.
I Command all my Brethren, as well Preistes as lay, that when they shall
travail thorough the world, or shall reside in any place, they have no kind of
beast to ride on, neither for them selves, nor for others, nor that it be ever
lawful for them to ride on horseback, but in case of sickness, or of manifest
necessity.

Of them that shall go to the Mores and Infidels.
THE XVI. CHAPTER.
Matt. 10.
Our lord says: Behold I send you as sheep in the mids of wolves. Be ye
therefore wise as serpents, and simple as doves. And if any Brother moved with
a divine inspiration, would go among the infidel Mores, he may not go
without license of his Minister Provincial, who knowing that Religious
sufficient, and of such a spirit, that thereof one may hope some fruit to
redounde to others (not only salvation to himself) let him not be denied, all
understood with the assistance of God. For the said Minister Provincial shall be
obliged to be accountable unto God, if granting, or refusing permissio^ to the
faid Brother, his resolution shall be pious, or indiscreet. And the Brethren that
shall go among the infidels, may in two manners converse with them: First,
they may not contentiously impugn them, but let them be subject, not only to
the said infidels, but to every creature for the love of God, yet confessing
themselves always to be Christians. Secondly, that when they perceive it to be
the will of God, they preach his word, to the end they believe in him one
sovereign power, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, on God in Trinity,
and in the humanity of the Redeemer and Savior of the world, exhorting them to
be baptized and to live Joan. 3.
thence-foward in Christianity: because he that shall not be borne again by
Baptism and the holy Ghost, cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. They
shall preach to the Infidel people these things, and many others, which God
shall inspire them: For our lord said in the gospel: I will confess before my
Father which is in heaven, all those that shall confess me before men: but the
day when I shall come on the earth in the Majesty of my Father, I will deny
them that shall be ashamed to confess me to be the Son of man. Let all the
Brethren, in what soever place they are, remember that they have already
offered their souls and bodies to the sovereign God, and that they ought to
expose and employe them for the love of him, in all occurrances, and to present
the same to the ennemies visible and invisible, because our lord has said: he
that in this world shall loose his life for my sake, shall find it safe in
eternal life, and blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice, for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Let them also call to Joan. 12. Ioh. 5.
Matt. 5.
mind that which our lord says: If you be persecuted of the impious and
wicked, they have first persecuted me, and if you be persecuted in one city,
fly into an other. When men shall hate you and persecute your name and you
renown and shall speak all evil of you for my sake, and for my love, rejoice
ye boldly: for your recompense thereof is great in heaven. And thus much I
speak to you (my Brethren) to the^d you should not fear those that have power
to kill the body, and with your patience you shall possess you souls, and he
that shall persevere to the end, shall be saved.

Of the Preachers.
THE XVII. CHAPTER.
THe preaching of the gospel being the food and nourishment of the soul, let
no Brother or Minister authorize himself and enterprise to preach without
license of his Superiors, and let such as ^^albe authorized, be very
respective not to preach against the form and constitutions of our holy mother
the Church. Let the Minister Prouincials be advertised not to admit to any
chardge, especially in matter of importance, all persons indifferently, but
let them formerly consider well thereof. Let the Brethren that shall be admitted
to preach, or to exercise any other obedience, take heed not to attribute to
themselves, or to their merittes, the office which they shall have, and
particulerly that of preaching, they ought rather to practice by worckes, then
by fair elected words: and therefore at all times and whenever they shall be
advertised to desist from preaching, let them without any contradiction
entierly forbear to preach. Therefore (by charity which is God himself) I pray
all my Brethren, Preachers, Orators, and other Officers and Ministers, as well
Preistes as lay, that they endeavor continually to debase and humble
themselves, and that they neither glory nor take complacence in any good, that
God does or speaks by them: because such worck is not theirs, but Gods:
and that they remember that which our lord JESUS CHRIST says: Esteem not the
more of your selves, for that you see the devils subject unto you; and let
each on rest assured that we have nothing of our own, but vices and sins:
and when we find our selves tempted and oppressed with diseases and
afflictions, as well in soul as in body, we should rejoice in hope of eternal
life. Let us beware of pride, and vain glory of the wisdom of the world, and
the prudence of the flesh, which endeavors to speak well, but little to do
well. For it seeks not a religion and sanctity of spirit, but a religion and
sanctity exterior and apparent unto men: for these are they of whom our lord
speaks, when he says: I tell you in verity, you have already your reward.
The spirit which is of God, desires the flesh should be mortified, Matthew. ^.
6.
misprised, and esteemed vile, and that it endeavor to be humble, patient,
pure, duly subjected to the spirit, and especially rooted in the fear and
love of God, the Father, Son and holy Ghost, referring all good things to
the most high: let us acknoledge our selves to be his, and let us continually
yield him thanks, as one from whom depends and proceeds all our good.
Therefore are all honors, and all benedictions due to him alone, by reason also
that he is the true and sovereign good: And therefore when we shall see any
thing il done or ill spoaken against his holy name, let us on the contrary
endeavor to praise, exalt, and thanck him, as blessed for ever world without
end. Amen.

Now, and when the Ministers ought to assemble.
THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
THe Minister Provincial ought with all his Brethren to assemble together,
every year, at the feast of S. Michael, in some commodious place to treat and
determine of matters behoufull for the service of God and Religion. And all the
Minister Prouincials that are beyond the sea and in places on the other side
the Mountains, shall assemble once every three years: the other Minister
Prouincials shall come every year to the Chapter, in the Church of S. Mary of
Angels, if the Minister general dispose not otherwise, to whose ordonnance all
ought to obey.

That all Brethren ought to live Catholiquely
THE XIX. CHAPTER.
Let all the Brethren be Catholics, and as such, live Catholiquely: and if
any one should err in faith, or in the instution and constitutions of holy
Church, either by worckes or words, if he do not forth with rectify
himself, let him be utterly expelled out of our Religion. We ought to
acknoledge for our Superiors, all Prelates and Religious in that which
concerns the good estate of our soul, provided that they proceed not against
our Order and our Rule.

Of the confesion and communion of the Brethren.
THE XX. CHAPTER.
Let all my Brethren, as well Preistes as the laity, the blessed of God,
confess to the Preistes of our Order, and if in case they cannot, they may
confess to an other Priest, that is prudent and Catholic, and let them
firmly believe that by the penance and absolution given them, they shall be
absolved of all their sins: and therefore let them endeavor, with the
greatest faith and humility that they can, to accomplish the penance that
shall be enjoined them. And if they should be in a place where they could not
have commodity of a Priest, let them in such case confess with their
Brethren, as the Apostle says: I^^. 5.
Confess your sins one to an other: But let them not yet omit, when they
shall have means to repair to Preistes, because they alone have the authority
and power of God to bind and loose: Being so contrite and co^fested, let them
with exceeding humility and reverence receive the most sacred sacrament,
calling to mind that which God says: he Joan. 6. Matt. 26.
that eats my flesh and drincketh my blood, has life everlasting. And in an
other place: Do this for a commemoration of me.

Of praising God and exhorting Christians to penance.
THE XXI. CHAPTER.
When my Brethren shall know and esteem it expedient to preach to the people,
hauig imparted the benediction of God, they may use these words: Fear, love,
honor, praise continually, and say ye: Be thou blessed almighty God, Trinity,
and unity, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Creator of all things: I beseech
thee to permit me to perform fruits worthy of penance, and to know this
truth, that we shall shortly die, and that at that instant the knotte of this
soul and body shall end, to be either eternally happy, or eternally miserable.
They must exhort such as have bin offended, to pardon, as God does pardon us:
and to this effect let them understand, that if they do not pardon, they
shall not be pardonned, and that they shall be blessed that shall die contrite,
because their place shall be in heaven, and miserable shall they be that shall
die impenitent, because they shall be children of the devil, whose worckes they
have wrought, and therefore shall they descend into eternal sier. Be careful
my beloved Brethren to shun all vices, and persevere in god even to the end,
that God may bless you.

An Exhortation he made to all the Brethren.
THE XXII. CHAPTER.
Matthew. 5.
Let us be mindful of that which our lord says; love your enemies, and do
good to them that hate you: Because besides what he has taugbt us by word, he
has in like sort taught us by effect, whose steps we ought to imitate. As
then he called Judas his friend, though he knew he would betray him, and
voluntarily presented himself to them that were to crucify him: so likewise
let us repute them our freindes that iniustly afflict us, that oppose them
selves against us, that injury us, procure our vexation, torment and death: and
we ought to love them the more, in that what they do unto us, God uses them
as an instrument: and because what soeeuer he does and permits, though it
seem displeasing unto us, it notwithstanding avails to our salvation, since
by mean hereof we shall purchase eternal life. We ought besides to abhor
and hate our body, when it is pleased in delights and vices: for so living
carnally, we estrange our selves from the love of JESUS CHRIST, and make our
own entry into hell; and by reason that by sin we become loathsome and
miserable, and that the concupiscences of our flesh are contrary to our true
good, and make us prone to evil, as our lord says. From the heart of man
proceed evil cogitations, Matt. 15.
fornications, adulteries, murders, covetousness, theftes, deceiptes,
blasphemies, false testimonies, pride, and the folly of this world, and all the
foresaid evils procure and make the soul loathsome, defiled, and refrigerate:
we therefore, who have already forsaken the world, should have regard to no
other thing, but to do the will of God, an to take contentment therein. Let
us have care not to be like the earth by the way side full of stones and
thorns, because as our lord Luc. 8.
says, the seed (that is the word of God) which was sown by the way side, was
trodden under foot by passengers and destroyed. Hereto are compared those that
hear the word of God, but dispose not themselves to virtue, and the devil
incontinently rooteth it out of their hearts, least believing they might be
saved. They are compared to the stone, whereon the other seed fell, who
willingly hear the word of God, and insome sort dispose themselves to do
well: but some affliction befalling them, they are incontinently scandalized,
the seed then withers, because it has no root. They are compared to thorns,
who hearing the word of God, have their hearts always employed on worldly
things and permit themselves to be seduced by richesse and avarice, busying
themselves in terrestrial affairs, and therefore the seed cannot profitt them.
But they are like to fertile land, who hear the word of God, and with the heart
observe and practice it, and do worckes worthy of penance. Let us therefore,
as our Lord says, suffer the dead to bury the dead. Let us be seriously wary
of the slightes and mischeiuous devises Matt. 8.
of the devil, who seeks no other thing but to separate our soul from union
with God by the bait of temporal richesse, honors, and pleasures of the
flesh, seeking to become lord and master of the heart of man, employing all his
endeavor to root out of his memory the precepts of God, and does strive to
blind the heart of man in the desires and cogitations of the world and to
confirm him in them, according to the saying of our lord: When the unclean
spirit shall depart out of a Luc. 11.
man, he wandereth through places without water seeking rest. And not finding,
he says, I will return into my house whence I departed. And when he is come,
he finds it swept with a besome, and trimmed. The^ he goes and takes seven
other spirits worse then himself, and entering in theydwel there. And the
things last of that man be made worse then the first. Since then we are by these
speeches admonished, let us not procure our ruin and death by disvniting our
soul from God, for whatsoever terrestrial recompense, affair, or favor, but
let all we do, be only for the love of God. I pray all the Brethren, that
being freed and delivered of al impediment and hinderance, that may trouble
them, they make their best endeavor, to serve, love, and honor God, with a
pure heart, and free spirit, in regard that he especially requires the same of
us: and let us so proceed, that in us may be the residence of his divine
Majesty, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, who Luc. 21.
faith unto us: Pray at all times that you may be accounted worthy to escape
all these things that are to come, and to stand before the Son of man: he
also teaching us to pray, says: When you shall pray, say: Our Matt. 6. Joan. 4.
Father which art in heaven: We therefore must always pray and never fail
therein. Let us adore God with a sincere heart, because such adorers please the
eternal Father and he would have it so. God is a spirit, and they that adore
him, ought to adore him in spirit, and truth. Let us have recourse to our
Lord, as to the Father and Pastor of our souls, who says: I am the good
Pastor, that feed and keep my flock, even to the Joan 10. Matt. 23.
exposing of my life for it: you are all Brethren, therefore call not your
selves Fathers on earth, because you have but one Father which is in heaven,
nor call your selves masters, for you have but one celestial Master. If you
remain in me, and my words in you, you shall have and Joan. 15. 6. and 13.
Joan. 17.
obtain whatsoever you shall demand. And where there are two or three
assembled in my name, I am there with them even to the end of the world. The
words that I have spoken to you, be spirit and life. I am the way, and the
verity, and the life: let us then keep the true life and doctrine, and the
holy gospel which it has pleased him to manifest unto us, as he says: Father
I have manifested thy name to the men whom thou gave me, and they have
received the doctrine which I have given them: they have known that I am
truly come from thee, and they have believed that thou have sent me. For them
I pray, not for the world, but for them whom thou have given me. Holy Father,
keep them in thy name, whom thou have given me that they may be one, as also
we. These things I speak in the world, that they may have my joy filled in
themselves. I have given them thy word, and the world has hated them, because
they are not of the world: as I also am not of the world. I pray not that thou
take them away out of the world, but that thou preserve them from evil.
Sanctify them in truth. Thy word is truth. As thou did send me into the
world, I also have sent them into the world. And for them I do sanctify my
self: that they also may be sanctified in truth. And not for them only do I
pray, but for them also that by their word shall believe in me: that they all
may be one, that the world may believe that thou have sent me, and have loved
them, as me also thou have loved: and thou shall let them know thy name,
because the love whereby thou have loved me shall be in them, and in me
together. By the same mean Father, whom thou have given me, I will, that
where I am, they also may be with me: that they may see my glory which thou
have given me. I pray all the Brethren in the name of almighty God, to learn
the sense of that which is written in this life for the salvation of our
souls, and to imprint it with great caution in their understanding, and I
beseech God Three and One, to vouchsafe to impart his benediction to all them
that teach and learn, and that accord together to accomplish the things before
said: and as often as they shall read over the same for the good of their
soul. I further beseech all the Brethren (kissing their feet) to love them
exceedingly, and to observe them. And in the behalf of God and the Pope, I
Brother Francis, by obedience have commanded, and do oblige, that no man
diminish or augment any thing of that which is written in this life and rule,
and that neither the Brethren have any other rule.

The end of the rule of S. Francis.
Of the miraculous approbation of this first rule.
THE XXIII. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father S. Francis, determined to repair with his companions and
disciples unto the Pope, to demand confirmation of the aforesaid rule,
composed and compiled more by the holy Ghost then by himself, according to
the words and sense of the holy Gospel. And did in deed with them attempt the
iorny, replenished with exceeding confidence and conducted by God himself, who
seeing their desire vouchsafed to add more courage to that weak hearted family,
who out of their simplicity feared, perhaps, they should A dream of S.
Francis.
not be heard. And out of his abundant clemency he permitted his servant
Francis, in a dream, to see a tree of merueillous greatenes, coming to the
foot whereof, he was by divine virtue lifted from the earth, and raised even to
the top thereof, which seemed to bend down his branches even to the ground.
Having interpreted this vision to be a manifest presage of the favor which he
should receive of the Pope, entierly filled with a spiritual joy, he recounted
it to his companions, whom he so comforted, that with exceeding speed they
arrived at Room: where understanding that Pope Innocent the third was at S.
John's of Lateran, they all repaired thither. But they found him so employed in
cogitations of trouble some affairs, that not having opportunity to hear
them, he dismissed them his presence. These poor people then much disquieted,
retired to the hospital of S. Antony, where they were graciously entertained.
But the Pope the night A dream of the Pope.
following had in a dream this revelation. He saw between his feet to grow a
little palm, which by little and little so grew, that it became a very fair
tree. His holiness musing on this that exceedingly amazed him, sought the
interpretation thereof, but the holy Ghost in the end illuminated him, who gave
him to understand, that the palm signified the poor family of Francis, to
whom he vouchsafed not to give audience. He therefore in the morning caused S.
Francis to be sought, who was found in the said hospital, whence he was
conducted to the Pope: at whose feet this blessed Father with all his company
fell on his knees, and then humbly discovered what he desired of his holiness.
The Pope An other dream and vision of the Pope.
seeing him, and considering him with more attention, called to mind what he
seemed certain days before to see as he was one night solitarily pensive and
heavy with sleep, by means of weighty affairs which then did bussy him,
which was, that the said Church of S. John was ready to fall, and that there
came afterward a poor man, misprised of the world, who so sustained the same
that it fell not. The Pope then Beholding S. Francis, considering the purity
and simplicity of his soul, and in what sort he contemned the world, how much
he affected poverty, the constancy of his firm resolution touching the
evangelical life, which he carried written about him, and wherein he promised
obedience to the Sea Apostolic, the zeal which he perceived in him toward
the salvation of souls, the fervor and freedom of spirit for the service of
JESUS CHRIST, he said in himself: This doubtless is the man whom I saw, who
with his worckes of example and doctrine shall help to support and sustain
the Church of God. Notwithstanding he differred to grant his demand, by
reason that it seemed to many Cardinals a matter rare, and exceeding humane
forces and abilities, to keep and observe a profession of such rigor and
poverty. But whiles they were in the Consistory thus irresolute, the Cardinal
Paul, bishop of Sabee named John, a lover of the poor of JESUS CHRIST,
inspired of God, publicly uttered these speeches: If we grant not the demand
presented unto us by this great servant of God, as seeming unto us a thing
strange and over difficult, though in deed he requires only the form and rule
of the evangelical life to be confirmed unto him, we may justly fear to
offend our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and the gospel: for you know if any one should
affirm that some new or rare thing, unreasonable, or impossible to be
performed were contained in the observation of the evangelical perfection and
in the vow thereof, we should esteem him a blaspheamour against JESUS CHRIST
the author of the gospel. The Pope having well understood this proposition, he
turned to S. Francis, and said unto him: My son, pray unto God that by thy
intercession he discover unto us his holy will, which being known unto us, we
will freely and without any scruple approve thy demand. S. Francis upon this
commandment departed, and with his accustomed fervor fell to his prayers,
beseeching our Lord that he would be pleased to inspire the Pope to do what
should be most for the glory of his divine majesty, and to instruct him what
speech he should use to obtain that which he so piously required. In this
prayer it was miraculously revealed unto him what he should say, and was
assured that The parabole which S. F. used to the Pope to persuade him to
confirm his rule.
the Pope should condiscendingly hear him. Being then joyfully returned to
the Pope, he said, that God had revealed unto him this similitud. That a poor
woman of right beautiful conntenance, and rare conditions, dwelling in the
woods, chanced one day to be seen by her king, who admiring her so singular
beauty, resolved to espouse her with hope to have by her a fair and comely
generation. And having in that sort accepted her, she in short time brought him
many children in that desert, to whom being well grown, the mother said: Know
my children that the king is your Father, go ye therefore to the Court, and
fear not to converse with the greatest, and he will exalt you to a degree
answeareable to your descent. These children leaving their mother, repaired to
the Court, where being arrived and seen of the king, they weere by him with
exceeding admiration at their beauty incontinently acknowledged to be his
children: yet not withstanding he demanded them whose children they were: they
answered, their mother was a poor woman, that lived in the vnco the desert.
But the king, who knew them before, and made them this demand, only to prove
the constancy of his children, being moved at lenght with a fatherly
affection, embraced them very amourously, and said: Fear not: for if till this
day I have and do maintain strangers, how much more reason have I to
maintain you, you, I say, that are my most dear children? And this affection
will I show to all those that henceforward shall be borne of your mother my
deerly affected wife. Applying which parabole, he said: Holy Father, our rule
and life is this poor woman, by the mercy of the king of kings accepted for
his espouse, of whom he has begotten many children, whom his divine majesty
neither has nor ever will fail to sustain: and as he has a care to relieve
strangers, your holiness need not doubt but he will also have regard to
maintain and support his true and ligitimate children, that the heirs of the
eternal king perish not by hunger, who are borne according to his likeness, by
virtue of the holy Ghost, of a poor mother, to wit, of the evangelical
poverty, and nourced with his proper milk. And if the king of heaven promise
the eternal kingdom to those that follow him with faith and verity, how much
rather will he give them such things as he ordinarily with so bountiful
liberality bestoueth indifferently on the good and the wicked? The Pope having
with careful attention heard this similitude, and so patheticall and strong
argument of the S. he admired and sincerely acknowledged that our Lord JESUS
CHRIST dwelled in S. Francis. Without farther delay therefore, and without
admitting any other A probation of the Pope for the rule and life of the Friar
Minors.
difficulty, he approved his rule, permitted him, with the title of precher of
penance, to preach over all the world, and caused little crounes to be made to
all the lay Brethren that were with him. And thereupon S. Francis with all his
companions made his solemn profession under the hands of the Pope, promising
to observe the evangelical life and rule: and he was by his holiness
established Minister general of all his Order, who offered and promised him
his assistance when soever he should need it. But because this confirmation of
the rule was then only made Viuae vocis oraculo, by the Popes word of mouth,
S. F. was made Minister general of the Order by the Pope.
the year of grace 1209. and the thirteenth of the Popedom of the said Pope
Innocent the third, nor having no Bulle of this confirmation, therefore the
beginning of the Order is not reckoned from that time, but from the time that
it was afterward confirmed by writing, which was in the eight year of Pope
Honorious with an authentical Bulle, fifteen veares after this first verbal
confirmation, as in place and order shall hereafter be inserted.

How S. Francis returned to Assisium, and how God declared unto him, that his
Order was instituted for the salvation. of the souls of the faithful.
THE XXIV. CHAPTER.
S. F. and his Religious miraculously provided for.
Saint Francis exceedingly encouraged by obtaining the so much desired
confirmation, departed from Rome toward the valley of Spoletum there to
begin to preach the gospel of JESUS CHRIST, discoursing always with his
companions by the way, in what sort they might most perfectly observe the
profession formerlie made. In which discourse having spent a good part of their
way, and being wearied, they rested themselves in a solitary place, no less
afflicted with hunger then with travail, not having with them any provision,
nor humanely cause to hope after any means of releife. But our most merciful
God, who is ever true, and never fails his faithful, of himself provided
for them, causing in a moment a man to appear laden with bread, who as soon
as he had distributed it to those poor of JESUS CHRIST, disappeared and Why
they confirmed and iterated the strict vow of pouerlie.
was never by any of them seen again. These poor Religious therefore,
acknowledging this grace and favor to be afforded them by the hands of God,
were exceedingly comforted, and there purposed and irreuocablie confirmed,
never to break that strict and rigorous vow of poverty for any want of food,
or whatsoever other necessity or affliction that might befall them: and with
this fervor and good resolution, they travailed through the valley of Spoletum,
discoursing with themselves whither it were better for them to dwell in
solitary places for their particular repose, or to converse in the world, for
edification of their neighbor. Upon which point S. Francis having long time
conferred with his disciples (not minding of himself to determine in such a
case, wherein he would not rely on his own resolution) he made his prayer unto
God, that touching this point, he would manifest unto him his holy will, which
he knew by this mean. He understood that God manifests to S. Fra. that he
would be served of his Order in the active life:
he was sent of God, to endeavor to gain many souls unto him, as Satan
sought to rob him of them, to carry them together with himself into hell.
He therefore resolved rather with his companions to converse in the world for
the profitt of many, then to live in an hermitage to benifitt only himself.
Having then settled himself with his Brethren in a desolate house near to
Assisium, they there lived conformably to their rule in very simple poverty,
seeming rather to sustain themselves with the bread of tears, then with
temporal consolations. They ordinarily employed themselves in prayer, and
especially mental, because they were not as then fournished with books, nor
brouiaryes, to say their cannonicall hours, and How S. F. taught his brethren
to pray.
so in supply thereof, they made their exercise in the excellent book of the
life of JESUS CHRIST, meditating thero^ day and night according to the
instruction that their blessed Father gave the^: for he co^tinuallie preached
unto the^ the cross of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. And whereas the Brethren most
instantly besought S. F. to teach the^ some form of prayer, he used unto the^
the words of our Lord: When you pray, say: Pater noster qui es in caelis,
etc. and afterward, Adoramus te Christ, etc. We adore thee our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, and we praise and honor thee here, and in all the churches of the
world, because by thy cross thou have redeemed the world. He also taught them
to praise and honor God, in all creatures, to reverence preistes, to believe
simply, and to confess firmly the truth of the Faith, as the holy Catholic
and Roman Church believes and confesses: and his disciples with admiration
of his doctrine were attentive unto him. They fell on their knees when they saw
any Church a far of, and there they made their prayer, as the S. had instructed
them.

Of the admirable vision of a fiery chariott, whereon the glorious S. Francis
appeared unto his disciples.
THE XXV. CHAPTER.
THe poor college of S. Francis was near to a place called Riuotorto, in an
old house, and so little that they could hardly acco^modate themselves sitting
one close by an other. From thence went forth the lover of poverty to preach
penance and contempt of the world, first by worckes and then by words. But
being one saturday in the evening gone thence, he went with a Brother to
Assisium, there to preach the sunday as he was accustomed to do. And to this
effect, he retired into a poor house adjoining to the bishopprick. Being about
midnight in prayer, a fiery chariott of admirable splendor suddenly appeared to
his poor family, which entering at the door of their cottage, where some
prayed, and others slept, it there turned three times: In the mids of this
chariott was the glorious Father S. Francis, and over him a circled cloud and
bright as the sun, the splendor whereof gave light to the obscurity of the
night; and then those that slept by means of the noise did awake, and the
bodies of the Brethren were so illuminated and resplendant, that their
consciences were discovered each to other: and at lenght they mutually seeing
each others heart, perceived that S. Francis though absent in body, was present
in spirit: and that by a supernatural virtue he appeared unto them on that
fiery chariott, to insinuate unto them that they ought to follow him as true
Israelites, since as an other Elias, he was by the providence of God 4. Reg. 2.
deputed to be their chariott and guide. It is credible that our Lord at the
prayer of S. Francis, opened the eyes of these simple servants, that they
might see the majesty of God, as he did, when he opened the eyes of the
servant of Elizeus, to let him see the mountain full of armed men, of fiery
chariottes, and of Angels that were there to protect 4. Reg. 6.
the Prophett. So that the S. incontinently retourning, began to penetrate
their hearts and to comfort them with this strange vision, discovering unto
them diverse extraordinary and admirable thing of the augmentation of their
order and explicating unto them many things that even exceed humane
understanding. Which gave the Brethren to understand, that the holy Ghost was
really descended and with such perfection remained always in him, that he was
unto them, and to all the faithful the securest way they could possibly have,
whereby to procure their salvation.

How S. Francis went to dwell at our Lady of Angels.
THE XXVI. CHAPTER.
THis holy Pastor of a flock little in number, yet great in merittes,
determined to leave the said place, as well by reason that it was not capable
conveniently to lodge them, as also because they were there exceedingly
disquieted, he therefore said to his children: My deerly beloved, I know that
God will multiply us, it therefore seems necessary that we repair to to the
Bishop of Assisium, or to the Canons of S. Ruffinus, or to the Abbott of S.
Benedict, to beg of them some poor Church, where we may read the canonical
hours, and near unto it, some poor cottage built of loame and laughtes,
wherein we may be all covered and have what shall be necessary for us: by reason
The bishop and canons of Assisium deny a place to S. Fra. to ledge him and his.

An Abbott of the Order of S. Benedict does accommodate the^. Why the monastery
of S.


that this place, as you see, is not capable to entertain many Brethren,
besides the inconvenience, which to us is more intolerable, that the strictnes
thereof does not afford us means to read our canonical hours, nor less to
bury on of our company, if any chance to dye here. The Brethren approved
these considerations. Repairing then to the Bishop, humbly to demand his
necessity, he received answer, that he had neither church, nor house for him.
The Canons answered as much: taking leave therefore of the^, he went up to the
mount Sabusio, to a monastery of S. Benedict and demanding for the Abbott, he
presented the same petition, relating unto him the answer and denial of the
bishop and Canons. The Abbott having attentively beheld him, inspired of God,
with a general consent of all his Religious, gave to S. Francis and his
disciples, the Church of S. Mary of Portiuncula, which was among all other the
poorest they had: but the same that S. Francis especially desired, and to whom
and to his the Abbott said: My brethren, understand this: We grant all that
you have demanded us, but in recompense, we require that, if God give you
grace to multiply, as we hope, the chief of your religion have his residence
in this place. Whereto S. Francis, having graciously thancked them for their
exhibited favor, answered that the place which they had bestowed on them,
should be as they desired the principal of his Order. S. Francis having
obtained this request, took his leave, and returned exceedingly Mary of
Angels is chief of the Order of the Friar Minors.
satisfied, as well in regard that the said church was dedicated to the most
holy Virgin, by whose merittes he had received many graces of God, and hoped
yet many greater, as also, because it was surnamed Porticella, of the place
where it was built, which was ancientlie called in latin Portiuncula, that is,
a little portion, the true figure of the religion which he professed to observe,
which was the strictest and most painful life that in all the holy church was
observed, and that of all other was to have the least part in this world. The
holy Father upon this occasion said, that God would not that the first Brethren
of the Order should build an other church, to the end the foresaid prophefie
might be accomplished by the Friar Minors, who were to persist in the
perfection of Evangelical poverty, to increase and multiply over all What
re^t S. Fra. gave for the monastery.
the world. And notwith standing, (as I said before) the said Abbott and his
Religious had entierlie given him the said church, without reservation of any
acknoledgement, S. Francis nevertheless, as a lover of poverty, a good and
prudent Founder, that would establish his religion on a strict and sharp
poverty, did yearlie send and give to the said Abbott, a little baskett full of
small fishes, which he took in a neighbor river, as a note, not only of
humility, but also of acknoledgement, that his brethren might understand that
they had nothing in propriety, since they pay even for the permission of the
Church, for which they gave the said fishes, which were in great reverence and
devotion received of the said Abbott and Religious, and in recompense thereof
was given them a vessel of oil. The poor of JESUS CHRIST being thus
accommodated in the house of the glorious Virgin, there began incontinently to
breath forth the sweet savor of their virtue, and not only in the valley of
Spoletum: but even in diverse parts of the world: by reason that S. Francis
went from thence to preach in diverse places, not with words of terrestrial,
humane, and artificial science, but by virtue of the holy Ghost; and that
with such merueilous efficacy, that his audience admired him as celestial,
because he most ordinarily fixed his countenance on heaven, seeking and
endeavoring to eleuate and raise the creatures from the earth to their
Creator.

Of the augmentation of the Brethren, of the conversion of Brother Siluester,
and how S. Francis cured Br. Maricius. and converted him to his Order.
THE XXVII. CHAPTER.
THe holy servant of God being with his disciples in his new residence, in
extreme austerity of life, most zealous exercise of How much the preaching of
S. Fr. did profitt.
prayer, and fervor (both by example and doctrine) of the salvation of souls;
the worthy vigne of JESUS CHRIST began to sprout forth new buddes, to branch,
and produce odoriferous flowers and sauourous fruictes of virtue, and respect
toward his divine Majesty. For there being many converted and enflamed in the
love of JESUS CHRIST, they bound themselves with strict and new laws of
pe^nance, following the rule and holy counsel of the blessed servant of God.
Others, not only touched with devotion, but inflamed with a holy desire to
imitate him, did tread his holy steps, and concerning the contempt of worldly
vanities, and earthly appetites, did chose him for their guide: and following
the spirit, they in short time augmented to such a quantity, that they
enuironned the whole world: One of the first that then came was the blessed
Brother Siluester, the twelueth Disciple who was the first priest that entered
into the Order: he was of Assisium, and the manner of his conversion was thus:
He was present when Brother Bernard Quintaualle by help of the S. distributed
what the had to the poor. And seeing with what liberality he gave his money to
the poor his avarice thereby increased and therefore he spoke to S. Francis, to
pay him the residue for the stones which he had delivered him, to the building
and restablishing the foresaid churches. But the S. admiring this demand
without making any reply, thrust his hand into the purse of Quintaualle and
gave him a handful of money, and then asked him if he were satisfied, or would
have more: whereto he answered that he would no more but was contented. And
being returned to his house, and finally perceiving the devilish covetousness,
that had blinded him, he sharply reprehended and checked himself, and
exceedingly commended the fervor and liberality* of Brother Bernard, and the
sanctity of S. Francis, and as well in regard of this light of conscience and
true knowledge of him self, as that God had already elected and predestined
him to this new life of perfection; he had shortly after a strange dream three
several nights together. He saw in a dream the city of Assisium enuironned
with a mighty and A vision of Brother Siluester before he was religious.
hideous dragon which seemed to intend the destruction, not only of the said
city, but also of all the country near: He saw also to proceed out of the
mouth of S. Francis a fair and lardge cross of gold, the top whereof touched
the heaven, and the arms thereof stretched even to the two ends of the earth,
at the sight of which cross this venomous dragon fled. For that time he spoke
not a word of this dream, because he did not perfectly believe: But
considering that the Pope had confirmed the rule of S. Francis, whose
perseverance also in sanctity of life and doctrine admiring, he recounted unto
him this vision: and having afterward distributed his goods to the poor, he
took the habitt of the Order of the said S. with whom he lived so piously and
with such observance of his rule, that of his part he verified what he had
seen. There was at that time one of the Order called Cruciferi who are
Religious whereof there are many in Italy, the greater part being gentilmen:
they are clothed in violet, and perpetually carry a cross of silver in their
hands) his name was Mauricius who was greiuously sick in an hospital near to
Assisium: where being dispaired of and abandoned by the Physicians, he reposed
all his hope and confidence in God, and by message unto S. Francis, of whom he
had a right good opinion, seriously besought him, that he would vouchsafe to
pray to God for him. Which the holy Father having done, he incontinently took
crummes of bread, which he steeped in the oil of the lamp, that burned before
the image of the virgin Mary, whereof he made a new kind of oyntme^t, which he
sent to the sick person by two of his Brethren saying unto them: Carrye this
Medicine to our Brother Mauricius, whereby God shall not only restore him to
perfect health, but shall dispose him also to be his servant in our company.
It so came to pass: for having taken this medicine, he was instantly cured: it
was not confected by any S. Fr. tells that Maurice should be a Freer Minour
and cured him of a desperate disease.
worldly apoticary, but of the unction of the holy Ghost: And the said drogue
wrought such forces both in his body and soul, that he afterward became a
Freer Minor, and was clothed with the habitt rather of a beggar then of a
Religious, in such sort was it patched, and also with a shirt of maile against
his flesh. In that manner did he live for many years, neither drinking wine,
nor eating bread nor any thing dressed by fire: but contented himself with the
only nourrishment of herbs, pulse, fruits, which extreme abstinence never
distempered his body, but was for diverse years preserved in health and
strength sufficient to support the labors and wearisomnes of the Order: for
which, after his death, God, by his merittes wrought many miracles.

How Brother Leo, Br. Mace, Br. Pacificus, with others, entered into the
religion of S. Francis.
THE XXVIII. CHAPTER.
IN short time after entered into the Order this said Brother Leo, who was
confessor to S. Francis. Among manie^vertues wherewith this Brother was endued,
there appeared especially one, which the said S. exceedingly prised, to wit,
an Angelical simplicity, in favor whereof he was very familier to S.
Francis, and did participate of all his secretcs, and therefore the said S. did
often call him, Brother Beast of God. Brother Maceus of Marignan, did also
enter into the said Order, he was a famous Courtyer, and for his prudence
exceedingly honored of the world: he obtained of God, grace to edify much by
his pious discourses: and therefore did S. Francis often take him for his
companion: and when any came to visitt him, they were so entertained with the
worthey discourses of Br. Maceus, that S. Francis was not interrupted of his
prayer. Brother William an Englishman made himself also of the Order, who was
of so pious a life, that he merited The first infringer of the rule of the
Friar Minors, as an other Judas at lenght did hang himself.
to be one of the first twelve disciples of the S. in place of Brother John
Capella who was one of that number: but being the first that participating in
the habitt, transgressed the rules, he was chasticed of God by the soars of
leaprie, which correction not receiving at the hande^ of the infinite bounty
in such sort as he ought, being moved with rage he grew into such fury of
impatience, and the devil so blinded him, that running out of the Religion, he
as an other Judas hung himself. Now this child of perdition being rased out of
the number, the said Brother William was subrogated in his place, who was a man
of such perfection, that when he died, God showed by many notable miracles,
how pleasing and grateful the merittes of so worthy a servant of his was unto
him. Brother Ruffinus was a very rich gentleman of Assisium, near of kindred
unto S. Clare: who being exceedingly edified by the conversion, life and
doctrine of S. Francis, was also converted, and at this time took the habitt.
He perseuered a virgin and pure in religion, as he entered into it, which
proceeded of the favor and grace of God. He was very deep in contemplation.
Brother Pacificus did afterward enter into the Order in this manner: Being a
very famous Poett, he was interiourlie affected by the Emperor Frederick the
second, who with his own hand crouned him with laurel, and entitled him the
Prince of Poetry. But How Brother
as the merittes of the virtues of the holy Father S. Francis did augme^t, and
the most pleasing savor of his sanctity was spread in diverse places, diverse
being moved and induced with so singular a virtue, went from the Court of the
said Emperor, where he was with a general Pacifious miraculously entered the
Order of the Friar Minors.
admiration so much praised for a great mispriser of the world, expressly to see
him: Among others Brother Pacificus, then a famous poett and Courtier,
conceived a desire to see and hear him: and therefore he attempted a iourny to
find him, which he did, when he least thought thereof, at the town of S.
Seuerin within the limits of Ancona, where he saw the said S. miraculously
crossed with two glittering swords, whereof the one reached from his head even to
the mids of his feet: and the other a cross from the left hand to the right;
by which vision, though he had never seen S. Francis, he notwithstanding
instantly knew him, and was then by God converted to the change of his
profession, to abandon the world, and to unite himself with him, as well in
that he had bin touched by the words of S. Francis, as transpearced with the
sword of the holy Ghost that issued out of his mouth. Having then misprised and
renounced the vanities of the world, he incontine^tly adhered to the said S.
with a firm purpose to follow him. Which the holy Father preceiuing, who by
the spirit of God understood that his conversion was perfect and entierly
changed from the inquietudes of world, to the peace and tranquillity of JESUS
CHRIST, he gave him the name of Brother Pacificus. This man perseuering in the
service of God, merited at an other time to see the holy Father S. Francis
with the great Thau (which is a Greek letter made in form of a cross) painted
on his forehead with such lively colors, that they cast as it were a divine
light upon the face of the said S. At the very same time Brother Geniprus
entered into the said religion: he was a man endued with profound humility and
patience, as in his life appears.

Of Many others that entered the Order, and of one whom S. Francis would not
receive.
THE XXIX. CHAPTER.
BRother John a man of deep simplicity, was about that time admitted after this
manner. It happened that S. Francis goeing to preach in a church, and finding
it foul and very unclean, he swept it himself. The report then incontinently
ran through those quarters, that S. Francis was arrived in that village,
whereupon out of a great devotion that the people bare him, many reprayed
thither, and among others the said Brother John, at that time a very simple
man, who being at his labor when he understood of the coming of the S. least
his oxen, field and plough to go to see him, and was one of the first that
came unto him, whom he found sweeping the said church, and therefore said unto
him: Brother give me this broom, I will assist you, and taking it out of his
hands, he ended the sweeping of the church. S. Francis soon after perceiving
the affluence of people there present, because he preached to each ones great
contentment, he retired himself, and the said John insinuating himself unto
him, said: I have for many days had a desire to serve God, and since I have
heard spoaken of you, this my desire has exceedingly increased, but I knew not
where to find you. Now since it pleased God that I have this day met you, I am
resolved to accompany you and to follow your commandments. The holy Father
perceiving his quality and good purpose, and exceedingly rejoicing in God to
understand that by reason of his great simplicity he should prove a good
Brother, he thus answered: My Brother if you desire to observe our rule, and
to conyoine your self with us, it is precedentlie necessary that you deprive
your self of what soever you have in the world, and following that which the
gospel does counsel us, that you distribute it unto the poor: for all those
of mine that could, have done the same. Which this good and simple John having
heard, he returned to the place whence he came from his labor, and loosing an
ox from the plough, he brought it to the S. and said: I have for so many
years served my father and his house, therefore though this be a very sclender
recompense, I will nevertheless, for the portion of mine inheritance, content my
self with this ox, which, as mine I will give to the poor, or will dispose
of him as to you shall be most pleasing. But as the holy Father and he
consulted together what should be done with this ox, his kindred having notice
that his resolution was to leave them, came all where he was, and did there so
bitterly lament, that the S. conceived great compassion thereat: and for their
consolation he said: Prepare some thing speedily to eat and weep not, for I
will recomfort you. So they went together to one of their houses, where they
did eat with the S. who after dinner, addressing himself to the Father of the
said John, said unto him: you ought not thus to disquiett your self for that
your son has a desire to serve God, but rather ought you to rejoice theratt
and to give thanckes to JESUS CHRIST, who is content to be served by one of
your blood: by mean of this yoursonne John, you this day gain all our
Religious to be your children and Brethren. And he being the creature of God
(whom to serve is to reign has) now made choice to serve his Creator. But
that, in this his service of God, you remain not utterly discomforted, I will
that in regard of your poverty he leave you this ox, whereas according to the
gospel he ought to give it to other poor people. His parents did then show
themselves much comforted, especially in regard of the ox he left them, for
they lamented him as much in respect of their poverty, as their son did of
charity. By this mean S. Francis gained his Brother John, as Elias did
Elizaeus, retiring him from temporal labor to the perfect labor 3. Reg. 19.
of the vigne of God. And because the S. exceedingly affected poverty in
himself and in others, being once clothed, he ever after took him with him
for his companion: which so augmented in him this his simplicity of heart, that
whatsoever he saw the S. to do, the same he sought to imitate. For if he saw
him in prayer, he would seek some place where he might easily observe him, to
conform himself unto him even in his very gestures, so that if S. Francis
were on his knees; or standing up right in prayer, or prostrate with his face
upon the earth, or if he held his hands joined together on high, if he sighed,
if he Merueilous simplicite of Br. John.
spett, or coughed, Brother John would do the like. S. Francis once
reprehending him for it, he thus answered: I have promised to God to do what
soever I shall see you do, and therefore I must endeavor to conform me
entierly unto you. The holy Father admired and together rejoiced to find him
so constant in his simplicity, by mean whereof he so much at lenght profited
in all other kind of virtues, that all the other Brethren held the perfection
whereto he arrived in great admiration. But by reason that the world was not
worthy of so pure a conscience, God afterward called him to himself. After
his death S. Francis with great joy recounted unto his Brethren his holy
conversation, Br. John. after his death called saint.
and called him not Brother John, but S. John. It happened about that time,
that S. Francis preaching in the province of Ancona, there came one day after
sermon a man unto him, that said, he would leave the world and dwell with him;
to whom S. Francis answered: If thou desire to enter into this order, go
first and accomplish the saying Matthew. 19.
of the gospel: Sell what thou have, and give it to the poor. He then
inco^tinently went and distributed all his goods among his kindred, being
hereunto moved rather by passion of the flesh, then devotion of the spirit:
and then returned to S. Francis, to whom he said: Father I have forsaken all
that I had. The holy Father demanded of him in what manner he had disposed
thereof: and he replied that he had distributed it among his poor and needy
kindred. S. Francis then knowing that this man had not Seculer almose.
any fervor of spirit, said unto him: Brother Fly, since thou have given they
goods to they kindred, get thee home, and ask no more to live of almose with
my poor Brethren. So this wretch returned alone to his kindred, as unworthy to
live with so many perfect servants of God. Many others inspired by the
supreme bou^ty and with an exceeding fervor of spirit daily entered into the
Order: the renown whereof was spread over all Italy, yea through all
Christendom. By reason that S. Francis sent his Religious into diverse parts
of the world, who represented the life of Represe^tation of a Christian life by
the Br. of S. Francis.
IEVS CHRIT by holy poverty which they carried in steed of purses, by
obedience wherein they were most prompt and ready, and travail, whereby they
were speedy in their iorneyes: and in regard that they had nothing, they
feared not the loss of any thing. Thus lived they every where without fear,
and in great tranquillity of spirit, without care either by day or night, as
they had bin instructed by him that is the only, true, and singular Master.
They kept not the remaynes of one days meat for the next, being of belief
that to endure want of these temporal and transitory benefittes, was their
great richesse and abundance.

In what exercise and belief he fashioned ^^is Brethren.
THE XXX. CHAPTER.
SAint Francis knowing that his religion was instituted of the holy Ghost in
the church of God for a mirror or looking glass, wherein sinners might behold
and contemplate their deformity, and how far different and distant they are
from the liknes of God: he for this respect endeavored to annoint his Brethren
with the unction of JESUS CHRIST, by whose virtue he begatt them. So then being
replenished with the holy Ghost, his Order did not only increase in number, but
in virtue also and edification of the faithful: and to the end that besides
their devotion they might also be exercised in charity* and love of their
neighbor, since they were piously to co^uerse in the world, he would often
lovingly sit down with them, and in the name of God command, now one, then
an other, to make some exhortation of that which the holy Ghost should dictate
unto him; and this he practiced often. And one time of all other, they, whom
he had enjoined to speak, did all deliver such excellent and admirable things
of the bounty and goodness of God and of his secrettes, and this vnpremeditated
only by the virtue of obedience, that themselves grew into admiration thereof.
He then by experience knew that which God said to his Matthew.
disciples: It is not you that speak before Presidents and Princes, but the
spirit of your Father that speaks in you. Now whiles these holy, pure, and
simple vessels, did pour out the baulme of divine grace, discoursing of very
high matters of God, and discovering the deep mysteries Our lord Jesus Christ
appeared to. saint Francis and his.
of the scripture, by virtue of obedience unto their holy Father, our lord
JESUS CHRIST appeared unto them, and stood in the mids of them in form of a
most beautiful young man, and gave them his benediction with such a sweet and
immensiue grace, that S. Francis and his Brethren were ravished in ecstasy, and
fell all in a sound and as dead to the ground. Being returned to themselves S.
Francis said: My deerly beloved Brethren, we are much obliged to be thankful
unto God, for that it has pleased his divine Majesty, to manifest his treasure
by the mouth of the simple, and to appear unto us to let us know that he was
present, and that when it pleases him, he makes the mouths of infantes, of
the simple and mute, to appear right eloquent. These servants of God thus
replenished with so great a light of divine grace, S. Francis sent them to
illuminate the world, and at their return they all repaired to our lady of
Angels, as their true mother, and there they enjoyed again each others sight
with an extreme contentment, which so filled them with a spiritual
exultation, that they easily forgott the labors and contradictions which in
their trauiles they had endured. The other Brethren that stirred not from the
Covent, though sometimes they were employed in manual labors about the
necessities of their house, nevertheless, the chiefest part Greatferuour of the
first Freer Minors.
of their exercise was in prayer, for they very frequentlie prayed with fervor
and tears. They arose at midnight watching to pray to God for themselves and
for all other sinners. They had a very tender and mutual love to each other.
The holy Father served them as a mother does her only son: charity so burned
in them all, that it seemed very easy unto them to spend their life, not only
for the love of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, but even for the safty of one of their
Brethren.

Two Brothers walking one day through the feildes, they met a fool, that cast
stones at one of them: which the other perceiving, he stepped before his
companion to receive the strokes of the stones. These good Brethren did such
and the like things, being induced thereto out of perfect charity. They
reverenced one an other, as masters, and he that by his office, or age, was
amongst them the principal, would appear the most humble and abject: they
exercised themselves in obedience, each of them being prepared to perform, not
only the precept, but even the will, of his Superior. They undoubtedly
believed that whatsoever was commanded them was the will of God, and by that
means obedience was easy and pleasing unto them: that they might not be judged
by others, they accused and condemned themselves: and if any so much forgatt
himself as to utter a scandalous word to one of his Brethren, he would
conceive such remorce and grief theratt, that he was not well, nor could
repose, till he fell at his feet whom he had offended: to whom, with demand
of pardon, Notable chasticements for inconsiderate words.
he acknowledged his fault, and herewith not content, he would pray the Brother
offended to set his foot on his mouth, and tread hard upon it: In this manner
chastissing themselves, did they suppress and trample pride under foot. This
was not practiced only among the simple Brethren, but among the Superiors
themselves: For in whatsoever place one found himself to have with out reason
offended any Brother, he commanded the offended to set his foot on his throat,
that by this mean the malice and tyranny of the devil being suppressed, love
and fraternall charity might be conserved among them. They also Act. 2. and 4.
armed themselves against vices, and exercised virtues: beside this, they used
their habites, books, and other moueables in common, that none among them
might presume to call any thing mine. And albeit they were in deep degree of
poverty, they were nevertheless in their hearts exceeding rich and most
liberal, and very freely and joyfully gave what was demanded of them, for the
love of God, fulfilling Matt. 10.
his word, who says. Give that Gratis which you have received for nothing. If
any poor people begged the almose which had bin given them, they gave it them.
He that had not what to give to the poor that asked him an almose, would give
them part of the habitt that covered him. When the rich of this world came to
visitt them, to confer with them of some spiritual matter, they joyfully
entertained them, and delighted sometime to frequent their company, so to find
occasion to persuade them to leave their sins, and to induce and move them to
do do penance, When their holy Father was to send them into the world, they
would instantly, and as a singular father, crave of him not to send them into
their own country, thereby to avoid the conversation of their kindred and
freindes of this world: because this seemed unto them a certain kind of
return to the world. For what soever necessity that might befall them in
their travail, they took neither gold, silver, nor otherkind of money, because
they singulerly contemned it, and above all things, did from their hearts
tread it under foot.

Being so freed and exempted of all wordly desires, they numbered themselves
with those of whom Isai said: how beautiful and swift are Isai. 52. Romans 10.
the feet of the Evangelists, and preachers of peace, and eternal Salvation?
Thus did these true Religious, circuit the world, by the straight and sharp
way of their poverty, surmounting the hard stones of self desires and evil
inclinations, breaking the thick clouds of the sins and depraved customs
of worldly men, with great pain of their life, walking on the thorns of
tribulations and contrarietyes, with examples, S. Fr. solicitous of the leapers.
virtues, and doctrine, of penance: because such is the path way that leads
them to live who with a perfect resolution seek the same. The holy Father did
also exercise his children in having care of leapers, so to plant in their
soul a firm root of humility and mortification of themselves: and therefore
ordained his Brethren to be at the hospital of leapers when occasion
required, to serve and minister unto them. If any Gentilman presented himself
to be received into the order, among many things propounded unto him, one of
the principal was, that he should serve leapers, and dwell in their house when
he should be commanded: considered withal that S. Francis himself did the
same with much contentment of body and spirit, and with him all his beloved
and holy Religious. And in regard that the holy Father was very zealous of S.
F. care of the churches.
the honor of the most blessed Sacrament, he would that not only the altares,
but even the churches and house of God, were convenient, neat and well ordered:
and if he found any one unclean, he would sweep it himself, or if he could
not, he would command some Brethren to make clean and accommodate the same,
that by this worck of God they might nourish in themselves humility, 2. Cor. 6.
a reverence to his divine majesty, and feruonr of spirit, to enrich with
him, the conscience of all the souls of faithful Christians, which are the
true temples of the living God.

Of the doctrine and documents of S. Francis.
THE XXXI. CHAPTER.
Saint Francis did often make spiritual lectures to his children in JESUS
CHRIST, putting them in mind of their profession, and the state whereunto God
had so graciously called them, which he performed by these words: My
well-beloved Brethren, let us have always before our eyes the first vocation
whereto, with so great Instructions of S. F. unto his Br. going through the
world 1. Pet. 2.
mercy, we have bin called of God, not only to save our selves, but also for
the salvation of many. And since it is so, let us travail over the world, with
good example and behoufull words exhorting and teaching every one, that
sinners may repent their sins past, and call to mind the divine precepts,
which they seem to have already forgotten. Now whiles you thus travail, you
ought to have a firm faith that God will procure you to encounter faithful
men, gentle and gracious, who will of charity receive you joyfully, and you
shall gain them. When you shall meet with unfaithful and proud persons that
shall resist your speeches, support them with patience and humility, for
theloue of him, who being iniuryed, misprised, and dishonored by the Jews,
did not answer them one cross, word, nor would revenge himself of the
outrages which they had done him, but presented himself with an extreme
charity to support all, in satisfaction of our sins.

When S. Francis sent his brethren to any place, he gave them this document.
Have always humility and honesty in your company, and in the morning till the
third hour, keep silence strictly, and in the mean while offer your
devotion and pray to God in your heart. Utter not words that are idle and
without fruit, neither do you give ear unto them: because in whatsoever place
you walk or be, your conversation ought to be no less humble and modest then
if you were in your oratory or cell, since that where soever we go or be, we
have always with us our cell which is our body, whereof our soul is the
hermit, which resideth therein to pray unto God and to meditate on his
benefittes. And therefore if the soul rest not in peace in this celle, that of
the monastery will little avail unto a Brother: Live in such sort as no man be
scandalized at you: but that each one by your sweetness be induced to peace, to
benignity and concord: considering that to this end we be called, to wit, to
cure the wounded, to reduce those that err, into the right way, and to make
union where there was division, fastening them together with the sweet nails
of the fear of God.

He afterward explicated unto them the state of the Freer Minors, saying: The
Religion of the Freer Minors is a nett, that takes the great fishes for God,
and lets the lesser escape: and the life and religion of the Freer Minors is
a little flock and fold of sheep, which the Son of God has desired his
heavenly Father to give unto him in this later time, which were a people
replenished with humility, and with so abject a poverty, that they were
different from all other, and were content to posses no other thing in this
world but himself, in regard that his Father had given them unto him. Hereunto
he added that for this respect, God had commanded him in a revelation to call
Why the Religious of S. Fr. were first called Freer Minors.
his Religious Freer Minors, because they were the poor people which he had
required of his Father, to whom in his gospel he spoke in these terms:
Fear not my little flock, for it has pleased the Father to give you the
eternal kingdom. And albeit this has bin understood in the person of all the
poor of spirit: yet was it particulerly spoaken concerning the Religion of
the Freer Minors, who were to renew in the church the primitive estate of the
Apostles. Thus did the holy Father encourage them, without fear to travail
over the world, securely to denounce, and simply to preach penance, reposing
their confidence in God who had vanquished the world, who would speak for
gayning of souls for them and in them, by mean of the holy Ghost. But let us
especially have care, said the holy Father, we that have already abandoned the
world, that we loose not the celestial kingdom, for a matter of small moment;
I therefore further advise you, that if you find money in any place where soever,
you esteem it no more then the dust you trample under your feet.

The Freer Minors ought not to contemnenor condemn any man.
The said S. did afterward admonish them not to contemn any person, that they
should see to live licentiously or clothed sumptuously: considering that God
is our common Lord, who is of sufficient power to call and justify them. For
which reason he would that his Religious should yield them equal reverence with
their fellow Brethren and Lords: for they are as well and really their
brothers in regard of reasonable essence, since we are all creatures of one same
and sole Creator and Redeemer, and they are also their Lords, in as much as
they assist them in their course of life and releive them in their necessities.
He farther affirmed that the Freer Minor ought to be such in the world, that in
whatsoever he should see or hear in the world, he should glorify the heavenly
Father. The Brethren one day besought the holy Father that he would be pleased
to manifest unto them what virtue would make a man the greatest friend to JESUS
What virtue was most recomended by S. Fra.
CHRIST, and he answered them: My Brethren, poverty, my Brethren, poverty, my
Brethren, poverty. Know for certain, that it is the singular way to
perfection, the stem or stock of humility, and that God would that thereupon
should begin the structure and building of perfection, saying: If thou will be
perfect, go and sell all that thou have: because thereby, the greatest
impedimentes are cut off, to wit, the affection and cogitations of temporal
substance (ordinarily Matt. 19.
accompanied with pride) and vain glory of the world, which breed of richesse,
as the moth engenders in cloth. Our Lord also declares this eminency of
poverty, to be the seat of all other vercues, when he says: He that will live
with me, let him renounce himself, and Matt. 16.
take up his cross and follow me. Because he that is perfectly poor ought not
only to forsake all love and desire of temporal things, but also the love of
himself, of his proper judgment, of his prudence, and of his own will: that
having no propriety in any thing, he may enter into the merueillous puissances
of God, and present himself nakedlie into his sweet embracementes. In the
discourse which S. Francis Prayer singulerly recomended by S. Francis.
made to his Brethren, he did also commend in a Religious the virtue and grace
of prayer: affirming that without the same none could persevere or profitt in
the service of God: he therefore exercised and induced his Brethren to prayer,
by all means he could devise, persuading them to pray always, trauailling or
resting in one place a broad or within, in comfort and affliction, and that
they should do al things with their spirit erected unto God, who is always
present in all places and within us, ^and will that we continually converse
with him, for fear that by our negligence and tepidity, we deprive our selves
of the verity of his holy spirit, not receiving it with due reverence.

Of the austere life of S. Francis.
THE XXXII. CHAPTER.
THe blessed Father knowing that he was given of God, for an example and light
unto the Gentiles and worldly Christians, and that many by his mean, carrying
the cross of our Redeemer, should be saved, as a captain of the war of
JESUS CHRIST, he endeavored to get the crown of victory by worckes of
perseverance in perfection: and reflecting on these words of the Apostle,
Galat. 5.
They that appertain to JESUS CHRIST, have crucified their flesh, with their
vices also, to carry the armor of God in their bodies; he crucified his flesh
with the rigor of discipline, and so bridled his appetites, that touching his
refection, he scarcely took what was necessary to suffice nature. And as one
that had well A memorable speech of S. Franc.
experienced the matter, he affirmed it to be a thing very difficult, to
satisfy the necessity of the body, without obeying the disordinate
inclinations of sensual delight. In the beginning of the Order, albeit he had
not sufficient almose of bread to releive his Brethren, yet for the most part
he demanded no more, because himself and his Brethren were so attentive and
addicted to the spirit and to prayer, that out of forgetfulness they omitted to
demand almose, and therefore refected themselves with herbs and roots, which
they did eat with exceeding good appetit, and great contentment. The holy
Father in his health did very seldom, or almost never eat any meat dressed by
fire. His ordinary repast was bread and water, and if at any time he did eat
of such, it was of boiled herbs, which he so mingled with ashes or cold
water, that loosing their savor, they were worse then raw, and drincking
water, he took only so much as he thought would suffice him, not to quench S.
F. and his Religious during his life did always eat on the ground
the heat of his thirst, but to satisfy the necessity of his body. His
ordinary table was the ground, neither had his Brethren other during his life.
He every day invented and found some extraordinary manner of abstinence, so
atttentiue and regardfull was he to chastise the flesh, and to render it
obedient to reason, that it might not hinder the profitable progress of the
soul.

He divided the year into diverse Lentes, all which he fasted austerelie, and
first, the Lent which our Lord, fasted which begins from the Epiphanie, this
great servant of God fasted it in The Le^ts which S. F. fasted every year.
the honor and example of JESUS CHRIST, very secretly with great silence, and
very strict abstinence of bread and water. Then, incontinently after Easter, he
kept an other Lent, to solemnise the feast of the holy Ghost, in which he
prepared himself in example of the Apostles for so great a coming. An other
he made in honor of the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul: an other from the feast
of the said Apostles, to the assumption of the virgin Mary. After this Lent, he
fasted till the feast of S. Michaell the Archangell. Besides the foresaid
Lentes, he very austerely fasted the Aduent: He left it as a precept to all his
Brethren to fast it, from the day after the feast of Alsaintes, according to
the same form of the quality of meat which himself used. What poor are
thieves.


Touching the rest of his austere life, it may be conceived by that, which he
said of himself: I was never thief in demanding almose superfluously: yea I
have always taken less of that which I needed, thereby not to frustrate other
poor: because if I should have done otherwise, I should have condemned my
self of manifest theft. Notwithstanding when he travailed he did accommodate
himself to Discretion of the S. Matt. 10.
their diett who gave him entertainment in their house, according to the
gospel, in such sort that both fasting and eating he always edified his
neighbor. If in his sickness he were constrained to eat flesh, from the time of
his recovery he would for penance double his ordinary abstinence. In regard
whereof, Brother Giles would commonly, say, that if S. Francis had a body sound
and strong as he desired, all the world together had not equalized him for
sufferance and patience in austerityes. But because the merit and nobleness
of virtue consists not only in the party of the body, but of the spirit:
therefore by how much his bodily force did fail, so much were the feruours of
his spirit refortified, so that they exceeded without comparison, his natural
forces, and that was his great crown: And therefore appearing one day to
Brother Giles, and telling him that he desired to speak four words unto him,
he answered and said, learn first with thy self that which thou would say
to me. Besides, the bare and hard ground was the ordinary bed of How he slept.
this poor, wearyed, and travailed body, and his pillow was a stone, or a
piece of wood: yet did he often sleep sitting, in respect whereof his body had
very small ease and repose in his sleep: for he spent the most part of the
night in prayer: Whereto he arose whiles the other Br. slept, when he was with
the^. His habitt was one only coat, with the capuce of very rude and boisterous
cloth, and sometimes breeches and the cord. As he hated His habit.
delicate clothing, so did he extremely affect that which was rude Matt. 11.
and rough, saying: that S. John was for that exceedingly praised of God, in
these words, that the custom of delicate clothing is in the Courts of
Princes, and not in the houses of the poor: If therefore the holy Father felt
any complacence in his habitt as being neat or whole, he would incontinently
quilt it within with gross thread. He affirmed that he knew of certain that
the devils did admire at the observance of a difficult and austere life, and
that on the contrary, they violently tempted those that were clothed
delicatelie.

A grave answer of S. Fra.
Being one day demanded how he could endure the sharpnes of winter in so poor
and simple habitt; he answered courageously: If we were clothed within with
the flame of God, we should most easily support this cold without, and greater
then ordinary if it shall happen. But because he knew that all his Brethren
were not capable of the like sufferance, he said that the true servant of God
ought to govern himself with much discretion in his drincking and eating, S.
F. was not so rigorous to his Brethren as to himself. Psalm. 21.
and in the use of all other things necessary to the entertainment of the
body, and in such sort that he gave it not occasion to murmr, that it has
not strength, not only to pray and labor with the rest, but even not to stand
on foot, and when he shall have done that, if the body do afterward play the
jade, become lazy and drowsy when it should pray, let him rudely chastise
it, and therefore he ought in all his necessities to have always recourse to
his superiors and humbly demand them: And if he do not obtain them, he ought
to bear it patiently for the love of God, who also prayed Matt. 26.
his Father and was not heard; and let him undoubtedly believe that a
necessity voluntarily suffered for the love of God, is reputed Necessity
voluntarily supported is a kind of martyrdom.
unto him as a martyrdom: and if his body be thereby endomaged, the fault is
not his: but it is the will of God. Notwithstanding these so mild documents
for others, he subdued his one body with an incredible rigor: in regard whereof
some few days before his death, he of conscience, asked it pardon for having
so rigourously treated it: and alleged for excuse, that he had not done it out
of hatred unto it, but for its greater security, and for the glory of God.

Of preserving the treasure of chastity, and how he afflicted himself and
cast himself into a pit full of snow.
THE XXXIII. CHAPTER.
THe blessed Father lived with an extreme rigor and sharpnes of discipline,
to conserve the virginal splendour of chastity, very diligently enflaming the
interior and exterior man. For this cause in the beginning of his conversion,
he often times, during the winter season, cast himself all naked in the mids
of snowes or on the ice, that he might perfectly subdue his domestical ennemy
the flesh, and conserve the shining robe of immaculate virginity, from the fire
of sensuality, not permitting it long residence therein, as by this example
shall appear. Being one day in the hermitage Lautiauo, making his prayer in a
celle apart, the devil called him thrice, saying: Francis, Francis, Francis:
to whom though the S. answered, yet knew he not who called him. The devil
then said unto him: there is no sinner in The Deceit of the devil to weary
firm resolutions Job. 41.
the world whom God does not pardon if he convert himself: but he that shall
kill himself by over rigorous penance, shall never find mercy before the
face of God. The holy Father then knew the deceit of the wicked enemy,
hidden under the sweetness of those words: and he knew it the more apparently,
in that at the same instant by the loathsome breath of that foul dragon,
which enflameth the coals of hell, he had a vehement temtation of the flesh:
which the lover of chastity feeling, he discloathed himself, and with his
cord very sharply beat himself, saying: Go to, Brother ass, this kindness
I must show Strange mortification of S. Fra. against a carnal temptation.
thee, it is requisite that thus I serve thee to make thee know thy self: and
since chasticementes and stripes do please thee more then fasting and
austeritie of life, thou shall surely have it (consider here the habitt of
religion, which signisieth sanctity, it was not permitted to sense to steal
it away.) And if thou desire to be gone, get thee now thus whipped whither thou will. Goeing then forth of his cell, he threw himself on the snow, and
incontinently made seven boules of the snow which he set before him, and
said: behold, my body, the greatest of these boules is thy wife, and these
four are two daughters and two sons which she has conceived by thee, and the
other two are a man and maid servant that are to serve thee, take them now and
get them clothing, for they faint with cold. And if this new solicitude be
troublesome to thee, content thy self to serve one sole master, who is much
more easy to please then this flesh. Thus was the devil confounded, the
temptation crosled, and the holy Father was in such sort victorious, that the
devil durst no more to visitt him with the like tentations.

By this so generous act of resistance against the flesh he left to his
disciples, a documente and example to resist sensual temptations, not only by
prayer, but also by corporal labors, with rigor and asperitie, accompained
with abondance of tears, and not deliciouslie as the worldly and carnal
would gladly do, and without any labor that might be any way troublesome,
nor much less with cold purposes rather then acts of the will, wherein
certain spiritual persons that are tender and delicate place their force
and knowledge. Wherefore it is not to be admired, if they be always feeble and
imperfect, because they shall ever prove such, whiles they omit the corporal
exercise of the virtues, and of the steps of their spiritual Father and
master. To the end therefore that this example might profitt us, God would that
whiles the Seraphicall S. was employed heerin, a Brother that was in prayer saw
and heard all that passed, by reason that the moon did shine: which being
perceived by the holy Father, he recounted unto him the cause, which was the
temptation, but with commandment, not to discover it to any person of the
world, during his life.

Of the guard and vigilancie he taught to be had of our senses.
THE XXXIIII. CHAPTER.
S. Fra. would not that his Bre. should frequent or behold women. Ierem. 9.
SAint Francis did not only teach how one ought to mortify the vices of the
flesh, and to bridle our se^suall appetites, but also with what ca^e one ought
to guard the exterior senses, by means whereof death enters the into the
soul, to the end that the Brethren might keep more securely the inestimable
treasure of chastity, though in so britle a vessel of earth: he did very
dilligently admonish them, and did prohibit them the amity and conversation
of women, which has bin oftentimes the ruin of many. He assuredly affirmed
that through the like occasions the weak man does fall, and the strong is
weakened. It is as difficult for a man that is no more then perfect to preserve
himself from these things, as to walk and go barefoot on burning coals
without burning. For this cause, he kept his senses so retired and sequestered,
and particulerlie his eyes from beholding the vanities of the world, that,
according to what he one day said, he scarce knew any woman by sight, because
he affirmed that it was not very secure to imprint in his memory the image of
a figure that might make greater the least sparckle of sensuality, mortified by
the ashes of penance, or to admit and yield unto it any thing that might
afterward stain the purity and splendor of the chaste soul: and therefore it
is not to be admired, if he attained to such perfection of chastity,
considering that he made such cruel war against his senses, that it seemed
he had obtained a perfect and sovereign dominion over his flesh, and, in
imitation of an other Job, had made a compact with his eyes, that he would not
only have in horror the sight of things perilous, Job. 32.
but even of such as were vain and curious. He admonished his Brethren, that
it was not expedient for them to give care to the speeches of women, whereby
the soul of the virtuous becomes effeminate and feeble, excepting in
confession, and when it shall be necessary, to give them some breife instruction
for the good of their souls. What occasion may a Brother have, said he, that
may force him to frequent women, unless when he is required to hear their
confession, or to discourse with them touching penance, or to give them some
counsel for the benefitt of their soul? A man that presumes of over much
security has less regard of his ennemy, who having power to surprise him
does not spare him. Thus did the holy Father love and desire in his Brethren
above all things, next unto the foundation of holy poverty and humility,
modesty and mortification of the eyes; to give them therefore a more apparent
instruction how to govern them, he once used unto them this parabole. A parabe
le which S. Fran. used to his Bret. touching mortification of the eyes.


There was a potent and just king, that sent two pages one after an other to
deliver a message unto the Queen his wife: the first retourning to the king
his master, made his answer simply, because out of modesty he had forborne
to behold the countenance of the queen his mistress: the second page making his
answer to the king, commended the beauty of the Queen, saying: Verily,
sir, the Queen is the most beautiful and pleasing woman that is under heaven;
and in truth you ought to repute your self happy in having such a woman to
your espouse. The king hearing this said: How have thou dared, thou lewd
fellow, so unchastly to behold my wife? thou have coueted the pourchase of
what thou so attentively have beheld. Thereupon he presently recalled the
other page, of whom he demanded what his opinion was of his wife, he
answered: Sir I esteem exceeding well of her: for she gave a very willing
ear to what I deliured in your behalf. The, king replied to this discreet
answer, and said: have thou observed her grace, do thou thinck there can be
any thing more desired or added to the beauty of her countenance? The page
answered: Sir it appertains unto you to judge of that. My duty was to
deliver her my message and to bring you the answer. Which the king
understanding, thus ordained, and said: it is most probable that thou who have
bin so chaste of they eyes, wilt prove more chaste of body: thou therefore shall
be of my chamber, and especially favored. But as for this presumptuous
brazen-face, I will that he be dismissed for fear of committing further
mischeife. S. Francis hereof inferred that the Brethren beholding a woman ought
to esteem and be persuaded, that it is this same Queen, the espouse of IEVS
CHRIST, and themselves to be the first page. And in this manner he very clearly
demonstrated unto them by his life and doctrine, the virginal purity wherein
God did always conserve him in the mids of worldly vanities, and that he had
such special care thereof, that he deserved to have the sacred wounds of our
Redeemer engraven on this his pure and virginal flesh. Whereof Brother Leo gave
testimony, who notwithstanding that he was his Confessor, being curious to be
confirmed therein, did nevertheless in his prayer demand the same of our lord
JESUS CHRIST, who by divine revelation ascertayned him thereof: for he shortly
after saw the holy Father in spirit on a high mountain in a most beautiful
garden; among roses and lilies, having his hands full of them. He was hereby
advertised, that what he saw on this mountain was the saint registered in
heaven with the virgins, not only of body, but even of spirit and will.

How the holy Father taught his Bretbren to shun idleness.
THE XXXV. CHAPTER.
HE a boue all other things taught, both by doctrine and example, that idleness
ought to be shunned, as a principal cause of lewd cogitations, and corrupter
of virtue: showing by example of his life, with what diligence one ought to
exercise the flesh by fruitful mortificatio^, in regard that it is addicted to
sloth, and is rebellious. And therefore he called the body little ass, as one
that ought to be subjected to the ordinary supporting of the burdens of
labors, not making resistance, and that it ought to be chasticed with stripes,
and nourished with very course and rude meats. If by chance he saw any
loitring and idle person, that would eat of an others labor, he said that he
ought to be called Brother Fly: because, not doing any good, but distayning
and hindering the good worckes of others, he ought to be reputed contemptible
and abominable.

In the beginning of the institution of the order, to give example of exercise
unto his Brethren, he travailed alone to seek almose, wherein he extremely
labored his body that was already very sickly. He spent the night in
watchinges and continual prayers, and the day in reading the office, in
serving and preaching in the towns and villages, or in administering to
leapers, or decking and triming the churches. It succeeded afterward that many
Brethren, who were not fit to keep the quire, did live of the labors of
others, as of Brother Giles, Brother Ginipero, and some others who were
employed in certain profitable occupations, to shuune the capital ennemy of
the life and soul: thence it proceeded that they had sufficient almose for
themselves and for others. Neither would he permit his Brethren to give ear
to news and relation of seculer matters, that they came not, by omitting the
contemplation and taste of celestial things, to employ themselves in vain and
worldly things, which they had already abandoned. It was not permitted to any
of them to relate what he heard abroad. All they that were nere S. Francis,
were as well by night as day exercised in divine praises: wherein they rather
seemed Angels the^ men. In this sort did they maintain the school of the holy
Father, in labor and exercises of the spirit. Among the said Brethren it was
held a great sin, for one to take his recreation and pleasure in any other
thing then the consolation of the spirit. The holy Father affirmed, that the
negligent and sloathfull that applied not themselves to any exercise, should be
inco^tinently vomited out of the mouth of God. And if he met with any Apoc. 3.
such, he would incontinently reprehend him, as one that by his example of
perfection was in continual exercise, to the end that in his school none
should loose any part of so great a benefitt as is time, which is given us by
our lord JESUS CHRIST.

After his refection he accustomed with his Brethren to use some exercise, to
avoid idleness, that when afterward they were to pray, they might not, by
mean of their unfruitful words then uttered, loose the gift and recompense
which they had merited at the hands of God. So, the more to shun idleness,
he gave this rule, that by his commandment all the Brethren that should utter
any idle word conuersing or The recreations of the Freer Minors which S.
Francis ordained them.
trauayling together, should be obliged to say one Pater, and to praise God in
the beginning and end to the benefitt of the soul of the culpable,
co^ditionally that he first acknoledged his fault before he were reprehe^ded by
others. But if he were first admonished and reprehe^ded by an other, the said
Pater noster should be for the soul of the reprehender. And if the culpable
would not admit the admonition and penance, mayntainning his speech not to be
idle, the holy Father ordained, that he should be obliged to redouble the said
penance, and now to say twice the Pater noster, once for the reprehe^der, and
once for him that should judge his word to be idle or unprofitable. Now the
praises which he ordained to be said before and after the Pater noster, he
would they should be uttered with such and so distinct a voice, that it might
be understood of all the Brethren there present, who should then be silent to
hear the praise of God: and if any one then spoke, he should in like manner be
obliged to say Pater noster for him that was to praise. He would that all the
Brethren entering into any house or other place: and casually meeting one an
other, should praise God, saying God be praised, or some like words. This
Seraphicall Father was accustomed to give these honors to God with a most
zealous fervor, and desired that all his Brethren should be careful and
religious in doing the like.

How he was enemy to murmuringe, and how he reprehended it.
THE XXXVI. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father extremely abhorred murmurers, the venomous fruit of murmures
growing of the pestiferous tree of idleness, yea he shunned them above all other
kind of vicious persons, affirming them to have a most mortal venime in the
topp of their tongue, wherewith they empoyson men both present and absent.
Wherefore having one day heard a Brother offending the reputation of an other,
he turned to Brother Peter Catanio, and crying with a loud voice, he uttered
these words: Discord, begins to enter into religion, if detractours be not
chasticed with discipline, and if these loathsome mouths be not stopped, the
sweet odor of the good, will incontinently be infected. Arise, arise speedily,
and dilligently examine the matter: and if thou find the offended Brother
innocent, chastise the murmurer sharply, that he serve for an example to all
others. And so I will that all Gardiens and Ministers be very vigilant, that
this pestiferous infirmity take not root in religion. To this purpose he often
said, that whosoever did frustrate his Brother of his glory and fame, merited
to be deprived of the habitt of the order, and of all power ever to lift up his
eyes to God, till he had to his power restored the honor taken from his
Brother. He further affirmed, that the cruelty of detractors exceeded that of
murderers, in regard of the law of JESUS CHRIST, which is not accomplished but
in charity, and does more oblige us to desire the good of the soul, the^ of
the body.

In this respect the Brethren from that holy time, as obedient children, that
desired to accomplish the just will of their Father, were with their best
industry wary thereof, because to murmr, what other thing is it (said the
same holy Father) then with the gall of Genes. 9.
dishonor and treason to fill holy religion his true and dear mother? Such
murmurers are of the cursed race of Cham: for as he discovered the nuditie of
his Father, so these discover and aggrauate the defectes of their Superiors
and of the Order. Therefore they deserve the malediction of God, they wallow in
filth like hogs, and seek to lay false imputations on their Brethren, and to
make them like unto themselves, who have their consciences exceedingly defiled
and loathsome, their office is conformable to that of dogs, to bite, to
barck, and to complain of the order of the Superiors and of the discipline.
The voice of the murmurer is thus: I want perfection of life and true
knowledge, I cannot attain to taste the sweetness of God, and therefore I cannot
find place near his divine Maistie, nor repose with men. I am resolved what to
do, I will raise discord among the elect, and the good people, and I shall be
favored of the principal, so much the rather because I know my Superior to
be a man, and that also, as I do, he sometimes uses this means. Oh wretch:
thou feedest already on humane flesh: why seek thou not they food other
where? thou gnawest the liver and bowels of those that live well. Those
fellows seek to seem virtuous, not to be so, and accuse the vices of others,
without indeauouring in the mean time co correct their own. They praise only
them of whom they are praised, or of whom they hope some benefitt: yet do
they not praise them, but when they think or know it will come to their
understanding, and that themselves shall be commended therefore.

The holy *Father thus labored with all his power to root out of his Order so
many occasions of euels as arrive by an unbridled tongue, to the end his
Brethren might observe the Evangelical silence. And in that respect he has
at times exhorted them to avoid idle words, as such whereof one should render
an account, and be punished for, in the Matthew. 12.
great and dreadful day of judgment: and if he met with any one that should
forgett himself in this point, he would very sharply reprehend him: assuring
his Brethren, that holy silence was the guard and co^seruation of the purity of
the heart, that it was not one of the least virtues, Prou. 18. and Matt. 12.
and that so slight regard ought not to be made thereof, since the Scripture
says, that death and life are in the power of the tongue.

Of the spiritual joy, he would that his Brethren should have.
THE XXXVII. CHAPTER.
HE had an especial care that his Brethen in their prayers, divine offices,
and corporal exercises, should ever have interiourly some spiritual joy
against the venime of idleness and mela^choly, and as a sign that they were the
habitatio^ of Jesus Christ. He did with all singularly affect in them this
peace and alacrity of spirit: he assured them that this spiritual joy was
directly opposite to all kind of deceit and temptation of the devil, and
said unto them: that if the servant of God did labor to conserve in him
interiourly and exteriourly the alacrity which springs of the purity of the
soul as his proper fountain, which is caused by the virtue of prayer, the
deuilles cannot annoy him: for they will say, If this man be joyful in
afflictions and travails, by what means can we procure him evil? And on the
contrary, when the devil sees the servant of God disarmed of this spiritual
alacrity, he hops with all to make him loose the taste of prayer, and of all
his other good worckes, and especially of the purity of the soul: for he well
knows with what temptations and by what slightes he can endommage and rob
the peace of the spirit, and of the good disposition which is in the servant
of God. But this mischeuious beast shall have less power, when the soul
shall be dilligent to expel this heaviness by the virtue of prayer, which as a
most pleasing odor has power to chase far a way from her, this fierce and
venomous serpent: but when the heart is oppressed with grief and heaviness, the
devil rejoices because he very easily plongeth him into melancholy or into
despair, or persuadeth it to wallow in worldly pleasures.

Thus did the holy Father exceedingly labor, to preserve the joy of the heart,
which is the oil of spiritual unction, wherewith the holy Ghost annoynteth
those whom he has sanctisied: and thereby preuenteth the dangerous disease of
idleness and of spiritual distaste, which the Saint with such diligence
endeavored to exterminate, that when he felt it to breed in him, he had
incontinently recourse to prayer, as to a most assured remedy and preservative
against so perilous a disease. He counseled his Brethren in like sort when
they felt themselves troubled, to have instant recourse to prayer, and being on
their knees prostrate on the earth before God, to say: Restore me, if thou
please my God, that grace which thou were pleased formerly to grant unto my
soul, whereto I beseech thee to give that alacrity and rast which it felt in
thy holy service, and comfort me by the same that I do not perish: and he
admonished them thus to persevere till they were heard, and that their former
joy returned unto them. For said he, if the soul permit it self to be
transported to heaviness of spirit, the vice of confusion of Babylon will grow
in it, which rustieth the heart and silleth it with sorrow, if it be not washed
with tears. And know ye (said this good Father) that the alacrity which
proceeds of a good conscience and of union with God by prayer, is one of the
principal gifts which one is to receive, and received ought to conserve.
Labor then all of you to obtain it, since I love it for my self, and desire
it for you, both exteriourly and interiourly for the glory of God, and the
greater confusion of the devil, who only and his have occasion to be
melancholy: whereas we on the contrary ought to rejoice in God. I know well
that the deuilles bear me envy, and that they cannot, but against their will,
endure so many graces to be imparted unto me by his divine majesty: and seeing
they can not annoye me, they endeavor to trouble my fellow-brethren: but they
less preuayling therein, if it please God, they shall depart with confusion. If
sometimes they tempt me with slugishnes, idleness, and heaviness of spirit, I
free me thereof, by consideration of the alacrity of my Brethren.

Now it is here to be understood, that the holy Father being an Idea and
pattern of all true modesty, he did not mean that one should show a vain joy
of speech, or of light laughter: for that is not the alacrity which the true
servants of JESUS CHRIST ought to have (as some esteem) which is but a
vanity and a manifest sign of little spirit. S. Francis therefore, in an
exhortation that he made to his Brethren, declared What ought to be the joy of
the true servant of God. Jacob. 1.
unto them, what was the joy of the true servants of God, saying: That Brother
may be called happy, who has not his joy but in worckes and words of charity,
by example and document whereof men are induced to love, praise and honor God.
And on the contrary, wretched is the Brother that is delighted in idle words,
where with he moves men to laughter: in whom, that is verified which the
Apostle says, that his religion is vain and unfruitful. So that by
spiritual joy he meant the fervor, resolution, readiness and taste of the will
and of the body prompt with alacrity to attempt all good: by which fervor
and joy, men are oftentimes more edified then by the very worckes they do, be
they never so good, if they seem to be done with an evil will: because they
represent the idleness and anxietie of the will and the sloathfullnes of the
body in doing well: so that they do not edify, but corrupt. The holy Father
affected gravity in himself and others, that the joy of the spirit might not
seem a certain vain mirth. He well knew by experience, that this gravity
would serve him as a wall against the darts of the devil, because the soul
disarmed thereof remains light and vain, and as a naked man amongst potent
ennemies, that seek all means to murder him.

Of the fraternall union which he taught his brethren.
THE XXXVIII. CHAPTER.
ANd because the said spiritual joy proceeds of the innocence of the soul,
and of an amourous peace and* tranquillity with God and our neighbor: S.
Francis exceedingly labored, that so holy a union might be co^serued among
his deerly beloved disciples to thend that they who had been engendered by the
holy Ghost in union of love and concord, might be conserved and maintained,
semblably united among themselves, in the lap of their mother, which is holy
Romans 12.
Religion. To the end also that the said disciples should praise God with one
heart, and according to the Apostle should rejoice with the joyful, and mourn
with the sorrowful, never permitting any root of sorrow, envy, or any other
disordinate passion to enter into them: and that the greater should be
assuredly united in a true love of charity, with the least, the prudent and
wise with the simple, as true Brethren, and they that are in their country with
such as are come from far. He one day proposed to his Brethren an example, to
this purpose, of notable doctrine and efficacy.

Supposing, said he, that a general chapter were held of all the Brethren that
are in the glory of paradise, and as there are both learned and simple
ignorantes, that have vowed to serve God, without any science acquyred: let
commandment be given to a learned man, and to a simple ignorant to make each
of them a sermon, the learned considering what he was to say, thus discoursed
with himself: where there are so many of perfect knowledge, it would be
unprofitable for me, to appear learned, my auditors being incapable of
further science to premeditate to make election and search of curious and
subtle matters, before more curious then my self, would appear ridiculous:
but peradventure I shall be better and more voluntarily heard, yea and with more
fruit, if I discourse simply. Now the prefixed day being come, all the holy
Saints assemble in the place deputed to hear the sermon of the Doctor, who
appeared clothed with a rude sack cloth, and his head covered with ashes.
Those present more admired this habitt, then the words which were compendious,
breife and simple in these terms: My Brethren, we A brief, but fruitful
exhortation.
have promised great matters: but greaters are promised us. Let us exactly
perform those: and tenderly aspire at these. The pleasure of sin is breife,
but the pain thereof is without end. The labor of virtue is small: but the
glory gotten thereby is infinite. Many are called: but few are chosen, and each
one in the end shall receive according to his deserte. These so pregnant and
patheticall words, did so touch and move the hearts of the audience, that they
were constrained to shed abondance of tears, exceedingly praising this
Preacher, and esteeming him a holy person. The simple ignorant then that was
also to preach, said to himself: Since this learned Preacher has made use in
his sermon of my simplicity, I know what I will do: I have some verses of the
Psalter by heart, them will I set forth the most eloquently and learnedly that
I can, since that the doctor has preached like a simple man. The hour of his
sermon being come, this simple man rose up, and replenished with the holy
Ghost, he propounded his theme with such fervor, so ingeniously and clearly,
yea with such eloquence by the grace which God imparted unto him, that his
auditors filled with admiration, said: Without doubt God does speak in the
simple.

Now S. Francis expounded this figure in this manner: Our Religion, said he, is
a great and general congregation, in which are united from all parts of the
world a great number of men, under one same form and rule of life: The prudent
therein ought to make use of the grace that is in the idiotes, which is to be
employed in worckes of humility, as true disciples of JESUS CHRIST, and so to
benefitt themselves thereby, when they shall see them exercised, with a lively
intention in celestial virtues, and voluntarily to hear the mystical
doctrine of the holy Ghost, yea with a pious and holy envy to resemble them,
and to clear their spirittes of all presumption, that they may be enriched of
God, with the spirit of humility and divine theology. On the contrary, the
simple ought to be very careful to make their profitt more of works, then of
doctrine and to convert the science which they see in the learned, into so much
fruit, seeing the honor and reverence which they exhibitt to the rule and to
simplicity of life, whereas they being so noble and so learned, might live in
the world as Lords, and yet they have made themselves little, because they had
true knowledge of the greatness of God. Then he concluded that in this worthy
concord consisted true peace, in this equality of hearts reposed true joy of
spirit, yea all the beauty and perfection of all their congregation, and that
by this only mean they might become grateful and pleasing to the eternal
Father, who as he had engendered them, and always conserved them in grace,
would also afterward unite them, together in glory.

How he accustomed his Brethren to perfect obedience.
THE XXXVIIII. CHAPTER.
BEside the premises, he also trained them up in the virtue of obedience and
abnegation of their own will, alleging unto them the example of God himself,
who had no sooner made man, but by precept he obliged him to obedience,
forbidding him to eat of the aple of the knowledge of good and evil, Genesis 2.
and 3.
whereof not eating he did not sin, but as soon as he had transgressed his
obedience, he condemned himself and consequently us by the same fact. The
Brother that appropriatelie to priateth to himself any thing of this tree of
knowledge, guided by self-will which by the vow of obedience he has already
forsaken, and becomes proud in regard of his substance already given to God,
living without the yoke of obedience unto his Superior, such a one; I say,
does apparently discover, that he yeldeth to the false persuasions of the
devil, since he is become a violatour and transgressour of his vow, to eat of
the aple of self will, and by this mean he rests Ioh. 12.
condemned and expelled out of the paradise of Religion. For God says in the
gospel: He that would save his soul shall loose it. Now, that man would save
his soul in this world, who desires to follow his own fancy, understanding
by the soul, the will which the said Brother ought in such sort toforsake, as
that though he could perform such acts as might be better and more behoufull
to his soul, then those which his Superior commands him, yet ought he to
sacrifice his will to God, and do only that which his Superior prescribes:
therefore my beloved Brethren, as soon as you shall hear the first word of
obedience, accomplish it without attending an other reply, neither make you
any excuse, though the commandment seem impossible, or that you be not
obliged unto it: for what soever is commanded you, allthough it exceed your
power, yet obedience is of it self so puissant, that it will give you supply
offorce to effect the same.

S. Francis being demanded by his Brethren, what was true obedience: he
answered, that one could hardly find a man in the world so perfect, that he
could entierlie obey his Superior: and to confirm the same he alleged an
example of a dead man. Take (said he) a Comparison of a dead body to one truly
obedient.
dead man without soul and set him where you will, he does not in any sort
contradict you, he resists not, if you change his place he does not murmr,
if you set him down he complayneth not, if you leave him there, he does there
remain: if you set him on a bench, he no more looks up then down, if you
cloth him with purple, he will not become the more proud: such is the true
obedient, that judges not to have changed place, and if any chardge be given
him, the dignity makes him not to forgett humility: but the more he is
honored, the more does he esteem himself unworthy thereof. Therefore, though
this holy Father, as a good Evangelical merchant, had by diverse means
purchased divine richesse, and employed the time present in meriting, yet would
he not be superior, but a subject: he would not command, but obey: that he
might not only leave unto his Brethren the quality of a good Superior, but of
a good and obedient subject also, that may live a life of continual
martyrdom, when the Prelates are mere libertines. Therefore, when his Order
began to multiply, he refused to be General thereof, and did incontinently
submit himself to a Guardian whom he obeyed in all things, as in place proper
we shall recount.

Obedic^ce is fruit full.
He affirmed the fruit of Obedience to be so great, that they who submitt
themselves thereto, do not pass any moment without much merit. And therefore
when he travailed, he accustomed to promise obedience unto his companion which
he performed, and hereupon sometimes would say: Of all the graces that the
divine goodness has imparted unto me, this is one of the principal, that I
would as willingly obey a Nouice of one hours antiquity, if he were appointed
unto me for Guardian, Great submisio^ of the hohy Father.
as to an old man of sufficient judgment and prudence: and I would as well
content me with what soever he should enjoin me, as if I were the meanest of
all other: For the Brother being subject as he is, ought not to consider his
Superior as man: but as him for whose love he is subject unto him: besides,
the less worthy of honor the Superior is, the more pleasing is the humility
of the obeyer unto God. Yet did he not forbear as Prelate, to advertise the
Superiors of his Order, that they should rarely charge upon obedience,
because one shouid not incontinently proceed with such thundering rigor, which
ought always to be the last, when no other mean can avail: for one ought not
upon light acccasion to lay the hand one the sword. Then addressing himself to
his Brethren, he would say: He that will not obey with diligence, may be
nombred among them that fear not God nor respect men. Now the one and the
other of these opinions are true and worthy What a rash Superious is.
to be marked, because in a rash man, auctority to command is no other thing
then a sword in the hand of one that is furious, and there is no thing more
desperate and incurable then a Brother without obedience: in respect whereof the
holy Father detested pride as the original of all kind of evils, and
disobedience as the eldest daughter thereof. Not with standing he did not reject
the humble penance of the disobient Brother, when he performed the same, as by
the ensuying chapter shall appear.

Ofcertaine acts of disobedience which the S. chasticed.
THE XL. CHAPTER.
THere was presented unto S. Francis, a Brother that had disobeyed his
Superior, to be corrected according to his desartt: but the benign holy
Father, perceiving by evident signs that the said Brother was already
penitent, and with great humility acknoledged his fault, he pardonned him:
yet to the end his facility of pardonning should not occasion others to
offend, he caused his capuce to be taken off, and cast into the fire, that it
might appear to all, with what rigor disobedience ought to be chasticed:
where having remained a certain time entier, he caused it to be restored to
the brother that very humbly demanded it, and the said capuce was seen, not
without a general admiration, without any appearance of burning. It pleased
almighty God in one act to show two things pleasing to his divine Majesty,
the virtue of the holy Father, and the meritt of true penitence.

It happened an other time, that the S. Having commanded a brother to have care
of a leaper, and to serve him with diligence and affection, the brother would
not attempt the matter: And being afterward demanded by the holy Father if he
had employed himself therein, and he understanding the contrary: I thought,
said he unto him, I had under my government men dead to the world: but they are
yet living: Go therefore you others, said he, to the Brethren, there present,
Rigourus chasticement of a disobedient.
take this disobedient and bury him alive. The Brethren attempted the
performance of their duty, some of them dug the grave, and others others
brought thither the disobedient, who entered into it with a great indignation of
spirit and besides his senses; as one that by his disobedience, was already in
the devils possession. He also commanded the Brethren to cover him instantly
with earth: but being scarce half covered, the devil, by the merittes of the
S. Having left him, he began bitterly to weep, saying: The devil that had
hardened my hard, has now altogether left me: but proceed you bouldly in
covering me, for I have well deserved this death and a more greiuous. The
Brethren hearing him, began to weep with him, and some of them advertised the
S. of his conversion, who commanded that he should be taken up and brought
before him, where being, he said unto him: Choose what house you will, wherein
you may be comforted, and there shall you dwell upon obedience: which the
Brother hearing, with bitter tears he answered: not so my most gracious
Father if you please, but the greatest consolation you can give me, is that I
accomplish my first penance: the holy Father being moved with these words,
gave him his benediction.

Thus has he shown us by these examples that the end of the chasticement of
Religion, ought to be penitence and amendment of the sinner, on whom, if he
acknowledge himself, chasticement ought not to Luc. 15.
be inflicted, but fatherly consolation rather, as JESUS CHRIST has taught us
in his worthy parabole of the prodigal child, who being repentant of his
offenses, demanded pardon of his father, and the father very tenderly
embraced him, and with great joy conducted him into his house.

How S. Francis sent Brother Ruffinus to preach without the caepuce in virtue
of obedience, and of the penance which thersore he inflicted on himself.
THE XLI. CHAPTER.
BY this that follows there appears a merueillous order for government: to
wit, that the Superior ought not to command unto his subjects the thing that
himself would not do. S. Francis one day called unto him Brother Ruffinus,
whom he commanded to go preach in the city of Assisium, and to deliver unto
the people only what God should inspire unto him: but Brother Ruffinus making
his excuse, answered: Pardon me if you please, good Father, you know I am not
apt to preach, because I have not any grace in my speech as being too simple
and an idiot. Which he spoke with much humility. And though in deed he had bin
a discreet knight in the world, he was, nevertheless so changed in himself by
means of the grace of contemplation which he had received of God; that he was
many times out of himself, and spoke very seldom, and yet that little was
with such difficulty, that he seemed to speak with exceedinge pain: but the
S. reprehending him for not having instantly obeyed, commanded him further
upon obedience, and gave him for penance, to go without his capuce.

The obedient Brother Ruffinus then, without farther contradiction, having put
off his capuce, and falling one the ground demanded his benediction, which
having received, he went to Assisium, and first entered into a church, there to
make his prayer: which done, he ascended the pulpitt, and began to preach. The
people then assembled, who admiring to see him without capuce, and amazed at
such a novelty, said one to an other: these poor Freers do such austere
penance, that there withal they loose their wits. So whiles this good Brother
preached, S. Francis considering the prompt obedience of Brother Ruffinus, and
the rigor of his commandment, he began to check himself, thus reasoning the
matter: What will have thou gotten, thou son of Peter Bernardone, thou of so
mean estate, to command Brother Ruffinus, who is one of the principal
gentlemen of Assisium, to go preach without his capuce? I will make thee to be
an example of what thou have commanded to an other: and speaking thus to
himself, he hastiely took the capuce from his own head, and taking Brother
Leo for companion, he went to Assisium. Being come into the church where
Brother Ruffinus preached, the people that saw him without capuce, esteemed him
to be likewise foolish, believing that the Br. Ruffinus and he were become
sottish, by means of their over sharp penance: many people therefore flocking
thither, Brother Ruffinus in the best manner he could delivered this speech.

My beloved Brethren, shun the world, leave sin, return to the
Substantial sermon of B. Ruffinus in notable speeches.
socure way, if you desire to avoid hell, observe the divine precepts, love
God and your neighbor and do penance, because the great king^ dome of heaven
approaches, at least if you will possess it. But as soon as he perceived S.
Francis he descended from the pulpitt, to come unto him: and the S.
incontinently ascended. The Church was then entierlie full of wordlie people:
for some came thither to see the extremity of that life, others moved with
compassion and devotion, and others to deride them reputing them senceles: but
the holy Ghost that was in S. Francis, caused him to utter such worthy and
merueillous matters, of the contempt of the world, of holy and necessary
penance, and of voluntary poverty, of the desire of the kingdom of heaven, of
obedience, of the nuditie, ignominies, and passion of our Lord JESUS CHRIST,
and other like things, which he declared in such manner, and with such
fervor, that they who formerlie derided the novelty of his habitt, and
reputed these Brethren to be out of their right senses, did now bitterly weep,
and such was that weeping, and so violent for the compassion which they had of
the death of JESUS CHRIST crucified, and the fear which they conceived of
hell, that they began to cry for mercy, as if it had bin an other good friday
(on which day the Passion is preached so patheticallie in Italy, that all the
world cries mercy, as one would do at the sacking of a town.) Wherefore the
people being so edified and contrite, Brother Leo, who had brought with him
both the capuces, gave to each one his own: and they afterward returned to
their Monastery, praising God for his great mercy, since by the virtue of
holy obedience, they had obtained victory over themselves, and manifested how
much they contemned the world. They had much to do to be ridd of the people,
that before reputed them for fools: and now he that could touch or kiss their
habittes esteemed himself happy. It appeared by the end of this worck, that
the beginning proceeded of God, though it were wrought by an excessive mean as
the work of the Prophettes, not so much to be imitated, as for a sign of
approbation of holy obedience, of mortification of self will, and contempt of
the world: and that we might know what glorious end God gives to the worckes
of holy obedience, either secrett or manifest, as it pleases him.

Of the love which S. Francis boar to poverty.
THE XLII. CHAPTER.
AMong many gifts and singular favors which the glorious S. received at the
bountiful hand of God, one of the principal was that of poverty, whereby he
became a new man in the world, terrible to the devil, and an example to all
mortal people, by the love and possession whereof, he merited by divine and
special privilege to have principallitie in the holy Church. The said S. had
this particular affection to holy poverty, by consideration how much it was
esteemed of the Son of God, whiles he conuersed here below, and how it was
then banished and expelled out of all the world. He therefore desiring with
himself to make his residence where holy poverty was retired, renounced the
world, and what soever he had proper, he gave to the poor: and having for the
love of God forsaken his Father, his mother, his kindred and freindes, he
remained a perfect pilgrim on earth, to meritt to lodge in himself holy
poverty so generally abhorred. There was never auaricious of the world so
greedy of money and so careful to keep his treasure, as Saint Francis was to
keep his poverty, which he always had in his eyes, and in his mouth, as a
precious Mat. 13.
stone and Evangelical pearl: he dwelt with poverty, he eat with it, he
clothed himself with it, he dreamed of it, breefly he had it always
imprinted in his heart, using only for this life a short coat, straight, and
all peiced, a cord and linen breeches: contenting himself nevertheless in this
his rich poverty, he therein perseuered even to the end, desiring in the same
to exceed every one, as he had learned of it, to esteem himself the least of
all. He often represented unto himself the poverty of our Lord JESUS CHRIST,
and of his most sacred mother, and practicallie taught it unto his disciples
with great abondance of tears, assuring them that poverty was the Queen of
virtues, in regard that it appeared of such excellent beauty in the king of
heaven, and in the Queen his mother. Poverty, said he, is a principal way
unto salvation, as being mother and nourse of humilitye, and the root of all
perfection, whose fruit is of exceeding profitt and furtherance to every one,
albeit this verity be very secrett and unknown to the men of the world, it is
without doubt the hidden treasure, in the Evangelical field, the Mat. 13.
which to buy, a man ought to sell all that he has: and he that cannot give
his goods to the poor, ought at least to have a will to contemn richesse,
and to use violence unto his proper will and presumption: for he does not
perfectly renounce the world, that keeps his purse full of his proper
judgment and will.

Thus discoursing of holy poverty, he often reiterated the words of Luc. 9.
God: The foxes have holes, and the fowls of the air nestes: but the Son of
man has not where to repose his head. Then he exhorted his disciples, that as
poor people they should build but poor cottages for their residence, where
they should remain, not as in their own The laws of Pilgrims imitated by
the Freer Minors. Poverty the foundation of the Order of S. Francis. Mat. 19.
houses, but as pilgrims, and strangers that aim at other places. The law
of Pilgrims, said he, and their reasonnable desire, is to retire into the
houses of others during their voyage, conceating never to see the hour to
arrive in their country, by reason of the great desire they have to be there,
and to pass peaceably without meddling in matters appertaynning to others. He
called poverty the foundation of his Order, whereupon all his edifice was
grounded. Therefore he affirmed unto the^ that he knew by revelation, that the
true entry of his Religion was this word of JESUS CHRIST: If thou will be
perfect, go, sell the things that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou
shall have treasure in heaven: and come, follow me: In respect whereof he
admitted noneinto his Order, if within the term of the year of probation
they did not forsake what soever they possessed in the world. This he caused to
be very exactly observed as well in regard of the said words of JESUS CHRIST:
as also that none should search in the His exactnes for renouncing of the world.
treasuries of Religion for any thing that he had putt there. And if any one
demanded the habitt of Religion not having made the said renunciation, he
would say unto him: Get thee hence: for thou art not yet gone forth of thy
house, thou have not forsaken that which appertains unto thee, nor abandonned
the feeble foundation, grounded on the sand of affection unto worldly goods,
and yet demaundest of me the habitt, first accomplish what thou ought, and
then demand it. By the said foundation he understood holy poverty, whom he
sometime accustomed to call mother, at other times espouse, and sometime
Mistress.

Goeing one day with some of his Brethren toward Sienna, being very near
the city, he met three women, so like in gesture, beauty and habitte that the
one could not be discerned from the other, and all three with one voice saluted
him saying: Holy Poverty is welcome: which the S. hearing, exceedingly
rejoiced: as one that affected nothing more then to be called poverty of each
one, as he was then of the said women, who incontinently disappeared: which
being seen and considered by the other Brethren his companions, filled with
admiration at such and so unwonted accident, they esteemed the same not to
want some great mystery: and it doubtless was easy to conjecture, that the said
three women (or perhaps Angels) did signify the beauty and Evangelical
perfection of the three principal vows, Poverty, Obedience, and Chastity,
which JESUS CHRIST counseled to the Brethren, all which did appear to be
equal in the S. in all eminence and perfection.

That he did extremely abhor money.
THE XLIII. CHAPTER.
THough he were directly opposite to what soever repugned poverty, he most
especially hated money, and by examples and words did often reiterat unto his
brethren that they should shun it as the devil. It chanced that a seculer
man having done his devotions in the Church of our lady of Angels where the
brethren dwelt, left a piece of money in sign of almose, near a little Cross;
which a Brother took and hid in a hoale of the said Church to give to Penna^ce
which S. Francis enjoined a Religious for having touched money.
the poor. But in the mean while S. Francis had intelligence thereof, and the
said Brother considered the matter and went and fell at the feet of the S. of
whom he demanded pardon, and offered himself to penance. The holy Father
having well checked him for presuming to touch money, commanded him to take the
piece of money where it was, in his mouth and to cast it into the house of
office: which the Brother having joyfully and instantly performed, his
companions did all admire, and thence forward more contemned money.

The S. passing an other time by Bary in Apulia, saw a great purse in the
mids of the way which seemed to be full of money: the Brother An illusion of
the devil to a Freer Minor to teach him not to touch money.
that accompanied him did exceedingly importune him to take up the purse being
thereto induced by a pious zeal to distribute the money which he believed to be
therein, unto the poor. But the holy Father refusing, affirmed, that it was an
illusion of the devil, and that he had no less desire to releive the poor,
then the Brother: and further that it was not well done to take an others
goods and to give it to the poor: and so went on his way. But his companion
being yet tempted of the devil, and persisting to importune him under pretense
of an indiscreet zeal to releive the poor: he was at length enforced to
permit him to take up the said purse, so to let him understand the illusion:
being therefore returned in the company of a young man whom they met in the
way, the holy Father made his prayer, and then bid his companion A viper
comes out of a pursethat a Friar Minor would take up to give in almose.
to take up the purse: who being licenced, began to tremble with fear* already
feeling the deceit of the devil. Yet stooping to take up the purse, now
rather of obedience then of any will he had, being already repentant, and
strecthing out his hand to take hold thereof, he saw go out of it a great
viper, and in the same instant all vanished, and so the deceit of the devil
was discovered. The said Brother therefore acknowledging his vain curiosity
and confessing his fault to S. Francis, he said unto him: Behold Brother, money
to a Religious man is no other thing, but the devil and venomous serpents.

That he desired that poverty should shine in all his, and his Brethrens
actions.
THE XLIV. CHAPTER.
THe true poor of JESUS CHRIST sought and desired that holy poverty should
appear in all his actions: and if sometimes he perceived any one that
exteriourly in his habitt seemed poorer them himself, he desired to exceed
him, and so practiced herein with such desire to appear miserable among the
poor, that for fear to be surmounted in poverty, he firmly contended
withal the world. Meeting a poor man one day on the way almost all naked, he
said with a lamenting voice unto his companion: The poverty of this miserable
man procures us great shame: for we have made choice of poverty to be our
great richesse: and I see it appear greater in this man, and this shame is to
us more insupportable, in that it is now said over all the world, that Brother
Francis and his companions have chosen holy poverty for companion, Lady,
Mistress, and their delights as well spiritual as corporal, and that they
have so promised to God and men. By these words the holy Father desired that
the Brethren should make it their esteem to be poor, and should be ashamed to
do or wear any thing wherein should not appear the inco^moditie thereof: so
that he would not have the beans or pease watered over night for the next
morning, desiring Matt. 6.
to observe the saying of JESUS CHRIST in the Gospel: Be not careful for the
morrow: and he would not that provision should be made of their food but from
day to day: which was long time inuiolably observed in many places of the
Religion.

A notable speech to his Brethren.
The true poor of JESUS CHRIST said that how much his Brethren should shun
poverty, so much would the world shun them, and that they should seek
almose and not find it: but if they embraced holy poverty, as their dear
mother, the world would sustain and nourish the^, and acknowledge them as sent
for the salvation thereof: for the accord between it and the Freer Minors, is
that they shall give it good example, and that it shall allow them necessary
releife: and if they give not Co^tracts passed between the world and the Friar
Minors.
it good example, performing that whereto they are obliged, the world has just
reason to deprive them of their ordinary almose. The Bishop of Assisium said
one day to S. Francis, that this his manner of life seemed to him very austere
and difficult, considering that he had nothing assured for his maintenance: the
holy Father answered him: My Lord, if we had any substance, it were necessary
we had also weapons to defend it, for of it would proceed difficulties,
debates, matters of self love, and many other impedimentes against obtaining
the love of God, and particulerlie of our neighbor. Therefore we hold it most
secure not to seek the possession of whatsoever thing in the world: and we
hope that in respect thereof, our Lord will permit us to be loved and cherished
of every one.

Of the exercise of poverty, which is to demand almose: and what S. Francis
and his disciples did touching this point.
THE XLV. CHAPTER.
WHen the holy Father began to have increase of Brethren, considering that God
had given him so holy a company and so sweet a conversation, he was exceedingly
comforted, and so loved and honored his children of JESUS CHRIST, that their
necessary food failing, he sent not them to the doors to seek almose, but went
himself, which he did as well that they should not be troubled at any thing
that might happen, or fearing they might be ashamed to beg, because it was
then an unusual thing, as also that the world should not give them occasion
to repent and return back, against their holy vocation. He continued this
course till the holy wings of the love of God and so holy poverty were grown
out, wherewith they were able to fly abroad and travail over the world, to
become glorious in the labors of poverty, the better to sow the seed of the
word of God among the people. And although it were very laboursome unto him so
much to beg, yet was it more painful unto him by S. Francis him self begged
at the beginning of his Order.
reason of his complexion, because being of a delicate nature, his abstinence
and austerity was an impediment unto him of supporting this burden. Therefore
the number of his Brethren being exceedingly multiplied, he began to seet one
foot this virtuous exercise of begging. And albeit they were at first ashamed,
and that it seemed very hard and difficult unto them: yet assisted by
remembrance of the holy obedience which they had vowed, they found both this
and every other thing very easy and pleasant. And then seeing the holy Father
so to pain himself for them, they prayed him to leave that labor unto them.
Whereto he answered: My beloved Brethren you should not esteem it a
difficulty to go seek almose from door to door for the love of God, but to
account it a great favor of his. For who is he that would not more then
willingly go to demand almose, if he saw his Prince and Lord to go before
him, saying with himself: What shall the disciple be more worthy then the
master, and the servant then the Lord? should it not be rather pride then
shame? would not such one deserve rather punishment then compassion? Remember
that our Lord JESUS CHRIST Praise of begging.
that celestial king, of whose mites or crummes (to wit of the bread of
grace) the Angels of heaven and the inhabitants of the earth are maintained:
He, I say, that became poor for our benefitt and example, Exhortation of S.
Fr. to his disciples sending the^ to beg. Psalm. 39.
asked almose, and lived by it in this world. We can never walk so strict a
way of poverty, if we have not first our Lord before our eyes as a beggar
whiles he lived in this world, and in like sort all his disciples. Therefore he
said by his Prophett David: I am a beggar and poor, God has bin careful of
me. Go on then securely after so worthy a Captain and guide, to take
possession of that inheritance which JESUS CHRIST has pourchaced us, and has
left to them that according to his example leave the world, and seek to live
in poverty, only for his love: glory of this inheritance and preferment, in
regard that he has given it only to his beloved. Know that many of the most
noble and best learned men of the world shall adhere to our company, who shall
repute it a great favor in this manner to go ask an almose. Go then seek
for almose with the benediction of God, and have a faith and assurance far That
the Freers richly pay their benefactours.
greater then they who carry with them a quantity of silver to pay it at the
will of their master, for you pay your benefactours more liberally then any
other, though it seem not so, giving them for your almose, the love of God,
when you say: Give us an almose for the love of God. But tell me, I pray you,
what thing may there be had in heaven or earth, that can equalize the price of
the love of God? The Brethren being by their gracious Father thus induced, went
with allacrity to demand almose into the towns and other places: and
being*retourned to their Covent, they incontinently delivered it to the Father
Guardian, who afterward distributed it in common. The said holy Father being one
time in the Church of our lady of Angels, a Brother that was very spiritual
returned from beging from Assisium, with a loud voice thancking God: S.
Francis perceauing him, was stricken with an amourous affection toward him,
and went himself unto him, and kissed his shoulder whereon he carried the
wallett, which he took off, and laid on his own shoulder to carry to the
Covent, where he said to the other Brethren: I will that my fellow How he
desired they should go S. Fr. expelled a Religious out of the Order because he
refused to beg.
Brethren do in like sort seek almose, and praise God at their return.

It happened one day that a Nouice was commanded to go to beg, but he
refused to go, alleging that he should be ashamed. The holy Father
understanding it, expelled him out of the Order with these words: What?
Brother fly, will thou live of the labor of the other Brethren, and rest idle
in the vineyard of God, as the drone, who without travail seeks to eat the
labor of the bees? The will of S. Francis was, that the Brethren should often
go a begging according to their necessity, that they might meritt; and that
being accustomed thereto, they should not be ashamed when occasion urged them to
go. And so the more noble and the more honored a Brother had bin in the
world, the more joyful and content was he and the better edified, as well by
this humility as by other services of obedience which he performed. Sometimes
S. Francis encouraging his Brethren, would use Why the Freer Minors are in the
world. Mat. 25.
these like words unto them: My Brethren, we have bin given unto the world in
this latter, age that the elect might accomplish in us the worckes of charity,
to the end they might meritt to be recompensed at the last day of judgment,
with these sweet words of our God: I was an hungered, and you gave me to eat: I
was thirsty, and you gave me to drink, and as long as you did it to one of
these my least Brethren, you did it to me. Thereupon the S. affirmed that to
beg under the title of Freer Minor, was a thing of exceeding consolation and
recompense in the retribution of the just; which forenamed title the master of
the Evangelical truth, particulerly specified with his divine mouth, when he
said by his Prophett: Man has eaten the bread of Psalm. 77.
Angels: for this bread which is demanded for the love of God, said the S. is
properly called the bread of Angels, since his divine Majesty On solemn
feasts S. Francis lived only with what he begged: Luc. 24.
by his Angels inspireth men to give it. At principal feasts, himself
having leisure would undertake to beg, to make the feast more solemn in
poverty. Being one time of Easter in a Covent, so far from habitation that
there was no mean for him to beg, calling to mind that our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, on the like day appeared in form of a Pilgrim to his disciples that
went to Emaus, he demanded almose in the refectorie of his own Brethren, as a
poor stranger, and lived therewith admonishing his Brethren, that passing
through the desert of this world as Pilgrims and strangers, and as true
Hebrews that have no assured residence here, they should always in humility
of spirit celebrate the Pasch of God, which is his passadge from this world to
his eternal Father in the glory of heaven.

Being invited by certain great noble men, to eat with them, be ^at nothing
there but the almose which he had begged at the doors.
THE XLVI. CHAPTER.
BY reason that he demanded not almose out of a covetousness, but only by a
liberty of spirit and a zeal of holy poverty, for the love of JESUS CHRIST,
therefore did he far more willingly eat of that which he begged and was given
him at doors, then of what was presented him at table in the banquettes of
Princes. When therefore he was invited by them, before he went thither, he first
begged morcels of bread at the doors, which he eat at their tables. Which he
did, partly for love he bare to holy poverty, and partly also to give example
Being invited to eat with a Cardinal he brought what he had begged and why.
to his Brethren. Being one day invited by the Cardinal of Hostia, who
exceedingly loved him, he first according to his custom begged pieces of
bread, and having got what was necessary, he went to the table of the said
Cardinal, where he sodenlie emptyed out all the said pieces of bread, and laid
before him, next unto whom was the place, of the said Cardinal, who esteemed
himself as it were braued thereby: yet for the present would say nothing
thereof. But the holy Father, thincking on what he had to do, began to divide
his bread into many little morcels, which he distributed among the noble men
that were at the table, who received it very devoutly, some of them presently
eating it, others kept it for reverence. Which the Cardinal perceauing with
much contentment, was somewhat appeased. Notwithstanding after the refection
being retired into a chamber with S. Francis, embracing him and clipping him
with his arms, he gestingly said: O simple brother my friend, why have thou
given me so great an affront this day, as coming to eat at my table, which
is thine and theirs who appertain unto thee, thou would first beg that
thou were to eat? The holy Father answered him: nay I have rather done you
this day great honor, since that at your table has bin honored a greater
Lord then your self, and one that is your master: besides the subject doing
that which his Lord commands him, he honors his master. For God had so
much loved this royal poverty, that he has vouch-safed to accept her for his
espouse, to enrich us her inheritours together with her, and by means of
poverty of spirit which we shall have here, to give us glory afterward in
heaven.

NOW I neither can nor will omit to gain such a succession, for any appearance
of false richesse that may be presented: considering with all that they are of
small continuance: and so much more in regard that it is necessary for me to
make my self a form and example unto my other Brethren: and besides for that
I well know that in this Religion, there are and shall be many Brethren that
shall be minors in name and effect for the love of God and by the light of the
holy Ghost that teaches them, with all humility to serve others in their
necessity. I know likewise very well, would to God it were not so, that there
are and yet shall be more, such as shall have no will to humble themselves to
ask almose and to do other servile offices, be it either thorough shame or by
corrupted manners. It is therefore necessary for me to instruct them their duty
by worckes, to the end that both in this world and the other they be
inexcusable before God: and that they may not say, they found none that gave
them example, and so they remain dischardged. Being therefore at this present
with you, who are an Apostolical Prince, and our Protector, or at other
times with some other great persons, that entertain me not only with a
pleasing countenance, for the love of JESUS CHRIST; but even do sometimes
constrain me to remain with you: I should not therefore be ashamed to ask
almose, but I rather am joyful to receive it and to follow my God: esteeming
it for his love to be an heroical act and of dignitye: for himself being
almighty, would for us become and make himself as nothing. Phil. 2.
Now I would have all my Brethren present and to come to know, that I am better
pleased to be at their table, and to see their poverty, then to be at these
your bountiful tables that are superfluous in all things: because the bread
received of almose, is bread offered and entierly sacrificed for the love of
God, since the Brother that demands it, says first, God be praised, and then
asks it, in the name and for the love of God. This said, S. Francis was
silent, and the Cardinal was exceedingly edified by the seruour of his words,
which did spiritualy comfort him.

Of the second exercise of poverty, which consists in giving: and how S.
Francis denied nothing to the poor.
THE XLVII. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father had besides, a most exceeding natural clemency and
liberality, which redoubled the gifts he had of holy poverty, and the
compassion that God had imparted unto him, which was the cause why he did not
only glory in demanding, but much more in denying nothing for the love of God.
He declared by effect that it is a more happy thing, to give for the love of
God, then to ask of them that are truly poor of spirit, who possess
nothing Acto. 10.
in proper, but as from JESUS CHRIST and their neighbor: And because the
professors of Evangelical poverty begin by this action of giving all they
have to the poor of JESUS CHRIST, and thereby obtain the estate and title of
poor of spirit, they exercise, persevere and consummate themselves therein,
denying nothing that is in their power, yea giving themselves, for the service
of their neighbor, because they who are such, are very ready and content to
give, having always in memory the words of JESUS CHRIST, Luc. 6.
which he left as a law unto his disciples, to wit: Give, and it shalb^ given
you: which words are so negligently observed of Christians, that they may be
justly called in humane (be they of what estate and condition they please) since
they acknoledge no necessity in others, because they feel it not in
themselves. And therefore the poor of spirit, whosoever they be do observe
this law: for if they acknoledge themselves in necessity and desire to be
assisted, they must assist every one toward his salutaion. The said holy
Father then instituting the true religion of poverty, endeavored to teach
that the true nature of holy poverty, did not so much consist in asking, as in
giving any thing that one has or possesses, if it be demanded in the name of
God: and this to the end that avarice or cruelty enter not into the house of
holy poverty and of Christian piety. He also taught them in all poor to
consider JESUS CHRIST: and therefore, meeting any poor on the way, were he
never so miserable, he did not only give him (as to the person of JESUS
CHRIST) what he had, though it were necessary to the entertainment of his own
life: but he even esteemed it of right to be rendered as appertaining to the
poor party: whereof I will deduce and relate some few examples, of a great
multitude which might be committed to writing of this holy Father.

In a very extreme cold of the winter, a brother of one of the Religious lent
him a piece of cloth to use for a cloak: but meeting a S. Franc. gave his
cloak and his companions also in the winter to a poor woman to cloth her.
poor old woman, that asked him an almose, he presently putt off the said
cloak from his shoulders, and, albeit it were not his own, gave it unto her
saying: Hold, sister, make thee a coat of this cloth, in regard that thou have
need thereof. She went very contentedlie and joyful to her house, and having
cut out a coat of that cloth, she wanted yet a little piece to finish the
same: in which case not knowing what to do, she at length considered the
liberality of the said S. whom she sought out showing unto him the coat cut
out and what she wanted. The holy Father seeing the necessity of this poor
old woman, tourning to his companion, Brother, said he, behold the necessity of
this poor woman: let us for the love of God endure the cold, give her thy
cloak, to supply her want of cloth, which the Brother incontinently
performed: so that by clothing her alone, they both remained in so cold a
season without cloak.

The S. being an other time in the Covent of Cortona, he had a new cloak,
which the Brethren had made him: but seeing a poor man Which he performed
diverse times.
that lamented his deceased wife and desolate family; he endeavored to comfort
him: but the afflicted answered, that the occasions of his tears were great
and diverse; but that which most afflicted him was, the great chardge of his
distressed family that remained desolate and forlorn, by the death of his
wife. The S. moved with compassion, gave him his cloak with these words: I
give thee this for the love of God: yet with this condition, that if it be
required of thee, thou deliver it not except thou be paid for it. Now the
Brethren that had very lately before given him this cloak, went whence he
came, and would have taken the cloak from the poor man: but he being
emboldened upon the words of the S. would not restore it, nor could they ever
recover it by other means, but by praying one to redeem it.

Retourning from Sienna, he found a poor man by the way and tourning to his
companion he said, it is necessary that I give my cloak to this poor man,
because it is his: for it is lent me of God, with chardge to restore it to the
first that I met poorer then my self; and this man is much poorer, wherefore
if I do otherwise I shall be a thief: and therewith he gave it unto him: not
withstanding the considerations that his companion alleged, whereby he
endeavored to persuade him, that he was bound to satisfy his own necessities
before an others.

Coming near to Perusia, he met a poor man whom he had formerlie known in
the world, whom having saluted and asked how he fared, the poor man with
grief, answered, Likewise for the hire which a master detained from his
servant that cursed him.
ill: then began to curse his master, that withheld his hire, affirming it to
be the cause of his despair. The saint exhorting him to pardon it, least he
should with all loose his soul, he replied that whiles his dew was retained,
he could not pardon him: The holy Father then putt of his cloak and gave it
him saying: Hold brotther, and friend, I give thee my cloak, for the hire
which they master owes thee, and I require only of thee that thou pardon him
for the love of God, and by this worthy act he so mollified the hardness of this
servants heart, that he pardoned his master.

The Physician of Rieta, that medecined his eyes, one day as he was dressing
him, recounted unto him, that he in like sort dressed and medecined a poor
woman of the same disease, to whom, besides the service he did unto her, he
was constrained, out of compassion he conceived of her misery to give her
releife. Which the S. understanding, and moved with pity toward this woman,
not so much for her disease, as for her poverty, he instantly called the
Guardian, to whom he said: Brother we must restore that which we have
appertayning to an other: The Guardian admiring, answered: Father what have we
belonging to others? S. Francis replied, this cloak whom we hold as borrowed
of a poor woman, to whom it is now requisite to restore the same. Whereto the
Guardian answered: Do as you please. The S. then called a very Religious
seculer man, and said: Take this cloak, and twelve loaves that shall be given
thee, and go to such a poor sick woman, and tell her that the poor man to
whom she Lent the same sends it again unto her with thanckes, and leave it
all with her, and then return. This good man did as the holy Father had
enjoined him, but the poor woman thincking that he had iested with her,
answered him: Friend I lent not this cloak to any man: so that I understand
not what you mean: but the man left the cloak and the bread, without other
reply then, it is yours, make use thereof: which the poor woman with thanckes
to God, accepted.

Of other like charities performed by the Saint for the love of God.
THE XLVIII. CHAPTER.
GOeing one day to preach, he met two of his Religious, that He gave his habit
that was demanded him for the love of God.
were French, with whom he a while discoursed. These Fathers being
exceedingly conforted both by his life, and conference, according to what they
had heard of him, did out of devotion demand his own habitt which he did
wear, and that, for the love of God: whose name he hearing, did instantly
discloath himself, and gave it unto them, putting on an other which one of
them did at that present putt off: which he performed in observance of his
vow, which was incontinently to give what soever should be demanded him for
the love of God, for reverence to this Lord, whose will was to be termed, Love:
and therefore he was much offended and sharply reprehended the Religious when
upon any light occasion, and without Note that the love of God ought never to
be uttered with out reverence.
edification of their neighbor, they named the love of God, which should not
be named but to some good purpose, and that with great reverence. The S.
seldom or never wear a new habitt: for when he had such one made, he would
incontinently change it with some other Religious for a torn one, and
sometimes he would take a little part of some ragged and worn habitt, and as
much of an other, and so patching it together, you may imagine what manner of
habitt it could be. But he no farther regarded then to cover his stomach that
was infirm.

There came a poor man one day where he was, that asked a piece of cloth of a
Religious for the love of God, to patch his garment. Which the S.
understanding, he caused every corner of the house to be searched, and being
answered that none could be found, he retired into a corner, not to be seen,
and ripped of that which covered his stomach, and gave it the poor man. But
not doing it so dexterously, but that he was perceived by the Religious, they
caused him to restore it. But the holy Father would neither take it not permit
the poor man to depart, till there was an other piece of cloth given him.

Being in the Covent of our lady of Angels, a poor woman that had two children
in his Order, came to demand an almose, and he called Brother Catanius, to
whom he said have we nothing to give to this our poor mother? whereto the
said brother Peter answered: That there was nothing fit for her, if not a new
testament, wherein they read the lessons at matines which might be given her if
he thought good, considering that she asked almose and was in extreme
necessity. S. Franc. gave the new testament which they used at Matines (having
nothing else) to a poor woman.
The holy Father pawsed not long thereon, but suddenly said: I pray you give it
her, for she may sell it, and reliue her self in this her misery: and I verily
believe that this charity will be more pleasing to God then our lessons: and so
it was delivered her. Few books were then printed, in respect whereof they were
dear. I have alleged this example to show that this holy Father spared
nothing from the poor that asked it for the love of God. Yea to perform this
office of piety, if he chanced to meet any poor people laden on the way, he
would disburden them, and for a while carry their burden, that in the mean
time they might take breath. He would have all his Religious to honor the
poor, as much as him self as representing the person of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

How much the said S. would have the poor to be honored.
THE XLIX. CHAPTER.
How he punished a rash judgment
GOeing to preach thorough Italy, he met on the way a poor sick creature,
afflicted with many infirmities, of whom he conceived a strong compassion.
Then spoke of him to his companion, who answered, that it was very true that
he seemed poor, exteriourly but perhaps was interiourly more puffed up with
desires then any of that country. The holy Father very bitterly reprehended him
for this rash judgment, and then said: If my company be grateful unto thee,
thou shall perform the pennaunce that I shall now enjoin thee. The Religious
acknowledging his fault and submitting himself to do his penance, S. Francis
said unto him: Strip thy self naked and ask him pardon, and beseech him to
pray to God for thee, which was done.

He caused an other Religious to do the like, for having only given a rigorous
answer to a poor man that asked an almose. He manifested to his Brethren how
they ought to behave themselves toward the poor in these terms: When you
shall see a poor creature, consider that it is a mirour which our Redeemer
JESUS CHRIST, proposes unto you of his poverty, and of his blessed virgin
mother, and What profit may be drawn out of the sight of the poor and
diseased.
that he presents it to your sight: When you shall see a sick person, know
that it is a pattern of the infirmity which he took on him for our sakes: and
if the pride and irreuerence of the rich displease God, how much more will
displease him the rigorous words of Freer Minors to such as make profession of
poverty? If in this our profession, God permit that we be honored of great
persons, how intolerable will our pride appear, if proudly puffed up, we
contemn such as are as poor as our selves? Let us therefore beware that by
just permission of God it happen not to our confusion, that the rich make less
esteem of us, yea that they suffer us to die for want of releife.

Of the spirit of fervor of S. Francis in his preachinges.
THE L. CHAPTER.
1. Tim. 4.
BEcause the Apostle says, that piety is profitable and behoufull in every
thing; this virtue was so united to the heart of the holy Father, and so
engraven in his bowels, that it seemed to subject him to all creatures: but
especially to the souls redeemed by the precious blood of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST: for if the saw them sick or dead in sin, he had such a tender
feeling of heart and affection with them, as if he had naturally begotten them.
And in that respect he excceedingly honored Preachers, because they always
raised some dead Brother unto our Redeemer, and with a pious care endeavored
to revoke the erring, and to confirm the imperfect in God. S. Francis then
preached being vested with this zeal and charity toward his neighbor, not
with selected words or by humane art, but by the virtue and doctrine of the
holy Ghost, did manifest unto them the kingdom of God: his preaching was
vehement as a burning fire, that peneteated the center of the heart, and putt
souls into a continual admiration, and as it were beside themselves. Prayer
alone was all his books, distrusting all his knowledged and industry, and
entierly relying on the divine virtue. He obtained of God this his holy grace
which he so instantly required for assistance of his neighbor, in such sort
that his words did penetrate not only the ears, but even the hearts of
sinners.

It only once happened that he studied his sermon, and the reason was because
he was to preach before the Pope and many Cardinals, by commandment of the
Cardinal of Hostia Protector of his Order. Having seriously studied a sermon
he could not recite it. And yet he other wise delivered worthy matters. Mat. 10.
The time being come to ascend the pulpitt, and being therein, he could by no
means begin his sermon, though he exceedingly labored to do it: which
infinitely troubled him, and much amazed the assistantes: wherefore he
publickely acnowledged that he had seriously studied that sermon: but having
incontinently recourse to prayer, and in few words recommending himself with
all his heart unto God, utterly rejecting his former conceit, and entierly
referring himself to his divine majesty; he began to preach with such
fervor, that having in an instant set at liberty his holy tongue, he
delivered matter so learned, sublime and so necessary, that he moved all the
hearts of his audience to compassion: and then it appeared to each one that the
words of God were undoubtedly true, where he says: It is not you that speak
but the spirit (of God) that speaks in you. This holy Father thus obtaining
the reuelatious of the divine mysteries by mean of prayer, and correcting
first whatsoever vices he found in himself, it is not to be admired that he
moved the most obdurat hearts unto penance, reprehending vices with such
vehemence. He preached with like fervor, his constancy being incredible, both
to great and meaner people, rich and poor, many and few, and always with
exceeding profitt.

What conditions S. Francis required in Preachers.
THE LI. CHAPTER.
BEing, according to the example of JESUS CHRIST a true Evangelical Preacher,
and teaching rather by works then words, he would in like sort that his
disciples rather wanted learning then goodness: because, said he, the function
and grace of preaching is far more grateful to God then any other humane
office, if it be especially practiced with a care of perfect charity: adding
with all that the poor and wretched preacher that despoiling himself of
piety sought not the benefitt of souls in his preachinges, but only to please
men for his particular interest, deserved to be lamented, so miserable was his
state and condition. But more greiuous was his case that by his lewd life, he
scandalized and ruyned more souls, then he gained by his doctrine. Hereupon he
inferred that before such Preachers was to be preferred a simple Religious man,
who by his pious example and imitable life, induces each one to virtue. Which
is insinuated by the words of S. Anne: 1. Reg. 2. Notable applicatiow of a
place of scripture.
Donec sterilis peperit. Till the barren bring forth many children: and she
that had many become infirm: understanding the barren to be the simple
Religious, whose function is not to preach and by his doctrine to bring forth
any child unto God: but at the day of the universal judgment, it will
appear that, by his life, his example, his prayers, and his tears which he
has presented unto his divine majesty, imploring him for the conversion of
sinners, he shall have engendered many more in the Church of God, then diverse
that preach, because the just judge shall attribute them all unto him for his
merittes, and shall recompense him accordingly. And the mother, that is, the
Preacher that in exterior appearance seemed to have many children shall appear
infirm: because he shall prove to have no part in that, wherein he gloryed as
proceeding from himself and notfrom God. In respect whereof he would not that
the Preachers should be distracted and transported by cares and asfaires of the
world: but should remain retired and attentive to prayer, as being elected by
his divine Majesty, for publishing his holy word unto sinners. Therefore, said
he, the first thing that a Preacher ought to do, is in private prayer to feed
himself with the spirit of God: then, being himself enflamed within, to
communicate and impart unto them, thereby to inflame them without.

How much S. Fr. honored the office of preaching.
The Function of preaching was by him reputed reverend, and so consequently
the Ministers thereof: Preachers, said he, are the life of the body of the holy
church, they are the champions and bucklers of souls against the devil: they
are the burning torches of the world. It cannot be esteemed how worthy they are
of honor if they be such as they ought to be, and on the contrary, how ^^ch
they deserve pity and compassion, if they sell their doctrine, ^^r recompense
of a vain and transitory applause. For which respect this holy Father could
not endure such that esteemed more of themselves for being eloquent and
learned, then for being servants of the omnipotent God, and employed by his
divine Majesty, in the most eminent degree that his Church affords: to those
whom he knew to be such he said: Wherefore do ye glory of them that are
converted to penance by your preachinges as though yourselues did convert them,
whereas my simple Religious do also the same? And therefore, the preachers that
entierlie applied themselves to preaching without any devotion he called evil
disposers of his goods, and exceedingly extolled those that had respect and
memory of themselves, after their preachinges rotyring and applying themselves
Ios. 8. 18. etc.
to the spirit of prayer, and to taste how sweet God is, after his example, who
leaving his disciples, retired him self unto the mountains to pray.

Of the fervent piety and charity which S. Francis had toward God and his
saints.
THE LII. CHAPTER.
WHo can ever express the fervent piety, wherewith the glorious Father S.
Francis, the dear friend of his Spouse JESUS CHRIST always burned in his
heart: considering that by means of this his fervor he was most often rapt out
of himself and so transformed in JESUS CHRIST, that it That one ought not to
deny almose demanded for the love of God.
well appeared, that with the exterior quill, the stringes of the instrument
of his heart were touched within: Wherefore he affirmed that it was unwonted and
over abondant prodigality, to offer so great a price as the love of God for an
almose: and he termed them senseles, who were ignorant thereof, and who made
more esteem of a base farthing then of such a purchase, for so much as they
refused that sclender price, which sufficed to buy heaven: besides that the
love of him who has so much loved us, ought justly to be prised and estoemed
above althinges. And to the end himself might be often stirred to this divine
love, he considered althinges as proceeding from the hand of God: and so by the
consideration of creatures, he was with an admirable sweetness swallowed up in
the contemplation of a most high and first cause and fountain of all essence
and life, admiring in the beauty and composition of the second causes, the most
eminent and prudent Creator: and pursued the same every where to his pleasure,
which he found by a thousand new means and manners, framing a continual
ladder of althinges created, whereby he ascended to the comtemplation and
fruition of this lord universally desired, and at every step of the said
ladder, he tasted, as in a little brook, of that most delicious fountain of
bounty, with an extreme pleasure, as if he had heard that celestial harmony
and consonance of the diversity of virtues, and of their effects which God
gave to his creatures, for which ^ounterchaunge he awakened and stirred the^
with the Prophet to praise Psa. 148.
their Creator, as in place hereafter shall appear.

He continually carried his desired cross, as a pleasing little bundle of mirrh
sauouring in his heart: desiring with all his power, to be transformed into it,
thereby to be enflamed with an excessive love, and to that end he had appointed
lentes, in which he retired into hermitages to enjoy in silence his amorous
JESUS CHRIST, who as gracious failed not to reciprocate his deerly beloved in
giving him divine consolations.

How devout unto the B. Sacrament.
He burned with devotion in the interior of his bowels toward the sacred
sacrament, admiring that so charitable and excessive divine communication. And
when he communicated, which was often, it was with such and so great devotion,
that such as were present were amazed and enforced to devotion, seeing him so
replenished with this celestial taste, wherewith being as it were drunken, he
was with all ravished into mental ecstasy. And he was so zealous and reverent
thereunto, that fearing to handle it unworthily, he ever refused to be Priest,
yea being thereto vehemently solicited, and so farce forth as he could no
longer resist. Wherefore he had recourse to his ordinary defense, which was
prayer, wherein demanding Counsel of God, an Angel appeared unto him with a
viol in his hand full of most pure and clear liquor, Why S. Francis would not
be Priest.
who said: Behold Francis, he that will administer the most holy sacrament,
ought to be as pure as this liquor: in respect of which words, he had never
thence forward desire to be priest, esteeming it no small matter to be Deacon,
since so great a purity was required in Preisthood. And therefore he commanded
the Superiors and all other Religious, to be careful in the provinces where
they resided, to advertise and exhort the people, Clerks and Preistes, to
place the most sacred body of our Lord in a decent place with all reverence:
and sent them the mouldes and first forms or modeles of steel wherein to make
the hosties. He was also careful to have the altares and churches very neat
and curiously adorned, and in How devout he was to the Virgin Mary.
all his chapters made mention thereof. He loved and reverenced the glorious
mother of our lord JESUS CHRIST, with such Charity as cannot be expressed, in
consideration that she had made the most high lord God our Brother, clothing
the divine majesty with our own flesh. Wherefore next after God, he reposed all
his hope in this glorious virgin, and even from the original of the
institution of his Religion, he made choice of her for his protectrice and
aduocatrice unto her Son: and for her honor To S. Michel and to S. Peter and
S. Paul.
and glory, he fasted as we have formerly alleged. After that, besides and
above all the other Angels whom he reverenced (for the special care they have
of us) he was with an inseparable bond of love vinted unto the Archangell S.
Michael, in regard of his office, presenting souls unto God, and in devotion
unto him, he fasted forthy days before his feast. In this holy fast it was,
that he merited that notable favor of the stigmagtes: as hereafter in place
convenient shall be inserted. Finally he was generaly enflamed in the memory of
the glorious Saints affecting them with all his soul, as lively stones of the
celestial edifice, shining and glittering with that immensiue light, above all
other resplendant with the charity of JESUS CHRIST, and among them he
especially reverenced with a singular devotion the Princes of the Apostles, S.
Peter and S. Paul: for he went often to Rome expressly to visitt them, and not
in vain since he was reciprocally by them visited, protected and comforted in
all occurances.

Of the great charity of S. Francis, toward his neighbor, and how he freed
his Brethren of temptations.
THE LIII. CHAPTER.
THe poor of JESUS CHRIST S. Francis, had but two pieces of money (so called he
the body and the soul) which upon every occasion he offered for the love of
JESUS CHRIST: the one by an ardent fervor, and the other by abstinence and
discipline: sacrificing the flesh exteriourly in holocaust, and interiourly
burning in the temple of his soul, the sweet incense of piety, eleuating his
spirit unto God by a most seruent love, and extending it by his interior
benignity, over all creatures that were associated unto him by nature and
grace, and redeemed by the precious blood of our lord JESUS CHRIST. He had not
bin reputed the friend of JESUS CHRIST, if he had left desolate the souls,
redeemed by such an inestimable price. Wherefore he affirmed that one ought to
prefer the safty of souls before al things: since that the only Son of God
the Father, would be crucified on the cross for their salvation. Therefore when
he prayed, he poured out an infinite quantity of tears. When he preached he
extremely heated himself: and in this consideration it was that he so
rigorously afflicted his body: for it was not to punish it for sins, which he
had desisted to commit, Why S. Francis so much affiicted his body. 1. Cor. 13.
nor to preserve himself therefrom, by reason that the hand of God was with
him. But it was to the end that by his example and merittes, he might free and
deliver the poor souls of JESUS CHRIST from that horrible and insatiable
gulphe of hell, using those words of S. Paul: If I speak with the tongues of
men, and of Angels and have not charity, I give no good education to my
neighbor, and very little do I profitt others, and much less my self.

Therefore he divided this his charity as an abondant Fountain into How much he
honored Priests and Preachers: and respected old men and those that were in
authority in the world and especially the poor.
many and diverse channels, whereby he dispersed it, loving and honoring each one
in his degree and estate. He particulerly honored Preistes as the Ministers of
God, which he performed with exceeding reverence, acknowledging them to be
sanctified by divine aucthority, with power to celebrate his sacred mystery,
and to absolve souls (his mystical body) from detestable sins. He would not
see nor consider any imperfection in them, as people that always represented
unto him JESUS CHRIST. He left by testament unto his disciples this notable
respect which he had unto Preistes, and showed by example that every man ought
to reverence them, as persons in whose authority next after God, consists
the recovery of our salvation. He exceedingly honored Preachers and divines,
as they who administered unto us the spirit and life of the word of God. He
also much respected old people, and gave due honor to men of power and
authority in the world. But in especial manner did he ground his affection on
the poor. He had peace and charity with all the world, and would that his
Religious should endeavor the like, that none might be scandalized or troubled
How much. He loved his disciples. 2. Cor. 11
by their occasion. He manifested unto them the cordial love wherewith he
affected them, as his children in JESUS CHRIST, in that he did not converse
with them, as their head, lord, or Superior, but as Father, brother, and
servant, perticipating of all their necessityes, afflictions and temptations:
so that he might well say with the Apostle: Who (among you) is weak, and I am
not weak? who is scandalized, and I am not burnt? and on the other side he
congratulated extremely at the spiritual progress they made: he corroborated
and conforted the feeble, and they that were tempted, as by these examples may
appear.

He was on a time entreated by one that was violently tempted, to pray unto God
for him: to whom, conforting him he said: My child be not disquieted, for this
ought to be unto thee an assured testimony that thou art pleasing and
grateful unto God. None may esteem himself the servant of JESUS CHRIST, but
in afflictions and temptations. There are many, though ignorant, that glory,
not to have tasted any infirmity, and not to know what temptation is, whereas
they might justly be greiued, and thereby understand their weak spirit and
sclender love toward God, and assuredly believe that they have much more to
endure in the other world. For God does here ^. Cor. 11.
chastise the faithful, to free them from fear of correction otherwhere,
giving them the meritt of a more worthy crown, and does never permit them to
be tempted above their forces: but causes his servants to make great benefitt
of these temptations. The said Religious was so comforted 1. Cor. 10.
by these words, that albeit he disposed himself thenceforward to endure and
support his temptations, yet he incontinently felt all the bitterness he had
sustained, to turn into joy and alacrity.

An other Religious being tempted with the spirit of blasphemy, far more
insupportable then any other, fell at his feet with abondance of tears and
such sobbes, that he could not utter so much as one word. Whereupon the S.
knowing the exceeding torment which this Religious endured, ^oued with pity
and zeal of his soul, he said: I command S. Franc. comman; death the devil.
you, ye devils, in the name of our lord JESUS CHRIST, that you presume not
henceforward to tempt this Religious, and he was incontinently delivered, yea
in the very instant. Here then appeared the deep compassion of the holy
Father, and his power against wicked spiritts.

How he travailed toward Siria, there to receive Martyrdom.
THE LIIII. CHAPTER.
S. Franc. ordained two general chapters in the year.
THe year of grace, '1212. the order of S. Francis still flourishing in number
and in fame of sanctity, he ordained that they should twice in the year
assemble at our lady of Angels, at the feast of Pentecost, and of S. Michael
tharchangel, to suck the milk of Evangelical poverty from this their holy
mother, and there to confer of matters necessary to their Order, and of
accidents occurring: as also to unite themselves in fraternall love, animating
each other in virtue of the spirit. There were the preachers deputed to their
places, and other obediences ordained. The holy Father God would not that S.
Franc. should suffer martyrdom which he so much sought and desired.
desiring to assist not only the faithful, but even Infidel Pagans, to sow
the faith every where, and to offer himself in sacrifice to the fire of
Martyrdom, a lively host unto God, and by his death after the example of JESUS
CHRIST, to lay open unto erring fowls, the way of salvation, in the aforsaid
year, which was the fourth of the institution of his order, being no longer
able to suppress the flame of desire of martyrdom, he resolved to pass the
sea to go preach unto the Infidels in Siria. He embarked himself to this
purpose, but the vessel which carried him was encountered with a most cruel
tempest, that forced it into Sclauonia where he remained diverse days: his
company refusing to proceed any farther.

Wherefore perceauing himself frustrated of his holy desire, esteeming it to
arrive by the providence and pleasure of his divine majesty: and understanding
that there were certain mariners retourning to Aucona, he besought them for
the love of God to conduct him with his The shipme^ would not admit. S.
Francis by reason of his poverty.
companion back again into Italy. They perceiving him to be extremely poor
and that no benifitt was to be gotten by him, they made excuse that they had
sclender provision. But the holy Father relying on the mercy of God, entered so
secretly with his companion into the shipp that they were not seen of the
Patron. Being so hidden without the knowledge of any person to give them to
eat, an Angel sodenlie appeared to a man in the ship that had the fear of God,
to whom he gave provision for his servant, saying. Take this food and dispose
it prouidentlie for the relief of the two Religious, that are hidden here
within, whom he showed unto him: and when they shall have need, be charitable
unto them. Having said thus much he disappeared, and what he had given in
chardge, was performed. The mariners God provided food for S. Franc. and for
other in the ship for his sake.
in mean while so long floted in storms and tempests, that they spent all
their provision, so that there only remained in the ship that releife which
God had sent unto the S. which appearing to be but little, did nevertheless in
such sort augment, by the prayers of S. Francis, rendering good for evil, that
it sufficed for all them that were in the vessel, till they arrived at their
pretended port: which miracle being known unto the Patron, he repented to have
refused to admit them, for the love of God, whose divine Majesty
notwithstanding was pleased to show such a manifest miracle, to the end it
might appear how much more his servants do by their merittes, support and
uphold the world, then they are supported by it.

Of the Conversion of the glorious S. Clare and of the beginning of her Order.
THE LV. CHAPTER.
THe afforesaid year, 1212. the glorious S. being by the divine Abbridged out
of the conversion of S. Clare.
Majesty recalled not without consideration of great consequence, from the
voyage of Siria, he gave a beginning to the Order of the Damianes, the root
and original whereof, was the glorious mother S. Clare, descended of a noble
family of Assisiu^, who albeit by her parents educated and nourished
deliciously, with intent to be afterward according to the manner of the world
honorably married: the holy Ghost did notwistanding worck the contrary, and
intended to enrich her with celestial treasures. For which occasion even from
her infancy, he had a very particular care of her, with purpose to espouse her
unto our Lord JESUS CHRIST. And when he thought the time convenient, he
permitted that, hearing admirable matters delivered of the holy Father S.
Francis, she with a manly courage resolved to follow him in the strict way of
euangelical perfection. Having then found opportunity, she presented her self
alone to the said S. and having discovered her heart unto him, he instantly
perceived the inspiration which she had from God, and in very few hours giving
the farewell to her kindred, her substance, together with all the world, she
procured him to cut of her hair, and to cloth her with his own habitt,
before the altar of our Lady of Angels. For more security, the holy Father S.
Francis committed her to the monastery of S. Paul, where were Religious of the
Order of S. Benett, whence by reason of extreme persecutions and violent
proceedinges off her kindred having at length taken her out, he placed her in
the Church of S. Damian, where was the first monastery of S. Clare, and by
reason of their number that there increased, they were called Damianes, as
shall severally and very particulerlie appear in the eight book, in the life
of B. and glorious Saint Clare.

How the S. went to Moroccho to seek Martyrdom.
THE LVI. CHAPTER.
Saint Francis ever thirsting to be martyred for the faith of JESUS CHRIST,
being peruented of his journey into Siria, in the year 1214. he attempted a
voyage together with Brother Bernard and Brother Macie, toward Moroccho
through Spain, supposing thence to find passage unto the Emperor of the Mores
at Moroccho, called Miramoline, to preach unto him the faith of JESUS CHRIST.
He enterprised this journey with such alacrity, that albeit he were very feeble
and infirm; he notwithstanding did always so much out go his companions that
he seemed to fly. But being arrived in Spain, his infirmityes did so oppress
him, that he could hardly travel unto S. James in Galicia, where prostrating
himself before the altar of the said S. and praying with his accustomed
fervor, God enjoined him to return into Italy, because many places were
offered unto him wherein to accommodate his family, and that his return
thither was very necessary, to confirm the green places of his erected
vingneyard.

In this journey S. Francis was at Guimaranes a city of Portugal, where it is
said that he raised the daughter of the master of the house where he lodged:
thence he visited the queen Vracca wife of king Alfonsus the second, who
beheld him with great reverence and devotion* and was exceedingly comforted and
edified by him. Proceeding afterward on his journey, he lighted on a river in
the said province of S. James, between the cities of Nonis and Orgogno, which
he knew no means how to pass by reason there was not any house in that part
nor person to conduct him over. Not knowing then what to do he had recourse
to prayer, and at the very instant whiles he was praying to God, there came a
boy from the city of Nonis, who having pity of them, gave the^ encouragment
saying, that having passed over his horses that were laden with bread, he
would unload them and retourning, would conduct them over: which he performed,
and having guided them to Orgogno, he lodged them in a house of his where he
putt his bread, wherein he gave them the best entertainment he could devise:
for which the holy Father gave him many thanckes at his departure, and said:
God give you the payment which he has promised to good people: and so departed.

That very year (which is worthy admiration) this young man retourning from
Rome having visited the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul he demanded of God as a
special grace that he would please to take him out of this world before he
lost the meritte of so many holy indulgences which he had gotten. His prayer
was not frustrate, for by the merittes of the blessed Father S. Francis, as by
the consequence is apparent, God heard him from heaven, and so he died in the
very pilgrimage. His Father by letters from freindes being advertised of his
death, after much lamentation, procured the office of piety to be performed for
his soul, at the end of which office, there appeared in the Seventy Friar
Minors were miraculously transported from Italy into Spain at the service of
a benefactour of S. Francis.
said city of Nonis, about seventy Friar Minors, though those people never
supposed so many to be in all the world, and they were all present at the
church in procession, singing with such melody and with so pious a sweetness,
that they drew tears of devotion from all the audience. After they had sung
mass, the parents of the deceased invited them to eat with them, which they
did, and then departed, and a great multitude of those people conducted them
very far: the table was afterward found furnished with meat, as if they had
not eaten. This miracle being perceived, many ran after them to see if they
could recover them, and know the place of their residence, but they could never
see nor hear of them. It was then judged, that this was the recompense of the
curtesy which the deceased had done to S. Francis and his companions, when he
entertained them at Orgogno: and thence, forward those people were ever
exceeding deuot unto the Freer Minors.

In the same journey between Barcelone and Ghirone, near unto S. Celony, one
of the companions of S. Francis being very hungry entered into a vineyard which
he happily found there and did eat of the grapes. The keeper of the vines
having perceived it, took from him his cloak (which he very patiently
permitted him to take) and would not restore it whatsoever instance S. Francis
used: but carried it to his master, A little after 22. Freer Minors came also
from Italy into Spain at the obsequies of their benefactour.
of whom the said S. so graciously demanded it, that he did not only restore
it, but withal invited him to eat with him, where he in such sort comported
himself, that this good man entierlie edified by the words of the S. and by
his doctrine, offered himself to be a perpetual host unto all the Freer
Minors that thenceforward should pass that way. To whom the S. reciprocally
replied: I accept thee for a Freer of our Order: and so proceeding in
continual performance of that charity when they passed that way, he died many
years after: and as his kindred procured his obsequies to be performed, where
were present many Preistes, some did deridingly begin to murmr, saying that
the Freer Minors did not appear at the death of one of their so affectionate
Brethren, of who they had received so many courtesies: and upon the delivery of
these words there came two and twenty Religious, singing the Psalms of David
with an exceeding melodious harmony, who having finished the office in the
Church, did all disappeare. The kindred of the deceassed prepared for them to
eat: but they rested content with only giving thanckes to God with the rest of
the people, for the recompense he affords those that entertayne his
servants, even after their death. It was then ordained in that city, that the
Freer Minors should thenceforward there be lodged and entertained with all
things necessary at the chardge of the common purse. S. Francis passing
afterward through the kingdom of France, preaching in a hospital at
Montpelier, he prophetically foretold that in that city should shortly after
be erected a monastery of Freer S. Franc. foretold future things.
Minors, which was accordingly verified soon after, in that a Covent was there
built which was very worthily mayntayned, till the fury of the Caluinian
heresy did utterly ruinate the same.

Of the first meeting of S. Francis and S. Dominick.
THE LVII. CHAPTER.
THe year of grace 1215. when the first general Council was held at
Lateran, during the reign of Pope Innocentius the third, the holy Father S.
Dominick was at Rome with the Bishop of Tolous called Falcon, to procure the
Popes confirmation of the Order of Preachers which he then intended to
institute and estabish: whereof the Pope being by divine revelation advertised,
and informed of the great fruit that this Order should produce universally to
the holy Church, at his first view of S. Dominick, without farther notice of
him, incontinently commanded him to return unto Tolouse, and to confer with
his Religious touching the penning of a rule that might be approved by the
Church, under which his Religion might be confirmed. S. Dominick then
retourning to Tolouse, and having with his Religious implored the divine
assistance, they made election of the rule of S. Augustine, with the name and
title of Preachers. The year following being 1216. (Honorius the third
succeeding Pope Innocent the third) retourning to Rome, he demanded of the
Pope that then succeeded, the said confirmation with the Bull and apostolical
authority, in virtue whereof to make profession, and with all A vision of S.
Dominick.
to add other constitutions that seemed necessary. All which having obtained,
the night ensuying he saw in prayer our Lord JESUS CHRIST at the right hand of
God against sinners in an hideous and terrible manner: brandishing three
lances in the air against the world: the first to suppress the hautines of
the proud: the second to disgorge the ouer-stuffed entrails of the auaricious:
and the third to massacre the carnal. There was none that could resist this
wrath, but the virgin Mary his most sacred mother, whom he saw most
affectionately to embrace the feet of her son, beseeching him to pardon those
whom he had redeemed with his precious blood, and with the mixture of his
infinite mercy to delay that his rigorous justice. Then he heard our Lord thus
answer her: See you not mother how many iniuryes they do me? how is it
possible that my holy justice permit so many enormityes to be unpunished? His
most gracious mother thus replied: Thou know my dear Son, what is the way
to convert sinners unto thee: but behold here a faithful servant of thine,
whom thou may presently send into the world to preach thy word to men: that
being conu^rted unto thee their Savior they perish not, and behold there also
an other of thy servants ready to assist him. Presenting unto him S. Dominick
and S. Francis, with whom he saw God to be satisfied. Now S. Dominick awaking
very well retained the marks whereby he might know this his companion, whom he
never knew before. But the day following, by divine providence he met S.
Francis, who was then in the Church of saint Peter at Rome, whom he
incontinently knew by the marks which he had observed in the said vision. Then
he ran and very affectionatelie embraced him and said: we shall be companions
and shall labor together in our holy purpose, and neither any man nor wicked
spirit, shall have power to prevail against us. At length he recounted vnro
him the said vision. And after long discourse together, they remained united in
God with one heart, will, and spirit. They commanded the like unto their
brethren: This vision was imparted unto the Religious of saint Dominick by
saint Francis his means, to whom only the said saint had recounted the same.

How these two SS. had sight of each other an other time at Rome, and how they
rejected the benefices that were presented to them and to their Religious
THE XLVIII. CHAPTER.
THese two eminent lights sent of God to illuminate the world, did an other
time meet together at Rome in Cardinal Hosties house, who for the great zeal
he carried to the Church of God, and for the devotion wherewith he respected
them both, said unto them: In the primitive Church the Prelates were poor, and
lived without any vanity, governing the flock of Christ with love and humility,
not by desire of terrestrial and temporal things: therefore in mine opinion
the holy church would return to her primitive estate, if of your Religious
we should make Bishops and Prelates, because by their doctrine, good example of
life, and by contempt of the world, they would represent to the whole world the
Prelates of the primitive church; or at least they would be far better then
we, who live ordinarily in vanities, because they are instructed and educated
in humility and poverty, and therefore touching this point I shall be glad to
know your opinion. The Cardinal being silent, there arose a pious contention
between the two holy Fathers which of them should first answer. At lenght
S. Francis superior of humility, left the superiority Why S. Dominick and S.
Franc. would not their Religious should have bevefices.
of obedience unto S. Dominick, whereby he answered the Cardinal in these
words: The Dominican Preachers are in a sufficient good and high estate, if
they can conceive it, and therefore for as much as shall lie in my power, I will
never consent that they ascend to higher dignity. And then silent S. Francis
arose, and with great vehemency thus spoke: My Religious are called Minors,
only in respect that they never presume to be made great in this world, and
much less to be Prelates: so that their title shows them their true
vocation, which is to remain always in their meannesse, and to tread the
steps of humility of JESUS CHRIST, that they may meritt to be exalted in the
other world among the blessed. Therefore if you will that they fructify in the
Church of God, keep them low, as they are, yea if they would aspire to
prelacie, never consent thereunto. Here was the S. silent also. The Cardinal
remaining exceeding well satisfied S. Dominick barc out of devotion a girdle of
S. Fr.
with these two answeares, dismissed the S. who goeing together, S. Dominick
most instantly requested of S. Francis the cord wherewith he was girded, who
after he had of humility much denied him, was at last content to be overcome
by charity, and vngirding himself gave it unto him: S. Dominick out of great
devotion girded himself therewith under his habitt: and afterward they departed
each from other. S. Dominick used these speeches generally to all men: I speak
it in verytie, all other Religious ought to admire and imitate the life of this
man, so great is his perfection, and so true the way which he has undertaken
to follow JESUS CHRIST.

How S. Francis proceeded in sending his Religious over all Christendom, and
divided unto them the provinces.
THE LIX. CHAPTER.
IN the year of grace, 1217. the general chapter being held at Assisium, by
reason of the great multitude of Religious that were there present, the
Provinces were assigned, as well on this side, as beyond the Mountains
throughout all Christendom. Then were elected Prouincials, with companions and
persons deputed to their obedience: and because then there were not a few
heretics in Spain, he sent thither his Religious: and among other Brother
Zachary and Brother Walter traveled even to Portugal, who as an unwonted
spectacle were very ill entreated, as well in regard of the nouelty or rarenes
of their habitt, as for the diversity of their language: and suspecting them to
be heretics, they were not permitted to rest in any place: wherefore they
addressed themselves to the said Queen Vracha, by whose favorable protection
they were received at Coymbra, Guymarances, Alanquer, and Lisbone, as
hereafter with the rest of their life shall be declared in the sixth book. The
others were much worse entreated, no man yelding to receive them not knowing
whence they were, and therefore they were every where driven away, especially
because they brought not authentical letters from the Pope, that might give
testimony of The Freer Minors were not permitted to preach but were expelled
for having no bull from the Pope.
their condition. Wherefore they were constrained to return unto S. Francis,
who incontinently advertised the Cardinal Hostie thereof, then made protector
of the Order, after the death of the Cardinal of Sebastian, who was their
first protector, but not according to the form of their Order as this was,
who offered himself to S. Francis for such, and for a Brother of the Order:
whom also the S. himself required of the Pope to be their Protector.

The holy Father being then by the said Cardinal of Hostie presented unto his
holiness and to the college of Cardinals, he delivered unto them a notable
oration of the praise of Euangalicall perfection, whereof himself and his
Religious were Professors, with such and so great seruour, that he put all the
College into exceeding admiration and devotion toward his Religion: who
thereupon promised him all favor. He esteemed himself happy, who after the
Consistory was ended, could have a Freer Minor in his company. And the Pope
caused letters patentes to be made him, whereof the tenor was such: Honorius
bishop, and servant of the servants of God, to our well-beloved, and as our
Brethren, Archbishops and Bishops, The brief of Pope Honorious in
approbation of the Freer Minors, and to permit them to preach.
our well-beloved son, Brother Francis of Assisium, and his companions of the
Order of Minors, having, after they had contemned and abandonned the vanities
of this world, chosen the way and life of perfection, with just reason approved
of this holy Church, and sowing the word of God, in imitation and example of
the Apostles, through diverse Provinces: We pray and command you in virtue of
holy obedience, by these presents our Apostolical letters, that when any of
them shall repair unto you, with these said presents, you receive them as
Catholics, and true believers: and that, for the reverence of God, whose true
servants they are, and ours also, you show them favor and courtesy. Given
at. Etc. The said letters were signed by the Protector and other Cardinals,
to the glory of God, and the benefitt of souls.

Of two other Apostolical Breuies, granted by the same Pope, transferred unto
this place, as proper unto it out of the tenth book of these chronicles and
31. chapter.
THE LX. CHAPTER.
IN the fourth year of his Popedom, the same Pope sent The Brief of the said
Pope to the Prelates of France
forth an other of this tenor: Honorius servant of the servants of God, to
our well-beloved, Arch-bishoppes, Bishopdes, Abbotes, Priors, and other Prelates
of the Church, who are with in the Realm of France, health and Apostolical
benediction. Having formerlie written unto you in the behalf of our welbelourd
children the Freer Minors, praying you to have them in recommandation: as we
are given to understand, some of you being yet scrupulous of this Order,
permit not them to seiourne in their bishopprickes, though in deed there is in
them nothing deserving suspicion, as we have bin very precisely informed and
assured, and therefore our letters ought to suffice to dispossesle them of all
sinister opinion, that they might formerly conceive of them. We therefore
certify and give testimony to each one, that we hold the Order of Freer Minors
for approved, and know the Brethren of the said Order to be Religious
Catholics, devout and of pious conversation: and therefore we admonish, and by
these presents oblige you, to admit the said Freer Minors into your
bishopprickes, and to hold them highly recommendable, for reverence of God, and
of us, Given at Viterbium, the eight and twentieth of May, the fourth year of
our Popedom.

In the very same year his Holiness wrote other letters of the same tenor, in
favor of the said Religion, which are recorded to be extent in the Covent of
Paris.

How S. Francis would come into France. and what befell him in the way.
THE LI. CHAPTER.
Saint Francis in an other of the foresaid Chapters, wherein the Freer Minors
were distributed over Christendom, addressed himself to all the Religious and
said: My beloved Brethren, I acknowledge my self obliged to give edification
to all the Brethren: therefore my children being sent into diverse Provinces, to
endure hungar, thirst; labor, and other necessities, it seems reasonable
that my self do likewise travail into some far country, to the end that
others the more voluntarily support their afflictions, when they shall see me
undertake the like: and therefore (his manner being never to send forth any
Religious, but first to pray unto God that he would afford some fruit to be
reaped thereby) having with all his Brethren made prayer for himself, he arose,
Greant devotion to the B. Sacrament in France.
and said: In the name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, of his most sacred mother, and
of all the SS. of God, I make choice of the province of France, wherein there
are many Catholic people, and subject to the holy Roman Church, and because
they be exceeding devout unto the most blessed Sacrament, I believe I shall
receive much consolation in conuersing with them: having said thus much, and
chosen two companions, he took his leave of his Religious, and enterprised his
journey.

Being arrived at the city of Arezzo, and not permitted to enter there,
because it was night, he lodged at an hospital in the suburbs, where he
understood that the miserable citizens of that place being divided into two
factions, did cruelly murder one an other. And the more to confirm the matter,
as he was at his prayers about midnight, he heard such a noise of men and
armor, that they seemed to be to armies ready to assault each other: whereby he
perceived manifestly, the worck of the devil that mayntayned them in war.
Wherefore moved with compassion, he spent the rest of that night S. Franc.
pacifieth a great sedition by certain words which he caused one of his
Religious to utter.
in prayer with much fervor and abondance of tears: then he called Brether
Siluester, a Priest, and man of worthy faith and purity, to whom he said: Go
you to the gate of this miserable city, and cry with a loud voice, the name of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST be praised and blessed. Ye devils that keep these people
in war and sedition: I command you on the part of almighty God, and in the
virtue of holy obedience, to depart all out of this city: which Brother
Siluester having done, the devils incontinently fled; and so without any
other prediction, or any other mean, the said citizens were reunited and
appeased. S. Francis being desirous to prosecute his journey, would not then
stay in that city, but preaching unto them afterward at his return, he
sharply reprehended them for their hatredes that had so furiously and
inhumanelie enraged them against each other, and gave them to understand the
great grace which God had given the^, by mean of the said words which were
uttered by Brother Siluester, that was a holy man (not to speak of himself)
delivering them from the devils, that maintained them in so cruel a war. By
these considerations the S. exceedingly confirmed them in the peace already
concluded, and besides induced them to do penance for their sins.

How the S. by commandment of the Cardinal Protector of his Order, was
intercepted of his journey.
THE LXII. CHAPTER.
BEing at Florence he there found the protector of his order, who was legate
of his holiness in that place. The holy Father goeing to visitt him recou^ted
unto him the cause of his journey, that he was traveling into France, there to
plant his Order, and to gain souls, wherein he me^t to employ some time: which
the Cardinal understanding, was exceedingly disquieted, and endeavored to
persuade him by pregna^t reasons to change his resolution, considering that he
might do greater seruice^ to God in Italy, and should benifitt more to
support and mayntaine his Religion, where it was already known, then
otherwhere. The S. answered that the cause that most moved him to go thither
was, that he thought it not reasonnable, that having sent his Religious into
diverse foreign Contryes, to endure many inconveniences, he should rest in
repose, whiles they suffered and endured. The Cardinal replied: Wherefore have
you sent your Religious so far, to undergo so many afflictions? The holy
Father answered him: Think you, my Lord, that God has instituted this
Religion for the good only of the Italian souls? You must know that he has
chosen the Freer Minors, to go over all the world, yea not only for the
behoufe of faithful Christians, but even of Infidelles. And they shall go,
and shall there be received, and shall fructify, gayning many souls to God:
who will provide them all their necessities, when men shall faill them. The
Cardinal admiring the good and pious resolution of the S. confessed to believe
that it would arrive as he had designed, nevertheless would he never permit him
to go into France. Wherefore S. Francis not minding any further to contradict
him, desisted his journey to content him, and sent thither in his place Brother
Pacificus and his other companio^s, and himself having seiourned some time
with the said Protector, returned to our Lady of Angels.

Of the great general chapter, called the chapter of Mattes.
THE LXIII. CHAPTER
AS well in regard that the Freer Minors did not yet thoroughly appear over
all foreign Provinces, as for other necessary respects, the years 1219. they
all assembled by a great general In this chapter held a little after the
institution of the order, were five thousand Freer Minors.
chapter at our Lady of Angels, where there met, according to S. Bonauenture,
about five thousand, which would seem somewhat difficult to believe (if such a
S. did not testify it) that this holy Order was so multiplied in so short a
space. Whiles this chapter was held, Pope Honorius was withal his Court at
Perusia, and the aforesaid Protector of this order went to Assisium, whence he
visited them every day. He celebrated mass and preached unto them, conceauing
exceeding joy to see fifty or an hundred of his soldiers of JESUS CHRIST
walking in open field united together, some employed in pious discources of
God, others in divine offices, others in some other worckes of charity, and
others separated in contemplation: and all this was performed with such and so
exact a silence, that there was not heard any noise at all. So the said
Cardinal, as also all the Lords of the Popes Court filled with extreme
devotion, did both admire and exceedingly rejoice interiourly, yea as much as
was possible, seeing those words of Jacob to be verified in so gteat a
multitude of the servants of God. These are the Camps of God, and his
dwelling is here: Genesis 32.
considering that their lodgeings were in the wild feildes, made of rushes and
mattes by them of Assisium, and contrived as a dormitory: therefore was this
chapter called the chapter of Mattes or rushes. Their beds were, either the
bare ground, or a little chafe, the bolster a stone or block of wood, each one
was so edified with this company, that many Cardinals, Bishops, great Lords,
and Gentlemen came from far of devotion to see this holy and humble
congregation: so that it well appeared that the like had never been seen in
the world. Many also came only to see and honor the glorious head S. Francis,
who in so short a time, had selected out of the world so many and so worthy
members, and (as a sage Pastor) had guided such a numerable and precious
flock, in the meadoes and spiritual pastures of JESUS CHRIST.

Now all the Religious being arrived, the said S. caused them to assemble
together, then arose he as their Captain, entierlie enflamed of the holy
ghost, and gave them the delicious and forcible food of the word of God, and
with a devout and loud voice, he made them a sermon, whereof the theme was
such: My beloved Brethren, we have The ordinary sermon of S. Fr. unto his
brethren.
promised great matters: but much greater ate promised us, let us observe
those, and aspire after these. The pleasure of sin is short: but the pain
thereof perpetual. Virtue is painful: but the glory is infinite. Many are
called* but few are chosen, and in fine all shall be rewarded. Upon which words
he so subtly discoursed that every one was amazed thereat. Afterward he
exhorted them all to obedience unto the holy Church, and to the exercise of
prayer, a most efficacious mean to purchase the love of God, charity,
edification of their neighbor, to patience, and labors, to neatnes and purity
of life, to have peace with God, amity with men, humility and sweetness with
all. He likewise exhorted them to solitude, to watchinges, to resist the
temptations of the devil, and withal seriously recommended unto them the
fervent zeal of Evangelical poverty, contempt of the world and of themselves:
breifely to apply all their cogitation of soul and body on the most high
Creator, Redeemer and true Pastor of souls our Lord JESUS CHRIST. And to
teach S. Franc. would not that any of his should take care for their
nourishment. Psalm. 54.
them all the aforesaid, rather by effect then by word, he commanded under
virtue of obedience, that none should take care to provide what to eat or
drinck or any other thing necessary to their entertainment: But that they
should only apply themselves to the praise of God and to prayer, with these
words of the Psalmist, which he often iterated: Cast thy cogitation in God,
and he will releive thee. All obeyed him without having care of any thing, and
so, void of all other temporal care, they entierlie employed themselves in
prayer and praise of God.

How the holy Father S. Dominick was present at this great chapter. And of the
resolution he made that his Religious should not thenceforward possess any
thing of proper, for the great miracle he saw there: and of the great number of
Nouices that were received at the said chapter.
THE LXIV. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father S. Dominick was present at this great chapter with seven of
his Religious, and having understood the rigorous commandment of the holy
Father S. Francis, he was utterly amazed: fearing perhaps, in regard of his
great love unto him, that some scandal might happen, having there so great a
multitude, and no order taken for their releife. But our Lord JESUS CHRIST did
quickly manifest what care he had of his servants, (who as birds did fly in
spirit, and conuersed continually in heaven) to feed them on earth: for he
touched the hearts of the people of Perusia, Spoletum, Follingnium, Assisium,
and other neighbor places, yea of all the valley of Spoletum, who by divine
inspiration, came all with unspeakable S. Dominick confesses his fault before
S. F. in that he had sinisterly judged of the said prohibitio^ which he had
given to his Religious.
speed as by a striving emulation, with horses, mules, asses and chariottes,
all laden with bread, wine, oil, cheese, flesh, foul, eggs, butter, and
other things necessary for releife: others laden with earthen vessels, as
pottes, cups, iugges, and other vessels for their use, also with linen and
other commodities, even with cloth, to cover them, finally they were most
abondantlie supplied of whatsoever they needed: he esteemed himself happy,
that could best and most devoutly serve them: there might one see kinghtes and
other noble men to putt off, and spread one the ground their own cloakes, to
honor these poor of JESUS CHRIST. In like sort were seen many Prelates and
devout gentlemen to serve them with like reverence, as they could have done the
Apostles.

This the blessed Father S. Dominick having seen, he assuredly knew that the
holy Ghost really dwelt in the servant of God S. Francis: Wherefore sharply
reprehending him self for the rash judgment he had conceived, he fell one his
knees before him, confessed his fault and publicly accused himself thereof:
protesting that S. D. vowet^ poverty, and gives his male dictio^ to al his
Religious present and to come that shall infringe the same.
then he undoubtedly knew, that God had a particular care of his servants:
whereof he had not till then had the like experience. Therefore (said he) I
promise also to observe Evangelical poverty, and henceforth on the part of God
I give my malediction to all the Religious of my Order, that from this time
shall possess any thing in propriety, be it in common or particular. And
therefore albeit they might before have rentes and possessious, as indeed they
had, which they enjoyed according to the grant made them by Pope Honorius the
third, in the year of grace 1216. the first year of his Popedom, yet the
year 1220. which was the year after this great chapter, S. Dominick also
holding a general chapter where there were present two hundred and twenty of
his Religious, they did together reform their constitutions, and renounced the
said possessions which they then enjoyed, and such as they There were 220
Iacobins present at a general chapter held by S. Dom.
might thenceforward enjoy. By which obligation, though the Order of Preachers,
may, by just dispensation, in respect of the great fruit they produce in the
Church, with their doctrine, have reuenowes for their Colleges, and studies:
yet the other monasteries, according to the commandment and malediction of
their Father S. Dominick, do strictly observe Evangelical poverty.

The Cardinal of Hostia brought to this chapter a great multitude of Lords,
to see the manner of lodgeing of these Religious, who seeing them to sit, eat,
and sleep one the bare ground, or one a little chafe or hay, without
respecting other delicacie, and that for pillow they had a stone or block of
wood, as we have said: they beat their breasts, and weeping said: If these holy
men eat and sleep one the earth, what shall become of us wretched sinners,
that laden In this chapter of S. Fr. were received more the^ 500. nouices.
with sin live in such superfluity without doing penance? Thus many being
well edified by this holy troup, endeavored to change their life and manners
into virtuous conversation. Their behavior was such, and the edification of
his Holiness Court, of the Cardinals, and other great persons, as also of all
the neighbor people, that there were more then five hundred Nouices received
in that only Chapter

Of the great maceration and austerityes which were discovered in (...) chapter
to be exercised by the Religious of S. Francis, who made mute the superiors of
his Order, that would change the rule, and of the terrible chapter that the
devils then held against the Freer Minors.
THE LXV. CHAPTER.
Five bu^dred mailes and hoopes of iron were by obedience brought to S. Fr.
which the Religious used instead of hair.
THe holy Father S. Francis having bin informed, that in this chapter were many
Religious, who to mortify their flesh, besides their other abstinences, fastes
and disciplines, did wear instead of hair, a shirt of maille, and certain
gross hoopes of iron about their loins, which procured them diverse
sicknesses, and even that some died therewith: the pitiful Father commanded,
by virtue of obedience that there should be brought him all the said mailles
and hoopes: and in an instant were brought him five hundred of the one and the
other sort: wherefore he presently there upon made a co^stitution, that none
should presume thenceforward to wear any sort of iron on their flesh.

There were in this Chapter certain learned superiors, who practiced with
their Protector some mean to temperate the rigor of that their so extreme
poverty and living, and to moderate it according to some other ancient rule:
that shunning extremities, they might choose one more supportable. Which being
by the said Cardinal, who Monopoly of certain superiors and learned Freer
Minors to moderate the rule of their Order.
also would have him condescend thereunto, related unto the holy Father S.
Francis, he took him by the hand and led him to the chapter where those said
superiors were yet assembled, to whom addressing his speech, he said: My
beloved Brethren, our most merciful Lord God has called me unto him by this
way of simplicity, poverty, humility, and of this great asperity of life, and
not only my self, but all those that will follow me: therefore let none of you
think ever to make me espouse an other rule, be it of S. Augustine, S.
Bernard, or any other, for my God has showed me this, has called us unto it,
and will that we be reputed insensible in this world, because he will guide us
to heaven by an other path then this of the humane reasons of your sottish
prudence and ignorance, wherewith you are confounded, yea I am so much assured
from his divine majesty, that he will chastise you by his executioners, the
devils, and then will remitt you into your former estate, whence you are now
fallen, though it beagainst your will, if first you do it not of your selves.
This said he left them with this worthy, conclusion. The Cardinal having heard
so resolute and terrible an answer, utterly amazed at the great zeal of God
which he demo^strated, durst not reply so much as one word, and the said
superiors with such an exceeding terror and fear of worse success, remained
mute.

A little after the said chapter, it was revealed unto the S. that whiles it was
held, many thousands of devils being assembled at the hospital between our
Lady of Angels, and Assisium, held an other, where were The devils hold a
chapter to ruinate the order of S. Fr.
present eighteen thousand, conferring of some means whereby to hinder the holy
progress of the said Order of the Freer Minors, where after many of the devils
had delivered their opinion herein, at length one more subtle then the rest,
thus proposed: This Francis and his Religious shun the world, and do
sequester themselves with so much fervor, and for the present love God with
such force, employing themselves in continual prayer and maceration of their
flesh, that whatsoever we shall now endeavor against them, will little or
nothing prevail: therefore mine opinion is, that we think not as yet of it,
but expect the death of the said Francis, the head of this Order, and the
multiplication of the Religious: for then we will procure into it young men,
without zeal of Religion and salvation, venerable old men, and delicate
gentilmen, learned arrogants, and men of feeble complexion, such as shall be
received to support the honor of the Order, and to augment their number, and
then by their means, we will draw them all to the love of the world and of
themselves, to a great desire of knowledge, and to blind ambition of honor,
and we will so allure them to our fantasy, as we may dispose of them at our
pleasure. The other devils approving this opinion, departed full of hope of a
future revenge, which would to God had not in part so arrived.

How the Freer Minors were sent, with authentical letters, into diverse
Christian and Pagan Provinces: and how God miraculously releiued them.
THE LXVI. CHAPTER.
IN the expeditio^ of the foresaid great general Chapter, all the Christian S.
Franc. sends his brethren to preach unto infidels.
and Pagan Provinces were deputed to certain Fathers, who were sent thither,
with their companio^s, carrying the letters pate^tes of the Pope, in favor
whereof they were very joyfully received, and courteously entertained of the
Prelates and people; among others, six were sent unto the city of Morocco,
among the Mores, of whom one remained sick in Spain, and the other five that
went thither were gloriously martyred, as in the fourth book shall be declared.

Many also were sent unto Tunes, there to preach against the false sect of
Mahomet, with Brother Giles the third disciple of S. Francis, who being there
arrived, were, by the merchantes with whom they came, putt again into the
ships against their wills, for fear they might incur some dommage by
their occasion, and so were sent again into Italy: there were also sent into
diverse other places: for many religiou^ entreated it of the S. for the desire
they had of Martyrdom, wherefore to give them confort, he permitted them to
go: they did much fructify in diverse places, as in their lives shall appear,
because having reposed all their confidence in God, he wrought many miracles by
them, and miraculously releiued them in their necessities, as in the accidents
following, here placed for example does appear.

How God sustained the traveling Freer Minors in their necessities.
Many of the said Religious being in very vast mountains, were exceedingly
afflicted with thirst, by reason of the extreme heat that then was: so that it
could not be more violent; when they came to any fountain (where having had
the benediction of their superior, they dra^ck their fill of that water, which
they well knew to be more divine then terrestrial) considering that they found
themselves thereby so corroborated and revived that in virtue thereof, they
coutagiously performed the rest of their journey, they yielded thanckes to God
for the same.

Two others trauailling according to the Apostolical manner (without wallet)
and having spent almost, a whole day in travail, without getting any bread,
were so enffeebled with hungar, that their extremety seemed at the full, yet
did it prove more, when coming into a Church, and demanding a little bread for
the love of God, of the priest thereof, the honest man answered that he had it
not: wherefore the poor Religious passing on in a kind of despair, met on the
way a young man, who having saluted them, began to question with them in this
manner: whither go you so sorrowful and heavy that you appear to be
ouerchardged therewith? they answered, that finding none that would give them
bread, they walked whither their hungar did lead the^, whereof they feared to
die, this young man presently replied: go to sit down and eat, here are two
loaves. Whiles they were eating, he began to discover who he was, saying unto
them: O men of little faith, why distrust you the providence of God? why
remember you not those words Psalm. 54.
of David so often cited by your holy Father: putt your hope in God, and he
will assist you, he that fails not the very beasts. Know that it has
pleased God, to chastise, and afflict you with hungar, for your weakness of
faith: and therefore learn how you ought to behave your selves hereafter: which
said, he vanished, and the Religious, thus humbled, demanded pardon of God, to
whom they promised amendment.

How a man that built a Covent for the Freer Minos had his money increased: this
is the thirteenth chapter of the sixth book, putt in this place where it ought
to be.
THE LXVII. CHAPTER.
But what happened unto two Religious that were sent into Arragon is very
admirable: being received in Lerida, by an honorable gentleman called Raymod de
Barriaco, very devout unto the Order of S. Francis, they persuaded him to
build them an oratorie without the town; assuring him that by such
disbursement his money would not diminish: whereto giving credit, he so
seriously set laborers on worck, that in short time the building was very
forward. Now sending his servant one day unto his cabinett to take thence some
money to pay the laborers, he returned, answearing him that there was no
more. He not believing it, sent him the second time; but he affirmed that
doubtleslie there was none; wherewith the gentleman considering the great
expenses he had made, and the failing of the foresaid promise, being
exceedingly disquieted: went impatiently to the said two Religious, and
reproached them: whereto they humbly answered, that he should not not be
afflicted: but should go himself, and curiously search, and should without
doubt find the promise of God not to be frustrate. Which the gentleman
hearing, being somewhat recomforted and encouraged, believed the words of the
Religious. Goeing then himself; he found all his money, as if he had not
disbursed a penie: and besides he found a notable sum in a corner. Wherefore
replenished with joy at the knowledge of such a miracle of God, he went to the
said Religious, at whose feet falling prostrate, he demanded pardon for the
little faith he had: and then with exceeding fervor proceeded in the building.

How S. Francis went into Egypt to preach the Faith of Jesus Christ unto the
the Sultan.
THE LXVIII. CHAPTER.
THe year of grace 1219. after the said holy Father had sent his brethren
into diverse places, as we have said, he determito go preach the faith unto the
great Sultan of Babylon in Egypt, and with such fervor, that the Christians
then went with exceeding devotion, to see if he and his Religious could fight a
spiritual combat, and by the grace of God, wrest those prisoners out of the
hands of the devil. But as a great number of his Religious followed him to
go in his company, arriving at Ancona, where they were to embarque
themselves, he said unto them: My beloved Brethren, I would willingly content
you all. I know that you vehemently desire to accompany me, in regard of your
greedy thirst of Martyrdom. But you may well perceive that it is impossible,
because the vessel is not capable to carry us all: It is therefore expedient
that you refer your selves to the will of God, whereby such of you as shall be
elected, shall presently How S. Francis knew the will of God for carrying with
him those that accompanied him goeing to the Mores
go with me, and the others shall remain in peace. And therefore that none be
discontent, you see there a little child very simple (which saying, he poynted
at him, being before him) who knows us not, if you think it good, as I
do, he shall make choice of you. They al incontinently consented thereunto: the
holy Father therefore called the child, to whom in their presence, he said:
Tell me, my child, is it the will of God that all these Religious go with me
into Egypt? The child answered, no. Which of them then (replied S. Francis)
This, this, this, (said the child) and so by one and one he pointed out eleven,
and no more: which the others perceauing they stopped their journey, and the holy
Father with the said eleven Religious embarked themselves.

At length after a long navigations they arrived in Egypt, where the Christian
army then beseiged the city of Damiett which the Sultan possessed, whose army
was also in the field, every day ski^mishing with ours: so that there was no
mean to pass the army of the Pagans, without imminent danger of death, in
regard that the Sultan had proclaimed an edict through his camp, that every
More that could bring in the head of a Christian, should be rewarded with a
ducat. But the servant of God S. Francis, who went thither for no other end but
to die a martyr, having made his prayer, and being spiritually comforted in
God, went with all his companyons to the army of the Mores, continually Psalm.
22.
singing this verse of the Prophett: Although I shall walk in the midst of
the shadow of death, I will not fear evils: because thou art with me. Bur
being discovered by the Mores, diverse of them issued out of the camp and
assaulted S. Francis and his companions, as hungry wolves the simple sheep, who
yielded themselves captives without any resistance, affirming only that they had
matters of importance to impart unto the Sultan.

How the holy Father S. Francis preached unto the Sultan
THE LXIX. CHAPTER.
THus then was S. Francis and his companions led fast bound unto the Sultan,
who incontinently demanded who they were, who had sent them into his army, and
what was the end A most vehement and persuasiue speech and exhortation of S.
Francis unto the Sultan.
of their coming. The holy Father, as one that found himself in that place
which he had a long time exceedingly desired, with a merueilous fervor of
spirit thus answered him: Know Emperor Sultan, that our coming hither has
not bin enjoined us by any earthly man or Prince, but by the will and ordinance
of that almighty king of kings, and lord of lords (the eternal God) who has
sent us unto thee, that art not only his creature as we all are, but art also
his Minister, and possessest his place in thine Empire: and therefore his most
gracious goodness seeing that thou with all thy people, walk out of the true
way of the knowledge of him, thine only, true, and sovereign God: and though
thou deceauest thy self putting thine affection in creatures, without
acknowledging their Creator and Redeemer: though thou do far stray from
the way of natural reason, whereby thou might attain the knowledge of thy
faults, of the honor thou owe unto his divine Majesty, and of his law, yet
he, having a feeling compassion of thee, has sent us hither to teach thee the
true way, and the only mean of thy salvation, which consists alone in the
faith and obedience of JESUS CHRIST, the true Son of God and true man, who
came into the world to redeem us from the hands of the devil, and to give
eternal glory to all them that have bin, are, and shall be sincere in holy
Faith: and on the contrary, eternal torment and damnation to the disobedient,
and such as err from the said most holy Faith: and to this end would he, by
his immensiue charity assuming our nature, therewith satisfy all our offenses,
and die on the wood of the cross for our sins, and would afterward leave
us the meritt of his passion, in the sacrament of holy baptism, whereby we are
newborn to eternal life, that all our sins dying, we may set our selves
free from the captivity of the devil, and from eternal death, which this
cruel ennemy has from time to time procured us. Great Sultan (proceeded the
S.) open the ears and eyes of thine understanding: misprise not the Embassadge
which thine omnipotent eternal king sends thee, permit his grace to enter
into thy heart, and by his holy light he will give thee instant knowledge of the
great blindes wherein till this day thou have lived: and consider attentively
how much thou art bound unto his divine majesty, letting thee now understand
that he can give thee a kingdom in heaven much greater then this which he has
given thee here one earth. But if thou persevere in thine error, be thou
assured of The effect of the holy Fathers speech.
the punishment prepared for thee: for thou must know that soon or late thou
must fall into his hands, and yield him an account both of thy sins, and of
thy vassals. The holy Father spoke these and many other* like words, with such
fervor and vehemency of spirit, that all those present, though they were all
infidels, did manifestly know, that the said words proceeded of a more then
humane virtue. And they Matt. 10.
were indeed uttered with the same spirit, that God promised his servants
saying: I will give you a tongue and wisdom, which the princes of the world
shall not be able to resist.

Now the Sultan acknowledgeing so great a virtue in the servant of God, he gave
him thanckes with much reverence, and tokens of courtesy, then asked him
concerning new difficulties, being very attentive to the answeares which the
holy Father gave him, as a man sent him S. F. having offered to put himself
into a fire with the priests of the Solda^ for proof of his Religion, the high
priest of the Sultan ran away.
from God: and therefore very instantly prayed him, not return to the
Christians, but to remain with him: the servant of JESUS CHRIST cntierly
circumvested with zeal of the faith, thereupon made him this answer.

Great Sultan, If you with all your people will be converted, I will right gladly
remain with you: and if you have any doubt that detaineth you from leaving
your belief for mine, because the time is very short, you may presently make
proof thereof: let there be made a great fire in the mids of the army, then
call your Sacrificers and Religious and command us all to enter into the mids
of the fire: and afterward follow their faith that by their God shall be
preserved.

The Sultan, amazed at the proposition made by the holy Father said: I do not
thinck that any of our Religious will make this trial. Wherein he was not
deceived: for he had scarcely uttered that word, but one of his Collociers
there present, very aged and among the Turcks reputed for a S. hearing it,
incontinently slipped away, fearing that (the Sultan, accepting the condition)
he should be devoured by the flames.

S. F. for better affirmation of his faith offers to go into the fire.
The holy Father then addressing himself again into the Sultan, said: Mighty
Sultan, will thou promise unto God to become Christian, if I my self alone go
into the fire? Whereto I am now readily prepared. The Sultan answered him that
he durst not then make any such promise, much less accept such offer, fearing
that such an unwonted attempt might raise some tumult in his army: nevertheless
it wrought much fruit in his heart, and though for the present he did not
resolve to be baptized, yet he remained exceedingly aflected to the holy
Father, to whom he offered a great quantity of gold, silver, and apparel, for
himself and his companions: which the Saint no more esteemed S. F. refuses
and contemns the presents which the Sultan offered him.
then very filth, not vouchsafing to behold the same: which much more amazed
the Sultan: yet he prayed him again to accept those presents, to dispose them
in almose for his soul, albeit he were not as yet resolved to be baptized. But
his requests were vain. S. Francis then determined to pass further, as not
finding any firm and stable resolution in the Sultan, though he prayed the
holy Father to visitt him often, affirming that he would confer more amply
with him: and granted him letters patentes, by virtue whereof he and his Br.
might freely preach over all his kingdom, wherewith S. Francis departed.

How S. Francis and his companions preached the faith to the kingdom of the
Sultan, and how he miraculously resisted a More that tempted him to carnality.
THE LXX. CHAPTER.
Saint Francis divided his companions and sent them over Egypt and Syria, and
himself with Brother Illuminatus went through all the kingdom continually
preaching the gospel. And being on a time enforced to rest himself in a
certain place expecting the mitigation of the stormy weather, he retired into
a house to lodge, where in was a More, who in the lineamentes and proportion of
her face was fair, and of comely grace, but in spirit extremely loath some:
she, induced by the devil, that one each side cast his snares to surprise the
S. went to him into a chamber, where purposely she had placed him alone, and
instantly prayed him to sin with her: the S. answered her: woman if thou will that I offend with thee, thou must also yield to me in my request. S.
Franc. lies on the coals.
Whereto the amourous More presently accorded. S. Francis then inco^tinently
goeing to a great fire that was there, and spreding it abroad, laid down and
stretched himself thereon, inuiting the More to keep her promise, and lie with
him one that bed so gorgious and resplendat. The More remained a while pensive
between love and fear, expecting A lewd More thincking to tempte S. Fr. was
converted.
the issue; but at length, seeing him to turn one the coals, as if he had
bin one roses and lillies; she acknowledged her self, and her sin: and was
baptized, and afterward (by virtue of the miracle of the S.) as an other
Samaritane, converted many Mores unto JESUS CHRIST. The S. having upon this
occasion seiourned there certain days, went on his journey, and coming within
three or four leagues of Antioch, to a place called Mo^tenegro, where was a
Monastery of Religious of the Order S. Be. he there made some stay and in such
sort co^ported him self, that in few days the Abbott and all the Religious
renu^cing A whole monastery of Benedictines became of S. Franc. Order.
all their possesio^s into the hands of the Patriarck became Freer Minors:

In the mean while it chanced unto two other of his companions that they
seeming to a More, so miserable, he of compassion offered them almose, which
they refusing in any sort to receive, the More demanded them wherefore they
would not accept the same, whereto they answered, that for the Jove of God they
would possess neither money, or any other thing in this world: the More was
therewith so touched, that he suddenly received them into his affection, yea into
such amity, that thence forward he had care of all their necessities, and
promised them to sell his goods to mayntaine them, if they would continue in
that country. The worthy example of their life was so admirable, that they who
could not be converted by their doctrine, were converted by mean of their
virtuous worckes, which indeed are of much more efficacy: they mollified the
most fierce and barbarous nations, mortal ennemies of the Christian name,
making them compassionate and pitiful, but the number of the wicked and
insolent budding forth, and being the more potent in that country, yet not
daring to kill them, in regard of the patentes of their great Sultan; they
caused them to live a S. Franc. returned toward the Sultan.
lamentable life, afflicting them ten thousand manner of ways: and the holy
Father here upon knowing the will of God to be that he should return, having
by the assistance of his divine Majesty, assembled al his Religious, not having
so much profited among those Barbarians, as he desired, he repaired toward
the Sultan, thence (having taken leave of him)to return into Italy.

How S. Francis returned into Italy.
THE LXXI. CHAPTER.
THe said holy Father being returned toward the Sultan, was very joyfully
and graciously entertained, and he at length told him secretly that he would
willingly become Christian, believing The resolution of the Sultan to become
Christian and his demand to be instructed.
firmly that the Christian Religion was the true way of salvation; but he
feared to manifest the same for the present, the time seeming improper, he
warring against the Christians, nor being secure, by reason that the Mores
hated them to the death: but because by thy return (said the Sultan to S.
Francis) as I conjecture, thou may profitt many, and I have many matters to
dispatch that deeply concern me: I beseech thee to instruct me at this
preset, that mine affairs effected, I may obey thee, when occasion shall be
presented, as I do now sincerely promise thee. The holy Father having
demanded respite of answer, went to his prayer, wherein perseuering for many
days together, he continually implored the grace of God for that poor soul,
whence he would never desist, till he was heard, which with the success being
revealed unto him, he went to the Solda^, to whom he said: Sir, I resolve to
go into Italy, the will of my God being such: but I promise to se^d you two
Religious, in time convenient, by whose mean (according to the revelation S.
Franc. assures the Sultan of his salvation.
which God has given me, and which I explicate and promise unto you) you shall
certainly be saved. The Sultan, having heard so grateful an answer, with an
exceeding contentement imprinted the same in his heart, and S. Francis taking
leave of him returned into Italy, and failed not in the accomplishment of his
promise: for he appeared to two of his Religious that were resident in Syria,
whom he sent to the Sultan who was deadly sick: the Religious repaired unto him
and instructed him, And sent him two of his Religious to baptize him a little
before his death.
and having baptized him he died.

S. Antony of Padua speaking of this Sultan, conformably hereto affirms, that
diverse are of opinion that he was baptized before his death: the firm
affection which he carried unto the Christians, being apparently manifested:
for he had entertained of the^ for the guard of his body: and it is well known
what piety he always showed toward our army. Likewise James de Vitry
Cardinal, in his history written of the conquest of the holy land, guieth
testimony of S. Francis his voyage in those quarters, in these words: We have
seen the Father S. Francis, the first Founder of the Order of the Freer
Minors, a simple man and without learning, James de Vitri Cardinal.
but so much favored of God and men, and elevated to so high a fervor of
spirit, that coming to the army of Christians, that beseiged the city of
Damiette in Egypt, he passed with out any fear, armed only with the buckler
of faith, to the midst of the army of the Mores, saying: Bring me to the
Sultan: to whose presence being come, as soon as he had beheld him, of a most
cruel beast as he was, he became a most gentle lamb, and gave most attentive
ear to the word of God which he preached. But at length fearing that many of
his people that desirously herad him, and yet did not stir from his camp,
would be converted and adhere unto our army; he returned him with great
reverence unto us, praying him at his deperture that he would pray unto God
for him, that he would please to inspire him to entertain and espouse that
law, that were most pleasing and grateful unto him.

Of the vehement temptations wherewith the devils tormented S. Francis.
THE LXXII. CHAPTER.
ALbeit the holy Father wrought so much fruit, converting the sinners of Egypt,
and conducting them into the true land of promise, which is Religion free from
all earthly tribute and obligation: nevertheless the ancient ennemy of this
blessed generation did not sleep: for he used all the slightes he could devise
wherewith to confound the same. And because he knew well that it entierly
consisted in the head which was S. Francis, he omitted not to assault this
fortress, which God had placed on an high situation to be an example unto
others, hoping always either to weary him, or at least to make some relent
and mitigation of his strict rigor and perfection of life. Knowing therefore
that all kind of virtue was complete in the said S. he also stirred all his
ministers against him, who notwithstanding could no further prevail then God
would permit. The arrogant and proud Lucifer, could not support his profound
humility. Mammon the prince of the world perceauing that there was no wordlie
thing in the S. but that he had cassiered every thing, yea him who was prince
thereof, by the rigor of Evangelical poverty, he never slept from
endeavoring to make him cast his affection on some creature of this world. The
gloutonus Satan watched and labored to procure some relaxation in the rigor
of his diett, lodging, and clothing. The impatient Asmodeus armed himself
against him to level at the patience of the holy Father. The loathsome and
filthy Behemol assaulted him, presenting sensuality, often unto him, with
endeavor to defile the candor of his virginity. Beelzebub the captain of the
idle, omitted no time to tempt him with sloth, and by some apparent reasons,
to persuade him to take some little recreation: The persecuting prince
Leuiathan, tormented him with natural perturbations, discontentements, and
disgustes, wherewith the flesh afflicted the peace and charity of the S.
against which Golias and his army, the humble David in the name and virtue of
his God, obtained so glorious a victory, that he might well sing: Francis has
ruined and subdued an hundred thousand ennemies, and has driven away the
derisions and rebukes which the devils procured unto the Church by avarice and
sensuality. But God would that the devil himself should by the mouth of the
possessed, acknowledge the cruel war that S. Francis and his Religious waged
against him, and likewise the great fruit they produced in souls, though this
his confession was sufficiently known and experienced by the world, and
revealed by JESUS CHRIST, himself: wherefore the S. merited to be crowned,
having bin so valiant in the fierce assaults of so many ennemies, and at
length vanquished so tedious a combatt as he had from the beginning of his
conversion: First by his very parents, and afterward by infinite other means,
that never permitted him in repose. But how much more the devil gave him
occasion to sin, so much more did he endeavor to meritt, and became pure as
gold in the fire. Wherefore he often said: If my Religious knew what war mine
ennemies raise against me, they would perhaps have compassion of me, and hold
me excused, if I cannot be sometimes with them, as I would desire.

One time when God permitted him for his greater good to be tempted, the devil
draw him into so deep a melancholy of spirit, that exteriourly there
appeared many signs thereof, he being no longer able to conceal nor moderate
the same, in such sort as he seemed to be S. Franc. had a temptation of
Mela^choly that continued two years. Matt. 17. Marc. 11.
utterly abandoned of God. If he would converse with his Religious, he could
not, if he would be sequestered from them, it was worse, abstinence and
mortification of the flesh annoyed him, haircloth and prayer auayled not. He
continued in this sort more then two years, though one would not have imagined
it had bin of an hours continuance, till at length God determining to have
compassion of him, as he prayed with effusion of tears, he heard the voice of
God that said: If thou have (so much) faith as a mustard seed, and say to
this mountain, remove from hence thither, it shall be done. S. Francis then
answered, which is this mountain, my God? and the voice replied: The
temptation: then S. Francis: My God, let thy word then be accomplished. And
from thence he was freed, and gave infinite thanckes to God for the same.

Of many other temptations with S. Francis had.
THE LXXIII. CHAPTER.
SAint Francis being in continual prayer in the hermitage of Grecio, a
gentleman one night sending him a pillow to use in regard of the infirmity of
his eyes: he could never repose nor pray: for he had such a trembling in his
head, that all his body was distempered therewith. Now having a long time
discoursed with himself, whence this distemperature should proceed, he at
length resolved and concluded, that it could not be occasioned but by the
pillow, wherinto the devil was entered: wherefore he caused it to be carried out
The devil entered into a pillow lent unto S. Franc. for his infirmity
of his cell by his companion: who having to that purpose laid it on his
shoulders and carried it out, incontinently lost his speech, and which was yet
worse) stood immovable with the said pillow, He continued in this affliction,
which how it tormented him may of each one be imagined, till saint Francis
admiring his long tariance, called him: at which voice the Religious returned
to himself, cast the pillow instantly to the ground, and ran to the S. to
whom he recounted all, whereupon he answered him: My Brother, last night
whiles I was at compline, I understood that this devil came hither: and know
that finding no other place, he entered into the soft pillow: learn therefore
now how subtle and malicious he is, that having no power to endommage the
soul, because it is protected by divine grace, he seeks to hinder the repose
of the body, that it may not pray, and perform other exercises in time
convenient; or to make it diseased to procure it to murmr, and thereby to fall
into sin.

Being an other time afflicted with the said infirmity of his eyes, in such
sort as for the space of fifty days together, he could see no light, he was
placed in a very darck cell made of rushes, mattes, and earth: there did he
endure such excessive grief, as he could not have one hour of repose. The
devil to augment his affliction, sent him into his celle a very great quantity
of huge mice, that they might provoke him to impatience: wherefore the S. being
entierly resigned into the hands of God, feeling a vehement anguish in his
heart, uttered these worde^ Help me, my God, in such a multitude of infirmities,
diseases, and afflictions: that I may patiently endure them. Whereto a voice
answered: Tell me, S. Francis, if for thine infirmities and afflictions, one
should How S. Francis was assured of his salvation.
promise thee such a treasure, and of so great value, as if all the earth were
gold, and all the stones diamondes, or other precious stones, and all the
waters baulme, would thou not esteem all thy miseries, filthy dirt, in
comparison of the said treasure, and would thou not be content more then
voluntarily to supporte the same? hereunto the S. answered, yea, I should be
very glad thereof. Well rejoice thee then (replied the voice) that thou may
live content and secure, as if thou were in my kingdom. Having concluded his
prayer, with exceeding joy of this vision, deliverance and divine promise, he
incontinently said to his companions: If a king had given a kingdom to a
servant, should not he have cause to be always joyful? And they answered,
yes. And if (added he) he gave him all the Empires of the world, should he not
have yet greater cause of joy? they likewise answered, yes. I ought then said
he, infinitely to rejoice in mine infirmities and greifes, and for them to give
thanckes unto the Father of mercy, unto my Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, and to the
holy Ghost the true comforter: since he has showed such mercy to me his
unworthy servant, as to vouchsafe at this present to assure me of his
kingdom. In respect whereof I will compose himnes, to singhenceforward, and to
yield him infinite thanks for the same.

Of many other temptations and subtilties, whereby the d^ui^^ tormented him.
THE LXXIV. CHAPTER.
THe devils, not content to disturb him with infinite temptations did also
assault him by occasion of sin, as by the ensuyng accident shall appear.
Preaching one day in Apulia, in a church very near unto the Palace of the
Emperor Frederick, being as yet unknown, many Courtiers were there present,
who perceauing him so freely to reprehend vices, affirming that whosoever
would follow and satisfy his sensual appetites, could never have part in
heaven, they retourning, did scoffingly relate the whole unto the Emperor, who
answered them. These Preachers in deed do say much, but they perform little.
Wherefore I would willingly know if this man be such a one, let some one
amongst you undertake to inuit him to supper and lodge with him, and having
given him good entertainment, let him dexterously A gentilman having promised
the Emperor Frederick the second to induce S. Franc. to sin with a woman,
did repent the same and the Emperor also.
convey into his chamber a fair courtisane, to try if he can use that virtue
of continence which he so forcibly preaches unto us. A gentleman did
presently offer to putt this project in practice, for in princes Courts there
want not men that seek, rather to please their master in these frivolous and
sottish toys, then in matters that concern the honnour and saffety of the
soul. This Courtier then, when he had found a time convenient to the purpose,
invited the holy Father, who simply promised him, his custom being ordinarily
to satisfy honest and lawful requests. He then went with the said gentleman
unto his house, which he found sumptuously adorned, and being set at table,
did according to his custom eat very little: after that, at convenient hour
he was brought to a chamber all tapistred, where was a right gorgious bed, and
a great fire conformable to the coldness of the season: the gentleman bidding
him good night, wished him to sleep at his ease: but the holy Father
answered him, that this chamber and bed were not proper for a poor beggar as
himself was, for whom the bare ground, or a little chafe would suffice: but
the gentleman departed without giving any reply, and subtly left the chamber
door open; whereby he brought in a very beautiful damsel, young, and witty,
and a corrupted Courtesane, to whom he promised great matters, if she could
induce this Religious to sin with her.

She then permitting him to end his prayers, and to cover himself at his
commodity, the time seeming to her purpose, went to his bed side: the S.
seeing her on the sudden, asked her to what end she came thither: whereto she
answered: that she came priuarely* to lie with him, and that she would never
leave him till he consented to her desire. S. Francis hereupon raising
himself, said: since thou art thereto resolved, be it: but stay a little, I will
prepate our lodging. And having with a courageous heart made a short prayer unto
God, he, with the irons that he found one the harth, spread and scattered the
most burning coals that were in the fire, and laid himself thereon, without
receiving any detriment, then invited the Courtisane, as he had done the More
in Egypt. Which the woman seeing, though she were sinful, began to cry out
that she had greiuously offended God, and his servant: and falling one her
knees demanded pardon of him. Wherefore they that attended on the stears
without the door to see the success of their lewd design, confounded and
filled with fear and terror, repenting their perverse Counsel did also ask
pardon, and relating all to the Emperor, himself sending for the S. did
likewise crave his pardon, and requested him to be mindful of him and his in
his devotions: thus in one instant he subdued the pleasure of the flesh that
was lewdly offered him by the woman, and the devil that had plotted the same,
remained conquered, and the Emperor and his Courtiers clearly assured that the
S. his life was conformable to his words, and finally God was praised.

Of the great assaults that the devils gave S. Francis in solitary places.
THE LXXV. CHAPTER.
THese afflictions which the holy Father endured were doubtless very violent:
but those which the devils laid on him in solitary places, where he prayed,
were without comparison much greater: for they gave him a marvelous war,
often appearing unto him in hideous and loathsome shapes, yea so horrible, that
no humane creature had bin able to endure them, if God had not given him force
S. Francis confounded the devils whenever they assaulted him.
and assistance, and these monsters did sometimes appear unto him with such
importunity, that they seemed to intend a combattt with him. Brother Giles that
was also exceedingly molested by the devils, did one day demand of S. Francis
if he had seen in the world that, which could not be beheld by any whosoever
the space of a Pater noster, who answered that the devil was so loathsome and
horrible that no man without the help of God, could behold him the space only
of half a Pater noster. Notwith standing armed with celestial armure, the more
they assaulted him, the more courage and valor did he get, saying: I will
defend me, My God, from the fury of these wicked spirittes, under the shadow of
thy wings and of thy graces. Sometimes, even being in the desert, he urged
them by these words. Ye false and wicked spirittes make boldly what anatomy
of me you will, for sure I am you shall do no more then my God will permit
you, whose creature I am, and for whom I am ready to endure as much
tribulation as he will give me, by your mean. The devils no longer able to
endure this notable constancy, departed utterly confounded.

S. Francis remaining one day in a Church of S. Peter, near to Bolonia,
desired to repose awhile, to make his prayer afterward. He had scarcely
inclined his head, but he began to feel his ennemies, wherefore making the
sign of the cross, he went out of the Church and said unto them: ye devils I
conjure you in the name of God the Father almighty, that to this my body you
do what soever my God has permitted you: for I am prepared to endure
althinges for his love, and because I have no greater ennemie then my body,
revenge me one it: which having said, they fled utterly confounded.

The rest of this chapter, to observe the Order of the history, is put in the
end of the thirty seventh chapter of the second book.

How S. Francis delivered his Brethren from temptations.
THE LXXVI. CHAPTER.
THus did S. Francis by the help of God obtain so many victories over his
ennemies, whereby he had already so terrified them, that he expelled them only
by virtue of his name, when he knew it to be to the honor of God. Besides this
auctority which God had given him, he had also such experience by reason of the
continual combattes which he had with them, that he knew how to counsel,
comfort and apply remedies to his Religious, when they suffered affliction in
that kind, as the sequel of this discourse will give us to understand.

A very spiritual Religious and one of the most ancient of the Order, very
familiar with S. Francis being afflicted with carnal temptations, by
extrauagant imaginations, in such sort as he was almost reduced to a desperate
point of power to resist them any longer, and one the other side he was
exceedingly perplexed to confess himself thereof, so much was shame to
express such foul and filthy cogitations, now increased in him: fastinges,
abstinences, and prayers, or other spiritual worckes did profitt him nothing:
Nevertheless resisting always to his vttmost, God sent unto him his servant S.
Francis, who coming to the monastery where this poor Religious was, he
privately S. Franc. in spirit knew the temptations of his Religious.
called him and said: Beloved brother, I will not that henceforward you
confess such and such fantasies, wherewith the devil to this day could never
prevail against you, and therefore hereafter fear not, but as often as he
shall tempt you, say only thrice the Pater noster, and by the mercy of God you
shall be delivered. The Religious exceedingly amazed at the virtue of S. Francis
that knew his very cogitations, was very conte^tedly satisfied with so sweet
and gentle a medicine, whereof making use, he freed himself of the temptations.

Brother Roger de la Marque, a Religious of pious conversation, was by divine
permissio^, so tempted of the devils, that he esteemed himself forsaken of
God: and because no application did avail him, he resolved to use this last
refuge: I will, said he go seek out S. Francis, of whom if I be mildly and
with a gracious countenance entertained, I shall have hope of Gods mercy: but
if he look awry upon me, I will take it for a sign that God has forsaken me.
Having thus determined, he took his way toward the holy Father, who was at
Assisium in the Bishops house who then was sick, where he had revelation of all
this, wherefore he commanded Brother Leo and Brother Macie to go meet him and
to tell him in his name; that he loved him particulerly above all other of his
Religion: which the said Religious understanding, full of consolation, he fell
on his knees with the interior of his heart giving thanckes to God, for that he
never abandoneth his servants, but does ever give ear to the prayers of those
that hope in him: and gives them the help of his grace to persevere in his
service. Which done, he arose, and with them went to the holy Father, who
knowing their coming, arose from the bed where he lay, and coming to him,
very tenderly embraced him, and left him not till he was entierly conforted,
and then dismissed him, fully satisfied and freed of his temptation.

Brother Angelus was also so greiuously tempted that he durst not be alone in
the night, for fear of the devils: but S. Francis having made the sign of the
cross upon him, enjoined him to go up on an high mountain and with a loud
voice to say unto them: O ye proud devils, come ye all and do that unto me
which God has permitted: which having done he never after saw any thing that
did offend him.

How S. Francis gave assistance to certain of his Brethren that were far from
him.
THE LXXVII. CHAPTER.
Saint Francis having his children always in his heart and in his soul, he
merited that as he prayed for them, God did often reveal unto him the
necessities wherinto they were fallen, to the end that by his presence, or
sending unto them, or prayers, he might releive them. His Vicar one a time
holding a chapter, he saw in spirit a Religious that would not acknowledge his
fault, to do penance for it, but did with all possible reasons defend
himself. S. Francis called a Religious and said unto him: Brother, behold how
the devil sits one the shoulders of that poor Religious and holds him by
the throat half S. Franc. assisted a Religious whom the devil choked.
choked, because I have prayed to God for him, and he has heard me, go and
bid him humble himself to his Vicar, and tell him the devil henceforward
shall have no power of him. Which the Religious having done, the other full of
contrition fell at the feet of the Vicar, acknowledged his fault, did penance,
and merited thenceforward to live very piously.

Brother Leo was delivered from a temptation by a letter from S. Franc.
Brother Leo being exceedingly oppressed and afflicted by diverse temptations of
the devil S. Francis sent him a letter such as the said Brother Leo then
desired, who at the very instant that he had read it, was delivered: the
contents whereof were thus: God hold and bless and turn his face to thee,
God be merciful to thee, and give thee his peace, Brother Leo, God give thee
his benediction, So be it. The which words taken out of the book of Numbers
of the benedictions of God, were of such efficacy, that they delivered all
those from temptations to whom the S. in writing sent them.

God permitted S. Francis, being one day at our Lady of Angels, to see a great
multitude of devils that endeavored to enter there, which they could not do
till a Religious began to conceive hatred against S. Franc. knew in spirit the
vices and defects of his Religious.
one of his Brethren, which did so breed in his heart that they entered into his
body and possessed him: which S. Francis perceauing (as a pitiful Pastor of
his sheep, called the Religious and reprehended him for the hatred he boar to
his brother: whereat he being exceedingly amazed that S. Francis knew it, did
acknowledge the virtue that God gave him, and put away that hatred, and thus
was consequently freed of his ennemy.

How he delivered Brother Ruffinus from a vehement temptation.
THE LXXVIII. CHAPTER.
BRother Ruffinus the companion of S: Francis was one time so extremely and
cruelly tempted, with a temptation of diffidence of predestination, that I
doubt whither there could be a greater, whence may be collected what slightes
the devil does use, to seek the ruin of the most perfect, if God did not
exceedingly assist them. Brother Ruffinus was a Religious of a pious and holy
conversation, and of very deep contemplation; wherefore the devil having
tempted him with diffidence of predestination, made it seem unto him that all
the labors, troubles and afflictions which he endured were lost, with the time
which he unprofitably spent in Religion, by reason that he was not predestinate
unto glory: which temptation augmenting, though he omitted not to converse with
his Brethren, did nevertheless make him exceeding sorrowful. And because he was
fearful and ashamed to discover it to any one, the devil by divine permission
did tempt him more and more. Wherefore assaulting him both exteriourly and
interiourly, he one time appeared unto him in form of a crucifix, that seeming
to have compassion on him, said: Poor man why do thou afflict thee with so
many abstinences without fruit? what avail thee so many prayers? since all the
world together cannot change that which from all eternity has bin ordained by
the providence of my Father: whereby thou art not of the number of the
predestinate, but of the reprobate. Wherefore I am moved with compassion of thy
so great sufferance: that at least thou begin not they hell during they life,
and albeit I have already diverse time inspited thee interiourly: I am now
content to appear unto thee such as I am, and by mine ordinary clemency to
assure thee of that which only I do know, since only I do damn and save,
which I do to putt thee out of all doubt, and to the end thou no longer
believe that other damned also, that son of Bernardone, who shall go to hell
with his Father, and all they that follow him shall be deceived. And after these
words he vanished, leaving the poor Brother Ruffinus in such heaviness (a
misery that does prostrate and ouetthrow the greatest servants of God) and in
his spirit so shadowed by the great princes of darcknes, that he was even
ready to loose the faith he had in God and in his holy servant: to whom
notwithstanding the aforesaid, he imparted nothing of his affliction.

S. Franc. delivered B. Ruffinus of a most greiuous temptation discovering unto
him the delusion of the devil.
But the holy Father being by divine revelation advertised thereof, and seeing
the peril wherinto his so deerly beloved brother was fallen, he sent for him
by Brother Macie as far as the mount Subasio, where he remained in a celle
separated from other: to whom, having understood the message, he rudely
answered: That he had nothing to do with S. Francis: by which words Brother
Macie esteeming that he might be deluded by the devil, amiably replied saying.
Oh God, brother Ruffinus what words have you uttered? are you besides you
self? or do you yield to be deluded by the devil? Know you not that S.
Francis is an Angel of heaven on earth? Is it not known unto us how many
millions of souls God has saved and will save by his means: how he has
illuminated the world, and how much ourselves perticulerly are by him
illuminated? howsoever since he has expressly sent for you, I will that you
repair unto him, because indeed I know that you are exceedingly deluded by the
devil.

Brother Ruffinus being by these words at length persuaded, without farther
reply went with him, and came to S. Francis: in whose presence appearing, the
devil lost his prey. For after he had recounted unto the S. all the
circonstances of his temptation by order, and had received demonstrations of
the S. to wit that the devil did harden the hearts of men, and God on the
contrary did soften and mollify the^, Ezechia 39.
himself saying: I will take from thee thy heart of stone, and will give thee
one of flesh, acknowledgeing the extreme hardness which the devil had left in
his heart, and with all understanding in one instant all his slightes, with
abondance of tears he uttered his fault and confessed his sin in concealing
his temptation S. Francis then said unto him: My son, go make thy confession
frequent prayer, and know for certain that this temptation, as thou shall
breifely experience, shall turn to no less peace and spiritual joy. And if
this horrible devil return to tempt thee, use these words unto him: Thou
base and loathsome devil, open wide thy lying mouth, that I may fill it full
of filth. Thus Brother Ruffinus retourning to his said mountain and celle
there to lament his passed error, Satan presented himself unto him in form
of JESUS CHRIST crucified, and said did I not forbid thee to believe Brother
Francis? But brother Ruffinus intertupted his words, and answered: Thou
loathsome and lying devil, open that thy mouth, where out issue such horrible
lies, that I may fill it with vilany: which the false and proud deceauer
hearing departed, making such a terrible ruin of the stones of the montaine
which he threw down by gross heaps hurling the^ with such impetuosity, that
the stones and flintes tumbling down stroke fire against each other: breifely
it seemed that the mountain was entierly to be ouer-throwen or suncken.

This storm was heard even to the place where S. Francis was, who with his
companions went out to see whence proceeded this terrible noise. They were all
exceedingly terrified, S. Francis excepted, who incontinently imagined the
cause. In the mean while Brother Ruffinus returned victorious from so tedious
and bitter a combatt, who by experience knowing this illusion, came to S.
Francis to whom to the great joy and contentement of all the hearers he
recounted all the success. He being returned to his cell, the true Crucisix
incontinently appeared unto him, and said: Thou have done well, Brother
Ruffinus, to take the counsel of Francis, who has discovered unto thee the
fraud of the devil: and therefore henceforward, in consideration of the
affliction which thou have endured in this temptation, I give thee this grace
that whiles thou live, thou shall be no more afflicted by the devil: then
blessing him he disappeared: whereupon he was according to the prophecy of the
holy Father so comforted, and replenished with such sweetness and fervor of
spirit, that his soul was often ravished and elevated in God: and so he lived
and died in this perfect union of his love.

Of the humility that shined in this Saint.
THE LXXIX. CHAPTER.
IT being understood, that the holy Father had obtained a right glorious
victory over the devil, in himself and his: for he only is vanquished that
presumes of himself, and the humble (as little fishes) escape out of the
nets, we will now consider by what mean the S. became so admirably
victorious over those proud and rebellious spirittes. It was in deed by no
other mean then by his humility, wherewith he did not only surmount their
cruel assaults, but they being unable long time to endure him, he putt them
to flight; it alone being the guard, beauty, and the mother of all other
virtues, above all which, it shined in him and gave light as in the person of
him that would be the least of all his brethren, and one that freely
acknowledged himself the greatest sinner of sinners, and reputed himself no
other then a veslell full of ordure: and not (as in deed he was) an elected
vessel, full of sanctity and very resplendant, by the luster of so great
virtues and singular graces, wherein all perfection appeared as in a very
beautiful and clear glass. Now on this virtue of humility, he labored to
found and build all his holy and worthy edifice, affirming that JESUS CHRIST
descended not into the world, from the besome of his eternal Father, nor was
vested with our so contemptible flesh for other end but (having redeemed us) to
teach us both by word and effect as a true master of humility, what himself
said: Learn of me because I am meek and Matt. 11.
humble of heart: therefore he as his imitatour endeavored to be of no respect,
first in his own sight, and then before others, fearing least it should befall
unto him as it is written, that he which is high before men, Luc. 16.
is abominable before God; for which cause he accustomed to say unto his
Religious: A man is so great as he appears to be before God, and no greater:
and therefore it is a great vanity to glory in the honors of the world. He also
rejoiced when any injury or reproach was done him, and received praises and
honors discontentedly, being better pleased with reprehension then with
flattery: because said he, by reprehension he learned to humble and correct
himself, whereas it was an over excessive vanity to hear ones self praised.
And with all he endeavored to conceal the gifts which he received of God,
forbearing to discover that which might occasion him to fall or offend.

Being one day called S. call me no more S. said he, for as yet I may have
children, and no man ought to be praised, till he have perseuered unto the end,
which to us is uncertain; besides, no glory is to be given to what soever is
done by a sinner: A sinner may fast, lament, and discipline his flesh, but he
cannot do it alone and of himself. The principal is that he be faithful
unto his God, whereof only he should glorify: which he shall do, if in his
servitude, he attribute all the good he shall do, unto God, from whom do
proceed and are derived unto us, all graces and perfections, as from the true
Father of all our consolations.

Of the love and zeal he had in humility.
THE LXXX. CHAPTER.
DIscoursing one day with his brethren, he said: I cannot repute my self a
Freer Minor, If I prove not this that follows in my self: I purpose to go
to the chapter, where shall be assembled Spiritual mortifications of S. Fr.
all the Religious who will receive me with great reverence as their superior:
afterward, let them pray me to comfort them, explicating unto them the word of
God, which for their satisfaction performing, let them all arise and say: Hold
they peace, we well have thee no longer for Superior, for thou art an idiot,
block-head, and ignorant: and with all know not what thou say, wherefore
it is over great shame to have such a superior; then be it that you detrude me
out of the chapter with utter dishonor, as deserving the same: I would not (I
say) esteem me a good Freer Minor, if I did not support all that with the same
promptitude and joy, as if I heard my self praised: for if I rejoice at
honors, what profitt reap I thereby? I putt my soul in peril of vain glory
without hope of any benefitt: but if I be contemned, my soul is thereby secured
and profits in spirit. In regard of his exceedingly zeal unto this
humility, when it happened that any praised him, either for his preaching, or
upon any other occasion, he commanded his companion, to contrary it, and to
give him words of disprayse: which doing, though unwillingly, the holy Father
would answer; God bless you, because you speak the truth, and that which
the son of Peter Bernardone does deserve.

Being one day at out lady of Angels, Brother Macie had a desire to try the
humility of S. Francis, though he were his particular friend, only because he
knew it would be grateful unto him: Being then in his presence, he twice
iterated these words: Wherefore to you? wherefore to you? as if he would
infer: Francis, wherefore do people so much honor you? The holy Father
smilinglie answered: What mean you by Proof of the humility of S. Fr.
that brother Macie? All the world (replied brother Macie) runs after you,
every one desires to see you, to hear and obey you: and for any thing that I
know, you are neither personable, learned, eloquent, nor noble, whence is it
then the world does follow you? The S. then vested with his accustomed
humility, having lifted his eyes to heaven, and a little prayed and thanked
God, thus answered his dear friend: Will you know, Brother Macie, whence it
proceeds that, as you say, such resort of people do follow me and willingly
hear me? This proceeds of the eyes of the great omnipotent God which in all
places beholding both the good and bad, has pleased to choose me as the most
^. Cor. 1.
simple and vilest sinner in the world: for God does choose the most feeble and
infirm things, with them to confound the noble, potent, strong, and worldly
wise: that the glory may be his alone, and that the creature being in presence
of his Creator may have nothing, whereof to glory. An answer doubtless more
then humane and descending from heaven, where the spirit of this holy Father
learned of that high Psalm. 66.
and potent God, who has ever his eyes fixed on the humble of spirit, as
likewise the most sacred virgin learned, when she answered to Luc. I.
the praises of S. Elizabeth by these words: My soul does praise God, because
he has beheld the humility of his hand maid.

How S. Francis reputed him self the greatest sinner of the world
THE LXXXI. CHAPTER.
THat the more he humbled himself on earth, the more he was exalted in heaven,
was manifested unto Brother Ruffinus in a revelation whiles he was praying: for
being rapt in spirit, A vision of Br. Ruffinus of the future glory of S.
Franc. for his humility.
he saw an high and eminent place in heaven, wherein was the Order of Seraphins,
and among them a seat void far more resplendant then any other, and all
covered with precious stones. Whereupon with exceeding admiration he demanded
for whom that seat was prepared, and he heard a voice that said: this seat was
one of the principal Seraphins, that fell into hell, and now it is reserved
for the right humble Francis. After this vision, Brother Ruffinus had an
extreme desire to know wherein principally consisted that so great humility
which was so meritorious in the blessed Father saint Francis: having therefore
some discourse one day with him he said: My beloved Father, I heartily beseech
you to tell me certainly what is your own esteem and what opinion you have
of your self. Saint Francis answered: Verily I hold my self for the
greatest sinner of the world, and toe serve God less then any other. Brother
Ruffinus replied unto him: that he did not thinck he could speak the same
sincerily and with a clear conscience; it being so that others, as was
apparent, did committ many greiuous sins, whereof by the grace of God he was
innocent. To this S. Francis answered: If God had with so great mercy favored
those others of whom you speak, I am assured that how soever wicked and
detestable they may be now, they would far more gratefully acknowledge the
gifts of God, then I do and would serve him much better. And if my God should
now forsake me, I should perpetrate more enormities then any other. In regard
therefore of this ineffable grace done unto me, I accuse and acknowledge my
self to be the greatest sinner that is. Brother Ruffinus by this answer was
thoroughly confirmed in the vision which God had showed unto him, having found
good demonstration of the meritt of the holy Fathers humility.

Objection of the author, and his solution.
But because humility ought always to have verytie for foundation, it seems
one may make a sufficient reply to this his answer and not without reason.
For some one might thus argument: Most holy Father tell me if you please, by
the excessive love which in this world you have borne to the humble Jesus
Christ, and at this present more the^ ever do bear him: where have you
learned, that if an other sinner had received or should receive the talent of
grace which God has given you, that he would more acknowledge it, and make
better profitt thereof then you have done? Upon what reason, upon what doctrine,
and on what spirit is grounded the foundation of this feeble opinion which you
seem to have of your self? For I firmly believe that if The answer.
God had known it, he would never have bestowed this grace on you, but rather
on that other. The most humble Father to this objection might well answer,
that he had learned it of the doctrine of John. 3.
our Savior JESUS CHRIST, who with his mouth has said, The spirit breaths
where he will; and of S. Paul, that neither 1. Cor. 3.
he that planteth is any thing, nor he that waters, but he that gives the
increase, God: whereof he might thus infer: I not being Francis, without God
that worcketh in me, when he had pleased to inspire an other, there is no doubt
but he had done the like, and even more according to his grace. And whereas you
believe, that if God had given it to an other, it had bin known that he had
done this or more, your belief is false: for as the same S. Paul says, it is
in the power of the Potter, to frame one pott for honor, and an other for
dishonor, Romans 9.
one for use of meat, and an other to serve for the chamber. Nevertheless it
would be ridiculous, for the vessel to complain, and say: why is this honor
given to him rather then to me? for thus it has pleased him, because he is the
master.

A worthy discourse of humility. Cant. 1.
But he might farther, and with much more reason allege the saying of the
Espouse: Consider me not nor do not admire that I am black, because the sun
has taken away my color: which has no other signification, but that one
should not believe that this great deformity (which the humble presupposes in
himself) does proceed of what soever cause indifferently, but that the sun
of justice, the living God, makes it appear so foul unto his eyes: and not
the light of the Moon, which is worldly wisdom. And this, I say, proves, not
that he makes the fair, foul in essence, but in appearance only, by
comparaison made of a thing imperfectly fair, with an other beautiful in the
highest degree. It being supposed then that I have yet in me some good (as it
may be) nevertheless when I fix mine eyes on that divine sun of justice, I am
enforced and constrained to behold the great multitude of sun motes of mine
imperfections in his clear beams, whereon reflecting as one ought, I know my
baseness and mine imperfection to be infinite, and to become as a nothing in
this mine accident all beauty. But because that which is true cannot be
otherwise: I return and reenter into my self, where considering the greatness
of my natural baseness, I acknowledge* nothing in my self but the grace of God
that does any thing* because as man, there is no sin but I might have
committed. In which respect I ought to humble my self, and believe that
touching this point there is no man in the world, any way inferior unto me.
This equality laid, the force of humility does after enter into Psalm. 21.
his meritt: whereas among men we are all naturally equal in imperfections:
therefore the truly humble does honor and repute all other as greater then
himself, and that is the black color, which the Sun of his grace does by
his goodness give him, with which humility God himself (made man) being
clothed, said: I am not a man, but a worm, the contempt of men and outcast
of the people. And if JESUS CHRIST spoke this of himself, who is the mouth of
truth, who can ever contemn a man and say that he does falsely esteem
himself less then other men. And therefore God does farther say: learn of me
because I am meek and humble of heart; learn of me, says he, because he knew
that proud humane ignorance, could not conceive, I will not say teach, this
doctrine more then humane by its apparent Matt. 11.
and sophistical reasons. But learn of me, to wit, what God is, and what is
man: for I being the one and the other together, none can better know the^ my
self, what difference there is between these two. Now of this consideration
proceeds true and perfect humility, and therefore it is greater in the blessed
that clearly see the Sun of justice in his splendours, then in themselves
walking in the pilgrimage of this world, wherein by faith and imperfect charity
they receive the divine beams only by reuerberation and reflection in the
cloud of their imperfection: and therefore the nerer the true servant
approaches unto him with the understanding, the more humble he is. So, as the
glorious virgin Mary was the most humble of all creatures on earth, even so is
she most humble of all in heaven, though she be at the right hand of her
Son: because the more she does participate of that divine and infinite light,
and does more clearly and with greater glory contemplate that so great depth of
the infinite and high divine bounty, so much better does she see the goulfe of
her litlenes, which in the end is to be a creature, which is nothing in
comparison of her Creator, before whom she bends her knees with far more
reverence then ever did the four and twenty ancientes, whom S. John saw
prostrate before the throne of the living God, because she Apoc. 4.
has a deeper knowledge of him then they. Therefore let all humane reason be
silent, mute, and give place in the certain contemplation of true divine
humility, since it cannot penetrat the deep secrettes of God, by mean whereof,
with a most miraculous operation it then raises a soul more high, when it
most debaseth her to the profundity of her consideration, and then it procures
her a crown in heaven, and makes her true Queen in that eternal kingdom,
when it causes her to be inferior, slave, and subject to all creatures for
the only love of God, which being her foundation, it What humility is.
is not to be admired if her building arise to such an hight. For humility is
no other thing then a profound and continual humiliatio^ of the soul unto his
divine Maistie, caused by his divine liberality. And therefore she ought duly
to consider with what benignity his majesty united himself unto us, receiving
into him our so base and abject nature, whereof he would make use to raise and
relieve our so extreme poverty: of this knowledge will* grow and increase in
the soul the true love and approbation of the obligation we have unto God. It
cannot be expressed how insatiable a thing it is to desire always to
correspond unto JESUS CHRIST, in worckes, misprising ones self for his love,
and ever desirously giving ear unto the foresaid voice. Learn of me, by the
true doctrine whereof there arriueth unto the soul by such a humility,
subjection, not only unto God and his commandementes, but even, for his love
unto all creatures, and she reputeth them her betters and superiors, though
they be sinners, having her eye only one her baseness or lownes, which is such,
as cannot be greater. So misprising her self to the utmost, she says with her
Lord JESUS CHRIST. I am a worm, and not a man, the contempt of men, and the
out cast of the people. By which words the question is cleared and resolved.

Of the discourses and exercises of the humility of S. Francis.
THE LXXXII. CHAPTER.
THe said holy Father would not have any thing in his Religion, were it never
so excellent, but it should in its kind, even exteriourlie preach Lowliness
and Humility. Wherefore he rejected the title of preacher of Penance, which
Pope Innocent the third had granted to him and his, and would that his
Religion should be called Minors, and that they should conserve them selves,
living like Minors, as true children of the Apostolical rule. And for the same
cause he would not that the superiors should be called Priors, but Ministers
and servants: Matt. 20.
(A name imposed by JESUS CHRIST, in the gospel, when he said, that he was
come to serve) to the end that by such a surname, they might be always
mindful both of their office and of their author JESUS CHRIST. He would also
that they should be called Guardians, that they might guard their Brethren.
Then also he would that his Religious should rather converse with the poor
then with the rich and potent of the world. And to conserve them in humility,
he exercised them to sweep the house, wash dishes, dress meat, and to serve
the leapers and diseased in hospitals, and in althinges to renounce their
proper will. For though he were General, he notwithstanding did nothing of his
own head, he consulted with the^, or more often with God in prayer, who
revealed unto him what he should do, both for himself and others. He was not
ashamed to learn of the least, the smallest matter that was, as being a true
Minor. He had also leerned high and worthy matters of his sovereign master
JESUS CHRIST, yea the principal philosophy. Whiles he lived he always desired
to learn of the learned and of the simple, of the perfect and imperfect, of
the great and little, the mean whereby he might become perfect and the true
servant of JESUS CHRIST. He was thanckfull to the most simple and abject that
taught him any thing, yea so far forth as to kneel unto them.

Once when he was very sick, and being desirous to visitt an oratory, and to
that end mounted one an ass, he met by the way an old country man that
labored on the land, who seeing him, forbear his S. Francis very humbly
thancked a country man that admonished him.
labor and asked his companion if that were not the famous Francis, who was so
much spoaken of: and he answered that it was. Tourning then to S. Francis he
said, Brother, endeavor with all thy possibility to be virtuous as thou art
generally reputed: for many have a strong belief in thy person. Behave thy
self therefore in such sort that there be nothing in thee but what is expected.
The holy Father then descended from his ass, and falling on his knees thancked
and kissed the feet of the country man, for the charitable admonition which he
had given him.

Of the constancy and courage of S. Francis, and in what manner he exercised
and proved the Nouices in humility and obedience.
THE LXXXIII. CHAPTER.
AS the holy Father obeyed the good counsel of the most simple man that was,
so when on the contrary their advise was diabolical, he would never coudiscend
unto them, therein discovering the constancy and virtue of his courage, as it
appeared by the consaile which the Card, of Hostia would give him in behalf of
the principal of his order, inserted in the 65. chapter precedent. Wherein How
couragiouslyS. Francis resisted the counsels and enterprises that were
contrary to his profession.
he demonstrated that against the supreme counsel of God, one ought not to
admit the advice of men, wherefore he would never consent, that the Order which
had so strictly began should in any sort be mitigated Which he manifested yet
more when he was earnestly persuaded to permit his Religious to accept of
benefices and temporal goods, wherewith to supply their necessities: whereto he
would never accord, knowing well what scandal the s^culers would receive
theratt, who would thin^k that the Religious were admitted into his Order
rather for some benifitt and temporal commodity, then by zeal of saving their
souls: beside the occasion which might be given them to err from that first
naked poverty: these kind of matters excepted, he permitted himself, in all
the rest (provided that it were not contrary to God or the Order) to be
governed as others would, renouncing his own will, even as he procured his
other Religious to renounce theirs, and to submit themselves to that of their
superior. S. Francis laid so sure a foundation on this virtue of humility,
that For love of it he affected obedience and poverty her daughters: by
obedience he particulerly proved what Nouises were fit for his Order, and what
not: as he practiced on two young men, who desired the habitt, whom he tried
after this strange manner.

He brought them into a garden, where he commanded them to assist him to
transplant colewortes, as he did, he began to plant the leaves into the earth
and the roots up into the air, where upon one of them What promptitude and
simplicity S. Franc. desired in the obedience of his Religious.
reasoned the matter with the S. saying: No, Father, it must not be done so but
cleene contrary. The S. replied, do as I do and question no more: but the
young man not conceauing the virtue of God, and esteeming it folly would not do
it: wherefore the holy Father said unto him: Brother* I perceive you are a
greatmaster, and therefore unfit for my Order: and so he dismissed him, and to
the other that had done as he did, he presently gave the habitt. And because he
was never sufficiently to his contentment exercised in this his virtue of
humility, he one day said unto his Religious, that praying God to voutsafe to
manifest unto him when he was his true servant, and when not: God had answered
him that he was his true servant when he thought, spoke, or did any thing
concerning his service. And therefore Brethren, said he, tourning to them, I
now* pray you, when you shall see me fail therein, to reprehend me publikelie
and shame me. He would never permit himself to be privileged more then an
other in matters of honor, nor in any other particulerly, that might procure
him contentment, in worldly matters, in^iekne^^ea, or in iorneyea, wherein where
there was assigned companions unto him for his case, he would in no sort
permit it, answearing, that he would* not have that singular prerogative, and
that it sufficed him to be accompanied from place to place, as God should
inspire It is i^dece^t for Religious to go alone.
him. And said he, were it not inconvenient for Religious to go alone, having
seen a blind man guided by a little dog, I would no more have any person
with me, because I would not appear more then he: he esteemed it an honor and
glory to be estranged from this singularity of honors and commodities.

Of the subjection and humility, wherein S. Francis would that his Religious
should live, under the holy Roman church, with their obedience unto Preistes.
THE LXXXIV. CHAPTER.
HE would that his disciples should be subject to the holy Catholic Roman
church, and that they should also show themselves humble and obedient to the
Preistes thereof, and for the greater confirmation of this point, he left his
Religion, so recommendable unto the church. And goeing the second time to Rome
for confirmation of his Rule, he said to his Religious: I go to recommend this
Order to the Church, of which I will that the evil be punished, and the
children of obedience be favored for their good; and therefore, when the
children shall know the sweet benefitt of their mother, they will always with
a singular devotion follow her doctrine: and one the contrary, he that will be a
child of Baal and of disobedience, shall not remain unpunished, nor live in
the Order, under the wings of her protection. The holy church will maintain
the glory of our poverty, and will not permit the beauty of humillity to be
destroyed, by the smoke of vanity, pride, and ambition, and will conserve in
you the bonds of peace and charity, seuerlie reprehending and chasticing those
that shall divide themselves from her rule and virtue, that it perpetually
flourish in the observance of evangelical purity, in her presence, and God will
not permit it to loose the sweet odor which he has given it. Such was the
intention of S. Francis, to subject his Religious unto the Catholic church,
ordayning that they should always choose a Cardinal of it for their
protector, as a thing that he knew to be necessary for the good of the Order.
He did not intend that they should be subject to the said protector only; but
likewise to all Prelates and Preistes of the Church, saying thus: Know ye that
we are called Freer Minors Ecclesiastical assistants.
Coadiutours of Preistes and Religious, for saving of souls: and therefore let
the church be in that sort assisted by us, and her holy faith augmented; I ever
understood the Bishop of Assisium his speech to tend thereto, when at the
beginning of my conversion, he admonished me to govern my self discreetly,
that in these turbulent times, mine Order did not mount his horns, and prove
disobedient unto the Church, therefore I ever did, and will that others do carry
a special reverence to the Prelates, and Religious thereof.

Further, considering that there is nothing more grateful to God then the
salvation of souls, as S. Paul says, the same shall be better accomplished by
the peace and amity of good Religious, then by their discordes: and therefore if
any among them seek to hinder it, I will not that you contradict the same, but
that you leave the care to God, and let it suffice you to be subject unto
them, and on your part to live so virtuously that by your occasion there arise
no discordes or debates among The Clergy must be supported.
you, which doing, you shall in one same instant gain unto God, the Clergy,
Religion, and the people: which shall be more grateful to his divine Majesty,
then to gain only the people: endeavor therefore not to scandalize the
Clergy, but as much as is possible, conceal their defectes, and supply where
they seem to have failed. For recompense her of it is, that the holy church in
his praise does sing this solemn antheme: Francis the Religious Catholic,
and a man entierly Apostolic; How much S. Francis would that his Religious
should honor Preistes.
taught Christians to observe, defend, and formally believe the faith of the
Roman Church, and that Preistes were to be reverenced above all others.

When he sent his Religious over the world, one of the documentes which he gave
them, was that when they met a Priest, they should incontinently fall on their
knees before him, kiss his hand, and ask his benediction: and in case so
happening, should sweep the Church, and should rest and lodge rather with them
then otherwhere. He besides affirmed that if he met a S. deseended from heaven
to earth, and a P^eist, he would first kiss the hand of the Priest, and then
would do reverence to the S. by reason that of the former receiving the body
of our lord There were heretofore very few priests in the couents of the Freer
Minors and why.
JESUS GHRIST, he in that respect meritted there more honor. In regard of this
dignity which he acknowledged in them, and for the reu^rence which he preached
that each one should bear unto the^, he would not be Priest, but Deacon and
the seruauut of Preistes. This his example was of such force, that art the
beginning* of the establishment of his Order, and in the reformation of the
observance, his Religious did exceedingly prise Preist-hood, yea did shun to
be Preistes: so that in a Covent full of Religious, there were very few
Preistes, all endeavoring to mount to divine communicatio^, rather by mean of
prayer, humility, and simplicity, then by high degrees, and dignities without
meritt.

How saint Francis by his humility, did edify and convert his neighbor.
THE LXXXV. CHAPTER.
IT is not then to be admired, if this holy Father exercised humility, not
only that his soul might be pleasing unto God, who is ennemy to the proud,
and most liberal of grace, toward the humble, but also that by mean of it,
he might edify his neighbor, and convert souls unto God, by way of humility
pourchasing that which otherwise he could not have obtained, as for example:
Arriving one day at Imola there to preach, and having demanded leave of the
Bishop, he gave him answer that himself could sufficiently dischardge the
office of preaching unto his people. The holy Father therefore bowing down his
head, departed; A Bishop refusing to permit S. Franc. to preach in his diocese
was at lenght constrained by his humility to accord unto him. Genesis 32.
but being afterward inspired of God, he returned thither*; the Bishop seeing
him, very rigourously asked him what he did, and what he sought there; S.
Francis very humbly answered him that if a son were by his Father driven out
at one door, the natural love which he boar him would constrain him to
enter again at an other. Which the bishop hearing, being overcome with his
humility, he embraced him, saying: that himself and all his Religious should
thenceforward with a general license freely preach over all his bishopperick,
because humility deserved it. I know hereby, added he, that it is no marvel,
if humility incline the will of man, since it enforces even the omnipotent
divine will to condescend to the desires of the humble, as the Angel said to
Jacob: If thou have bin strong against God, how much more shall thou prevail
against men? The holy Father then with this arm of humility delivered many
souls out of the hands of the devil, and out of the throat of hell, as we
have seen and by the example following shall appear.

Certainne Religious ministering unto a leaper, as S. Francis had commanded
them, could not by any gracious usage whatsoever, give him co^tentment; nor,
besides the injuries which he uttered against them, and the buffettes which he
gave them, all which they co^tentedly eudured, could procure him to forbear to
blaspheme against God and his SS. being thereunto induced by the devil and by
the extreme violence of his disease. These good Religious unable to support
those blasphemies, that were so horrrible as would have made an Infidel to
tremble, they went to the holy Father, who in person resolved to visitt him.
And entering into the chamber of the sick, he said: My Brother God give thee
his peace, and he answered: What peace can I have, since from the time that God
did interiourly and exteriourly deprine me of it, I have ever bin in cruel
war? S. Francis comforting him, replied: My Brother and Freeind, you must
have patience: for these afflictions which you endure in body will avail to the
salvation of your soul, if you patiently support them. But the leaper
answered: how can I possibly have patience, considering that mine afflictions
are so permanent that they permit me no ease day, nor night, and besides your
Religious do exceedingly aggrauate the grief of mine infirmity: for not only
they do not assist and serve me, but they afflict me even to death. The holy
Father knowing by divine inspiration, that this wretch was tourmented by the
devil: went presently to offer his prayers for him, which done, he returned
and said unto him: Go to, my good friend since these Religious do not serve
you well, I will serve you my self. The Leaper answered: Tell me I pray, what
will you do more then they? the S. replied* I will do whatsoever you shall
cammand me, begin from this instant to tell me what you please to have S.
Franc. by admirable humility and patience cured a leaper within and without.
and I promise to do it. I will, said the leaper, that you wash all my body,
for I cannot endure the filthy savor thereof. I will most willingly do it,
answered the S. and suddenly caused to be prepared a bath of veri^ pleasing
herbs, then discloathed him to his skin, and washed him, one of the
Religious pouring water on his body.

But there hapened a notable miracle, whiles the holy Father with his pitiful
hands washed him, all the scurfes of his leapry one after an other fell off,
so that the flesh remained clean and neat as of a little child: in fine, he was
entierly cleansed and cured within and without. The diseased person therefore
knowing this great miracle, began very bitterly to lament, saying: I am worthy
not of one, but of a thousand helles, as well for having blasphemed against
God, as for the contempts, injuries, and buffettes, whereby I have offended your
poor Religious, that so lovingly have ministered unto me. And after his cure he
remained fifteen days in this lamentation, then he made a general
confession, imploring the aid of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. S. Francis left him not
till fearing himself, for the great concourse of people that repaired to this
miracle, he was constrained to depart, so leaving the man in the grace of God,
who shortly after passed from this world into an other. And incontinently, the
holy Father being in prayer, he appeared unto him in heaven more bright then
the sun, and said: Father, know you me? The S. asked him, who are you? And he
answered, I am the soul of that leaper whom living in the world, God cured
by your prayers and humility. I now enter into the kingdom of glory, for which
I give thanckes to God and you, blessed be your words and your actions also,
whereby many souls in the world are saved. Know that there passes no day, but
the Angels and SS. in heaven give glory and praise to God, for the innumerable
fruits which by your mean and your Order are procured in the Church: and
therefore persevere to the time predestined to your great crown: having said
thus much, he disappeared, leaving the S. exceedingly comforted, who gave
thanckes to God for all, and particulerly for the saving of that soul, who was
in such imminent peril of damnation.

Of three famous thieves converted by the humility and charity of S. Francis,
the eight chapter, of the tenth book, transferred to this place as most proper
unto it.
THE LXXXVI. CHAPTER.
BRother Angelus being Guardian at Mount Casal, three famous thieves haunted
that place, doing cruel murders thereabout, who being one day oppressed with
hungar, came to him demanding somewhat to eat. The good Guardian knowing them,
not only refused to give them almose, but began to check and reprehend them:
alleging that they feared not God nor men whom they so miserably slew,
living by the labors of others, and leading a life more diabolical then
humane, robbing, dishonouring, tormenting and cutting the throats of their
neighbor as they did, and that he admired how the earth did sustain them,
that it did not swallow them quick as they were: and so bad them have away, and
withal rudely shutt the door against them, whereupon they in extreme choler
departed. S. Francis a little after came with one of his companions unto that
place, to whom the Guardian recounted the precedent; whereto the holy Father
answered, that he had done very ill, because such sinners return to God and
are converted, rather by sweet and pitiful words, then by such reprehensions
which did rather harden them, and that therefore God said, They that are in
health, need not a Physician, but they that are ill at ease, and that he came
not to call the just, but sinners to repentance. And therefore, added he
because you have done against charity, the commandment of the gospel, and the
example of JESUS CHRIST, I command you in virtue of obedience, for penance to
carry them to the mountain where they are, this loaf of bread and this flagon
of wine, which was given us by the way, and when you come in their presence,
fall one your knees at their feet, and ask the^ pardon for the words you have
spoken: and when they have taken the bread, entreat them in my behalf to Ieaue
that miserable kind of life, and I will provide for all their necessities, and
use all the art you can devise to induce them hither. The most obedient
Guardian presently went on, and the holy father in the mean while went to the
Church to pray for them, whence he departed not till God had heard him.

Brother Angelus coming to the thieves, and having performed the commandment
of S. Francis, whiles they did eat the bread, one of them said to the others;
Alas what shall become of us sottish wretches, what must be our lot, what
horrible torments are prepared for us in hell, for so many theftes and murders
as we daily perpetrat? neither yet have we any scruple, much less fear of
God, or repentance for so many enormous sins. And this Religious who has
brought us to eat, is come thus far, with so great humility to ask us pardon
for one only word justly uttered unto us, admonishing us according to our
desert, in the mean while we wretched thieves and detestable robbers, never
demand pardon of God. Besides this he has sheuen us charity praying us to
repair to that holy Father, who has sent us relief, who for the zeal he
has of our souls, does so freely offer us always to provide us all our
necessities. They are true servantes of God who have already gained heaven: but
what shall we do, who being children of the devil, every day heap sins
upon sins, considering withal that our sins are so enormous as deserve of
God, rather punishment then pardon. Mine opinion therefore is, that it were very
convenient, since God does seem to call us by this Religious, that we make no
longer delay, nor abuse the patience of his divine majesty, but that we repair
unto him, and he will instruct us in the direct way how to free our selves at
length from hell, and even to meritt mercy.

The other two thieves being of the same opinion, they went together with the
Guardia^ to the holy Father, in whose presence being com they kneeled at his
feet, saying: Father we have little hope, by reason of the enormity of our
sins, that God will use mercy unto us, but if you assure us that we may yet
find grace, behold us here ready to do whatsoever you shall command us. The
holy Father received them very amiably cherished and encouraged them,
affirming withal that they should not doubt but God was very ready to pardon
them, whenever they should be resolved to leave their sins, and that they
should rest assured thereof, otherwise they should committ a greater sin then
any other that they had formerly committed: and therefore he promised and assured
them God would pardon them all. These three thieves therefore being converted,
did not only abandon their lewd life, but did perfectly renounce the world, and
became Religious of his Order, where living piously, two of the^ a little after
passed from this life to a better. But the third lived many years after,
wherein often considering the enormity of his sins past, he was so penitent
for them that for fifteen years together he fasted three days every week,
with only bread and water, besides the lent and ordinary abstinences of the
Order, and was never clothed but with an old habitt without tunicle, he
disciplined himself every day, and after mattins slept no more, but continued
still in prayer. In this time S. Francis departed to the glory which God had
prepared him: and he suruiuing, perseuering, and continuyng in the asperity of
life which he had begun, and in continual and fervent prayers, had a
revelation from God of the pains of hell, and of the glory of Paradise, such
as follows:

A revelation of the pains of hell and of the glory of Paradise presented
after the death of S. Francis to one of the aforesaid thieves, whom having no
more cause to mention, and they being converted by the* holy Father S. Francis,
it seems not improper to put in the place of their conversion, and to take it
out of the ninth chapter of the tenth book, disorderly there inserted.
THE LXXXVII. CHAPTER.
THis thief converted by S. Francis, being according to his custom one night
after matines in prayer, he found himself so oppressed with sleep, that he
could not overcome it howsoever he strayned himself against it, so that he was
enforced to fall into a deep sleep, and was incontinently elevated in spirit
by the Angel of God, that carried him over an high mountain all enuironned
with gross cutting stones, upon which the Angel that carried him let him
fall, from the top of the mountain even to the bottom of the valley, where
being utterly crushed, as he seemed and rather dead then alive, the Angel
called him and bid him arise: because he had yet a long journey to make. The
Religious answered him: how is it possible you should be so cruel as that,
seeing in what plight I am, you would I should travail? The Angel then
touching him cured all his greifes: then goeing before him, showed him a field
full of sharp stones, thorns and wild thissels, which he commanded him to
pass through bare foot as he was. The Religious knowing no excuse, passed
through it, with such pain as may be imagined. After that he forced him to
e^ter into a burning furnace which was at the end of the said field: for having
refused to enter in, he caused him to be thrown in with a forcke, by the
devils there present. Having remained some time in that eternal fire, there
enduring that, which he alone that has proved it can express, the Angel drue
him out, and bid him prepare himself to pass further: whereupon he lamenting
that without any pity he would force him further, so burned and half dead as
he was, the Angel touched him and cured his burning. Then he brought him upon a
bridge; that was in such sort made as he could not pass it without falling;
for it was narrow and round, so that the feet could take no hold thereon. Under
it there ran a very swifte flud full of fearful and terrible dragons and
serpents: the Religious therefore excused himself, affirming that he could
not pass it without falling: the Angel bid him follow him and not to fear,
but in his goeing, to set his feet where he should see him stepp before. So
was he enforced to follow him even to the mids of the bridge with a fear
that freezed his breast: but the worst was, that being there, the Angel
disappearing, left him, and ascended a mountain, whereon was a very beautiful
city, leaving the poor Religious in such fear as each one may imagine: who
beheld under the bridge those horrible dragons, that with open mouth attended
his fall only to devour him instantly.

He being in such extremity, not knowing what else to do, very fixedly
embraced the bridge, and began to lament and invoke the name of JESUS, whom
he besought to have pity on him in that extreme necessity, and to deliver him
of that imminent peril. God having heard him, he seemed by little and little to
have wings grow out on his back: whereupon he began to hope, that his wings
growing great he should fly unto his guide. Now wanting patience to expect the
full growth of his wings, such being his desire to be thence, he endeavored
to fly: but he fell again on the bridge, and his wings also were loosed from
his Psalm. 54.
back. Wherefore embracing the bridge again, he began to lament and with the
Prophet to say: Who shall give me wings of a* dove, that flying from so
perilous and mortal estate, I may attain a secure repose? Only thou my lord
JESUS CHRIST, my sole hope and true redress. He had scarcely ended these
words, but his wings did grow again: but he had no more power then before to
expect the sufficient growth of his wings* by reason of his extreme fear, so
that he fell and lost them again. Then he prayed, and resolved to expect till
his wings were fit to carry him, though every hour seemed to him a thousand
years. So having attended till he knew them to be of sufficient stre^ght and
force, he mounted into the air, and flew up to the high mountain where his
guide was, where they both together went toward the gate of that supreme
city, wherinto the Porter admitting the Angel, made him stay without, asking
him who he was, and who emboldened him to come there, He answered that he was
a Friar Minor, and that his coming so far was not of presumption or of his
own motion, but was conducted thither. The Porter replied. Attend till I call
S. Francis to see if he know thee. In the mean while the Religious vewed the
walls and structure of that admirable city, that were so lustrious and
resplendent, and with all transparent to behold all the iubilyes and
exultations made by the Angels and blessed within, which to his exceeding
contentement beholding, he saw the holy Father S. Francis coming and with him
brother Bernard Quintaualle his first disciple and other Religious his
companions, trained with an infinite number of the blessed: who seeing him
commanded the Porter to admit him in which he did: and he was very amourously
received by the holy Father, who showed him all the meruailes whereof neither
the eye nor ear, nor understanding of any mortal man is capable.

The Religious was so satisfied and content with this view, and in his soul
conceived such consolation thereof, that he no more remembered all his travails
past, then if he had never endured them. S. Francis then said unto him. My
son admire no more: for it is necessary that thou return into the world:
but greiue not, for God has appointed thee a very short time of seven days
only, that in the mean time thou may prepare the better: which ended I my
self will come to thee, and will conduct the thither to enjoy with me this
immortal glory. The blessed Father S. Francis with a very rich mantell, and
his holy stigmates glittered as shinning stars, with such a splendor, that
he seemed with his beams to illuminate the greatest part of that great city.
The Religious did there know many SS. of S. Francis his company whom he had
seen in the world, all whom he nomminated at his return. At length having
received the benediction of S. Francis, he awakened out of his sleep and heard
the bell ringing to the Prime for it was yet early morning, and he seemed to
have spent many years in his journey; he the^ recounted the vision to his
Guardian and the Religious, for the consolation of all such as live in labors
and afflictions: and to demonstrate that whatsoever sinners they be, God does
never abandon any one, but does ever assist and preserve them in all their
tribulations, till he bring them to his kingdom. Now for confirmation of all
the precedent, the Religious fell incontinently sick, and with an admirable
fervor of spirit prepared himself for his last hour. The seven days
expired, the glorious Father S. Francis came as he had promised and carried the
soul of this thief into Paradise. This holy Father then by this humility in
this sort gained souls unto God, as by the ensuyng example shall more appear.

How S. Francis converted certain other thieves: this was the 27. chapter of
the 10. book, transferred hither as a place more proper unto it.
THE LXXXVIII. CHAPTER.
THere were certain thieves that had their residence on an high mountain,
whence they descended to rob the passengers they found on the ways, and some
time very hungar constrained them to ask bread for the love of God at the
Covent of the Freer Minors, near the borough of S. Sepulcre: some of the
Religious affirmed that it was not well done to give them almose being thieves
and murderers, such as ought not to be releiued to the detriment of the common
weal. Others nevertheless of compassion gave them almose, still admonishing
them to leave that lewd and detestable life, and to do penance for it. But S.
Francis one day accidentally coming to that Covent, the Religious proposed
this doubt unto him, to whom he answered: If you follow mine advice, I hope
by the grace of God, you shall gain him those souls: which is, that you take
bread and wine, of each of the best you have, and carry it them to the
mountain whither they are retired, and that calling them, you very lovingly
use this speech unto them: Brethren, fear not: for we are Religious that
bring you to eat, then presently spread your cloakes on the ground, and set
them your bread upon it, and with a joyful humility minister unto them, till
they have done eating: After that in favor of that charity on your part
exhibited, and of what you may thenceforward do them, pray and conjure them
not to hurt, kill, or offend any man personnally, and for that first time
require no other thing of them. An other day according to the good answer
they shall give you, you shall carry them other bread, wine, eggs and cheese,
which you shall present unto them with the greatest humility and kindenes that
you can, then you shall say unto them: Brethren we know well what moves you to
live in these mountains, with so many inconuenie^ces, fears and perils both
of body and soul, which you will undoubtedly bring to ruin if you persevere in
this course. Therefore we counsel you for the best, to give over this life, to
putt your confidence in God, and he will never abandon you in your temporal
necessities. On our part we will not fail for his love and yours to releive
you, at least to save your souls: and I hope in our Lord, said the holy
Father, by this your charity and humility, you shall convert them, which proved
true. For these Religious following that counsel, the virtue of the holy
Ghost in a moment descended on the thieves in such sort that, moved by the
demonstrations of those good Religious, they believed them, so that by little
and little the greater part of them entered into the Order and there lived
piously; and the rest having sworn unto the Religious that they would amend
themselves, spent their time in very great repose, and ended their lives as
good Christians, to the exceeding contentment and edification of all the
country, who for the same gave thanckes to God and to those good Religious.

How much S. Francis shunned and abhorred honors for the love of humility.
THE LXXXIX. CHAPTER.
THough by the precedent it may be sufficiently understood how much S. Francis
shunned worldly glory, and on the contrary how he rejoiced when God was praised
by his worckes: yet it will more manifestly appear by this which we are to
speak of him, on this occasion: Having one day ended his sermon in the city
of Iterrena, the bishop arose, and after he had made a short exhortation to his
people, in the end he said: That from the time that God had planted the Church,
he never abandoned it: but did always illuminate and assist it by mean of
some perfect men that continually supported the same, but now he did illustrate
and maintain it more then ever in this poor barefoot and idiott, utterly
misprised for his love: whereupon he concluded, that they were much obliged to
give thanckes unto his divine majesty, for that his singular benefitt. As soon
as S. Franc. very graciously thancked a bishop for publicly calling him idiot.
the bishop had ended, S. Francis doing him reverence; very joyful replied:
doubtless, My Lord, never man in the world has to this day so much honored me
as your self: for some say of me, this man is holy, and when God worcketh any
thing by me, many reflecting on me only, give not to God the glory due to his
divine majesty: but you (as wise and prudent) have separated the vile from the
precious: wherefore falling on his knees before him, he kissed his hands and
departed, leaving the bishop exceedingly edified.

S. Franc. his answer being called S.
If any one called him S. he would inco^tine^tlie answer. If God should take
from me the treasure of his grace which he has given me in custody, there
would remain to me only my body and soul, both burdened with sins and
extreme blindness, as are the damned and infidels: but as the picture and
sculpture, where the images of God and of the glorious virgin are engraven and
peinted in wood or stone, are reverenced and honored as figures of the true
image, and as they are stone or wood no honor is attributed unto them: even
so, a man that is the true image and portraiture of God, if he be honored as
such, he ought not to attribute that reverence to himself, but to God whom he
represents: yea he ought to repute himself in regard of his sins most
worthy of all infamy in this world.

Why S. Francis once suffered his habit, hands, and feet to be kissed.
With the like spirit he one day received the honor which the people gave
him, who kissed his habitt, his hands and feet, without making them any kind
of resistance, his companion that saw the holy Father to stand still and admit
those honors, thought with himself that he was glad thereof, and vainly
conceived pleasure thxerin, as afterward he told him: but the holy Father
answered him. Brother, these people perform not the least part of what they
ought to do: Whereat his said companion was more scandalized: S. Francis then
added: Brother I attribute not to my self, but to God, all these honors which
thou see presented unto me, whose althinges are, and I remain in my vile
estate, which does not conclude that the presenters gain nothing thereby:
because by that mean God is acknowledged and honored in his creatures. The
Religious by this answer was entierlie satisfied, with an exceeding
admiration of his perfection: considering that when he reflected on himself,
he could not on the other side in any sort endure praises and honors.

And how at an other time he shunned honor that should have bin given him.
Goeing one time to Rome, the Bishop of a city (whose name is perished in the
authors) by whose diocese he was to pass, went against him out of the town
to entertayne him: which the S. in spirit foreseeing, he said to his
companion: We may be here molested, for these men which you see, come to honor
us, which we cannot avoid, there being no mean to turn out of the way: come
therefore after me. He led him to a gross heap of chaulke that was close by
the way, whereof they made vessels, on which he mounted and did very nimbly
tread thereon with his feet. Which the bishop and his followers beholding, they
returned without giving him a word. So the holy Father rejected the honor,
and a while after he entered secretly into the City, where he edified more by
example of pious life then by words of doctrine.

How by humility he discovered his own imperfections, and what a capital
ennemy he was to hypocrisy.
THE XC. CHAPTER.
TO the end that such as saw him labor virtuously, and perform holy and pious
acts extraordinarily, might not imagine that what he did proceeded of any
other then of God, that wrought in him, he publicly discovered whatsoever
defectes he thought to be in himself, though most commonly they were no
defectes at all. Being one day very sick, he by obedience rebated some little
of his abstinence: but beginning a little to amend, the true mispriser of
himself taking courage against his flesh, for greater confusion, he said in
himfelfe: It is not requisite that the people repute me sobre and abstine^t,
and I on the contrary secretly eat flesh. And so, moved by the holy S. Franc.
went naked to the market place of Assise to accuse himself of having eaten
flesh in his sickness.
Ghost, he commanded some of his Religious, to fasten a rope about his neck
and to lead him to the marckett place of the City of Assisium. But his
Religious refusing to obey him, he putt of his habitt, and with nothing on him
but that with was under it, he went into the place, called the Berlina, where,
notwithstanding he had a quartane aigue, and therefore was very feeble, he
began to preach, and when he saw that there was a great concurse of people, he
affirmed publicly that they ought not esteem him otherwise spiritual,
because in that his lent, wherein he had accustomed to fast in the honor of
Alsainctes; he had eaten flesh, for which he prayed them to reprehend him. All
the assistantes seeing so great a humility, conceived a deep conpunction in
themselves, and sighing said: Ah we miserable wretches, that live continually
in sin, and entierlie apply our selves to the commodities of this life,
without doing penance, what will become of us, since this S. lamenteth to have
eaten flesh in time not prohibited, and upon a just and manifest necessity? he
does nevertheless repent it, and with so much confusion accuses himself,
though he seem nearer death then life: why learn we not of him, who leads a
life rather to be admired then imitated, and who is a true pourtraiture of
perfect humily, and as the imitatour of JESUS CHRIST, contemns and treads
under foot the world and the honor thereof, rejecting the shadow of hypocrisy,
wherein each one either more or less is intricated?

But all this was little in comparison of what he did ordinarily for to mortify
the first motives of the ambitions of the world and to batter them against the
most firm rock JESUS CHRIST, he did as* follows: As often as there assailed
him any motion of pride or vain glory; being before the people, he confessed
it to the world, saying sometime to his companion: I endeavor to live in the
presence of God in an hermitage ^e would not wear a fox skin on his stomach
without being seen.
and other solitary places, no otherwise then if I were in the mids of the
world: for if I do otherwise I am an hypocrite. Being one time sick in the
winter, by means of an extreme coldness in his stomach, his companion prayed
him to have a piece of fox skin sowed within his habitt against the flesh and
upon his stomach. But he would never consent thereto without condition that
there should be an other sowed without, that each one might know he woare a
skin on his flesh. Passing by Assisium, a poor old man asked him an almose
for the love of God: which name hearing uttered, he took off his cloak from
his shoulders, and gave him: Now in performing this act of charity, he
conceived a little vaineglory, He publicly accused his evil thoughts.
he confessed it publique^^ and acknowledged his fault. What cogitation God had
of this his most humble servant, may be judged by the example following.

Saint Francis being in Alexandria, a city of Italy, he was entertained into
the house of a gentleman, who being very devout unto him, said: you must
resolve to obey the gospel, and eat whatsoever shall be presented unto you, and
thus saying, he caused a Capon to be brought: whereof the holy Father with the
benediction of God did eat; mean while a poor man asked an almose at the
door, to whom the S. sent a leg of the capon: the poor man took it and
with a malicious and diabolical eye beheld it, and kept it A leg of a capo^
changed into a fish in the ba^ds of a poor man that would scandalize S.
Francis.
quietly till the next morning, when S. Francis preaching, he showed it
publicly to the people, saying: Behold ye all, the flesh that this Friar
Francis the preacher of abstinence does eat; being last night full fed, he gave
me this leg of capon: But God, whose providence is admirable, and knows to
dissolve the snares of the devil, and to convert them unto his confusion,
caused that when the poor man thought to show to the people the said leg, he
miraculously showed a fish, wherefore being reputed senceles, he was expelled
the church whither he came afterward to ask pardon of God and the S. which
being obtained, the fish returned into a capons leg, and the holy Father
publicly recounted the success of the fact: for which they generally gave
infinite thanks to God.

With what rigor he chasticed his passionate words and thoughts.
THE LXXXXI. CHAPTER.
Having bin many days blind, as, by reason of the great infirmity of his eyes
which his wepinges had procured him, it often happened; he determined for his
consolation to visitt Brother Bernard, one of his first companions and inward
freindes, and to remain some time with him, to talk of God. But coming to
his cell on the top of the mountain, and finding it shutt, he thought he was
in prayer, as indeed he was, and having no mean to see him, he called him by
these words: Open Bernard, and come comfort this poor blind man, and many
times reiterating the same, and the Religious not answearing, he was much
disquieted, and said to his companion: I have called him many times, and he
will not answer me, let us go in the name of God: and so departing judged
Brother Bernard to be proud: and nevertheless considering better that it was not
his coustume so to do, he turned from his companion, and fell to prayer,
where he was not long but he heard answer from God, who reprehending him,
said: Little man, why do thou trouble they self so much, do thou thinck
it reasonable to leave the Creator for the creature? when thou calledst
Brother Bernard; he was with me, not with him self, and therefore he could not
answer thee; for he did not hear thee. Which S. Francis hearing he humbled
him self to God and asked him pardon.

What penance S. Franc. did for an ill thought he had of one of his Brethren.
Then incontinently retourning directly to Brother Bernard, he met him without
his cell, having ended his prayer: and as Brother Bernard fell at his feet, he
likewise fell at his; and acknowledged his fault of the ill judgment he had
conceived of him: then required of him to enjoin him this penance: I will,
said he, that thou set they feet on my throat, and on my mouth, and treading
hard thereon shall say: Poor worm, the son of Peter Benardone, there lie one
the earth, since thou have so exalted thee in pride, bafe and abject as thou
art: which poor Brother Bernard hearing, he would in no sort yield there to,
till the holy Father commanded him in virtue of obedience, and then with the
greatest modesty and reverence he could possibly, he obeyed, first conditioned
that the S. should in like sort do to him what he would; and so having obeyed
the S. he reciprocally commanded him very sharply to reprehend him for every
fault of his he should know, as often as they should meet together. Thus did
the Religious Saints of those days exercise themselves in humility. But S.
Fracis hearing that, was in such sort afflicted for having promised him
obedience, for the great reverence he had toward him, as well for his great
worthynes, as because he was the first of his Order, as that he resolved rather
to forbear his sweet and gracious conversation, then to have subject to
reprehend him, though in such a servant of God there were little or nothing to
reprehend.

A Religious that had care of a leaper, coming with him to our Lady of Angels,
the S. reprehended him for having brought him thither, with trouble and
afliction, which he had scarcely uttered but, thinking that he had offended the
leaper in reprehending the Religious in his presence, he presently went and
acknowledged his fault unto his Vicaire* S. Franc. did eat pottage with a
leaper for penance in that he thought he had scandalized him.
of whom he demanded for pennace, that he would enjoin him to eat with the
leaper in one same dish, who not to give him discontent was constrained so to
command him; and so there was inco^tinently brought a dish of pottage from the
kitchen, for the leaper and himself: it was admirable to see with what
patience and taste this worthy servant of God endeavored to eat of the pottage
in which the leaper putt his finges, which being all covered with the loathsome
infection of his leapry, the drops of putrefaction ran into the dish; which
caused in the Religious there present an extreme hart-greife and compassion,
that their Father without offense should perform so bitter and intolerable a
penance. Let this be spoaken to our confusion, that seek so many curious arts
to season our meats, which we desire to have so delicious. The said Religious
did assuredly affirm, that as often thence-forward ae they remembered that
refection of their Father with the leaper, all meat how delicate soever it
might be, made their heart arise, and was disdayned of them.

Of the new and notable Matines of holy humility, which S. Francii and Brother
Leo did sing having no Breuiary to read them.
THE LXXXXII. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father being one time in the hermitage with Brother Leo, he went so
far from the celle, that the night prevented them, and having no Breuiary
with them, the hour of Matines S. Franc. assured of his salvation.
being come, S. Francis said to the Brother: will not ye that we employ this
time unprofitably? that therefore we pass it in the praise of God, say as I
shall tell you: but take heed that you change not any word; I then will say: O
Francis thou have committed so many sins in the world, that thou deseruest
hell; and you shall answer me, you say the truth, that you deserve a place in
the deepest part of hell. Brother Leo, most humble and obedient, promised him
to say so: but as the S. began to utter the foresaid words, Brother Leo
answered. Know Brother Franc. that you shall not go to hell, but to the glory
of Paradise. Which the holy Father admiting, he commanded him again not to say
so, but as now I shall tell thee: I will begin to say, Francis thou have so
much offended God, that thou well deseruest to be eternally accursed, and you
shall answer, without any variation: thou art doubtless worthy to be forever
expelled from the face of God: which the good Brother Leo promising to observe,
the holy Father with a loud and fearful voice, knocking his breast, began: O
God lord of heaven and earth, I have committed so many offenses against thy
divine Majesty, that I am well assured, I meritt to be eternally banished thy
glory and perpetually damned: and Brother Leo answered: God will accept thee
for such an one, as among the great multitude of his elect thou shall be
especially blessed and glorious in his celestial kingdom. S. Francis more
admiring then before, in that he knew how obedient Brother Leo was, he said:
why do you not answer me, as I enjoined you, and as you promised me? I now
command you in virtue of obedience, that when I say: O wretched and miserable
Francis do thou thinck ever to deserve pardon of the God of mercies, having
always so much offended him? thou art not worthy of grace: I command you, I
say, to answer me: thou in no sort deseruest the mercy of God. But albeit
Brother Leo promised him, yet did he nevertheless answer him: God the Father
whose mercy is infinite, and infinitely greater then our sins, will give you
his grace, accompayned with most singular gifts,

The holy Father therefore half angry, said unto him: Brother Leo, why would
you not give me co^tentement in so reasonable a demand, and why have we thus
misprised the precept of obedience? Brother Leo falling prostrate on the earth,
humbly answered him: God knows that I always purposed to obey you, but he
would have me speak according to his will, and not according to yours. The S.
herewith not fully satisfied, replied, and with instance said: I beseech you,
my dear child, to comfort me at least for this once: and when you shall hear
me to accuse myself, answer me that I am not worthy of mercy; Brother Leo
answered him: Father, if it lie in me, for your satisfaction I will most
willingly do it: S. Francis then all bathed in tears, with a loud voice cried
out: Ungrateful wretch, do thou thinck ever to find pardon at Gods
hands; and Brother Leo incontinently answered: Father thou shall find it,
and shall besides obtain so many special graces of God, that he will exalt
thee on earth and in heaven (then he added:) pardon me, Father, if my power
has not bin to speak otherwise, as you desired, for God speaks by my mouth;
thus did they spend the night, and in other like exercises, wherein God did
appare^tly manifest how grateful unto him is humility, as also the true
misprise of ones self.

How S. Francis prepared himself to prayer, and what conditions be that
prays ought to have.
THE LXXXXIII. CHAPTER*
Since we have spoaken of the holy Fathers Marines, it seems now convenient
time, to make some mention of his so perfect prayer* Mine opinion is that there
is no place more proper to speak thereof, then after the description of his
great humility, whereon as on a firm stone, and true foundation, prayer, to
have it penetrate even to heaven, ought to be builded. Wherefore he merited to
obtain all the The first condition of prayer to know ones own misery. 3. Reg.
8.
conditions requisite to a true and worthy prayer; the first whereof, is the
knowledge of ones own misery, according to Solomon, when he says: O living
God, if any one acknowledgeing the wound of his heart to wit, his sins, does
lift his hands to thee in this thy temple, hear him. Now who has more
perfectly known himself? who has more clearly confessed his fault, and who
has more humbly discovered it to God and men, then this glorious S. Therefore*
also were his prayers admitted before the presence of God, who fixes his eyes
on the Psalm. 101. Judith 9.
humble, and rejects not their pious prayers, as the Prophett says. The
devout Judith, affirms the same, saying: My God the prayers of the humble are
always pleasing unto thee.

The 2. to keep the soul separated from terrestrial things, and elevated
unto God Matt. 6.
The second condition of prayer, is to keep the soul ever separated from
terrestrial things, and elevated unto God, as says Isodorus: If the soul
will be illuminated with spiritual light, she must precedently purge her self
of the filth of worldly cogitations, and so she may be neat and pure before her
God. That prayer is pure, which is made without any mixture of worldly
thoughts, and that impure where the spirit is employed in terrestrial
things. And therefore, JESUS CHRIST, leaving us the form of perfect prayer,
says: When thou shall pray, enter into thy camber in secrett, that thou may
leave out all care excepting only of speaking with God: shutt the door of thy
heart, that nothing enter in, to rob his substance: call thy soul, and make
her be in her self, without any distraction, and attentive in God, and then
thy prayer shall be perfect before God, and thou shall be heard. The holy Father
S. Francis performed the same, for he so rejected all other care of the world
to transform himself into God, that he had no remembrance The 3. condition is
compassion.
of himself or of his worldly affairs. And therefore most commonly when he
prayed, his body was elevated into the air, having nothing in it that could
poise it down to the earth.

God teaches us the third condition of prayer, by his Prophet Isaie, saying.
Give thy bread to the hungry, and thy coat to him that is naked Isai. 21.
and releive each one in his necessities: then offer thy prayers to God, and he
will hear thee, call him by this mean, and he will come unto thee. On the
contrary, he that shuts his ears to the demand of the poor, when in his
necessity, he shall cry to God, he will not hear him. This piety and
compassion was such and so great in S. Francis, that he absolutely gave or
bestowed, his only coat, occasion presenting, yea, which is the most that may
be, he desired to give entierlie himself, for the only love of God, as is
formerlie alleged. In regard of this extreme charity toward the poor, and
for his example unto the world, he also merited to be so interiourly affected
of his God.

The fourth condition of prayer necessary to a Christian, is to give good The
4. condition is to harken unto God. Prou. 28.
ear to God, if we desire to be heard of his divine Majesty. for God will
abhor the prayers of him, says the Sage, that has not ears to hear his
holy commandments: therefore the sinner has no cause to complain that God
does not hear him, because himself did not first hear God: and if he hear
him in one only thing, or two, or three, he proves deaf in all the rest. And
therefore, on the other side, one Pater noster, or one Aue Maria, of a
Christian fearing God, is with greater reason heard, then a thousand of a
vicious and disobedient person: the holy Father S. Francis obeyed God in such
degree of perfection that having called him by his grace, he did not only
labor to accomplish his divine precepts, but even the Counsels of his
gospel, without omitting the least point: therefore also did God afterward
graciously grant him what he demanded, so far forth as he permitted other
creatures to obey him.

The fifth condition is, that he that prays do also separate himself The 5.
is to be separated from worldly conversation for ever. S. Bernard. Matt. 26.
John. 18.
from the conversation of the world, not only when he would pray, but even
always, if he will pray perfectly, and that he sequester him self into some
desert and solitary place, if he will that his soul be always disposed
worthily to pray unto God: The contemplative Father S. Bernard, speaking by
experience says: If the world delight thee, thou shall ever be impure: Our
Lord JESUS CHRIST has also left us example hereof, for he often went up to the
mountain, and left his best beloved disciples, to unite himself alone to his
Father; So this glorious Saint found himself so much more gratified by the
communication of the holy Ghost, as he was farther estranged from the rumors
of the world, and farther sequestered into solitary places, wherein, he was so
far from being subdued by cogitations of the world, and by the infections
thereof, that he obtained notable victories against the devil. He shunned
sensual light, as distractiue unto the heart, and having given some repose unto
his body in the beginning of the night, he spent the rest in most deep
silence, and in high contentment with his beloved God. The sixth condition of
perfect prayer, is, a fervent charity toward The 6. is ardent charity.
God, without all fear, not like unto that of the cold* negligent, and new
beginners; for this perfect charity expelling all base fear and labor, does
by love unite the heart of man with the goodness of God. This love was such in
the holy Father, that it continually burned in his heart, as a living fire, the
flame whereof dilated it self in charity, to the benefitt of his neighbor,
through all the parts of the world.

Of the perseverance of his prayer, and of the effect it wrought, and continued
in S. Francis.
THE XCIV. CHAPTER.
The 7. condition of prayer, is perseverance therein. Luc. 18.
THe seventh condition is perseverance therein, because God says we must
always pray, and not cease. Of this point it may be alleged that the life
of S. Francis was a continual prayer unto God, either for his own salvation
or his neighbors, desiring to communicate his Redeemer JESUS CHRIST unto all
Creatures, that they might know and love him, as he did, and that for his own
part, he might ever dwell with his divine Majesty* But being, by the
impediment of the weight of his terrestrial body that was a stranger and
remote from his true country, disabled to enjoy his beloved, he, by perseuerant
prayer endeavored with all possiblity, to keep his soul always united unto
him, which was not ouer-difficult unto him, as having so mortified in himself
earthly afflictions, that he conuersed in spirit on high with the blessed, as
a Citizen of heaven, and familier in the house of God. Therefore prayer was
unto him a singular refreshment in his labors, an assured fortress against
temptations, and a remedy in necessities: for distrusting himself, and his
proper forces, industry, and knowledge, he had settled and reposed all his hope
in God, by mean of prayer, which he affirmed that every faithful Christian
ought above all other things to demand of God in this life, considering that
without it, one can make no Fervor of S. Fr. in prayer
profitt nor progress in spiritual life: and therefore, to be an example unto
his Religious, he made always to appear exteriourly and interiourly, that
travailing or praying, being in action, or rereposing, his spirit was
continually attentive unto prayer. And therefore it seemed that he had not only
dedicated his soul and body unto his beloved God: but even the very momentes
of time, to the end that no visitation of the holy Ghost should by his
negligence pass, and be lost, as not finding him disposed to receive it.
Therefore when in his journey he felt the same, he would stay and let his
companion pass on, to know with a very deep attention, what God inspired unto
him. And when he was in solitary places, he filled the mountains with sighs,
and bathed the earth with a flud of tears, he beat his breast for the offenses
committed against his God. Sometimes he accused himself as if he had bin
before a Judge, other times he demanded mercy as a child, of his gracious
Father: sometimes he sweetly discoursed as if he had bin privately with his
intimous friend: he has at such time bin heard of his Religious to invoke
the clementie of God, by the great commiseration which he felt in himself of
the death and passion of our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, as if he had seen him
crucified. He showed exterior gesture conformable to the interior effect.
Sometimes he held his mouth against the earth, now he was on his knees, then
upright on his feet, now he held his arms crossed, then his hands joined
toward heaven. And praying after this manner, he was most commonly seen
enuirouned with a great light, and lifted into the air in testimony of the
interior light and affection toward God, and then did he participate of the
divine secrettes, which he never revealed, but when it was requisite: for he
ordinarily said, that one did often loose an inestimable treasure, for a very
base price offending the giver, and with danger never to have it again. For
which cause when he returned from his exercises, he in such sort composed and
dissembled his countenance, that he that had not much experienced it, would
never have suspected that he had prayed in such excess of spirit. When he
prayed with his Religious, he retained his sighs and all other gestures:
whereby he might be observed. He taught the manner to pray secretly, then to
say: My God I recommend unto thee this consolation which it has pleased thee
without any meritt of mine to grant me: to the end I steal not this great
treasure. He assured them that by this mean they should obtain that God
inuiting them, would say: Friend because thou have Luc. 14.
bin so humble ascend now unto an higher place.

Of the attention which S. Francis had in his prayers, and of the devotion he
had in divine service.
THE LXXXXV. CHAPTER.
HE said the canonical hours with so great reverence and devotion, that
albeit he were most commonly weary and feeble by reason of his infirmities: yet
making no esteem thereof, he was always standing or kneeling with his head
bare, reading very distinctly. If he trauiled when the time of prayer and
saying the said The reason which S. Franc. gave of his atte^tion.
hours was, he would stay. This practice did he never omit whatsoever rain
or storm did happen, saying: If the body that is to be food for worms,
desired to eat in repose, with how much more reason ought one to give repose to
the soul, when she receaueth the refection of the life which she is eternally
to possess without corruption? He said his psalms and what soever was to be
said with such attention, as if God had bin before his eyes. When he was to
name the name of God, he pronounced it so sweetly, that he seemed to lick his
l^ppes, such contentment felt he in his soul: yea he commanded his Religious
carefully to gather up all the papers they found wherein was written the name
of JESUS: that it might not be trodde^ under foot. He reputed With what purity
S. Francis served God.
it a great offense, when one spoke unto God, to think of other matters. And
if he chanced sometimes to apply his spirit on other* affairs, though
spiritual, he would accuse himself thereof in confession; yea albeit he had
his interior powers so recollected within him by mean of the continual and
assiduous exercise therein employed, that the flies of the world molested him
very seldom.

Being one lent at an hermitage he attempted for exercise to make an osier
basket, but the time of prayer being come, because in saying the third hour,
the basket came to his mind, he took it and incontinently threw it into the
fire with these words: I sacrifice thee unto How he once celebrated the
nativity and with what new fervor.
God, in place of his service which thou have interrupted.

This glorious Saint, held the feast of the nativity of our Savior in
particular devotion. Being on a time near unto the city of Grecio, he
determined to celebrate that feast after a new manner, thereby to stir up the
devotion of the faithful: and having therefore, to avoid sca^dal, obtained
permission of the Pope, he caused a great stable to be prepared in an old
houell, where he caused to be putt hay and a manger, then brought thither an
ox and an ass, and assembled so many of his Religious, that they near
exceeded the inhabitants of the place. But because he had published the
solemnity, all the inhabitants of the neighbor places flocked thither as who
should be foremost, with flutes, cornettes, and other rusticall instruments,
so that all the mountains thereabout gave ecchoe to their harmony, they
ceased not all night to sound and rejoice before that stable, wherein S.
Francis and a great number of his Religious prayed before three images of wood,
that represented our lord JESUS CHRIST, the Virgin Mary and S. Joseph, before
which images were lightened a great quantity of lights that were with curious
art exquisitelie set forth. S. Francis read the gospel atr the midinght
Mass, then preached to the people with such tenderness of heart, that when he
would utter the name of JESUS, he could not but called him the little child of
Bethleem. This feast was not spent without fruit for a famous gentleman named
John of Grecio, forsaking the cheualry and nobility of the world and the
pompes thereof, became very familier unto S. Francis and an imitatour of him,
because he had seen him in vision that night with a child in his arms who
seemed to sleep, and whom he sweetly awakened. The hay that was taken from
that stable cured many diseased beasts, yea very many men; whence may be
judged that God had singulerlie assisted that devotion of his servant.

How S. Francis caused the oratories of Bis Religious to be accommodated: and
of the care he had of their enterteynement.
THE LXXXXVI. CHAPTER.
THis holy Father labored exceedingly to have his Religious know the mean
which they ought to use to pray well, that being free from all worldly
employmentes, they might apply themselves to prayer and conte^plation, as a
fountain that drowneth disordinate thirstes, and on the contrary fills and
satisfies the soul with a spiritual taste of divine graces. And that the said
Religious might more commodiously emploie themselves therein, he would have
their Oratories sequestered from the bruit and tumult of the people, that they
might avoid distraction: and therefore he caused the^ to be made in the mids
of woods and forestes with bows of trees and wreathed with rushes, where they
spent their lentes entierlie in fastinges and prayers. And that the care of
temporal affairs might not choke the grace of the spirit, nor the
cogitations of worldly necessities procure them impediment, he committed to
one Brother alone, when the number of Religious permitted, the chardge of the
door, the kitchen, and larder, appointing all the other Religious to observe
the Order following.

All the morning they were to remain retired in prayer in the divine offices,
and very strictly observing silence, till the Officer at the ordinary hour
warned them to dinner, which he did by knocking on a tile: for their poverty
afforded not them a bell. But he knowing that man co^sisted of a body and
soul, it was necessary the body should be mayntayned to sustain the soul in
the service of God: he accustomed to go into the kitchen, where if he saw
nothing to begin their refection, he would go into the garden and thence bring
a bundle of herbs which he would mildly deliver the Cook, to have dressed for
the Religious. When the Cook had eggs and cheese* gotten by begging, the holy
Father in time convenient would eat thereof very merrily, to encourage others,
and would commend the prudence of the Cook. But if he exceeded, he would
reprehend him for the excess, and command him to give nothing to the Religious
the day following, which was performed: though most commonly they set
themselves at table to eat nothing but dry bread pourchaced by begging, which
they did eat with exceeding contentment as a gift received of God, it having
bin demanded for his sake: Because our Savior worthily says: Man lives not
Matt. 4.
by bread only, but by the word and will of God. Therefore when they least
thought thereon, and had most need thereof, they were provided for by the
Angels, with who^^e in their continual prayers they conuersed. After they had
taken their refection they used deep silence and corporal exercises, laboring
about that which S. Francis commanded them for the necessityes of the house.
Then at the hour of Euensong and Compline, they all returned to accustomed
prayer in their Church, and other places there unto deputed.

Of the efficacy of the prayer of the Saint.
THE LXXXXVII. CHAPTER.
OF the humility of heart of S. Francis, did grow a diffidence of his force and
knowledge, a perfect confidence in the divine piety, which caused that he did
neither desire nor begin any thing, but he would first in prayer demand of
God that he would please to inspire him to think and excute his will, wherbie
he did obtain singular graces for himself and others. At the beginning of
his conversion, being yet in the world, he obtained that matters of difficulty
(according to the world) as to serve leapers, and to pardon injuries should
appear easy and pleasing unto him, so that he had in short time obtained by
prayer that, which he could not have attained by tedious exercise. The
Evangelical perfection was revealed unto him; and what the Religious should
do in thrice opening the Missall: his rule was approved by Pope Innocent the
third, he knew that the will of God was he should assist to the saving of
souls. Our lord spoke to him in the Crucifix, and in diverse other manners
revealing unto him what he should do: he subdued the assaults and embushes
prepared against him by the artifice of the devils, who fled when they could no
longer resist him. It were not possible to recount by order all the graces
which by prayer he obtained of God: for beside the aforesaid, there remain
many other to relate, of which we will here insert some few and the rest in
place convenient.

The bishop of Assisium becoming very familier unto S. Francis, and often
visiting him at S. Marie of Angels, goeing one time unto his celle, he found
the door thrust to, and in a manner shutt: therefore goeing near and hearing
no noise, he thought he might be ravished in ecstasy in his prayer: which made
him desire to see the manner there of: and to that end very curiously opened
the door so wide as he might thrust in his head, which putting further to see
him, he was surprised with a great trembling, and such a fear, that he could
not breath nor respire: and was miraculouslie thrown far from the celle and
lost his speech, wherewith he was so terrified, that he had scarce the force to
return where the Religious were, to whom, having recovered his speech, he
presently acknowledged his fault in his presumptious enterprise. Thenceforward
he much more reverently respected saint Francis hen before.

The Abbott of S. Justin in the diocese of Perusia, meeting him one day,
alighted off his mule for the great devotion he had unto him, and embraced him,
discoursing a long time of certain affairs: at their parting he besought the
S. to pray for him, which he promised: and so being separated, S. Francis
withdrew himslfe from his companion saying that he must pay the dept which he
would perform to the benefitt of the Abbott, who in the same instant that S.
Francis prayed for him, felt himself as it were rapt out of himself by an
extraordinary fervor which ouer-past, he knew right well the virtue and
efficacy of the prayer of the Saint, and afterward related the same to diverse.

Brother Macie an other time saw S. Francis pray in such sort that there seemed
lively flames to issue out of his mouth and eyes, and so entierlie enflamed he
went unto him and calling him thrice, he said: Ah! ah! Brother Macie come to
me: wheratt he amazed at such an excess of spirit, cast himself into his
arms, and S. Francis lifted him up into the air the hight of a lance: and
afterward he recounted unto the Religious that in that instant he felt such and
so great sweetness, that he never after felt the like.

Passing by the Bourough of S. Sepulcher, by reason of his infirmities riding
on an ass, he was almost stifled by the extreme concourse of people that
flocked thither to kiss his feet, coat* hands and his habit: whereat he
remained so immovable that he seemed rather an image then a man. Being past
the Bourough, and not one of those people near him, he demanded of his
companions, how far he had yet to the Bourough: whereby they knew that being
ravished in spirit unto heaven, he had not felt that extreme press of people.
The said Fathers affirmed that the same happened not unto him once only, but
diverse times, by reason of the great excess of spirit which was ordinarily
incident unto him.

How by prayer he obtained of God what he would.
THE XCVIII. CHAPTER.
THough God alone, who endued him with so many graces, is able to express
them, yet we must not forbear to relate those that have bin committed unto us
by writting. Goeing to an hermitage there to spend one of his lentes, and being
unable, by reason of his great infirmities, to go one foot, he borrowed an
ass of a poor man, who of devotion would also go with him. The season being
extreme hot on the barren and sharp mountains, he had a great thirst, and
such as he feared to dye thereof: and being no longer able to endure it, he
acquainted the S. therewith, who moved with compassion, alighted off his ass,
and on his knees prostrated himself before God, and praying, did not arise
till he was heard, then arising, he said to the poor man: Go to yonder stone,
and by the virtue of God, it will yield thee water sufficiently. He went
thither, found water, and quenched his thirst: which done, the fountain shutt
again, to make it more manifest that by the only m^rittes of the S. God had
made the water to issue out of an hard rock^, as he did for Moses.

S. Franc* obtained of God that a covetous man became liberal.
The holy Father being at Spoletum, a lay Brother called Brothre Andrew of
Sienna that went a begging, reported unto him that there was a Bourgesse that
had little fear of God, of whom he could never get an almose: whereto he
answered, that he should endeavor to get were it but one only loaf of him,
and should bring it unto him. The said Religious went unto him, and was so
troublesome in demanding, that at lenght by importunity he got a loaf.
Having it, he carried the same to S. Francis, who divided it into little
morcels, and thereof gave to each of the Religious with condition, that they
should all say a Pater and an Aue for the auaricious, man: and himself joining
with them to pray unto God, they obtained that this extreme nigard became
liberal; God permitting him to know his fault, in such sort that thenceforward
there was none more liberal unto them then he.

A gentleman became Freer Minour by the prayers of S. Francis.
A virtuous gentleman did often inuit the holy Father unto his house, where he
extended so much charity unto him, that casting his affection on him, he much
desired to have him of his Order, and to that effect he prayed God that he
would voutsafe to illuminate this his friend to leave the world: which he did
with such fervor, that being in ecstasy he was elevated into the air, whiles
it chanced that the said gentleman passing by, saw him so in the air, and God
with him: who seemed to grant him this grace, being therefore converted and
touched by God, he entered into the Order.

Passing by the forest of Cortone, a Lady of worth came before him and
demanded his benediction: which he having given her, she began to recount unto
him the miserable estate wherein she then was, to wit, that God having long
time before inspired her to serve him, she had a husband so contrary to that
her good intention, and such an ennemy to their faluation, that thereby she
lived in perpetual anguish. And therefore she prayed him for the love of God to
assist her. The holy Father answered her, woman have faith in God, for he
knowing your holy and pious intention, will accomplish your desire. Go
therefore to your house, and boldly use these words unto your husband: I tell
you in the behalf of God, that now is the time of mercy, and the time of
justice will come hereafter. And therefore, by the wounds of our redeemer JESUS
CHR. crucified, I pray you so to dispose, that we may live in the peace and
fear of God, and you shall see, said S. Francis, that he will hear you: the
woman left him By the counsel and prayer of S. Fr. a gentleman was converted
from the world to God.
and his companion in prayer, and she in the mean time went away full of
consolation. The success was admirable, for coming to her lodgeing, her
husband asked her whence she came, she recounted unto him all by order, and on
the part of God used unto him the words S. Francis had taught her, wherewith
he became so mild, that he seemed not the man he accustomed to be; and in deed,
answered his wife that he was resolved thenceforward to change his life, and
to serve God as she desired. Whereto, his wife replied: since it pleases you
thus to obey God, it seems requisite that we begin the same by a vow of
chastity, it is a virtue exceeding grateful unto God, and will be very
meritorious unto us, the husband was content therewith, and so they after lived
piously. This conversion gave a merueilous admiration to all those that knew
them, and much more, when having perseuered piously together, they also dyed in
one same day, the wife in the morning, and the husband at night, she as a
morning sacrifice, and he as a sacrifice of the euenning: God permitting that
according well on earth, they should, by the merittes of the prayer of his
servant, be also united in heaven, leaving to the inhabitants of that place, a
perpetual memory of so worthy a miracle.

Of certain apparissions made unto S. Francis in his contemplation.
THE XCIX. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father S. Francis always sought solitary places, wherrin he might
more freely converse with God, and discourse with his Angels; and there making
his celle of bows of trees, distant from those of the other Religious, he
enjoined Brother Leo his companion, to visitt him no more then once a day, and
to bring him only bread and water, and once in the night at the hour of
Matines; and at his coming, to say: Domine Labia ^ea aperies, and if he
answered. Et os meum a^nu^ciabit laudem tuam, then he should enter to say
matines with him: but if he answered not he should depart in peace: because,
he was sometime so ravished in ecstasy, that he could not speak, day nor
night* Brother Leo very seriously observed the commandment of the holy Father,
nevertheless he sometime watched him for his consolation: he oftentimes saw him
elevated into the air, and then he boldly embraced his feet when they were low
enough to do it: for at such time he was lifted higher then a great tree, and
at other times so high that the eye of man could not attain the sight of him*
which when Brother Leo saw, he would fall on his knees under him, and ask
mercy of God.

This Religious ^^counted that he saw him once on his knees having his
countenauce fixed toward heaven and his hands joined together, when he heard
him utter these words, which with great effusion of tears he often repeated:
Who art thou, my God, and who am I? at which words he saw a light to descend
on his head, and in the same heard a voice that spoke unto him: but he could
not understand the words, being remote from him for fear the Saint should
perceive him, and of reverence, reputing himself, unworthy to hear the divine
secrettes; he only saw S. Francis th^ise to putt his hand into the said flame
of fire, which done the vision disappeared* But Brother Leo could not go so
gently but the holy Father heard some noise: and therefore said: I command thee
in virtue of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, whosoever thou be, to stay there. Brother
Leo staying said: Father, it is I. S. Francis, calling him, checked him for it:
but Brother Leo acknowledging his fault, prayed him that since he had pardonned
him, he would also so much favor him as to tell him what signified the vision
which he had seen. The holy Father willing to satisfy him, in this manner
expounded it unto him: Know that when you saw that light descend from above,
God communicated unto me the knowledge of his divine majesty, and of my self,
which was it that I demanded of him, saying My God, who art thou, and who am
I? that is, his greatness, and worth, and my extreme baseness, and the very
nothing that I am: and therefore I never accustomed to reiterate those words.
After this revelation, I said unto him, whence is it then, my God, that thou
voutsafed so to gratify a worm of the earth, such as my self, so abject and
vile? and he answered me such high matters, as humane understanding is not
capable to conceive them. Before he departed, he demanded of me to offer him
some thing, I answered, that I had nothing in this world, and that my self
was his, that I had given my self to him for ^uer, and therefore knew not what
to offer him. Then he commanded ^e me to putt my hand into his bosom, and to
present unto him that which I should found there: which I did. And I found
there S. Franc. offered to God three medalles signifiing the three vows.
three medalles or balls of gold, which I three several times offered unto
him. Then he pleased to explicate unto me that those three balls signified
precious pou^rty, resplendent charity, and rich and golden obedience, which by
his grace I acknowledged to have in such sort offered unto him, that my
conscience does not any way reprehend me in the observation of them; Now in
counterchaunge of this gift which I presented, he of his infinite bounty
granted me that I should ever be thanckfull unto him both in mouth and heart,
for this and all other benefittes which his divine majesty has bestowed on me:
and which S. Franc. soretold the impression of the stigmates he was to have.
I reputed not mine but his. For this then was it that thou saw me stretch
out my hand three several times. Now since I have satisfied thee I command thee
that whiles I shall live, thou discover it to no person of the world, and that
thou watch me no more when I shall be in prayer. Go then, with the benediction
of God, into your celle, and pray to God for me: for with in few days, God
will worck such meruaylous things in this mountain, that all the world shall
admire it. He meant the holy impression of his stigmates.

Of an other apparition unto the holy Father.
THE C. CHAPTER.
AVery young and simple Religious, being in an Oratory, where the Religious
accustomed to retire themselves when they went into the desert, (S. Francis
being then there) and being surprised by the night, he was to remain there to
take his rest, and then he determined to see that which he had so often heard
spoaken of the holy Father S. Francis, to wit, that when he prayed in the
night he did merueilous things. Wherefore every one being gone to rest, he
placed himself at the feet of the holy Father, and that he should not go
away without him, he tied their girdles together, to the end that if he arose
he might be awakened. But this devise little auayled: for S. Francis arising
very gently, loosed the cords and went to pray otherwhere. The Religious that
was a sleep with his cogitation running on his desire, was not long from
awaking, and finding himself alone and deceived, purposed at adventures to
follow him through the woods: to whom God was so favorable, that he found the
holy Father in prayer on the top of a Mountain; and he seeming to hear some
speech, saw a merueilous sple^dour that enuiro^ned the S. and therein, our lord
JESUS CHRIST, with the glorious virgin his mother, S. John the Evangelist, and
an infinite number of Angels that were there present: which the Religious
seeing, he was seized with such a terror that he fell as dead to the ground,
and had no feeling till the holy Father having ended his prayer and retourning
to his celle, by reason of the darcknes of the night stumbled against him. So
conceauing presently who he was, embracing him and laying him on his neck the
best he could and God assisting him, as a good Pastor he carried his beloved
sheep to the fold, and having reduced him to himself, and made him report
what he had seen, he likewise commanded him, not to reveal it to any living
creature, during the time he was as in this world.

Of an other vision.
THE CI. CHAPTER.
GOeing one time from one Monastery to an other, there was committed unto him
for companion a young Religious that had no great fear of God. So having
refreshed themselves in the Monastery, whither they went, the S. repaired to
his rest before the others, that he might rise to prayer, when the rest were in
their first sleep, as he accustomed to do, and his said companion remained
with the other Religious, to whom murmuring against the S. he said, that he
did eat, drinck, and sleep very well, and withal that he was reputed a S. and
therefore he resolved to go see, if he arose in the night to pray as the said
Religious had assured him he did, and to that end, he slept not that night. At
the second watch he perceived the holy Father to arise, who hastened into a
wood thereby, whither the Religious followed his steps very gently. Being
come to the place that seemed most proper, and falling on his knees, he began
to cast out his ordinary fervent sighs and pious enflamed speeches, beseeching
the glorious virgin to show him her sweet child, in such sort as she brought
him into A Religious doubting of the purity of life of S. Francis was
sufficiently assured thereof having watched him one night.
the world. This prayer ended, the said religious saw the holy virgin mother,
appear in a most resplendent light, who coming to the Saint with an admirable
benignity delivered and laid her son in his arms, whom the S. having
thanckfully received, he tenderly embraced, clipped, and kissed very
amourously; this infinite contentment and contemplation of the S. continued
even to the break of day, when he rendered him again whence he received him,
then with most humble reverence kneeling on the ground, all the vision
disappeared. The said Religious was so edified by this miracle, that he craved
pardon of the S. and changed his life. This holy Father had such and the like
visitations of the glorious virgin Mary, of the blessed Apostles S. Peter and
S. Paul and of the glorious Archangell S. Michael, for the particular devotion
he had unto them; and they all did exceedingly comfort him; as his Confessor
and companion Brother Leo, did diverse times hear and see.

How the privileges which God gave to the Friar Minors, were by an Angel,
declared to their Father S. Francis. This is extracted out of the 26. chapter
of the 10. book, and here set in his proper place.
THE CII. CHAPTER.
Seven privileges which God granted to the Order of the Freer Minors.
Saint Francis being in the Covent of Saint Vrbin, the Angel of God appeared
unto him, who revealed unto him the singular privileges and graces which God
had granted to them that observed his rule, and should die in his Order. The
first privilege is, that if their intention be good, they shall in althinges
be governed by the holy Ghost. The second, that in this desert of their
pilgrimage, they shall be particulerly defended in their temptations from the
snares of their ennemies and from the pit of mortal sins. The third that
they shall be so purged here, that the pains of Purgatory shall be no stop to
their speedy passadge to the glory which God has prepared them. The fourth,
that they who shall follow their rule with fidelity and fervor, shall meritt
to hear and obtain that which was promised to the Apostles of God, and
afterward enjoyed by them, when he said: ye that have left althinges to serve
me, shall sit on seats, and shall Matt. 19.
judge others. The fifth, that God shall give them increase of the goods of
this life and of grace, who shall have particular devotion to the Order and to
the Religious thereof in releuing them, and shall afterward if they persevere,
make them heirs of his glory. The sixth is that they on the contrary, who
shall persecute the Order, and not repent, their life shall be short, or if they
live, it shall be in afflictions and maledictions of God, and after their death
shall be damned. The seventh, that this rule shall endure even to the end of the
world, and that temporal provision shall never fail the Professors thereof,
that likewise therein shall be always Religious of good and pious life, and
zealous of the honor of God and Religion.

Of the continual exercises which S. Francis used of the passion of Jesus
Christ.
THE CIII. CHAPTER.
THe principal of all the exercises of devotion wherein S. Francis ordinarily
employed his soul, was the passion of our lord JESUS CHRIST, which was so
engraven interiourlie within his heart, even from the beginning of his
conversion, that as often as he remembered the same, he could not forbear to
weep, and therefore he so loved the blessed cross, that if it might be ever
truly said, that any one has faithfully carried it after God, he has bin
one, and doubtless the same, in shunning all temporal consolations, seeking
and finding all kind of affliction in this world, to suffer with JESUS CHRIST.
He was also, by means of his continual prayers, abstinences, watchinges, and
pilgrimages, become very diseased and infirm: for he was subject to the
headache, grief of the eyes, and of the lunges: notwithstanding he omitted
not the pious worckes that caused those infirmities. He had no care to be cured
thereof, excepting his eyes for the benefitt of his neighbor, that he might
suffer in his infirmities with his God: such was the interior and perfect
love, which he bare to his most holy passion for which, every thing that to us
seems carnally bitter, was to him spiritually exceeding pleasant.

Being one day transported by this dolor of the passion of his sweet JESUS
CHRIST, not suspecting to be heard, he cried out with a loud voice, as if he
had then seen him die: whereupon a man of honor that feared God, who had bin
familier unto him in the world, passed by where the holy Father was, of whom
he very instantly and as utterly amazed, demanded what disgrace had befallen
him, S. Francis with tears answered him: I lament and weep for the greiuous
torments and dishonours wherewith the barbarous Jews afflicted my lord JESUS
The great compassion which S. Franc. had of the passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ.
CHRIST, which I so bitterly bewail in regard that all the world, for whom he
has so much endured, seems to have forgotten so worthy a benefitt. Which
uttering, he began to poor out a river of tears, in such sort that the
gentleman who came thither to comfort him, began himself to bewail the
passion of our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, with his servant Francis.

Being one time blind (which often happened unto him, and sometimes every
month) through the infirmity of his eyes, a Superior of his Order demanded
of him, what would follow, since he could not read at least some spiritual
book, by mean whereof he might rejoice his spirit in his infirmity. S.
Francis answered him: Brother, I always find so much consolation and so much
love in the memory of the life and passion of our Savior JESUS CHRIST, that if
I should live till the end of the world, I should need no other lesson. So that
this holy Father carried the gospel better written in his heart, then is seen
on paper. Wherefore he often put his Religious in mind of those words of
David: My soul has rejected consolation, I have bin mindful of Psalm. 76.
God, and have rejoiced: as if he said, that he respected no other temporal
consolation, since he enjoyed all consolation in the passion of his sweet JESUS
CHRIST. And therefore he exhorted his Religious often to turn the leaves, both
night and day, of this pious book of the passion of JESUS CHRIST, without care
of any other. And all his sermons and exhortations were (according to the
abondance of his heart) of this cross and most sacred passion, to perfect them
therein, as a most assured way of salvation.

An exhortation of the holy Father S. Francis, to the meditation of the passion
of our Redeemer Jesus Christ.
THE CIV. CHAPTER.
BE always mindful, said the holy Father, of the way of humility and poverty
of the cross, whereby our Savior JESUS CHRIST has walked for our example,
considering that if it were necessary for his divine Majesty to enter into his
glory, Luc. 24.
by mean of this his passion, it is far more necessary for us detestable
sinner to tread the same path. And if every faithful Christian be obliged
thereunto, much more are we, we I say, who make profession to follow the
cross: which God will that we do not only bear, but that by our example and
doctrine, we procure others to bear it, and do induce them after us, with
them to follow him that is our guide: Considering withal that the good will to
imitate the passion of our Savior, is a particular grace which the holy Ghost
bestows on the soul, that truly loves and serves him, for the soul that
is selfe-affected and a friend to her self does not taste, but repugneth this
doctrine of the holy Ghost, nor reputeth this participation of the passion of
our Lord, necessary to perfection: yet pretending to make greater benefitt by
other ways, not ways, but hidden down falls, shunning the gall of
tribulations, and the bitterness of the cross of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, she
holds her heart drowned and blinded in self affection, by other natural and
voluntary cogitations, resting assured that she serves God better in that
liberty of life, without respect of the infinite pleasures and contentmentes,
which the soul receaueth interiourly in this contemplation and compassion of
her God: because they can find no taste but in suffering for him: but the soul
purged and entierly exempted from her proper interestes, permits her self
to be guided by the holy Ghost, that he wor^k in her, at his good pleasure, as
an excellent master of the singular doctrine which our Lord left written in the
books of his humility, patience, and passion, the infallible ways of
Christian perfection. Therefore the soul that obtayneth of him greatest purity,
seeks also to transform herself in to his dolours, reputing all other ways
as mortal food, and this alone for a medicine, bitter unto the taste, but right
pleasant in fruit, bitter to taste, delicious in operation. So preferring health
before the taste, she experienceth how admirable this taste of eternal life is,
to have rejected the former that is frail, transitory and mortal. For she
experienceth that his love does not better appear in any other* then in his
charitable passion, and that the more she transformeth her self into JESUS
CHRIST crucified, the more she is transformed into the high and glorious God,
because the humanity cannot be separated from the divinity, and himself
requires it as a grace of his Father when he says: John. 17. 12.
I will that mine be where I am* And so the soul contemplateth both the one
and the other estate of her God, that she may never be separated from him, as
she should be, in shunning his passion, according Romans 8.
to the words of S. Paul: That he who suffers not with him, shall not reign
with him: she therefore considers him mortal and immortal, of which estates
the one is of them that run the race, the other Joan. 15.
of them that have already gotten the price. Now as the price is not given but
to them that run, so heaven is not given but to them that carry the cross.
Neither is it reasonable that the servant be above the Lord, or the disciple
above the master: therefore we see that God communicates his grace to them
that follow him in the aforesaid manner, and on the contrary he takes it from
those presumptuous who affirm that they will adhere unto him, by other
inventions, and nevertheless do never leave themselves, and in the end also
they are seen erroniously to fall.

How the holy Father knew the will of God to be, that men should exercise them
selves in the passion of Jesus Christ.
THE CV. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father did not without cause affirm the aforesaid, considering that
desiring no other thing then JESUS CHRIST crucified, with S. Paul, and teaching
no other unto his Religious the better to secure them and himself, he
demanded of God that he would voutsafe to reveal unto him, in what exercise
he and his might appear most acceptable unto his divine majesty: and being
inspired of God, arising from his prayer, before the high altar where he was,
he took the missal that lay thereon, whereupon making the sign of the cross,
he began again to pray unto God, that he would please by the opening of that
Missall, to manifest unto him wherein he was best served. Then opening it, he
found the passion of our Redeemer, and not trusting the first time; at the
second he found the like, and the third time the same: Being thereupon fully
encouraged, he prepared himself to suffer, and as presaging what should arrive
unto him, he gave thanckes unto God that he would please to make him
participant of his passion: so that being no longer able to conceal the
alacrity of his heart, as drunken with the spirit of divine love, he showed it
exteriourlie, singing praises unto God in the Italian tongue, and in French,
and often times with two sticks, whereof he held the one in form of a violl
on his breast, and the other he used for a fidle stick. But he never ended his
songs, till he was utterly melted into tears, with such an excessive dolor,
that what he held, fell out of his hands through his extreme feeblenes,
without any feeling of his; washing his soul with the tears of his corporal
eyes, which he made blind, to illuminate his soul interiourly. And though he
had attained to such degree of perfection and sanctity, he answered his
Physician, who told him he would destroy his eyes if he did not abstain from
such weeping, that he would rather loose the eyes which he had common with
flies, the^ the tears, by mean whereof he illuminated the eyes of his
spirit, and made them like unto those of Angels, in the contemplation of God.
Notwithstanding which torrent of tears, he always sheued a gracious face as
one that by reason of the purity of his conscience, feared nothing, and was
ever united with God. He also joyfully received whatsoever came from his holy
hand. But in regard that one could not arrive to this perfection without having
precedentlie washed his soul from the spots of sins and imperfections, he
ordinarily persuaded his Religious to endeavor to purge themselves with tears
poured out for the passion of our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST.

How the hole Father S. Francis seeing any creature afflicted could not
forbear to weep, considering therein his God, in his dolourous passion.
THE CVI. CHAPTER.
BY this charity of compassion which he perfectly carried to JESUS CHRIST, his
soul remained so affected to suffer all adversities with his neighbor as a
member of JESUS CHRIST, that he was as much greiued as if himself had endured,
and this purity so augmented that he could not endure any creature to be
afflicted, though they were unreasonable, and among them, those particulerly,
to whom the holy scripture compares our Lord JESUS CHRIST: and therefore he
loved little Lambs, in whom is figured the patience and meeknes of our God.
Coming from Ancona to Osimo with brother Paul, whom he had made Provincial
of the Marches, he met upon the way a shepherd that among many goats and
kiddes, had one only sheep, which beholding, he felt his heart through pierced
with grief, to see the said sheep alone among so many goats and kiddes,
reprobate creatures: he therefore said to his companion: Behold, brother, how
meek that sheep is among those goats: our Lord walked so humble and meek
among the Scribes and Parisees, in memory whereof I pray you let us endeavor
to redeem it out of S. Franc. desired a sheep because it was among goats and
kiddes and had it.
this sheepheards hands. But his companion not knowing what remedy to apply,
in regard they had no money, he began with the holy Father to bewail his
grief; they both thus weeping, by chance there arrived a merchaunt, who
having demanded the^ the cause of their weeping; and understanding the same,
paid the sheepeard for the said sheep and gave it to the holy Father, who full
of comfort, conducted it to Osimo, even to the presence of the Bishop, who
admiring thereat, and demanding the cause after he understood it, was much
amazed at the great goodness and admirable simplicity of the holy Father, and
began also to weep. Now the day following, that the sheep might not be worse
entreated, he left it with the Religious women of Seuerina, which was much to
their contentment, for the devotion which they boar to the S. And therefore
keeping it as a peculier relic, in short time it yielded so so much wool as
they made thereof an habit, which was sent him in their name to the chapter
following: which he received with such affection, as cannot be expressed: for
embracing it very lovingly, he called all them that were there, to rejoice with
him, at the profitt he had made of that sheep.

On an other time he met in the same Province of Marches, a contry man that
carried on his shoulders two lambs to sell at the Marckett, and coming near
the holy Father, he laid down his Lambs, a little to repose himself, the two
lambs, then that were bound together began to bleat, and the poor holy Father
to co^passionate them, wherefore tourning to the co^try fellow he asked him why
he held them bound in such extreme affliction and torment, and he answered;
because they should not escape, he being to carry them to the markett where
necessity enforced him to sell them, and that he could do no less, the S.
replied: and what will they who buy them do with them? the fellow answered O
simple man, they will kill them, then cause them to be baked, boiled, or roasted
according to their appetite, and so eat them. S. Francis, exceedingly S. Franc.
gave his cloak to save the life of two lambs.
afflicted, said to himself: it shall not be so, for I will have them my
self: and withal went to the fellow, and said: come hither, will thou give me
thy lambs for this my cloak? wherewith he was very well content. So having
made exchange, the holy Father bethought himself how he might do to save
them; whereof having co^sulted with his companion, they found it most expedient
to render them to the co^try fellow, which they did upon his promise that he
should neither sell nor kill them.

Being in the monastery of Verecondo near Agubio, a poor sheep brought forth
her young one nere unto a sow* which did eat the tender lamb, which S. Francis
did bitterly lament with these words: Ah* little lamb, how well do thou
represent the innocent death of my Savior JESUS CHRIST: then as zealous of the
honor of almighty God, he laid his malediction on the said sow, which at the
very instant did admirably fall diseased, and within three days died: and by
force of this maledictio^, became of so loathsome savor that she was cast into
a ditch where neither dog, nor foul, nor other beast would eat her, but she
dried up, and so remained for memory long time after. This example should teach
us, by the temporal punishment of this beast, that whosoever uses cruelty
toward his neighbor, cannot avoid the eternal judgment of God: as also how
just the compassion of this Psalm. 21.
S. was, fith it merited to be heard of God, who being, by his Prophett David,
called worm, and not a man; the holy Father took up the very worms he found
on the ways, that passengers might not tread on the^ with their feet. In the
winter he gave either wine or hunny to the flies to preserve their lives, and
so by mean of all creatures, he elevated his heart to God the Creator, in
whom he lived with full consolation.

An exposition of the glorious Father S. Francis, made on the Pater noster.
THE CVII. CHAPTER.
THe Pater noster, was the principal of all the prayers which the holy Father
most contentedlie used, wherein he coceaued a meruaylous taste, eleuating his
heart unto God. And therefore he taught his Religious, for edification of their
neighbor to say it in this manner: Our Father, most blessed and most holy,
our Creator and Consolatour, which art in heaven, amongst the Angels and SS.
whom with they presence thou do illuminate, thy self being the light; thou
do inflame them with love, thou being love it self, raising them to thy
glory: thou dwell in them, because thou art the sovereign eternal good,
whence all good is derived, and without which nothing is good in it self;
Hallowed he thy name, and let thy knoweldge be manifested unto us: that we may
the better know the greatness of thy benefittes, and the accomplishmenr of thy
promises, the eminency of thy Marestie, and the depth of thy judgments; Thy
kingdom come, to the end thou now reign in us, by grace, and that hereafter
we, attain the other of glory, where is eternally thy glorious presence,
with perfect love, glorious company, and joy and alacrity without end; Thy
will be done in earth as is it in heaven, that we may love thee with an
infinite love, and may be always in cogitation with thee, that we be with thee
in intention, and with thee in spirit, seeking thine honor in all our
actions, with all the forces and powers of our soul, and body, freely
employing all in the service of thy love, and in no other thing, and that, to
observe thy commandment, we love our neighbor as our selves, showing to all
as to our selves an entier charity, for thy love, rejoicing at the good of
others, as at our own, compassionating their necessities and afflictions as
our own, giving them all assistance we can possible, far from offending them,
as our selves would desire to be assisted in like necessity: Give us this day
our daily bread: that is, thy deerly beloved and blessed Son, our Redeemer
JESUS CHRIST, in our spirit and understanding, with all reverence, by the
great love wherewith he has affected, and by what soever he has said, done,
and endured, for us wretches; And forgive us our debtes, by thine infinite
mercy, by the virtue of the passion of thine only Son our lord JESUS CHRIST,
and by the merittes and prayers of the blessed virgin Mary, pardon us also good
God, As we forgive our debtors: and if we pardon not them perfectly as we
ought, make us, Lord, to do it, that we may meritt pardon. Grant, good God,
that by thy love, we do not only forbear to do evil for evil, nor hate our
ennemies, but that we love them, and that by good offices and prayers for them
we demonstrate the same to thee, O God of mercy. Lord God forsake us not in
our cruel temptations, both secrett and manifest, and permit us not to fall
therein, but deliver us from evil, past, by mean of true contrition, and holy
penance; present, by preservation of thy grace, and future, by perseverance in
thy most holy fear. Amen.

Of certain other mystical prayers and canticles, which the holy Frther S.
Francis made.
THE CXVIII. CHAPTER.
The Holy Father in his canonical hours said in latin these prayers
following, which he composed in the praise of God.
Apoc. 3.
HOly, holy, holy, lord God almighty, which art, which have bin, and art to
come, thou art worthy that we offer unto thee, and to receive of us, all praise
and honor, and that we exalt and acknowledge thee above althinges, the lamb
that was slain is worthy to receive all virtue, divinity, wisdom, force,
glory, honor and benediction. Let us always praise God, let us yield the
honor dew unto the Father, the Son, and the the holy Ghost: let us praise
God for ever: let us praise the lord of heaven, and earth, and of all other
things created under and on the earth, with those that are in heaven: let us
praise God and exalt him for ever. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the holy Ghost. Let us praise God for ever and magnify him as he has
bin, is now, and shallbe world without end. Amen. Let us praise God and exalt
him for ever, Amen.

An other breife prayer unto God.
Almighty most high and my sovereign good, all good that only is good. We
give thee all praise, all praise, all glory, all honor, and yield thee all the
thanckes we can, and will that all good be referred to thee alone, Amen.

An other short prayer, for the divine office
Most high most mighty, most just, and most merciful lord, afford us miserable
wretches so much of thy grace, that we may accomplish thy holy will, and may
with all diligence seek that alone which pleases thee: that being interiourly
illuminated and enflamed with the fire of the holy Ghost, we may tread the most
holy steps of thine only Son our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, that by mean of
this thy grace we may see thee with the blessed, thou that art the most high
God, who live in perfect Trinity, simplicity, and unity, and as almighty
raignest in eternal glory. Amen.

A prayer to the Queen of heaven and to the Angels.
God save thee, holy Queen, most holy Mary, mother of God, and perpetual
virgin, chosen of God the Father, and of the holy Ghost the comforter; in whom
is faith and the entier perfection of all eminent virtue with all good united,
since thou have merited to have in thee the author of life and grace. God save
thee divine Palace: God save thee the habitation and tabernacle of the
Redeemer: God save thee, thee robe of God: God save thee, the servant and
mother of God: and God save thee, with all the Angelical powers, considering
that thou art sent by the holy Ghost into the hearts of rebels, that of
Infidelles thou make faithful and true servants of God. O most worthy mother
of our Savior JESUS CHRIST, Espouse of the holy Ghost, pray for us with S.
Michael the Archangell, and all the celestial spirittes, unto they beloved
Son our lord and master. Amen.

An other prayer to the virgin.
Holy Mary virgin and lady, like unto whom never woman was borne, nor shall be,
in the world, daughter and servant of the most high king and celestial Father,
most sacred mother of JESUS CHRIST, and Espouse of the holy Ghost, pray for us,
with all the Angels and saints, unto they beloved Son, that he will
voutsafe to save us: Glory be to the Father, unto the Son, and to the blessed
holy Ghost, Amen.

Praises unto God.
Lord God, thou art holy and God of all Gods, that worckest merueillous
things, that art the mighty and most high, thou art the omnipotent Father, and
entierly sovereign lord of heaven and earth, God in Trinity and Unity and
sempiternall, sovereign good, all good, and every good thing. Lord God living
and true, thou art true love and perfect charity, thou art wisdom, humility
and patience, thou art the incomprehensible beauty, thou art true pleasure and
assured repose, thou art our hope and joy, thou art justice, temperance,
fortitude and prudence of mortal men: thou art the richesse that can satiate
us: thou art meek, thou art our only protector and our guard, thou art our
virtue, faith hope and charity, and the sweetness and consolation of all; thou
art the bounty without end, a great God and admirable, God omnipotent,
pitiful, merciful and our Savior. Glory be to the Father and to the S.
Franc. devout to the versicle Gloria Pat.
Son etc. The holy Father saint Francis had a very fervent devotion to this
versicle Gloria Patri, therefore he often repeated it in his prayers. He
respected not so much, Sicut erat. Saying euensong one day with Brother Leo,
at every verse of Magnificat, he said, Gloria Patri, feeling therein a
merueillous taste and contentment, yea such as he thought he should never be
satisfied with saying thereof: he taught a Religious Priest, that was in
affliction and extremely tempted, to say, Gloria Patri, which he did, and was
incontinently delivered of his temptation.

Of the Canticle of the sun and other creatures, composed by S. Francis.
THE CIX. CHAPTER.
THis holy Father composed a Canticle in latin, in the praise of God, when he
revealed unto him the fruition of the glory of Paradise, and because the sun,
of all corporal, creatures is the chief of the irreasonable, and our Redeemer
JESUS CHRIST is called the Sun of justice, he therefore entitled it the
Canticle of the sun, which is that which follows, divided into eight little
verses, conformable to the eight beatitudes. Most high lord, all praises,
glory, and honors are thine, to thee alone ought to be rendered and referred al
graces; and no man is worthy to name thee. My God be thou praised and exalted
of all creatures, and particulerly of our brother the Sun thy work, which
illuminateth the day that lighteneth us, it is also thy figure, by his beauty
and splendor; likewise of the silver moon and glittering stars which thou
have created in heaven so bright and so beautiful. My God be praised by the
fire, whereby the night is lightened in his darcknes, because it is
resplendent, pleasant, subtle, clear, beautiful and vigorous. Let the air
and winds, clear and cloudy seasons and all other seasons, praise my God,
whereby all other base creatures do live. Let my God be praised by the water,
an element most necessary and profitable to mortal creatures, humble, chaste,
and clear. Let my God be praised by the earth our mother, which supporteth
and nourishes us, producing such diversity of herbs, flowers, and fruits.

S. Francis added the ensuing versicle, when he accorded the Bishop and the
Captain of Assisium, as in place proper shall be inserted.
Let my God be praised by them that pardon each for his love, and support in
patience, afflictions and infirmities, with alacrity of spirit. Blessed are
they that live in peace, for they shall be crowned in heaven.

The holy Father likewise added the verse ensuyng, when God* had revealed unto
him the day of his death.
Let my God be praised by corporal death, which no living man can escape.
Wretched be they that die in mortal sin, and blessed those that at the hour
of their death be found in thy grace, as having obeyed thy most sacred will: for
they shall not see the second death of eternal torments. Let all creatures
praise and give thanckes to my God, let them be grateful unto him, and serve
him with due humility. This Canticle was many times sung by the said S. unto
his Brethren, whom he also taught to sing the same. He exceedingly rejoiced
when he saw them sing it with grace and fervor: for hearing it he
merueillouslie elevated his spirit unto God. He sent certain Br. Pacificus a
Musicia^.
of his Religious that were very spiritual, unto Brother Pacificus, who living
in the world had bin a very skillful Musician, as we have said, that he might
learn them to sing it perfectly in Music, thereby to praise God afterward,
when they should preach over the world: for he would they should observe to
sing this canticle after their preaching, as a praise unto God, and that they
should affirm themselves to the people, to be the musicians of God, and that
they would no other reward for this their music, but that they should do
penance for their sins. For confirmation whereof, what are the servants of
God, said he, but his representers to move and awaken humane hearts to true
spiritual joy? and particulerlie the Freer Minors, who are given to the people
for their salvation. The holy Father affirmed, that in the morning at Sun
rising, a man ought to praise God the Creator of the Sun, by whose beams
our eyes are illuminated by day: and that he ought likewise to praise God in
the night for his Brother the Fire, because by it our eyes are lightened by
night: and that we should be all blind, if God did not illuminate our eyes by
these two creatures: for which and for the other creatures whose use we
ordinarily have, we ought continually to praise our glorious Creator.

Of the prayer and thanckes giving to God which S. Francis made after the
confirmation of his rule.
THE CX. CHAPTER.
MOst mighty, most high, most holy, and sovereign God holy Father and just
Lord, king of heaven and earth, we thanck thee for the love of thy self,
because that by thy will, and by thy only Son with the holy Ghost, thou have
created all things corporal and incorporall: then did frame us according
to thine image, and placed us in the terrestrial Paradise, whence through our
fault we are fallen. We also thancke thee for that, as thou have created us for
thy Son, so for the infinite love which thou did bear unto us thou have
procured him to be borne in this world, true God and true man, of the womb of
the ever glorious virgin Mary, and would that his life should be unto us an
example of poverty, humility, and penitence: and that his precious blood* his
torments, and most cruel death, should be the price of the Redemption of
human nature. Finally we thanck thee for that thy Son is once again to
come down on earth, in glory and majesty, to chase the accursed into hell, who
would not repent nor acknowledge thee for Redeemer; and to say to them that
shall have served and adored him, and done penance: Come ye blessed of my
Father, possess the kingdom, which is prepared for you from the beginning of
the world. But because we miserable sinners are not worthy so much as to name
thee, we humbly beseech thee to accept, that our Savior JESUS CHRIST thine
only beloved Son, with the holy Ghost the true comforter, do yield unto thee
for each of us the thanckes we owe thee, according to thy pleasure, and that he
satisfy thee for all the graces thou give us by his mean and shall give us,
provided that we fail not in our endeavor, such and so great as no humane
tongue shall be able to express. We also pray the blessed Virgin, S. Michael, S.
Gabriel, S. Raphael, and all the quiers of blessed Spirittes, Seraphins,
Cherubins, Thrones, Dominations, Principalities, Pouers, Virtues, Archangels,
and Angels, the blessed Elias and Noe, and all the Patriarckes and Prophets,
S. John Baptist, and all the holy Innocents, S. Peter, and S. Paul, withal
the other Apostles and Evangelists, Disciples, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins,
and all the saints that have bin, are, and shall be, that with the good
pleasure of thy divine Majesty, they give thee thanckes for so many favors as
it has pleased thee to afford us, to thee that art sovereign, true, eternal
and living, and to thy most glorious Son, our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and to the
holy Ghost the comforter, world without end. Amen. Al^etuya. We Friar Minors
unprofitable servants, demand of thee and most humbly beseech thy divine
Majesty, to grant unto all them that will serve thee in thy holy Catholic,
Apostolic and Roman church, and to all Orders of the said holy Church,
Preistes, Deacons, Subdeacons, Acolites, Exorci^tes, Lectors, Porters, and to
all the Clergy, to all Religious of both sex, and to al Kings, Princes,
Lords, and servants, Artizans, and laborers, to all Virgins, widows and
married women, and to all lay men and women, healthy and diseased, children,
young and old* to all people, families, and tongues, to all nations; and all the
men of the whole earth, that are, and shall be, the grace of true penance in
this life and so perseverance in the true faith, without which no man can be
saved; and we beseech thee to grant us grace together with the^, to love thee
withal our heart, withal our spirit, with all our forces, withal our
understanding, and withal our affections, desires and interious wills, since
thou alone have given us, soul, body, and life, creating and redeeming us by
thine only mercy: thou have saved us, and have given us miserable, rotten and
putrified, ungrateful and ignorant, lowed and rebellious wretches, and daily
do give us infinite benefittes. Permit then, good God, that we never desire
nor seek other thing, and that no other thing seem good unto us, or delight
us, but they self our Creator, Savior and Redeemer, only true God* that art
the perfect good, all true and sovereign good, that only is good and pitiful,
meek and delightful, that only is holy, just, true, and upright of whom, for
whom, and in whom, consists all our pardon, all the grace and glory of all
penitentes, of all the just, and of all the blessed that reign in heaven.
Permit, also Lord, that nothing prevail and hinder us, but that in every
place, in all time, at all hours, and continually we love thee, in verity,
and humility, and that we hold thee imprinted in our heart, as our true God* And
grant, if thou please, that we love thee, honor, adore, serve, praise,
glorify, and preach thee for great and glorious, and that we thank thee, thou
that art most high and God, three and one, Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
Creator of althinges, and Savior of all them that believe in thee, and have
placed in thee their only hope and love, who art without beginning and without
end immutable, invisible, inenarrable, ineffable, incomprehensible,
inscrutable, blessed, praised, glorious, glorified, high, amiable, agreeable,
delectable, and above all things desirable world without end. Amen.

Of the intelligence, and spirit of prophetie which this S. had.
THE CXI. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father S. Francis had in such sort cleared his soul, illuminated and
united it to our sovereign God, by the continual exercise of prayer, that
albeit he had no ouer-great understanding of holy scripture, being
nevertheless illuminated by the beams of divine revelation, he did penetrate
the sublimity of the said scripture, with an admirable intelligence of the
divine mysteries, by which, acquired science remains excluded, the infused of
divine love entering in his place. And therefore, what he read in holy scripture,
he understood by divine revelation, as a dilligent disciple of the holy S.
Franc. had a science infused from heaven that made him admirable to the most
learned divines.
Ghost: he first imprinted it in his memory, and then ruminated the same with
an interior taste of devotion: And (if God inspired him not) he never revealed
it to any person to appear a learned master, as now the practice is.

The Cardinal of Hostia, Protector of the Order, who was afterward Pope
Gregory the ninth, secretly requested him one time, for the consolation of his
soul to expound unto him certain profound places of holy scripture: I do
not, said he, demand this theological exposition of you, as of a great
doctor, for I know well you have not studied: But I require it, as of a man
illuminated of the holy Ghost. The S. satisfied him, and gave him such
contentment as he could desire no more.

Being one day at Sienna, a Religious divine asked him, how the Prophett
Ezechiel is to be understood where he says: If thou do not admonish Ezec. 33.
the impious of his impiety, an account of his eternal death shall be exacted of
thee: the holy Father answered: if those words be to be understood generally
as they sound, I thus understand them, that the servant of God ought in such
sort to burn and give light by exemplare life, and by his pious conversation,
that he seem silently to reprehend all the impious: for by such in deed, he
preaches their vices. Wherein is duly to be considered, how much more a
Religious is obliged hereunto by the light of his good life, seeing that it is
here apparent that if he do it not, he cannot escape the terrible judgment of
the living God: which prudent and true interpretation, the divine affirmed to
proceed directly from heaven, and that himself could not give a more direct
exposition then was given by him, with the swift and speedy wings of the eagle
soaring from infused science. And affirmed with all that our interpretation was
not such, which proceeding from our blinded understanding, goes naturally, as
a serpent trayling his body on the earth. The said Religious did not try the
holy Father in this matter only, but in diverse others also, in all which, he
rested fully satisfied, and exceedingly admiring at the grace which God had
given him, which was so great, that he could not only discover and understand
mysteries past, but (which God alone of himself can do) he discovered eue^
the things to come, as if he had had them then before his very eyes, as by
this example and them that follow, shall evidently appear.

The holy Father being yet in the city of Sienna, he once demanded a
charity for the love of God of an affectionate friend of his, who directly
answered him he would not grant it, but that he should first tell him the
certainty of his predestination: a demand doubtless very strange, Prophesies
of S. Francis.
yea exceeding terrible. But God that would, for his profitt, manifest unto the
world the merits of this his so glorious servant, was content he should promise
to assure him: Being the^ amazed at this so inciuill request, he elevated and
addressed his countenance to heaven, but much more his spirit, and so remained
in prayer a certain space, wherein was revealed unto him that this man was of
the number of the predestinate, and then he Of the salvation of his friend.
promised his devout friend eternal life, assuring him of his salvation. But
this good man unable to conceal this his so extreme spiritual alacrity, and
so coming to the ears of the before said Religious divine, he was exceedingly
sca^dalized at the presu^ption of the holy Father. Therefore repayring unto
him, filled with choler as an other Pharisie, he demanded if it were true,
the S. answearing affirmatiuelie; he laughing and deriding him, said: and who
has revealed unto youthat this your friend should be saved? to whom the S.
very jealous of the honor of God, openly answered: he that also told me that
the last night thou committedst such a secrett sin, and that therefore, in
short time thou shall abando^ The apostasy of a Religious
thy habitt. But because the Religious deserved not pardon, though by
manifestation of his sin he might be well assured of the ensuying punishment
which he prophesied unto him, he nevertheless did not penance as the holy
Father then admonished him, God permitting him to die out of his Order, that by
his damnation, he might manifestest the salvation of the other.

Whiles he was in the ca^p of the Christians under Damiette, when he went to
preach to the great Solda^, he prophesied to the Christians that if Of the
loss of a battle.
they gave battle they would loose the field. But they not believing him,
their fault of incredulity was paid by the loss of the body of the army that
was putt to flight, where of one part was slain. Retourning afterward on this
side the sea, and arriving at Celano, he was invited to dinner by a gentleman,
where being, as according to his coustume he prayed before his sitting to the
table, he saw in his God, on whom he had always his eyes elevated, that which
he fore told, as it afterward arrived, for incontinently calling unto him the
said gentleman. Confess Of the sudden death of his friend
and prepare your self, said he, for in short time you shall dye, and from
this time you shall receive the recompense of all the good worckes you have
done, particulerlie in harboring the servants of God. Do then in such sort
as without impediment you may go directly to God. The gentleman therefore who
had confidence in the words of the holy Father, sodenlie taking leave of him
prepared himself to confession, then calling the companion of saint Francis
who was priest, he made an entiere confession unto him: afterward he
recomended his patrimony to the divine providence, so to avoid all impediment.
And so with the greatest devotion he could possible he expected when God would
call and inuit him: but he expected not long, for whiles his family were at
table, without other grief, but very well disposed of body and spirit, he
rendered his soul to his Creator, according to the prophecy of the holy
Father, armed by the divine mercy, with armor convenient and necessary to a
true penitent.

How S. Francis saw the secrets of men's consciences.
THE CXII. CHAPTER.
Our lord JESUS CHRIST having chosen the glorious Father S. Francis for Pastor
of his flock, he also so illuminated him interiourlie by his divine virtue,
that he discovered unto him the secrettes of the consciences of those that were
his, and likewise their private and hidden necessities: so that by the same
mean he knew both the grace which they had received of God, and eue^ that
which they the^ received. By this knowledge he foretold the fall of many, who
seemed to have attained the state of perfection, and on the contrary the
salvation of many wicked, prophesying their conversion. He saw what should
succeed them for many years after, as if it had bin present, only beholding
the unspotted and clear mirour of divine light, and his admirable splendor,
by a divine prerogative and especially the successes and mutatio^s of Religion,
which he would sometimes with abo^dance of tears communicate to his
companions. Touching that which concerned the consciences S. Franc. knew the
thoughts of men.
of his Religious, he both with all possible speed and effect redressed the
same: and if they were far distant, he appeared unto them in their sleep, and
instructed them what they ought to do, and from what to abstain, as by the
sequel shall appear.

The holy Father coming from beyond the sea, with his companion Brother
Leonard, a Religious of very worthy family, and being by reason of his
infirmities very weary and feeble, he had for ceraine days the use of an
ass. But the poor Brother Leonard that followed him a foot, being also very
weary, began to murmr, saying to himself: Of a Religious that murmured
because goeing a foot S. Francis had an ass.
what do I poor follow that I am, to follow this man a foot? Is there not
great difference between his descent and mine? why then contrary to that which
should be, do I go on foot and he on horseback? and even I follow him as a
lackye driving this ass, with speed, and so wearying my self as I can no
longer endure. The good Brother Leonard went on thus still discoursing with
himself in his first motions, when as the holy Father S. Francis seeing in
spirit the secret murmr of his companion called him, and alighting from his
ass, he said: Brother and Friend, I confess I have little discretion, to see
you so wearily to go a foot, and my self to ride at mine ease: Get up
therefore on this ass, now at least whiles I remember me, considering that
being in the world, you were far more noble and more honnorable then my
self. Brother Leonard hearing this was utterly confounded and amazed, that the
S. so soon knew his evil cogitation: Falling therefore at his feet, and
confessing his vain ridiculous discourse, with a very deep contrition, he
asked and obtained pardon.

Two very spiritual Religious came expressly from Rieta to the Oratory of
Grecio, to visitt S Francis and to have his benediction. But being there
arrived, it was told them that there was no hope of speaking with the holy
Father, by reason that having taken his refection he was returned to his cell,
where he prayed and slept, and came forth but once a day to eat, it being lent
and that being then so solitary, he would not have his companion, much less
any other Religious to disturb him, unless he so commanded. These two poor
Religious exceedingly afflicted, esteeming themselves by reason of their sins
unworthy of such grace, not having opportunity any longer to expect, because
their superior had commanded them to return the same night to their Covent,
they hastened homeward. S. Francis who in spirit had seen all Of two Religious
that came to visit him.
this, contrary to his custom came hastily out of his c^lle, and went after
the said Religious, who by that time were far gone, and so in an instant
giving them consolation together with his benediction which they demanded, he
dismissed them doubly satisfied, knowing that the holy Father came by divine
inspiration to give them his benediction.

Of a Religious that by humility would conceal the fault which his companion
had committed.
Two Religious coming from Naples to visitt him, the elder of them on the way
committed some fault, at which the younger was extremely scandalized: now
coming to the presence of S. Francis, he giving them his benediction,
demanded of the younger, how his companion had behaved himself: he esteeming
it indecent to discover the faults of his Brother, answered, well. The holy
Father replied, My son, beware that under color of humility, you do not
lie; for I know what has passed in your journey: and I would have you know that
you shall shortly see this man to prove worse: Which so succeeded, for this old
man not long after went out of the Order, according to that which S. Francis
had foretold for the sin, for the scandal, and for his neglect of doing
penance, which is the ladder to divine mercy.

In the first beginning when none was admitted and received into the Order, but
by S. Francis himself, a gentleman of Luca, came expressy to demand the
habitt of him, he had with him some of his companions, it being when he lay
sick in the Bishops lodgeing of Assisium. The said gentleman being conducted
to the S. he fell on his knees before him, most instantly beseeching him to
admit him into his Religion, but the holy Father beholding him attentively,
answered: O miserable man, this request is not granted to men entierly
addicted to sensuality and to the world, as you are, for you do lie to the
holy Ghost: these tears are seigned and not true; your interior is not with
God: neither is it he that calls you to this Religion. Depart you therefore in
good time, for you are not fit for it. The holy Father had scarce Of a
gentleman that feined to desire the habitt of F. Minor.
ended these words, but the Religious understood that the kindred of this
gentleman were come for him: but not believing them, he put his head out at
the windoe, whence having seen them, he was very joyful, and taking leave of
the said Religious he returned with them to his house. Those present
exceedingly admired the spirit of S. Francis, that knew the feined intentions
of this man who exteriourlie appeared so contrite.

The rest of this chapter is transfered to the end of this first book, with the
31. and 32. chapter of the second book, there placed together as their proper
place.
Of a Religious that seemed a S. The 28. chapter of the 12. book, transferred
to this place as proper unto it.
THE CXIII. CHAPTER.
HE knew by an other Religious, who being deluded by the devil he more strictly
to keep silence proceeded so far, as that he would not so much as confess
as did the other Religious but by signs as one dumme: which he used also when
he demanded any thing, and without any speech he sheued such signs of
spiritual alacrity, that he moved all the Religious to praise God: The fame
hereof was presently diuulged, so that he was generally held for a S. In the
mean while S. Francis arriving where this Religious was, he was advertised of
his proceeding; but he answered that he was exceedingly tempted and deluded by
the devil, because confession of the mouth was necessary, as contrition of the
soul, and satisfaction of worckes. The superior of the place then confirmed
the sainctity of the said Religious, unto S. Francis, alleadgeing that it was
not possible he should be tempted of the devil, considering the signs of
sanctity which he exteriourlie showed. The holy Father replied, prove him in
this manner: command him to confess twice or at least once every week,
which if he refuse, believe that it is a delusion of the devil. Which the
superior having done, the Religious putting his finger in his mouth, and
shaking his head, by these signs declared, that he could not do it, for
breaking of silence. His superior would no farther urge him: but the great
prudence of S. Francis was not long unknown: for a little after this Religious
S. abandoned his Religion, a took a seculer habitt. Two Religious of his
companions meeting him attyred seculerly, conceauing great compassion of his
blindenes, said unto him: O miserable wretch and forgetful of thy self, where
is that thy solitary and sainct-like life, yea such, as thou would not
converse with thy Brethren, nor speak in Confession, for keeping of silence?
thou now having lost thy self in the world, abandoned our habitt, rejected thy
vow, and broaken the rule, as if thou had no belief of God? but he gave
them so devilish an answer, that he plainly discovered, he had not only
changed habitt but also One must beware of singularity.
Religion, and interior virtue. These good Religious could by no means reduce
him, though they labored to reprint in his mind the obligation he had to God,
and the peril of his damnation: and so in few days after he dyed, being in
possession of the devil that held him choked: because he would not confess.
It is a worthy example for all Religious, to beware of singularity, in matters
appertayning to their Order, that demonstrate more pride then spirit of
devotion and humility.

Of other merueillous accidents wherein the spirit of Prophetie of S. Francis
did miracously appear.
THE CXIV. CHAPTER.
THe Cardinal of Hostia having on a time command S. Francis to repair unto
him to Rieta, where then was Pope Honorious with his Court: and coming near
the city he saw a great troup of people that came against him: wherefore
stopping his journey, he staid in a Church, before S. Fabian, a league and half
from the city, where was a very poor Priest, that very courteously and in the
best manner he could, entertained him: But the Cardinals and many other of his
Court, knowing whither he was retired, went thither to see him: by this
visitation; the vineyard of the poor Priest was wastfullie gathered by the
indiscretion of the trampling train of the Cardinals and others, whereat he
exceedingly complained, repenting that he had entertained S. Francis, in regard
that for the little good he had done him, he thought he should incur such
loss. The holy Father, S. Franc. obtained of God that a little vigne boar ten
times double of that he used, and why.
who in spirit knew the affliction of the Priest, that durst not acquaint him
therewithal, and who on the other side knew what fruit he was to procure in
that place, whither he had bin expressly sent of God, there to plant an abondant
vigne of true penitentes: in which respect he could not depart thence, reputing
it behoufull to endure the loss of that little material vigne; for the better
gayning a spiritual. Nevertheless as a pitiful loving Father, he called the
Priest, whom, for his consolation, he bad not to vex himself nor to fear,
for of the little that remained of his vigne he should gather double the
ordinary, though there appeared almost nothing. The Priest that firmly
believed these words, deserved also to be recompensed according to his faith:
for whereas he accustomed to have three hogsheddes, he had then twenty, of very
good wine, as the holy Father had promised him: which (with exceeding joy and
admiration) he related unto him and to all the people thereabout, to the praise
of God, and of his servant Francis.

This holy Father being in the Province of Massa, on the Mount Casal, within a
desert Church there employed in prayer, God revealed unto him that in the same
Church were relikes of his saints. Wherefore determining that they should no
longer there remain concealed, and without the honor due unto them, and
having no opportunity of longer abode in the said church, by reason of other
occurrances for Reuelatio^s made to S. Fr.
which he was to take order; he commanded his Religious, sheuing them where
they were, to take them from that place, and to carry them into their church:
which having said, he departed. But these good Religious forgatt it: Wherefore
they being one day to say mass in the Oratory, thinking to prepare the Alcare,
they found under it certain bright and glittering bones, that filled the place
with a most delicious savor. Being extremely amazed, and diuising who should
putt them there, they remembered the commandment which S. Francis had given
them, and concluded that those were the relics which he commanded them to
remove: and that because they had failed therein, God had miraculouslie
supplied it: as accordingly S. Francis, being returned to that place, and
having understood the process and pardoned the Religious their negligence who
most humbly required the same, thancked God very heartily for that he
voutsafed to have care of the very dust of his true servants, then he went to
see and Predictio^ of S. Fr. concerning two Religious giving them the habitt.
with great contentment to reverence them. Brother Pellegrino and Brother
Falcone, coming to take the habitt at the hands of S. Francis, he prophesied
unto them, that the first, though very learned, should serve the Religious as
a lay Brother: and the other, albeit ignorant, should apply himself to
contemplation, wherein he should prove most perfect, as the other reciprocally
in humility: which came to pass, as in the sixth book, and 55. chapter, shall
appear.

Other effects of the prophetical spirit of S. Francis.
THE CXV. CHAPTER.
Saint Francis remaining in the house of the bishop of Rieta, exceedingly
Proph^sies of S. Francis.
afflicted with the grief of his eyes, a Priest called Gedeon advanced by the
said bishop, a man worldly affected, had long time kept his bed sick, without
power to remove him self, and when any endeavored to take hold of him or lift
him up, he remained utterly crooked, for he could in no manner stand upright.
So perceauing that no humane application auayled, and that Saint Francis
rightly to the purpose was there, he caused himself to be brought before him:
at whose feet falling, he besought him to make the sign of the cross upon
him: The holy Father answered: My Brother and friend, know that because to
this day thou have lived carnally, and according to the allurementes of thy
sensual appetites, without any respect of the judgments of God, he has
therefore sent this affliction to make thee know and amend thy self. But now
in his holy name I give thee his To a Priest curing him by the sign of the
cross.
benediction: and do advertise thee, that if thou alter not thy course of
life, a greater misery will befall thee, for the sin of ingratitude. So
having made on him the sign of the cross, the Priest incontinently arose
very sound, and stretching himself on his feet, the chinebone, and the breast
plate gave a crack as a staff forciblie broaken. But by reason that this
ingratfull fellow and ennemy of his salvation, returned unto his vomitt, being
one day with diverse of his companions, committing their ordinary sins, about
midnight the loose of the house fell upon him, and so being crushed and slain
alone, that the divine vengeance might the more evidently appear, according
to the prophecy of S. Francis, he miserably ended his life.

Being at his Oratory in Grecio, it was told him, that the violent storms did
every year destroy all the fruits of that place, that the wolves devoured the
cartell, and that the very inhabitants could hardly be secure of their lives.
The holy Father therefore having To a country man.
compassion of these poor people, he made them a sermon, whereby he exhorted
them all to amendment of life, as the surest mean to appease the wrath of
God: to confess and communicate, with a firm purpose to offend no more:
affirming that by this mean God would disburden them of the said punishment:
which being effected, he admonished them to beware of sinning a fresh, for then
the chasticement would be redoubled. This people moved by these holy
demonstrations, prepared themselves with great contrition, confessed,
communicated, did penance for their sins and craved mercy of God: in respect
whereof and in favor of the prayers of the holy Father, God incontinently
freed and delivered them from the tempest and wolves, yea in short time this
people did not only repair their dommages past: but became very rich. But
alas! they could not long time perfeuer in this happy estate, which made them
forget the behoufull admonitions of S. Francis: which procuring Gods wrath, he
so chasticed them with the rod of pestilence, that few among them remained
alive: he also burned a great number of their houses, accomplishing all that S.
Francis had foretold unto them.

As this holy Father preached in Apulia, a Religious that was fallen from his
Order, repaired unto him, fell at his feet, and with infinite tears demanded
him pardon: promising if he To a Religious fallen from his order.
would restore him the habitt, to correct his course of life. The Saint made
him arise, and before he spoke a word, showed him a gibbett that was upon the
high way, then said unto him: I receive thee, but remember that if thou once
again prove an Apostata from the Order, thou shall be hanged on that gibbett.
Which even so succeeded: for falling again, and being shortly after in company
with certain lewd fellows, he was apprehended and hanged on the same gibbett,
co^firming the usual proverb: a wicked life has a wicked death.

Of the peace which was made between the Bishop and the Governor of Assisium,
by mean of two Religious sent by S. Francis to sing in their presence the
canticle of the sun.
THE CXVI. CHAPTER.
THe mortal enmities which were between the Bishop and the Governor of
Assisium redoubled the greifes of S. Francis his infirmity who lay sick at
our lady of Angels. The Bishop had excommunicated the Governor, and he had
forbidden all persons to sell any thing to the bishop, or to buy ought of him.
So their enmities was every day nourished and increased by some new and
diabolical invention, to the great scandal of all the city and the ruin of
their own souls. S. Francis seeing that neither ecclesiastical nor seculer
person labored to accord them, said one day to his Religious: doubtless this
may be a great shame to us that make profession to be such servants of God, to
permit this so dangerous and abominable hatred thus to breed, without
applying any redress. Whereupon calling two of them, he said: Go presently
to the Governor, and in my name bid him to repair to the Bishops house
together with the principal of the city, and as many as he can train
thither; and two others he commanded, to go in the mean while unto the
Bishop, and when the Governor and people were come to the Bishop, to sing
the Canticle of the Sun; with the verse which he then added, (as is before
mentioned) in the praise of God, at which song (said he) I hope those hearts
so obdurate against each other, will be mollified, and they will accord together
a perpetual peace: which so arrived. For first the Governor, as if God had
commanded him to repair to the Bishop, obediently hastened thither, with as
many people as he could assemble, and found the Bishop in a great hall with
his Clergy: where being together, one of the Religious which S. Francis sent
to the Bishop, spoke to them in this manner: Syrs, and deerlie beloved Brethren
in JESUS CHRIST, the holy Frather Brother Francis being by reason of his
infirmity, unable to come in person, has sent us hither, to sing you a
canticle, which he has made in the praise of God. He beseeches you by the
love which you bear unto his Maistie, and to him, that you will devoutly hear
it, then the two Religious began with a loud voice to sing, the Governor with
his hands joined and his eyes lifted toward heaven gave ear unto it,
weeping for the great devotion he had to the holy Father. The Canticle being
ended, the Governor loudly spoke: I verily protest, that I do not only desire
to be reconciled and become friend to my lord the Bishop, whom I ought to
acknowledge for my Superior, but even if any one had slain my brother or
son I would heartily pardon him: uttering these words he went to the Bishop,
and said: My lord behold me ready, for the love of God and his servant the holy
Father S. Francis, to do what soever you shall enjoin me. The Bishop also
being exceedingly qualified, answered: My duty was, and being a Prelate, I
hold my self obliged to have bin the first in action of humility and patience:
wherein having failed, I repent me, and ask you pardon. And with those words
full of love and charity they embraced and kissed each other in token of amity,
not without the infinite admiration and joy of the assembly: since no man had
induced them, for which they also gave thanckes unto God.

How much the spirit of prophecy assisted the holy Father S. Francis.
THE CXVII. CHAPTER.
Prophesies of S. Fr. to a young man that he should be one of his
THere came one day three young Florentines to ask the benediction of the holy
Father S. Francis: whereof the porter having advertised him, without uttering
one word he went into the garden, where he gathered five figs, whereof he gave
two, unto two of the three young men that came to visitt him, and the other
three unto the third, to whom he said: within few days you shall be one of
mine, the^ having given them his benediction he dismissed them. And short^ly
after, this young man became a Friar Minour, and proved very pious and exemplar.
When S. Francis gave his benediction, it was in these terms: The In what words
S. Francis gave his benediction.
name of our lord JESUS CHRIST be blessed and his sacred passion, the most holy
virgin that brought him forth with all the celestial Court. Therefore being
one day in prayer, the virgin Mary appeared unto him, and gave him the fairest
aple that could be imagined, saying unto him, that as that gift was precious,
even so as often as her Son heard these words with devotion uttered: The
name of our lord be blessed, it was exceeding grateful unto him, and he so
much esteemed them as if some matter of high worth were presented unto him: and
therefore the holy Father did afterward more often use them.

S. Francis residing at Grecio, where he took physic for his eyes, the
Physician being one day come to visitt him, he invited him to dine in the
Covent, who dwelling not far thence, never accustomed to eat there: nevertheless
he was at this time content to stay in regard that S. S. Frane. purposely
invited to dinner a Physician against all appearance.
Francis had so invited him: But the Guardian being by commandment of S.
Francis and in his name advertised thereof, he returned answer that there was
nothing wherewith to entertayne him. S. Francis sent him reply that he should
cause to be prepared the herbs and bread which he acknowledged to have, and
should leave to God the care of the rest. Now as they were sitting down at
table, there knocked one at the gate, where the porter found a woman that
brought a great basket on her head, full of bread, eggs, fish, cheese, fruit,
and other things, which a lady had sent them three leagues distant from the
Covent* which being joyfully received by the porter and set on the table,
every one admired thereatt. By mean of this miracle they understood the words
of the S. when he bad that the care should be left to God: And when he smiled,
the Guardian also sending him word that he was ashamed to entertain the said
Phisician having nothing wherewith all. So they were more confirmed in the
belief they had of the prophetical spirit of S. Francis, and the Phisician
said to the Religious: verily Brethren we do not know the sanctity of our
Father: For I stayed only in respect of him, rejoicing to eat this day with you
by devotion, of your gross refection: but he has waited then to inuit me,
when he knew by prophetical spirit, that here would be a plentiful repast.
The Religious replied that it was particular unto him, to foretell what was to
succeed, without ever failing therein.

Of other like cases of Prophecy.
THE CXVIII. CHAPTER.
A Religious of the Order deluded by the devil, forsook Religion and under
color to live more perfectly, became a Pilgrim. But committing many
offenses, he reflected on his error, and with great humllitie went to the
holy Father, who seeing S. Franc. procured pardon of God for the Apostasy of
one of his Religious.
him, shutt himself into his celle (at the merueillous astonishment of all
his Religious, for he accustomed to show himself very mild and gracious to
the penitentes that returned unto him) whence when he came forth, his
Religious demanded of him why he shutt himself in: he answered that he ran to
the armor of prayer, to assist that Religious and to defend him from the
hands of the devil, whom he saw over him, and that he had presently
obtained the victory. Retourning then toward the said Religious, Brother,
said he, our lord God has pardonned thee: but be careful that the devil,
under pretense of any other sanctity deceive thee not again, and cause not
thee, for any other stepmother what soever to forsake thy true mother: which he
perfectly observed, perseuering in his Order all the time of his life.

This that follows is taken out of the 22. chapter of the sixth book, because
it is the beginning of the matter recounted, even to the place here recorded.
The holy Father S. Francis passing through Tuscane, Brother Macie his
companion walked a little before him to discover the way, and coming into a
parting way, where one might take his course either toward Florence, Sienna,
or Arezza, he asked S. Francis which way they should turn, who answered, as
it shall please God. Brother How S. Francis made Br. Macie to turn to know
the will of God.
Macie replied, how shall God show us his will herein? By thee, said the S. and
withal commanded him under obedience to turn and not to rest, till he
commanded him. Brother Macie was no less ready to obey then he should have bin
to command, yea he turned so much that he many times fell to the ground by
the giddines he felt in his head with often tourning, and desisted not, though
the passengers stayed to behold him, and derided him as an idiott, till S.
Francis with a loud voice bid him to stay, which done, he asked him toward
what place he was turned, and he answered, toward Sienna. Go on then to
Sienna said the holy Father: whither being come, the greater part of the nobles
and gentlemen met them and with exceeding devotion accompayned them to the
Bishopperick, where the holy Father S. Francis preached upon occasion of two
men that by civil sedition had then bin slain. And by his preaching he so
wrought, that before his departure he reconciled them all: by which work,
more divine the^ humane, it manifestly appeared that it was Gods will he
should come thither. This holy Father finding himself laden with the praises
of men (which he esteemed an intolerable burden) he one day privately departed
the town, without speaking a word to any man.

The sequel of the aforesaid hundredth chapter.
Brother Macie thefore that followed him murmured a little to himself, at his
little good manners in departing from the Bishop without taking leave of him,
and for making him turn as a fool in the mids of the way the day before:
but perceauing afterward that it was a deceit S. Franc. knew the thoughts of
Br. Macie thatmurred with him self.
of the devil, he very bitterly reprehended himself affirming that he
deserved hell, for presuming to judge of the S. as opposing against the divine
worckes by him wrought, as a very true Angel of the living God, in such or
like manner accusing himself. The holy Father tourning to him, said: Proceed
bouldelie, Brother Macie, for this thy last discourse is even so of God, as thy
former was of the de^ill. Brother Macie then so much more humbled himself as
he more approved the admirable sanctity of his holy Father.

An other Religious had a great desire to converse with him, but he abstayned
fearing to offend him by knowing his great imperfections: doubting withal,
that offending the purity of his soul, he should also utterly loose his
favor. These thoughts being entierly revealed unto S. Francis, he one day
called him to him, and said: Brother, I know you desire to converse with me,
speak therefore, and say freely what you will, and come to me when you desire:
by this Of one of his Religious that was troubled to frequent his company.
mean the Religious was so secured, as he remained more affected unto him.
These things whereby the prophetie of the holy Father Saint Francis was
generally manifested, are almost infinite: therefore having hereafter recited
two or three other, we shall have ended all that may be collected of all
authors. God knows the rest.

How S. Francis prophesied the Papacy to Nicolas the 3. when he was yet a
child. This is taken out of the 9. chapter of the 9. book, and here put in his
place.
Matthew Rimido a Roman gentleman, was an affectionate friend unto the holy
Father Saint Francis: yea did afterward take the habitt of the Rule of the
third Order, this man having one morning invited Saint Francis to dine with
him, and presenting unto him his son John Caietan, then a little child, who
was afterward Pope Nicolas the third, to give him hs benediction: the holy
Father took him in his arms, embraced and kissed him very lovingly, and
recommended unto him his Religion, which procured great astonishment and
abondance of tears of the Father present, and much more when he more plainly
told him, that the child should not be Religious in habitt, but much in
devotion, and principal Lord of this world, and protector of his Religion.
The holy Father used one of his ordinary exercises of humility with this
gentleman, out of the very hearty love he boar to holy poverty: which was, that
being invited by him and coming at such time as he was not at home, where
certain new servants S. Franc. did eat with the poor at his frei^ds house.
not knowing him gave diverse poor people to eat within a Court, he likewise
received almose and did eat together with them. The Lord Matthew coming home,
and finding Saint Francis to eat among the poor, he incontinently sat down
on the ground with him: where he would in like sort eat with the poor, and the
S. to whom he said: Father, since you would not dine with me, I must dine with
you.

The sequel of the said hundredth chapter.
Brother John Bonello, a Religious of great perfection, held a general chapter
in Prouence, in the monastery of Arles, where he was Provincial S. Franc.
living and being in Italy appeared to a Religious in the provincial chapter
held at Arles in Province.
Minister. S. Antony of Padua preached at that chapter upon the title of the
holy cross. It there happened then that a Religious Priest called Brother
Monaldus of a very exemplare life, saw over the door of the Chapter in the
air, S. Francis, with his hands and feet stretched on a cross: and as he
was, he blessed all the Religious, loosing his right hand from the cross,
whiles S. Antony most profoundly expounded the said title of the cross.
Wherefore, the spiritual consolation which they all then felt in themselves
was such and so great, that albeit Brother Monaldus alone saw the said S.
present, nevertheless they all did participate of the grace: in such sort that
if any one would not have believed the relation of Brother Monaldus, he was
constrained to be assured thereof, by that which he had felt in his heart.
Besides many other like apparitions of the said S. by divine permission,
wherein God would demo^strat how near our soul is (when she will receive his
grace) unto the divine light, and eternal wisdom, by communication whereof,
she arises from the world, to unite herself with God, making the humble and
poor of spirit, Prophettes, revealing high mysteries unto them, as it made
David, one of the principal prophets, afterward S. Peter and the other
Apostles, according to the saying of the Gospel: Many things I have to say to
you: but you cannot bear them now: John. 16.
But when he, the spirit of truth, comes, he shall teach you all truth: and
in these latter days, his humble and simple servant S. Francis. For as he did
chose the Apostles, simple and idiotes, in regard of the learning of the world,
he nevertheless made them famous by doctrine and divine worckes; and the
Shepherd David, to feed the sheep of the sinagogue transported out of Egypt,
and S. Peter the fisher, to fill the nets of the holy church, with the
multitude of faithful Christians: so he would have Saint Francis a merchaunt,
to teach us to traficke and negociate for this precious stone of the
Evangelical life, selling all his goods, and distributing it to the poor for
his love: and to enrich his church with souls redeemed by this holy mean.

How the blessed Father Saint Francis, renounced and rendered in the hands of
his Brethren, the office of General of the Order, and instituted a Vicar
General in his place. This was the 31. chapter of the second book improperly,
and therefore, to follow the true Order of his life, we have here put it in his
place.
This B. Father was so zealous of obedience, and especially of that his most
holy humility, that he could in no sort dispose himself to co^mau^d: so that it
was irksome unto him to perform the office appertayning thereunto, as to have
the chardge of governing so many thousands of Religious, to command and
reprehend, to advise and correct, to give ordonnances, and to chastise the
offenders. Therefore, he resolved to renounce the office of Minister General,
as well for the cause hereafter alleged, as the better by example to teach
obedience unto his children. Besides he found himself too sickly, so that he
could not apply himself to that office as was requisite: and yet would not
omit the rigor of his penance, to conserve his body, yea he was better
content to continue sick, then by never so little relenting his austeritie, to
be cured of his infirmities: the occasion was reasonable, to free himself
piously of such a chardge. And therefore, at the general chapter held two
years before he received of our Lord JESUS CHRIST his sacred stigmates, he
publikelie renounced the office of Minister General, not without the exceeding
grief of all the Religious, who by all means refusing, during his life, to
admit any other Minister, he was constrained to constitute a Vicar General,
that governed the Order in his name; To this effect, he made choice of Brother
Peter Catanio, his second son in Religion, a man of great prudence, and very
expert to govern: to whom the holy Father promised his cheiffest obedience,
and besides to him that should be constituted his Guardian. Which all the
Religious seeing, they began bitterly to weep esteeming they should continue
as orphans, without the ordinary government of their beloved Father, who
comforting them the best he could, his hands joined, and his eyes elevated
toward heaven he said: My God, I recommende unto thee this family, which to
this hour thou have recommended unto me: For now, by reason of mine
infirmities, other impedimentes, and just causes to thee known, being unable
henceforward to have care of them, I have committed them to a Vicar General,
and to other Provincial Ministers, who shall be obliged to yield thee a very
exact account of them at the terrible day of the great judgment; if they
chance to perish by their negligence or evil example. And so the holy Father
S. Francis thenceforward perseuered to be always subject, even to the day of
his death; surpassing the^ all in humility. Yet did he never fail to be very
zealous in assisting and with his utmost to favor his Order, even during the
life of his first Vicar, who died at the end of the second year of his
Prelature, in the Monastery of our Lady of Angels, S. Francis not being there
when he was buried. His body wrought so many miracles, that an infinite
multitude of people from all parts flocked thither leaving a very great
quantity of almose unto the monastery. The holy Father therefore coming
thither, and unable to endure either the one or the other, the former for
distracting them all, and the latter for relaxation of the order which he
forsaw would grow of such quantity of almose, he went to the sepulcher where so
many miracles were wrought: and to the deceased he S. Franc. commands a S. to
worck no more miracles and he obeys.
uttered these words: My deerlie beloved Brother, as thou have always obeyed
me during thy life, we being now by thine intercession molested with such a
world of peopl, thou must also obey me after thy death. I therefore command
thee on obedience that thou work no more miracles, since by them we are in
danger to be ruinated. The deceased (which is admirable to consider) ceased
upon this commandment to work any more miracles: such is the virtue and
power of holy obedience, in a true and good Prelat, and in a true and good
subject, that it extends not only on earth and during life, but even in
heaven and after death. Yea by it, ceased the glory and eminency of
miracles, that exalt the honor of the living God, the more to magnify him by
the exercise of holy poverty and the quiett retire from a turbulent applause
of the world.

How S. Francis instituted his second Vicar General. This was the 32. chapter
of the second book, but hither transferred to observe due order of the history.
The miracles of Brother Peter Catanio, being now ceased as we have said, the
holy Father S. Francis, by advise of the ministers, in place of the said
deceassed, subrogated Brother Elias, a man of singular prudence, and very
learned, for which he was respected, not only of his Religious, but even of
seculer persons, Prelates and Princes. He governed as long as the holy Father
lived, who the more to honor him, gave him the title of General, though he
were not so, for the reason aforesaid that the Religious would never accept
other General then S. Francis during his life. The said Brother Elias
attributing the said honor unto himself and not to God, he made him know with
all that his deep prudence according to the world, was before him but a very
sottish folly: for rising into pride, he fell as an other Lucifer, from such an
hight to the deepest profunditie of these worldly miseries, the great mercy
of God, by the prayers of the S. redeeming him from eternal punishment as
hereafter shall appear.

This that follows is the residue of 85. chapter already past, which we
purposely omitted, as no proper place for it, as may How much the third
general of the order of Freer Miners forgot himself.
easily be judged.
The holy Father S. Francis being at table together with many of his
Religious, he took some of the most remarkable in humility and simplicity that
sat near unto him by the hands, and tourning toward the said Brother
Helias, he willed him graciously to honor those other learned and noble
Brethren sitting there. Brother Helias, extremly puffed up in pride, without
any respect thus answered: O Brother Francis, I doubt not but by your
simplicity and careless negligence, you will ruinate this whole Order. The
holy Father more curious of his salvation then of himself, answered him; O
miserable wretch, this pride which thou will not cast off, and this kind of
thy passionate behavior to such evil purpose, will be occasion that thou shall
dye out of the Order. Which so happened, for he died out of the Order, in the
Court of the Emperor Frederick the second, who was excommunicated.

An other time the holy Father prophesied in this manner of this Vicar General;
It hapened that Brother Helias was once called for at the door of the Covent,
by one that affirmed himself to be an Angel, sent unto him from God, and the
porter did him the message, telling him that an Angel in humane shape expected
him at the gate: musing therefore what this might be, he was a long time
perplexed, yet at lenght he went thither, An Angel came to speak with him.
and the Angel proposed unto him this doubt, whither it were lawful for the
professors of the gospel, to eat of what soever was indiffefently presented
unto them or no. At this proposition he rested utterly confounded, for he had
purposed to be author of a new constitution in the Order: which was that the
Freres might not eat flesh, against their first holy Rule: wherefore he rudely
and cholerickly shutt the door against the Angel, and returned into the
Coue^t. Which being reported unto S. Francis, he incontinently arose from
prayer and went to his Vicar, whom he sharply reprehe^ded saying: Brother
Helias you have done ill in shutting the gate against the Angels, when God
sends the^ to iustruct you. I tell you therefore it is impossible for you to
persevere stable in the Order, with this pride. The holy Father spoke thus much
unto him because it had bin revealed unto him that he should die out of the
Order, and besides, that he should be damned, in respect whereof he did ever
after so disaffect him, that he could not endure to behold him, which was not
long vnperceaued of Brother Helias: and therefore being very cautelous and
subtle, he so labored and wrought by signs of humility and importunity that
he got knowledge of all, wherewith he was so terrified and amazed, that with
abondant effusion of tears demanding pardon of S. Francis, he never ceased
to supplicate him, that considering he was also, by the passion of our lord,
one of the sheep of his fold, he would not abandon him, but that like a good
Pastor as he was, he would please to reduce the strayed sheep unto the flock,
and so deliver him from eternal death; alleadgeing that upon change of the
sinners life, God could easily revoke his sentence. Father said he, such is my
confidence and devotion unto you, that were I in hell it self, I would hope to
come forth upon your prayers for me: so that I am fully assured that if you
please for me to implore the divine mercy, my sentence shall be revoked. The
holy Father, moved by these prayers, could not at lenght deny him; so that
with a very great fervor he entierly cast himself into the arms of God, in
such sort praying for S. Franc. prayed for him.
this lost soul, that God answered him, that he should do penance for his
sins, and should not be damned, but for dying out of the Order he could not
be otherwise satisfied, and so it arrived, for he dyed out of the Order, with
many signs of contrition, according to the opinion of some in the habitt.

This that folloueth is of the aforesaid 32. chapter of the second book, the
better to observe the Order of all that appartaineth to renountiation of the
office of General.
Why S. Francis renounced the office of General.
The holy Father S. Francis being by a Religious friend of his entreated to
tell him what had moved him to make that renountiation, and to committ it to
the chardge of an other, as if they were not his children, who had bin such
made, nourished and instructed by him, he answered: know my child that I love
you all more deerly then any man can imagine, and if all would follow my will,
I would love them more, and would not have left their administration. But I
have bin constrained thereunto, because there are many Religious that esteem
more of the advice of some of their superiors, by whom they are drawn to
other matters, by example of the ancient, and which is directly contrary to my
rule, and so they make very little esteem of mine aduertisme^tes: but in the
end, they will more evidently find their error. The holy Father being on a time
as it were oppressed with his infirmities, and hearing some speak of the
aforesaid matters, and particulerly of the overmuch indulgence of the
superiors, and of the evil examples they gave their subjects, he lifted up
his head and cried out, Ah! ah! cover me, cover me, who are they that withdraw
the Religious from mine Order, and from my way, and my examples? If I once go
to the General chapter, I will show my Brethren what is my desire, and mine
intention, that they permit not themselves to be deluded.

Being also an other time sick, a Religious said unto him: O Father, it seemed
that at the beginning our Religion we striued to live in all austerity and
poverty, we were poor in our habitt, in our diet, in our dwelling, in our
moueables, in our books, and in all our other corporal necessities, for which
we took no care: by reason of this poverty exterior, the interior daily
proceeded from good to better, because we were al of the same fervor, of the
same will, with one consent co^spiring to the entier obserua^ce of our rule,
and always to give good example to our neighbor, finally we observed the
gospel the most exactly that we could. But of later time, it seems that the
purity of this our first vocation, is much deminished, upon excuse that it ca^
no longer be observed as before, by reason of the great multitude of brethren:
yea there are some that believe that the people are much more edified by this
their modern and new inobseruance and mortification of their proper will and
of their senses, then they were when they all lived in such deep austerity of
life: and they thinck it a matter more Religious to live after this new manner,
the^ according to the ancient and former, which they hold for crowned, as
proceeding of simplicity and holy poverty, which were the foundations of this
our holy Religion. Now perceauing this, and believing that you likewise perceive
it, and are therewith exceedingly displeased, I marvel you do not labor
with all speed to hinder the further progress of this evil, nor do correct
it whiles you have power, and mean to do it.

S. Francis having with great affliction of spirit heard this long discourse,
thus answered: Our Lord JESUS CHRIST pardon you that which you suppose I ought
to do, which I am not obliged to have care of, neither by chardge, nor by
office: for whiles I was General, though from the beginning of my conversion I
have almost continued in sickness, I have not yet failed either in cogitations
or effects, to satisfy my duty, both by example and government. But having
well considered that God did daily increase the number of Religious, and that
they already began to leave the secure, strict, and difficult way, wherein they
first walked, and in such sortas you say strayed from it, without correcting
themselves notwithstanding all my demonstrations, predications, and good
edification that I gave them, I then resolved to leave the office of General,
as I did, and though when I renounced it, I failed not at the chapter to
excuse my self by mine infirmities, as was partly true: alleadgeing that by
means thereof I could no longer dischardge so burdensome an office: Nevertheless
my son, I assure you if the Religious would now live conformably to my rule,
and to my pious intention, I would again accept the office of General, and
would excute it so long as it should please God to give me life: considering
that so, the care of that chardge would not be painful unto me, for certain
it is, that when the faithful subject knows the good will of his superior,
he strives to obey him in every thing, so that it is no great difficulty to
govern him, yea I should rejoice and be exceedingly comforted, in their
spiritual progress, and in the honor that thereby redoundeth to his divine
Majesty: and though I should be continually sick on my bed, yet should it not
be tedious nor troublesome unto me to give them content in all things: but
because I see I can no longer dischardge mine office, which is spiritual, and
opposite to vices, in correcting them either by love, or by aduertissement, I
will not return (to the chardge) to be their executioner, chasticing them
with the rod of discipline, as the princes of the world do justly correct
their rebels: nevertheless I hope in God that the invisible ennemies the
devils, that are his executioners to chastise the disobedientes in this world
and in the other, will also chastise the transgressors of the vow of their
profession; thereby to their shame and forciblie, to make them return to their
first vocation: to this effect I will not omit to assist them whiles I live,
at least by prayers and example, since otherwise I cannot, and to instruct them
the secure way, which I have learned of my God, as I have formerly done, that
they may have no excuse before his divine majesty. No further do I hold my
self obliged. Such was his answer, which satisfying the Religious, procured
an inestimable grief to all the hearers: whereby it also manifestly appeared,
what reason the S. had to leave them, and what occasion they had to know
themselves, and by a pious acknowledgement of their fault and true repentance,
to have recourse unto him.

The end of the first book of the Chronicles of the Friere Minors.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES.
OF THE FRIAR MINORS.
WHEREIN IS PROSECVTED THE discourses of the life, death, and miracles of the
Seraphical Father S. Francis, translated out of french into English.
Of the plenary indulgence granted by Jesus Christ to the Church of our Lady
of Angels of Portiuncula.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
THE more the glorious Father S. Francis profited in perfection, and
endeavored to unite himself with God, the more did he pour out tears, and
felt intolerable grief at the loss of souls redeemed by the price of the
precious blood of our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST. Wherefore not ceassing to desire
mercy of God for 1223. Three years before his death.
sinners, as he thirsted to have all saved, the year of grace 1223. being to
that effect in prayer, an Angel appeared unto him, and bid him, incontinently
to repair unto the church, because our Lord JESUS CHRIST with his glorious
Mother and a great number of Angels there expected him. Having received this
gracious embassadge, he hastened thither and there found our Savior sitting in
a Royal throne, on the high altar, and the Virgin Mary at his right hand,
enuironned with an innumerable multitude of blessed spirittes. The holy Father
incontinently falling prostrate on the earth, heard the divine voice of JESUS,
saying: Francis, Know that I have heard thy fervent prayers: and because I know
with what solicitude thou and thy Religious procure the salvation of souls,
ask me what grace thou will for their souls benefitt, and I will grant it
thee. The S. being by such an answer emboldened, most humbly answered: My
Lord JESUS CHRIST, I miserable and unworthy sinner, with the greatest reverence
I can, require of thy divine majesty, that it will please thee so much to
favor all Christian people, as to grant them a general pardon and plenary
indulgence of all their sins; I mean to all them that shall enter into this
church, confessed and contrite. I also beseech thee, O glorious holy Virgin
mother, and our Aduocatrix, that it would please thee to make intercession to
thy most gracious son for me and for all Christian sinners. Our Lady was
instantly moved with these words, and began in this sort to pray our Redeemer
in his behalf: O my most high Lord and son of my bowels, I beseech thee
grant unto this thy faithful servant this grace which he has demanded with
so great a zeal of the salvation of souls, which thy self above all other
things disirest. My God grant him this grace in this place, to thine honor
and the edification of thy holy church. Our Lord sodenlie answered: Francis
that which thou demaundest is great: but this thy desire conformable to mine,
deserves much more, and therefore I grant thy request. But go to my Vicar, to
whom I have given al power of unbinding and binding here on earth, and in my
name demand it of him, which said, he disappeared. The Religious that had
their celles near thereunto, saw the splendor, and heard some speech, but
durst not approach for reverence and great fear that possessed them.

The holy Father S. F. having tha^cked God, presently called Bro. Macie, in
whose company he went to Perusia, where the^ was Pope Honorius with his court:
before whose holiness he thus spoke: Holy F. I have reestablished a church that
was very ruinous and desert, called S. Mary of portiu^cula, very near unto the
city of Assise, wherein are reside^t your Religious the Friar Min. I beseech
your holiness by our Redeemer I. C. and his most glorious mother, to voutsafe
for the benefitt of the souls of all faithful Christians, to grant a plenary
indulge^ce and remission of all their sins, to all them that shall visitt
this church in good estate, without giving any almose in the same. The Pope
answered him that the Apostolic sea did not accustom to grant indulge^s
without giving of almose, because it will that they be gained by the^. He the^
asked him for how many years he desired the indulge^ce S. Francis answered:
Holy Father I desire not years, but souls? How souls said the Pope. S.
Francis replied: I require that every Christian confessed and contrite, that
shall come to visitt the said Church, receive plenarie absolution in earth and
in heaven, and that of whatsoever sins he shall have committed from his
Baptism to that very hour. I require not this in mine own name, but in our
Lord JESUS CHRIST, who has sent me to your Holiness. Which the Pope hearing,
inspired of the holy Ghost, he thus spoke thrice with a loud voice, I am
content to grant it as thou have demanded it. But the Cardinals present,
advised the Pope to consider well what he granted: because by that act he
would destroy the indulgences of the holy land, and of Saint Peter and S. Paul
at Rome, which would no longer be regarded. The Pope answered, that he would
not revoke what he had at that present granted. They replied that at least
it were requisite he should limitt the said indulgence to a certain time, and
moderate it to a certain prefixed day of the year. The Pope then Confirmation
of the said indulge^ce by the Pope.
said: We grant to all faithful Christians, that being truly confessed and
contrite shall enter into the Church of our Lady of Angels, plenary indulgence
and absolution both of pain and fault: and we will that the same be of force
for ever, for one entier day, that is, from the first euensong till the sun
sitting of the day following. Which the holy Father Saint Francis having
obtained, he kissed his feet: then demanded his benediction: which received,
he arose to depart. But the Pope recalling him, said: Whither go thou simple
man, what specialtie have thou of the indulgence obtained? The holy Father
answered that his word should suffice: and besides, that this worck was of
God, and therefore, it should be published and supported by his divine Majesty:
and withal, that he would have no other Bull, but the Virgin Mary, JESUS
CHRIST for Notary, and the Angels for witnesses. Which said, he departed, and
by the way stayed at the hospital of leapers, where making his accustomed
prayer: it was revealed unto him by our Lord JESUS CHRIST, that the indulgence
which he had procured, was confirmed in heaven, whereof having advertised his
companion, they both returned to give thanckes to his divine majesty.

How the day of the said indulgence was miraculously assigned from heaven.
THE II. CHAPTER.
The devil tempts S. Francis.
THe day wherein the said indulgence was to be gained, was not yet prefixed: S.
Francis being come to the Covent of our Lady of Angels, and being about
midnight in prayer in his celle, the devil appeared unto him in form of an
Angel, saying: O poor to make him leave prayer.
Francis, why seek thou to dye before the time? why do thou consume chy
complexion by so long watchinges? know thou not that the night is made to
sleep, and that sleep is the principal nourishment of the body? thou art not
yet old, why then will thou thus kill thy self? Were it not better for thee to
conserve thy life, therein to serve thy God longer, and to profitt the holy
church and thine Order? Believe me therefore, and spend not thy life in such
superfluous prayers and watchinge; only mediocrity pleases God. Which the
holy Father having heard, and knowing it to be a delusion S. Franc. cast,
turned and wallowed himself all naked in a bush full of thorns.
of the devil that tempted him exteriourlie by his voice, and interiourlie by
his suggestion, arising from his prayer, he stripped himself naked, then cast
himself into a bush full of very sharp pricking thorns, wherein he turned
and wallowed till the blood every where trickled down, and doing the same, he
thus discoursed unto his body: Ah my body! it had bin better for thee to
contemplat the passion of JESUS CHRIST then to endure this, for having in vain
repined and searched the delights of the world. Thus discoursing, a great
light appeared unto him in the mids of the ice that was there, (it was in
January) and in the bush of thorns he saw very beautiful roses white and
vermillion, and a venerable troop of Angels that filled all the way even to
his church, and one of them called him, saying: Come Francis, for our Lord
expectethe thee, and in an instant he miraculously found himself clothed. So
knowing him that S. Franc. gathered vermillio^ and white roses in January.
called him, he gathered twelve white roses and twelve vermillion, then went
through the way all tapestred with Angelical spirittes toward his sweet
Lord, before whose feet he fell in great reverence, and then presented these
twelve roses unto his divine Majesty, that appeared sitting on the said high
altar, as the other time accompanied with his glorious mother, and assisted
with an innumerable multitude of Angels, to whom he said.

Most gracious lord and governor of heaven and earth, since it has pleased
thee to grant me the plenary indulgence for this church, I most humbly beseech
thee to voutsafe also assign the day wherein it shall be gained. I herein
conjure thee by the merittes of thy most glorious mother our aduocatrice, that
it please thee to appoint the same by thy divine mouth. Our Lord answered him:
I am content to satisfy thy desire: and therefore, I assign thee the first day
of August from the euensong of that feast, wherein is made memory how I
delivered mine Apostle S. Peter from the chains of Herod, until the sun
sittiug of the day following. But tell me if thou please my Lord, said the holy
Father after he had given him thanckes, how shall the world know it, and
knowing it, how shall it believe it? Our Savior replied* I will consider
thereof in time convenient: but in mean while return to my vicare, and carry
with thee some Religious that have seen this apparition, and give him some of
these Roses, and he shall incontinently confirm thee the day, and cause the
indulgence to be published. The holy Father upon obedience took three white
and three vermillon roses, and whiles our lord disappeared, the Angels sung. Te
Deum laudamus and S. Francis gave him thanckes, who presently went to his
holiness with Brother Bernard Quintaualle, Brother Angelus of Rieta, and Brother
Ruffinus who had seen this great vision. Being before the door of the church,
he found the Pope returned from Rome, to whom he yielded account of what our
lord had told him, calling his companions for witnesses, and presenting him the
said Roses. The Pope having attentively heard him, and being unable to satisfy
himself with beholding the said Roses, so fresh and sweet, and therwithall so
ravished, as he could no longer contain himself, he said: Ah good God, such
roses in January, to make me believe what they have said! these alone are
sufficient: therefore he said to S. Francis, I will consult with my Cardinals
how thy request may be accomplished, then will give answer, and with those
words dismissed him. The next day he repaired again unto his holiness in the
Consistory, where by the Popes commandment he once more recounted all the
success, and the day which God had prefixed unto him: The Pope the^ said, since
we arecertaine of the will of our lord JESUS CHRIST the true and sovereign
Bishop, whose place, though unworthy, we hold on earth, we also in his behalf
do grant, the plenary indulgence for perpetuity, to the foresaid church on
the day before mentioned.

How the said indulgence was published in the church of S. Mary of Angels.
THE III. CHAPTER.
But that so great an indulge^ce might be published by Apostolical authority,
the Pope wrote to diverse Bishops of the valley of Spoletu^, and particulerly
to the Bishop of Assi^e, within whose diocese the said church was, and to the
Bishops of Folliniu^, of Agubio, and of Nocera, that they should be all
present at S. Mary of Angels the first day of August, to consecrate and
publish the said indulge^ce, that there had bin granted by divine revelation
and Apostolical permission, at the request of the holy Father S. Francis: who
taking the said letters and thancking the Pope, he departed with his companios
with great reverence and humility to deliver the^ to the said Bishops,
praying them in the name of God and his holiness that they would not fail on
the said day to be present in his Church, there to perform what was enjoined
the^. After that, he returned to Assisiu^ where he caused to be prepared a
great scaffold for that effect: that the said Bishops might the more
commodiously and better be understood of the people. The day determined being
come, the Bishops entered into the said Church, where being ascended on the
scaffold, they said to S. Fran. that though they were come thither to publish
the indulgence as they were ready to do; yet they thought it more requisite,
that himself should first declare unto the people, when and in what sort it
had bin granted him by God and the Pope, which done, they would confirm it.
The holy Father answered the^: though I be not worthy to speak in your
presence: yet as most obedient servant, I will perform your command. Asce^ding
therefore in the pulpitt, he made a sermon to the people that thither by Gods
providence were abonda^tly flocked from all the neighbor places, with an
extreme fervor explicating unto the^ this so great treasure, which he
performed with such deep doctrine, that it seemed rather the discourse of an
Angel, the^ of a man unlearned as he was. At the end of this sermon, he
denou^ced unto the people in the name of God and his most sacred mother, the
indulge^ce, in these words: Whosoever being truly co^trite and confessed,
shall visitt this church the first day of August, from the euensong thereof, and
the night and day of the feast it self to the sun setting, he shall gain a
plenary indulgence, which is granted him first by God, and seco^darily by his
Vicare Pope Honorius, and the same to continue for ever on that day. The
bishopps there present to confirm the speech S. Francis, would not accord to
that for ever. The bishop of Assisiu^ therefore co^firming the indulge^ce to the
people, purposing to limitt A miracle in publication of this indulgence.
it to ten years, could never utter it: but was constrained to say: for ever:
the like happened unto the other bishops. This miracle being very evidently
known unto the people, it increased their faith, and prevented the doubt which
some might have had, that God himself had not granted this indulge^ce.
Therefore the publicatio^ being ended, the bishops being exceedingly amazed
at the miracle, did with great sole^nity consecrate the said church, which
continued for ever endued with this great treasure, to the glory of our lord,
his holy mother the virgin Mary, and his servant S. Francis, and to the souls
health of all Christians.

Of certain miracles wrought by Godin confirmation of the said indulgence.
THE IV. CHAPTER.
IT pleased God besides the fore mentioned, to cause this so great indulgence
to be believed and reverenced in due mannner, for the public good, by such
miracles and revelations as we shall now relate. The year following a great
number of people being come to gain the said indulgence whiles they watched by
night in prayer unto God in the said church, there arose in a moment such a
rumor among the people there assembled, that the Religious who were at rest,
were awakened therewith. Coming therefore into the church they A dove was seen
to fly in the aforesaid Church the day of the said indulgence.
saw a Dove whiter then snow, that flew five times about the Church. One of
them stepping forward the better to see, came near the high altar, where he
found Brother Corrado of Offeida a right holy Religious, of an exceeding
exemplare life and famous for miracles, whom he prayed to let him better
understand the occasion of the great murmr that was among the people who
very pitiful cried out. This venerable Father answered that he was content
to tell him: conditionally that he would promise not to reveal it to any
person during his life. Which being condicioned, he said: I saw the Queen of
heaven to descend, clothed with an ineffable splendor as holding her Son in
her arms, and to give her holy benediction unto all present: then this Dove
The Virgin Mary was likewise seen there.
which was with her on the altar began to fly, to signify the visitation of
God, it has here flowne round about the church. Which the people seeing,
though they knew not all, began thus to cry out toward heaven. The same day
the mother of our lord was seen to enter into the Church with the Religious,
and to accompany the ordinary procession, with a great troop of Angels that
sung praises unto God. This was seen by Religious of pious life, and also by
certain pilgrims.

As (in the Marquisat of Ancona) one coniured the devil, that vehemently
afflicted a poor possessed woman, to enforce him to tell what course was to be
used to expel him: he answered at lenght, that he tormented not the woman
for any sin of hers, but only to the end God might be praised by her, and
that therefore there was no other remedy to deliver her, but to procure her to
gain the indulgence of our lady of Angels; and that he spoke thus much as
forciblie constrained to speak against him self: as he likewise confessed
that by the same indulgence he lost a great multitud of souls which he already
held as his own, by reason of the enormous sins they had committed. The
devil confesses the virtue of this indulge^ce.
The woman was therefore with great affliction and grief brought to our lady
of Angels the very day of the indulgence: and as soon as she was entered the
effect succeeded, for the devil lifting her into the air departed, and the
poor woman fell as dead to the ground: But by the merittes of the glorious
Virgin, she incontinently arose very sound of body and soul, having bin
confessed to gain the indulgence.

There are besides, many true testimonies to whom have appeared the spirittes
of diverse deceassed, revealing unto them, that having certain days before
their death, gained the said indulgence, they were sodenlie by the glorious
Virgin Mother conducted into Paradise without feeling any pain of purgatory:
others also gayning this indulgence that was applied unto them by form of
suffrage after their death, by mean of some living freindes, were delivered of
the pains of Purgatory, as by this ensuying discourse shall appear.

A Venetian Gentleman that was a very spiritual Priest, desiring to gain
this indulgence, as he prepared himself to go thither he fell sick and of
the same sickness dyed: but before his death, he said to a very friend of his:
My good freinde, I desire you to believe, that there is no man in the world of
my kindred or whosoever other, in whom I have more confidence then in your
self, nor of whom I hope to obtain what I desire for the salvation of my
soul: I therefore pray you, that if it please God to call me unto him, you will
undertake so much labor as to go to our lady of Angels, to gain the
plenaire indulgence for the benefitt of my soul: and to defray your chardges
in the journey, demand what you will and I will give it you, that the
indulgence being mine, you receive no detriment thereby. This friend took what
was requisite for his expenses and promised to go. Now this Priest being dead,
and the time of Pilgrimage being come, his dear friend, though he saw many
that prepared them selves to the journey, he, as if he had made no promise,
deferred his journey, purposing with himself to go the year following, which
is a thing but too ordinary to ungrateful persons, kindred and freindes
neglecting and forgetting the poor decassed; the Priest appeared to this
unworthy friend in his sleep the same night that he had made the foresaid
purpose, and with an angry countenance reprehending him, he said: Go on thy
journey now with such as prepare themselves thereto. He awaking determined to do
that for fear, which he had neglected to do for respect of amitye. Having
effected the promise, the same day that he entered into the church and gained
the indulgence for the deceased, the Priest in the night ensuying appeared unto
him, not as before in choler, but bright and resplendent as the sunnet and
thancked him and revealed unto him that then when he entered into the church, he
entered into Paradise.

Of other miracles of the same indulgence.
THE V. CHAPTER.
THis famous indulgence being diuulged over almost al Christendom, there
departed from Sclauonia about twenty pilgrims to gain this Iubileye: but
landing at Ancona, and there having visited the principal churches, they
repaired to a monastery, where were showed them many precious relics. The
Sacristine, that showed the^ asked the^ whither they went in Pilgrimage: they
answered, to our Lady of Angels, to gain the indulgence whereof the day
approached. The Religious then said: O simple people to endure heat,
incommodities, and travails, without any benefitt: for there is no such
indulgence as is spoaken of, or at least there is no authentical bulle of the
Pope extant thereof, I blame you not to go of devotion to that church of our
lady: but for the indulgence I tell you your journey is in vain. And if you
believe me, you shall save much of the way: for there are here in this church
far more indulgences then in that whither you go, which if you be well advised
you may gain, and so return again. In confirmation of his speech, he showed
them many privileges and bulls of Popes, of lardge indulgences granted to
that church. The Pilgrims upon these considerations believing the Sacristine,
and repenting the wearisome travail they had undertaken to come so far,
followed his counsel, and having offered their devotions in that place, and
gained the indulgences there to be had, determined to return. Amongst them
was a very devout woman, that said unto them I marvel, my freindes, you are
not ashamed upon the opinion and discourse of one only man, to loose the meritt
of your pilgrimage? Return you in Gods name, if you think good, for my
part I am determined to go alone to visitt our lady of Angels, though there
were no indulgence in that church, and so to accomplish my journey so much
advanced: so went she alone toward Assisium. But by the will of God, that she
might not travail alone, she erred from the direct way, being therefore much
troubled and sollicitous how to find the ordinary way, there appeared unto her
a right venerable old man all gray, clothed in a long habitt Religious-like,
who said unto her: Fear not my daughter, for I assure thee thou art in a
secure way for thy soul, and know that thy companions shall instantly join
unto thee. She looking behind her, saw them all, whereat she was exceeding
joyful: being then together, this venerable old man told them, that they had
done well to prosecute their attempted journey, because the said indulgence was
true, and that himself was present when the Pope Honorious confirmed it: and
that he knew it also to be confirmed of God: though there were many that knew
not all that, and that denied it, and therefore bid them go on confidentlie.
And after he had made them a worthy exhortation, to persuade them to offend
God so much no more, he vanished in their presence, leaving them exceedingly
comforted and thanckfull unto God* Coming to Assisium they manifested this
accident, and having gained the indulgence, they joyfully took their journey
of return. The aforesaid woman by reason of a sickness that happened her unto,
remained alone behind: but dying afterward, she ouertooke them in spirit, and
appeared unto them on the sea, and said unto them: Fear ye not, for I am such
a one your companion, that am dead at Assisium. The Virgin Marie has sent me
to assure you of the virtue of the plenary indulgence; wherebie I passed
incontinently to heaven, without enduring the least punishment, which said,
she disappeared. Wherefore many of those Pilgrims that saw this woman on the
sea, returned often times with greater faith to gain the indulgence, and
recounted the apparitions: so that though no bulls were seen, Saint Francis
not respecting them, many of diverse nations, repaired thither, when neither
war nor plague did hinder them: for God who granted it and promised to
favor it also with his grace, besides the revelation thereof unto many, did
also inspire souls to seek the pourchace of their salvation in that holy
church.

An old man, coming to gain this indulgence recounted what he had heard
spoaken by a Pilgrim that first doubted thereof: to wit, that being in a
solitary place, where he recommended himself to God, he seemed miraculouslie
to see the Pope, the Cardinals, and S. Francis, conferring together; and that
according to the gestures and motions they used, it seemed that the Pope would
give the bulle of this indulgence to S. Francis, who refused it, and one of the
Cardinals standing up, took a book in his hand, wherein he read these words:
A plenarie indulgence of all sins at S. Marie of Angels, granted in earth
and confirmed in heaven, and tourning leaf by leaf, he still read the same
thing, and having turned it all over, and so read the said book, the vision
disappeared, and the pilgrim to his great contentment rested fully satisfied,
of the meritt and virtue of the said indulgence.

The Bishop of Assisium named Illuminato, diverse times made relation of a
gentleman a very devout pilgrim, to who^ (being by some dissuaded from goeing
to gain the said indulgence) there appeared, as he was in prayer, a Religious
man, in habitt of a Deacon, clothed in white, and exceedingly glittering, who
thrice said unto him: The indulgence is true, come sec^rely. Being so assured
by the true Deacon of JESUS CHRIST'S. Francis, with great confidence repaired
thither, in all his journey diuulging this indulgence, whereof he so much doubted
before being related by other: he recounted this his vision to the said Bishop
of Assisium.

Certain Pilgrims coming from the marquisate of Ancona to gain the said
indulgence, they met some young men, who understanding by them whither they
went, one of them deridingly said; that indulgence whither you go is as true,
as that I hold in my hand that swallow that flies in the air: which having
said, he instantly saw the swallow in his hand, at which miracle both the
pilgrims and those present, were all amazed: the said young man acknowledged
hisfault, and accused himself, the Pilgrims confirmed in faith, proceeded on
their journey, every where recounting what had befallen them to the praise of
God, so highly zealous of the salvation of miserable souls.

Gerard de Fighnio being very passionately amourous of an honest woman, to whom
he could in no sort get to speak, by reason that she was almost always
retired in her house, and accompanied when she went abroad, he attended an
occasion (the devil having already led him into error) when, according to her
custom, she should of devotion go to our Lady of Angels, hoping either in the
way, or in the church, some opportunity would be offered of speaking unto her:
the time being come, he joined himself in company with many devout persons,
that went with the said woman to gain the indulgence; but the men being a
little separated from the women, his first hope was vain, and his second more:
for it miraculously happened that he could never see her in the church, though
he well saw all her company. Wherefore acknowledging his fault, and repenting
it, he confessed himself, gained the indulgence, changed his life and
behavior, yea so far forth, that he shortly after became Religious, where he
lived and dyed virtuously.

What sanctity Saint Francis would have observed in that church.
THE VI. CHAPTER.
AS well in respect of the accidents before recited, as diverse other which God
wrought in this holy church, the holy Father Saint Francis avouched as being
revealed unto him, that it was loved of the Virgin Mary with a particular
devotion above all other churches of the world. Therein were also granted very
great graces to the said holy Father, and prerogatives generally and
particulerlie, for himself and for others: and therefore, that the Religious
might never forgett with what devotion and reverence they ought to respect that
church, and that particular memory might be had thereof above all the memorable
things of the Order: being one day sick in presence of his Vicar General,
and many other Religious, in manner of a testament he left these words: I will
that this house and church of our Lady of Angels of Portiuncula, be duly
reverenced and honored of my Religious, and that therein be the residence of
the General of the Order; that he may provide unto this house a pious family,
with greater devotion and diligence, to the end it may serve for example and
mirour in piety and good conversation; and especially that there be chosen very
spiritual Preistes and Clarckes, to minister with devotion, that the Religious
and seculers coming hither to gain this holy indulgence be well edified
thereby: and likewise I will that the lay Brethten be chosen humble and of
virtuous life, and that they serve the Preistes, with much respect and
reverence. I will besides that in this place be observed a perpetual silence,
and that if there be necessity of speaking, they speak only with their
superiors and among them, be very wary not to recount worldly matters, or
other idle words, yea that themselves give no ear in such things to seculer
persons, to the end that no worldly matter enter into this holy house, and
that the Religious may the better conserve their holy poverty therein. And with
all that this habitation be not profaned by earthly discourses: but that
therein the time be always employed in himnes, prayers, and psalms, the most
secure armor for guard of the heart. And if any religious herein already
placed, become and libertine a observe not this Order and course of life, I
will that the Guardian expel him, and put an other, such as he shall thinck
sit, in his place. To the end that if other Religious and monasteries
established, wheresoever else where do err from the purity due to their
estate and to their vocation, and vow made to God, this holy place at least,
blessed by our Lord, may remain and persevere as a mirour and example of true
Religion, and evangelical perfection, and may be a candlelesticke before the
throne of God, and the glorious Virgin Mary, ever burning and giving light, for
whose sake God may pardon the faults and offenses of all the Brethren of the
Order, and that this plant of our Religion may be for ever conserved,
producing fruits worthy of merittes, and so obtaining the most holy grace of
God.

Such was the Order of the glorious Father S. Francis, which was seriously
observed of his first Religious, nourished and educated with the purest milk
of sanctity, who knowing how much this place was loved of JESUS CHRIST and his
sacred mother, lived always in this house, in highest purity, in perpetual
silence, and in extreme poverty. When they chanced to speak some little out of
the time of silence, their discourses were of spiritual things, The sanctity
of the first Friar Minors of Assise.
of benefittes received of God, of our ingratitude, of his mercy, and all with
exceeding great humility and devotion. And if by misgard it happened, which it
very seldom or never did, that some one of them began to speak some thing
that was not of God or more necessary, he was incontinently reprehend by the
others, and did penance for it at the same instant. In this place they
mortified their flesh, not only by watching and fastinges: but also by
disciplines, nakedness, and the rigor and austerity of their habitt, supporting
the one in summer, and the other in winter, and the lay Brethren by laboring
in the feeld to gain bread, and to maintain themselves, and the other
Religious by such and other virtuous exercises, sanctifying themselves, and the
place where they dwell. A very devout Religious being yet in the world, saw
once in vision a great number of people, kneeling before this church, with
joined hands and eyes elevated toward heaven, all blind, who with loud
voice required mercy of God, pouring out abondance of tears, and beseeching
the divine Majesty, to voutsafe to restore their sight: which prayer, ended,
he saw desce^d from heaven an exceeding great light, that illuminating all the
place, restored sight to the blind, upon which vision he afterward became
Religious.

How saint Francis instituted the second rule, and of the Apostolical Bulle
of pope Honorius, against the professed that leave the Order.
THE VII. CHAPTER.
THe Religion of the Friar Minors daily augmenting and many entering therinto
without well measuring their forces before, by their weakness of spirit, their
first feruours incontinently decayed, wherefore being unable to continue firm
under the hammer of Evangelical life, leaving the habitt, they went out of the
Order, worse, by reason of their apostasy committed, then they entered in.
Others without leaving the habitt, went wandering over the world, others, the
rigor being not then so severe, lived at libetty; affirming that they were
not bound to observe a rule that was not confirmed, nor approved by the holy
Apostostolike sea, but only viua vocis ^racul^, by the mouth and voice of Pope
Innocent the third, and approned, but not privileged by Pope Honorious his
successor. The year of grace 1221. which was the fist of his Papacy, his
holiness, for the reasons aforesaid made his breuet following, two years before
the second rule was confirmed.

This following it the said Breuet, extracted out of the 32. chapter of the
tenth book, and transferred hither as its proper place.
HOnorious bishop and servant of the servants of God, to our beloved son,
Brother Francis, and to other Superiors of the Friar Minours, health and
Apostolical benediction. Because according to the opinion of the wise, one
ought to do nothing without counsel, that being done no repentance ensue* It
is therefore necessary to him that will orderly and duly dispose a spiritual
life and one more excellent then ordinary, that he set his eyes before his
feet: that is, that he precedently make good trial of his proper forces, with
the rule of discretion, that he happen not (which God for bidd) to look back
and be converted into a pillar of lost salt, for not having seasoned his
sacrifice with the salt of prudence, remaining as he that is un wise without
savor and salt, if he be not seruent: and so he that is seruent, shall be
foolish and unsavory, if he be not wise: therefore it is most prudently
ordained in all Religious, that they who are to promise reguler observance, do
formerly make good trial thereof, for a certain time, to auoyed occasion of
repentance: for so he cannot lay any excuse on his temeritie or ignorance. For
this cause, we by the tenor of these presents, forbid you to admit any
person to the profession of your Order, if he have not first made an entier
year of probation, and also we ordain that after the the said profession none
presume, to forsake the Order, and that no other receive him, having left the
same. We also make prohibition, that none go out of his obedience, with the
habitt of the Order, nor do corrupt the purity of true poverty. And if any
presume to do it, we authorize you his superiors to execute against such, the
ecclesiastical censures, till he return to obedience. Let none whosoever
attempt to infringe these present letters of prohition and benefitt, or to
oppose against them: for if any one presume so to do, let him be assured to
incur the indignation of God, and of his blessed Apostles S, Peter and S.
Paul. Given at Viterbium, the 22. of September the fifth year of our Papacy.

This is the prohibition which saint Francis alleged in the second chapter
of his rule.
The prasecution of the s^auenth chapter which (...) ^^^itted
Besides all this, it was thought necessary, Ad perpetuam rei memoriam, for a
perpetual memory thereof, and for the asseurance and stabilitie of the order,
to confirm the said rule by Apostolical authority. Therefore the Cardinal
Vgolino, Protector of the Order, prayed the holy Father S. Francis to abridge
it, for it had bin much augmented by reason of many new accidents that
happened from hand to hand. He prayed him, I say, to moderate it in certain
things, that it might be more easy, to execute and to learn by heart, and that
he would procure it to be for ever confirmed by an Apostolical bulle. S.
Francis understanding this, would know if such were the will of God, as in all
matters of importance that he enterprised, he accustomed to do: and therefore
taking leave of the Cardinal, telling him that he would shortly give him
answer, he had recourse to prayer, where he made supplication to God, that he
would reveal unto him what he should do, who was ravished in spirit, and had
this vision: It seemed unto him that he heaped together a quantity of crummes
of bread, which he was to share amongst many Religious, who together with
himself were as it were hunger-staruen, and because the crummes were too
small, he was careful how to divide them that they might not fall through his
fingers: but he heard a voice that said; Francis make one entier host of those
crummes, and then give it to them that will eat it. Which having done, it
seemed unto him that all they who received it not with devotion, or misprised
it, were entierlie covered with leprosy, which vision, he not so plainly
understanding as he desired, praying again the day following, and perseuering
in demanding counsel of God, he heard the same voice that said: Francis the
crummes of bread of the last night, are the Evangelical counlailes, the host
the Rule, and the leaprosie malice, The holy Father then knew, that he should
unite his rule, and compose it of the Evangelical counsels, compendious and
mystical.

Having therefore given answer to the said Cardinal, that he would confine
his rule, conformably to the will of the divine Majesty, and taking with him
Brother Leo, and Brother Bonisius of Bolognia, he went up to the mount
Carnerio, near Rieta, otherwise called Fonte-Colo^bo, where fasting with bread
and water forty days and forty nights, and persisting in continual prayer,
he wrote and composed his rule, as God revealed unto him, then came down with
it from the mountain, as an other Moses, with the tables of the law, and
committed it to the keeping of Brother Helias, who was his Vicar General, who
perceauing it to consist of a greater contempt of the world, and of a more
strict poverty of life, then was grateful unto him, so dealt that the rule was
lost and perished, that it might not be approved and confirmed by the Pope,
with intention to make an other according to his fancy. But the holy Father
that would rather follow the divine then humane will, making no esteem of the
wise of the world, and knowing in spirit the feigned cogitations of that
Religious, resolved to return to the said mountain, by fasting and prayer
more copiously to obtain the will and rule of God, for his servants the Friar
Minors.

Now Brother Helias to interrupt this his second attempt, called an assembly
of many learned superiors of the Order, where ^e began to discover his
perverse intention, alleging unto them that Brother Francis intended to
constitute a rule so strict and austere, that was impossible to be observed,
and that he would procure it to be confirmed by the Pope for ever. Which they
having heard, they with one accord answered: that they yielded all authority
unto him: and that since he was his Vicar General, he should go to him, and
tell him that they intended not to keep the rule he made, but that it should
be for himself alone if he would. But Brother Helias fearing to be reprehended
of S. Francis, encouraged them, and persuaded them to go with him: and so they
wentin company to the said mountain, and being called by Brother Helias, he
knew his voice, and came out of his celle, and seeing so many Religious, he
asked Brother Helias what they would, who answered: they are superiors of the
Order, who understanding that you institute a new rule, they and I fearing we
shall not be able observe it, do protest unto you, that we will not oblige our
selves thereunto. S. Francis made no other answer to this protestation, but
falling on his knees, and casting his eyes to heaven, said; My God, did I not
tell thee, that these people would not believe me? and at the instant a voice
was heard that said. Francis, as in this rule there is nothing of thine, but
all comes, and is of me, so also I will that it be observed. Ad literam, ad
literam, ad literam, without gloss, without gloss, without gloss, I know the
infirmity of man, I know also my will to assist him. Therefore, they that will
not observe it, let them depart the Order, and permit others to keep it: S.
Francis then tourning to the superiors, said: have ye heard, have ye heard,
have ye heard? would ye know more? hereatt they were so confounded, that
trembling as besides themselves, they departed acknowledgeing their error and
not replying one word, the holy father then returned to accomplish the rule,
entierlie conformable to that which God had precedentlie revealed unto him.
This was in the year 1223. fifteen years after the Order confirmed by Pope
Innocentius.

The S. did afterward carry this rule to Room, and delivered it to Cardinal
Vgolino his Protector, who presented it to Pope Honorius, together with the
holy Father, who reading it unto him, and the Pope considering the severity and
rigor thereof, said: that it seemed to him very difficult to be observed* The
S. answered: I beseech your Holiness to believe, that there is not in it, so
much as one word of mine invention, but that our Lord JESUS CHRIST, has
composed it, who well knows what is necessary and behoufull to the salvation
of souls, to the profitt of Religious, and to the conservation of this Order.
Therefore I neither can, nor ought, to alter any point thereof. The Pope then,
inspired of God, and for the zeal he had to Evangelical perfection, which by
this rule, S. Francis planted in the church, said to himself: Blessed is he
that, being inspired by divine grace, shall with fidelity and devotion observe
this rule: since what is contained in it is Catholic, holy, and perfect: and
so in perpetual memory, by the insuyng Apostolical Breuy, he confirmed the
same.

The bulle of confirmation of the rule of the Friar Minors, by Pope Honorius
the third.
THE VIII. CHAPTER.
HOnorius Bishop and servant of the servants of God, to hie beloved children,
Brother Francis, and all other Friar Minors: health and Apostolical
benediction: Because the Apostolic sea has always accustomed to favor the
just desires and vows of them that require it. We therefore condescend to your
pious petitions (children beloved in our Lord JESUS CHRIST) which are, that we
confirm the rule already approved by Innocentius the third our Predecessor,
as is cited in the present letters. We now by the Apostolical authority which
we have, do confirm the same, and do corroborate it unto you by virtue of
this present Breuy. The rule is such as follows.

THE SECOND RVLE OF THE FRIAR MINORS, approved and confirmed by Apostolical
Breuy of Pope Honorious the second.
In the name of God here follows the rule and life of the Friar Minors.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
THe rule and life of the Friar Minors is thus; to observe the holy gospel of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST, living under obedience, without possessing any thing of
proper, and in chastirie. Brother Francis promises to Pope Honorius and his
successors canonically elected, and to the Roman Church, obedience and
reverence: and the Religious are obliged to obey Brother Francis, and his
successors.

How they who desire to lead this life, are to be admitted.
THE II. CHAPTER.
IF any one inspired of God, will enter into this Religion and espouse this
kind of life, when he shall have imparted his intention to some Religious, let
him be sent to the Provincial Minister, who and no other, is permitted to
receive the Religious. The Minister being informed of his desire, ought
dilligentlie to examine him touching the Catholic faith, and the sacraments
of holy church, if he be obedient and give satisfaction herein, he shall
proceed further and ask him, if he be not married, or being so, if his wife be
entered or intend to enter into some Monasteries of Religious women, by
permission of their Bishop, having first both together made vow of chastity,
they must also be of age, that no sinister opinion be conceived of them. The
truth of all this being understood, and no other impediment consisting, let
him be instantly advertised of the gospel that says: Go sell all thou have
Matt. 19.
and give to the poor: and if for some lawful impediment, he cannot do it;
his goodwill shall suffice. Let the Brethren and their Ministers be very wary,
not to respect his temporal affairs, but let them leave it freely unto him
to dispose it as he shall find himself inspired of our lord: and if the said
Nouice demand Counsel concerning this point, of his superior, he may send
him to some man fearing God, by whose counsel he may distribute his substance
to the poor or otherwise art his pleasure. And all this done the habitt of
probation may be given him, which consists of two coats without capuce, and
a cord for a gridle, and the linen breeches with the Caperon reaching even to
the girdle, unless it sometimes seem to the said Ministers otherwise
convenient. The year of probation expired, the Nouices shall be received to
obedience, making vow to observe this rule ever during their life. It shall be in
no sort permissable unto them after the said probation, under whatsoever
pretense to go out of Religion conformably to the commandment of his holiness:
for as the gospel says: No man putting his hand to the plough, and looking
back, Luc. 9.
is apt for the kingdom of God. Let there be given to them that shall have
already promised obedience, a coat with the capuce, an other without it: those
that will and are constrained by necessitie^, may wear sockes. All the
Religious shall be clothed with course cloth, which they may piece with sacking
and other patches with the blessing of God. I admonish and exhort them, not to
misprise nor judge rashly of the me^ whom they shall see clothed deliciously
and in diverse colors, and do live and feed themselves with delicate meats;
but let each one judge and misprise himself.

Of the course and order to be observed in saying divine service, and its
fasting, and how the brethren ought to travel over the world.
THE III. CHAPTER.
THe clarckes shall say the divine office, according to the Order of the holy
Roman church, except the psalter, when they may have breuiaries. The lay
Brothers for their matines, shall say twenty four Pater nosters, for lauds,
five; for prime, third, sixth, and ninth hour, for each, seven; for euensong,
twelve, and for compline, seven; and they shall pray for the dead, All the
Brethren shall fast from the feast of Alsainctes, to the Nativity of our lord:
as also the lent of forty days that begins after the Epiphany (it was
consecrated by our lord JESUS CHRIST, with his holy fast) they who shall fast
it of their proper will shall be blessed of God, and they that will not fast it
shall not sin, nor are obliged unto it: but all ought to fast the lent before
the Pasche of the resurrection of our lord. This rule does not bind to fast
any other time but the friday: but in case of necessity, the Religious shall
not be obliged to corporal fast. Now I counsel; admonish, and exhort my
Religious in the name of our lord, that when they shall go over the world,
they use no disputes nor co^tentious words, nor iudgeil of any person; but
that they be courteous, mild, humble and modest, speaking religiously to every
one, as is requisite. And they ought not to travel on horseback, if they be
not constrained by manifest necessity or infirmity. Entering into houses, let
them say: Peace Matt. 10.
be in this house. And according to the gospel, of all meats that shall be
presented unto them, it shall be lawful for them to eat.

That the Brethren ought not to receive money.
THE IV. CHAPTER.
IAbsolutelie command all the Brethren, not to receive any kind of money, be
it by them selves or any third person; yet for necessity of the sick and to
cloth the other Brethren, it is ordained that the Ministers and Guardians,
shall have care and cogitation thereof only by spiritual freindes, according to
the places and times, and as of necessity they shall see expedient: nevertheless
persisting always resolute as is said, not to receive any kind of money.

Of the manner of laboring.
THE V. CHAPTER.
THe Brethen that have the grace of God to labor, let them perform it
faithfully with devotion, and in such sort, that shunning idleness, the capital
ennemy of souls, they extinguish not the spititt of holy prayer and devotion,
which ought to be preferred before all other temporal exercises. And as for
the hire of their labor, they may receive for themselves and their brethren
whatsoever shall be necessary to the body, except money, and this with humility,
as is convenient to the true servants of God, and to the followers of holy
poverty.

That the brethren may have nothing proper, and of the manner of asking almose,
and ministering to the sick.
THE VI. CHAPTER.
THe brethten may have nothing proper, as houses, lands, farms, nor other
thing whatsoever: but let them live as Pilgrims and strangers in this world,
serving our lord in humility and poverty, let them go confidently to demand
almose. And they must not be ashamed, being mindful that our lord became
poor for us in this world. My most dear brethren, for this most high virtue
of poverty it is that you are institued inheritours of the celestial kingdom,
by our Redeemer IESEVS CHRIST, who making you poor in temporal substance has
enriched you with virtue, that with this portion of riches he may exalt you to
the land of the living. I therefore pray you in the name of JESUS CHRIST, to
possess nothing in this world. In whatsoever place you are, be always
familier among yourselues, manifesting only to each other your necessities. For
if the mother nourishe and love her carnal child, with! how* much more
diligence, ought each of you to love and cherish his spiritual brother? And if
any of the Brethren fall sick, the other brethren ought to serve and comfort
him, as themselves in necessity would be served.

Of the penance to be given to the Brethren that shall sin.
THE VII. CHAPTER.
IF any of the Brethren induced by the devil offend mortallie in those kind of
sins which are reserved to the Provincial Minister, let him be obliged
inco^tinently without delay to go to his Prouincial Minister, who being
Priest, shall enjoin him penance with mercy. And if he be not Priest, he shall
procure him to be enjoined by an other Priest of the Order, as God shail
inspire him, and as to him shall seem most expedient; let them be careful
not to be moved to anger or vexed at the sin of an other: for choler and
anger hinder charity in himself and others.

The manner of holding the General chapter at Penticost, and of electing a
General when there shall be occasion.
THE VIII. CHAPTER.
ALL the brethren of this Order, ought always to have a Minister General and
servant of all the Brethren, whom they shall be obliged sincerilie to obey. And
he dying, his successor shall be elected by the Prouincialls and Guardians at
the Chapter held at the feast of Penticost. At which time the Prouincialls are
always bound to assembly every three years, more or Jesse, in such place and
according as shall please the said General. And if it seem to all the
Provincial Ministers and Guardians, that their Minister General is not
sufficient for the service and common utility of the Brethren, in such case
all the Brethren that have aucthoririe to elect a General are bound to
constitute, in the name of our lord, an other in his place. The general
chapter of Penticost being ended, let the Ministers and Guardians of every
Province have power if they please, to keep the same year a chapter in their
jurisdictions, assembling thither the Brethren that shall be under their chardge
and jurisdiction.

Of the Preachers.
THE IX. CHAPTER.
Let not the Brethren that are admitted to preach, intrude themselves to
preach in any bish oppericke, without permission of the Bishop: and let no
Brother presume to preach to the people, whom the Minister General has not
formerly examined approved, and admitted to the office of preaching. I also
exhort and admonish the Brethren to have great consideration in their
preachinges, what words they utter, to the end they be so pure and chaste that
the people may be edified thereby. Let the^ reprehend vices, praise virtues,
discovering the punishment of the one and glory of the other, and let their
sermons Esa. 10. Romans 9.
be co^pendious of words: for our lord has made an abbreuiated word on earth.

Of admonitions and corections of the Brethren.
THE X. CHAPTER,
Let the Ministers, as servants of others, be careful to visitt and admonish
the Brethren that are under their government: and as need shall require, let
them correct such as shall deserve it, but let it be done with humility and
charity; Being very careful not to command them any thing against our rule and
the benefitt of their souls; and let the Brethren that ought to obey,
remember that for the love of God they have renounced their proper will. I
therefore very strictly command them to obey their Ministers in whatsoever they
have promised God to observe, and to obey in their profession, provided that it
be not in prejudice of their souls and of our rule. In whatsoever place the
Brethren be, where they know they cannot spiritually observe the rule, they may
and ought to have recourse to their Ministers; who must receive them with
benignity and charity, and give them confidence and courage to discover their
necessities, and that with such familiarity, as if the subjects were the
masters. For so is it requisite the Ministers be servants to all Brethren. I
admonish all the Brethren in the name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, to be very wary
of the great and enormous sins of pride, vain glory, envy, avarice, and of
cogitations and cares of the world, of murmuring and detracting their
neighbor. Those who have not studied, let them not regard to begin the
same: but let them especially study to have the spirit of God and his holy
works, to make continual prayer with a pure heart, and to be patient and
humble in sicknesses and persecutions toward them that persecute, reprehend
and contradict us: for our Lord says: love your enemies and pray for them
that persecute and calumniate you. Matt. 6. 10. and ^4.
Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice: for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven: and he that perseuereth unto the end shall be saved.

That the Brethren shall not enter into Monastories of Religious women
THE XI. CHAPTER.
I O^rdaine and command all my Brethren, that they have no suspected
familiarities with women: and that they enter not into the Couentes of
Religious women, those excepted who to that effect shall have special license
from the Apostolical sea. Likewise I will not, that my Religious be God
fathers either of men or women, that by such means there happen not any
scandal among the Brethren, or by their occasion.

Of such as shall go among the Sarrazins and other infidels.
THE XII. CHAPTER.
EVery Brother whosoever, that by divine inspiration desires to go among the
Sarrazins and other Infidels, let him demand leave of his Provincial
Minister; who shall be very respective not to give license, but to such as to him
shall seem fit to do good among such people. And for all these causes, I
command the Ministers upon obedience to procure of his Holiness to have a
Cardinal for Governor, Protector and Correctour of this Confraternity, that
they may be always subject to the feet of the holy Roman Church, stable and
firm in the Catholic faith. Let poverty, humility, and the holy gospel of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST, be entierlie observed of us, as we have faithfully
promised.

The end of the rule of the Friar Minors.
The rest of the bulle, touching the confirmation of the said Rule, omitted in
the beginning thereof.
Let it not therefore be permissible for any man to infringe this ordonnance
of our confirmation, or rashly to contradict the same. And if any presume so
to do; know that he shall incur the indignation of Almighy God, and of S.
Peter and S. Paul his Apostles. Given at S. John Lateran, the 29. of November,
the eight year of our Papacy.

The end of the confirmation of the rule of the Friar Minors.
Of the perfection of this rule and the abridgement thereof.
THE IX. CHAPTER.
AS the three young men (according to Daniel) were joyful in the flaming fire
of the burning fournace, where Nabuchodonosor had caused them to be thrown, as
faithful servants of God, because they would not give to his monstrous
statua, the honor dew to God alone, and as they sung praises to the Almighty,
together with a fourth like unto the son of God: so there were three Orders
and holy Rules founded by three holy personnages, S. Basil, S. Augustine, and
S. Benedict, in the burning fournace of temptations and worldly afflictions,
wherewith the prince of the world, combatteth against the servants of God and
often times surmounteth them, which holy persons as men freed from the fire
and from fear, have with alacrity praised God, in the mids of it; Afterward
there was seen the fourth, like unto the son of God, to wit. The
Seraphicall and crucified servant of JESUS CHRIST'S. Francis, that gave a fourth
estate unto the church, wherein men, being delivered from the prison of the
world and taking more content in the honors and graces of God, might more
freely serve JESUS CHRIST. And such was his intention in all the words of his
Evangelical rule, to wit, that they who had made profession to imitate JESUS
CHRIST, should endeavor to become the most like unto him in labors of their
life and exercises of spirit, that possibly could be procured. He with the
help of the holy Ghost, founded on that only and firm foundation of JESUS
CHRIST, the edifice of the rule in meruaylous hight and perfection. Therefore
in the first chapter The substance of the rule.
he says: The life and rule of the Friar Minors is such: to keep and observe
the holy gospel, living under holy obedience, without possessing any thing
in propriety, and in pure chastity. The life, spirit and words of the said
holy Father considered, his intention was, that the Friar Minors should observe
not only the precepts of the gospel, but the counsels also. Nevertheless
knowing and considering humane infirmity, he would not oblige them to all. In
the second chapter, he John. 14.
teaches to forsake and contemn the world, with whatsoever is in it, giving
them means to make such renunciation as the gospel teaches, which is, to
sell what they have and to give it to the poor, that being delivered of so
great an impediment they might freely serve JESUS CHRIST, and with him say.
The Prince of this world is come, and in me he has found nothing. In the third
he teaches exercises to praise God by the divine offices, and by fastinges and
severe abstinences, mortifications of the flesh, good examples and edification
of our neighbor, and particulerlie of seculer persons. He also teaches them
the virtue of penance, humility and charity, whereby they may with edification
converse with all people. In the fourth, he expressly declares, that he will
not, his brethren shall have money under any pretense whatsoever: but that the
Prouincialls shall supply their necessities, knowing that avarice is
dangerous to souls, and principally to Religious: and how true is the
sentence of JESUS CHRIST where he Matt. 6.
says, that no man can serve God and Mammon. The holy Father therefore would
that richesse should not only be remote, but entierlie and absolutely
separated from the Order. In the fifth, he bannisheth from his society,
idleness, as contrary to the true servants of God, and capital ennemy of
men's salvation. In the sixth, he rayseth the soul from cogitations of the
world, and in as much as may be hoped or expected of him, leaving neither place
nor affection proper in the^, whereby they might adhere to any cogitation of
terrestrial love, to the end that they might Philip. 3.
joyfully say: Our conversation is in heaven, as possessing nothing on earth.
In the seventh, he comfort sinners and such as are sick, teaching the^ the
conditions of their Physician, that can and will cure them, who is our lord
JESUS CHRIST, who will mercy, and not sacrifice, and who came not to call the
just, but sinners, that they might be converted and Matt. 9.
live. In the eighty chapter, he teaches the Superiors and all his Order, in
what manner they ought to govern* the Religious and insinuates that they
should procure to have always a General sufficient and worthy of such a
chardge. In the ninth, he teaches his preachers, to fly pride, and arrogance
in their life and doctrine, and to be humble and zealous of the salvation of
souls, feeding them always with holy and profitable doctrine, without which
they can never produce fruit redounding to the benefitt of the said souls. In
the tenth, he admonishes superiors and subjects to be very careful in the
diligent accomplishment of their obedience, and the obligation which is
reciprocallie between them, but particulerlie that which they owe and is due to
God, by reason of their profession. In the eleventh chapter, he demonstrateth
unto his Religious, how they ought to shun occasions of sin and scandales,
especially women. In the twelueth and last, he teaches them how they should
expose their life for the love of JESUS CHRIST and for his law, among
Infidelles: Then he concludes according to the beginning, showing that all
consists in the faith and obedience of the Roman church, and in the
observance of the holy gospel of our lord JESUS CHRIST, who is our Alpha and
Omega, that is, our beginning and our end. The holy Father S. Francis founded
his life and rule, on these twelve Apostolical chapters; as on twelve stones
taken out of the depth of Iourdain, that is out of the hight of Evangelical
Iosue 4.
perfection. This rule shall continue and be of force for ever as a testimony
unto the professors thereof, that God has already co^ducted them out of the
desert of this world to the land of promise: Therefore Matt. 5.
of them may besaid, as of other perfect: Blessed are the poor in spirit, for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven: since that for it they have forsaken the
kingdom of the earth.

Of th zeeale which the holy Father S. Francis had unto Religion and to the
observance of the gospel.
THE X. CHAPTER.
THe perfect imitatour of JESUS CHRIST, did so affect the observance of the
holy gospel, and was so exceeding zealous of the rule, that with a singular
benediction he enriched those that were singulerlie zealous in the observation
thereof. Whereupon he said to his Brethren: our rule is a book of life to them
that follow it, a hope of salvation, an earnest of glory, the juice of the
gospel, an assured way of the cross, an estate of perfection, a key of
Paradise, and an accord of eternal beatitude. He would that all his Brethren
should have it with them, and often times read it, and in their spiritual
conferences and conuersations should for edification ordinarily discourse
thereof: that often conferring thereof together, they might never forgett this
divine pact and spiritual vow, and that they might so possess it in their
hands, their bosom and before their eyes, that death assaulting them, they
might dye with it in their arms.

A Religious, dying among the Mores, as he desired, made his benefitt of this
holy doctrine of his holy Father: for being taken by the Mores preaching the
faith, and having endured many torments, and they intending to cut of his
head, he took his rule into his hands and falling on his knees, with great
fervor and humility he said to his companion: my beloved Brother, I confess
me before God and you, of what soever I have committed against this rule, and
acknowledge my fault therein, and do beseech you, to pray for me, and I do,
and will pray, for you. The words uttered his head was cut off on earth, to
be afterward crowned in heaven.

But to the end that no impediment should hinder the observance of In the 10.
chapter.
this rule, the holy Father S. Francis has putt into it this clause, that when
they suppose they cannot observe it in some certain place, they shall have
recourse to the Ministers: meaning that where the Religious know that the by
reason of disturbers, corrupted conditions of the places, or oblgations exposed
against the rule, it cannot be observed according to the true, not cloaked or
erroniously interpreted intelligence thereof, they may in such case and ought to
have recourse to the Ministers, who are obliged to putt them in such place, as
they may without any impediment and contradiction observe it. Brother Leo, and
Brother Bonizzo, that were present with S. Francis when the Pope confirmed the
rule, affirmed that when his holiness very attentively read this clause (as also
he did all the rest: therein manifesting himself to be exceedingly well
pleased therewith) he very particulerie rejoiced theratt: which S. Francis
perceauing, he said, that he would very willingly have added in that place,
that if the Ministers would not provide for the said Religious, they might
observe the rule in what place it should please them: but his holiness
answered, that he had discreetly done in not inserting those words, because
such license might easily cause the division of the Order, and little respect
unto the superiors by many who under color of such pretense would avoid
discipline. S. Francis replied, I would have added it; because I know there
will be Superiors in the Religion that will persecute such as would faithfully
observe the said rule: and if such license were admitted, the poor Religious
would avoid persecution; but the Pope would in no sort give consent,
alleging, that it sufficed that by this rule the Religious Ministers knew
their duty, and his intention, without making more apparent specification
which would take away both obedience and respect unto the Superiors, and in
steed of causing the observance of the rule, would entierlie ruin it. Now that
such was the intention of the S. appears by the example following.

A Religious Almaine, who was a great divine, came to visitt ou^ holy Father
at our lady of Angels, where discoursing together of certain points of the
rule, the divine said unto him: Father I vehemently desire to observe the holy
gospel and our rule simply even till death, as I have already promised unto
God, according to his intention and yours, and I hope his divine Majesty well
give me force and virtue to perform it. Therefore I require this favor of
you, Father, that, if during my life, the Religious shall err from the pure
observance of the rule, as it has bin revealed unto you, and as you have
affirmed that they shall wax cold within short time: I may by your authority,
either alone or with such as will follow me in the way of Evangelical
perfection, separate my self from those that will not observe it. Which
demand being well understood of the S. with exceeding joy he blessed him
saying: know my Brother, that what thou requirest, is both by me, and by JESUS
CHRIST, granted thee, and laying his hand on his head, said: Thou art a true
Priest according to the order of Melchisedech.

Of a vision that Brother Leo had, and the expositoin made thereof by S.
Francis, and of a benediction which S. Francis left to his true children.
THE XI. CHAPTER.
BRother Leo accompanying S. Francis that was very sick, had a merueillous
vision, which is very convenient for this place, for such as are zealous of the
Order, add no less, for such as dispe^nse with themselves in the profession
and obligation which they owe to his divine majesty. Being then in prayer near
unto the S. he was ravished in spirit, and was conducted to the border or side
of a violent and impetuous flood, and devising how he might pass it, he saw
certain Religious that entered into it, but by the force of the water were
presently swallowed to the bottom, without any more sight of them; and others
that waded to the midst and almost over it, but by reason of diverse weighty
things which they carried on their shoulders, being overcome by the violence
of the water, were also drowned, without possibility of any man's assistance.
After these came other Religious vnburdned and without any weight: these were
very poor, and entering into the flood did easily and without any peril pass
the same. Now S. Francis knowing by divine inspiration that Brother Leo had had
a vision, and perceauing him much disquieted, said unto him: Brother Leo tell
me what God in this prayer has manifested unto thee. Brother Leo
incontinently recounted unto him the circumstances of the vision he had,
praying him to expound it, because he understood it not. The holy Father
failed not to comfort him, saying: know that all thou have seen is true, the
flood is this world, which with extreme impetuosity runs to perdition; The
Religious which are drowned in this flood, are such as accomplish not their
Evangelical profession, and the strict and voluntary poverty promised, but
do burden What perfection of sanctity of life and doctrine ought to be in the
Friar Minors.
themselves with affairs of the world, which sinck them to the bottom: the
second are such as having begun the way of God, arrive to the mids, but being
vanquished by sensuality, and concupiscence of terrestrial things, forgetting
their vows, are by the violent stream overwhelmed and drowned: the third are
such as having followed the spirit of God, and not of the world, have not
regarded to load themselves with the burden of the earth, but have bin content,
with one only habit to cover them, and a morcell of bread to sustain their
life, and to follow JESUS CHRIST naked on the cross, and therefore without any
peril do pass to eternal things, whither they are called of God.

A Crucifix walks before S. F. A scrole discendeth from heaven on the head of
S. Franc.
The sequel, is extracted out of the sixteenth chapter, of the 6. book.
THe said Brother Leo an other time saw S. Francis, having before him a
crucifix that walked together with him, and rested when he rested: the face of
the S. was illuminated with a splendor proceeding from the crucifix. The third
time he saw descend from heaven upon his head a scrole wherein was written, Hic
est gratia Dei, the grace of God is on this man.

The process of the eleventh chapter of the same book.
THe infirmity of S. Francis vehemently increasing, in such sort that all the
Brethren thought he would die, by reason that from the evening to the hour of
mattines, he ceased not to avoid blood, and had also very frequent accidents
happened unto him; all the Religious began lamentingly to say unto him: Father
who after JESUS CHRIST have engendered us in the world, how without you shall we
remain orphans and desolate, deprived of your presence, with which our hearts
were edified, and did walk in the service of God? Wherefore, O Father, do you
so leave us without a guide? Alas most dear Father, who shall comfort our
feeblenes? who shall cure the infirmities of our soul? who shall give moisture
to the dried root of our heart, that it persist in charity? since these virtues
were conserved in us, by your holy aduertisementes, and by the example of your
holy life, and by these virtues we most strictly observed Evangelical poverty.
Give us, O Father, some consolation, if it be now your hour, because we who
are here, in the name of all your children, that are and shall be, do demand
your Fatherly benediction. Leave us Father some memorial in sign of your holy
will, that God having called you unto him, we as your most obedient children,
may persist in the continual exercises of your holy aduertismentes, and may
say: Our Father delivered us such speeches, and recommended unto us such
things at his death.

S. Francis intending to comfort them, caused to be called Brother The
Testament of S. Fr.
Benedict of Pirra, one of the most ancient of the Order, A Religious of great
doctrine and sanctity, who was his Confessor, and said mass unto him every
morning: he being come, the S. faid unto him: Write Brother Benedict, these
words which I leave as a testament unto my children. I give my benediction to
all them that are and shall be in my Order, even to the worlds end. And because,
by reason of my extreme weakness I cannot speak much, I declare my last will,
and intention to all the Religious present, absent and that hereafter shall be in
my Religion by these three last words only. The first in sign and memory of
my benediction and testament, I command you mutually to love each other, as I
have and do love you. The second, that you love and alvayes keep holy poverty
which is my mistress. The third, that you be always faithful and subject to
the superiors, of our Order, and to all Preistes of the holy church, and that
you be humble and respective unto them.

But God who saw that his servant was yet very necessary to this his flock, and
that he should pourchase himself a greater crown in heaven, prolonged his
life. S. Francis was absolutely contrary to those that desired and procured to
have privileges and exemption from the Pope, touching their life, because it
had bin revealed unto him of God, that how much the Religious were privileged,
so much the less fruit did they produce: he would that the intelligence of the
rule should be taken of his words, being so clear as they were, to any
understanding, provided that it were free from passion: though they seemed very
obscure to such as would not conform their life thereunto, but endeavored to
wrest and draw the sense to their libertine life: seeking against all equity to
have this their licentious life, called the life of Evangelical perfection:
And to prove this to be true, we see that those first children of the holy
Father, so simple, virtuous, and pious, found no such difficulties therein, and
the reason was, because seeking to imitate him, they simply understood, and
most dilligentlie observed this rule, which many that were learned neither
could nor can understand with all their declarations and exclamations, of whom
may be said, and not without reason that they would not, or will not understand
it, as it has bin understood of those ^^, though they were simple and
unlearned.

What esteems S. Francis made, of the great obligation which the Prelates have
toward their subjects.
THE XII. CHAPTER.
THe S. was always a vigilant Pastor, to govern the flock which God had
committed unto him, encourageing them to prayer, to fastinges, and to the
observance of holy poverty, and teaching them to imitate the highest master
JESUS CHRIST, who began first to do then to teach, himself doing the like,
enduring many things only to give example to his children. Being one day at
the Oratory of S. Eleutherius, near unto Rieta, he patched his habitt within
and without with course and gross cloth, as well against the violent cold that
then was, as for the indisposition of his He would not that his habitt should be
peeced against his stomach to assuadge the infirmity thereof.
stomach, which the said patches did cover: he commanded his companion to do
the same. But feeling that this peecing did comfort his body, he presently
remembered the necessity of his Religious, of whom having compassion, he said
to his companion: considering that I ought to be a mirour and example to my
children, it is therefore necessary that with them I endure cold, heat, and al
other necessities that they endure: therefore though I feel this piece much to
asswadge the grief of my stomachs infirmities, nevertheless considering that
many of my Brethren may have this infirmity, who cannot receive this
consolation, I am enforced to suffer with them, to the end that when they shall
see me also to endure, they may the more contentedly support their infirmities.
This said, he incontinently rent of the piece, by this mean giving to each
one an example of perfection. God showed unto him how grateful unto his divine
majesty is the example of Prelates to their subjects, such as this was, in
this admirable How much superiors are bound to give good example to their
subjects.
ensuyng accident.

Having made a journey to the Cardinal Protector of his Order, upon certain
affairs concerning the service of God, and after the dispatch of them, having
taken leave of the said Cardinal, before he departed the place, he went also
to visitt the Cardinal of S. Cross, a Prelate of exceeding great prudence and
sanctity, and one that loved him well, of whom also he was most graciously
entertained, as of him that especially desired his conversation. But
understanding that he intended presently to depart, and being exceedingly
troubled that he could no longer have his company, taking occasion of the time
that was extreme rigorous to travail, as well by reason of the coldness of the
season (for it was winter) as because there was then risen a violent tempest of
winds one the feildes, he said: My beloved Brother, this time is not fit to
travail in, therefore, I will that this day you rest your self with me, and
afterward we will dispose ourselves according to the time: in mean while, my
soul shall be some what comforted and edified; And that you may take no occasion
of disconte^tme^t against me, I promise to entertain you in quality of a poor
beggar, and to give you to eat as to other beggars: for he knew that to be the
thing which the S. especially desired. He besides offered him a house,
separated from his palace and solitary, where with his companion he might
remain without trouble, and there perform all his spiritual exercises.
Besides all this, which much inclined the S. Br. Angelus was then with the said
Cardinal (he was one of the first disciples of S. Francis) who much desiring
to procure contentment to this Lord, began also to persuade the holy Father,
telling him that near thereunto was a solitary tower, where he might as
conveniently make his prayer, as in his Oratory. In the end S. Francis being
overcome by those prayers, and by the time together, went with the said
Religious to see the toure, which contenting him, he told the Cardinal, that
to satisfy him, he was content for all that day to remain with him: then he
enjoined Brother Angelus, that he should not permit any person to enter into
the said toure, whiles he should be there, that with his companion he might
attend to his ordinary exercises without any interruption.

F. Francis is beaten of the devils.
Now the first night, about the first sleep, the deuilles came in, and beat
him cruelly: Whereupon S. Francis called his companion, who was in a chamber
near unto, to whom he recounted how he had bin handled by the devil, saying.
Brother, the devils have beaten me even till this present, I will tell thee
why, you must understand that the devils are executioners, and ministers of the
justice of God, and as an earthly prince, when one has committed an offense,
or enormous fact, does send the Provost of the Marshals to apprehend him, and
then causes him to be punished: so God the Prince of princes by his Preuostes
and executioners, does chastise and correct, even those whom he loves, when
they neglect to do their duty toward his divine Majesty and their
neighbor: and because the imperfect Religious does often sin by ignorance,
when he knows not his sin, he permits him to be chasticed by the said
Ministers, to make him consider by what way he walks, and dilligentlie to
observe in his exterior and interior, wherein he may have offended: for God
does chastise in this present life, such as he loves, and has determined to
save, leaving little or nothing to correct in the other life, which is to be
eternally glorious unto them. Therefore, having now considered with my self, I
did not imagine I had offended him in any thing, his mercy considered, for
which I hane* not satisfied him, according to humane fragilitie, by confession
and penance: and the rather because by the grace which he has given, I knew in
prayer althinges, whereby I could please, or displease him: now nothing having
till this present, bin revealed unto And wher^^re.
me, of this new accident, I am of opinion that God has for no other cause
afflicted me by his ministers of justice, but for that the Cardinal has used
this charity unto me, deteyning me here this tempestuous season, though it
were necessary for my debili^ie: Nevertheless my Religious that now travel over
the world, enduring hunger, thirst, and continual labors, and others that are
within their poor celles and Oratories, knowing that I am with the Cardinal,
will take full occasion to murmr, and say: we spend our days with so many
miseries, and our Father rests at his ease and in delights and honors: And
because I know my self to be bound to give them always good example, having
bin by God committed unto them for Pastor to that effect, and that my
disciples are much more edified by me when I am with them in poor Oratories,
keeping them company in holy poverty, then when I am with rich and honorable
persons, in place of corporal consolation, and that they more patiently
support their necessities, when they see or hear that I suffer with them:
therefore I say, I acknowledge to have exceedingly failed therein. As soon as
the day appeared, the holy Father went to the Cardinal, to whom he related
what he had endured that night, then added: Men that know me not, repute me a
S. but behold how the devils, who know me well, do handle and chastise me for
my sins. So taking leave of him, he returned to his Religious.

In this manner did S. Francis endeauoure to give good example of himself to
every one, not only in small necessities and weak infirmities, but in the
greatest extremities and afflictions of his life, to take away all occasion of
murmr, and that his Religious might not justly say of him, that in his
necessity he could provide well for himself, but not for them, considering
that he endured such excessive dolours in his person, without procuring any
remedy, that the Religious who served him, and they who knew it, could not
contain their tears of compassion, and fought out some one, who by prayers or
authority might command him to apply some necessary medicines. And therefore
there was no Religious that took not courage by his example patiently to
sustain his proper and particular infirmities and labors, in imitation of
their chief Pastor, as also misprise all corporal recreation, for the
fervent desire they had to carry the cross, for the love of JESUS CHRIST, and
to refine themselves in the virtue of penance.

Of the conditions which, according to the will of S. Francis the minister
General ought to have.
THE XIV. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father S. Francis being once so weakened with sickness that his
Religious supposing he would dye, did visitt him extraordinarily, beginning to
feel the detriment proceeding of the loss of his presence: In regard whereof
they were very careful to demand him many matters concerning the serenity of
their consciences, and the observance of the Order. Now one of them who was
very zealous of the rule and his profession, made him this demand: Beloved
Father, you shall go toward God, and your family, who to this day have
always followed you, shall remain in this valley of tears, forsaken of you
their dear Father and assured Pastor. But since it will come to pass, and
that there is no remedy, I most earnestly beseech you, before your departure to
assign us one of our Order, if there be any worthy and capable to accept the
charge and office of minister general, after you. The holy Father with groaning
sighs and tears thus answered: my son I know not if there may be found a
Father of so great a family, a head of so great an army of God, a Pastor of so
great a flock, that would be sufficient: but I will leave you a pattern and
model, wherein may be seen what he ought to be. The General ought to be a
man of great prudence, of laudable reputation, and of holy conversation, a man
without self-love, and particular affection: because if he should more favor
one part then an other, a tumult and discention with scandale would proceed
thereof: a man exceedingly addicted to prayer, and a continual practiser
thereof, and nevertheless, he should elect and choose certain hours of the
day and of the night, for the benifitt and contentment of his soul, that in
other hours he may attend to the government of the flock which God shall have
committed unto him: the first hours of the morning, let him repair to the
place where he is to pray and celebrate mass, recommending himself and his
flock unto the divine protection. He must also be a man that after must go
forth into a public place, where all the Religious may commodiously speak
unto him, and must answer them with humility, providing for each one
according to his necessity, as to him shall seem best: let him be a man of
courage, and constancy, that will no be moved with others words, but will
govern with justice, and therefore let him not give light belief to words
that shall be reported unto him, but let him first search to know the truth,
then let him proceed according to justice, and let him not disdain to hear
indifferently, the little with the great, nor have less care of the one, then
the other, a man all whose actions may be so many exemplar good works, God
having given him grace to appear such by his virtues: a man that has
imprinted in him the image of piety, of simplicity, and of patience, laboring
to create virtue in himself and others, exciting every one by his example to
imitate him: a man above all other things detestinge money, as that which is
more able then any thing else, to corrupt our estate and profession: a man ever
mindful that he is the head and light, set in an eminent place, that other
Religious may see and follow him, to imitate him in his holy exercises: a man
that is content, though he be General, with one only habitt, and one breuiary,
where with to say his divine office: one inck-horne and one seal, to provide
for the occurants of the Religious of the Order, a man not over much addicted
to the curiosity of learning, nor seeking to furnish his library, to the end
he do not rob the divine office and prayer, of much time consuming it in the
study of learning: a man principally of condition and conversation,
spiritually to comfort the desolate, as one that must be the remedy and refuge
of the afflicted, for fear that this virtue and remedy not being found in him,
it happen that his sheep, by their labor and vexation, be at length
surmounted by the detestable and perilous disease of despair: let him be
ouermore, a man fit to humble himself, according to the example of JESUS
CHRIST, and sometime to mortify his sense, and particular opinion, though
reasonable, to gain unto God the souls of his subjects, as did the Apostle
S. Paul; a man that shuts not the bowels of compassion against the
Apostatats of the Order: who are as strayed sheep, to whom he ought never to
deny mercy, considering their temptations were very prompt, and let him
thinck that if God would permit him to be tempted, he perhaps would fall
into a deeper pit: a man, that, if necessity sometime constrain him to eat
meat better then ordinary, he do eat it publikelie and not in secrett, that
others may in like sort be in their necessities provided for: a man that, being
requisite for him principally to give light and luster to obscure the darckned
souls, do seriously consider what he is to do, that he may discover the
true and loyal path to passengers, amongst so many crooked, disordered, and
confused ways. A man not rejoicing in the honors and favors of the world,
nor troubled in iniuryes and afflictions: a man not defiling nor in any sort
mittigating the worthy form of justice by impartiality, by desire of
conseruing his honor, or reputation, or for whatsoever other respect, not
correcting him that deserves recompense, nor favoring him that meriteth
punishment: a man that by his ouer-seuere rigor is not occasion of the ruin
or despair of any soul, and that by his too tender compassion causes not
sloth and negligence in his subjects, or by long sufferance and indiscreet
indulgence, occasioneth a dissolution in discipline: a man that does know how
to govern himself, to be of each one both feared and loved: a man, that at
the first relation shall suspecte the accusations made against his Religious,
till he have duly examined and gotten knowledge of the truth: a man, that
with great fear of God, refuses the chardge of such office, and the
obligation of so great a Prelature, acknowledging himself insufficient of such
dignity, ever reputing honor to be a great burden. And finally a man, that
disdayneth not, yea procures, as I would do, and seeks to have for his
companions, men adorned with holy virtues, whom he knows to desire nothing
for themselves, but seek only the honor of God, and the reformation of the
order, the salvation of souls and of all the Brethren, and that both himself
and they, give to each one good example of themselves, comfort the Brethren in
their afflictions, and appear to all the Brethren a model and pattern in the
observation of the holy gospel and our rule, fuch ought to be my son the
General of the Friar Minors. I would also that such a Prelate should be
feared, loved and honored of all, and that all his necessities be provided
for, with a singular love, as true Father, and most loving Pastor.

Of a letter which the holy Father S. Francis wrote to Brother Helyas his Vicar
General.
THE XIV. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father S. Francis being sick, wrote this letter following to Brother
Helias his Vicar General that governed and visited the Order. Brother, God
give you his holy benediction: I admonish you, to be always patient in what
soever you shall take in hand, and well disposed to support whatsoever accide^t
may give you disconte^t. And if you should be injuriously offended by any of
the Religious or other, receive all as proceeding from the hand of God,
manifesting to the world that you seek no other thing but to love them, and to
procure them to be the true servants of JESUS CHRIST. And therefore exact no
more of them then that which God shall give you, and herein I will know if you
love God, my self his servant and your self, to wit, if whenever any Friar
Minor in the world having committed never so enormous offense comes before
you, he depart not without mercy, and though you afterward understand that he
sinned a thousand times, if yet you love him more then you would my self: and
though by reason of fear or reverence he should not require pardon, you
encouraging him shall demand if he desire it: to the end that acknowledgeing
his offense, he do penance for it; and thus much to be practiced especially
toward the infirm. You shall not fail to admonish the Guardians to do the
like, and that they resolve ever to do it. And therefore when it shall be known
that one of the Brethren has offended and forgotten himself, let not the
other Brethren dishonor him, nor murmr at him, but let them have compassion
of his fragility, remembering that the sick and not the healthie do need the
Physician. If any Religious induced by the devil, do fall into any mortal
sin, I will that he be obliged upon obedience to have present recourse unto
his Guardian who shall send him to the Provincial, and he receiving him
compassionatly, shall have care of him and comfort him, as himself in such
case would be conforted, and he shall have no authority to give other penance
to the contrite, but to say only unto him, depart in peace and sin no more.

Of the Provincial Ministers.
THE XV. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father S. Francis would, that the Provincial Ministers should be
equal with the other Religious, and that for their goodness and virtue, they
should be loved of all, in such sort that the simple conceive no fear nor
apprehension to be under their government and discipline. He would also that
they should be very discreet in their commandementes and compassionate in
offenses, more ready to receive injuries and to pardon then to revenge, and
capital ennemies to vices: but dilligent Curers of the vicious. He would not
have them command the Religious in virtue of obedience, in a matter of light
consequence, for that were to lay hand presently on the sword, or to show
authority to command, or to discover the commander to be temerarious, He
desired they should be much respected, but withal that their life should be
such as might shine before all the Brethren as a mirour of virtue and Religion.
The cause why he would they should be loved and honored was, by reason that
they carried the burden and carre of all the rest and did meritte great
recompense at Gods hand, and great praise and honor with men when they
charitablie preserved and governed in the foresaid manner the souls committed
unto their chardge,

How the holy Father S. Francis obtained of God the gift of poverty, for
hinselfe and his Order.
THE XVI. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father S. Francis, as he trauayled came one night to a town very
weary, and his companion also who was Brother Macie: though as Religious living
in manner of the Apostles, they had nothing with them to eat, and therefore,
they begged it for the love of God, and got bread to releive them: coming
afterward to a fountain that was nor far from the town, they there found a
very fair stone, as a table there expressly placed to eat upon, whereon the holy
Father having laid the little bread they had, exceedingly contented in
himself, said: O Brother Macie, we are not worthy of so great a treasure, and
still raising his voice he often iterated the same words: Wherefore Brother
Macie reasoned with him in these words: Tell me Father if you please, how call
you this extreme poverty treasure, where there is only bread and water without
napkin to eat upon. The holy Father answered, yea, I call this a very great
treasure, where there is not any thing procured by humane industry, but all
administered by the divine providence. The bread has bin given us for the love
of God, the fountain and stone The praise of poverty.
were created of God for us: therefore will I beseech him to give us grace to
love the treasure of poverty with all our heart, whereof he is the only
administrator and distributer. They also received a refection more spiritual
then corporal, and gave thanckes to God for it. The next morning proceeding on
their journey S. Francis on the way discoursed very profondlie of poverty,
thus saying to his companion: Brother If we well knew the worth of holy
poverty, we should find it to be so divine a treasure and of such
excellency, that we are not worthy to possess it in such base and unworthy
vessels. For this is the virtue, wherbie these terrestrial and transitory
things are misprised and trodden underfoot, that they may serve us and not we
them. This is it that remoueth the impedimentes between God and us, that our
soul may unite it self to her Creator: for it gives her wings, by which,
though she live on earth, she conuerseth with the Angels in heaven. This is the
virtue that accompanied our Lord JESUS CHRIST from his holy conception, even to
the cross, that arose again with him, and in fine ascended with him to
heaven. On it especially God founded his holy church, not only in the
Apostolic estate, but even in all Christians, who then renounced and sold all
they possessed, and brought the price to the feet of the Apostles. There on
also, may beloved Brother, has he founded our Religion. Which let us
therefore pray him to support on that Evangelical foundation, and to cause to
increase in an infinite number of virtues, in imitation of his beloved Son
our Lord and master, and that we may with more ease obtain the same, let us
procure to be our intercessors, the glorious Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, the
lovers and preachers of holy poverty, that in our behalf they make
intercession to God to grant us to be truly poor and his right humble
disciples, and grant this privilege to our Order, that there be always
therein such as are truly poor, that honor and love holy poverty.

S. Francis with this fervor went to Rome in pilgrimage to visitt the holy
Apostles, beginning already to foresee the great persecutions, which How
poverty was granted to S. Fr. for his Order.
many of his Order would lay on poverty after his death, and that few would
adventure to pass with all. Being then come to Rome, he entered into the Church
of S. Peter, and being retired into a chapel, with violent effusion of
tears, he demanded of God that he would please to confirm unto him the grace
and privilege of most holy Evangelical poverty, for himself and his Order,
inuocating for intercessors the glorious Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, who in
most glittering splendor appearing unto him, did embrace and salute him, then
said: Brother Francis, because with such devotion thou demaundest that which
God will, and we observe, and counsel to be observed, he has sent us unto
thee to advertise thee in his behalf, that thou art heard in heaven, and that
he has granted the treasure of Evangelical poverty to thee and to all them
that shall follow thee, and that they shall be of the number of the blessed who
shall embrace the same. Which said, they disappeared, leaving the holy Father
S. Francis exceedingly comforted, and recounting the whole to Brother Macie,
they according to their duty together yielded thanckes to God.

Of the poverty which the holy Father S. Francis observed, and would should be
observed at table, and how the Religious were often miraculously provided for
in their necessitis.
THE XVII. CHAPTER.
Saint Francis being in the Oratory of Rieta, a Provincial repaired unto him
to celebrate with him the Nativity of our lord. Wherefore the Religious
entending to honor the feast and the Provincial, prepared the table with a
cloth and white napkins, fournishing it with neat vessel and meat a little
better then ordinary. But the S. coming that morning to eat with them in the
refectory; and seeing that preparation, and that the table was raised from the
ground, where it accustomed to be, he secretly went forth and finding a beggar
at the gate, he borrowed his hatt and cloak, then taking a companion with
him, they went out of the house, and in the mean time the Religious sat down
at table: for he had ordained that when soever he was not found in the Covent
at the hour of refection, they should not attend him. About the mids of
their meal, the holy Father returned disguised as aforesaid, and went
directly to the refectory, at the door whereof he demanded an almose for the
love of God. The Provincial answe^ared him: Brother, we are poor as you are,
and therefore have need of these almose: but for the love of God which thou
have named enter and we will give thee part of the almose which JESUS CHRIST S.
Fran went attired in disguise of a beggar to show and correct some little
defects of his Religious.
has sent us: S. Francis entered and stood expecting to have somewhat given
him. The Provincial gave him his own dish, with the bread that was in it. The
S. receiving it discovered himself and sat down on the ground before the
Religious: but being approached to the fire, he sighing said. My beloved
Brethren, this table so decently prepared, is not fit for poor Religious,
that ought every day to go ask alms from door to door for the love of God,
it would better beseem you, to follow the example of humility of our lord
then of any other: for to that end are we called; considering also that we have
promised to observe it: now do I esteem me a Friar Minor, beholding my self
sitting on the ground. The feasts of God and his saints, ought to be
honored with that holy poverty, whereby they have pourchased heaven, and not
with these superfluityes which they did utterly abhor, as things that did
separate them from the love of God. It cannot be expressed, how much the poor
Religious were amazed, having heard and seen this act: for many did weep
seeing their Father sitting on the ground with that habitt with so great
humility correcting the fault which they had committed, whereof accusing them
selves, they acknowledged their fault to the S. who blessing them bad them with
all ever to keep their table so poor and humble that the seculers seeing it,
might He exhorts them to observe poverty.
not be scandalized, and that if any beggar came, he might be invited to eat
with them. Besides, he would that the bread which they begged should be so
limited, that there should remain none superfluous in the house, but what
should only suffice the Religious; assuring them, that if they wanted, God
would provide for them, as by the ensuing miracle does appear.

The general chapter being on time ended, and the Ministers dimissed S. Franc.
multiplied bread by the sign of the cross.
each one to his Province, there remained with S. Francis 31. Religious, among
whom was that Brother Monaldo that merited to see the S. as crucified at
Arles, as we have formerly alleged; they being upon departure and the S.
desiringe charitably to eat with the^, there was found only three little loanes
in the house, which S. Francis caused to be brought, made on the^ the sign of
the cross, and the^ divided it amongst the^, And God did so multiply it, that
it sufficed the^ all: and with the fragme^ts was filled a great baskett: by
mean of which miracle the Religious returned exceedingly encouraged in the
service of God and the love of poverty, finding by experience that God was
their procuratour.

On an other time S. Francis coming by night to the Oratory of So^, nino in
Lombardy with many Religious, exceedingly oppressed with hunger, they found not
in the house one only morcell of bread, for their custom was to demand no
more of almose then would suffice, them for one day, and if any remained, they
presently distributed it to the poor. S. Franc. miraculously obtained bread in
a necessity.
The holy Father S. Francis understanding thus much, said to the keeper of the
provision: go to such a place and you shall find a baskett full, bring it
unto me. He goeing thither brought thence a baskett full of bread, which had
bin miraculously conveyed thither to releive the servants of God. They all did
eat with very great appetite, finding it extraordinarily pleasing: which did
not pass without giving thanckes to the divine Majesty for the alms which so
liberal a hand bestowed on them. Many other such miracles happened unto these
poor of God, as this that ensues

How whiles the Cook was at his prayers in the Church, the refection was
miraculously prepared. The 33. chapter of the tenth book, transferred to this
proper place.
Saint Francis admitted to Religion a knight called Bennenuto, who of his
great humility, made choice to live always in the kitchen. It happened on a
time that a Burgess had a will to refect the Religious one morning: and to
that end sent them betimes what he thought convenient thereto, that they might
prepare it at their pleasure, which Brother Bennenuto received and lapped all
together: then went to mass, where he was so rapt in devotion, that all the
time of service he remained insensible without either memory of the kitchen or
any other thing in the world. The conuentuall mass being ended he returned to
himself, and remembered that the meat was yet to dress which was sent them,
and nevertheless it was the hour of dinner: he therefore went much troubled to
the kitchen, and coming near, he heard many persons playing the Cooks,
whereat admiring, he opened the door that was shutt wihout, whereof he had the
key: and entering he saw no person within, but only found the said meats
ready dressed as he had purposed to prepare them: whereupon he gave thanckes to
God, for that he would please by the hands of his Angels, to supply that which
he had omitted.

How S. Francis was prayed to tell what was his intention concerning the
observance of Evangelical poverty.
THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
NOtwithstanding the premises, and by how much the number of Religious
increased, so much nevertheless did the number of true obseruers of Evangelical
poverty diminish, each one seeking to interprett the rule in such sort as he
might not be obliged to this rigorous vow of poverty: yea there were good
Religious that were putt in doubt thereof by the subtilities of the infringers,
as particulerly Brother Ricorio de la Marquese, who one time was very instant
with saint Francis to be resolved therein praying him to explicate his meanning
concerning the observance of Evangelical poverty, as well past, as present,
and to come; that if it pleased God he suruiued him, he might give testimony
to the Religious his Brethren of his true intention, and with all concerning
the books which the Preistes might possess, though they affirmed that their
books apperteined to the Religion and not themselves. The holy Father
answered him: Know brother, that such was my first intention and shall be my
last, if all the Religious would believe me, that none of them possess any
other thing then one habitt, with the cord and linen breeches, as the rule
permits. Therefore to them that afterward affirmed that the holy Father S.
Francis caused not the same to be observed in his time, his companions answered
that among many words which the S. used to his Religious, and caused to be
written according as from day to day God did dictate unto him in his prayers
and revelations for the good of the Order, he diverse times said, that he
supported many things by reason of the scandal which might happen between
his Religious and himself in the beginning of the Order, and albeit he saw
that many waxed cold and relented he tolerated the^, in case that it were not
in an essential matter of Religion against the vow; because he would not
debate with the disobedient: he excused himself herein toward God,
alleging unto him, that to the end his word of the augmentatition of his
servants might not prove vain, he would in himself supply for them, wherein
they were deficient, which S. Franc. would rather that the ornaments of
thealtare should be sold then the vow of poverty in necessity infringed
he failed not to do, as we have formerlie inserted.

To confirm his intention; I will relate what he one time answered to the
Prelate of the Monastery of S. Mary of Angels, that asked him leave
thenceforward to receive something of the nouices that should enter into
Religion, to relieve the necessities of the Covent. The S. answered, that when
necessity constrained him, he should sell the ornaments, and rather disfurnish
the altar of the virgin Mary, then do against the strict vow of poverty, and
the observance of the rule because he was certain that the glorious Virgin
would be better pleased, that her terrestrialll altar should be disfurnished,
then her celestial Son should be disobeyed.

An other time, Many ministers were ernest with him, to permit his Religious
to possess something, if not in particular at least in common, wherewith they
might supply their necessity, their number being so God promises S. F. to have
care of all the necessities of the Friar Minors that hope in him.
increased, thut they sometimes endured intolerable inconveniences. S. Francis
then felt a great anguish in his soul, and having no will to answer the^ of
himself, he fell to his prayer and demanded counsel of God, who with a
clear and loud voice answered him: Francis I take from the Friar Minors all
things both in common and particular, because my self alone will have care to
provide for that family: let it multiply as much as it will, for as long as
it relyeth on me, and not on temporal substance, I will nourish it. Saint
Francis gave this answer incontinently to the Ministers, and exhorted them
with patience to persevere in their first holy vocation, considering that by
such proceeding they should be eternally comforted of God.

Of the poverty which saint Francis would that his Religious should show in
their habittes.
THE XIX. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father S. Francis would that his Religious should likewise be
clothed with the habitt of poverty, as well in the baseness of the stuff, as in
the number of coats, that is with cloth of gross locks and one only habitt,
he detested them that were clothed with three coats, or with a double
garment, he said that the necesity which is not governed by reason, but
follows the pleasure and commodities of the body, is a note that the spirirt
is dead interiourlie, because, said the S. the spirit being waxen cold and
careless of the heat of grace, wherewith one ought to be covered and defended,
it is necessary that it make use of things appertayning to flesh and blood,
for in defect of spiritual releife three remains to the soul no other remedy
then that. He therefore gave this marcke to discern true necessity. The soul
and the desires do show signs of necessity, when reason What is true
necessity.
gives scruple to a man of such necessities. But for that, one must not so
soon provide: for if the Religious having necessity should insta^tlie provide
for it, what meritt would remain unto him? what exercise of patience could he
have, yea where subject of meritt is presented unto him, he by the diligence
he uses to provide for himself, retourneth unto Egypt to avoid the
sufference of any thing for the love of JESUS CHRIST which he had at other
times promised to endure. He very sharply reprehend them that made difference
of colors, desiring to have them lighter or sadder and to confound them with
his example, he patched his habitt with pieces of the grossest sackcloth, and
at the end of his life commanded, that they should bury him in his habitt
covered with sackcloth. If it chanced some Religious could not support this
burden, he rather permitted him, to have his under coat less austere then the
upper, in which he would that in all manner, severity and poverty should
appear. He would sometimes with extreme grief utter these words: A time
will come when this observance of poverty, will so relent that it will loose
his vigor, and careless coldness will reign in place thereof, because the
children of this poor Mother will be ashamed, esteeming it their honor to
wear coats of delicat and precious cloth.

In his very time Brother Hely his vicar general caused to be made an habit of
fine cloth with lardge and long sleeves, which S. Francis understanding, he
called him in the presence of many Religious, and prayed him to lend him the
habitt which he woare, which he did: and the Saint presently putt it on upon
his own, plaiting it exquisitlie, settling the Capuce, and redoubling the
sleeves, which he did with all the vain gestures which he saw in spirit that
the Religious in such an habitt would use, then he walked with his head Just
displeasure of S. Fr. for the first delicate and ample habitt of the Freer
Minors that was made in his time.
alofte, in ietting manner, talking with a grave, strong, and sounding voice,
marching in proud gate, now saluting one, now an other of his Religious, who
were exceedingly astonished, expecting what the Saint would do. At length
tourning to them he said: honorable company God save you: which said he putt
of the habitt and threw it as far as he could, being moved with exceeding
great fervor of spirit and zeal of God, then said to Brother Helias, in such
sort as each one might hear him: so do the bastardes of the Order, go
attired: then putting on his humble, short, strict and contemptible habitt, he
changed countenance, and appeared gracious and mild as before, then began to
converse with the other Religious humbly according to his custom, teaching
them to be humble poor and meek.

How saint Francis would not that his Religious should have any thing in
proper, and of the poverty of the houses of the Religious.
THE XX. CHAPTER.
AS the holy Father would not that his Religious should possess any thing
proper, neither in particular nor common, much less would he it should be said
that any thing was belonging S. Franc. made all the Religious of a Covent to
depart thence because it was told him that it was the Friar Minors.
to the Religious. He chanced one time to pass near to Bolonia, where it
being told him, that a monastery was there builded for his Religious: he for
hearing that this monastery was his Religiouses, comma^nded all them that were
in it in virtue of obedience, presently to depart: who in such sort obeyed that
one being sick there, caused himself to be carried out: and he would not
permit them to return t^ it her till their Protector, who was then legate
at Bolonia, had publicly preached, that the said house was his and not the
Freer Minors. So would he not that they should dwell in any other place, if
first it were not assured that the propriety there of had an other master then
the Religious.

A Guardian that was a dear friend to S. Francis, founding an Oratorie, made
also adjoining unto it a little cell for him, builded only with hewed wood
without other fashion. The Saint seeing it, said to the Religious: If you will
that I use it, dress it with osier twigges and bows of trees, that I may
there see my holy poverty: which being done he there remained certain days,
but hearing one of the Religious one time say, that he came to see his celle,
he answered, S. Franc. left his cell because speaking to him one called it
his. Matt. 8.
since you say it is mine, it shall no longer be so, and thenceforward would no
longer continue therein: the like did he in all other places, wherein he the
more willingly remained, as they were poor and meanly accommodated. To
comfort his Religious he would sometimes use those words of JESUS CHRIST in
the gospel: The foxes have holes, and the fowls of the air nestes: but the
Son of man has not where to lay his head. And speaking of him, he would say
that when he remained forty days and as many nights in the desert to pray, he
had there neither cell nor bell, but was constrained to rest under a tree or
rock, and therefore he at least did imitate him in this, that he possessed no
cell, that was, or was called his: And if some times by misgard he bad his
Religious to accommadate him some cell, calling himself to mind he would no
longer remain therein, thincking of what is said in the gospel. Be not
careful for the Matt. 6.
morrow. He would have it putt into his testament that all the celles wherein
the Religious dwelt and their house should be made of clay and wood. There was
every year a general chapter held at our lady of Angels, whither repaired a
great number of Religious, who were there very ill accomodated. The citizens of
Assisium considering this great inconvenience; and having compassion to see
them all resting in an house covered with thatch, having the walls made of
osier together with bows of trees and clay, they resolved to build them a
fair great house against the church of the monastery, expreslie for the
general chapters there yearlie to be held, and so meerlie without the
knoweldge of saint Francis, they in short time S. Franc. endeavored to pull
down a house which was builded to serve the Religious only in time of the
General chapter.
builded it with lime and stone, they knew well that if saint Francis had
known thereof, he would never have permitted it; which opinion the success
confirmed, for retourning and finding such a building, though he were informed
that the inhabitants had done it of their own motion, and that it was to
serve only for the said chapter, nevertheless, foreseeing the evil example,
which this great house might give, and that the Religious would build the like
otherwhere, in which respect this building was inconvenient in that place,
which he would have to be an example of sanctity and poverty to all others,
having called certain Religious that were zealous of the Order, before the
chapter ended, he with them got up on the said house and began to uncover it
with intention utterly to pull it down. Which being seen by some kinghtes
and gentlemen there placed by the city in guard to hinder scandales that might
happen, they came to the S. and said: Father, hold your hands and know that
this house is proper to the city of Assisiu^ we therefore advertise you to
desist from further endommaging the same. Which the holy Father hearing, he
answered: if the house be yours I will no further touch it: and calling the
said Religious, they descended, and the citizens covered the roof again, and
made choice of gentlemen that in time of the chapters should have care to
fournish it as was requisite, that the Religious might be freed of solicitude,
which continued for many years.

Of the rule and manner of building which saint Francis prescribed to his
Religious.
THE XXI. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father S. F. residing for the infirmity of his eyes, nere unto
Sienna, there came a rich gsntleman to visit him, who having given to the Friar
Minors a place where to build a monastery, and devising on the form of this
building, the holy Father said to this man who was very familier to the Order,
Brother, will you know how the houses of our Religious must be builded? you
must observe this order: when my Brethren shall come into any place, where they
shall have no place of retire, and shall find any one that will permit them
to build on his land, a house, a garden, and other necessities, they must first
consider how much land will suffice them, having always regard to our poverty,
and to the good example which we are bound to give in our houses, as well as in
other things. And therefore, he would not that the Religious should be many
together in houses, nor that they should make them great, it seeming to him a
difficult matter, that poverty can be observed, where there is a great
multitude. After they shall have considered the situation, and the place
convenient to erect the Monasteries, they must repair to the bishop of the
city, and say to him: My lord and Father, such a one, for the love of God, and
for the benefitt of his soul, permits us to build a house one his land: we
first are willing to address our selves to you, who are lord and Pastor of
all this flock recommended unto you and even of us, and of all the Religious
that shall have residence here where we desire with the benediction of God and
yours, to build a Monastery. And having received the benediction of the bishop,
let them first of all take a cord, wherewith they shall measure the plott which
is necessary for them to build the house, which they shall make poor: the
matter shall be, wood and stone, the celles shall be little, only sufficient for
the Religious to repose therein, who shall also pray there, and strive to avoid
idleness, their churches shall be little, they shall not make What kind of churches
the Friar Minors should have.
them great under color to preach to the people therein, or for other
edification: for it shall be reputed greater humility, and better example, to go
to preach in other churches. When Prelates, Preistes, Religious and other
seculers shall come to our Oratory, the poor celles and little churches will
preach to them, and they shall be much better edified then by fair or good
speeches.

An other time he said: The Friar Minors will often build great and sumptuous
edifices, bringing to ruin our mistress poverty which shall be cause of evil
example, murmr and importunity of the people. Therefore S. Franc. foretold
what the Friar Minors have don in their buildinges.
it would much better beseem our estate and the edification of souls, to make
no such buildinges: at other times under pretense of making change for a more
healthful place, more commodious, and less troublesome, they will forsake
their poor houses to the great scandal of the people, to erect greater and
such as are abominable to the eyes of God and poverty, in which buildinges
they will employ much almose gotten under pretext of necessity, whereof they
shall yield account to God as robbers of the almose of the poor. In these
respects it is much better for them to have little churches, in them observing
their profession, giving to their neighbor example of true Religious. S.
Francis forbad his Religious to build their Monasteries of other matter then
wood and earth, as do the poor of this world. There were certain Religious
of contrary opinion, alleging diverse reasons, as that in some provinces wood
and bordes were deerer then stones and lime, and also that buildinges made of
lime and stone were of longer continuance, and more sure: but S. Francis to
avoid contradiction would give them no answer, nor did he approve their
humane reasons. To demonstrate that he dyed with this intention, he caused
these words to be inserted in his testament, that the Friar Minors should be
very careful not to accept the houses that are builded for them, if they were
not conformable to their holy poverty: that they should be as for Pilgrims,
and that they should live in them as strangers. He sometime said against
certain learned Prelates of the Order and wise in erroneous worldly prudence,
that were always directly contrary in the strict observance of poverty:
Wretched be the Religious that are contrary to me in such matters as I know to
be the will of God, and are necessary for conservation of the Order: then he
said to his companions: These contradictions redouble mine infirmities, for
some Religious are always contrary unto me, by the authority of their
erroneous science and prudence, in matters revealed unto me by God, for the
benefitt of the Order, as well present as to come, which they misprise, desiring
rather to follow their own opinion, then the will of God.

How much he was ennemy to the use of supperfluous books
THE XXII. CHAPTER.
ANouice had license of the vicar general, to have a psalter, whereby to learn
to read, but because he heard it spoaken, that the holy Father S. Francis would
not that the simple Religious should have care either of books or learning, he
could not contentedly keep it without approbation of S. Francis, who coming
to the place where the Nouice was, who was lately professed, h^ went to him and
said: Father, it would be great satisfaction unto me, if by your license I
might keep the psalter, though your vicar general, has permitted me, I am
not yet well satisfied unless you confirm it. The holy Father answered him:
The Emperor Chaflemagne, Rouland, and all the other Pallatine and valiant
warriers, with exceeding swetty labors and travails prosecuting the infidels,
got of them great victoryes and purchaced great honor, in the memory of men,
the holy martyrs get far greater glory, in the battles and victories,
which they obtain against the infernal spirittes and their fellows who are
wicked 1. Cor. 8.
men, they dying gloriously for the faith of JESUS CHRIST: it seems that the
men of these times seek to pourchace glory and honor, to read or hear
related these histories without imitating the^, not considering their labors
and their death. My child hereof I would infer, that thou should seek
neither books nor learning, but virtuous worckes, in which consist true glory,
because science alone puffs up in pride, and charity edifieth. The Nouice
with this answer departed utterly confounded. A little after being tempted by
the devil he met S. Francis at the fire, to whom he spoke again of the
Straung temptation of a Friar Minor to have a psalter.
psalter: And the holy Father answered: My Son, when thou have leave for
the psalter, thou will also ache for the Breuiary, then for other books to
learn.: and when thou have learned any thing, thou will sit in a chair, as
if thou were a great divine or Prelate, and wilt say to one of thy Brethren,
Go fetch me my breuiary. Speaking this with great fervor of spirit, he took
ashes, wherewith rubbing his head, he said: A breuiary for me, a breuiary for
me; and diverse times reiterating the same, the Religious remained as beside him
self, and durst not for that time speak any more of the psalter. S. Francis
said further vuto him: I have bin at times tempted, as thou art now, to have
many books, but to know if such were the will of God, I took a book, where
the gospels were written, and besought his divine Majesty to voutsafe to show
me his will by the opening thereof, whereupon I lighted on these words of his
own: The knowledge Matt. 13.
of the mysteries of the kingdom of God, is given to you simple, and to other
in paraboles. Many months after that, S. Francis being at our lady of
Angels, the same Religious in extreme temptation, recommended again unto him
the aforesaid license to have a psalter: to whom the holy Father said: go,
do what the vicar general has granted thee. The Religious returned whence
he came, but the holy Father considering what he had granted, went after him,
and ouertaking him, said my son, return with me and show me the place where
I bid thee do with the psalter what the vicar general had permitted thee.
Coming thither, S. Francis fell on his knees before the said Religious,
saying: Brother I confess my fault, I confess my fault, then added: know that
he who will be a good Friar Minor must have nothing but his habitt, the cord,
and linen breeches as the rule enioyneth, and they that are by manifest
necessity constrained, sockes: every thing else is superfluous, and against the
purity and poverty of the rule, which we promise God to observe: the said
Religious moved with the words, believed this holy counsel,

Being by diverse demanded the like counsel, he answered them with this
sentence, right worthy to be set in letters of gold, and not only painted or
engraven in marble, but in the hearts of men: A man has Apothegma of S.
Francis. Matt. 7.
so much knowledge, as he is a man of virtue and loves God and his neighbor,
and no more: and the Religious so good, as he does good worckes; because the
tree is known by his fruit. When he returned from Syria, a Provincial came
to visitt him to co^ferre with him of the affairs, of the Order, and
particulerly touching the vow of poverty: to know his will therein, and of the
obligation inserted in the first rule, taken out of the gospel: to wit, when
you travail, you shall carry with you neither money nor wallett: S. Fran.
answered, I mean thus, that the Friar Minors must only have their habitt, the
cord, and linen breches, as the rule says, and Luc. 10.
such as are enforced by necessity, the sockes. The Provincial answered: What
shall I do with so many books as I have, that are worth more then forty
crowns? which he said, because he desired to have license of S. Francis to
enjoy them, for he kept them with a remorse of conscience The S. replied,
Brother, I neither will, nor ought nor can do any thing against my conscience,
and the profession of the holy gospel which we have promised. Which this
Provincial understanding he was exceedingly troubled: and the S. perceauing
him so sorrowful, with a great fervor of spirit said unto him, as if he had
spoake^ to all the Religious: you would seem to me^ to be Friar Minors, and
would be called Preachers of the gospel, and make show to observe it: but in
effect, you desire to have propriety and superfluity, and to have a purse. The
Ministers earnestly seek to take away the first rule (you shall not carry
wallettes in your travail) they supposing that they should so be freed from
the obligation of this counsel of Evangelical perfection: but the holy
Father S. Francis in the presence of many brethren, said: the Ministers think
to deceive God and me, but the deceit falls on them selves. Let them and
all my other Religious know, that they are obliged to the observance of
Evangelical perfection: and will that it be thus written in the beginning and
end of the rule. That the Brethren are firmly obliged to the observance of
the holy gospel of our lord JESUS CHRIST.

Of the horrible malediction which S. Francis gave to a provincial, and
wherefore: and of the miracle that ensued.
THE XXIII. CHAPTER.
BRother John Estitia a very learned Minister of the Province of Bolognia,
ordained an exercise of study in the Monastery of Bolognia, without license of
the holy Father S. Francis, who understanding thereof, went incontinently
thither, and very sharply reprehended him by these words: I rather desire that
one obey the holy gospel, and be employed in the study of holy prayer, where
the holy Ghost is Master, then in humane studies, and curious lessons, wherein
is S. Fr. did not desire that his Religious should study. Therefore he cursed a
Provincial because he had established a study against his will.
lost the spirit of humility and the sweetness of God, the ladder whereof is
this Religion, which annihilateth this new study. But S. Francis being
departed, this Provincial began again as before, whereat the holy Father being
for the zeal of God much disquieted, he publikelie gave him his malediction as
to a disobedient child. By which the said Brother John fell incontinently very
sick, and lying in his bed, perceauing that his sickness did hourly increase,
seized and touched, rather with the fear he had of death, then with true
contrition: he sent, two Religious to pray S. Francis to revoke the said
malediction: to whom the S. answered: God has confirmed in heaven the
maledictio^ which I have given him, so that he is cursed of God. In that
instant, there fell from heaven a little stone of burning brimstone, which
transpearced both his body and bed, and at the very hour he died, yelding an
extreme infection: by this so severe chasticement God showed how just and
assured was, the counsel of the S. that they should not be curious of books,
but should rather study to ground themselves in holy humility, prayers, and
poverty.

The holy Father being once demanded if he would consent that the learned who
were and might enter into religion, should study divinity, he answered
affirmatiuelie, provided that they imitate the example of JESUS CHRST, who
prayed more then he read, as is How he would that his Religious should study.
written also of his disciples, and also that they omit not the study of
prayer to get learning: and that they study not only how they ought to
speak, but principally how they may effect what they read, and doing so may
teach others to do good worckes. I will that my Religious be disciples of the
gospel, and that so they make progress in the knowledge of the truth, and do
also increase in purity and simplicity, that from the prudence of the serpent
they do not separate the simplicity Matt. 10.
of the dove, which JESUS CHRIST with his mouth has united together. The holy
Father affirmed that by mean of the knowledge of ones self, one easily
obtayneth the knowledge of God, provided that one sought it with humility and
without presumption. Therefore he was much troubled when he knew that neglecting
virtue and the vocation whereto the Religious was called of God, one sought
knowledge by curiosity, with extreme dolor of his soul, saying: My Religious
that are honored by the curiosity of knowledge, are found empty handed, in
the times of tribulation. I would rather Very remarckeable sentences of S.
Franc.
exercise them in the virtue of humility, that the perilous times of
temptations happening, they might find God with them in those anguishes: for
afflictions will come, against which, neither their books nor pourchaced
science will avail, then would it be more expedient for them to be simple and
fervent in obedience, humility, and charity, then great in commanding and
teaching, in curiosity of science. He already foresaw that knowledge puffed
up with vanity in future time would give a great fall to the Order, because
curiosity of the said knowledge would induce many to great arrogance, which
would destroy obedience, humility, poverty, with all true Religion; bringing
in liberty and privileges: The said holy Father said: there shall be so
many that will labor to get knowledge, that he shall be happy who for the
love JESUS CHRIST shall shun the same. He appeared after his death to one of
his companions who was exceedingly busied in the study of preaching, and
reprehended him sharply, forbidding him that over great anxietie of spirirt
which he had toward study, and commanded him to study to walk the path of
holy humility and poverty.

How he discovered and prevented the deceit of the learned, and curious of his
Order.
THE XXIV. CHAPTER.
IT will succed (said S. Francis) to these curious of knowledge and learning,
that esteeming to be more edified and enflamed in devotion toward God, by
knowledge of him, if they use it not with great humility, they, by the same
science, and by the great study therein employed, will remain void of all
goodness, cold in charity, and puffed with vain glory, rejoicing in their
vanity, and obstinate in opinion: wherefore the holy Ghost being unable to dwell
in bodies subject to sin, he will be constrained utterly to forsake them.
Certain Religious therefore one day relating unto him that a great divine was
entered into their Religion at Paris, and that by his doctrine, he much edified
the people and clergy, and was a great honor to the Order: S. Francis
sighingly answered them, I much fear that his like will one day destroy,
whatsoever God by me his unworthy servant has planted in this vineyared, I
would have no greater Doctors in divinity, then they who teach their
neighbor, by worckes, meekenes, poverty, and humility, because the goodness of
a Religious is according to his obedience to the rule, and his doing what he
knows. Those preachers that trust only in their doctrine, when thy see
concourse of people, and that they are desirously heard, and some by their
preaching Exhortations for the preachi^g Friar Minors.
are converted to penance, thy are puffed with vain glory for the worckes of
an other, as if they were their own, and so preach salvation to others, but
damnation to themselves: therefore they glory of that whereof they have no more
cause then, a trumpett which sounds by the mouth of an other man that windeth
it: for what are they but trumpettes, whereby God sends his sound, be they
good or evil, so that the cause of the conversion of the hearers, ought not to
be attributed to them, but to the very force of holy doctrine, and to the
tears of the simple, though the same be not by them understood: these simple
ones are my knights of the round table, who hide them selves in deserts and
sequestered places the more commodiously to apply them to prayer and meditation,
lamenting theirs and others sins; therefore God alone knows the fruit they
produce, and how many souls by their merittes are saved, wherefore they shall
hear this his voice: Come thou faithful and prudent servant, because thou
have bin faithful unto me in few things, I will place there over many, enter
into the kingdom of eternal life: but they who have had no other cogitation
but to learn knowledge; and to demonstrate their doctrine unto others,
preaching without edifying by good worckes, shall be poor and empty of all good,
before the throne of the terrible judge, they shall have their vessels full of
shame and confusion, and they shall also hear God say unto them: you have
preached only by the words of your purchaced science, but I have saved souls,
by virtue of the merittes of my simple ones, you therefore shall remain with
the wind of pride which you have sought, and these shall receive the
recompense of the labor of their humility and prayer, which is ourvocation,
whereto these puffed ones shall have bin contrary, with the wind of their
knowledge persuading many to relinquish this truth, yea persecuting, as blinded
and frantike, such as walk by this truth, but the error and false opinion,
wherein in they have lived, which they have preached, and whereby they have
conducted many with the^ in the profound goulfe of ignorance, and spiritual
blindness, shall turn to their grief and confusion, and they shall be buried 1.
Cor. 1.
in darcknes, for it is written: I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, of
this world, and the prudence of the prudent I will reject. So the holy Father
as far forth as his power extended, for his office in this world, permitted
not any of his Religious to be called Master, though formerlie in the world he
had bin such, alleadgeing unto them the words of our lord IESEVS CHRIST, One
is your Masterin heaven, and therefore let none be called master on earth. He
affirmed of himself, that though Matt. 23.
he had bin very learned, he would never have endured to be called Doctor or
master because it was to do against JESUS CHRIST: so that he concluded that it
was much more profitable to a man to knowlitle, and be humble, then to perform
great matters with much knowledge, and presumption of himself.

How much S. Francis rejoiced at the good example which his order gave to the
church, and how much displeased, when his Religious procured or caused any
scandal.
THE XXV. CHAPTER.
THis glorious Father said, that the Friar Minors were sent of God in this
latrer age to be an example of light to them that were entangled in the
obscurities of sin. Therefore if he heard relation of any example of
edification, that the Religious gave to the holy Church, he with great fervor
would say. The house of God shall be filled with good and sweet savors, which
shall be produced by the precious oyntme^t of virtues. He exceedingly rejoiced
at the good reputation of his dear children and at the example of piety which
they gave, because by mean thereof they converted sinners, to the love and
service of JESUS CHRIST, a thing especially desired of him, and to such he gave
his holy benediction, And consequently because his Religious knew that their
holy Father would have them exercised in this virtue, and zeal of the
salvation of souls, they so much the more endeavored to give him satisfaction
therein. The humility of the first Friar Minors.
And if it happened that any one procured the least trouble to his neighbor,
he presently asked him pardon, with great humility and offered to do penance
for the same.

It chanced one time that an ancient Religious of the Order, in presence of a
gentleman, uttered some words in choler to one of his Brethren; but perceauing
that he had troubled his Brother and disedified Marckeable satisfaction.
the other, acknowledgeing his fault, and impatient against himself, he
incontinently took the dong of an ass, and putt it into his mouth: and forced
himself to chew it, saying, tongue eat this dong since thou have presumed to
arise against they neighbor and in his face to spett the venime of thy
choler. Which the said gentleman seeing, was exceedingly edified, and devoted
to the whole Order, presenting himself entierly to the service of it.

How much S. F. was troubled to hear that his Religious gave scandal.
The holy Father S. Francis was contrarily extremely afflicted when he
understood that any one had disedified his neighbor. To this purpose it being
related unto him that a bishop had reprehended one of his Religious, for having
seen him do something sauouring of hypocrisy, as to procure the growing of
his beard and other things unbeseeming a Friar Minor, he stood up right, and
joining his hands, he weeping said: Lord JESUS CHRIST, who having chosen
twelve Apostles, one of them proved a traitor and was therefore damned, and the
residue over all the world preached thy holy faith, by words and by pious and
virtuous worckes: and now in this latter hour being mindful of thy mercy,
it has pleased thee to plant the Religion of Friar Minors for help unto they
church, and for service of they holy faith and thy holy gospel, have care
thereof I beseech thee for thy piety: for if this Religion give scandale in
steed of good example, who shall satisfy thee for her? Thus urged by zeal of
the honor of God and the salvation of souls, stretching his arms a broad,
with great effusion of tears he vrtered these Terrible imprecation of S.
Franc. against the scandalous.
words: Good God and Father, I beseech thee le^t all the Religious, who by
their evil example and impious worckes shall destroy that which by mean of
thy true Friar Minors thou have edified, be accursed of thee, of thy celestial
court, and of me thy humble servant. Upon a day reprehending a Religious that
had given ill example, among other things he said this: Brother will you that
I let you know the displeasure which the Religious procure me that scandalize
others? the same that one should do, who having a rapiere in his hand should
often thrust me into the flanckes, and therewith I could not dye, so the noughty
Religious do augment in my soul greifes upon greifes, giving evil example
and doebucher my bowels: then he added: Ah my God! if one wounded could fly him
that threatens his death, would he not fly? and why then do not I fly into
the Mountains and deserts, to avoid the hearing of such and the like matters
of my Religious?

Of an answer which God gave to the holy Father S. Francis in prayer, being
exceedingly afflicted for some scandales committed.
THE XXVI. CHAPTER.
THe afflicted S. Francis knowing that certain Prouincialls of his Order gave
not good edification to the simple Religious, foreseeing that thereby many other
in short time might swerve from the observance of the rule, moved with great
grief which afflicted him for the zeal of the honor of God, often
reiterating these words: My God I recommend unto thee this family, which thou
have given me, he heard a voice that said: Why troublest thou thy self poor
man? Why do thou so much afflict thee? if some Religious walk not my way,
and give ill example, esteemest thou that I have so chosen thee for Pastor of
this Religion, as that I continue not the principal Pastor thereof? Who has
planted this Religion of Freere Minors? who co^uerteth men to penance? who
gives them force and virtue to persevere in it? Tell me do not I all this? yea
I have chosen thee expressly without learning or eloquence, yea simple: that
performing what lies in thee, thou committ the rest to me, and that this new
conversion of so great part of the world be not attributed to thy doctrine, nor
to any humane industry: but to my grace alone. Now to the end thatt thou and
all the world know, that I will watch over my flock; I have placed thee there,
as a blanck and pattern to all the Religious, that by what thou shall do,
they* may see whereunto they are obliged, and I will preserve and maintain
them: And if it happen that some do fall, others shall rise. They that walk
in my way, are mine and shall return to me, they that walk not in it, shall
loose the little good which they seem to have. Therefore I command thee not so
much to vex they self henceforward, but only persevere in thy course, and
know that I have planted and conserve this Religion which I so much affect,
that if one of the Brethren return to his vomitt, I will refer his crown
to an other in his place, and if he be not borne, I will cause him to be borne.
And that thou may know how much I love the Religion of thy Freres, though in
the Order there remain but three, I will not abandon them, but those three
shall be my Religion. The poor Father was comforted with these words, and so
supported all with more patience. In the Chapters he would often use these
words to his Religious: I have made vow and profession of the rule of Friar
Minors, and all the Brethren are in like sort obliged thereunto. I have left the
office of Governor of the Religious, by reason of mine infirmities, and
withal because it was permitted by his divine majesty for the good of my
soul; I know the greatest furtherance that I can give to my Religion, is
continually to pray for it, and to beseech God to govern it. I am not obliged
to any other thing then to give to each one good example. And if any perish by
my evil example, The answer of S. Franc. to his Religious that desired to
have general auctority to preach
I will be obliged to yield account for him unto God: Therefore they that hold the
same rule with me, and know very well if they will, what they ought to do,
(for they see it practiced both by me and others) if they do not their duty
they worck their own damnation: God will chastise them, I shall not be obliged
for them in that respect; wherein I refer my self to God.

Certain Religious one time said to S. Francis with a good zeal thincking
thereby to meritt much: Father, do not you know that Prelalates sometimes
refuse to give us leave to preach, by reason whereof we spend much time idlye:
we therefore think it convenient that you shall do great service to God and
much good to souls, if you procure general license of the Pope to preach
freely with privilege. The holy Father exceedingly reprehended them,
foreseeing the sca^dall that thereby might easily arrive between the Clergy
and his Order, and said unto the^: you Friar Minors, will not know the will of
God, nor will permit me to convert the world, in such sort as God will I
should convert it. Therefore I tell you, you ought to obtain this license of
the Prelates themselves with your humility and the good example of your life,
which co^tinuyng in you, the Prelates will pray you to preach in their
diocesses and churches and to convert their people to penance. After this
manner they will more willingly call you to preach the^ your privileges will
do, which will only puff you up in pride: and if you believe mine advise, you
shall endeavor to keep you from pride, from the vices of avarice, of envy and
vain desires so detrimentall to your souls (and by your example) to your
neighbors also: you shall in your sermons exhort the people to pay their
tithes to the Preistes, of whom so* doing you shall be entreated to preach and
hear their confessions, though you should not so much respect that, as to
convert them: for a man converted will soon find a confessor, as for me, I
demand no other privilege of God, but to love and reverence each one, and to
convert the most sinners that I can, by obedience to God and his holy church,
and the same more by humility and example of the observance of our rule, then
by words.

Of the afflictions incident unto the Order, revealed unto the holy Father S,
Francis.
THE XXVII. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father S. Francis being one time in prayer at our Lady of Angels,
most instantly praying his divine majesty that he would please to show mercy
to the Christian people, on whom, he had revealed unto him that he would lay a
great scourge: God answered him: Francis if thou will that I have compassion
of my people, procure dilligentlie that thy Order persevere in such sort as it
is instituted, that therein may be found such as may worthelie make intercession
for them: and in favor of thy Order and of thee, I promise thee, not to let
fall on my church that great affliction which aymeth at it and threateneth it.
But I will have thee know that if thy Order do preuaricate, the first
punishments which I shall inflict on my church shall be on the preachers thereof,
and will give to the devil what authority over them he will. Thence will grow
so many scandales between them and the world, that none will adventure to
take the habitt, but in the deserts where I will preserve this few number of
elect, as I preserved the children of Israel so many years: and so the good
being conserved in my grace, the Order shall afterward be reduced to his
pristine estate. Hereupon Prophesies (...) Francis.
did S. Francis prophecy; that a very violent temptation should be raised in
his Religion by pourchaced science, wherewith in manner of a furious wind from
the region of the desert, as the affliction of Job furiously striking the four
corners of the house of his Religion, his own children would bring it to
ruin: because, said he, being puffed up by their learning and relying thereon,
they well lay ambushes and cast snares for the true and lawful children,
framed by that huge damned woman called pride, to whom they will sacrifice
their child birthes, that is, their worckes: and will live in the delights of
the profitt of them, and of the recompense of their impudency and arrogancy.
Now the authority of such Religious will be extremely bitter and insupportable
to the just, that shall be persecuted by them: because their simplicity,
obedience, poverty and zeal of the honor of God, shall in a manner
inexplicable, secretly confound them. Wherefore they by reason of their pride
being unable to endure it, relying on the wisdom and reputation of their
valor, and the authority of the nobility and Princes of the world, pourchaced
by mean of ambition, will persecute them to death There is also found a
prophecy of the holy Father S. Francis, written by the hand of Brother Leo, of
the great schism and division that was in the Church after the election of
Pope Urban the sixth, the year 1378. that continued near 40. years, the
tenor whereof was thus.

A time will come when the holy Church shall be full of schisms, which will put
men in extreme perplexity, as well in the spiritual, as temporal estate, and
the devil shall have many followers and shall be more dilligente then ordinary,
to take advantage by this occasion to augment his kingdom: then shall the
beauty of this Order be defiled with that of others, and profane apostasy
shall be accomplished, to the dissension of two Realms, when few shall obey the
holy Church with a true charity, and he that shall not be canonicallie
elected to the Papacy, yea suspected of heresy, shall be obeyed: because
many shall be subtillie perverted by him, by his contagious errors, then shall
scandales multiply, and Christianity be divided, many refusing to contradict
the same, the scismes and divisions of the Clergy, of Religious and of the
people shall be so violent, that if those days were not abbreuiated by God, the
elect if it were possible would fall into the same errors, if God of his
mercy should not deliver them. S. Francis in regard of this revelation
particulerlie put into his rule the vow of obedience unto the Pope, unto his
successors canonicallie elected, and to the holy Roman church, in the
beginning and end of the same rule, knowing how much it would profitt his
order, in that so turbulent time to persevere firm: therefore he gave this
instruction to his, that foreseeing the same, they might know to govern
themselves well therein.

Of the liberty wherinto the Order should fall, prophesied by S. Francis.
THE XXVIII. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father S. Francis being one day in presence of the Cardinal Vgolino
Protector of the Order, and of many other of his Religious, he uttered these
words, which he afterward also preached to the Brethren: a time will come,
when the Religious of my Order by the malice of the devil, shallleaue the way
of holy simplicity and poverty, indifferently receiving all sort of money,
and all such legacies as by testament shall be bequeathed them; and leaving
solitary and humble places, will build fair and sumptuous houses in cittyes
and towns, capable to entertayne Princes and Emperors: then by favor they
will procure obtain privileges of the Popes through art and humane prudence,
and by their earnest importunity they will obtain requests merely iniust,
though cloaked with truth, by this mean they will not only abandon their rule
instituted by JESUS CHRIST, against their solemn profession: but will also
ruin and alter the purity thereof, changing the good intention into perverse,
and being armed by mean of the said privileges, against obedience, against
other Religious, and against all the Clergy, when they shall expect to get
the victory, the wretches shall ^inde themselves fallen into the trench which
themselves shall have made, gathering no other fruit of their seminary, but
scandales which they shall offer to God in steed of the salvation of souls:
who seeing the same shall be no more thenceforward their Pastor, but their
ruiner according to their meritt: And therefore he will leave them entangled in
the nets of avarice and their vain desires. Which being naturalie considered
of many, shall cause that acknowledgeing this punishment of the hand of God,
they repent their faults, and return to their former estate, notwithstanding
that they be persecuted and derided of others, as are all the virtuous and true
servants of God by the wicked and impious. But as the same temptations shall
accomplish the ruin of these, so the temptations of the wicked and the
afflictions of the perfidious, which the elect shall support patiently for the
love of JESUS CHRIST shall be to them so many crowns of glory.

Of a merueillous statua that appeared to S. Francis and the exposition thereof.
THE XXIX. CHAPTER.
Dan. 3.
THis glorious Father being one time in prayer at S. Marie of Angels, there
appeared before his eyes a statua of merueillous greatness and beauty,
resembling that of Nabuchodonoser, as the holy scripture describes* for it had
the head of gold, with a most beautiful face, the breaste and arms of silver,
the belly and thyghes Predictio^ made to S. Fr. of the four first times or
estates of his Order.
of metal, the legs of iron, and the feet partly of iron, and partly of
earth and clay; it was covered with a cloak made of course and gross
sackcloth, whereof it seemed to be ashamed and exceedingly disquieted; which
did much amaze the saint; but the Angel that represented this vision thus spoke
unto him: Francis, whereat art thou amazed? know that God has sent thee this
vision full of mystery: that seeing it, thou may know the mutation which
will be in thy Religion in future time: and therefore hearcken: the head of gold
which thou see so fair, signifies The first estate compared to a head of
Gold.
the beginning of thy Religion builded in the constancy of Evangelical
perfection. Therefore as gold is of greater value then any other metal, and
the situation of the head is much more eminent in the body then any other
member, so the beginning of thy Order, is more precious, in regard of
fraternall, and golden charity and Angelical virtue: and is of such beauty and
nobility, for the observance of Evangelical poverty, that it shall fill all
the world with admiration. And the queen of Saba, that is the holy church with
all her faithful shall admire it and feel in their hearts an incomprehensible
joy, beholding so beautiful a mirour of sanctity and spiritual wisdom, and
all the first, builded on this first rock, shall be glorified by his divine
majesty. Because they shall endeavor to imitate JESUS CHRIST and The second to
the breast and arms of silver.
his holy virtues. The breast and arms of silver represent the second estate of
thine Order: so much inferior to the first as silver is more base then gold:
But as silver is of value in regard of the fair color and worthy sound: so
this second estate of the Order shall have many Religious Gentlemen of descent,
famous for learning, and renowned for their preachinges, who shall be so honored
in the Church, that many of them shall get the chiefest dignities therein, as
Abbeys, Bishopprickes, Cardinalships, yea even the Papacy: and because the
force of a man consists principally in the arms and breast, God will then
fournish thine Order, with men of such valor, and of sogood conscience, as
shall defend it from the potent ennemies that shall then persecute it, they
shall likewise help to support the holy church, against the impetuous fury of
heretics and schismatikes that the^ shall take arms against it. After this,
shall come the third estate figured by the belly of brass, which is without
comparison more base then the second. But as the greatest quantity of monny is
made of this metal: so in that time the number of such as shall esteem their
belly their God, shall be exceeding The third the belly of metal.
great. But in their greatest glory, they shall be yet confounded: for they shall
only know the things appertayning to the earth. And though they be followed of
many for their learning and eloquence, which they shall display in the pulpitt,
for which they shall be extolled of many people that consider only the exterior
barcke, nevertheless spiritual men shall little esteem thereof: for they shall
perceive them to affect sensuality, not the honor of God and the salvation of
souls. Alas, they shall be reputed of God in the same degree, as the Apostle S.
Paul mentions: that preachers without charity are like to metal or belles
that have good sound, but it nothing profits them: for according as they
shall preach holy and spiritual words, they shall bring forth spiritual
children, and shall manifest to others the fountain of life, but themselves
shall remain withered in the desert land. The fourth estate shall be sterill and
terrible. The fourth in the legs of iron.
signified by the legs of iron, for as iron does mollify brass, silver, and
gold, so this estate shall be of such malice and obstinacy, in his own opinion,
that by negligence and unaccustomed conditions, they shall forgett the good
which they had built, that is the golden charity of the first founders of the
Order, the silver verity of the second, and the preaching and voice of the
third in the church of God. And therefore as the feet support all the body, so
they by the force of iron, and by a terrestrial hypocrisy, shall sustain the
body of the Order, and shall cover themselves in their course cloak, and
endeavor to make the world believe in exterior appearance, that they yet live
in their former poverty and humility. These interiourlie shall be ravening
woulfes and to God known for such, though to men concealed, be it that they
endure afflictions by diverse tribulations as iron in the fire, Sap. 6.
not only by the hammers of the devils, but even by Princes of the world: for
as the scripture says: the great for their malices shall also support great
torments: they nevertheless shall be so hard and strong, that as the iron
resists all other metals, so shall they resist all, as well Prelates as
seculer princes, with a will to overcome all, and subdue every thing by their
hardness compared to iron: therefore shall they be in disgrace with God, as
hard-necked men. But as his feet are not of pure iron, but of clay also, that
signifies hypocrisy, they shall employ themselves in affairs and negotiations
of the world, to please and intrude themselves into the favor of seculer
persons: notwithstanding because of the great contrariety that is between
baked clay, and iron, in such sort as it is impossible to unite them together,
there will arise such a contrariety among the Religious of that latter time,
that at length having little resisted and their forces being weakened, they
shall begin to use the art of hypocrisy, being impossible to join true pride
with feigned piety, at least any long time, they being at length discovered
to be misprisers of the discipline of the Order, and consequently of the
gospel of JESUS CHRIST, first they shall be divided one from an other, as baked
clay is separated from iron, though they seem to be united together: and
therefore hatreds, dissentions, partialities and tyrannies shall begin to reign
among them, and afterward the world perceauing such impieties and wickedness,
they shall be examined and chasticed even by the seculers, and this shall befall
them because they shall be loosed from their head of the first charity. And
therefore they shall be happy, who shall be mindful of the commandments of God
and of their Order: for they shall be refined as gold in the fire, and though
they be not known in the world, they shall nevertheless be much esteemed of
God, for he will never abandon this Religion so that there shall always
remain some competent number of virtuous: though in comparison of so many lewd
and libertines, they shall appear very few: and this few shall be persecuted
of the world, which shall procure them a greater crown with God Now the
sackcloth and cloak so course, whereof I seem to be ashamed, and disquieted,
is holy poverty, which as it is the ornament of this Order, and the singular
foundation of all piety, so the bastard children shall be ashamed thereof, for
their aim shall not be to God, but to the world, and therefore, endeavoring to
please it, they shall misprise the habitt of God, and seek fair and fine
cloth, for the use whereof they shall importune the world, and shall pourchace
it by way of simonie; and therefore happy shall they be that persevere to the
end in observance of their holy vows: After these speeches it disappeared, and
the holy Father S. Francis, remained full of admiration and tears, with all
his heart recommending unto God his sheep, both present and to come.

God revealed these things and many other to his servant Francis, as head and
Pastor of his Friar Minors, concerning the change of his Religion, which
being founded in Evangelical perfection, exceeding difficult to be observed
according to the world, it is not to be admired, if it be fallen, and do
decline from its perfection; We all being naturally inclined and affected to
worldly things, and to shun alll severity and rigor, and all necessity,
and much more freindes to our own will, then to the will of God, which
according to our sottish prudence, causes us to make no esteem of the
commandments of God, and to forke his most strict way, though most
necessary to our salvation, as in deed it is: and therefore degenerating more
and more we fall from our first Fathers. On the other side also it is not to be
admired if some of these so frail vessels composed of earth as we are, have
demonstrated such an invincible constancy, in so strict an obligation to
observe the gospel; and in themselves to preserve such a treasure; because all
that is the worck of God, to the end the world may know that the eminency and
glory of this Religion, proceeds of the virtue and power of his divine
majesty, and not of humane force and virtue: And therefore when to him seems
time convenient, he sends reformations to support the same.

Of the compassion and discreet charity of S. Francis to wards all his
Religious, but particulerly to wards the sick.
THE XXX. CHAPTER.
BEcause the obligation of a Prelate toward his sheep, does not only extend
to give them advise and spiritual refections, but also to releive them in
their corporal necessities, the holy Father S. Francis was replenished with
an infinite charity, and had a continual care to provide for the corporal
wantes of his beloved children, and particulerlie where sickness and necessity
were joined together, which charity he exercised, not only of Fatherly
duty, but of natural compassion, which he ever had toward the afflicted:
which virtue he afterward redoubled to make it more meritorious: so that he
referred all the afflictions of his neigbour, to the person of JESUS CHRIST,
for whose love they ought to be assited, and therefore, his heart melted, as if
he had seen his God in them: for which cause, those new and fervent warriers of
JESUS CHRIST in the beginning of the Order, did so specially exceed in leading
severe lives, and doing worckes worthy of penance, which may appear by the
ensuying example, together with the charity of the Saint.

As the Religious were one day a sleep, one of them began with a loud voice to
cry: I dye: at which lamentation S. Francis instantly arose, and caused all
the other Brethren to arise, and to light a candell, then asking who was he
that complained, the Religious answered him: S. Franc. did once eat in the
night with all his Religious to accompany a Brother that hunger oppressed to
death.
Father it is I, that dye with hunger: which hearing he presently caused to be
brought him to eat: and that he should not be ashamed, he caused a table to be
prepared, whereon he meant to eat himself; which he caused all the other
Religious to do though it were a very extraordinary hour. The Religious
having taken his Refection, the holy Father, to teach his children the virtue
of discretion, whereby they should moderate the fervor of the spirit, for
conservation of the corporal forces in abstinence, he said. Brethren, learn
and retain in you this advertisement; that each one carefully conserve his
natural complexion and forces, and let him use moderation in abstinence,
according unto them: for albeit some can sustain themselves with little food,
it is not therefore reasonable that others who cannot live with so little, should
keep the same abstinence: for as we are obliged to forbear superfluous eating,
for not damning our soul and consuming our body: so ought we to shun
indiscreet abstinence, but must so use it as the body may serve the soul: for
God loves mercy above sacrifice, and let every one remember what by charity
I have done, I have only done* it as a pious work, and for an example of
charity, his extreme necessity requiring it. And therefore let each one
refrain to cause the like an other time, and especially Prelates toward
their Religious. Which was exceeding carefully observed of the S. for though he
were very glad that poverty in all things, should appear in them, yet would
he never that his Religious should be frustrate of their due releife, and
therefore when he saw they had not sufficient to eat, himself would go to
beg, as we have heretofore made appear.

For his own respect, notwithstanding his very feeble complexion, he was ever
very strict and abstinent, yea beyond reason, even from the beginning of his
conversion to his death. Yet he is not therefore to be reprehended, considering
that one ought not to measure or limitt the life of the great servants of God,
who are continually directed in their actions by the holy Ghost, but we must
permit to worck in them, the spirit and certain excesses that are to be
seen: it is sufficient for us to our confusion to admire them, and thereof to
imitate what one can, for it was expedient, that, as many were defective,
performing less then their duty, God should raise others that in their bodies
should supply both for themselves and their neighbor: and to the end that the
holy Father might give this good example of himself, whereas in his sicknesses
many things extraordinary were necessary for him, he would rather deprive
himself thereof, to give example to others^ and when there were any Religious
sick, he was not ashamed to go into the villages to seek flesh, and their
other wantes, which in their health he would not have permitted them to use for
any thing in the world. He did also seriously admonish them to remember that
they must be Friar Minors, not only in their health, but even in their
sickness, and that therefore they should not have an insatiable spirit, nor
admit all the commodities that the delicate of the world enjoy, for so there
would be no difference, nor should they meritt before God, for whose love they
ought to be content to endure some inconveniences, yea even in their
sicknesses. Now though this holy Pastor did zealously utter these words: yet
such was his charity that seeing them sick he could not but releive them, and
seek to supply their necessities, and cherish them to his power, as by this
example may appear. One of the most ancient Religious of the Order being
sick, the S. moved with compassion to see him so afflicted, said to himself;
if this Religious had eat grapes, he would be better: then calling the
Religious, he conducted him into a vineyard, near unto the Covent: whither
being come, that the Religious might not be ashamed, he began first to eat
grapes, then gave to him, and made him sit down, and so entertained him that
he arose as sound as he had ever bin, the virtue of God worcking by the
charity of his servant: which the said Religious diverse times with tears
recounted to his brethren.

How the holy Father S. Francis did eat with S. Clare, and how both were rapt
into ecstasy. This is taken out of the 4. chapter of the 10. book, and hither
tranfferred to his proper place.
Saint Francis being at our Lady of Angels, was infinite times importuned by
his first spiritual daughter S. Clare, to take his refection once with her.
Yet though she were of sanctity sufficiently known to all people, he would
never consent thereto: at lenght the glorious saint fearing that when she
least thought thereof, God might call unto him the holy Father, such being the
infirmities whereunto he was subject, so that she should never enjoy that
consolation in all her life, she so much solicited all Religious that were most
ancient and best beloved of the S. to obtain so honest a request in her
behalf, that they together so affectionately entreated him, as that in the end
he consented thereunto: But to avoid scandal and ill example to his Religious,
and that they should not thereby challenge a consequence of goeing to eat at
the monasteries of Religious women, he caused S. Clare to come with some of her
Religious, to our Lady of Angels, where he had consecrated her unto God, and he
very courteously entertained her with all her Religious, then having with her
made a long prayer unto the Virgin Mary, and having devoutly visited the
altares, he made preparation according to his custom upon the ground, and at
the ordinary hour, they sat down, where for the first course, he began so
highly to discourse of God, that himself, S. Clare, and all the Religious were
so rapt in ecstasy, that they were no longer of this world: but having their
eyes lifted up, they were as it were out of themselves.

At that instant it seemed to the Burgesses of the city of Assisium, that
they saw the house of our Lady of Angels, with althe circuit, and the very
Mountains to burn: they seemed also to see an exceeding great fire over the
monastery much more violent then the rest: wherefore they all ran hastily to
quench it. But being come to the church, they found neither fire nor flame, but
that of the holy Ghost, which they considered and very well perceived, in the
countenances and aspectes of those whom they found yet fitting and swallowed
up in God, with S. Clare, and all her companions: from whence awaking, and all
finally finding the grace of God, they did eat and use little other thing,
being already satisfied and filled with that celestial food. So every one
departed, giving thanckes to God, who always offers and presents himself
to them that in charity unite themselves unto him. Saint Clare returned to
her monastery of S. Damian, where here Religious received her with much
consolation, because they feared that S. Francis would have sent her to found
some monastery other where, as he had done her Sister Agnes, whom he had sent
to Florence.

The 31. and 32. chapters are formerlie inserted, after the last chap. of the
first book, so to observe the true Order of the life of S. Francis.
How S. Francis knew that it was the will of God he should help to save souls
by his preaching, and not only by prayer: and how he instituted the Order of
Penitents, called the third Order.
THE XXXIII. CHAPTER.
THe true servant of God, desiryng to serve his master entierlie in such
things as should be most grateful to his divine majesty, in fidelity and
perfection of life, without respect to any kind of consolation temporal, or
spiritual: there arose a doubt in his spirit, whereof he diverse times
conferred with his Brethren in this manner: My brethren I beseech you by the
charity which lives and is amongst you, to tell me, what I ought to do, and
whither of these two exercises you esteem more to the service of God: either
that I apply my self entierlie to prayer, or that I also labor in preaching,
so to instruct the ignorant the way of God: I am of little and simple stature,
as you see, and cannot teach with words full of doctrine: and withal, having
on the other side received a greater grace of God to pray, then to speak, I
would more willingly apply me to continual prayer: besides that, I know by
experience, that there is a great gain, and a certain augmentation of grace
in prayer, whereas to preach is to impart and communicate to others, those little
gifts which one receaueth of God; prayer is a luster of good desires and of
the pious affections of the soul, and a collection of celestial virtues,
united to the true and supreme good: but preaching is to bedust the spiritual
feet: that is, the amourous affections of the heart toward God, which serve as
feet and foundation to all the spiritual edifice, a man by it detourning
himself from severity of life, and rigor of discipline. In prayer we speak
unto God, and harcken unto him when he speaks to us, and leading a life in
manner Angelical, we more converse in heaven with the Angels, then here on
earth with men: whereas preaching, we must always converse with men, and live
among them, to convert them, to tell them the truth, and to hear many worldly
things of them: Nevertheless there is one thing in preaching very contrary to
all these* which makes much in behalf thereof, and is worthy of great
consideration, discovering unto us that God makes esteem thereof, which is,
that his only Son, who is sovereign goodness, the only model of divine
wisdom, descended from the bosom of his eternal Father, to enstruct the
world, to teach by his holy example, and to preach unto men, the word of
salvation, whereby he afterward saved the predestinate souls, washing them
with his precious blood, reviving them by his death, and maintayning them by
his most sacred body, in the holy sacrament of the Eucharist, not reserving any
thing to himself which he did not graciously give unto us to further our
salvation; In that respect we are obliged by his example to do whatsoever we
thinck may be pleasing unto him, to leave all our affections, and for a time
omitting prayer, to apply us to preaching. Further, to tell you the truth* on
the one side mine own will allureth me to repose: on the other, I remember
when I returned from Rome, wtih the confirmation of the rule, God revealed
unto me that his intention was I should remain, not in deserts, but in the
world to assist the redemption of many souls from the swallow of the devil.
In regard of all these considerations, I crave your counsel: because God
would never reveal it unto me, for I every day with very great instance
demand the same of him.

All the Religious answered, that they were not capable to counsel and
satisfy him therein: then calling Brother Macie* he said: Go to thy Sister
Clare, and in my behalf will her with all her sisters, to pray unto God, that
he will please to teach me to perform his service in this point: and having
done this message, go to Mount Subasio, to Brother Siluester, who by the holy
Ghost is made worthy of divine discourse, and who by his merittes obtayneth of
God what grace he pleases; to him deliver from me the same message. Brother
Macie having accomplished his commission, and retourning, S. Francis received
him with very great charity, for he washed his feet, and made him eat, then
conducted him to the top of a mouutaine, where kneeling down, with his head
bare, and arms crossed, he said to Brother Macie: What pleases my Lord JESUS
CHRIST that I do: who answered that Brother Siluester settling himself to
prayer, as soon as he had spoaken, he had revelation from God, that he had not
called him, to this vocation, for his proper and particular benefitt: but that
by mean of his preaching, many lost souls might be converted to penance and
told him withal that the same had bin revealed to S. Clare. God would have
this matter thus to proceed, that every one might by diverse testimonies know,
wherefore his divine Majesty had sent this his servant into the world. The S. of
God standing upon his feet, having heard this answer which he desired to
hear on his knees, as a resolution from the almighty, replenished with the
holy Ghost; and enflamed in the love of JESUS CHRIST, he answered Brother
Macie, let us then go Brother in the name of God, and so transported by the
holy Ghost, he that very hour put himself in journey, having called Brother
Angelus for a third companion: he knew not whither he went, but committed
himself to the conduct of the holy Ghost, and so he arrived at a town called
Carnerio, two leagues from Assisium where he preached to the people, with so
great a fervor, and general edification, that as well the men as women,
having heard him so piously to discourse of the contempt of the world, and
seeing that God spoke by him, they were so moved, that almost all of them would
have abandonned their own houses and followed him to effect his holy
counsels: but that the S. inspired of God, willed them not to stir: but
that they The first occasion and original of the penitents of the third Order
of S. Franc.
should live uprightly in the fear of his divine Majesty, observing his holy
commandementes; and should educate and train up their children and family
christianlike, always hoping in God, and shunning sin as their greatest
ennemy, and told them he would not fail to enstruct the^ the way to find
pardon at Gods hands: But all these words were vain for these people having
no further power to resist the holy Ghost that boiled in their heart, would not
yield to him nor be satisfied, till he had received them al for Brothers and
sisters of his order: and so by divine inspiration the glorious Father S.
Francis instituted the third order of penitentes, which is for persons of all
qualities, virgins, married people, widows of both sex, whereof we shall
particulerly treat hereafter in the ninth book of the second part.

Of the first Chapter of the third Order, and of the revelation made by one
possessed, unto S. Francis; This was the eight chapter, of the ninth book, and
here placed as a matter particulerly appartayning to saint Francis.
THe year 1222. there was among others a man of this Order called Bartholameo,
a Procuratour, who having heard a sermon of S. Francis, was converted to God,
and gave over the processes of the world, and being clothed in the habitt of
the third Order, he endeauored by a continual spiritual labor to produce
fruits worthy of penance, so that he attained to such a sanctity of life, and
familiarity with the holy Father S. Francis, that he authorized him in his
place for ever to admit men and women into the third Order. It happened that
this m^ had accidentally a possessed person in his house, that did never rest
babbling, nevertheless at the coming of S. Francis he became mute and so
continued for three days, the time of S. Francis his abode there: Which the
master, of the house found very strange: yet not to molest the holy Father, to
whom he carried a singular reverence, he forbear to discover any thing unto
him: the holy Father being departed, and the possessed beginning again to
talk, the said Bartholomeo asked him in the name of God, why he had bin so
mute, whereto the possessed resisting, and the coniurations augmented, at
lenght he said: know that till that Religious was departed, I was so bound of
God, that I could never utter one word. This man of God replied: has then that
Religious so great virtue as for three days to make thee mute? the possessed
answered: it is not long since that our Prince being with all his troop
assembled, gave us to understand, that God had never abandonned the world, but
that he sent it some of his servants, as Noe, Abraham, Moses, and at lenght
his Son himself; and since that time, An attempt and assembly of devils
against the Order of Friar Minors.
the charity of Christians being was so cold, that the benefitt of the passion
of his Son, was as it were utterly bannished all memory and consideration,
wherefore he (our Prince) much admrred that God did so long foabeare to give it
succoure, but when he saw this Religious to issue forth with such a sublimity
of contempt of the world, and with such a resignation of himself unto God, yea
to renew the life of JESUS CHRIST on earth, drawing after him such a multitude
of the world, and particulerlie of perfect men, he manifestly knew that this
was the man whom he feared to come: he therefore excited us all to persecute
him, and to that purpose, it is not long since that many thousands of us were
assembled in an oratorie, where we found means to ruinate his Order: for we
will induce therinto the familiarity of women against chastity, and the
admission of young men withour spirit, against poverty, magnificent and
sumptuous buildinges, proud Prelates, that shall have no power to co^taine
themselves within the bo^des of humility, against obedience diversity of
opinions, and other things which now I will not discover: let it suffice thee
that we will labor so much as to get the upper hand, and this Order, which
thou see so eminent, shall come to such ruin, and be so contemptible to men
as is admirable. Albeit in that time there shall arise an other Religious of
the same Order of no less virtue then this Francis. He shall attain to that
sanctity, that the third part of men shall be by his example and predication
converted to penance: we have now resolved with all our possibility to oppugn
and assault this order; and to that end there are lately sent eight thousand of
my companions, to a Monastery where there are but seven Brethren, to tempt
them. This was two years before S. Francis received the stigmates. And though
it be not received for a truth, because it was spoaken by a devil; nevertheless
that which is since arrived causes a belief that God forced him to utter it:
this not being the first time that God has manifested his secrettes unto the
world by the mouth of devils, as in the time of our lord JESUS CHRIST, when he
constrained them to confess that he was his true Son.

How S. Francis departing from Carnerio, preached to diverse birds.
THE XXXIV. CHAPTER.
Saint Bonauenture and S. Antony do recount, that S. Francis being departed
out of the said Carnerio, before he came to Benammo, he saw on a tree a great
number of birds of diverse kinds, and hard by them an other squadron, a matter
indeed deserving consideration, in regard that it seemed to signify I know not
what extraordinary thing, as it happened. For the S. inspired of God, causing
his companions to stay behind, went to preach to the said birds, and coming
near to the tree, saluted them in these words: The peace of God be with you:
and they showing signs of joy, approached all to this predication: those that
were on the tree descended to the ground, and rancked themselves with the
other, and keeping a quiet silence, they seemed to expect when the holy Father
would begin: Wherefore he thus discoursed unto them: My Brother Birds, ye are
exceedingly obliged always to praise God your Creator, for he has given you
wings, wherewith you lightly fly in the air and whither you will, a favor
that he has not given to so many other Creatures. He has also adorned and
clothed you with feathers, and they of diverse delectable and beautiful
colors: he has created your bodies light, and supporteth you without any
pain of yours, permitting you to enioie the labors of men. He has also given
you a quality of singing very delightful: then he conserueth and has
conserved you from the beginning of the world: he miraculouslie co^serued you
from the deluge, sending couples of every kind into the arck of Noe, there to
be preserved: he has given you Matt. 6.
for habitation one of the four elements: therefore does holy scripture
ordinarily call you the birds of heaven, besides that you possess the
mountains and hills, the vallyes and plains at your pleasure, the
fountains, rivers, trees, and houses for nestes: it has pleased God himself
by his sacred mouth to testify unto the world, that you neither spinning, nor
in any sort laboring, he has care to cloth you, both summer and winter, and
to give you althinges necessary to your conservation. All which benefittes, are
pregnant signs of the love which God bears you as his creatures. And
therefore my Brothers and sisters, blessed of God, beware that you be not
ungrateful unto his divine Majesty; but praise him always devoutly, with
your sweet accentes, since he has given wherwithall.

The Saint having ended his sermon, all these birds (which is admirable)
began to open their bills and beat their wings, as if they would have said,
we thank you, but being unable verbally, bowing their heads they manifested
unto him, their due reverence, and that they expected his benediction to praise
God, and so to depart. The holy Father was much comforted in beholding those
gestures, perceauing these creatures to be so obedient unto their Creator; and
therefore for their farewell he gave them his benediction, which having
received; they with one accord mounted into the air, filling it with most
pleasing accentes, then did they divide and separate themselves in the air
into four bands, conformable to the benediction which the holy Father had
given them in form of a cross. S. Francis returned to his companions, who
were as beside themselves seeing such strange meruailes in unreasonable
creatures, he asking them pardon in great humility, for having made them
attend, whiles he preached to those birds, whom he found so prepared to hear
the word of God. He thenceforward preached, to all creatures, exhorting them
to praise their Creator, that all the world might yield honor, glory and
praise to God.

A short advertisement, for the better understanding of this miracle, and some
other the like, contained in this Cronicle of S. Francis: added for the better
understanding of the simple.
The glorious Father S. Francis was not ignorant, that dumb creatures, were
not capable of his sermon, and therefore preached not unto them to instruct
them, but to stir up him self the more to admire the goodness of God. And God
(no dout) to comfort his devout sernant, made the very unreasonable creatures
by a secret instinct, to reverence the Saint, whilst he preached unto them, or
rather, whilst he preached to him self in them, and by them: the holy
Scripture being full of such sermons, and namely the four last psalms of the
prophet David, and the Canticle of the three children in the furnace of
Babylon, which what else are they but such sermons as Saint Fr. made unto
these creatures to adore their Creator?

Of the virtue and efficacy of the holy Father S. Francis his preaching, and
of certain miracles wrought thereby.
THE XXXV. CHAPTER.
THrough whatsoever towns and villages he travailed, he preached with such
fervor and spirit, and with such efficacy that there was no heart so obdurate
but was moved to penance. Besides that which is spoaken of the town of
Carnerio, it many times arrived, that there followed him more then thirty or
five and thirty men converted to penance by his discourses, who did not only
abandon vanities, as the custom is for ten or twelve days, but did utterly
and entierly forsake the world, following God in his Evangelical poverty. He
admirablie confounded the blindenes of heretics, and exalted the faith of the
Roman Church, which he performed by the mean of the science which the holy
Ghost had infused into him, and of the merueillous miracles which God wrought
by him, who was also present and favorable unto him in all his actions. He
expelled devils out of the humane bodies which they possessed, and cured all
diseases. Wherefore men and women, poor and rich, gentlemen and yeomen,
Ecclesiastical and seculers, from all parts repaired to hear and see him
discourse, as a man descended from heaven: many of his hearers, without any
return to their houses remained with him to do penance. His word was as a
fire that penetrated the interior of hearts, leaving him that felt it contrite
and penitent, for he preached not with an eloquence and humane science, but by
the holy Ghost and by divine revelation. Therefore preaching always according
to what JESUS CHRIST inspired him, he uttered nothing but the same verity, with
great zeal and without any fear or respect. He could not dissemble among the
great, nor much less flatter them: but he reprehended their vices, and if they
were guilty of public sins he corrected them with severe demonstrations,
exciting them to penance, he preached the word of God with like attention to
the meaner sort as to great persons, he as carefully instructed a small
number e
as a great, for which cause he was indiffere^tlie heard of every one, as a
man sent them from God for their salvation, and so much the more in S. Franc.
was, moved and stayed of it self to give him better commodity of preaching.
regard that they saw his words confirmed by miracles, as here ensues.

S. Francis being one day on the sea shore at Gagette, and a great multitude
of people that were very devout unto him flocking to hear and see him, and to
have his benediction, he, that shunned honor, being retired into a bark to
hide himself, felt the vessel miraculously to move it self from the port, and
being a little, yet enough retired, it arrested immovable, as it had bin a hard
marble in the mids of the waters: whereby knowing the will of God, tourning to
the people who exceedingly admired the event, he made them a very behoufull
sermon: then according to their desire he blessed them with the sign of the
cross, which gave them great consolation, and the S. insinuating their
departure, after they were retired from the shore when it pleased the S. the
bark of it self approached again, so that one might say, the soul was
obstinate that refused to obey him, whom the very dry wood obeyed.

Swallows are silent at the commandment of S Franc. and of a scoller at his
invocation.
Preaching in a Church at Aluiano, being exceedingly disturbed by the
swalloes, he commanded them to be silent and give ear to the word of God till
he had done. At those words (which was admirable) the swallows ceased to
fly and sing, and never stirred till he had ended his preaching: this miracle
was so generally spread with exceeding edification to all that heard it, that a
scholar at Paris being very much disquieted by a swallow, said to himself,
this same should be one of the swallows that troubled the holy Father S.
Francis when he preached: wherefore with a very strong faith he said, I command
the swallow in virtue of the holy Father S. Francis to be silent and to come to
me. This was not uttered in vain, for the swallow by those words constrained,
incontinently flew to his fist; whereat admiring, he committed her to the
feildes, and after that she was neither heard nor seen.

Of certain miracles of the holy Father S. Francis.
THE XXXVI. CHAPTER.
He cured a benumbed child
IN the city of Thoscauella, he cured the son of a knight that had with
great devotion entertained him, who being borne without reins could not stir
from where he was set: the S. taking him by the hand, made him arise and stand
on his feet, whereon he always after walked very well, and as a sound as any
other, to the great contentment of the Father and all them that knew him, who
therein praised God and his servant. In the city of Naruia S. Francis cured one
of the palsy, at the One sick of the palsy. One of the dropsy.
request of the bishop of that place, which he effected by the sign of the
cross, which he made on him from the head to the feet, which being done, the
sick arose instantly sound from his bed. In the bishopprick of Riete, he
cured a child ouer-gone with the dropsy, who had his belly so swollen, that
he could not see his feet: the Saint being moved to compassion by mean of the
mother that brought the child unto him, by the only touch of his hand, cured
him, to the exceeding admiration, edification, and thanckesgiuing of all that
knew One crooked.
it. He also restored health to an other, that was so extremely crooked and
curbed that his face and feet did almost meet, he had compassion of He restored
the use of a woman's hands. He restores sight to one blind. An other.
the Father that endured more then the child it self; whom he cured by the
sign of the cross. He restored the use of a woman's hands that were withered,
by the sign of the cross, this was done in the city of Agubio, and at the
very instant this woman prepared dinner for the S. and many poor people. In
the city of Niuiano he restored sight to a blind, thrice annoynting his eyes
with his spetle, and making the sign of the cross on them in honor of the
holy Trinity. At Narui he cured an other by the sign of the cross. By the
same sign of the cross he cured the son of a Gentleman of Bolonia who had a
filme on his eye, which besides the hindering of his sight, was so unseemly
and disgraceful to behold, that it molested them that looked thereon, This
child On blind of one eye.
being full grown acknowledging this benifitt became a Friar Minor, confessing
that he saw more perfectly with the eye that the S. had cured, then with the
other. So in the same time the holy Father S. Francis illuminated this child
exteriourlie and interiourlie. Being lodged at S. Gemignano One possessed*
with own devout unto him, who had his wife extremely tormented by the
devil: which he knowing, after some prayer made, he commanded the devil in
the name of God to depart, and instantly An other.
he left the woman at liberty. In the city of Castella he delivered an
other possessed and tormented of the devil. A Religious being vexed with an
horrible and terrible disease, the fittes whereof coming on him, made him more
like to one possessed, then afflicted with any other infirmity: One of a
strange disease.
for he became so loath some, and bespotted with such different colors, that
he terrified those that beheld him, he gave notice to the S. and recommended
himself unto him. He taking compassion of him, presently sent him a soppe of
the bread which he was then eating, which the diseased with a very strongh
faith and devotion having eaten, was instantly cured and was no more sick
till his death. At the Castle of A cord of the said S. wrought many miracles.
Pieue, a man much devoted to S. Francis so labored that he got a cord
wherewith S. Francis had bin long time girded, with the only touch whereof, he
cured all the sick of the neighbor places, and if he could not repair unto
them, he therewith touched the water which they were to drinck, which having
drunck they were incontinently cured: this continued a long time, according to
the merittes and faith of them that applied And the crummes that remained after
his refectio^.
it. Some preserved the crumes and morcels that remained of the S. bread, which
they afterward with great faith would give to the sick, and many were
miraculously cured thereby, the divine virtue working al these things to the
glory of his faithful servant, and for the salvation of souls, to the end to
induce people the more desiredly to hear him, and to convert themselves to
penance.

How S. Francis goeing to preach, the Mountain of Aluerne was given him by a
noble man of Toscane.
THE XVII. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father S. Francis departing one time from Spoleta, to go to Romagna,
having taken Brother Leo for his companion, they understood by the way that a
solemn feast was held in a great town called Montfeltro where many gentlemen
were assembled: whereupon he said to his companion: Brother let us go to that
feast, we may there do some good: and so they went and entered directly into
the Church, where then was the Lord Orland Earl of Chiuisi, who was very
devout to S. Francis by reason of his reputation, and much desired to see and
hear him. Now this man understanding of his coming, went presently to hear
him as he began to preach on a wall, the better to be heard, and for want of a
pulpitt or chair of sufficient hight. His theme or text was this: I hope no
more, then I take pleasure to endure: on which words assisted by the holy
Ghost, he delivered worthy and merueillous matters, attributing the whole unto
the afflictions and persecutions which the Apostles and Martyrs of JESUS
CHRIST endured, and the Confessors that were continual Martyrs and not of
one day or momentes endurance; and this they performed by the hope and lively
faith they had in recompense of their few days of sufferance to enjoy a
perpetual fellicitie; and which other well living Christians endure who serve
God and their neighbor with a fervent charity, and who support the temptations
and afflictions of this world with patience rejoicing in God with whom they
are certain to enjoy his high and incomprehensibles promises. Each one was by
this discourse exceedingly enflamed in the love of God: but especialy the said
Count Orla^de, who was much more satisfied by the presence, doctrine, and
spirit of S. Francis, then by what he had heard related, or would ever have
imagined. Wherefore the sermon being ended, he went to salute him and made
known his devotion unto him; then told him that he earnestly desired
(cosidering his affairs called him otherwhere) to speak only four words unto
him in secrett, concerning the good estate of his soul. The holy Father
graciously answered him that at his pleasure he should come to him after
dinner, and he would attend him; and being returned, he a long time discoursed
with the S. of what most troubled his conscience, which the S. by the grace of
God did inco^tinently clear; which done, the Count added: Father I have a
place in Toscane, where there is a montaine of indifferent hight, called
Auerne, which would be very convenient for you, wherein to spend a devout and
contemplative life, because it is very solitary, I much desire you should see
it, and if you find it convenient, you should do me a favor in accepting it
for you residence: and certainly I should esteem it as an extraordinary
courtesy and singular grace. The S. as presaging his good, though at
othertimes he appeared more nice in like points, very willingly accepted it,
and told him he would send two Religious to see it, and if they found it such
as he described, himself would dwell therein, as afterward he did: and whiles
he thancked him, he commanded two of his Religious whom he sent to view it,
that finding it convenient, they should make choice of a place for a chapel
and should take possession thereof, which they performed: S. Francis wishing a
celestial recompense to the Count, who instantly went to a town which he had
under the said mountain, where he very honorably entertained the said
Religious, as Angels of God: and then sending with them some of his people, he
commanded them to conduct the Religious over all the mountain which way they
desired. When they came thither, at the first sight the place pleased the
Religious exceedingly, and goeing further they found a very pleasant plain at
the foot of a hill, where without further delay, being of opinion they should
find no place more convenient, they began to cut down bows of trees and with
the help of their guide to fix them in the earth, and so quickly made a lodging
w erin they rested all night, taking possession in the name of S. Francis, who
they advertised thereof, who full of joy, called Brother Leo, Brother The
miraculous entertainment given to S. Franc. on the mount Aluerric.
Angelus, Brother Macie, with whom he gave thanckes to God: the^ imparting to
the^ his purposes, they came together into the said Mountain, unto the top
whereof being ascended, he reposed under the shadow of an oak, whither a great
number of little birds incontine^tly came to entertain him, by their singing,
with their heads and feathers discovering their inward joy, which in deed was
admirable to behold: for some flew on the head of the S. others on his
shoulders, others on his hands, and his arms, with such familiarity as if
they had understanding. Which S. Francis perceauing, he said to his companions:
My beloved Brethren, I now firmly believe that it is Gods pleasure we should
here remain, and therefore having given his benediction to the birds, he
proceeded to visitt the mountain, where the two Religious meeting him, they
showed him the choice they had made for their residence: which did not content
S. Francis, but circuited about till he had found an other place more to his
satisfaction, where he might secretly contemplate, and there with bows of
trees he built a cell, wherein shortly after God communicated unto him his
sacred stigmates, as in due places shall appear.

How in the said Mountain God appeared unto him on a stone, and of the
privileges he gave him for the Order. This was the 34. chapter of the 10.
book, transferred to this place as proper unto it.
THe holy Father residing in the said Mountain, our Lord appeared unto him:
who having manifested his will unto him, and being departed, the holy Father S.
Francis called Brother Leo, and said: Brother (sheep of God) wash that stone
with water, who taking water incontinently washed it, then he bid him wash it
with wine which he did; afterward with oil, and he washed it; and finally he
bid him wash it with baulme, and Brother Leo answered that he had none, nor
none was to be had in that place. S. Francis then, expounding the figure said
unto him: Know Brother (sheep of JESUS CHRIST) God granted four privileges to
the Order of Friar Minors.
that God having even now appeared unto me on this stone, correspondentlie to
the four things wherewith I commanded thee to wash the same, has granted me
four privileges for our Order. The first, that whosoever with all their heart
shall love me, the Friar Minors, and their Order, shall by his grace and mercy
end their life happily. The second, that whosoever shall against reason
persecute the Order, shall be notoriously punished. The third, that the Religious
who shall persevere impious in the said Order shall soon dye out of it, or
therein shall remain confounded. And the fourth, that the Religion shall for
assistance of holy Church, continue to the end of the world.

The sequel is the rest of the 64. chapter of the first book, transferred
hither, as the proper place thereof.
The devil strives violently to kill S. Francis.
THe devil being unable to endure such perfection of S. Francis and perceauing
the great fruit which he did and might produce, determined to kill him:
wherefore the S. being one morning at the top of the mountain, whence did
hang a very deep downfall, there praying to God with all his heart, the devil
to ruin him in that downfall, thrust him so violently, that he cast him far
off, upon a great rock of the mountain: and whereas the devil has no farther
power over us then God permits him, he could in no sort annoy him, for the
S. inuocating the help of his divine majesty, Who was received of a hard rock
as of wax.
the rock whereon he was cast, received him in, as if it had bin a heap of very
tender wax, or soft earth, so that besides the space of his body, which was
enclosed in the rock, there remained the hollow and mould which he there made,
as also the impressio^ of his hands and fingers when he took hold thereon,
which character or impression to the great admiration of all people, is at
this present there to be seen; for all is apparentlie to be discerned; so that
the devil was confounded and enraged, and the servant of God miraculously
conserved, by that immensiue virtue which is ever present to his servants, to
releive them as occasion shall require. Such was the possession that God gave
to his servant, of this mountain: let us now then return to speak of the
innocencye of the holy Father, which caused the birds, as we have said, to
secure themselves on him, as on a solitary tree, they knowing his interior:
and let us observe how many other creatures did the like.

Of the familiarity and obedience which all kind of creatures had unto the
holy Father S. Francis.
THE XXXVIII. CHAPTER.
THe soul of the glorious Father S. Francis was in such sort endued with
sanctity, that he evidently declared that he had obtained of God, the first
estate of innocence interior and exterior; for in this estate he conserved
himself perfectly subject and obedient unto God, whence followed that he was
so much honored and obeyed of other creatures his inferiors, over whom God
had given The brut beasts honored S. Fr. showing to acknowledge his sanctity.
him dominion, as by the examples ensuying we shall make appear, Passing one
time by the city of Sienna, he found a great flock of sheep feeding in a
meadoe, and coming near them, he very courteously saluted them. They leaving
their pasture (as if they had bin capable of reason) went toward him, and
with their head lifted up beholding him, made show that they rejoiced at his
presence. The Religious companions of the S. and the shepheardes, were
exceedingly amazed at such a nouelty, that sheep, muttons, and lambs as
reasonable creatures, should demonstrate that they admired and reverenced the
S. They would not return to their feeding till the holy Father had given them
his benediction.

At our Lady of Angels one gave him a sheep, which he most gratefully
received, for the natural simplicity, innocence, and meeknes which is in
sheep. This holy Father admonished this sheep to be careful to praise God, and
to be wary not to offend or be offended by the Religious, which the sheep to
her utmost observed and performed: yea so seriously as if it had discretion to
obey a master. When the Religious went to sing in the quire, the beast went
also, and followed them to the Church, where without any instruction, she would
kneel down; Then in steed of singing she would leap and bleat before the
altar of the A sheep shows a will to honor, praise and adore God.
virgin Mary, and of her Son the lamb without spott, as if she would salute
and praise them. And when one elevated the sacred host at the Mass, she
inclined, kneeling down, honoring and adoring her Creator, as if she would
inuit devout Christians to give more honor to the Sacrament, and check and
reprehend the indeuout for their little reverence.

S. Francis had some time at Rome a little lamb, in memory and mindfulnes of
the patient lamb JESUS CHRIST: and being to depart, he recommended it to a
Roman gentlewoman his devoted friend, called Iaqueline of Sertesoli: the lamb
followed her as the S. commanded it goeing and retourning from church: if the
hour of mass did pass having heard the clock, it solicited her with his
voice, and by gestures, so that the disciple of S. Francis was master of And a
lamb likewise.
devotion unto this gentlewoman. Being in the Oratory of Grecio, on presented
him with a leuerett, but he presently set him at liberty, that he might run
away, but seeing that he would not run away, but was only removed from him,
he recalled it, and the leuerett incontinently lept on his legs, and he
embracing it as his child, sweetly asked A leueret became tame unto him at an
instant. A wild conny likewise. And a water bird.
it why it permitted it self to be so taken: then having compassion of it, he
delivered it to a Religious to carry it to the mountain, to some desert and
secure place and there to leave it, aduertising it first that it should be
careful not to be taken again of any man. Many other like accidents happened
unto him. In the lake of Perusia, a wild conny being taken, and given to the S.
as soon as it saw him, it ran and lept into his hands and bosom. Passing by
the lake of Reite, to go to the hermitage of Grecio, a fisher presented him on
great devotion with a water bird, which the S. joyfully receiving, opened his
fist, that it might fly away, but the bird stirred not: the S. lifting his eyes
toward heaven, remained long time as in an ecstasy, then coming to himself
as if he had returned from some far country, seeing the bird still in his
hand, he gave it his benediction, and gently commanded it to go whither it
would: and so the bird having received his benediction flew merrily away. In the
same lake was given him a great fish alive, which As also a great fish.
having accepted, and thancked the giver, he putt again into the lake, the
fish mounting presently upon the water, always followed the S. by the river
side, till he came to the place where the S. was to depart, and there staying
he began to sport above the water, and would not depart till the S. had given
him his benediction.

Of many other miracles like to the precedente.
THE XXXIX. CHAPTER.
Saint Francis passing with his companion by the Marshes of Venise, found a
great number of birds on a tree which sung very melodiously, near unto whom
he went with his companion to say his canonical hours and to praise God with
them who stirred not; yea the S. coming to say his office, they so raised
their tunes, that the holy Father and his companion did not well understand
one an other: wherefore he willed them to stay a while till they had ended their
Birds obeyed S. Francis.
office. They were incontine^tly silent and sung no more til the office was
said, after which he gave them leave to sing, and then they began again with
more delight the^ before, to the great contentment of the S. There was at our
lady of Angels a fig tree whereon was a grass hopper, at Of a grasse-hopper.
whose singing S. Francis (as one that in the least creatures did always
consider the greatness of his Creator) did often awake to praise God. He one
day called her, and she instantly flew unto his hand. He commanded her by her
song to praise God, and she began to sing, and never ceased till he commanded
her to be silent, and to return to her place: Being returned to the fig
tree, she every day at the same hour came flying to the hands of the S. One
day he said to his brethren: I will that we give liberty to our sister, which
having done she flew away, and as a true daughter of obedience was never seen
after. Being sick in the city of Of a phesant.
Sienna, a gentleman a devoted friend of his, sent him a pheasant taken a live,
which being before him, showed such signs of familiarity, that he who brought
him could not hold him, so great a desire had it to come to the Saint, who
receiving it would not claspe it in his fist: but carried it at liberty, that
it might fly away, but it settled in his hands, wherefore having committed it to
a friend of his, to keep, the phesant for grief would never eat, till it was
brought again to the Saint, who having received it, it began to eat very
joyfully. A Faulcon did nest on the mountain of Auerne, close unto the celle
of saint Of a Faulcon that served S. F. for an alarm.
Francis, which came to the Saint as familiarlie as if he had bin a dear
friend. In the night it served him as an alarm or watch, singing at the
ordinary hours that the Saint accustomed to pray, which pleased him will:
for the care which the Faulcon had, freed him from care, and so much the more
because by divine instinct, when he was sick, the faulcon as if it had had
discretion, defferred his call about, two hours, or more according to the
necessity which the Saint had to repose; at other times very gently after
the break of day. This proceeding doutles is strange whereby God mayntained his
servant. As S. Francis was one time in his travail he willed his companion to
prepare him to eat, which having done, and the Saint blessing the table, a
Nightingall began to sing so sweetly, that the Saint replenished with joy
said to his companion: Brother, see how this sweet Nightingall inuiteth us to
praise God, sing therefore with him: Brother Leo excusing Of a nightingal.
himself by his unpleasing voice, he began himself to singe: the nightingall
being silent when he sung, and singing when he rested, alternatiuelie, so that
he was allured on by that sweet music even till night, when being weary* he
confessed to Brother Leo, that the nightingall had overcome him in the praise
of God, then he said, let us eat, it is time, and being sat the nightingall
first flew on his head, then on his shoulders, and arms, and at length on his
hand where it took of him to eat, and then having received his benediction it
flew way.

How he made gentle a very fierce woulfe. This was the 29. chapter of the 10.
book, transferred hither to his place.
GOeing to preach in the city of Agubio, he found it in deep despair, by
reason of a woulfe, that did not only devour the cattle, but killed men and
women, and did eat people, in respect whereof they durst not go out of the
city but armed in company; and therefore the Saint went with his companion
to seek out the woulfe, against the liking of the Citizens who feared his
adventure, he refusing to accept of any company with him. The Citizens to
behold the success, dispersed themselves on the hills and mountains about
the city. They expected not long, but they saw the woulfe with extreme fury
come toward the Saint. The Agubians then began to cry out and bid saint
Francis to fly, but the servant of JESUS CHRIST, armed with the weapon of
invincible faith, went courageously against him, and opposed against him the
sign of the cross, and in a moment turned the woulfe into the nature of a
lamb, then courteously said unto him: Brother woulfe come hither, I command
thee in the name of my God, that thou offend neither me nor any other. At
these words, which was admirable, the woulfe fell at his feet expecting what
the Saint would enjoin him, who said: Thou have committed so many homicides,
and made such spoils in this country, that thou have a thousand times
deserved death. The souls of those whom thou have murdered cry to God for
justice against thee: but because thou have humbled thy self, if thou promise
amendment I will procure thy pardon. Whereto the woulfe seemed to answer
clapping his tail against the ground, humbling his head and weeping, thereby
making show that he would obey; which the S. understanding said: Go to, since
henceforward thou will do no more hurt, I will procure thee food of this town
for all the time of thy life: pardonning thee all the offenses past, as if thou
had never offended: for we know that whatsoever thou have done, thou have
bin thereto constrained by necessity of hunger: but give me thy faith never to
offend more. At which words the woulfe lifting up his leg laid his paw in
his hand: thou may now, said the S. come with me without any fear, and so he
followed him as a little dog. The S. being come into a spacious place of the
city with the woulfe, there was such affluence of people to see the miracle,
that there could be no more. Therefore he made the^ a sermon, demonstrating unto
them that God had sent these scourge^ unto men for their sins: but that the
mouth of this woulfe was nothing in comparison of that of the infernal woulfe,
which afterward expected the souls to devour them eternally: he admonished
the^ therefore to do penance, if they would be freed both from the one and the
other, then said unto them: My Freindes, behold here the woulfe which has
promised me to do you no more mischeife: you must also promise to releive him.
Which the people having promised him, he turned to the woulfe and bad him
promise them also to do them no more hurt, and to ask them pardon. Admirable
accident! the woulfe in sign of repentance incontinently falling one his knees
laid his Muzzle on the ground, and the S. causing him again to give his paw in
pledge of peace, I promise said he, for the one and the other party, and so he
lived two full years in the mids of the city, without any dogs barcking
at him: then he dyed to the great grief of all the Citizens, who seeing him,
were induced to the love of God, by the memory of so rare a miracle and
benefitt which he had done them, by mean of his servant S. Francis.

How it being necessary that saint Francis should have a cautere made with a
burning iron, the fire obeying him lost his force.
THE XL. CHAPTER.
NOt only the beasts obeyed S. Francis: but even the very elements, as may
appear by the example following, and others to be inserted hereafter. The
glorious Father was long time afflicted with sickness, and having no means of
cure, he was, by reason that the cold was aduersiue unto him, as the Protector
had appointed, removed from Rieta to Font Colombo, for better commodity of the
Physician that had care of him; and to defend him from the air that was very
dangerous unto him, and from the splendor of the sun which he could not
endure, they made him a great capuce,, and put a gread band over his eyes. Now
the Physician being come and perceauing the danger of the disease, affirmed
that there must necessarily be applied a cautere behind the ear, next that
eye which was most offended, in which act, though the holy Father S. Francis
deferred his cure, fearing perhaps to dye in the absence of the Vicar
General who was to be there: nevertheless the infirmity increasing and the
Vicar not coming, it was necessary to proceed and to apply the fire, and
especially because in a whole night he could take no repose. Wherefore the
night following he made this exhortation to the Religious that attended and
watched with him, taking compassion of him that by his occasion, he reposed
neither night nor day no more then him self: Brother and my beloved son, I
beseech thee let it not afflict thee, to suffer and take pains for me in this
my sickness: for God will give thee recompense of thy labor both in this life
and the other: and will reward thee even for all the good worckes thou omittest
to do by means of mine infirmity. Yea I advertise thee that thou gaynest
much more by this charity, then thou should by prayer; for they that serve
and assist me in such necessity, serve all the body of our Order and assist
to mayntaine it. Therefore thou may securely say unto God, offering this thy
service: My God I spend my time in service of this man, for which thou art
indebted to me, considering that I serve him for thy sake. The S. spoke this,
to the end that being by the devil overcome of impatience, he should not loose
his meritt. And therefore as we said a little before, seeing the imminent peril
wherein he labored, and the trouble of his Religious, he consented that
preparation should be made to administer unto him the cautere appointed by the
Physician, though his vicare were not present. Every thing necessa^ie then
being prepared, S. Francis seeing the burning iron, had a natural fear of the
torment he was to endure: wherefore he mildly uttered these words to the fire:
My noble brother, most profitable of all other creatures by the almighty
created, I pray thee with my utmost affection, have compassion of me in this
thine action, and use not thy rigor against me, since I love thee so much for
our Creatours sake, of whom I demand so much favor, as to moderate thy
fervor and heat in such sort that my feebleness may support it. Then he made
the sign of the cross on the fiery bullet, when in mean while the Religious
left him alone with the Surgeon, for great compassion they had of him, and
being unable to behold his torment and endurance. Now the iron having bin
applied the S. recalling them they returned, to whom he said: O weak of heart
and more weak of faith! why did you fly? I would have you know that I felt not
any pain, yea if it be thought that the Surgeon have not well made the
cautere, I am content to have an other made, then an other, till it be well
made. The Surgeon and Religious being amazed at so strange a miracle, whereby he
saw force did fail to annoy but not to benefitt, in such sort that the S. held
himself immovable without having his head held, and insensible of the hot
iron, he knew not what else to say but that in effect, there was no other good
in this world, but to be the true servant of almighty God.

Of the love which the holy Father S. Francis boar to all creatures for the
love of his Creator.
THE XLI. CHAPTER.
But it is not so much to be admired that the fire and other creatures obeyed
S. Francis when he commanded them: for he in such sort honored and loved them,
that he rejoiced with them at their good, and was so much afflicted at their
detriment, as a friend were he never so pitiful and affectionat would do at
the dommage or detriment of his dear friend. He would discourse with them as
if they had bin endued with judgment and reason, raising himself by their
mean condition, to the consideration of the greatness of him that had created
them such, therefore above others he carried most affection to those creatures
that had any relation unto God, or figure, correspondence and proprietye with
his servants, as may be said of Larckes, as having on their head a capuce,
like to his and his Religious. And because they were humble and of earthly
color, and walked by ditches and ordinary ways to seek their releife, and
then mounted sweetly into What esteem he made of larckes.
the air, praising their God. Wherein they showed him example (as he said to
his Religious) to be clothed with base and course cloth of earthly color, and
to go humbly seeking almose through the streets, and having conuersed here
on earth as much as is necessary, to mount afterward into heaven with their
cogitations praising their Creator. And therefore he once said, that if he were
Emperor he would ordain that no Larckes should be killed. Discoursing
afterward of other creatures, he said that he would command all Governors of
cities and borroughes to cause wheat to be scattered and cast abroad on
Christians day in the streets and feildes, that the birds might have more
occasion on that day to rejoice having to feed at their desire: and in memory
that our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST was borne between an ox and an ass, they who
had such beasts should be constrained to give them on such day, hay and oats
abondantly. Among all creatures he particulerly affected the sun, the reason
has bin formerly expressed, next unto it, the fire, as a most noble element,
he would never putt it out, in consideration of the innumerable benefittes
which God by mean thereof has done us, as by the examples ensuying shall
appear. Sitting one day before the fire, there lept into his lap upon How he
loved the elemen^ of fire.
his habitt certain little sparckles as it often happens, and albeit he saw
it burn his habitt he would never extinguish it, nor permit a Religious there
present to do it, who at length called the Vicar whom against his will and
by obedience he permitted to extinguish it. An other time on the Mountain of
Aluerne, a Religious that was his companion made a great fire in the celle
where he did eat, by reason of the extreme cold that then was, which leaving
enkindled, he went to call the holy Father who was in an other place, adjoining
to the celle where he accustomed to pray and sleep; where S. Francis staying
him to read unto him the gospel of that day (which if it were possible he
accustomed always to do before his refection, when it chanced that he could
not here mass) the fire in mean while so wrought, that when they thought to
come to warm themselves, it was mounted even to the planching of one side of
the celle: S. Francis seeing his companion labor to quench it did not assist
him, but taking up a skin of furre that was there wherewith he covered
himself in the night, he returned into the mountain, the other Religious
perceauing the fire, came all out of their Oratorie, and extinguished it in an
instant: which being done S. Francis goeing to eat, said to his companion: I
will no more use this skin of furre, because by* reason of mine avarice I
could not endure that my Brother fire should consume it for it self. After the
fire he affected the element of And the water.
water, because by it was signified penance and affliction: by reason that with
it the soul was washed by mean of the sacrament of Baptism: therefore when he
washed his face and hands, he always sought a place where the water falling
away might not be trodden on and fowled. He also reverenced the stones, so that
sometimes The stones. The wood.
he tre^bled to tread on them, remembering the corner stone I. C. He commanded
the Religious that made provision of wood on the mo^taine, not to fell the
whole tree, but always to leave a great stock in remembrance of him that for
our salvation would dye on the hard wood of the cross. He forbad the gardenet
to take up an entier plant and root And the flowers.
together to be eaten, as many do: but commanded him to leave sufficient
whereby to spring again, that in season it might produce flowers, for his sake
and in memory of him that would be termed a flower. He would that the gardener
should make a little guarden alone and several from the greater, of sweet
delicious and pleasing herbs to behold, that producing flowers in their
season, they might be invited each one to praise God for their beauty,
considering that all creatures speak in their language, and say: Man, God has
made and created us for thee alone, to the end that thou praise our Creator by
us and in all his worckes. Therefore he would have them of all persons
esteemed as a mirour, which beholding, they might admire the greatenes of their
Creator, and might always seek some subjects the more to love, honor and
adore him.

Of a miracle entitled of apples, because Saint Francis demanding apples,
raised a child.
THE XLII. CHAPTER.
A Gentleman that was a dear friend unto the S. invited him to dine at his
house when his opportunity would best permit. S. Francis answered that on
such a day he would preach in his city, and then he would satisfy his
request. The day so much desired of the gentleman being come, having taken
order in his house for the dinner, and left a servant at home to that purpose,
himself with his wife went to hear the sermon: but they being departed the
servant who also had chardge of a little child, said to her self: every one
runs to hear this great S. of God, and is it possible that I alone must be
barred from hearing him? verily I will hear at least a little, and then will
return before the rest in sufficient time to prepare my dinner: which she
did, but hearing the sermon she remembered that she had left the little child
alone, wherefore she instantly returned home, and not finding the child where
she had left it, having in vain sought him every where; and considering on the
other side that her master would presently return, she went all weeping into
the kitchen, where she found the child boiling in a pott of hott water over the
fire, and thincking hastily to draw it out, she took it by the arm, but the
arm coming from the body, she took out all the rest by morcels, and though
she were extremely afflicted and as it were beside her self, nevertheless
enforcing her self she fitted all the pieces together in a chest which she
shutt up, and then thought of dressing the dinner, till her master and
mistress came, to whom she related all, showing them the child. The mother,
whiles the S. according to his custom was in prayer, would have fallen into
extreme rage and lamentation but her husband of sound faith, remembering that he
had the S. with him, who he knew to have great creditt with God: persuaded his
wife to pacify her self till S. Francis had dined, telling her, that she
should have time enough to lament afterward, if the divine mercy did not assist
the^: that she should have confidence in the S. and that she should see
merueillous success. So with an extraordinary constancy perferring their love
to S. Francis before that to their child, not to discontent him, they
suppressed and concealed their interior grief, and did eat with him with the
greatest joy they could. Now at the end of dinner, the holy Father S. Francis
demanded of the gentleman if he had a couple of apples, whereof he would gladly
eat: who answered that he had none present, but would soon get the^. The S.
replied that he would not any should go out of the house for them, but willed
that one should look in that chest, pointing at that wherein were assembled
the members of the dead child, and there should be found two: the gentleman
hearing the chest nominated and knowing what was in it, was extremely agitated,
and replenished with faith which God augmented in his heart, hoping that day to
see some merueilles of the infinite bounty: he opened the chest where he found
his son a live and very well, holding two fair aples in his two hands,
which he joyfully brought to S. F. as if he had bin in a cradle: it may be
imagined what joy the Parents conceived to see their child alive: they were so
surprised with this joy, that being as it were beside the^ selves, they could
not speak a word. S. F. recounted unto them how in his prayer offered, God
revealed unto him the death of the child caused by the devil: the^ he exhorted
the^ thenceforward to have confidence in his divine majesty, as they had
formerlie had; because faith wrought greater miracles then that, which being
generally diuulged, caused many to lift their hearts and hands to God. This
history was painted in diverse places in memory of this great benefitt, and of
the devotion that many bare to the holy Father S. Francis,

Of an other child which God raised by the merittes of the holy Father S.
Francis, and of diverse other miracles wrought.
THE XLIII. CHAPTER.
BEing at an other time lodged with a knight, as they discoursed of spiritual
matters, there came a servant all chafed and full of tears, telling this
ge^tleman his master that his son was at that very hour drowned in a
channel: wheratt the Father and mother pitifully lamented. S. Francis was
moved to compassion: and after that he had comforted the^ willing the^ to have
hope in God, he fell to prayer beseeching his divine Majesty to reveal unto
him the place where he might find the child. Now God having revealed it unto
him, he bad the gentleman to send unto such a place where he should find his
child, which being brought utterly suffocated and drowned, he raised him an
restored him to his Father in the name of God, with an infinite joy to all the
assistantes The ants obey S. Francis.
who re^dred tha^ckes incessa^tly unto his divine Majesty. The holy Father S.
Francis minding to preach in a certain place within the diocese of Cisterno,
where a great number of people were assembled to hear him, and wanting
convenient place to preach unto the^ co^modiously, by reason that it was a
plain, he approached to an oak which was from the bottom to the top all
covered with antes, which the holy Father having seen heco^manded the^ to go
from that tree; and tourning to the people, he willed the^ to give way to the
said antes. And the^, which was admirable, they in number almost incredible,
went that way which S. Francis had caused the people to make for them, so that
they never returned more, and this was cause Why S. Francis loved not the
antes. Matt. 6.
of unspeakable fruit. The holy Father S. Francis of all other beasts had
least affection to those antes, because they employed over much dillige^ce in
hoarding their provision for the time to come. And withal he affirmed that
they deserved not to be nombred with the birds of whom God said: Behold the
fowls of the air, that they sow not, neither reap, nor gather into barnes:
and your heavenly Father feeds them. S. Francis would that all his Religious
should have the same faith and resignation of all their cogitations in his
divine providence, that God would should be in his disciples.

In the same place and time that the S. preached, there happened a fearful
miracle, for there came a woman with a cow-bell to disturb the company,
wherewith she made such a ringing sound, that one could not hear what he said;
S. Francis reprehending her, she increased it, such possession had the devil
of her. Upon this occasion, the holy Father The devil visibly ^aried away a
woman for troubling a sermon of S. Fr.
inspired of God and moved with zeal of his holy word, and of the conversion
of souls, uttered these words: Carry her away Satan, carry her away, for she
is one of they members and is thine. O horrible and fearful accident, these
words being ended, the woman was incontinently carried up into the air both
body and soul in view of all the world: for which cause every one was stricken
in extreme terror and fear of the divine majesty, and thenceforward gave ear
to his holy word in very great reverence. S. Francis walking with his
companion on the banckes of the river Po, and being overtaken by the night he
was exceedingly perplexed to get lodgeing, by reason that the way was extreme
foul and durty, the air very darck, and the place not free from thieves; for
though they had nothing to loose, yet should they have bin afflicted by them:
wherefore his companion said unto him: Father pray unto God, if you please,
that he may voutsafe to be our guide: and to deliver us from this affliction.
The S. no otherwise answered but: God is able if he please, and that it be for
our good to deliver us, and removing this darcknes to give us his light. At
this instant as he lifted up his hands to heaven, a clear light appeared, and
so resplendant that being in all other places a very darck night, they saw very
clearly and perfectly, nor only how to go in their way, but every where about
the^. So by this light guided and comforted both spiritually and corporally,
God sent a light to enligh ten S. Francis in a darck night.
they made such speed as they arrived at their place of retire, singing
praises and himnes unto God, of whom S. Francis was assisted in his necessity.
He accustomed when he came to any place to preach, thereby the more co^modiously
to assemble the people, to sound a cornet which to that purpose he carried with
him with two sticks of a paulme long, which are to this day conserved in his
church of Assisium, in the sacristye, having the ends garnished with silver:
they are showed with other relics at all times when they are desired to be
seen.

Certain doctrines and discourse of the glorious Father S. Francis which have
bin found recorded.
Of the faith and reverence due to the holy sacrament.
THE XLIV. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father saint Francis, did not only seek to edify his neighbor
in corporal presence, and by example and preaching, but also such as he could
not assist by those means being remote from them, he assisted by letters and
aduertissementes, which he caused his Religious to write, whereof I thought it
requisite to select the choice and principal, to insert in this place,
specified according to the contents.

A letter of the holy Father saint Francis to all the Religious of the
general chapter.
IN the name of God, of the most sacred Trinity and sovereign unity, the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Amen. To my beloved Brother the Minister
General of the Order of Friar Minors, and to all other Ministers that shall
succeed him, to all Prouincials, Guardians and Preistes of our co^frarernitie,
united in JESUS CHRIST, and to all the humble, simple, and obedient, first and
last: Brother Francis, a man of nothing, frail and infirm, your least
servant, saluteth you in the name of him that has redeemed you, and has
washed us with his own blood, whose name we ought to adore prostrate on the
earth, with great fear and reverence. Most high lord JESUS CHRST Son of God
is his name, who is blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

He aduert^seth the priests of his Order of their duty.
Harcken ye children of God, and my dear Brethren, imprint my words in your
minds, incline the ears of your heart, and obey the voice of the Son of
God: keep with all your heart and observe his sweet precepts, and embrace his
counsels with your entier will: praise him, for he is good, and know that the
eternal Father sends you into the world, by your worckes and words to
testify his worckes and words. And therefore strive to make it known to all
people, that he alone is almighty in all things, persevere in his discipline
and observance, and maytaine that which you have promised him with a firm
resolution, si^h he as Father to his children gives us the true preserving
nourishment of spiritual and corporal essence, and presents us to his
Father as our protector: I beseech you my Brethren, even humbly kissing your
feet, and with the greatest charity I can, I do exhort you to reverence and
honor with your utmost ability, the most sacred sacrament, whereby heavenly and
earthly matters are reconciled with God. I beseech all my brethren that are
Preistes, and such as in the name of God shall be, when they intend to celebrate
the divine mass, Marc. 26
to be pure and neat, that they may worthelie offer the true sacrifice of the
most sacred body and blood of our lord IESEVS CHRIST, with the greatest
reverence, purity and holy inte^tion that they shall be able, not for any
humane respect, for any fear or love; but that their intention be directed to
God, desiring to please only his Majesty, who says: Do this in remembrance
of me. Know then ye Preistes, that he who shall do otherwise, shall be like
unto Judas. Remember the saying of the Apostle: ^eb. 10.
A man making the law of Moses frustrate: without any mercy dies under two or
three witnesses. How much more thinck you, does he deserve worse punishmente
which has trodden the Son of God under foot, and esteemed the blood of the
testament polluted, wherein he is sanctified, and has done contumely to the
spirit of grace? For then is a man irreuerent and treads on that lamb of
God, when, 1. Cor. 11.
as the Apostle says, he does not examine and make a difference between this
true bread of God, and that which he does ordinarily eat, and therefore he
receaueth it unworthily. For God says in Jeremy: The man is cursed that does
negligently and feinedly. And the Preistes that Iere. 48.
will not have this care to celebrate so excellent a Mystery, the most Malac. 2.
worthily that possibly can be, shall be condemned of God, who says: I will
tour^e your benedictions, to maledictions on your selves.

Lnc. 1* 2. 11. Matt. 3. Esaias. 11.
My brethren, hear me I pray you, if the glorious virgin be so much honored
(as she deserves) for having received into her chaste womb our lord JESUS
CHRIST; If. S. John Baptist trembled, and durst not touch the head of JESUS
CHRIST: and finally if the holy sepulcher, wherein JESUS CHRIST was buried, for
his so small time of residence, is so much reverenced; how much more ought he
to be just, holy, and well purged, who with his hands does handle, and with
his proper mouth does receive so high and infinite a Majesty, and does
administer, the same to others? Remember that he is an immortal and eternal
God, that lives glorious and eternal; with contemplation of whose Majesty the
Angels themselves cannot be satisfied. Preistes know your dignity, 1. Pet. 1.
and be holy, for God is holy, and as in regard of so great a mystery and
dignity you have bin more honored then other men; remember in like sort to be
also more grateful unto God, and to reverence, love and honor him; for
otherwise your misery is exceeding great, and deserves continual tears, in
that you having in your hands the almighty God, the fountain of all good
things, you procure to have transitory and terrestrial things, all the world
ought to tremble with fear, and sweetly weep, whiles the Angels themselves
bend their knees, when JESUS CHRIST the Son of the most high is upon the
altar, between the hands of man. O merueillous highness, and divine
debasement! O most high humility, that the Son of God, yea God himself, the
master and lord of the universal world should so humble himself, as to give
himself unto us, hidden under the form of bread. Consider my brethren, so
profound a humility, and purify your heart before his divine Majesty, to the
end he receive all as he gives himself to all. Therefore I aduerti^e you in
the name of God, that in all places where the Religious are, you celebrate but
one mass a day; and though you have diverse Preistes, let the rest be content
to hear it: for although it be seen in many pertes, yet is it one and
indivisible, and without any detriment, true God and true man, so in one sole
mass, he can communicate his grace to all present and absent that make
themselves worthy, one only and very God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
worcking this, Amen.

Of the faith and knowledge of our Savior Jesus Christ, and of the sacred
Sacrament.
THE XLV. CHAPTER.
TO all Christians Religious, Ecclesiastical, lay men and women that are in
the world: Brother Francis their servant and subject in God, desires withal
reverence a true peace in heaven, by the sincere charity which is descended on
earth. As I am the servant of you all, so am I obliged to serve all, and to
administer unto you the most sweet word of my lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST:
Considering therefore in my soul that by reason of the diverse infirmities that
afflict my body I cannot by corporal presence as I desire, visitt you my
self: I have thought good to supply the same by letters, and by them to
administer unto you the word of JESUS CHRIST, who is the word of the eternal
Father, and the words of the holy Ghost, which are spirit and life. Of the
dignity of the B. Sacrament of the altar and how on ought to reverence it.
Joan. 6.
I then admonish you Brethren, to confess your sins to a Priest, with all
the diligence you can possible, and at his hand to receive the true body and
blood of JESUS CHRIST. For as our Lord says: he that eats not my flesh, and
drincketh not my blood cannot have eternal life. Let us then endeavor
worthily to receive such and so eminent a majesty: for he that receaueth it
unworthily, in steed of salvation pourchaceth death. Besides I exhort you often
to visitt the holy churches, and to reverence Preistes, not so much in respect
of themselves if they be sinners, as for reverence of the function and dignity
which they have in being ministers of the most precious body and blood of our
Savior JESUS CHRIST, which by them is offered on the altar, received, and
administered unto us, without which none can be saved: by the holy words which
they utter, and minister, he discendeth from heaven to earth, and Mat. 22. Luc.
10.
none but they can do it. O how happy and blessed are they who love God
withal their heart, with all their souls, and with all their forces, and their
neighbor as themselves? I inuit you all my brethren, and you my sisters, to
this love: let us all with one accord love God, and with one pure affection of
our heart adore him, because that is the thing which he Luc. 4.
especially requires and demands of us, as himself has said: the true
adorers adore in spirit and truth; and it is necessary for them that adore
Joan. 14.
him, to do it in that manner. Our lord said to his disciples: I am the way
and the verity, and the life. No man comes to the Father but by me. If you
had known me, my Father also certes you had known: and from henceforth you
shall know him, and you have seen him. Phillip said to him Lord show us the
Father, and it suffices us. JESUS said to him, So long time I am with you: and
have you not known me? Phillip, he that sees me, sees the Father also. The
Father dwells in a light inaccessible, and Joan. 1.
God is a spirit, whom no man has ever seen, because he is a spirit and
therefore, invisible, but in spirit, considering that he is a spirit most
pure, for it is the spirit that gives life, and the flesh can do nothing.
He may also be seen of every true Christian, in the Son, in that substance
Joan. 6.
which is equal to the Father, and therefore all they that see our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, according to the humanity, and not according to his divinity, are
condemned, as likewise are they who see the sacrament which is consecrated by
the words of our Lord, on the altar, by the hands of the Priest, under the
forms of bread and wine, and do not see him and believe in their spirit,
that it is the true and most sacred body and blood of our Lord JESUS CHRIST,
are condemned, the souueraine Lord gives his testimony against them when he
said: This is my body and this is my blood of the new testament, Mat. 26. Marc.
14. Luc. 22. Joan. 6.
which shall be shed for you, and for many in remission of sins. He says in an
other place: He that eats my flesh and drincketh my blood shall have life
everlasting. He that has the spirit of God, which dwells in his faithful,
he receaueth the most sacred blood and body of JESUS CHRIST: and all other that
have not the same spirit, yet nevertheless presume to receive it, they eat and
drinck their judgment and damnation: therefore, ye children of men how long
will you be senseless, and have your hearts so hardened? When will you
compass to know the truth, and to believe in the Son of God? who so humbly
seeks you every day, as when he descended from his imperial throne into the
virginal womb, he ordinarily comes every day unto us, in such humble manner
attired and so approachable? He every day descends from the bosom of his
Father into the hands of the Priest on the altar, and as he was known unto
the holy Apostles in true flesh, in that very manner does he communicate
himself unto us in the holy Sacrament. And as they with their corporal eyes
saw nothing but flesh, yet with their spiritual eyes, they knew him to be God:
even so we with our corporal eyes, seeing the accidents of bread and wine,
ought to see and firmly to believe, that there is the most sacred body and
true blood of our Lord JESUS CHRIST on the altar. In this Mat. 2^.
manner is God always with his faithful, as himself has said: I will be with
you, even to the consummation of the world.

Of lone toward our neighbor, and how much the body is to be hated.
THE XLVI. CHAPTER.
THis thing may doubtless much confound us, that making profession to be
servants of JESUS CHRIST, and being certain that his true freindes have done
may worckes that have bin entirely devout, virtuous and holy, we nevertheless
content our selves with the only relation of them, and esteem by the bare
discourse thereof without execution, to reign eternally. Blessed is the servant
of JESUS CHRIST that loves his Christian brother as much being sick as in
health, and in adversity as in prosperity. Blessed is he that loves and
honors his Brother both far and near, that speaks nothing in his
absence, but what with great charity he may say in his presence. Matt. 5.
God said in the Gospel: love your ennemies and pray for them that hate and
injury you: He loves his ennemie truly, that complains not of the injuries
which he has received and does receive of him, but of the sins which
himself has committed, and does co^mitt against God and his soul, and also
he that is not content to have the love of God in himself, if he do not also
make demonstration thereof by the same worckes unto his neighbor, and much more
unto his ennemy. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom
of heaven. There are many that endure diverse afflictions in their bodies, in
prayer and good worckes, and that mortify it with abstinence, and nevertheless
for a slight word spoaken against their liking, or for having something denied
them, they are incontinently scandalized and troubled. Such are not poor in
spirit, though exteriourly they appear so: for the true poor in spirit,
misprise and abhor themselves, and love not only those that afflict and
injury them, but even those that beat them. Blessed also is he that supporteth
the infirmity and fragility of his neighbor, as he would be glad to have his
own supported: My faithful, let us love our neighbor as our selves: and
they who see they cannot love them as themselves, let them love them as much
as they can, or at least let them not offend them. Let us hate and detest
our perverse Matt. 15.
wills: for as God says, of our heart proceeds all evils: this is to be
understood of him that applies his heart, to satisfy his sensualities. Many
when they sin or receive any injury, accuse their neighbor thereof, which
they should not do: for each one has his ennemies, which is the body, with
the senses thereof, by which he offends. Therefore blessed is the servant that
has such an ennemie in subjection, and so keeps it under, and watches it
with such prudence that he has no cause to fear it: for whiles he uses this
diligence, no other ennemy visible or invisible can annoy him, nor procure him
to sin, in such sort that as S. John Chrysostom says: no man is hurt but of
himself. We hate our body in as much as it will committ sin: for living
carnally, it seeks to destroy the love of God, together with the glory of
Paradise, condemning it self and the soul perpetually to to hell; the
greatest ennemy therefore that a man has, is his proper flesh, which can thinck
of nothing but that which offends it, nor fear ought in foresight of that
which is eternally to befall it, the humor and desire thereof is only to abuse
temporal things: and the worst is, it usurps to it self all contentment,
and glory, even of that which is granted to the soul, not to it, for it
seeks the honor of virtues, of prayers, watchinges, and temporal favor, it
will have applause of tears, in fine it leaves nothing to the soul that
apperteineth to her.

Of obedience.
THE XLVII. CHAPTER.
Genesis 2.
GOd said to Adam: Of every tree of Paradise eat thou: But of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil eat thou not: and whiles he obeyed God he offended
not. But having transgressed this commandment, he was condemned of God for
ever, till he was redeemed by the grace of his Son. That man does eat of the
forbidden apple of knowledge of good and evil, who appropriateth to himself,
his own will, and with his benefittes which God utters and works by him,
does exalte himself; therefore was he necessarily obliged to punishment. God
says in the gospel: he that loves his life, shall lose Joan. 12. Luc. 14.
it: and in an other place, he that does not renounce all that he possesses,
cannot be my disciple. He renounceth all that he possesses, and loses his
soul, for the love of God, who in every thing submits himself to his
Prelate: for by this mean, he may be termed truly obedient, and then also
knowing he could do some other thing better then that which he is commanded,
and of more profitt to his soul, he sacrifices his will unto God; employing
himself in that which he is commanded for the love of God, though it be of
less fruit: for true obedience, is full of charity, edifieth our neighbor,
and entierly satisfies God. But if the Superior should command him any thing
in prejudice of his soul, then only he ought not to obey, but this case
excepted, in althinges else, he must hold him his true Superior: and if that
other Religious persecute and afflict him, because he obeys his Superior;
happy shall he be, for he may then truly say that God has communicated unto
him his perfect charity, which consists in enduring persecutions, and
exposing his own life for his neighbor. But the misery is, there are certain
Religious who whiles they would consider, and know whither certain things by
them invented, be not better then those which the Superiors command them, the
wretches do not consider that they look back, and return to the vomitt of
their self-will; and so do they ruin themselves and their neigbour by their
evil example.

Of patience and humility.
THE XLVIII. CHAPTER*
THough there be nothing that ought, more to displease the true servant of God
then sin, nevertheless if he fall into overmuch passion, for any sin
whatsoever, his charity toward his neighbor excepted, he is guilty of that
sin. Therefore the servant of God which is not moved in such accidents, may
be truly said to be without passion; for his patience ^cannot be known while
alt^inges smiles upon him, and succed according to his wish: But when occasion
is presented wherein he desires to be satisfied, and the contrary arriueth,
then is his patience experienced, for he has as much as he then shows, and
no more* The holy Father S. Francis would say, that they were truly peaceable,
who suffering in this world for the love of God, conserve peace in their
interior, and live as Lambs among woulues. In which respect God himself
lived and dyed so. Happy is he that being reprehended and accused of others,
receaueth and bears such reprehension charitably and patiently as of
himself, and without excusiue reply, consents with shame, confesses with
patience, and performs due satisfaction courageously, yea even in matters
whereof he is guiltles, and being a subject, persisteth under the rule of
discipline, or being superior, conuerseth with his subjects as with* his
superiors. Happy is the servant that incontinently corrects and chasticeth
his offenses, interiourly by contrition, and exteriourly by confession and
satisfaction.

A discourse which the holy Father S. Francis made to Brother Leo his
companion, being in seruour of spirit.
BRother Leo my beloved son, note well these my words: Albeit the Friar
Minors in whatsoever place they be, give example of edification and sanctity,
nevertheless consider prudently and seriously observe that their perfect joy
consists not in that. Yea if they should restore sight to the blind, health
to the sick, hearing to the deaf, speech to the dumb, ability of goeing to
the lame, should expel devils out of bodies, and raise the dead that had
sauoured four days, their true alacrity consists not in all this. If they
should understand all the scriptures, could speak all tongues, should
prophecy and know the consciences of men, yet does their true joy less
consist in this. Had they intelligence to discourse of celestial virtues, with
the very tongues of Angels, as also of the course of the stars, of the
proprieties of plants and stones, were all the treasures of the world
discovered unto them, knew they the nature and virtue of fishes and other
beasts, and also of men, their true joy depends not thereon. Though they
should preach with such fervor as to convert all the Infidels to the faith of
JESUS CHRIST, neither does their true joy consist in that. Brother Leo to all
this answered: Wherein then consists it. S. Francis replied: Hear me Brother
Leo: If we coming to our Lady of Angels by mean of a long iorny, very weary,
wett with the rain, frozen with cold, dabled with dirt, and extremely hungry,
ringing at the gate, the porter utterly disquieted and in collar should ask
us, who we were, and having answered him that we were Friar Minors and
therefore ^e should open us the door, he should reply: So far are you from
Wheri^ ought to consist the true spiritual joy of a Friar Minor.
being any of ours, that you seem two idle companions and rogues, that go
loitering about the world, robbing the poor of their almose, and so should not
permit us to enter, but should make us remain till night all drowned and
dagled with dirt and rain without giving us any comfort, and if that we
support it patiently for the love of God, receiving all that from his holy
hand, and confessing that the porter knew us very well: Brother Leo writ that
therein consists perfect joy. And if being constrained by necessity, we
continued ringing to enter, the porter should come forth in great choler
against us, and use us indiscreetlie and importunately, ^aying unto us: Get ye
gone to the hospital lewd and impudent fellows as ye are, and stay no longer
here for you shall not enter; if we support all this with alacrity, and pardon
him with all our heart, therein consists perfect joy. And being full darck
night we being every way molested, should begin again to ring and knock, and
weeping bitterly should pray the porter to let us in for the love of God, yet
he more cruel then before should come out with a good cudgel and load us
soundly with injuries and bastinadoes, leaving us in the dirt rather dead then
alive: write, Brother Leo, that therein would consist perfect joy: provided that
we support it all with great patience, that we pray God to pardon him, and that
we love him more, then if he had opened the door unto us for the love of God,
who has endured much more for all us.

Hear now the conclusion of all the graces of the holy Ghost which JESUS
CHRIST has granted, does, and ever will grant to his elect* The principal
is that a man do conquer himself, and for his love do voluntarily supporte
all kind of injuries and blows even to death: because indeed we cannot truly
glory of any of the other foresaid virtues and graces, by reason that they are
not ours, as the Apostle says, but 1. Cor. 14 Worthy aduertisment to
Superiors of the Friar Minors. Mat. 20. Luc. 21. Gal. 6.
Gods: What have thou that thou have not received? and if thou have received,
why do thou glory as if thou have not received? wherefore we neither can nor
ought the glory, but in the cross of tribulations and afflictions, which is
our own: therefore the Apostle says: I will glory only in the cross of our
Lord JESUS CHRIST: by which words is sufficiently explicated the sentence of
God when he said: In your patience you shall possess your souls. Our Lord God
the sovereign Prelat said: I come not to be served but to serve: And therefore
such as are constituted over others, ought to glory of such Prelature, as if
they were constituted to wash the feet of the Religious. And when they are
deprived their chardge, they ought no more to be greiued, then if were taken
from them said office of washing the of feet: such as do otherwise do really
appropriat to themselves this dignityin very imminent peril of their souls.
That servant of God then is happy, who esteems himself neither greater nor
better, for being honored of men, yea no otherwise then if he were reputed
among the most base and abject; for so great, as he is before God; such is he,
and no more. Wretched is the Religious who being raised to dignity by an other,
will not humble himself of his own accord and of his own will, happy is he
that is exalted against his will, and not having procured it, and does
nevertheless desire to remain always in low estate and under the feet of his
subjects for the love of God. Happy is he that is no more puffed in pride for
the good which God does or speaks by him, then of that which he does or
speaks by others. A man offends at all times and as often as he procures
to have more of that which is his neighbors, the^ to give to God of what is
his own. We should never desire to be superiors and over others: but to be
subjects and seruanees of all creatures for the love of God: and they who
shall do so, may assure themselves, that if they persevere to the end, the
spirit of God will rest upon them, and there will make his residence. Ye men,
consider in what excellency you have been created of God, who has created and
framed you after his own image according to the soul and after the image of
his Son according to the body, and yet all creatures are much more obedient
unto him then your selves. The devils have not crucified him, which thou being
induced by them have done, and daily do crucify him by thy sins. Wherein
then can thou glory? miserable that thou art, if thou were endued with all
knide of science celestial and terrestrial: the devil has known what
appertains to heaven better then thou, and now though against his will, he
knows more of earthly matters then all mankind together. There is no health,
corporal disposition, nor beauty, comparable to that which the devil had:
Take heed therefore, least in abusing it, as he did, not acknowledging it to
proceed of God but of himself, thou fall as he has done into the extremest
depth of hell. Happy is the servant that treasureth up, the richesse his Lo^d
and master has given him, in heaven, and expecting the recompense thereof,
regards not to demonstrate them here unto men, but leaves the cogitation
thereof to God himself, who when it shall please him will manifest it more then
he would desire. Happy then is he, that keeps and concealeth the secrettes of
God in his heart.

How Religious ought to behave themselves in Oratories and solitary places.
THE XLIX. CHAPTER.
Let those that desire to reside in solitary places, there to live religiously
and spiritually, be in number four or more, whereof let two be as mothers that
have two children, let two act the Life of Martha, and the others of Magdalen,
and let each one have a celle, so that they neither sleep nor converse
together but when they read their office. Let them be careful to say their
Compline before the Sun setting, that thence forward they may keep silence,
till they arise in the night to say Mattins. Let them in all things first
seek the glory and the kingdom of God, and his justice: Let them say the
Prime Matt. 6.
and Tierce at the ordinary hour, which done they may speak each to other of
some matter of edification. Those said children as poor creatures shall
demand almose of their mother for the love of God: after that let them say
the Sixth, Ninth, and Euensong at their due hours: let them permit no person
to enter into the Cloister or enclosure where they reside, nor to eat there.
The mothers shall labor to live also sequestered from all conversation, and
with due observance of obedience to their Guardian, let them permit none to
speak to their children, but their Guardian when he comes to visitt them.
And let the children sometimes for exercise of humility assume the office of
Mothers according as the Guardian for their behoof shall appoint, that so they
may experience both the one and the other office. Happy is that servant who
has no taste of any other thing then the word of his God, and by the same does
excite others to love him. Miserable is that Religious that takes pleasure in
idle and vain words, for therbie enducing other to vanity in imitation of
himself, in steed of edifiyng his neighbor, he procures his ruin.

Of the care which each one ought to have of his own salvation.
THE L. CHAPTER.
BRother I have a secrett to open unto thee. Each of you well knows, that we
are the sons of the most high; but I now advertise thee that more then
children, we are also Spouses, brothers and mothers of JESUS CHRIST. Spouses
when our soul by the virtue of the holy Ghost is united with God: Brothers,
when we perform his will: we are Mothers when by love we bear him in our
heart, with a pure and sincere conscience: for we afterward bring him forth,
both by the pious worckes which we perform, and by the example which we give
our neighbor. O my brethren, it is a glorious, admirable, and desirable thing
to have such a Spouse, Brother, and Son in heaven: And more then that, a
Pastor who has given his soul here on earth for us his sheep, and who
continually prays the eternal Father for us, Joan. 17.
saying: Holy Father, keep them in thy name, whom thou have given me, that
they may be thine, and may be with me where I shall be, that they may enjoy my
glory and splendor in my kingdom. All they who live not in penance, not
being contrite, nor receive not the sacred Sacrament, but live in vices and
sins, and conceive complacence in their pernicious desires, do not perform
unto God what they have promised: but do serve the world with their bodies in
carnalities, and the devils with their souls, being deluded in their
contentment by him whose children they are; Such people I say are blinded, and
deprived of the true light of JESUS CHRIST, and have not true knowledge: for
they have excluded from themselves the wisdom of the eternal Father JESUS
CHRIST the sovereign verity, and though they seem to see, know, and
understand, yet do they neither see, know, nor understand: for they do
voluntary blind and ruinate their own souls. Open your eyes, then, blinded
and deluded as ye are by your ennemies, the flesh, the world, Matt. 15.
and the devil. To the body it is a very delightful thing to serve sin, and
very tedious to serve God: all evils and sins proceed from the heart of man,
as God says in the Gospel. The wicked have no good in this world, nor shall
have in the next, they seem at their pleasure to possess the present
vanities, but they are deceived: for the time and hour will come, when they
shall loose all.

The holy Father said also that one being known to be very sick the first
advertisement of his kindred and freindes, is not to provide for his soul, but
to make his will, and so his wife, kindred and freindes gather How we ought to
prepare our selves to dye.
about him, to induce him to be mindful of them: And he overcome by the tears
of his wife, the tender love he bears to his children and the persuasions of
his kindred that seem to have forgotten his soul, disposes of his substance
according to their fancy to give them content, and says that he commits to
their government and authority his substance, his soul and his body: that man
is truly accursed who in this sort puts his trust in man: conformable to
what the Prophett Jeremy said: Cursed is the man that trusts in man. Now
after such disposition Iere. 17.
the Confessor is sent for, who finding the wretch obliged to some
restitution, soliciteth him to discharge himself thereof, but he answeareth
that he has made his testament, disposed of all his goods, and delivered it
into the hands of his heirs, who will satisfy whatsoever shall be necessary,
and because he is in agony and has almost lost his speech, there is no time
to dispose of matters necessary to the discharge of his conscience, and so he
dies a most miserable death. Therefore let every one know, that when and
howsoever a man dye in mortal sin, and without due restitution of an other
man's goods, having power to do it before his death, the devil carries his
soul directly to hell, where he shall be eternally tormented, and so in an
instant he loses body and soul, goods and honor; because his kindred
dividing his inheritance among them* they often curse his soul, for not having
left to one of them, what he has left to all.

Of the contrariety of vices and virtues, and certain breife aduertisements
and exercises of them.
THE LI. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father S. Francis affirmed, that where true charity is, there can
neither be fear nor ignorance; Where there is a joyful and voluntary poverty
there is neither envy nor avarice; where there is Meditation of God, there is
no care: where the fear of God is keeper of the house, there the devil cannot
enter; where there is discretion and mercy, there is neither superfluity nor
deceit. Now I tell you there is no man in the world can in any sort have one
of the said virtues, If he do not first die to himself, and he that reallie
possesses one has all: with that one, he erreth not in the rest, and he that
erreth in one, erreth in all the other, and is in that case as if he had not
any; they are of such value, that each one of it self confounds vices and
sins: holy wisdom confounds the devil with all his malices: holy
simplicity confounds the prudence of the devil, the world, and the flesh:
holy poverty confounds envy, avarice, and seculer desires: holy humility
confounds pride, with all worldly honors, and what soever is in them: holy
charity confounds all diabolical and carnal temptations and pleasures: holy
obedience confounds all natural will and sensual affection, subiecteth the
body to obedience of the spirit, renders and makes a man humble and subject,
not only to all men, but even to other irreasonable 1. Cor. 3.
creatures. The Apostle says: the letter kills but the spirit gives life:
they are killed by the letter, who seek to know only, to be reputed learned
and wise of the world: by this mean to purchase honors and richesse, with
anxiety to advance their kindred and freindes: and in a word, not for
themselves, but for the body or for others. And they are quickened of the
spirit, who refer all the learning and knowledge they have, and desire to
have, only to the praise and honor of the divine majesty, and who appear
before God, by the example of their life, and with words full of edification,
offering unto him that goodness which is entierlie his own. In this sort it is,
that the servant of God may know if he really have his spirit: for if the
flesh glory in the worckes it does, by mean of the grace of God as its own,
it is then a sign that he is of the devil: But if in the said worckes, he
nevertheless repute himself vile, and acknowledge himself a most greiuous
sinner, he is then truly of God, and God is in him: Happy is the servant that
neither speaks nor does any thing, for hope of recompense in this world,
but for the love of God, nor lightly speaks, what comes to his mouth, but
prudently and in due time, disposes his propositions and answeares. Wretched
also is the Religious that buryeth in his heart the graces which he receaueth of
God, or that commanicateth them for subject of vain glory, desiring rather to
manifest them verbally then to God; for he has already received his reward,
and they who have heard him, have bin little edified thereby. These are words of
life, and he that shall ruminate and accomplish them, shall find true life,
and in the end obtain salvation of God. They that seek not to taste how sweet
God is, and that love darcknes more then light, neglecting to observe the Psalm.
118.
commandementes of God, are by his Prophett accursed of him, who says: Cursed
are they who err from thy commandementes: but how blessed and happy are they
that love God, and perform the saying of the gospel: Thou shall love thy Lord
thy Mat. 22.
God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and withal thy will: Let us
therefore, My Brethren, love and praise God day and night: Our Father which art
in heaven, because it is necessary to pray always, without intermission: and
let us have charity and humility, Luc. 18.
and do almose deeds, that they may cleanse our souls from spots of sin,
for every thing appertayning to the world tourneth to ruin, men must leave
it, and carry with them only the recompense and reward of charity and the
almose they have done, whereof they shall receive recompense of God: And
therefore it is good to fast from vices and sins, flying all occasions of
them, and to keep us from all kind of superfluity, though lawful, and we
must frequent churches, and honor Preistes, in respect of the dignity they
have with God: and especially the Religious that have renounced the world, to
do more good then others, and by their example we also must renounce it, if
not entierlie, at least in part. Let us love our ennemies, and do good to
them that hate us: let us observe the precepts and counsels of our Savior
JESUS CHRIST, renouncing our selves, and living under the sweet yoke of his
obedience. Let us not be wise according to the flesh, but simple, humble, and
pure, keeping our senses mortified, and pride trodden under foot, considering
our baseness unworthy to be superior to others as they would we should be.
Let us imitate our Lord, and carry his cross upon us, let us suffer together
with him, who has endured so much for us wretches in this world, and bestows
on us so many benefittes, and far greater will hereafter, and to whom all
creatures ought to give praise, honor, and glory in heaven, in earth, in the
sea, and in the depth, because he is our virtue and our force, who only is
good, only most high, only almighty, meruaylous and glorious, and only holy,
praised and exalted for ever Amen. I Brother Francis your servant with the
greatest humility I can, prostrate on the earth and kissing your feet, do
beseech you by the bowels of the charity of God, to receive these words and
others of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, to effect and observe them with due humility
and charity, assuring all them, that shall receive, understand, and effect
them, and shall by words and example teach them to others, therein perseuering
to the end, that the Father, the Son, and holy Ghost, will give him his
benediction. Amen.

Of the conditions and qualities in a true Friar Minour, taken out of the 10.
chapter and 10. book, and placed here as in their due place.
THe holy Father S. Francis as a good pastor, and zealous of the profitt and
releife of his sheep in Evangelical perfection, considered often with
himself, what conditions ought to be in a true and perfect Freer Minor. Our
Lord having revealed unto him the perfections of many of his interior freindes
and first disciples, in whom he made appear singular grace^, he, uniting them
all together, in this sort framed a Friar Minor: Let him have the faith and
loyaulty of Bro^ther Bernard Quintaualle, who had also a most perfect
observance of poverty, as in his life shall appear: the simplicity and purity
of Brother Leo: the good manners and good nature of Brother Angelus of Riete,
who being in the world, was a right worthy and co^pleate knight: the gracious
countenance, natural science, and devout speech of Brother Macie: the soul
elevated in contemplation as Brother Giles: the perseuerant prayer of Brother
Ruffinus, who prayed without intermission; though he were employed in other
affairs: it seemed even when he slept that his soul was with God: the
patience of Brother Iuniperrus, who desired nothing more then to endure and be
contemned: the Fortitude of Brother John des Lands, a man of notorious courage
and extreme abstinence: the Charity of Brother Roger, and the care of Brother
Lucidus, who was so sollicitous of soul, that when he felt consolation in one
place, he would repair to an other, to avoid the settling of his love in this
world: whereupon he would say, that one must dwell as in an inn, with the foot
ever ready to putt into the sturrup, to prosecute the journey to heaven.

Th end of the doctrines.
Of certain Miracles whereby our lord confirmed the life and holy doctrine of
his Preacher S. Francis.
THE LII. CHAPTER.
S. Franc. obtained rain by prayers.
THere happening an extreme dryness at Beneuentum for want of rain, and
whereas every one expected and feared a great dearth, the holy Father S. Francis
arrived there, and having preached and being informed of their affliction, he
commanded each one to say a Pater nostex and Aue Maria: which done, it rained
very abondantlie. Preaching an other time in a church, near unto a pond where
were many frogs, which by their croakinges hindered The frogs obey him.
the people from hearing him: the holy Father commanded them to be silent,
and they in such sort obeyed him that retourning thither an other time, and
knowing that they had not croaked from the time of the said prohibition, he
gave them license to use their natural voice, which at the very instant they
began to do. There being a general procession made in a place called Arona,
for an extreme dryness which they endured; saint Francis coming thither,
began to preach unto them publikelie in the mids of a field Swallows couers
the hearers of his sermon.
in the violent scorching sun, whither (to the end he and his audience might
not be molested) our lord sent such a number of swallows, that remaining in
the mids of the air, they covered the multitude from the beams of the
sun, and stirred not thence till saint Francis had ended his predication.
Preaching at Albruzo in a church of the Virgin Marie, to excite the people
more seriously to observe the word of God, there being presented unto him a
child that was crooked, lame and mute, called Albertus He cures a crooked lame
and mute child.
Campoly, he with his very hands straightened his crookedness and his other
maimed members, which obeyed him as if they had consisted of soft wax, and
composed every part aacording to their nature: then calling him, he made him
answer, and of that answer followed his speech, so that he delivered him
perfectly cured unto his Father, who with very great faith expected the
success, whereupon he with all the people were inflamed in the true love of
God, and yielded infinite thanckes to his divine Majesty. He cured a dangerous
wound in a young man by the sign of the cross in the city of Castello,
whither he was brought with great faith, A mortal wound.
that he might sign him with the said sign, so that the next morming, the
flesh being grown where before it was putrified, the cicatrice remained
vermillion like a rose, in perpetual memory of the miracle. When the
Monastery was builded for his Religious at He converted water into wine.
Ancona, the worckmen wanting wine they murmured, and would no longer labor:
but saint Francis having made his prayer, went to a neighbor fountain, the
water whereof, by the sign of the cross which he made thereon, he turned into
wine, then made the laborers to drink, whom he made penitent of their
conceived impatience. A gentleman visiting the holy Father in the Church of
saint Christopher at Iterrena, and having invited him to eat He also
conuerteth vinegar into wine.
with him, it happened that there was no wine in his house, saint Francis then
commanded a botell of vinegar to be drawn, and it was seen and known to be
most precious wine. In the same city, a wall being fallen upon a young man,
that was found dead under the stones, whiles he was lamented in his Fathers
house, saint Francis having compassion thereof and inspired of God, He raises
one dead.
entered in at a back door, and approaching to the bear that was uncovered;
(for in Italy the body is carried to buried clothed as Prelates are here) he
took the dead by the arm, and calling him by his name, he raised him, no
otherwise then if he had awaked* him from sleep, and at the very instant he
prophesied that he should live and have no children by his wife, which came so
to pass, and all this was assured to Pope Nicolas the third by autenticall
testimony that was produced before notaries.

Of the exercises of the holy Father S. Francis: and of the lent he kept on the
lake of Perusiea.
THE LIII. CHAPTER.
THe glorious S. after he was converted to God never remained idle: for he
always endeavored to be employed in some action, in example of Jacobs ladder,
where on the Angels ceased not to mount and descend, receiving and carrying the
pious worckes of the children of God to the sovereign Father: so the S. by
contemplation mounted toward God, and by piety and preaching descended to
his neighbor: thus did he employ all his time which had bin given him of his
divine Majesty to meritt in the pious worckes which the holy Ghost did dictat
unto him. Now the time of one of his lentes being come wherein as a careful
be, he collected the fruits and flowers of God by mean of prayer, thereof to
compound the delicious honey of predications, wherewith he might refectionat the
hungry chidren of the word of God, he resolved to seek out a place where he
might perform the same commodiouslie, solitary and without any impediment; to
this purpose on Shrouetuesday he went up to the lake of Perusia where a friend
of his, lodged him on the side of the lake, whence the next morning he got
himself to be conducted in a barcke to the Island that is scituat on the said
lake then uninhabited, with two little loaves to sustain him during the said
lent, he coniured his friend not to speak thereof to any person, for so much as
he would not therein trust any of his Religious not having for that time taken
any companion, and enjoined his said friend not to come for him till Maundie or
holy thursday. Being then descended into this I Will, himself made a little
cottage S. Franc. did eat but half a loaf in the whole lent.
of bows of trees, where he resided all the lent in continual and holy
contemplation and conversation with God, the Angels, and blessed Saints. On
holy thursday his friend coming early unto him reconducted him to the
Covent, where he would communicate with all his disciples and wash their feet:
he restored a loaf and half to his friend, of the two which he had given him,
the other half it is credible he did eat to observe humane fast, or not to
give subject of vain glory to the devil, and not to equal himself to his
God, though God alone does know, and his servant saint Francis, who would
never reveal it to any man, the combats he had during that lent, against the
invisible ennemies, and the glorious graces he obtained; Afterward God
voutsafed in some sort to reveal them, worcking in that place many miracles,
by the merittes of the Saint, whereupon the i will began to be inhabited, and
there was erected a Covent of Friar Minors which is exceedingly reverenced in
memory of the said miracle.

Of the lent of S. Michael which he kept on the Mount Aluerne.
THE LIVE. CHAPTER.
THe year of grace 224. two years before the death of this glorious Father,
some days before the nativity of the Virgin Marie, he repaired to the
Oratorie of Mount Aluerne, there to keep his lent that began the day after the
said feast of the Virgin Marie, and continued til the feast of S. Michael the
Archa^gel, according to his particular devotion, where he shutt himself into a
celle, sequestered from all others. The first evening that he entered there, he
demanded this grace of God, that he would please to reveal unto him in what
he should serve him that lent, as he accustomed to do, for he governed him in
althinges according to the will of God, and not according to his own. Now in
the morning about the break of day S. Francis arysing from prayer, there
incontinently flocked a great number of birds that began to sing one after an
other and having sung, they took their flight and left the Saint contented:
In that instant he heard a voice that said: Francis, let this be a sign of a
notable favor which God intends to show thee in this place. By which voice
his heart was so altered that thence forward he felt a great quantity of
spiritual gifts in his interior, God continually visiting him, and
remaining there, he burned with an ineffable flame of his love, and therefore,
he was often in his contemplations elevated so high, that as Brother Leo
recounted who was then his companion and a curious obseruer of all his actions,
he could not discern nor comprehend him with his sight, surpassing the high
clouds of heaven; which is not ouer-greatly to be admired, considering that in
this world he led a life more angelical then humane. He, as he afterward
recounted to his companions, there demanded as a singular grace of his God, to
be entierlie transformed into his anguishes and dolours, since his Majesty had
not voutsafed to accept of his life, which so many times he had offered unto
him, as the only thing he had to offer, having no other thing in this world,
and having so often gone among the infidels there to receive Martyrdom in the
service of his divine majesty: Wherefore it was incontinent. lie revealed unto
him of God, that as he had always endeavored perfectly to follow and imitate
his life, and actions, so should he be permitted to be like unto him, and to
suffer with him in the dolours, of his passion. Which the holy Father
understanding, albeit he were already exceedingly weakened, by the rigor of his
life past, and by the continual cross with he had carried, yet he was fo
far from being troubled with all, that he encouraged himself, and enamoured
himself the more to suffer a Martyrdom so noble and worthy above all others,
and by the interior burning flame he extinguished the water of all the
afflictions and dolours that ever could befall him, and desired no less
perfection, to receive in himself so inestimable a treasure.

How S. Francis received the sacked stigmates of our Lord Jesus Christ.
THE LV. CHAPTER.
THe most fervent Father S. Francis being thus highly elevated in God, by an
extreme ardor of celestial desires, and transformed into JESUS CHRIST,
crucified for our sins, by sweetness of compassion on the day of the
exaltation of the holy cross, which is the fourteenth of September, a little
before the break of day, there appeared unto him this vision following: He saw
an Angel descend from ^say. 6.
heaven like unto the Seraphin with six wings in the Prophett Esaias, enflamed
with a most resplendant fire, whose beams were so glittering, that to humane
eyes they were insupportable. This Angel approaching unto the S. being already
in the region of the air so near unto him that he might see him, there
stayed: and then the S. beholding him more attentively saw the image of JESUS
CHRIST crucified imprinted in him, which had the two wings crossed on high, as
were those below, so that the ends of those upper passed the hight of the
head, and those below passed the soles of the feet, and the other two passed on
each side the ends of the fingers and hands, the two arms being stretched in
form of a cross. The soul of S. Francis was with this admirable appatition
exceedingly melted, being surprised with a contentment and an extreme grief
entermingled so together, that it was impossible to explicate, whither of the
two were greater, for on the one side he exceedingly rejoiced, beholding
himself in the mirour, wherein the Angels themselves cannot be weary to look,
and wherein are enclosed the treasures of all beautitude, and keeping his eyes
always more fixed on that celestial fiery globe, shining with a divine light,
he consumed with love and sweetness: but on the other side, considering his God
so cruelly fastened on the cross with hard and gross nails, as he then
appeared unto him, and having his side opened with the stroke of a lance, he by
commiseration experienced that cruel iron, which pierced the delicate breast
of the Virgin Mary, in such sort that he no less felt that dolor, then if
himself had bin crucified in that manner, yea by his interior compassion he
was fully transformed into his beloved JESUS CHRIST. No man can doubt hereof,
since this vision was not as others, appearing only to the exterior eyes, but
it was effectiue and operative by an act not heard of, in the very body of
his Saint, imprinting in him the very wounds which he had, by means of his
divine beams, which from his two hands, his two feet, and side, he sent into
his hands, feet, and side, not spirituallie, or imaginatiuelie only, but
sensibly and corporally, opening his side, and pearcing his hands and feet;
and this was not only for the present, but for an eternal testimony he left
him the nails framed of his very flesh fixed therein, the heads of the nails
lardge appearing without in the paulmes of his hands, but round and of iron
color, and on the other sides the points clinched, for the wounds were
transpearced through both sides, so that at the principal wound, whereby the
hands were pierced from one side to an other with the said nails, on the side
where the points of the nail was clinched, there was such a space between
the superior part of the hand, and the turned clinch of the nail, that
between the same one might putt in a finger; the like might be said of the
feet: so that thenceforward he could not stand upon them but with extreme
pain; in such sort that besides the incessant running of the blood, it was
very troublesome unto him; as also was the wound of his side which was very
lardge and open, the flesh being there grown again in form of a cicatrice,
which was of the color of a rose, as it was seen afterward by diverse, having
touched the same, as in place convenient shall be inserted. Our sovereign Lord
and God, leaving in the body of his feruant, a lively, true, and long memorial
of his dolorious Passion, not without a most profound judgment, and immensiue
sign, of an excessive love unto us, for seeing that the memory of his bitter
passion was utterly extinguished in our hearts, he would not this other
misterious passion, for our cause only, renewed in the body of his servant,
should be so soon forgotten. In which respect it was necessary that he should
endure it, not one hour or two, one day or a month, but two years entierly,
the hard obstinacy, and obstinate hardness of our hearts opposite and
rebellions to his divine Majesty, so requiring it to procure us with efficacy
to remember the other.

How the glorious Father saint Francis was at length constrained to reveal
the impression of his stigmates, to such as were most familiar unto him.
THE LVI. CHAPTER.
NOw after this admirable communication, performed with such and so great a
prerogative as a greater could not be imagined, the altar eukindled in the
breast of the holy Father, burned with the immensiue charity he had unto his
God; but leaving this to the deuoutsoules, that raise themselves from the earth
toward their Creator, we will prosecute the history, telling how he
discovered this treasure unto the world. Saint Francis then having finished
his lent which he fasted in the honor of saint Michal the Archangel, and
having given thanckes to God, he descended to the foot of the Mountain,
carrying with him the divine image of JESUS CHRIST crucified, not in tables of
stone or wood carved and engraven by the hand of some humane or Angelical
Master, but written and imprinted in the members of his properflesh, by the
hands of the Son of God himself, not casting his precious stones before
every body; because he feared much to manifest to little purpose so great a
secret of God; yet withal he found it impossible to conceal the same, at
least from his companions, that were hourly with him; therefore calling them
together, he proposed unto them his doubt, as in a third person, not
specifying the fact, but only speaking generally of the revelations of the
secrettes of God. But Brother Illuminato, truly illuminated of God, aiming at
that which proved true, that Saint Francis had received of God some
revelations of very great importance, especially perceauing him to be as out of
himself, he thus answered: Beloved Father, who knows better then your
self, that for the most part, and almost always God gives great revelations
to his servants not for themselves alone, but for others also, as has bin
seen that it has pleased him at lengtht to manifest them all? Wherefore it
seems to me that you having received such, should prove ungrateful to God if
you conceal that which he has wrought in you more for the salvation of the
world, then for your own particular, thereby burying his talent under the
earth. Which the holy Father understanding, as from the mouth of God, besides
what he often said with the Prophet: My secrett unto my self, my secrett unto
my self, he very Esaias. 6.
humbly recounted unto them the vision he had, the success thereof, and many
other most high and divine matters, under the seal of secrecy, which is not
to be doubted but God did reveal unto him in so merueillous a conjunction.

How his sacred wounds were scene of diverse during his life.
THE LVII. CHAPTER.
But it being impossible for the holy Father to conceal this light with God
would have to shine to all the world, on an high candlestick: though he could
cover his feet with his sandales when he would, and his hands with the sleeves
of his habitt; yet he was constrained in the end to manifest them. Brother Leo
his Confessor, saw them every day, the holy Father being of necessity to use
him, as a Physician, to dress his holy stigmates, whence did continually
distill blood, and to change the linen and putt tents between the nails and
flesh with incredible pain and patience of the holy Father. Nevertheless, he
would not have them touched on the friday, because he would endure the more,
and so suffer with his Savior. Brother Ruffinus, who as S. Francis affirmed
was already for his sanctity of life canonized in heaven, having many times
seen the wounds of Brother Leo and Br. Ruffinus, S. Clare, the Cardinal
protector and the bishop Vgolino, saw the holy Stygmates and wounds of S. Fr.
in his life time.
the hands and feet of the S. desired also very earnestly to see that of his
side whereof he held himself as fully assured, by washing his linen bretches,
which he always found embrued with blood on the right side, and annoynting his
stomach with oyntmentes, insinuating himself and thrusting his hand farther
then he needed, did often touch it with his fingers, and sometimes the S. felt
much grief thereby; nevertheless he had a very extreme desire for his
consolation to see it: And therefore one day, faigning to request the holy
Fathers habitt, of deuorion to change it for his own, and requiring it for
the love of JESUS CHRIST, he so wrought, that the S. who could not deny any
thing that was demanded him in the name of God, not suspecting any other
thing, putting of his habitt to give him, he contented him therein though he did
his endeavor to hide the same. S. Clare that made him many plasters for
dressing thereof, deserved to see them, the S. showing them all unto her, in
regard that she was such an Espouse of JESUS CHRIST as each one knows, and
the eldest daughter in God of the S. The said plaster is with great reverence
shown for a relic in the Covent of S. Clare at Assisium. The Cardinal of
Hostia, Protector of the Order, law them also, and many persons devoted and
affected unto him, as the bishop Vgolino and others.

How God by many miracles published the Sacred stigmates of his servant S.
Francis.
THE LVIII. CHAPTER.
The water that issued out of the stigmates of S. Fr. cured cattle infected
with the plague. An ordinary te^mpest that destroyed all fruit near the Mount
Aluerne ceased after S. Francis. had there received the stigmates. S. Franc.
with his hand touching a man that was extrem cold did warm him.
THe same God that had imprinted the sacred stigmates in his servant for the
good of the world, would not have them buried in silence; but did miraculously
manifest them, as to his majesty seemed convenient, which he did, as well for
his own glory, as for the benefitt of faithful souls, who seeing his sacred
wounds in his servant, increased in faith, and glorified the author of them in
his saint. There reigning a great pestilence among the cattle of the Country
of Riete, which procured their death, notwithstanding any remedy that could be
invented; God revealed unto a devout person that he should procure to get of
the water that fell from the hands of his servant Francis, when he washed
them, and therewith should sprinckle the cattle, and so they should be cured:
The man fearing God, went and got of the said water, and with faith
experienced the application, and all the cattle that were touched therewith,
though half dead, arose sound and secure on their feet. Before S. Francis had
the stigmates, there arose every year a cloud, with a tempest near the Mount
Aluerne, that destroyed all the fruit of that place: But after he received
them, that tempest never appeared which procured great admiration to all the
world. Being one time accompanied with a poor man, himself riding on an ass,
by reason that the wounds that were under his feet hindered his goeing, the
night having surprised them, they retired themselves under the couerture of a
mountain, where the poor man, for the extreme cold which he felt could not
sleep, and tourning himself from one side to an other, did nothing but sigh
and lament: Whereof the holy Father having compassion, touched him with one of
his sacred hands, and the poor man in steed of the bitter cold which he felt,
incontinently found himself so exceeding hoate, that he seemed to be in a
stoue or hoate house, where he sweetly slept till the morning, and afterward
affirmed that in all his life he never slept better. A woman of Arrezzo had so
dangerous a labor that she was abandonned of the phisicions, and the health of
her body being desperate, there was no care but of her soul: it happened by
chance that the ass whereon S. Francis had ridden was brought to drinck near
unto the house of the said woman, which her kindred knowinge, they took of the
bridle, which S. Francis sitting on the ass had held in his hands, and A
woman being in extreme dangerous labor was delivered by holding the bridle
which S. F. did ride with all.
having with great faith girded the woman therewith, she was presently without
danger delivered. God wrought such miracles during his life, that by them it
might appear that his sacred stigmates were truly worckes of his omnipotent
hand; but he made it much more apparent after his death, as here ensuying
shall be declared, though they happening afterward seem not convenient to be
written as yet, nevertheless I do it that the matter may be seen well united
together.

Of the testimonies of the wounds of the Seraphicall Father S. Francis, by the
holy Apostolical sea.
THE LIX. CHAPTER.
POpe Gregory the ninth, himself saw and touched the hands and feet of the
glorious S. and because he saw not that of the side he had no great belief
thereof; Wherefore some time before he canonized S. Francis, one night in his
sleep, as himself often affirmed, the S. appeared unto him as in choler, and
reprehending him of his Pope Gregory by a bulle assures and confirms the
truth of the stigmates
sclender faith, lifted up his right arm, and showed him the wound of his
side: then demanding a cup it seeming to his Holiness that he delivered him
one, it was presently filled with blood. By this apparition, he afterward
remained assured of the wound, which he so reverenced that being unable to
endure the envy and lewdnes of some that impugned the same, striving to
darcke^ the glory of so singular a miracle, he commanded by the first bulle he
published, that this truth should be believed, as affirmed by Apostolical
sentence. The bulle begins: The glorious Confessor: then afterward he
says: We by the tenor of these presents declare unto all people, that the
stigmates of this glorious S. having in his life time and after his death bin
seen in his body, the same has bin approved with his other miracles, by our
venerable Brethren, the Cardinals of the holy Church: wherefore we have had just
occasion to enrole him in the catalogue of SS. And because in the beginning of
this verity there were two ecclesiastical persons that publicly declared
themselves adversaries to the said stigmates, one of who was Brother Euerard,
an Alleman Preacher, who in his sermo^nes avouched that he never had those
wounds: and the other was the Archbishop of Colleigne, who commanded the said
stigmates to be putt out of his image; the said Gregory the ninth, made and
sent two breuies against them, the one of which being directed to the
Prouincials and Priours of the Order of Preachers was such, Gregory Bishop: we
having heard with no less grief then marvel, that a Religious of your
Order* named Euerard, not remembering that the sermons of Preachers ought to be
seasoned with the salt of grace; being at Copania, a city of Morauia, of a
Preacher becoming a blasphemer, was not ashamed to affirm that the stigmates
of the holy servant of God Francis, that were so miraculouslie by divine
Majesty imprinted on him, were fables, and ought to be reproved; what could he
say more? He at one same time deprived the holy servant of God, of his honor
and glory, yea God himself, who by a singular privilege and excellent
mystery gave him those signs, and has deprived us of authority and dew
respect, considering that he has presumed to impugn our authority; for we
have approved the said stigmates; not only as having heard relation thereof by
persons worthy of creditt, and bin assured thereof by very authentical
written testimonies; but over selves also have seen them with our proper eyes,
and touched them with our very hands, Now we Plus vnus oculatus, quam december
allriti.
understand that the said Religious is mounted to such audacitie, as he
presumes to preach publikelie, to the dishonor of the Religious Friar Minors,
baptising them before the people with the false name and title of dore-begging
preachers and liars, adding that they ought to be prevented and excommunicated.
All these things considered, we command you in virtue of this present
Apostolical Breuie, to suspend the said Religious from the faculty of
preaching, in what place soever he shall appear, and using all means to get
him into your hands, you shall incontinently send him unto us; that we may
inflict on him the punishment due to his desert.

The other Breuy that was directed to the Archbishop of Coileigne was thus:
The divine wisdom; that first framed man according to his flesh to redeem
him, by the mystery of his holy Incarnation; he also has adorned his servant
Francis with the same wounds, and that it is so, we with the College of our
venerable brethren the cardinals have approved the same, having bin assured
thereof by diverse persons of virtuous life, and have our selves seen very
authentical testimonies thereof: and besides we have bin induced by our selves,
that have with our own eyes seen, and touched them with our own hands. For
which respects we have really and with just reason concluded, that it ought to
be held for truth: wherefore we command you that understanding this our
intention and probation of them, you Pope Alexander the 4. did as much.
also publikelie approve them, and not to permit any within your diocese to
contradict them. Pope Alexander the fourth that saw them, made also a Breuie in
approbation of them, and commanded the Friar Minors never to leave the Oratorie
of Mount Aluerne, where their holy Father had received so singular a gift of
God. Pope And Pope Benedict the 2.
Benedict the second, ordained by a Breuie that the Friar Minors should
celebrate the feast, and say the office of the said sacred stigmates of the
glorious Father saint Francis: All which testimonies, (and many other which
for brevity I omit) we were willing to insert in this place, because the
malice of envy, that will be of as long continuance as the world, had enforced
us thereto, by reason that so admirable a miracle ought not to be related,
without due circumstances and proofs, to make mute the perfidious tongues of
the evil minded envious.

Of the zeal of the honor of God, and salvation of souls which the holy
Father saint Francis had, after the impression of the sacred stigmates, and of
the figures precedent.
THE LX. CHAPTER.
THis glorious Saint having felt in his proper flesh the dolours pain of the
passion of God, and as it were partly experienced, of what dear price souls
were unto the Son of God, he to loose no time began incontinently to
travail over all cittyes and towns instructing by mean of prayer, preaching,
and the example of good life, God assisting with merueillous miracles, in
testimony of his docttine, to redeem the precious souls of poor Christians
out of the mouth of the perfidious Lucifer, he being armed with these weapons
of the cross, that always overthrow every ennemie corporal and spiritual
of the elect of God, who continually get the victory. And as a new Legate
deputed of his divine majesty, he carried with him the sea le of the
sovereign bishop JESUS CHRST, wherewith he confirmed his doctrine and his
worckes. Thereby did he truly appear to be sent of God: wherefore he not only
found no contradiction where he went, but was exceeding grateful to all all
persons. Besides that, this is also worthy of merueillous consideration, that
as in all things deserving perpetual memory for being of great consequence,
it seems that his divine Majesty always observed three conditions,
prophesying or figuring them precedently, approving them by good testimonies
with the rumor of present renown, and confirming them afterward by divine
signs and miracles; in like sort would he observe three conditions in this
singular favor, whereof the rumor, renown, and manifest proof, being seen
for the time present, and the miracles afterward, it rests now that we
demonstrate the figure, by which this singular act has in a certain manner
bin many times prophesied. First it seemed to be signified by the vision of the
glittering and resplendant souls, marcked with the sign of the cross, of
whom God constituted him his captain in the beginning of his conversion. The
same also seemed to be signified by the vision of the crucisix that interiourly
transpearced his soul with excessive sorrow, with the voice that told him he
must repair his holy church. And it was also signified by the cross which
Brother Siluester saw to come out of his mouth, that expelled the dragon of
hell. Again it was denoted by the vision which Brother Pacificus had before he
was converted, when he saw two glittering swords, that made a cross upon his
breast. Finally it was signified by the apparition which S. Francis made at the
Chapter of Arles, in form of a cross in the air, giving his benediction to
the Religious there assembled. Let no man therefore presume to contradict so
certain a truth, denounced and prophesied by figures, seen visibily, touched
palpably, approved by the church justly, and finally by JESUS CHRIST
confirmed, by so many miracles in earth and in heaven.

Of the new seruour, and merueillous patience of the saint.
THE LXI. CHAPTER.
S. F. used a staff to go with all the two last years of his life by reason
of his stigmates as he had don the two first years of his conversion. Luc. 10.
THe holy Father S. F. finding himself enriched with so glorious a treasure,
made his habitt to be lengthened, as much as was possible to cover the same,
and began thenceforward to carry a staff, wherewith he walked about the house,
though very seldom, being unable by reason of the sacred wounds to set his
feet on the ground. It is admirable to consider, that as in the two first
years of his conversion, before he founded the Order, he carried a staff, so
he began again to carry it two years before his death, that he might end by
the walking staff as a true Pilgrim on earth, albeit he had left it upon
observation of the word of IESEVS CHRIST, who commanded his disciples not to
carry it in their journey, signifying, that they should not rely on any favor
of the world, understood by the staff or stalk of a reed more perilous then
secure; and afterward he conformed himself to the ancient fathers, who used
it at their hermitages, as saint Paul the first hermit, saint Antony and
others, and not to be singular herein, he gave leave to all the Religious to
use one in their infirmities, sicknesses and old age. Afterward burning with
this seruent fire of charity toward God and his neighbor, he was carried,
as we have formerlie said, through cittyes and towns, where he preached with
excessive fervor, thirsting with an extraordinary burning desire to see the
number of the elect of God accomplished; to which places he was so welcome and
grateful, that when he went from the people he was half naked because each
one striued to cut part of his habitt, some with cicers, others with pincers
or like instruments, carefully keeping those shreddes afterward as
relics, with most pious devotion, for cure of diseases and dangers of this
life, others brought him bread to bless, whereof afterward to make use in like
necessities, having seen thereof manifest experiences. Notwithstanding all
this, the holy Father had a violent desire to return to that former
humility and simplicity of serving leapers, and of not knowing the
imperfections of his disciples, as he was afterward forced to know them, and
also of enduring austeritie of life. To this effect he said to his Religious:
My Brethren, we must now begin to serve God for to this present we have done
nothing or very little. So he proposed in his spirit to perform great
matters, not considering the weakness of body, by reason of the great fervor
of his spirit, wherewith being carried away, he desired nothing but fresh
combattes to get victory over the ennemie, and indeed, he that well
considers it, sindeth that feeblenes nor tepeditie have any place, where the
port is always open unto true love, which inuiteth and induces to attempt
impossibilityes. And so much the more by reason that he had accustomed his
flesh to obey the spirit, and had such a promptitude to obey God, that he was
so far from resisting, that he strove and endeavored to work above his
forces. Wherefore God that knew his desire, opened unto him the means of
meritt, so that he did not only desire, with the ineffable doloures of his
infirmity, which did so afflict him from the soale of his feet to the crown
of his head, that he had never repose; he endured in each of his members an
extreme and particular pain; in such sort that in short time he came to have
nothing but skin on his bones. In all these afflictions he discovered his
desire of them, since that he was never heard to utter so much as one word of
complaint, but he called his dolours his brethren, and his diseases his
sisters, yet he answered the Religious, who being moved with compassion wished
him to pray unto God, that he would please to appear a little more merciful^
toward him, that if he did not hold him excused in regard of his simplicity,
he would teach him what it was to check God in his judgments. He omitted not
yet to chastise in his body, the excess of the offense of this Religious, for
rudely flinging himself out of his bed upon the ground, he turned and
wallowed upon it, often kissing it gave thanckes unto God, praised him, and
besought him for his greater consolations to redouble his afflictions: which
words ended. The Religious by force of arms laid him again on his bed: for
he could not help himself into it. O invincible patience of this glorious S.
comparable to that of Job! he was doubtless both joyful and humble in his
tribulations, as an other S. Paul considering that the more he endured of
greater pains in his body, the greater vigor and force appeared in his soul,
besides what affliction his stigmates procured him, which continually distilled
blood, with such extreme grife, that it was humanely impossible for him to
support them only two days, not two years as he did for augmentation of his
meritt and example unto the world.

How God sometimes conforted his faithful servant in his afflictions.
THE LXII. CHAPTER.
ALl this being very well known to almighty God, beside the interior virtue
which he bestowed on him, he did often comfort him exteriourlie. One day to
mitigate his dolours thereby to raise his spirit unto God, he had a desire to
hear some praise sung unto his divine majesty, upon some instruments. And
therefore he told Brother Pacificus, who had bin a famous and excellent Poet,
that though men of this world abuse musical instruments* which were invented
to praise God, as in deed so many holy men had praised him thereon: he should
nevertheless find mean to have secretly a violle, and for his consolation,
should sing some spiritual praise, affirming that therein was no offense unto
God, and that it seemed the greifes of his body by that mean would turn
into consolation and joy of the spirit. But Br. Pacificus having answered
that in so doing he might scandalize God sent Angelical music to comfort S.
Franc. in his sickness.
the world, he replied that he had reason, and that he should let it alone. Now
God who had a special care of him, incontinently sent an Angel that sounded
and gave so sweet a touch to a violl, as may be imagined that an Angel of
Paradise could do, in the same instant comforting both the afflicted body and
the soul of the great servant of God. Addressing himself therefore to Bro.
Pacificus, who had not heard the melody no more then his other companions, he
caused them to give thanckes unto God, for the great consolation which he had
voutsafed to send him.

Being in the house of the Bishop of Assisium utterly without all taste, and
unable to eat any thing by reason of the grief of his infirmities, And also
sent him fish and lettice miraculously in his sickness.
his companyons asked him whereof he would willingly eat; he answered them: If
I could have a few little fishes of fresh water, me thincketh I could eat of
them. These words being ended there entered a boy that brought him many as sent
from Brother Girard Minister of Riete, though it were winter and so extreme
cold, that it was impossible to take them the rivers being frozen. The
Religious exceedingly admired to perceive the care which God had to releive
the necessities of his servant and especially in things impossible to men. An
other time, desiring to have a little lettice he asked some of his companion who
answered that the same day they had bin all gathered. Go into the garden,
said he, and bring me the first herb that comes to thy hand, which shall be a
lettice. The Religious went and found a very fair lettice, and thanking him
who had there set the same for the consolation of the servant of God, he took
it up with great joy and brought it unto him: and the S. having eaten a thereof,
leaf felt himself fully conforted.

How he was assured of the Glory of Paradise.
THE LXIII. CHAPTER.
But because there cannot be given to a servant of God a greater consolation
then the hope and certainty of the glory to come, whereto S. Paul esteemed not
the passions of this world co^digne, howsoever greiuous and continual they
might be; The S. goeing one day for his consolation to visitt S. Clare, with
Brother Leonard of Assisium his companion, the sweetness of their spiritual
discourses was such and so great, that the night surprised the^ before they
perceived it. Wherefore constrained by her prayers, her Sisters and her
companions, he did eat two morcels with them, and in an instant he was
swallowed up in the holy Ghost and ravished in ecstasy, with a deep
contentment, where he heard that which sequentlie shall be related. Being
returned to himself he cried out with a loud voice; My God be thou praised,
and incontinently went to our Lady of Angels. Arising from the table, he fell
on his knees and there was again in ecstasy the space of an hour, then
instantly went away and left S. Clare and her sisters who were exceedingly
greiued t^erewith. His Company admiring theratt asked him the cause in their
way: the S. acknowledge it unto them, affirming that in the ecstasy God had
revealed unto him his salvation by these very words: Francis I promise thee
eternal life and assure thee thereof, in such sort as I tell thee thou can no
way loose it: for which I thancked him, saying: Praise be to thee my God: then
he forbad them to speak thereof till after his death. Being come to our Lady
of Angels, for eight hours together he could not utter other words then
these: Be thou praised my God: yea he could not say his canonical hours by
reason of the joy that had surprised his heart. After that time his infirmity
in such sort increasing that it manifestly appeared he could not live long,
one of his f^eindes, seeing him clothed with his coursest and patched habitt,
and having a piece of rugged cloth on his forehead for the infirmity of his
eyes, in spiritual mirth said unto him: Father how will you sell this old
habitt? Oh how soon will God buy it of you, and pay you deerlie for it! giving
you in exchange thereof an infinitye of precious garments of silk and gold
besides eternal* glory afterward in the other world. The S. induced and
inspired of the holy Ghost, suddenly answered. Brother thou have reason, for so
shall it be, to the honor and glory of God.

Of the last and extreme sickness that augmented and redoubled in the holy
Father S. Francis.
THE LXIV. CHAPTER.
BEsides all the other infirmities of his eyes, his stomach, his liver, and
the grief of his stigmates, there fell also a dropsy into his feet six
months before his blessed end: Notwithstanding he omitted not to visitt the
monasteries, cities and towns, to procure the salvation of souls. But his
infirmities growing daily The Assisians sent to pray S. Franc* to dwell and end
his days at Assisium.
more violent, the citizens of Assisium jealous of so noble and precious a
treasure which by right appertayned unto them, and fearing it would be robbed
from them upon the way, they sent Ambassadors to their holy Father, who was
then near to Sienna, to pray and by all sweetness and amity to enforce him to
return to his Monastery. Saint Francis failed not to comfort them, yelding
that benefitt to them who in the beginning of his conversion, used him as a
fool: wherein each one may consider the admirable disposition of God: and then
let him deride his Sai^ct that can. Now on the way these Citizens came to a
village, somewhat later then they expected: by which mean they were
disappointed of all provision, finding there no Inn, but only houses, of
country people, which refused to afford the company victuals for money. They
who had chardge of the provision, recounted this discurtesie to Saint Francis:
who answered: See now what use you make of your monyflies, return again,
and demand something to eat for the love of God, and you shall experience what
difference there is between the vain hopes of the world, and the true and
assured hope of God. The The assisians found food for the love of God, which
was denied them for money*
gentlemen obeyed the S. and found for the love of God so much to eat, that
they knew not what to do with so much food: Hereupon the S. said unto them:
you are of opinion that it is a shameful thing to demand an almose: but tell
me, wherewith does all the world live, but with the continual almose given by
almighty God? They were all filled with great admiration, and silent with
confusion: and so shrincking their shoulders, they proceeded on their journey,
conducting their Father to his Country, whither being come and for more
security brought to the Palace of the Bishop of Assisium, master Bon John, a
Physician and his dear friend came to visitte him, whom he prayed to tell him
freely his opinion of that sickness, adi^^ing him not to deal with him as with
other sick persons, feeding him with vain hopes, wherewith he had not to
do, assuring him that by the grace of God, he rather desired death then life.
The Physician answered him assuredly that his infi^mity was mortal, and that
according to humane judgment, he could not pass the mids of October. Which
the S. understanding, he so strayned himself, that he got on his knees upon
his bed, first stretching his arms, then lifting his two hands toward
heaven, with an e^ceeding fervor of spirit he said: you are welcome my
beloved Sister, the death which thou my God do send me.

Of the consolation or exercise of the S. on his later days.
THE LXV. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father in this greiuous sickness had no other recreation and
consolation but to praise God, and to procure his companions to praise him, by
himnes, psalms, and spiritual Canticles, with which alone and without any
other comfort of the world, he qualified that his greiuous infirmity his
dolours and his pains, which were such and so cruel, that as he affirmed, it
had bin far more tolerable with all kind of torment to endure a dolourous
death by the hands of the executioner, then to suffer what he endured. But
considering that the divine spirit does not accord with the humane, nor the
children of light, with the children of the world, Brother Helias his Vicar
General, who went with the said Citizens to pray him to return to Assisium,
and who forsook him not till his death, to whom on night, two years before
his death, there appeared a venerable old man, in a white habitt, this was in
an Oratory nere to Fulliniu^ who willed him to advertise S. Francie that from
thence two years, he should be called of God out of this world, which he had
told him; this man then seeing this his so unaccustomed alacrity amiddes so
many torments, and that he did nothing but sing, and cause to be sung praises
to God, without otherwise lamenting his sins, as formerly he accustomed to
do, said unto him, that himself and his most affectionat freindes were much
edified by this his joy in that mortal infirmity, and were assured that it
proceeded only of the integrity of his conscience, which knowing it self pure
before God, could fear nothing. Not withstanding it was not convenient in
presence of so many seculers, who all knew him to be nerre death, to show no
sign of repentance of his offenses past, no remorse of his sins committed
against God, attleast in this terrible passadge of death. S. Francis with great
fervor answered him: Brother give me leave, give me leave I pray thee to
rejoice in God and in his praises, during this sickness, because by the grace of
the holy Ghost, my spirit is in such sort united unto his divine Majesty, and
so secure that it may rejoice: Remember now, that there are two years past
since you delivered me from him an aduertisment of this my passadge: since
which time I have always endeavored to prepare my self, lamenting my sins,
and satisfying God for them. But sithence that by his immensiue grace, he has
made me worthy of his glory, as he has revealed unto me, I have ever since
endeavored to rejoice, and now so much more in that the time approaches,
wherein my soul shall for ever be loosed from the weight of this body, and
shall go toward him who has created it, and in that he will not omit in me
to edify this people.

How the S. made himself be carried to our Lady of Angels, finding his death
to approach.
THE LXVI. CHAPTER.
THe glorious Father therefore perceauing that the day of his death approached,
prayed all the gentlemen and his freindes there present, to cause him to be
carried to his church of our Lady of Angels, that he might render unto God the
spirit of life, where he had received of him the spirit of grace: So having
obtained permission of the bishop and Governor of the city, they went
acco^panyed with the greatest part of the said city, and coming to the
hospital, which is in the great street between the city and our Lady of
Angels, causing himself with his bed to be set on the ground, and tourning
toward the city he gave it his benediction, saying: City blessed may
thou be of the sovereign God, because by thee many souls shall be saved, and in
thee many worthy servants of God of both sex shall make their residence, and
by thy mean, many shall attain the kingdom of glory. So having blessed the
city, and proceeding his way toward our Lady of Angels, S. Clare his dear
and true disciple, imitatrice and daughter in JESUS CHRIST, fearing she should
not see him before his death, sent to advertise him, that herself was also in
such estate, as she should not live long after, yea that she thought to go
first; and that therefore she felt an extreme grief, to dye without his holy
benediction and without seeing him, who was her master and beloved Father in
CHRIST JESUS: and for that occasion she prayed him for the passion of our Lord
I. C. with her knees on the ground, not to permit her to dye so discontent:
but since he was in his journey, to do her that last and singular favor as to
visitt her, before he went to our Lady of Angels. The holy Father S. Francis
felt the bowels of Fatherly compassion to move in him, in that he could not
content her, by reason of the immine^t peril wherein he was, and that the
Phisicions, nobles and gentlemen there present would not to permit him; yet
procuring wherewith all to write, he sent her by a Religious his benediction in
writing, then lifting his eyes to S. Franc. prophesies that S. Clare shall see
him before her death.
heaven he said unto him: Go and comfort my beloved sister, telling her this
good news, that she shall see me before she dye, which shall be shortly: as
shall all her Sisters, to their exceeding consolation. This prophecy failed
not in the effect: for the holy Father being dead, when the Citizens, carried
him to bury at Assisium they passed through the monastery of S. Damian, as
hereafter shall appear, and seeing the body of the Saint with in their
Covent, they were all exceedingly comforted therewith.

How a Roman Lady very devout and affected to S. Francis called Lady Iaqueline
of the seven Suns, came by divine revelation from Rome to the death of S.
Francis.
THE LXVII. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father approaching near unto his death, called a Religious whom he
willed to find out a messenger to go with all diligence to Rome, expressly to
advertise the Lady of the Seven Suns that she should incontinently come to
visitt him if she desired to see him living; knowing in what affliction she
would have suruiued, if she had not seen him before his death, as he had
promised her when he took leave of her at his departure out of Rome: and in
mean while procuring wherewith to write, he dictated this letter ensuying: To
the Lady of the Seauen-Sunnes, poor Brother Francis, desires health in our
Lord JESUS CHRIST; Know my beloved Sister in JESUS CHRIST, that God by his
grace has revealed unto me the last day of my life: Wherefore if you desire to
see me living, hasten so much as S. Franc. knew in spirit that the lady of the
Seauen-Sunne came to see him.
sometime on saturday you may be at our Lady of Angels, and bring with you a
morcell of gray cloth wherewith to coue^ me, and wax for my service. At the end
of this letter, it was revealed unto the S. that she would come: wherefore he
said to the writer: Rent this letter for there is no need thereof. He had scarce
ended those words, but a messenger came from the said lady, that told him she
was at the gate of the Monastery with two of her children, sena^ours of Rome,
and a noble and honorable company to visitt him. A while after the said lady
came, who entering his chamber, fell incontinently on the ground, humbling her
countenance, as an other Magdalen, toward his feet, bathing them with bittet
tears; and ^mprinting her lips in his sacred stigmates, with such joy and
consolation of spirit, as nothing could be more; she could not be satisfied
with kissing them, embracing and clipping them with all reverence, in regard of
their virtue, representing unto her those of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, she could
not depart from him, no more could the Religious, for she was entierlie
ravished in this so singular sweetness of spirit, without any speech at all,
till S. Francis called her: at whose voice awakening, she answered the S.
(who asked her how it happened that she came so readily) that being one night
in prayer, she heard the voice of God, that said: If thou will find Brother
Francis alive, go incontinently to our lady of Angels, and carry with thee
what thou know necessary to his sepulture, and such meat as thou gave him
at his being in Rome, to comfort him in his sickness. Which having heard, I
prepared my self very instantly, and thus am come. S. Francis gave thanckes
to God, and demanding the said meats, he refected his body with very great
consolation. Now this lady supposing that S. Francis would lie long time sick,
determined to send back her children to S. Franc. foretold the days of his
death and burial.
Rome, and many persons of note that came also with her: But the holy Father
willed them all to stay, and told them he should dye the saturday following,
and be interred on the Sunday, and then they might return in company, which
was done. This lady after the death of Saint Francis, dwelt at Assisium
where she lived very piouslie, and was afterward buried in the Church of Saint
Francis at Assisium, in a chapel adjoining to the body of Saint Francis.

How S. Francis gave his benediction to his eldest son, Brother Bernard
Quintaualle. Taken out of the sixth chapter of the sixth book, and put here as
the due place thereof.
NOw whiles S. Francis was eating the said meats, prepared by the hands of
the said Lady, calling to mind that Brother Bernard was with him at Rome the
first time that he did eat thereof; he asked those present where he was, and
caused him to be called to eat thereof also. Brother Bernard being come and
obeying the Saint, having eaten two morcels with him perceauing that he
approached near his end, making his benefitt of the good occasion, humbly
demanded his holy benediction. To whom saint Francis answered: my dear
child I grant it most willingly: and so commanded his benediction to be
written, which thus began: The first Religious and companion that God gave me,
was Brother Bernard Quintaualle, who was the first that began, as he that ever
since continued, perfectly to observe the rule of the gospel and the
Counfailes thereof: wherefore as well in regard of that, as for many other graces
which God has bestowed on him, I am much obliged to love him, yea above all
other Religious of our Order. And therefore I will and ordain that every other
Minister that shall come hereafter, do love him as my self. Then he bad him
stand at his right hand, for he had already lost his sight. But Brother
Bernard seeing Brother Helias that extremely desired it, knowing right well
the need he had thereof, having compassion of him, he sent him to the right hand
of the Saint and placed himself at the left, contenting himself to gain
that soul to God, by the benediction so much desired, of his beloved Father.
But saint Francis intending to lay his hand on the head of Brother Bernard,
knew either by the touch or by divine revelation, that it was Brother Helias,
wherefore he sodenlie called Brother Bernard, who answearing him, he perceived
by his voice that he was at his left hand, and therefore crossed his hands as
did the Patriarch Jacob, and gave them his benediction, yet always naming
Brother Bernard he said unto him: God give thee his benediction, and increase
in celestial benedictions of JESUS CHRIST, as thou have bin first called to
this holy Religion, to serve for an example of Apostolical life, and to
demonstrate how one ought to follow JESUS CHRIST, in poverty and in his cross:
since thou have not only given all they terrestrial substance to his poor, but
have offered thy very self unto him in sacrifice. Be thou therefore blessed of
our lord Jesus Christ and of me his poor servant with an eternal benediction,
goeing, retourning, remaining, sleeping and waking. He that shall bless thee,
be he blessed, and let not him that shall curse thee rest unpunished. Thou
shall be superior of all thy Brethren and they shall be subject unto thee. Let
him that thou will receive into this Order, be received, and him that thou will
reject, be rejected. Thou shall have liberty to reside where thou will, none
having authority ever to forbid, or to prescribe thee any law, in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the blessed holy Ghost. Amen.

Of the testament the holy Father S. Francis made before his death.
THE LXVIII. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father S. Francis, before he left his spiritual children, determined
to leave them his testament, that therein beholding the will of their holy
Father, they might enable themselves to effect it, to meritt the patrimony he
bequeathed them in the Evangelical rule and profession; which testament was
such: First my Brethren I will imprint in your memory how God drew me unto him,
and how I stripped my self all naked before the bishopp and renounced al my
possibilityes in the world: the^ seeking to do penance, God gave me this
grace, that whereas I formerly abhorred to behold leapers (much more to serve
the^) I began to love the^ extremely: so that what before seemed unto me bitter
and insupportable, was then pleasing and desirable. After that I began simply
to pray unto God and to make unto him this prayer: Most sacred Lord, we adore
thee in this place and in all the churches that are over all the world, and do
honor thee; because by thy holy cross thou have redeemed the world. And his
divine goodness gave me afterward such faith toward Preistes, that live
according to the form of the holy Roman church, in regard of their Order,
that albeit they had persecuted me, I would have had recourse to none but them
selves. And If I had had the wisdom of Solomon, and had met the most simplest
Priest in the world, I would never have preached in his church against his
will. And them and all other will fear, love and honor as my Lords and
mastes, and will remarck no sin in them, in whom I see the Son of God,
observing no other thing of him in this life but his most precious body and
blood which they consecrate, receive and only administer unto others. And will
above althinges reverence and honor these sacred mysteries and bestow the^ in
precious places. As also I have ever reverenced the holy name of God, and in
whatsoever papers I have found it written, in unseemly places I have gathered
it up, and do pray every one to do the like, and to putt the papers in honest
places. I desire also that all divines be honored, such as teach the divine
word, as they who truly give us the spirit and life. Besides I beseech you
to refer your selves entierly into the hands of the divine mercy, who as he
has taught me to live according to the form of his holy gospel, will show
you the like, if you follow the rule which his divine Majesty has caused me
to prescribe in breife and simple words, confirmed afterward by his holy
vicar on earth. Now all they that presented themselves to live in this Order,
distributed their goods unto the poor, as the said rule does import, they
contented themselves with one coat, peiced without and within, and with a cord
to girde them, with the linen breeches, and we would have no more. We have for
a time lived in this sort, praying in devotion, the Preistes saying their
office, according to the use of our holy mother the church, and we the lay
Brethren in our simplicity, subiecting our selves to all for the love of JESUS
CHRIST, and endeavoring to gain our living with the labor of our hands. Now
I beseech you so to do always. And if there be any ignorant, let the^ learn
and exercise themselves, not under hope of gain, but to give good example and
to shun idleness: and if such suffice not to sustain you, I will that you
have recourse to the most abondant table of our Lord JESUS CHRIST: that is, to
demand almose at the doors, always giving the benediction which God at
first revealed unto me, to wit: The peace of God be in this house, and in all
them that dwell therein: Let them nevertheless take heed that they receive
nothing as proper to themselves: for neither will I that there be received in
common either house or church, that may be termed ours, but as shall be agreeable
to the poverty and simplicity of our Order, which we promise to God in our
vows: But let us all continue in this life as true pilgrims and strangers.
I command all under obedience, that in what soever place they be, they do not
presume to demand any kind of privilege, or exemption from the court of
Rome, either themselves or any person in their behalf, for their Churches or
other places, neither under appearance of intention to preach, nor as being
persecuted in their bodies: but if they cannot observe their rule, in some one
place, let not their demand be therefore admitted, but let them go other
where to do penance with the benediction of God. I was always resolute to
obey the General of this Order, and the Guardian that have bin constitued over
me since I renounced the chardge, in such sort as I would never attempt to make
choice of my residence, nor to do any thing without his license, because he is
my master, And although I be simple and infirm, I would always have a Clerck
to perform unto me the divine office as the rule imports. I will likewise
that all the other Religious be obedient to the General, to the Provincial
and Guardian, and that they all read their office according to the rule. And if
any one be ever so hardy as to presume to alter the office, or to hold opinion
contrary to the holy Catholic Roman Church, I will that all the other
Religious in whatsoever place they be, shall be obliged by obedience to apprehend
him and committ him to secure ga^d, and so send him to the Provincial or
General, who shall present him to our Protector in such sort as he may not
escape: and he shall give him punishment according to his desert. And let none
affirm this to be a new rule: for it is only a remembrance and an exhortation
which I poor Brother Francis leave you as a testament, that the said rule may
better and more Catholikely be observed; And because I will that the minister
general, with the other ministers and Guardians be obliged not to add nor
substract from these words, but that this my testament be putt with the rule,
and be read to my Brethren, Preistes and laity: I do further command all
under obedience, that none presume to gloss upon the rule nor this present
testament, affirming, that it must be understood after such or such manner: but
as God has made me understand it simply, let them also understand it simply
without gloss, and let it be conserved perpetually to the end. And I beseech
the omnipotent goodness, that all they who shall religiously and exactlie
observe these things, may here on earth be filled with the benediction of his
Beloved Son, with the holy Ghost the Conforter, and with all the blessed
Angels and Saints: and afterward on high in heaven with the benediction of
the most sovereign celestial Father. And I Brother Francis, your wretched and
unworthy servant in our Lord, give my benediction to those that shall observe
it, as I have formerlie said in the behalf of God the Virgin Mary, and all the
Angels and SS. of God in heaven and in earth; in the name of the most
sovereign Father, of his beloved Son, and of the holy Ghost the Conforter,
So be it, Amen.

Of the supper which the glorious Father S. Francis made with all his children
and of the last benediction which he gave them.
THE LXIX. CHAPTER.
AFter he had made this last testament, his sickness so increased that his
present death was generally expected, but encourageing himself in God, he
called all the Religious that were in the Monastery, who being come and
perceauing that the holy Father intended to give them his last benediction,
they fell all on their knees, bathing the earth with their tears, and
thundering out loud cries and sighs toward heaven. S. Francis with a melted
heart wept together with them, and he seemed to have recovered some little part
of his sight; and so laying his hand on their heads by one and one, and
firmly beholding them, he blessed them, then afterward he began to bless them
all together, as well the present as the absent, and all those that should
enter into his holy Religion; lamenting that he could not have them all
present, in regard of his extreme love unto them, which exceeded that of a
mother toward her children, himself also having engendered them in JESUS
CHRIST: And the more to comfort them, he caused bread to be brought which he
divided in pieces, in imitation of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and gave to each a
piece, bidding them to eat it for his love at this his departure. Then were
there tears redoubled, many of them did not eat all their portion, but did
reserve some part thereof, which afterward was effectual in restoring desired
health to such as were disealed: which done, this holy Father for his last
advertisement, recommended that holy place to his Vicare General and to all
the rest, admonishing them never to abandon it, but that if they were extruded
at one door they should enter in at an other, alleging that the place was
holy, and the true habitation of God, of the glorious Virgin Marie, of the
Angels and Saints of the living God, and that therefore they had so
miraculouslie multiplied there, where they had bin illuminated in his service
for the salvation of so many souls; wherefore he doubted not but whatsoever
should in that place be demanded of his divine majesty, with a pure and
contrite heart, should always be obtained, who also would not fail greiuously
to chastise such as should offend in that sacred place, being the true
habitation by grace of the celestial Court, the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost.

Of the blessed and glorious death of the holy Father S. Francis.
THE LXX. CHAPTER.
THe fourth of October, in the year 1226. upon a Saturday in the evening
twenty years after his Conversion, and the five and fortieth of his age, the
holy Father having bin very aptly cut, squared and accommodated by the hard
strokes of tribulations, temptations, afflictions, incommodities, and
infirmities, as a lively and firm stone, that should be placed in the
principal corners of the supreme City of the celestial Jerusalem, he heard
the voice of his sweet Lord that called him unto him. Then to make public
manifestation that he had not any thing in this world, and with the more
facility to wrestle against his furious adversary in this last conflict and
trial, wherein consisted the crown, he with an exceeding fervor and S.
Francis before his death stripped him self all naked.
courage stripped himself all naked, as he had bin without any infirmity, then
cast himself on the ground, covering with his left hand, the precious wound of
his right hand, and tourning his joyful face toward the kingdom whither he
was to go, he began to praise and bless his sweet lord JESUS CHRIST, that
being dischardged and freed of all worldly impedimentes, he might ascend to
heaven and enjoy his divine Majesty; then tourning toward his Religious, he
said unto them: My dear Brethren, I have to this present done what I ought to
do; These words were diuersely understood of the Religious, some of them wept
in regard he was to leave them without Pastor and governor, others, because
he seemed to leave them as men forlorn, others, for other occasions; only the
Guardian, whom he obeyed, understood the desire of the holy Father; wherefore
taking presently an habitt with the cord and linen breeches, brought and gave
it unto him, saying: Father take this habitt which I lend you, with the cord
and breeches, that you may be buried therewith as a poor creature, who of your
self have not so much as wherewith to cover your nakedness: I command you to
receive it in this your last hour, even by the virtue and meritt of obedience;
whereof the Saint discovered to have the greatest contentment that can be
imagined, considering that in this extremity he had observed his holy poverty,
in such sort as he desired even to the last end: He contentedlie accepted the
breeches, but to conform himself entierlie to his truely-beloued JESUS CHRIST
that would dye naked on the cross, to the performance whereof wanting nothing
but to dye naked, having already bin, and even for the present being admirably
crucified by the virtue of the almighty, he commanded his Religious, not only
to permit him to dye on the ground, but even to leave him there a long time
after his death. Having procured S. Fran. receaueth the holy Sacraments before
his death.
to be brought unto him the holy Sacraments, and they being successively
administered unto him, those I mean which the Church accustometh to afford such
as are ready to dye, he lastly turned toward his Religious, to whom he made
a worthy sermon, exhorting them to the love of God, then of their neighbor,
and especially to obedience unto his holy Roman Church, next to observe their
poverty, and before the same and all other things, to be always mindful to
prefer the observance of the holy gospel, and the divine counsels thereof.
Then crossing his hands, this great Patriarch of the poor gave his holy
benediction to all his Religious, both present and absent, saying: My dear
Brethren, God of his mercy bless you, as also I bless you, be it And gave his
holy and last benediction to his Religious.
his holy will to confirm me it in heaven. Remain ye all in his holy fear,
perseuering always therein; for the time of afflictions approach, wherein they
shall be happy who shall persevere even to the end: remain ye all in his holy
obedience, as you have solemnly promised unto him. Finally remain ye all in
his most holy peace, and in charity among your selves, God bless you. I go in
great have unto God, to whose grace I recommend you, Amen. Which having said,
he asked for the gospel, and speaking no more to any person, he only desired
that place to be read unto him where is mentioned the departure of our lord:
Ante diem festum paschae: which being read to the end, he began to say to
himself: The death of S. F. the 45. year of his age the 20. of his
conversion, and of our Lord the 1226.
Voce mea ad Dominum clamaui. And being come to the verse, Educ de custodia
animam meam, that is, deliver my soul if thou please my God out of this
prison, that it may attain to thee my God and my lord, where the just expect
me, to the end thou may give me my recompense. Which being ended this holy
soul, at it desired, was delivered out of the prison of her proper flesh, and
elevated to heaven, there forever to enjoy the eternal bounty, with all the
saints his elected of both sexes, in that degree which his divine majesty
ordained and parepared for him.

How some saw the soul of the glorious Father saint Francis ascend in glory.
THE LXXI. CHAPTER.
The soul of B. Angelus accompanies that of S Fr. into glory. He appeared to
the Bishop of Assisium presently after his death.
THis holy soul failed not to appear to some when it ascended to the
celestial glory: For Brother Angelus a Religious of worthy sanctity, being at
that time provincial of the province of Naples, and very near his end, saw in
an instant the soul of the saint as a resplendant star on the top of a
very bright cloud, to be transported above the great waters, and directly
mounted and elevated into heaven. And albeit he had the space of two days lost
his speech, he nevertheless then resumed his spirittes; for seeing the blessed
spirit of the saint, he began to cry out: Stay for me Father, stay for me,
for I go also with you. The Religious asking what he meant therbie; See you
not, said he, our holy Father saint Francis that now goes to the glory of
Paradise? which having spoaken, he yielded his soul to God, and followed his
most holy Father. The Bishop of Assisium being gone in pilgrimage to visitt the
Church of S. Michael the Archangell, on the mount Gargan, S. Francis appeared
unto him the very night of his death, and said: My lord, know that I have left
the world and go to heaven. The Bishop therefore being risen, told his Vision
of the passadge of the soul of S. Fr. unto glory.
people that S. Francis was dead the night before, which was proved to be true.
An other Religious of this Order, being the same night rapt into deep
contemplation, saw the blessed Deacon of JESUS CHRIST vested with a very rich
tunicle, accompanied with a great multitude of souls that attended him as a
worthy Prince, who so ascended into a palace of merueillous beauty and
eminency; it is piously believed, that the said souls were by his merittes
delivered out of Purgatory. This glorious soul ascended to glory accompanied
with many Angels, that attended and visited him continually in this life, and
is now seated among the Seraphins, which glory he merited not only in this
life, by the excessive and Seraphicall love of God, but also it appartayned
unto him in regard of the Seraphicall vision of JESUS CHRIST, who transformed
him into himself, making him a Seraphin by gtace, and sealing the same with
divine seals, as has bin revealed to many holy persons worthy of creditt,
as well during the life of the Saint, as after his death: The very birds,
and particulerlie the Larckes that were much beloved and very familiar unto
him, did exceedingly rejoice at his glory, a great flight of them appearing
very early the next morning on the roufe of the house where saint Francis
lay dead, warbling a very delightful and extraordinary note, yea as it were
miraculous, which continued diverse hours, celebrating the praises of their
glorious Saint, and giving testimony of his glory.

The vision ensuying is extracted out of the 49, chapter of the sixth book, and
here put in more proper place.
THe blessed passadge of S. Francis was also revealed to Father Christopher,
who was present at the Chapter of Arles in Prouence where S. Antony of Padua
preaching, S. Francis appeared in the air, in form of a cross, being yet
alive, and dwelling in Italy; the apparition was in this manner: The said
Father being in the borrough of Marulo in the bishoperick of Cardoua, he seemed
in dreaming to be at the door of a house wherein S. Francis lay sick, and
having knocked, he was by commandment of the Saint admitted entrance, in
whose presence coming, he demanded his benediction, which the Saint very
graciously gave him; and being about to depart, he said unto him: Return my
son into thy province, and tell my brethren, that I have performed the course
of my life, and now do go to heaven: the said Father Christopher in the
morning recounting this vision to the Religious, it afterward appeared that
the holy Father S. Francis at that very hour, departed out of this life
unto the other.

Of the beauty and splendor of the sacred body of the holy Father saint
Francis, and of the great concourse of people that from every part repaired to
see him.
THE LXXII. CHAPTER.
THe blessed Father S. Francis being the servant and friend of the omnipotent,
was Founder and Captain of the Religion of the Friar Minors, a most singular
professor of poverty, a pattern of patience, proclaimer of the truth, a
mirour of sanctity, and finally the pourtraiture of perfection, according to
Evangelical doctrine; mounting by assistance of divine grace with a due
ordered and measured progress, from virtue to virtue, from meaner matters to
such as were more high and sublime, as one that became rich by poverty, high
exalted by humility, living eternally by mortification, most prudent by
simplicity, shining and resplendant by his honesty. For which cause God would
also illustrate this his servant with an extraordinarily glory and splendor
after his death, preserving his body entier, incorruptible, pure and shining,
in such sort as he seemed to have given in him in this world a perfect pattern
of the general resurrection when our flesh shall rise again for ever
incorruptible and immortal. There were seen the said sacred stigmates in his
hands and feet engraven by the supreme artisan, after an admirable and
incredible manner: for the nails were in such sort framed of his proper flesh,
that drawing them one the one side, the sinowes and arterye veins yielded, as
also on the other side the said arteries would stretch with a miraculous
artifice. The like may be said of the feet: the sacred wound of the side was in
form rather round then otherwise; and of color vermillion resembling a
natural rose, and all the other flesh that was naturally brown and very hard
by means of disciplines and inconveniences past, became in an instant, white,
bright, soft and delicate as the flesh of a tender child. There was not seen
over all his body (which to each one represented the first innocence, and
second nativity to come by resurrection in glory) any other blacknes then the
heads of those blessed nails, which yet was a blacknes that equaled the
splendor of a glittering star. In which respect it is not to be admird if
his spiritual children themselves, knew not which passion in them was grater,
either the grief of the loss of their holy Father, or the present
consolation to have had such and so excellent a Father, whom, by so many
manifest signs they might assuredly know not to have abandonned them, but even
being in heaven did always behold govern and assist them. And doubtless the
eminency of this rare miracle, was sufficient to break the most obdurate and
obstinate heart, and to mollify and soften it as wax, with contrition and
faith toward God. The death of the holy Father being diuulged over Assisium,
and the neighbor places, there reprayred such a concourse of people to see his
glorious body, that it was impossible to resist them. Wherefore it was consulted
and concluded not to admit entrance unto any, but to those of Assisium and
such as could not with civil courtesy be denied, who entering at their ease,
beheld and handled at their pleasure the blessed stigmates of this holy
servant of God. Among other there arrived a noble man called Hierome native of
Assisium a learned man and of great authority, who as an other Thomas, doubting
of the sacred stigmates before he saw them, could not satisfy himself with
tourning and retourning his hands and feet, and to move hither and thither the
hard nails: and the more he considered the matter, the more he admired:
therefore with his incredulity he testified this truth to all the assembly; so
that the holy Father was rightly inspired of God, when he commanded the
Religious to leave his body naked a long time on the ground: that this so
singular grace of God might be manifested. The Religious and people there
present spent that night in praises and psalms, offering infinite thanckes to
God, so that this watch might rather be esteemed, a feast of celestial Angels,
then humane funerals.

Of the stature and natural quality of the body of the glorious Father S.
Francis, extracted out of the thirtieth chap. of the tenth book, and here
inserted in due place.
WE have thought it convenient after the discourse of the splendor of the body
of this glorious S. for the satisfaction of many, to decipher all the other
natural qualities thereof. The glorious Father S. Francis then, was of a mean
stature, and rather little then great, he had his head round, his vilage long,
a full forehead, black and modest eyes, with black beard and hair, he had a
joyful and sweet countenance, his nose correspondantlie protioned, little
ears, his flesh broune, his tongue sharp and quick, a voice clear, sweet,
vehement in delivery, and elegant in utterance, his teeth white, little, and
equal; he was by nature indifferently lean, and of a most delicate
complexion, of a worthy spirit, prompt and ready memory, and of little
sleep. To conclude, he was expert, dilligent, liberal and meek in
conversation, and very discreet in accommodating himself to the behavior of
others. Wherefore after his conversion unto God, he was most holy among the
holy, and most humble and abject among sinners, but almost always strictly
united unto JESUS CHRST, in such sort that whosoever beheld him esteemed him a
man of an other world.

Of the prophecy of the Abbot Ioachim, of the person of the holy Father Saint
Francis: being the sequel of the same chapter.
THe Abbot Ioachim, who lived more then an hundred years before S. Francis,
thus prophesied of him: Veniet nomo insignitus characteribus Jesus Christi. that
is: There shall come a man adorned and enriched with the wounds of our Lord
JESUS CHRIST: he left his image naturally drawn at Venise in the church of S.
Marck, such as we have formerlie described, and with stigmates enameled after
the Mosaicall manner.

Of the Burial of the body of the blessed Father S. Francis.
THE LXXIII. CHAPTER.
THe before mentioned Lady Iaqueline of the Seven Suns, was the last that
could not be satisfied with seeing and touching as an other Magdalen, this
sacred body of her dear master; She did nothing but bath it with her gracious
tears and dry it with her kisses: the extreme swetnes that proceeded from this
holy body, but particulerlie from the sacred stigmates, exceeded all other
sweetness: nevertheless she held her eyes always fixed on the wound of his
side, whereto she often applied her mouth and hands, whence she received such
and so exceeding consolation, that it seemed unto her in this conversation The
lady of the Seven Suns as an other Magdalen anointed the body of S. Fr.
with her dead master and fre^nd, that her soul, with a straung and admirable
joy began to live. Butt to the citizens of Assisium that desired to carry him
to burial, finding much delay, every hour seemed an hundred, by reason of the
extreme fear they had that so precious a treasure, by some extraordinary
accident might be^ taken from them: wherefore they placed a guard before the
monastery gate, and soldiers divided through the street even to the gate of
the city, which citizens so importuned the said Lady, that she anointed him
with precious iontment, then clothed him in a new gray habitt which she had
expressly brought from Rome, according to the advertisement of the Angel, and
the Religious so opened this habitt, that the wound of his side might easily be
seen. This glorious Saint did always in his life time desire that his body
should be buried in the basest place of all the city of Assisiu^, his heart
excepted, which he deputed to our Lady of Angels, He was enterred as he desired
in the place of execution being the most abject of the city.
as during his life he had by affection there settled the same, and in deed God
did not frustrate him of this just desire: for his holy body was enterred
(though this were not till four years after, by reason that the monastery
was not yet build there, nor the church which they sumptuously built there
afterward) in the most abject place of Assisium where malefactors were
executed, called the mount of hell; the common opinion is that his heart is in
the chapel of S. Mary of Angels, where, according to report, it is preserved
with great reverence. On the sunday morning, all the people being assembled
with bows of trees, and the Religious, Preistes, and Gentlemen with their
burning torches and lights, carried this holy body as in procession, first
to the Church of S. Damian, to S. Clare, that the prophecy of the Saint might
be accomplished, sending her word some days before that she should shortly
see him, to her exceeding consolario^. The grate being opened, the body of the
Saint was brought in to the Religious, who were so comforted therewith, that
grief could How S. Clare saw the body of S. Franc.
find no place in their hearts, particulerly in that of S. Clare, who
endeavoring in vain to pluck out a nail of his hands, to keep it with her
as a relic, she began again with her Sisters to bath this holy body with
tears, encourageing themselves together to proceed in the way begun of the
cross of our Savior JESUS CHRIST which he had taught them. And so after they
had restored this holy* body to the people, who wear troubled at this long
attendance, they carried it to be enterred in a new sepulcher within the Church
of S. George, as in a dispositorie, where it remained full four years under
guard; till his church was builded at the Mount of hell as aforesaid. It was
not without mystery that he reposed in the said church wherein he had bin
baptized, had learned his first letters, and where he had deliuerd his first
preachinges, therefore it seemed very reasonable that his body should begin to
repose in that place, whither the said Lady of the Seauen-Sunnes, repaired
never to abandon him, forsaking her habitation in Rome, and never left this
body till her death when she went for ever to dwell with his blessed soul in
Paradise.

How the glorious Father Saint Francis Was canonized by Pope Gregory the
ninth.
THE LXXIV. CHAPTER.
THe merittes and glory of the holy Father S. Francis began by his great
miracles to be diuulged, whence succeeded that himself reigning in heaven, his
sanctity was also by divine power manifested here on earth, which he had
nevertheless already made sufficiently apparent to the world in his life,
directing an infinite number of souls in the infallible way of virtue. The
brute of the admirable things which God wrought by his servant Francis came
even to the ears of Pope Gregory the ninth, who resting assured that the S.
was glorified with God, not only in regard of the said miracles wrought after
his death, but even of the experience had with his own eyes; desiring here
below to comforme himself to the will of God as his true Vicar, he determined
with a pious and devoted zeal to canonize him, and propose him to the world
for a remarckeable example of sanctity, and to take all scruple from the
Cardinals and others, he caused all his principal miracles to be examined and
approved by acts of public Notaries, and infinite testimonies worthy of
belief. So the Cardinals and all the principal divines of his Court being
herein duly advertised, concluded that it was just and very expedient unto
the Church of God, to canonize this glorious Saint his servant. The year
1228. the Pope himself went with his Court to Assisium expreslie S. Fr. was
canonised a year and nine months after his death by the same Pope at Assisium.
with this resolution, and the sixteenth of Iulie, a year and nine months
and half after the death of this glorious Saint upon a Sunday morning his
holiness, with many ceremonies and great solemnity, inscribed the blessed
Father saint Francis in the catologue of the saints; and before they
departed thence, his Church was begun to be built in the said city, and in the
foundation thereof the Pope himself, in presence of an infinite multitude of
people, laid the first stone, and thenceforward the place which was called the
Mount of hell, was nominated the mount of Paradise.

The bulle of canonization of the holy Father S. Francis, extracted out of the
fifth chapter of the tenth book, and here more aptly placed.
GRegory Bishop, the Servant of the servants of God. To our venerable Brethren
Archbishoppes, Bishops, and to our beloved children, Abbottes, Priors,
Archpreistes, Archdeaco^s, Deanes, and other Prelates of the church, to whose
knowledge these presents shall come, health and Apostolical benediction. As
the vessels of gold which S. John saw full of perfumes, (which are the prayers
of SS.) powered out most sweet odours before the most high, to destroy the
corruption of our sins: we also believe that it is a great furtherance to our
salvation, with great reverence to have memory of his saints on earth, and
with solemnity to publish the merittes of those whose assistance by their
continual intercessions we hope for in heaven. Knowing therefore right well the
conversion, life and merittes of the holy Father S. Francis, Institutour and
Governor of the Order of Freer Minors, yea by our own experience, and by the
testimony of others of most worthy creditt, who have seen the notable miracles
which God by means of him has wrought: we are likewise assured that he is
glorified in heaven, his life and apparent renown dissipating the obscurity
of sinners, that live and have lived in the shadow of death both men and women:
for corroboration of the faith of the holy church, and to the confusion of the
malice of heretics, the contentment of a great number of them that have and
do follow him, yet flourishing and leading a celestial life. Wherefore that it
may not seem we intend to frust^ate the said S. of the honor due unto him,
permitting him to be deprived of the reverence which men owe him, as one
already glorified of God; by the advice and counsel of our venerable Brethren
the Cardinals, and of all the Prelates now here present, we have judged it
requisite, to inscribe him in the catologue of SS. that as a candle of God, he
give light here below, no way deserving to be hidden under a bushel: but to
be set on an high candlestick of his holy Church. We therefore command you in
virtue of these present Apostolical letters, that for the universal benefitt,
you awaken the devotion of your people to the veneration of this S. of God,
every year celebrating his feast on the fourth day of October, and that you
admonish every one to observe the same, that by his prayers and merittes, God
may grant us his holy grace in this life, and his glory in the other. Given
at S. John Lateran, the six and twentieth of march, the second year of our
Papacy. The original of this authentical bull is extant in the great Convent
of the Cordeliers at Paris.

Of the great devotion which Pope Gregory the ninth ever had to the Order of S.
Francis: extracted out of the eleventh chapter of the tenth book, and here put
in due place.
COnsidering that we have discoursed of the canonization of the glorious Father
S. Francis, performed by Pope Gregory the ninth, it seems to the purpose to
set down what also concerns the said Pope, touching the familiarity and
devotion which he ever carried toward this glorious S. and his Order, and the
prophecy whereby S. Francis often revealed unto him that he should attain to
the dignity of the Papacy. His holiness being yet Cardinal of Hostia, Pope
Gregory the 9. being Cardinal would become a Friar Minor.
and Protector of this Order, had ever a particular devotion to his Religion;
so that discoursing once together he said unto him; I beseech you Father for
the love of JESUS CHRIST tell me freely your opinion: for I am determined to
obey you in that you shall resolve me: which I promise you and call God to
witness: to wit, whither I shall live in this dignity, or serve God in your
Religion, leaving the world and vanities thereof, and be clothed in your
habitt. Which S. Francis hearing, and considering what a beneficial member he
was unto the church, answered, that on the one side he might do the Church of
God and S. Franc. fortold and prophesied to Pope Gregory the 9. that he should
be Pope. This Pope sometimes clothed himself in habitt of a Friar Minor and
unknown did his devotion among them.
the world good service in this present estate, considering that he was a man
of great experience, very prudent and judicious of Counsel, and on the other
side being such and in such dignity in the Church, and thence entering into
religion, should give a most worthy example, and by his preachinges purc asing
many souls to God should exceedingly benefitt the world: therefore he could not
herein resolve him without revelation from God; and so he left him extremely
perplexed. But a little after knowing by divine revelation that he should be
Pope; many occasions happening of writing unto him concerning his religion, he
thus made the superscription of his letter: To the future Father of the world
the Cardinal, and so it came to pass: for after the death of Pope Honorius,
he was chosen in his place the same year that the S. dyed. It is said that of
devotion unto tha^ Order, he often went unknown in company of the Friar Minors
wearing the habitt, and particulerly on good friday, when he went to visitt the
Churches, and in this sort did wash the feet of the poor with them. Wherefore
he failed not with his utmost affection to favor the two Religions of S.
Dominick and S. Francis, in such sort that he canonized this holy Father as we
have said, the second year of his Papacy, and S. Antony of Padua, in the
sixth, as in due place shall be mentioned, he also canonized S. Dominick the eight
year of his Papacy.

How the body of the glorious Father saint Francis, was transported into his
own church.
THE LXXV. CHAPTER.
THe year of grace 1230. the Friar Minors, being assembled at Assisium there
to hold their General Chapter, when the translation of this holy body was to
be made, from the church of S. George into the new church builded to that
purpose, there repaired an infinite multitude of people from all parts of
Italy, and many further remote to see this precious body. But brother Helias,
who by the favor and assistance of the Pope and many seculer gentlemen (though
Brother John Pare^t were Minister General) caused the holy body without
priuity of the said General or other perso^ne to be secretly removed,
permitting none saving only certain of his freindes to know where it reposed;
which he did for certain humane considerations. And this exceedingly
disquieted the said Religious, who came, rather to see the holy body, then to
hold the Chapter. Brother Helias satisfied them with very few, yet witty
words; so that this notwithstanding, the said translation was celebrated with
a very sumptuous solemnity; the Pope having expressly sent thither his
Apostalicall Noncioes as well to make his excuse of not coming in person, by
reason of certain lawful impedimentes, as also to adorn that new church with
a great cross of gold enriched with many precions stones, wherein was s^tt a
little piece of the true cross, and also with many dressinges and vessels to
trim and deck the high altar and many other rich ornaments; and withal a
good almose to defray the said translation, and toward the finishing of the
said building then half erected. His holiness by Apostolical authority
exempted* the said church, as also his monastery from all the lands subject to
the Roman Church, and would that it should be immediately subject to the holy
Sea, himself having there laid the first stone. Now this holy treasure being
translated and transported, thus sealed with the character of the omnipotent,
it pleased his divine majesty by mean of his servant to worck many miracles:
thereby to induce the faithful by fervent imitation to follow his steps:
considering that during his life he had bin so dear unto him, as that by
conte^plation he had transported him as Enoch into Paradise, and as Elias had
bin carried away on a fiery chariott, by reason of his fervent zeal of
charity: he in like sort made him famous on earth after his death (as in the
third book shall appear) curing the deaf, the blind, maimed and leapers, by
his merittes expelled devils from the bodies of the possessed, loosed
imprisoned captives, delivered women in travail and childbed, helped all
sorts of diseases, as also trauaillers by sea, that were delivered safe and
sound from the depth of the Ocean, in the time of horrible tempests, which
disaster by their sins they had deserved; finally raising the dead, as in his
life time he had reduced many to divine grace: In such sort that God made him
to be always present with the virtue of heaven, unto such as with an ardent
faith did invoke him, whom he freed of all their dangers, to the praise and
glory of his divine Majesty, and of his glorious servant saint Francis.

Here ensue many apparitions and miracles of the holy Father S. Francis wrought
after his death, with a catologue of his virtues, for which he merited such
notable guiftes of his divine Majesty. This was dispersed throughout, but the
translatour has collected it and here placed it as in place proper and
particular to S. Francis.

And first of an admirable manner wherein S. Francis appeared to Brother Leo,
taken out of the sixteenth chap. of the sixth book.
SOme time after the death of the glorious Father S. Francis, Brother Leo,
unable any longer to support the absence of his dearly beloved Father, began
with the most affection he could to pray almighty God that he would voutsafe to
show him his dear master: and to obtain the same, he retired himself into a
solitary place where he continually persisted, fasting, weeping, and
afflicting himself. Upon this occasion, the holy Father who affected those
that were his more internallie being in heaven, then he had done on earth,
appeared unto him exceeding joyful and resplendant, having a pair of wings
as feathers of gold, the nails of his feet and hands were as those of an
eagle, likewise of gold. Brother Leo was filled with joy and consolation, yet
exceedingly amazed at the rariety of those feathers and nails: wherefore
having done him reverence and kissed his feet and hands, he prayed him to let
him understand what the feathers and nails might signify. The Saint
answered: among many graces which God has given me, this is one, that I
assist my Religious and such as are affected unto mine Order: and that I may be
instantly present at their affections, when they have recourse unto me, and
also to assist the carriage of their souls to heaven, I have the use of these
wings and nails not only to cause the devils to fly, but eu^n to wound them,
and to chastise the Brethren that grow negligent and trouble mine Order, and
such as persecute it, be they Religious or seculer.

Of an other vision that the said Brother Leo had, of the universal judgment,
wherein S. Francis made intercession, taken out of the 17. chapter of the sixth
book.
BRother Leo upon an other time in vision saw preparation to the general and
last judgment of God, in a great field where the Angels sounded their
trumpettes to assemble all the world, and there were instantly placed two
ladders, that reached even from the earth to the throne where the son of God
was to sit; the one was white, the other red: Our Lord incontinently appeared
in vehement choler, upon the redladder, theatening as if he had bin greiuously
offended. He seemed to see S. Francis come down on the said red ladder and
call his Religious, whom he animated to present themselves courageously: at
which voice many of his Religious began boldly to ascend the said ladder. But
how it chanced he knew not, they all fell to the ground: wherefore S. Francis
began to pray unto God for them, and God showing him his wounds renewed
distilling out blood abondantlie, answered: Thy Religious have procured me all
this. S. Francis yet desisted not to pray him again to show them mercy: and
then called them again, saying: make an other attempt to ascend, and fear
not, nor be you terrified that you have already fallen: but repose confidentlie
in God, without despair, and ascend by the other white ladder; which doing,
they found at the top thereof the glorious Virgin Mary, who joyfully received
them, and procured them all, entrance into Paradise.

How the glorious Father S. Francis appeared to John de Brenne, king of
Jerusalem, and Emperor of Constantinople, whom he caused to take his habitt,
and to die therein. Taken out of the eleventh chapter of the tenth book.
THe Count of Vienna, called John de Brenne, was a most vailliant knight, and
worthy Catholic, he was of the race of Godfry of Bullen, first king of
Jerusalem, as himself was also crowned within Tire; the year 1^10. he
obtained many notable victories against the ennemies of IESEVS CHRIST: as,
against the Mores in Syria, and against the Sultan of AEgipt, from whom art
lenght he took Damietta, which afterward he lost again with all his army,
through default of an Apostolical Legatt that was in his camp. Whereupon
retourning to require help of the Christian Princes of Europe, and passing
Sicilia, he married one of his daughters to the Emperor Federick, the second,
upon condition that he should assist him in the enterprise of the holy land,
and for dowry gave him the title of king of Jerusalem, together with all the
jurisdiction and authority he had there: thence is it that the kings of
Sicilia have ever since challenged and enjoyed this title; but the Emperor did
not only not assist him, but proved his adversary; so that being in misery he
entered into the service of Pope Gregory the ninth, and then contracted amity
with the holy Father S. Francis, where God assisting him, he continued not long
but was called from Greece to be governor of Constantinople, where marying an
other of his daughters to their Emperor Baudouin, that was yet a child, he
resigned his Empire unto him as a worthy protector and coadiutor, principally
after the said marriage. He governed that contry very prudently all the time of
his life, which was about seven years, and then dying, as hereafter we shall
relate, he again resigned the Empire very peaceable to his Son in law. This
worthy captain of JESUS CHRIST, both corporal and spiritual, having always
in memory the end of his life, did very instantly demand of God, that he would
please to inspire him to end his days in this service and in such sort as
should be most acceptable unto him, wherefore after many prayers, the holy
Father S. Francis appeared one night unto him, having in his hand a very poor
habitt with the cord and sandales, and said: John, thou must dye with this
habitt, wherewith being exceedingly amazed he awakened, yet discovered it not to
any person. The two nights following, he had again the same vision, and the
third, saving that the third time he added that he should not be terrified to
consider or fear his fall again into misery: for, that was the habitt of a
Religious, and as soon as he awaked, calling for Brother Angelus his
Confessor, disciple of the holy Father S. Francis and declaring unto him his
vision, the Religious graciously eucouraged him to take the habitt, wherein he
made no difficulty, but showed himself most ready, especially being surprised
with a tercian ague that suddenly assaulted him, whereof he dyed very piously
with the utterance of these words: Almighty God, I now dye contentedly and
very willingly, in this poor habitt of a beggar, as a punishment of so many
vain superfluities, wherein, to the great prejudice of my soul, I have
exceeded in the world: wherefore I humbly beseech thine infinite bounty to
accept this my good will, in regard that thou know that if I should live
longer, I would never forsake this abject and holy poverty. This great Prince
did by example demonstrate to all men, that to reject the vanities and wealth
of the world, is not so great a disgrace and shame as it is reputed.

Of certain miracles wrought in Spain by the merittes of the holy Father S.
Francis. Taken out of the fourtenth chapter of the tenth book.
S. Franc. cured a tame girl.
IN the city of Girone within the Country of Catalogne, the daughter of a
poor woman, about ten or twelve years of age, was so lamed and benumbed in
her feet and hands, that she was not only unable to undertake any exercise,
but even could not feed herselfee which exceedingly perplexed and annoyed her
mother, as well in regard of her poverty, as of the trouble she incurred thereby.
And being one day otherwise employed, she forgott to give her daughter to eat,
who at night complaining, her mother as disquieted answered her: Would to God
daughter thou were in heaven, since I am so troubled to serve thee, and that
thou can do me no service again. The girl took these words so
greiuouslie, that she would eat nothing that evening, and remained all night
much afflicted, till she heard it ring to matines at the Church of S. Francis:
which made her remember the great miracles which then were wrought by the
merittes of S. Francis, and then said with her self: S. Francis, if that be
true which is said of thee, I most humbly beseech thee voutsafe to make farther
proof on me of thy sanctity freeing my mother and me from such an
insupportable torment and affliction. S. Francis and S. Antony incontinently
appeared unto her, clothed in white, and girded with a cord, seeming as white
as snow: S. Antony took her by the feet, and S. Francis by the hands, and
lifted her out of the bed, and set her on the ground, so leaving her entierly
cured. When the SS. were departed, the girl said to Saint Francis, Lord who
art thou, that have done so singular a favor to my mother and me? Saint
Francis answered, that he was the same whom she had so devoutly inuocated,
and bid her to arise, because she was cured: which said, they both disappeared.
The girl perceauing herself to be cured, full of joy and admiration at the
miracle, with a loud voice called her mother, who was abroad with her
neighbors, and they hearing a clear voice, came speedily to see what the
matter was. But exceedingly amazed to see her cured, they asked her by what
means she got the use of her members: she answered that recommending
herself to Saint Francis, two Religious appeared unto her and cured her. The
bruit of this miracle was incontinently diuulged over all the town. The bishop
understanding thereof, with a great multitude of people accompanied the said
girl to the Church of the Freer Minors, to give thanckes to God and S. Francis
for this gracious benefitt. The girl seeing the image of S. Francis in the
Church, poynting theratt with her hand, she said a loud: behold him that has
delivered me from the peril of death and cured me. In the city of Cumbre, in
the kingdom of Portugal, the niece of one that was devout unto S. Francis and
his Order, was playing on the river side of Modego, and entering into the water,
was carried away with the stream, even to the mids of the river: her uncle
with other of her kindred seeking her, she was found upon a stone safe and
secure in the mids of the water. Whence being fetched And saved a girl fro
drowning.
with a boat, and asked all the matter, she answered that two Religious of S.
Francis who her Father the night before had lodged in his house, had saved her
from being drowned. Thus did the holy Father S. Francis requite this his
affectionate friend for his devotion in entertayning his Religious into his
house.

This ensuying is taken out of the twelfth chap. of the tenth book.
THere was a woman in Almania that by the merittes of S. Francis obtained of
God a male child: this boy playing in the street and his mother beholding him,
as she sat at the door of her house, there came a possessed man that
audaciouslie and impudentlie attempted publicly to force this woman, but she
shifting in to her house violently shutt the door against him. The possessed
partly perceauing that the mother was escaped, took the child and with his
diuillesh force rent it in pieces and went his way. The poor mother in mean
while S. Franc. by his merittes reuiueth a dismembered child.
went to the windoe to see if her son had no hurt; but perceauing him so
dismembered, she filled the air with sighs; and coming speedily down, she
assembled all the members of her child into her lap, and with a strong faith
carried them to the Church of S. Francis, who a little before had obtained him
for her, where having laid him on the altar; with great courage she uttered
these words. Glorious Saint that have obtained this child form of God,
restore him me again at this present I beseech thee; for I believe and hope
that his divine majesty will not deny thee such a favor. This strong faith
was not frustrated of what it expected, for in an instant, the members of the
child were miraculously reunited together, and the child restored to his life
and beauty, to the exceeding admiration and increase of devotion in all
persons. This miracle remained a long time pictured in the city of Bolonia.

How S. Francis and S. Antony delivered a lady from despair. Taken out of the
12. chapter of the tenth book.
IN the kingdom of Portugal, and city of Liuarez, the lady of the place
called Lopez, had for gouernesse a devil, in disguise of a woman, by whose
counsel she practiced most horrible cruelties on her subjects, and most
enormous sins in her self: but following the custom of most women, she was
very devout unto the SS. and particulerly to S. Francis and S. Antony of Padua.
Now she falling greiuously sick, and by reason of her enormous sins committed
running into despair, she had no care of spiritual phisicians, nor of other
Sacraments; whereupon the SS. mentioned having pity on her, came to visitt
her, and having saluted her, began to comfort her, and to persuade her to be
confessed; but they little auayled, for she alleged that her sins were such
and so heinous as could not be pardoned. And therefore the elder of the two SS.
told her that if she would confess and have contrition of her sins, he would
be contented to take her sins on himself, and to satisfy God for her, yea
and would make her participant of all the good deeds he had done during his
life, and finally would in the name and part of God promise her eternal life.
These words put her in good hope, whereupon of a wolf she became a meek
lamb, with exceeding contrition doing penance for all her sins; having
made a general confession to one of the two: And having received the holy
Sacraments by their Minister, she by their own hands was vested in the
habitt of the Friar Minors; which done, they disappeared; they who saw them,
esteemed them by their comportment and gestures, to be S. Francis and S.
Antony. A few days after their departure, this woman dyed very piously, and
commanded her body to be buried in the Church of the Freere Minors, some
league distant from the said city of Liuarez. That very night a foot man of
hers retourning from abroad, as the day began to break, there appeared a
shadow before him, and he coniuring it in the name of the living God, it
answered that he was the devil, that for fourteen years had served the lady
Lopez in shape of a woman: and that by right he had gotten and pourchached her;
but that at the end of her life, there presented themselves unto her two
Religious wearing the Capuce whom she much affected, who so prevailed that
they converted her to penance for her sins, and against all right, wrested
her soul out of his power, and carried it with them unto glory: But that thou
may know this to be true, (said the devil) when thou shall come to Liuarez,
where she is dead, thou shall find a rumor among the people, by reason of a
locke-smith that had killed his wife, who being taken upon the fact shall be
hanged, and I that have bin cause thereof, shall gain their souls, and carry
them with me into hell. So that for one soul which I have lost, I shall gain
two. The footman endinge his journey, found what the devil had told him to be
true, and therefore to all persons recounted this discourse.

How the mentionned Saints hindered a woman from hanging her self. Taken out
of the 23. chapter of the tenth book.
AN other woman of Portugal named Sara, being very devout to the said
Saints, was cruelly tormented by her husband; for besides his queanes which
he entertained in his house, the bread and wine which he gave her were injuries
and bastonadoes. Now being hereupon one day run into extreme despair, she
fastened a cord about the beam of her chamber, and having made a bow to put
about her neck and to hang her self, she heard some rudely knock at the
door and calling to have it hastily opened, wherefore hiding here cord, she
found that they were two Religious, who prayed her to give them entertaynement
for that night in her house. She demanded who they were, and how they were
called; they answered that they were two-frere Minors of a far country, the
one called Francis, and the other Antony; she presently replied, that she would
willingly entertain them for the devotion she had to S. Francis himself, and
to S. Antony; and so having admitted them, she did accommodate them a chamber
wherein to sleep, resolving for that night to defer to hang her self, for
reverence unto those servants of God. But the SS. about midnight appeared to
her husband, and said: God has sent us in his behalf to advertise thee, that
if thou do not convert thee from thy sins, shake off thy lewd retinue, and
live in peace with thy wife, who is very devout unto us, thou shall die within
three days, and be buried in hell, since thou art cause that this evening she
would have hanged her self, if we had not come to prevent her: arise therefore
instantly, and in token that this is true, go speedily to thy house, and
ask thy wife for the cord wherewith she would strangle her self. This
miserable husband, being by these words full of contrition, went to find his
wife in his house, who at her rising missing the Religious, was in exceeding
admiration, how they should go forth she keeping the key of the door which
she opened to her husband, that then knocked, who humbly demanding the cord
wherewith she would have hanged her self that night, she knew not what to
answer: her husband recounted her all, how she had bin preseuered by S.
Francis and S. Antony, thenceforward she lived with him in peace and piously,
to the great contentment of the poor woman, who was very thanckfull to the
Saints.

How the glorious Father S. Francis held a chapter with his Religious in
vision. Taken out of the 18. chapter of the tenth book.
THere was a Friar Minor in Thoschane, for his own particular of very austere
life, who being raised to government, perceauing many young gentlemen daily to
enter into Religion, and many other other desirous to enter, if there were
place commodious to entertain them, determined to erect a great and sumptuous
Monastery: Which having done, he left the little house wherein he formerly
resided. Now the glorious Father saint Francis appeared to him one night in
vision, and said: Come with me: he answered: whither? and he replied: to our
Monastery, goeing toward the first he answered that it was ruined. The S.
then said, come only with me, I know well whither I am to go; and so following
him, he came to a Chapter, where it seemed to him that the S. called all the
Religious by one and one, and that according to their manner, they confessed
their faults unto him, yea and that he heard some to accuse themselves of
carnal sins, others of disobedience, others to have infringed their first
vow of poverty; of whom the first and second it seemed that the S. with
compassion pardoned, only admonishing them to be wary the^ceforward not to fall
into the like, but did cruelly chastise those that had transgressed the vow of
poverty; which this Religious much admiring, most humbly prayed the S. to tell
him the cause. The S. answered him, that the rule gave a sufficient punishment
to the lascivious, and such as disobey their Superiors, who will enforce them
to obedience, therefore it only needs to admonish them in good sort. But said
he, the precious stone of my holy poverty, is now of each one trodden under
foot, as well the great as little, esteem it contemptible and misprise it,
wherefore I must my self redress it: then addressing himself to this
Religious, and thou, said he, that have so rashly presumed to build asumptuous
Monastery, and to destroy mine own so precious and poor, shall not escape
the wrath of God. But the Guardian in his own excuse alleged that he did it
not of himself, and that by the grace of God he affected not those worldly
honors, but had only consented thereto for the commodity of other Religious.
Therefore, said he, do thou meritt a double punishment, considering that
being austere in thine own behalf, and accommodating they self unto others;
thou do not care to damn thine own soul: which said he vanished. And what
after became of the said Guardian is not known.

How S. Francis appeared in vision, deciding who were his Religious, and who
not, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, sitting as Judge. Taken out of
the seauententh chapter of the tenth book.
IN the primitive time of the Order, there happened a very horrible accident on
this subject in England; which was thus, there being a Religious of saint
Francis very contemplative, who for the merittes of his devotions was often
rapt into ecstasy: his Guardian seeing him so to remain a whole day and
weeping, said unto him, I command you brother, upon holy obedience to return
to your self from the ecstasy you are in. Having heard the word of obedience,
he incontinently came to himself, and took refection according to his
necessity: having resumed his spirittes, the Superior commanded him again
upon obedience to tell him what he had seen that caused him so bitterly to
weep, which seemed unto him merely extraordinary: for the property of mental
ecstasy is to cause joy, and not sorrow and lamentation. The Religious thus
constrained, began to recount unto him saying: O Father, I saw our Savior
JESUS CHRIST sitting on a very high throne with an incredible Majesty attended
with all his celestial guard to execute his judgment. Then in an instant I
saw to appear all degrees of men and women, and saw, which I would never have
believed, many Religious, and many Preistes also condemned as worldlinges among
whom I saw a Religious of our Order that had a delicate and sensual habitt,
who being demanded of what Religion he was, he answered that he was a
Religious of the Order of saint Francis. Wherefore the mighty Judge tourning to
S. Francis asked him if it were true that this Religious were one of his. He
answered that he was none of his Religious, because his woare no habittes so
fine and sensual, but poor and patched, and so the wretch was suddenly thrown
into hell: after him came an other, accompayned with many seculer Gentlemen,
the S. denied him also to be any of his, affirming that his Religious applied
themselves to prayer and other spiritual excises, and not to vain seculer
conuersations, and so he was condemned as the other, as also the third, because
he came with a great quantity of curious books: after these there came one
very expert in contriuing lofty and sumptuous buildinges, who was sent for an
architect into hell. Finally there came one miserably clothed and ragged, who
fell on his knees, affirming himself to be a wretched sinner unworthy of life:
but demanded mercy of God. S. Francis, joyfully received him into his arms,
and conducted him with him into Paradise, saying to our Lord, this is one of my
Friar Minors; and then the vision disappeared: now this is the cause of mine
extraordinary tears.

Here ensues an order of the nine principal virtues of this glorious S.
whereby he merited to obtain such worthy graces of God: Taken out of the second
chapter of the third book.
AFter the miracles and apparitions which the holy Father S. Francis made to
those that were devout unto him, it shall not be amiss to recount also the
virtues whereby he merited to obtain of God such graces and so notable gifts,
which also he daily obtayneth, according to what the blessed Brother Iuniperus
his disciple writes thereof. The first virtue then was his great contrition,
confession, and satisfaction for his sins, and his care to avoid them
afterward. The second, was the admirable affection he had toward his
neighbor, and the compassion he had of him in effect and in word, and
especially in his interior; in that he esteemed every one far above
himself, taking for his ground this argument, that having offended the
sovereign Creator, who so much loved us, as that for our love alone he would
take on him humane flesh, he therefore participated himself with every
creature, and so did voluntarily obey all, not only his Superiors, equals and
inferiors, but, as fair forth as was lawful and possible, all creatures. The
third, was a separation of heart, from all terrestrial and transitory things;
for he was united to JESUS CHRIST alone, who had created him, and whom alone
he desired: Wherefore he in such sort exercised himself herein, that it was so
easy for him to sequester himself from terrestrial things, and to have his
spirit always addressed unto God, that it seemed his flesh had the same will
with his spirit. The fourth, was the incredible patience wherewith he endured
all his afflictions and all the iniuryes that were laid upon him, endeavoring
to love them that iniuryed him, mortifying his proper senses, and receiving all
as from the hand of God: for as he believed that all good proceeded from the
divine liberality, so did he believe that the affliction which he endured was
for his sins, and that God meant to chastise him in this lif and not in the
other. The fifth was his love unto the good and the great compassion he had of
the wicked, reputing himself much less then they; for he would say, that the
end was not yet seen when the good might become wicked and the wicked good.
When he heard any one detracted, either he would excuse him, or would show that
he disliked it, so that he would putt the detractour to silence, or change the
discourse. The sixth, was that he loved to be reprehended, for which he was
very thanckfull; Nevertheless he was very unwilling to reprehend, though he
were very zealous of the honor of God, of the good of his neighbor, and of
the observance of the rule; yet to avoid obligation to reprehend, he renounced
the office of General. The seventh, was that he served each one, with a pure
will and very great affection; though he would never permit himself to be
served, but in extreme necessity; reputing himself unworthy to be served:
alleging that JESUS CHRIST said, that he came not to be served, but to serve,
And if any one in any necessity served him, he would in his heart give thanckes
to God for giving will and power to that Religious to serve him. The eight was,
that he endeavored to conserve in his memory, the graces which he had
received of his divine majesty, as also the universal benefitts exhibited to
al other creatures, for which he was always thanckfull for himself and all
others. At the end of this thanckesgiuing, he ordinarily accused himself,
discending to the knowledge of himself and ascending to that of God, reputing
himself unworthy to give him thanckes, as by these words he often signified:
But who am I, that presume to gives thanckes for others, I, I say, that am not
able to thanck him for the least grace he has done me, and am also such an
abominable sinner? The ninth and last virtue, was the guard of his tongue,
which is the hight of all good, as being the very gate of life and death,
according as it is employed: without the guard whereof all good also is lost. In
respect whereof he was always very careful that his words should savor of
truth, humility, poverty chastity, goodness, benedictio^, praise of God and his
neighbor: and so he merited to be in like sort blessed of God and me^, world
without end. Amen.

How the glorious body of the Seraphicall Father S. Francis, was buried in the
city of Assisium. This is taken out of the first chapter of the tenth book,
and here placed for conclusion of the second book.
THere is no man but knows that the glorious body of the Seraphicall Father
S. Francis, is buried in his own monastery in the city of Assisium, but yet
after an ordinary manner: for it is not otherwise known in what place it is
in the said church: bnt that it is in a great chapel under the earth under
the high altar, and that lamps are putt in at a windoe to lighten that place
where the sacred body reposeth, as is also reported of saint James of Galicia,
that he is buried so far under ground, that none can come at him. We must
believe that God has so disposed, to the end such precious treasures by whose
merittes it pleases his divine majesty daily to work such and so great
miracles might not be robbed or ruinated by any alteration or disastrous event
of war or other evil accident. Now we desiring to content the readers, and
not to omit any matter in this worck that may be desired and is possible to be
performed, we have so dilligentlie searched and informed our selves, that we
have gotten knowledge that the true relation of what may be desired concerning
this subject, fell into the hands of the great Captain Gonzales, Heruandez
de Cordoua, in his conquest made of Calabria and the kingdom of Naples for his
Catholic majesty, and therefore we have so much Labored with importunities
and industry, that at length we obtained the same, it being this that
ensues, read it with contentment.

A true and faithful discourse whereby appears how the glorious Father S.
Francis is buried. transla^ted out of the latin original, which fell into the
hands of the great Captain Gonzales Herua^dez de Cordoue, in his conquest
made of the kingdom of Naples.

To the right reverenced Antony Bishop of Andria, Francis Bancie Duke of
Audria, Health.
THe charge which it has pleases you to lay on me, to committ to writing the
visitation which the sanctity of Pope Nicolas the first personally made of the
glorious body of the Seraphicall Father S. Francis, being on the one side
ouerburdensome unto me in regard of the great feeblenes of my spirit, has
nevertheless for other considerations bin very easy and contentfull, as well
in that this labor is pious and devout, as because I am to present it unto
you; to you I say, who were present when it was related unto us, so that you
are able to correct it and supply that wherein mine endeavor may fail. So I
beseech my sweet lord JESUS CHRIST, for whose praise and glory I have
attempted to dictate this discourse, to afford me the grace worthily to
dischardge my duty herein: I beseech him I say, by the merittes of this
glorious S. of whose body I am to treat, considering that it is not convenient
to burry in silence so great a miracle, wherein God does manifest so great
bounty and omnipotency. Your reverence and my Lord James Bishop of Laquidonia
being with me the eighth day of march, as you conferred together walking and
often resting your selves, as the manner is in discoursing of some admirable
accident; I came near you, and prayed you to make me participant of your
discourse if I were worthy and my request lawful: the said Lord James then
said unto me: My Lord Duke, if you knew whereof we did talk you would also
admire and wonder. Then did I very instantly entreat him to tell me the
occasion of such admiration. Whereto the said Lord answered that he would
willingly do it: but that he rather desired to weep when such things are
recounted and to hear the^ of an other, then to relate them himself.
Nevertheless he neither could nor would omit to content me and leet me know
that their admiration was not without subject: considering withal that it was
a matter worthy to be known, but not of all persons, therefore making me
partaker thereof, he thus began his discourse. My Lord Duke, you must understand
that I was one of the servants of the deceased Eustergio of worthy and blessed
memory, Cardinal of the title of S. Eusebius Archbishop of Beneuentum: who
approaching to the pangs and agony of death, yea arriving to that privation of
natural heat and vigor, that we much feared he could not live a day: about
midnight I heard him with a loud voice to cry: O S. Francis! then staying a
while, with groans and sighs he redoubled, O Francis! O Francis: wherewith he
much amazed us all: but none of us durst approach to ask him to demand the
reason for fear to trouble him, but were attentive to see the success of this
frequent invocation. I, that exceedingly loved him, wept bitterly with him,
and for him mentally inuocated the Saint to whom I have ever had a particular
devotion: but this had no other success saving that the next morning, when we
supposed to prepare his obsequies, he began to amend: and the physicians
likewise conceived better hope of him, he having always esteemed me for one of
his most affectionate servants, having bin then a very small time absent from
the Court, to yield due residence to an Abbey which he had bestowed on me:
knowing well that he had bin with his Holiness to visitt the body of the
glorious S. Francis, and desiring to hear the discourse, as also knowing that
at other times he had much desired that I should understand the same, but no
occasion was ever presented to demand it of him: Now taking this occasion of
his frequent invocation of the Saint, I began first readily to ask him the
cause, then at lenghth I freely discoursed, and humbly requested him
breifely to relate unto me, how he had seen that glorious body in his Church.
Whereupon he graciously answered me in these words: know Abbot, if thou were
not dear unto me as I hold thee to be. I would not impart it unto thee, much
less to any man in the world: we that were there present having express
commandment of his holiness to the contrary: and therefore by reason of that
prohibition I will not tell thee the place where it is, but am well content to
tell thee what I saw. Thou shall then understand that Pope Nicolas the 5. went
expressly to Assisium to see the body of S. Franc. the year. 1449.
in the year 1449. Pope Nicolas the fifth, who with an inestimable providence
governed the holy Church, goeing for certain affairs of great importance to
Asssisium, or according to the opinions of some merely and expressly to visitt
this glorious body, sent Sir Peter of Noceson his Secretary, to give the
Guardian of the place understanding thereof, who assembling his Religious
communicated unto him the intention of his holiness. Upon consultation whereof
they were exceedingly busied, for fearing on the one side that his holiness
would take and transport it to Rome: and on the other, not daring to contradict
him, they knew not well how to resolve to answer his holiness: but that the
said Secretary being very prudent and discreet, considering the anguish wherein
the Religious were, made answer of himself, and retourning to the Pope told
him in their behalf, that none of his predecessors not the holy Apostolic
Sea having attempted the same, they knew not well how to resolve, much fearing
that he would deprive them of that precious treasure of their Father: which the
Pope understanding, he returned his Secretary to secure them and putt them out
of that doubt. The Religious then accorded that he should freely come about
midnight: but most humbly beseeching him to come attended only with two or
three persons. A bishop of France that was then near his Sanctity hearing
this, was much scandalized, saying that this was as it were to contradict and
to limitte the Apostolical authority: and that if his holiness did what those
Religious required, it were to give ill example to the world, and advised him
not to endure it. The Pope answered him, that having good intention, he would
not have it esteemed evil without subject: and so much the rather because they
had very great reason for it, being also requisite to go into holy places with
great humility, whereby he hoped to obtain of this S. that, for which he
expressly went at that time. And therefore he chose only the said Bishop, my
self, and his said Secretary, and commanded the Guardian to take the like
number of his Religious to be present with him at the said visitation. Now as
we expected the hour, the Guardian preventing it came about three of the clock
at night unto his holiness, and having kissed his feet conducted him by diverse
turninges to a gross wall but low, whither being come the three Religious
which he had brought, began to break the wall, so that thy made a hole fit
for us to pass commodiously through: we then began there to consider, that
unto the place where the body of S. Francis was, there was a long rue of
steps of marble, by which goeing we came co a tomb made in form of a vault
under earth, where the Guardian kneeling down gave a burning torch into the
hand of his holiness, that he might the more securely enter. At the higher part
of the vault we found a door some what low, that was of brass very strong,
having three gross bars of iron, with their locks that shutt very
curiously, and three great chains of iron that crossed the door: which being
opened, there issued an odor so precious and rare, that none of us either felt
or shall feel a sweeter on earth. The Guardian then with his knee on the
ground said to his holiness, that he might enter at his pleasure, he entered
alone (we remaining without where we discoursed of diverse spiritual things)
and falling incontinently to the ground before the feet of the S. he began to
sigh, groan and weep so bitterly and so sorely, that so persisting a good
space, we began to fear, that some accident had befallen him: We then
determined to enter to withdraw him, but that having of himself changed his
lamentation into joy, which was an evident sign that he had obtained of this
glorious S. some grace of importance; he called us all in, desiring to see the
said place and to confer with us thereof, and so entering we fell on our knees,
and abbreuiating our deuotious to be less troublesome to his holiness, arising
up, and lifting our eyes on high we remained all amazed. O how inscrutable,
friend Abbott, (said the Cardinal) are the ways, of God! and how distant and
different are his judgments from all humane prudence! who in his life has
ever seen or heard of a body so many years dead, to remain and stand upright
on his feet without any rest or stay? It is no baulme, nor any drith of
natural coldness, but an only supernatural and evidently divine virtue, that
thus supporteth this holy body as if it were living, in such sort as we have
seen it. We may well acknowledge that the hand of God is no more abbridged in
his behalf then if he were living, seeing that he is truly living, alive I
say in God, alive in virtues, alive in miracles, and alive in image, gesture
and and flesh: so that only breath, yea breath alone is wanting. But to tell
your particulerly and by order: Know Abbott, that this place is made The
admirable standing of the body of S. Franc.
in form of a little chapel with three arched vaultes, that in the midst
seemed to be miraculously made, were it in respect of the walls or pauement,
having in the midst a stone whereon the glorious body of the S. stood upright
on his feet as I have said, with his face toward the west, and his eyes
elevated toward heaven, which they very attentively beheld as he accustomed
in his life. His hands were joined one in an other within the sleeves of his
habitt, after the manner of the Freer Minors, and rested on his breast. This
body was in all parts as entier and exempt from corruption as the first day of
his death. On the other side of this vault, stood an other body likewise
upright, and clothed in the habitt of S. Dominick, who seemed to pray with his
hands joined on high, and his eyes fixed toward the feet of S. Francis, and
they were so lively and clear, that to neither of both there wanted but
speech. They yielded such and so gracious a savor that it could hardly be
supported: for it was so admirablie subtle and penetrant, that it ravished our
spirittes into extaise. Now the Pope having well seen and duly considered all
this, fell again on his knees before the said body of S. Francis, then very
reverently lifted up one side of his habitt, for the other side was fast under
his foot which he would not pull up, because it could not conuenie^tlie be done
without stirring the whole body: wherefore he contented himself to discover
only the other foot, which was all bare without sandale. O happy were our eyes,
that then deserved to behold The stigmates of S. Franc. appeared fresh on his
body.
the sacred stigmates which God himself with his own hands imprinted in his
deerly beloved! Happy doubtless are the understandings that can at their
pleasure contemplate them: for the wound was as fresh on the midst of there
foot, as if it had bin made at that very hour, with the hard nail upon the
bare flesh: and the blood appeared exceeding full of life. O happy were the
souls that were held worthy to see in his servant, what they could not see in
their Lord JESUS CHRIST! and more when afterward they saw his sacred hands,
which his Holiness discovered and saw pierced as the feet, and having also the
like nails: we also kissed them laying our impure lips onthe sacred blood
that was yet very fresh: which made us to poor out tears, that so abondantly
fell from our eyes, as that they hindered our co^tentment; for we could not
taste nor enjoy the same according to our wish: our eyes were so troubled that
we often saw not that precious treasure. But who ca^ ever explicate the motion
of our understanding, the abstractio^ of our spirit, the melting of our
senses, and the faintnes of our corporal forces, procured by this precious
sight? O thrice happy the mouths of us so greiuous sinners, wherewith we were
permitted to kiss that sacred wound of his foot, with such interior
consolation as none could be more! But seven fold more hapy the Pope who alone
kissed the wound of his side, flowered as a fresh rose, and consequently his
very mouth; whereupon he graciously uttered these words: O most worthy and
excellent memorial of our redemption, wherewith the eternal God would that
conformably to our Lord I. C. the glorious Father S. Fr. should be deputed
alive and dead to represent to the world, even till the last day of judgment,
the sign of his dolorous passion! O holy wounds first endured by the Son of
God for the sins of men! and after for our benefitt renewed in his holy
servant Francis O most gracious God! to whom have thou ever shewe^ such love
but to this thy most faithful servant? Blessed saint, thou have really carried
the triumphant stander of the cross, together with the lively marckes of his
passion. Finally thou alone have ben elected and found worthy to be pierced in
true imitation of our Lord I. C. differing from him only in this, that he
received his wounds of the wicked Jews, and thou of our Redeemer I. C. O
extreme benefit! O singular gift! O ineffable prerogative! Fr. who taught thee
to serve God? in what new scoole was it performed? and by what merueillous
doctrine? Of what master have thou learned to mount to so high a degree of
perfection, that never S. of either sex could equal thee in the gifts of God?
The Pope uttered these and many other words, being ravished out of himself in
the presence of this S. of God, himself together with us bathinge the pauement
of that holy place with abondance of our tears. Now we so persisted in these
sweet co^ceiptes, that when we least thought thereon, one advertised us that it
was near day, and that it was necessary for us to depart, to shutt up the hole
of the sacred sepulcher dexteriously which touched our heart as a deadly wound,
the space of six or seven hours that we were there, seeming to have flowen
and not passed away. Making therefore some little prayer more, and recommending
our selves to the S. the Pope first goeing out we all followed, but not till we
had opened the two vaultes in the two other arches, where we saw the two other
glorious bodies of his disciples, entier also and very odoriferous, but much
less then that of their master; having their habittes of sackcloth. At the
entry we saw the body of the blessed Brother Giles, then Brother Giles also.
we came forth, and the Guardian shutt the doors, praying his Holiness to keep
the same in great secrecy: which he promised him, and commanded us also the
same. This, my friend James, was the cause of my invocation that night, when I
cried, O Francis! Francis! having yet hope, yea very confident, that he will be
protector of my soul before God at my departure. But it seems indeed very
admirable that this glorious S. had not procured his recovery, but that he
might have declared this his glory to many his devoted freindes that much
desired to understand it: for this discourse ended he began so to decay that he
dyed the night following, leaving assured testimony of this truth, considering
that it is not to be believed nor thought, nor is it probable, that aman
especially such as this being in the conflictes of death, would for his
pleasure and without occasion feign a false matter, the time so near when he
should most stricktly render an account unto God, who severely condemns the
culpable and ill-deseruers, as he crowns the saints, his elected here on
earth, but much more in heaven, there glorifiyng their bodies and their souls
with his glorious vision eternally; whither I beseech him by his grace to
conduct us, where he is three and one, and lives and reigns world without
end. Amen.

The end of the second book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES OF THE FRIAR MINORS.
CONTAINING A TREATISE OF S. Bonauenture of certain miracles of the glorious
Father S. Francis after his death.
With a discourse of the Author, of the degrees whereby the S. attained to
perfection. Translated by the parties before mentioned.

Of the miracle of the Stigmates.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
TO the honor and glory of almighty God, and the blessed Father S. Francis.
Being to write certain miracles of his, wrought after his glorification in
heaven, we have determined to begin with that immensiue privilege given him by
our Lord JESUS CHRIST, honoring him with the sign of the cross and passion.
This glorious Father S. Francis, was then eminent by a new miracle, when he
appeared charactered and illustrated with so singular a privilege, never
before granted to any creature, I mean the sacred wounds of our Lord, which
made his mortal body like to that of JESUS CHRIST crucified, the sacred
stigmates considered, whereof whatsoever any humane tongue can express, is
little or nothing in comparison of so sublime and worthy a mystery, wrought by
his divine majesty in his faithful servant Francis; that this sign of the
cross which he always carried imprinted in his heart, from the beginning of
his conversion, might also exteriourly appear in his body entierly united in
the said cross, and that as his soul was interiourly vested with JESUS
CHRIST, the habit of a penitent which he took representing the image of the
cross, the body also might in like sort be invested with the said sacred
sign, and that with such colors and distinctions he might the more
courageously serve his God, as his principal Captain, in the spiritual
war and army, wherein God had overcome the powers of spiritual ennemies. Yea
and diverse mysteries of the cross, appeared in the S. from his first beginning
in spiritual warfare, as in the discourse of his life plainly appears, by
the diverse apparitions of the cross which he had. And for farther assurance of
the verity of so admirable a fact, God did not only give testimonies worthy of
creditt, that saw and with their own hands touched, those holy stigmates
during his life: but did manifest them even by merueillous apparitions, and
miracles wrought after the death of the glorious Father, as hereafter we shall
orderly discourse, besides what has bin formerly said, upon the doubt of Pope
Gregory the ninth, in the nine and fiftieth chapter of the second book.

A Religious Freer Minor, and Preacher very famous in regard of the admiration
of many virtues that excelled in him, believed at first the mystery of the
sacred stigmates which the holy Father had: nevertheless being desirous to know
by humane reason the occasion of such a miracle, he began to doubt thereof; so
that growing daily more scrupulous his doubt increased of so manifest a verity:
Wherefore one night as he slept, S. Francis appeared unto him, having his feet
covered with dirt, How the doubt of the sacred stigmates was cleared from a
Friar Minor and preacher.
and a countenance humbly austere, and patiently angry who said, what combatt
do thy cogitations cause thee? what turpitude has so absolutely possessed
thee? behold my hands and feet. But the Religious, though he saw the wounds
of his hands, with their nails, could not yet perceive those of his feet,
because they were covered with dirt: wherefore the S. said unto him, put of the
dirt from my feet, and behold the wounds of the nails: and so the Religious
devoutly taking hold of his holy seet, seemed to make them clean, and with his
hands to touch the said wounds; after which awaking, he found himself all
bathed with tears, and being cleared of all his scrupulous cogitations, he
publicly confessed his error, with a firm belief of such an assured
verity, craving pardon thereof at the hands of God and his Saint.

Of other miracles, of the stigmates of the holy Father S. Francis.
THE II. CHAPTER.
A Gentlewoman not believing a miracle of the stigmates which God had set on an
image where there were none an other miracle putting them out made her to
believe.
A Virtuous Gentlewoman of Rome, having chosen the holy Father S. Francis for
her advocate, and having upon this occasion placed his image in her oratory,
beholding it one time, and seeing that it had not the sacred stigmates, she
began in admiration to complain, and not thincking it to be the fault of the
painter that had neglected to make them, she for many days had purposes to
search out the cause of this defect; but those admirable signs one day
appeared in an instant in that image, as they are accustomed to be painted in
all other. This Gentlewoman perceauing it, filled with fear and admiration,
called her daughter who was very young and devout, and had dedicated herself
unto God, and asked her if she remembered that she had formerly seen in that
image those stigmates that then appeared. The daughter did swear that she had
never seen them, and that they came there miraculously: But the soul of man
often seeking occasion to fall, calling the verity in doubt, there entered an
other scruple into the heart of this gentlewoman, contrary to the former; which
was that the said stigmates had ever bin in the said image, but that she had
not well observed it. God intending not to have his first miracle misprised,
added a second, permitting the said stigmates to vanish again and the image to
remain as before, and so the first miracle was confirmed by the second.

At the City of Lorio in Catalonia, there was a man named John, very devout
unto the holy Father S. Francis, who passing one night through a street where
certain lewd persons attended to murder their ennemy that was to pass that
way, who was a friend to the said John, and did resemble him; so supposing him
to be their ennemy in person, they assaulted him, and so wounded him, that they
left him on the ground for dead, there remaining in him no hope of life; for
the first blow cut as it were clean off one arm; besides a stabbe that had
pierced him thorough, under the breast, so that the wind which issued thence
blew out six burning candelles joined together: whereupon the Phisicions
presently judged him for dead, and as such forsook him; his wounds daily
putrefying, the loathsome matter that issued out of his body was so
intolerable, that even his wife could no longer endure it: wherefore seeing
that all humane help was out of hope, he had recourse to his Patron, and to
the blessed virgin, whom he had very confidently and courageously inuocated
at the instant of his wounding. Now this miserable afflicted thus lying in his
bed, accompained only with his misery, did in a manner continually weep and
often calling on the holy Father S. Francis, there one day appeared unto him a
man in habitt of a Freer Minor, who as it seemed to him, entered at the window,
and calling him said, know John that because thou have had confidence in me,
God will cure thy wounds. Which the afflicted One wounded to death cured by
the sacred stigmates of S. Franc.
man hearing, he prayed him to let him know who he was that brought him such
grateful news: he answered that he was Brother Francis; who coming near
him unbound his wounds, and anointed them with a precious ointment: which
doing the sick man felt such virtue to proceed out of his sacred hands, that
he perceived himself manifestly to be healed, and so at an instant, from
half dead, and already sauouring, he was restored and cured; for his
putrefaction was by the virtue of the signs of the passion of our Savior,
chanced into sweet savor, and the flesh of his wounds in such sort renewed
that he was absolutely cured: which done the Saint disappeared, and the good
man arose from his bed with great joy to praise God, and the blessed Saint:
then called his wife with so strong a voice that she was utterly amazed,
knowing that she had left him in his bed with so little courage that scarcely
could he utter a word: but finding him out of his bed and cured, whom she
thought to bury the next day, she was much more amazed, wherefore she so cried
out in admiration of the miracle, that she was heard of all the neighbors.
Those of his family at first supposing him to be frantike, prayed him to
return to his bed, for they could not be persuaded that he was cured; but he
having showed them his body sound, they were exceedingly abashed, being of
opinion that he whom they saw was not John, but a fantastical spirit or
vision, which conceat never ceased in them till he had recounted the whole
progress of the miracle, which being diuulged over the city, the people
abondantly flocked to see this man and the notable miracle, wrought by the
sacred stigmates of S. Francis, ad all replenished with joy and admiration,
with one accord extolled the praises of the Standerd bearer of JESUS CHRIST,
who being dead of body, nevertheless lived in the other life, so that by the
admirable demonstration of his presence, and the sweet touch of his hands, he
raised, as may be said, one already dead by mean of his more then humane
marckes, with which our sovereign Redeemer raised the Christian people already
dead eternally by sin.

Of an other miracle of the stigmates of S. Francis.
THE III. CHAPTER.
IN the city of Potencia in Apulia, there was a Priest called Roger, a very
venerable man, and Canon of the great church, who being by means of an
infirmity, become very feeble, entered one day into a church to pray, wherein
was painted the image of S. Francis, with the stigmates, which beholding he
began to conceive a doubt in himself of the sublimity of the miracle, as of an
inaccustomed thing and utterly impossible; his heart being thus wounded with
incredulity, he felt at the very instant such a greiuous pearcing of his left
hand, within his glove, that an arrow flies not out of a bow with more force
and violence: whereupon being exceedingly amazed with the wound together with
the stroke, and yet more with the secrett manner thereof, he pulled of his
glove, to see with his eyes, the effect of that which he had heard and felt,
and having never before had any wound in his hand, with admiration he beheld
this new wound, whence began to proceed such an extreme pain as he thought
thereof to dye: it was merueilous to consider, for in the glove appeared no
sign at all but only in the hand, that the wound made secretly in the hand
might be correspondent to that which was secrett in the heart. So for the space
of two days making public relation of the occasion, and the secrett of his
incredulity, he confessed and with oath affirmed that he believed the sacred
stigmates to be imprinted in S. Francis; he humbly recommended himself unto
him, beseeching him, by the virtue of his sacred stigmates, and by the efficacy
of his intercession to procure the cessation of his pain. At the end of two
days his incredulity having bin sufficiently punished, God by the merittes of
the S. gave him ease, for the grief entierly ceased, the heat of the hurt was
qualified, and no sign of the wound remained; so that secrett infirmity of the
soul was cured by the manifest lance of the flesh: and by divine providence
the body was cured together with the soul: the man remaining humble toward
God, devout to his servant S. Francis, and affectionate to the Religious of his
Order. This so solemn miracle, was assured by autenticall letters from the
Bishop of the said city, sealed with the ordinary seal, that thenceforward
none might admit any doubt of the sacred wounds of the Son of God, divinely
imprinted in his servant Francis, and that no man's eye should be evil to see
that God is good, as if the liberality and gift of this grace, did not
corresponde unto the eternal bounty.

Of the dead raised by the merittes of S. Francis.
THE IV. CHAPTER.
IN the city of Mont-Maron near to Beneuentum, there dyed a woman of singular
devotion unto the glorious Father S. Francis, where the Clergy being assembled
the same euenning to sing her vigiles, the woman arose before them all, and
called one of the Preistes there present, saying unto him: Father I desire to
be confessed of one sin: Know A woman devout unto S. Francis raised to
confess a sin and then died again.
that after my death, I should have bin condemned to the devil in an obscure
and horrible prison, because I never confessed a sin which I now desire to
confess: but the holy Father S. Fr. having prayed for me, because I have ever
devoutly served him, it is permitted me to return to life, that being
confessed of this sin, I may afterward obtain eternal life with him. And
for assurance hereof as soon as I shall be confessed, and have absolution, I
shall go to the glory promised. So having with exceeding great contrition
confessed her sin, and performed the pe^nance enjoined by her Confessor all
trembling, accommodating her self sweetly into her bed, she slept in our Lord.

In the mountains of Apulia, in the town of Parmace, there was a married man,
that had one only daughter, young, and exceedingly beloved of himself and her
mother, who being seized with an inexpected and greiuous sickness sodenlie dyed,
wheratt the Father and mother being out of hope ever to have other children,
were so afflicted, that they were ready to dye with her. Their kindred and
freindes being come to bury and bewail her; the mother was so sorrowful and
oppressed with grief* that she consumed into tears, yea so gave way to
sorrow, and so employed her self in this affliction, that she neither saw nor
understood any thing that was done in her house; but as every one was thus
disquieted, yea void of hope; the holy Father S. Francis with one Religious
only appeared to the mother The only daughter of one devout unto S. Francis
raised by his merittes.
that was devout unto him, and in compassionate manner said: Woman cease to
lament, for the light of thy candell, whom thou bewaylest as dead, shall by
mine intercession be incontinently revived. Which said he disappeared; and the
woman presently related what had bin said unto her by the S. unto those
present, and would not permit the body of her dead daughter to be carried to
burial: but coming near her, and inuocating the name of S. Francis, she
lifted her up alive and in health in the presence of her kindred and freindes,
who gave thanckes to God and to his blessed servant.

The Friar Minors of Nocere standing in need of a chariott demanded one of a
man named Peter, who in steed of lending them his chariott A blasphemer of the
name of S. Franc. lost his eldest son, but repenting the S. restored him.
and affording them the almose which they demanded for the honor of God, and
S. Francis, he sotishly answered them, and with injurious words cursed the
name of the S. but he soon repented his folly, in regard of what incontinently
befell him, which wrought in him a great fear of the wrath of God: for he lost
his eldest son: who being even then stricken with a disease suddenly dyed,
wherefore in an extreme passion that assailed his heart, casting himself on the
ground and there wallowing, he inuocated the S. with the same mouth that had so
indiscreetly blasphemed him, and bitterly weeping said: Father I am he that
have offended, I am he that have impiously spoaken: thou do justly
chasticie me o S. of God! restore the innocent child to him that repents his
fault, and is ready to do penance. Punishment is due to him that has lewdly
blasphemed, wherefore I freely give my self to thee, I offer me to serve thee
for ever, and to offer unto God sacrifice of praise to the honor and glory of
thy holy name. It was admirable, that at these words his son arose one his
feet, and procuring end to their lamentation that mourned for him, he
confidently affirmed that when he dyed he saw the holy Father S. Francis, who
had conducted his ^oule from the separation of the body, and by their prayers
had restored it again.

The son of a Notary at Rome, about the age of seven years, desi^ing
according to the custom to go with his mother to mass, she unwilling to
permit him, did shutt him into the house. The child seeing he could not get
out at the door, lept out at the window, and fell dead against the ground. The
mother that was not gone far, hearing the fall, returned again, and seeing
the sorrowful spectacle of her dead son, crossing her arms, began to cry
out and torment her self, thereby moving all her neighbors to compassion. Now
among them that there assembled, there was a Freer Minor that was goeing to
preach in a church nere thereunto; but came first to see this acccident, where
he said to the Father of the dead child: do you not believe that S. Francis, by
the great love which he carried to JESUS CHRIST crucified to give S. Franc. by
his merits raised a child.
live to me^, can raise thy son? The Father answered that he firmily
beleeeued it, faithfully confessed it, and would for ever remain servant to
the S. if by his mean he might meritt to obtain that favor. The Religious
then fell to his prayers, and exhorted all that were present to do the like,
which done the child first began to speak, then opening his eyes, lifted up
his hands, not without exceeding astonishme^t of all the assistants that
attentively beheld him. Finally he arose one his feet, and incontinently went
to embrace his mother sound and secure, without any sign of such a fall, which
was performed by the virtue of the holy Father S. Francis.

Of other dead, raised by the merittes of the holy Father.
THE V. CHAPTER.
IN the city of Capua, diverse children playing upon the water-crane, one of
them by mischance fell into the river, which being very swift and violent, he
sunck instantly to the bottom where he remained buried in the sand His
companions not knowing how to help And an other drowned.
him began to cry: which the people hearing, they hastened thither from all
pa^tes, many inuocating the merittes of S. Francis, in regard that the pare^tes
of the child were very devout unto him, that he would please to assist him.
Their prayer being ended, one of them that could swim, inuocating the name of
S. Francis, so labored in the river that he found the place where the child
was, covered with sand whom with much sorrow and pain he drew out quite dead,
to the exceeding grief of those present, who with loud voice cried out: S.
Francis the true servant of God, restore this child alive unto his Father; yea
certain Jews being there arrived, induced by a natural commiseration,
likewise prayed unto him: At these prayers, the child that had bin dead and
lay deformed on the ground, incontinently arose in health and joyful as he had
come from play, and prayed those present to conduct him to the church of saint
Francis, that he might give thanckes unto him, acknowledgeing that by his
merittes he had bin raised.

In the city of Suesse, there fell down a house in the Piller-street under
which was crushed a child that there was present; at the noise An other
crushed under the ruins of an house.
of this fall all the neig^bours presently hastened, and suspected that which
was true, they incontinently removed the stones, and wood, and found the child
dead whom they carried to his mother, who seeing it was so overcome with
grief, that she lost her speech. Retourning to her self she began with a
sorrowful voice to lament, in these words: O S. Francis! O glorious S. restore
me my child, I beseech thee, by the love wherewith thou have served JESUS
CHRIST. This woman did not pray alone, but together all that were present,
affectionatly imploring the S. to comfort this disolate mother, perceauing that
this dead body had neither se^ce, nor voice, they took it and stretched it out
to be shrouded, to bury it the day following. But the mother reposing great
hope in God that by the metes of the S. her son should retou^ne to life,
vowed to cover the Altar of S. Francis with a new ornament and a new altar
cloth, and about midnight her child began to gape, and after his dead members
were warmed, in an instant he arose on his feet very sound and well, to the
great amazement of all that were present, who praised and thancked God for the
same.

A child of Rogouse, called Gi^laudin, being in a fa^me at the time of the
vintage, goeing under the wine press, with a vessel to putt wine therein,
there fell down g^osse stones and blocks of wood from upon the said press,
that crushed his head. At the cry of the child, his father that was near by
came running, but being unable to help his son that was covered with the
gross stones and pieces of wood, he called the presse-labourers and prayed
them to assist him: who having compassion of him, drew out the child already
dead from under the burden. and delivered him to the extremly afflicted father,
who humbly falling prostrate on the earth, prayed ou^ lord, by the great
merittes of the holy Father Francis, whose feast was very near, to restore
life to his child; and he made vows, especially with his son being raised,
to visitt the body of the S. God by the merittes of his servant heard him, An
other.
but after an admirable manner, for as soon as it pleased God to grant to
this man the favor he required, at the very same instant the child that was
all bruised, appeared perfectly well, and very merrily, reprehe^ding those that
wept, and assuring them that his life was restored him by the merittes of S.
Francis.

And an other.
An other dead person was raised in Almaigne, whereof Pope Gregory the ninth, by
his apostolical letters at the translation of S. Francis, certified all that
were present, and at the general chapter of the Friar Minors, who upon this
advertisement ended their chapter with great alacrity. The manner and
circumstance of this miracle is not committed to writting, because it is not
known, nevertheless it is believed that the testimony of so holy a Pope much
exceeds in aucthority, all the declarations that may be made thereof.

Of such as were delivered from danger of death, by the servant of the
omnipotent.
THE VI. CHAPTER.
THere was a gentleman near unto Rome, named Rodulphus, whose wife was very
devout, they willingly entertained the Friar Minors into their house, as well
in form of hospitality (for they were very charitable) as for the love and
reverence they carried to the glorious Father S. Francis. Now it once happened
that two Friar Minors being lodged with them, whiles they were a sleep, a
sentinel that kept watch by night on a very high tower, resting against a
piece of wood that was not well fastened, the wood and the man fell both from
the hight of the said tower, upon the roof of the lodging, and thence to the
ground, with such a noise that caused very many, yea A man fallen from the
hight of a tower, had no hurt, by the merits of S. Franc.
the master and mistress, with the said Friar Minors to hasten thither who
found the man so fallen, in such a deep sleep, that he perceived, not himself
to be fallen nor did awake, at the noise made by them that came to help him:
so that he was pulled, and called, and at length so rudely shaken, that he
awaked out of that profound sleep: co^playning that he had bin distourbed of
the sweet repose wherein he was: affirming that he slept with extreme
contentment in the arms of the glorious Father S. Francis. But when he was
shown his fall, and had seen whence he came even to the ground, he was
utterly amazed and beside himself, to consider what had happened unto him
without any knowledge of his till the present. Wherefore be promised unto God
before them all, in acknowledgement of so worthy a benefitt, to do penance,
for the favor afforded unto him by the merittes of the glorious Father S.
Francis.

In the town of Pophy, in Campania, a Priest called Thomas, goeing to repair
a mill appertayning to the church scituat on the border of An other fallen
under a water mill.
the river, he fell by mischance under the wheel of the mill, which by
violence of his motion carried him down, and held him in the current, with his
face upward, without power to move or speak by reason that the water which
drove the wheel fell on his face, so that he could not utter one word.
Wherefore he called in his heart for help unto S. Francis, having no farther
power, and having so remained a good space, his companions endeavoring to
assist him, by force and industry they so prevailed that the wheel turned
back, so that the Priest was by the current of the water incontinently carried
into the depth of the channel: and whiles he was there, there appeared unto him
a Friar Minor clothed in white and girded with a cord, who very dexterously
took him by the arm, and drew him out of the channel, saying unto him: I am
that Francis whom thou have inuocated. The priest therefore finding himself
not only freed from danger, but perfectly well, considering the greatness of the
miracle, and the great mercy of God in his behalf, by the merittes of S.
Francis, exceedingly amazed, and prostrating himself to the earth to kiss the
feet of his benefactour, but not seeing him, he being already vanished, he asked
his companions whither he was gone, and how he might find him: but they
knowing no more then himself, began to conceive the miracle. Wherefore they all
together fixing their eyes on the earth, did eleuate their spirit to God,
magnifying his immensiue greatness, and the virtuous merittes of the Saint.

Certain young men goeing from the town Celan to gather grass in a field,
where there was a well, which being ouergrowne with grass was not seen, and
each of them endeavoring to cut his part, it chanced that one of them fell
into the well, where the water was four pases deep. Falling he called for the
help of S. Francis with a very strong faith and devotion, and so loud that all
his companions An other fallen into a well.
heard him: and not seeing him, they came to the place where they hea^d the
voice, and by the way which his hook had made thy found the well, where seeing
him therein, they ran to their houses, lamenting and crying for help, where
they so moved their town fellows, that they came to assist him, and one of
them descending into the well, found him sitting on the water, without
receiving any detriment, and drawing him out, he told them that falling, he had
inuocated the help of S. Francis, who in his very fall assisted him with his
presence; for he very gently supported him with his sacred hand, never leaving
him till they had drawn him out, then he exhorted them all together with him
to give thanckes to God, for that by the virtue of his faithful servant, he
had delivered him from death, and so they returned to the town giving
thanckes to God and to S. Francis.

When the Roman Court was resident at Assisium, the Cardinal of Hostia, (who
was afterward Pope Alexander the fourth) 'preaching in the church of S.
Francis, there fell a gross stone upon the head of a devout woman, wherewith
she received such hurt that falling to the ground, A woman being wounded with a
gross stone.
each one thought her to be dead, and for such covered her with her own coat
not to trouble the sermon, with resolution to carry her out to perform her
funeralles. But this woman as she testified afterward, when she received the
blow, with great faith called for the help of saint Francis; she was then
before his altar, so the sermon being ended, she arose with the other women
sound and perfectly well, without any sign of hurt: and which is admirable, A
double admirable cure.
having formerly had a great pain in her head that had long troubled her, in
favor of this last mortal blow, she never felt any pain after.

Near to the city of Cornette, where there is a monastery of Friar Minors,
as they were melting a bell, many of the neighbor places repaired thither to
see it: but there arose such a wind, that the whole world seemed ready to be
dissolved, and taking the two doors it mounted them into the air, and cast
them again on the ground with great impetuosity and violence, whereof one fell
on a child called Bartholomew about eight years of age, which a woman, devout
unto the Covent, had sent thither with an almose. Now they all esteemed him not
only dead, but utterly dismembered under such a weight; nevertheless inuocating
the glorious Father saint Francis, they ran all to lift up the child from
under the door; the Father of him being present, was so surprised with grief,
that he was even senseless, yet he inuocated the Saint to whom he offered
his son if he recovered: the door at A child on whom had fallen the door of
a church.
length being lifted up, the child arose on his legs sound and well as if he
had awakened from a sleep, which procured a great joy to the people and
particulerly to his Father. Now according to his vow, the child being of
competent age, which was about fourteen years, he made him a Friar Minor,
where he dyed piously, having so lived a good Religious, of a notable spirit,
worthy doctrine, and a famous Preacher.

Certain other miracles like to these, of diverse that were delivered from the
danger of death.
THE VII. CHAPTER.
Certain men of Castel-Lantin, having cut out a very great stone, to place
under the altar of a church of saint A man crushed with a verymassie stone by
the merits of S. Frno hurt befell hun thereby.
Francis, that was shortly after to be dedicated, albeit they were forty men
to raise and accommodate the same on the wagon to carry it to the said Church,
yet were they not of sufficiency to perform the same. Now some of them
attempting to try their forces and to do more then they were able; the stone
slipped out of their hold and fell upon one of them: which was a great terror
and grief to the rest, as not knowing how to releive their companion. Wherefore
they went away all, to ten persons, as not able to endure that hideous
spectacle: which ten inspired of God, having inuocated saint Francis, praying
him to have compassion of him that had so employed himself in his service,
they attempted to turn the said stone, which they so easily handled that they
perceived well they were assisted by the S. The stone being removed the man
arose very sound, without any hurt, yea having one eye defective, he was
entierly cured thereof, that it might publicly appear what power the holy
Father S. Francis had with God, even in desperate matters.

An other accident like unto this, happened at saint Seuerin in the Marquisat
of Ancona, in this sort; A very great stone being brought from Constantinople,
and by the help of diverse men carried into the Church of the said S. in laying
it down it so slipped that a man fell directly under it; but the stone at the
very instant raised it self: S. Francis appeared to the miserable labourer,
whom he caused sound and safe to arise, albeit he was esteemed utterly crushed
in pieces.

Nor an other.
A Burgess, of Gayette, called Bartholomew, earnestly employed in building the
Church of S. Francis, there to be erected, a beam of timber being not well
settled, fell upon his neck, so that he was esteemed a dead man: as well
therefore, as he could, he required the B. Sacrament of a Religious there
present, who supposing it impossible for him to live till the same might be
procured; used unto him these words of S. Augustine: Creed and manducast^,
believe and make account that thou have eaten and received it; then he caused
him to be carried to his house. The night following, S. Francis with eleven
Religious appeared unto him, holding before him a little la^be, and drawing
near the bed, he called him saying: Bartholomew, fear not: for the devil
shall not be able to hinder thee from laboring in my service. Behold the lamb
which thou did require to be given thee, whom thou have received by thy
good and pious desire, and by virtue whereof thou shall recover health of body
and soul. Then having laid on him his sacred hand, and given him his holy
benediction, he commanded him to go finish the worck begun. He being utterly
amazed arising in the morning entirely cured of so mortal a blow, returned
with alacrity to his labor: which passed with incredible admiration to all
those that had left him for dead, who awakened their souls, disposing them to
love and devoutly to reverence the holy Father S. Francis.

In the town of Ceperan, there was a man called Nicholas, who was so wounded
by his ennemies, that they left him for dead upon the pauement. Nor an other by
death.
But whiles they stroke him he always with a loud voice cried out: S. Francis
help me: which cry was heard a far of by diverse who from the place where
they were, could not so redely releive him, but came to see him when the fact
was done, and carried him into his house, where he assured them, that albeit
they saw him all bathed in his blood, notwithstanding he should not dye of
those wounds, whereof he neither felt any kind of pain, and that this
proceeded of the help he had received of the holy Father S. Francis: and also
that he had obtained of God, time for to do penance. The success confirmed
the same: for being washed from his blood, he was withal cured of his wounds
to the great astonishment of those that had seen and carried him into his
house.

In the town of S. Geminian, a gentleman's son had a flux of blood issuyng
out of his eyes and mouth, which had brought him to extremity that nothing was
expected but his death, and had in deed diverse effects or tokens of death, as
feeblenes of his spirit, loss of his A sick child aba^doned of men was cured
by the merits and intercessions of S. Franc.
hearing, his members also were so weakened that he seemed insensible, and at
every moment was expected the yelding up of his spirit. Many therefore of his
fathers freindes repairing as the manner is, to comfort him, they had no other
discourse but of his burial. But the father that had a great faith and
confidence in God, though as a man he was exceedingly afflicted, entertained
in his conceit a pious cogitation, which he put in execution, for leaving all
those that were come to comfort him, he retired himself alone into the Church
of S. Francis that was near unto his house, where falling prostrate on the
groo^d, he putt his girldle about his neck, and prayed to S. Francis that he
would please to be a meditatour for the health of his son, in such sort and
with so great a faith, so profound a humility, and such dolorous plaintes and
tears, that he merited to be heard of JESUS CHRIST, then filled with hope, he
returned to his house where he found his kindred and freindes full of joy, for
the health which his son had recovered, so that they and he together changed
their tears into joy and their affliction into contentme^t. So by the
intercession of the said S. the death of the son was turned into life. And
afterward they altogether gave thanckes to God, and his freindes and kindred
departed exceedingly comforted and edified by the virtue of the holy father S.
Francis.

And an other sick in like sort. Then an other. A Priest also that was poisoned.
Our Lord JESUS CHRIST wrought a like action, by the merits of this glorious
S. in a town called Tamarit in Catalonia; where he restored health to a young
gentlewoman; as also to an other of Ancona, who had a daughter ready to dye,
through the extremity of her disease, whose father inuocating the S. obtained
his daughters health.

A Priest named Mattheiw of a city called Ville-bla^che, having drunk a deadly
poison incontinently lost his speech, his tongue and body swelled in such
sort that death only was expected. An other Priest being present at this
pitiful spectacle, persuaded him to be incontinently confessed: the other
fell on his knees, but could not utter so much as one word; wherefore making use
of reason, he humbly recommended himself unto God in heart, beseeching him to
vouchsafe by the merittes of his servant Francis, to free him from such an
odious death. At the very instant, which was admirable, he began with a loud
voice to invoke the name of S. Francis, then he vomited the venime which he
had received, yelding thanckes to God and S. Francis.

How S. Francis delivered many pilgrims from tempests and misfortunes of the
sea.
THE VIII. CHAPTER.
Certain nauigatours were on a time in this sort in peril of death: they being
some five leagues distant from the harbor of Barut, the winds and tempests
growing violent, fearing to be drowned they cast ankor, but their disaster by
the impetuositie of the winds so increased, and the seas in such sort swelled
that the cables breaking, the ankors did stick fast to the bottom, and the
vessel floated here and there, without hope of safety, by reason of the
incertaintie of the course of the waters and the inequality of the tide, till
it pleased God to calm the sea, when the mariners as half dead began to seek
their ankors in the sea where they perceived the cables, there employing all
the diligence and art they could devise. But their labor vainlie spent, they
inuocated the assistance of diverse saints. And being exceedingly wearied,
one of them whose name was Perfectus, though of condition very lewd and
imperfect, said in scoffing manner to his companions: You have implored the
assistance of so many Saints, yet have they not heard you: let us a little
invoke that new saint called Francis, and let us see if he will diue into
the S. Franc. by his intercession made iron ankers to swime upon the sea.
sea to find our ankors, whereto all the rest accorded, not in derision as he
moved it, but heartelie and with great faith, reprehending Perfectus for his
sottish speech and derision: and so praying and making vows, they instantly
saw their ankors miraculously to swim upon the waters, as if the nature of
iron had bin changed into that of wood; so that by this mean they persisted
devout and fully comforted.

A poor pilgrim exceedingly wearied and afflicted, by means of a sharp
fever that had a long time tormented him, came by ship from beyond the sea;
he had enterprised this journey to see the body of the glorious Father Saint
Francis, to whom he was exceedingly devoted: and not being entierlie
recovered of the said sickness, he was one day extremely afflicted with thirst:
but having no fresh water in the ship where he was, he began to call with a
loud voice and with a strong faith for drinck to be brought him, affirming that
he well knew that Saint Francis had filled his barrel with pure water: and so
in deed the barrel (which was known to be empty) was found full of sweet and
clear water. The day following there a rose a very cruel tempest, which so
raised the waves S. Frans. miraculously sent fresh water to one devoted unto
him and in his favor ceased a violent tempeste.
that they covered all the said ship, which was so beaten with the winds
that the mariners expected the breaking of the mastes and tacklinge, and
consequently the immediate sincking and drowning of the vessel and themselves
by the furious impetuositie of the surges. But when the said pilgrim, that
ceased not to pray for them all, began to cry a loft: Brethren arise and come
to entertain Saint Francis who comes to assist us: behold him, he is come
to save us. Then did they all kneel down, and with tears and sighs beseech
him to voutsafe to make intercession for their delivery. The sea immediately
became calm, the winds and cruel tempeste ceased, and they all gave
thanckes to the almighty, and rested obliged to the pilgrim, who at the
instant was also cured of his feiuer, and together they perseuered devout to
the holy Father S. Francis.

Brother James of Ariete passing over a river in a boat with other of his
Brethren, and coming to the shore attempting to land out of the boat as his
componions had done, the boat was utterly ouerturned, so that both himself
and the ferry-man tombled in the water, S. Franc. preserved a Fr. Minor from
drowni^g yea from being wett, though he were in the bottom of a river.
the ferry-man saved himself by his dexterity of swiming: but the Religious
sunck to the bottom. The other Religious extremely afflicted at the
mischance of their Brother, most instanlie prayed S. Francis that he would
voutsafe to assist his devout child, who on his own part in the best sort he
could in the water employed the help of his holy Father: who failed not in so
urgent a necessity to relieve this his beloved child: for he continually
accompanied him in the depth of the water, till they ascended to the boat,
where being taken by the hand he mounted, and went afterward to his Brethren,
who were much amazed, not only to see him safe and secure, but more to see his
garments so dry, notwithstanding the long time he had bin in the bottom of
the river, in so much that one drop of water could not be perceived upon him.

An other Religious called Bonauenture trauailling with two of his companions
in a boat, which by the forcible current of the water being splitted on the one
side, they by that means sunck to the bottom And also three Religious
of the river, but they from the lake of miseries inuocating the depth of
mercy, and in this imminent peril imploring the assistance of their holy
Father S. Francis, the bark at length was raised without one dropp of water,
and being conducted by the power of God and the virtue of the glorious S. they
all arrived safe and secure to the shore. And an other.


A Religious of Ascoli being cast into a river, was delivered of the danger by
the merittes of the saint.

And certain men and women. And also Mariners of Ancona
Certain men and women being in manifest peril of drowning in the river of
Riete, they inuocated the help of S. Francis, and were delivered from the
dangerous shipwreck of their vessel.

Certain Mariners of Ancona, being in a vehement storm without hope of saving
themselves, and as it were assured of their death, they humbly inuocated the
assistance of S. Francis, yea with such faith, that there incontinently
appeared a great light about their ship, whereby in an instant they found the
sea very calm, as if the glorious S. by his admirable virtues, could at his
pleasure command the seas and the winds. I should in deed esteem it a matter
impossible to undertake in this behalf perticulerly to relate the admirable
miracles which this holy Father has caused to appear so potent by sea as by
land, where he has assisted and releiued an infinite number of miserable
dispayring persons. And in truth it is not to be admired, that now reigning in
heaven he command the sea, considering that whiles he lived in the world, he
was obeyed of every living creature, yea in admirable manner.

How diverse have bin delivered out of prison by the merittes and intercessions
of the saint.
THE IX. CHAPTER.
A Grecian servant of a gentleman in the Roman confines was falsely accused of
theft: whereupon his master caused him to be apprehended and cast into an
obscure prison, with order to be bound and chained: but his mistress knowing
it, was exceeding sorrowful, because she esteemed him sincere and faithful,
therefore often prayed her husband not to condemn him of disloyaulty but to set
him at liberty; but her prayers could take no hold in the obstinacy of her
husband, and therefore she had recourse to the help of the glorious Father
saint Francis, beseeching him to undertake the patronage of the S. Franc.
delivers a prisoner iniustly imprisoned.
truth, to her prayers adding vows. This aduocat of the afflicted went at the
same time to visitt the prisoner; and having broaken the walls of the prison,
and caused the manacles to fall from his hands, and the fetters from his feet,
taking him by the hand led him out, saying: I am he to whom thy mistress has
so affectionately recomme^ded thee. And albeit this poor prisoner was in
extreme fear, and wandered much to find his way being much amazed and
laboring to clear his passadge, by the virtue yet of his deliver he found
himself in the direct way, where he evidently knew the favor he had received,
whereupon taking courage he went incontinently to his mistress, to whom he
recounted the miracle, which increased her fervor and love toward our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, and her devotion toward S. Francis.

A gentleman misprising S. Franc. had trial of his power.
In the city of Massa, a poor man was to pay a quantity of silver to a
knight; but he was so poor that his goods being insufficient to dischardge
the debt, he was at the suit of the knight imprisoned, the wretch therefore
finding himself fast in prison, prayed the said knight to have compassion of
him, and grant him some time for the love of S. Francis: but this proud and
merciles man contemning the cries of this poor man, together with the love of
S. Francis, as if the love of the saints were a frivolous matter and of small
consequence, answered him arrogantlie, that he would putt him in such a place
as neither S. Francis nor any other should deliver him, till he had dischardged
his debt: and so caused him to be shutt up in an obscure prison, with fetters
and manacles, thereby supposing, conformably to his perverse will and not unto
reason, to torment him the more: but a little after that he had practiced this
impiety, the glorious saint Francis went to the prison, brake the doors,
locks, and iron chains, manacles and fetters, and so freed the poor fellow,
and sent him directly to his house having by this admirable miracle trodden
under foot the pride of the world. The cruelty of this knight was
thenceforward changed into great mildnes.

Albertus of Aresso being also detained in prison, but iniustly: because the
debtes pretended against him was not due, he recommended his innocence to the
holy Father S. Francis, to whom as also to his Religious, he was exceedingly
devoted, which he who had caused him to be imprisoned understanding, with a
loud voice blasphemously answered: neither S. Francis, nor God himself shall
deliver thee out of my hands till I be satisfied. On S. Francis eve, the
prisoner having not yet eaten, And an other likewise.
because for reverence unto him he had given his meat to a poor creature, the
said S. appeared unto him in the night, and as he entered into the prison all
the doors did open, and at the same instant the fetters and manacles fell from
the hands and feet of the prisoner, who went forth and with great
astonishment hastened unto his house: from thenceforward with greater devotion
he fasted the eve of the feast of his deliverer, and whereas he accustomed
yearly to present a wax light unto his church, he thenceforward in memory of
this benifitt augme^ted the quantity thereof.

Of other miracles like unto the forsaid.
THE X. CHAPTER.
IN the time of Pope Gregory the ninth, there was a Citizen of Alisia called
Peter, who being accused of heresy, was apprehended at Rome, and by order
from the Pope committed to the custody S. Franc. freed a prisoner without
seking him at liberty.
of the Bishop of Tiuoly, assuring him that if he permitted him to escape he
should be deprived of his bishopprick. He then having received chardge of him,
had him no sooner in protection, but he chained him with fetters and manacles:
and cast him into a strong and strict prison, and gave him bread by weight, and
water by measure. The miserable wretch therefore finding himself reduced to
that ruefull and pitiful estate, hartelie recommended himfelfe unto God and
continually powered out tears; he implored the assistance of S. Francis,
praying him to have compassion on him, calling withal to memory that his
feast approached: and because the light of faith had expelled all peruersity
and error of heresy, affectionatlie recommending himself to the faithful
servant of JESUS CHRIST, he merited to be heard of his divine majesty. For in
the very night of the holy Intercessours feast, about the beak of day, the
merciful Father descended in to the prison and called him by his name, willing
him incontinently to arise. He not having heard the doors of the prison to
open, nor any other noise, and hearing himself called, full of trembling
demanded who called him. Having understood that it was S. Francis, and
perceauing his manacles and fetters to be fallen of from his hands and feet:
and seeing the doors of themselves to open, he was stricken into such an
amazement, that albeit he found his person freely at liberty and had commodity
to go forth, yet had he not power to stir from his place. Being in this
perplexity, he called out, and the keepers came running, who seeing the man
thus unchained, knowing well in what manner he was fettered; perceauing also
the doors of themselves to be opened, that were so surely fastened, and the
locks with other iron implementes lying on the ground, they advertised the
bishop thereof, who goeing incontinently to the prison, and ha^uing seen and
considered all circumstances, knew manifestly that it was a worck of God.
Whereat falling on hIs knees he adored God, and causing the chains, manacles
and other irons, as locks, bars and nails that were miraculouslie loosed,
to be gathered together, he sent all to the Pope and Cardinals, to whom he
related the miraculous history not without admiration to his Holiness, who was
willing to give absolute freedom to this wretch, for his Intercessotrs sake.

A gentleman called Guidolot, of S. Giminian, was falsely accused to have
poisoned a knight, and to have resolved also to poison his son withal his
family, in which respect he was by the governor of the S. Franc. was
protector of the innocence of a ge^tleman devout unto him.
place committed prisoner to a very strong tour, where his hands and feet were
laden with irons, but knowing his own innocence he put his hope in God,
recommended his cause to the holy Father S. Francis, and inuocated him to be
his Aduocat and Protector. But the governor considering the enormity of the
fact whereof he was accused, devised by what tortures he could to wrest out the
truth of this accusation and by what torment to putt him to death when he
should have acknowledged the crime: and having determined to begin the next
morning by torture to examine him: the gentleman the same night was visited by
Saint Francis, who was environed with a resplendant light which still
continued till the break of day, and this divine light being gone, the prisoner
was exceeding joyful, with hope shortly to be delivered without any detriment.
Now soon after the Sergeants came to conduct him to the place of examination,
where without other proceeding he was fastened to the torturing cord, then
being lifted up very high, the Judge examined him upon the crime: but having
confessed nothing, the Judge appointed a great weight of iron to be fastened
unto him, wherewith he was often times hoissed aloft, and violently let down
again, to make him confess. But he as innocent and interiourlie comforted by
the divine majesty, in favor of his innocence, appeared before the face of
the judge full of joy, as one that felt not any pain by the torments. The
Judge perceauing that he contemned his tortures, became furious and commanded a
great fire to be kindled under him, that by the extremity of the hot fire, he
might be constrained to confess the fact, which proved vain, for neither the
fire, nor smoke, did in any sort offend him. The judge therefore, for his last
cruelty caused a vessel full of boiling oil to be cast in his face, which by
the virtue and meritof his Aduocat to whom he had recommended his cause,
procured him no more offense then had done the former extremities. At length
the Judge and executioners, wearied with tormenting this gentleman, he was by
sentence declared innocent and freed, and remitted to his former freedom and
liberty,

Of the certain women, that being with child and in danger of death; at their
delivery were releiued by the saint.
THE XI. CHAPTER.
A Great Countess ot Slauonia, who was no less famous for her virtue and
worthiness, then noble in blood and descent, was exceeding devout unto S.
Francis, and very charitable, unto his Religious. She being in travail of
child, was so tormented with throws, that the birth of the child was attended
to be her death; all humane help was despaired of, without destroying the
fruit. Now amiddest the anguishes, she called to mind the great virtues and
merittes of S. Francis and of his eminency, therefore having at other times
bin piously affected unto him, she with a very strong confidence, had recourse
A lady very happily delivered in a dangerous travail of child.
unto him, as to the assured refuge of the desolate, saying: O glorious S. all
my afflicted members, beseech thy pity to assist them, and I promise thee by
heart, that which I cannot express by words. Behold an admirable accident! she
had no soever uttered these words, but her pangues did cease as did the term
of her travail, for she brought into the world a fair and healthful boy,
neither did she fail of her vow; for she caused to be builded a fair and
lardge church, in honor of her deliverer, which being finished, she gave it to
his Religious, spending the rest of her days exemplarly, more affected then
ever to the glorious father saint Francis, her Advocate and Protector.

About the plains of Rome, a woman called Beatrix, whose time of greatness
being complete, and having already four whole days carried her fruit dead in
her womb, oppressed with most violent torments, she expected only death, the
creature which she carried liuelesse in her, reducing her to this extremity:
the Phisicians failed not to administer unto her all convenient remedies that
they could devise; but all humane help was vain, so that the malediction
which A woman was delivered of a dead child by touching a girdle of S. Fr.
God gave to Eve in the earthly Paradise, might be said to be in a supreme
manner fallen upon her, considering that her very womb wherein she had
already buried her son, was the beginning of her sepulture. Now for her last
releife, she sent to the Church of saint Francis to demand some relic,
where finding no other thing then a piece of the cord wherewith he was girded,
two Religious of his Order brought it unto her and laid it reverently upon her.
It admirably succeeded, that as soon as this doleful woman had touched the
piece of cord, she was delivered of her dead child, which doubtlesly had caused
her death, so that her anguishes did cease, and she remained sound and
delivered from the imminent peril of death.

Of other like miracles, in assisting little children.
THE XII. CHAPTER.
ALl the children that a gentlewoman of Carnio called Julian, brought into the
world, did dye before she could have comfort of them, which caused her an
extreme affliction, incessantly A woman that could not bring up her children,
did nourish one by the intercession of S. Fr. that proved very virtuous.
complaining of her disastre that till then she had brought forth her children
only to be buried; now it chanced that being four months gone with child,
reflecting more, by reason of her disgraces past, upon the death, then the
birth of the child conceived in her womb, she prayed saint Francis for the
conservation of the life of that which was not yet borne. Upon a night
therefore, there appeared unto her in vision a woman having in her arms a right
beautiful child, which she offered her, but she refused it, as fearing it
would incontinently perish in her hands. Notwithstanding the said woman
encouraged her saying: receive it confidently, for it is sent thee by the
glorious Father saint Francis, the true comforter of the afflicted, and be
assured it shall not dye as the rest have done, but shall live, and thou shall
find great contentment in his virtuous disposition. Awaking, she remembered this
celestial vision, which thenceforward procured her exceeding joy to the time
of her delivery, which was of a strong and complete son; who as he came into
the world by the intercession of S. Francis so did also the virtues and
merittes of the S. increase in him, that being great he induced his parents to
live spiritualy: he faithfully served JESUS And an other also. A woman that
could have no sons had by the merits of S. Franc. two at a birth.
CHRIST, and honored his glorious SS. with great zeal, and perticulerly the
holy Father S. Francis.

The like miracle was wrought in the city of Tiuoly. A woman having diverse
daughters, much desired to have a son; to which effect she often offered her
prayers with a strong faith unto saint Francis that he would be her
Intercessor, who at lenght conceauing and the time of delivery attended, her
favor was doubled, for at one birth she brought into the world two sons,
whereof being ouer-ioyed, she yielded infinite thanckes to God the Creator and
to his devout servant S. Francis.

Near the city of Viterbo, a woman being near her delivery, was subject to
soundinges, such as she was often supposed to be dead being withal oppressed
with such panges and throws as women in that case do ordinarily endure; her
nature and strenght already failing her, and as it were desperate of all
humane help, she devoutly inuocated saint Francis, and with such faith
recommended her self to his merittes, that she was miraculouslie freed of
those torments, and was delivered of a fair and well proportioned child: But
w^eras shortly after, she seemed to have forgotten this great benefitt
received, not yelding due honor unto the saint, because one the day of his
feast, in steed of honoring and sanctifying it, she employed her self in
certain base and unseemly exercises, God permitted, for this ingratitude,
her right arm instantly Punishment of a woman ungrateful to S. Francis.
to wither: the just divine wroth rested not there, but she attempting to lift
up her cripled arm with the other, that also withered withal. This woman thus
miserably afflicted, became repentant and acknowledged her crime committed,
and with such a faith promised almighty God to amend her self, that by her
true contrition and penitence, she merited to have the use of her arms thus
lost, by almighty God, restored unto her, through the merittes of saint
Francis; wherein appears how God punishes ingratitude, and admits into
favor the truly penitent.

A woman was assisted by S. Francis and delivered of a most dangerous child
birth.
An other woman of the country of Arrezzo in Tuscane, having for seven days
together endured intolerable anguishes of childbirth, being become even all
black and deformed in her countenance, by means of the extremity of her
grief her cure being desperate, she, more by heart then voice, vowed her self
to saint Francis, and with such a firm confidence implored his aid, that
falling into a slumber, she saw in vision her Intercessour, who sweetly
saluted her, demanding of her if she knew him: and she answered, she did:
Then he bid her say the Salve Regina, affirming that before she had ended the
same, she should be securely delivered. This woman upon this discourse
awaking, with great hope began the Salve; and having said, Illos tuos
m^sericordes oc^los ad not convert, she was instantly delivered of a son,
for which she gave thanckes to the Queen of heaven, the mother of mercies,
who, by the merittes of saint Francis had vouchsafed to have compassion of
this miserable woman, and to comfort her.

Of the blind that by the virtue of this S. received sight.
THE XVII. CHAPTER.
THere was a Religious in the Covent of the Freer Minros at Naples, called
Robert, that for diverse years had bin blind, yea there were fleshy lumpes
grown with in his eyes that hindered the motion and use of the eyeliddes;
Diverse Religious being from several parts of the world assembled unto this
Covent, the holy Father S. Francis vouchsafed in their presence to cure him
that was blind, thereby to encourage the said Religious that were to attempt a
long journey; so that the said Religious supposing one night to dye, and having
had the recommendation of his soul, the holy Father saint Antony of Padua,
Brother Augustine, and Brother James of Assisium, and taking S. Franc. cured a
Religious of a mortal infirmity of his eyes.
a knife, he cut of all the superfluous flesh that was on his eyes: in such
sort that in one instant he both restored his clear sight; and delivered him
from present death: and then said unto him: Robert this favor which I have
done thee, is a pledge and testimony unto all the Religious that are to depart
hence to travel into diverse contryes, that I will be continually in their
presence, and will direct their steps, that they may fulfill their obediences
with a greater consolation, joyful heart, and as enamoured of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST.

Near unto Thebes in the Roman contrie, a blind woman, having fasted with
bread and water on the vigill of saint Francis, the A blind woman received
sight on the feast of S. Fr.
morning of the feast, her husband very timely conducted her to the Covent of
the Friar Minors, there to hear Mass, and at the elevation of the Blessed
Sacrament her eyes were opened, and she manifestly saw and adored it with the
greatest devotion she could with a loud voice crying out: I yield thee infinite
thanks my lord, and to thee o glorious saint Francis, who have permitted me
to see the most sacred body of my Redeemer JESUS CHRIST. Which the people there
assembled, seeing and hearing, they all praised and thancked God for the same.
The mass being ended, the people, in regard of this miracle, could not be
satisfied with beholding this woman; for they all knew she had bin blind.
Retourning to her house she gave infinite thanckes to God, and to S. Francis,
spending the rest of her time very religiously.

In the plains of Rome, there was in the city of Posta a child of fourteen
years old, so afflicted in one of his eyes, that it slipped out of the place,
and for eight days together he was constrained to hold in his hand the aple
that hung by the sinowes of the same eye, which being as withered hung out the
length of a finger: The Phisicians were ignorant what to do, for to cut it
off, was very dangerous, and therefore they held it as a desperate cure: but the
Father who fainted with g^eife, having turned his heart toward God and the
glorious Father S. Francis, with a right confident faith required his help,
wherein he was not deceived, but graciously heard: for without other mean the
eye of the child returned into his first estate, and of dried and withered as
it was, became fair and cleerer then before, enoying a pure sight, to the
exceeding joy, edification and consolation, of all those that understood thereof.

Of other blind, restored to sight by the virtue and merittes of the S.
THE XIV. CHAPTER.
And an other.
IN the plains of Rome, in a town called Magno, upon the eve of S. Francis, a
piece of timber falling from on high, stroke a Priest on the nape of the
neck: the violence of which blow stroke the right eye out of his head, and by
the force thereof he also fell unto the ground. But imploring the aid of S.
Francis by these words: Holy Father help me, that I may be able to go to thy
feast, as I have promised thy Religious, he incontinently arose sound, and
cured, his eye being returned into his proper place, with as great contentment
to those present, as they had conceived horror at the accident. Therefore the
more reverently to show themselves thanckfull unto God, they went in company
into his church, to celebrate his feast with this priest, who made publicly
relation of the great compassion and virtue of this S. which in himself he had
experienced.

Then an other.
A man of Mount-Gargan, laboring in a vineyard, thincking to cut a branch of
a tree, cut one of his eyes in two pieces, one of which falling out of his
place, hung down to the depth of his jaws: whe^fore despayiring of all humane
help, he had instantly recourse unto S. Francis, vowing to fast the eve of
his feast, if he assisted him in this extremity, which he uttered so heartily
and with so strong a faith, that his prayers ended, the two pieces of his eye
reioyned again, and his S. Franc. gave sight to one borne blind.
sight was as perfect as before, for which he gave thanckes with great devotion.

A gentleman's son that was borne blind, by the intercession of the glorious
Father S. Francis received his sight: for which great miracle, he attayning to
convenient age was called Illuminatus, who to show himself grateful as was
requisite, and to attain greater perfection, became a Friar Minor, where he so
profited in the light of the grace of God, that he seemed to be the son of
the true light, that illuminateth every man of this world, and conformablie to
his life also dyed very piouslie.

A gentleman c^lled Girard of Zacanto, near unto Anania, albeit he were
sinful, yet did he not omit charitably to entertain the Friar Minors: This
man on a time lodged two that were of a Covent near unto him, who being to
^etourne to S. Francis appeared to one of them, and said: Go to that gentleman
who, in you receaueth God and me, and tell him from me, that he is become blind,
by reason of the sins which he knows himself to be guilty of, and whereof
he would never be confessed: which said he vanished The Religious went to him,
and made full And an other for his spiritual prositt.
relation thereof unto him, who reflecting on himself, acknowledged that what
the S. had revealed of him was very true, whereupon being moved unto perfect
contrition, he made a general confession, with abondant effusion of tears:
and as soon as he had confessed all his sins, he recovered his sight. The
bruit of this great miracle was generally spread, which stirred up many, not
only to devotion toward this holy Father, but even to an entire confession
of their sins, and to an entertainment of the poor of JESUS CHRIST.

Of many diseased that were cured by the merittes of the glorious Father Saint
Francis.
THE XV. CHAPTER.
THere was in the village of Preue a poor boy both deaf and dumb, from his
birth, whose tongue was so short and little that it seemed to such as sought it,
to be cut of. A gentleman called God restored speech and hearing to one by the
intercession of S. Fr.
Marck, for the love of God entertained this poor boy, of whom he conceived a
great compassion in regard that he found him to be of a good disposition. He
often said unto his wife, that if the holy Father S. Francis would vouchsafe by
his intercession to cure him, he would promise for the love of God to
entertayne him all the time of his life. The glorious S. lent not a dease ear
to this pious intention, for the oblation being made, the boy began sodenlie to
have his tongue at liberty and to speak, saying glory be unto God, and to
the glorious Father S. Francis, who has now given me my speech and hearing:
for which the gentleman and his wife no less amazed then joyful, gave
infinite thanckes to God, performed the said promise, and lived very
spiritually; being always mindful of this miracle, and had a special care of
the said child, for the love of God, and of his faithful servant S. Francis.

Brother James of Iseo in his infancy, and whiles he was under his And cured
mortal wou^des.
fathers protection, had a cruel wound in his stomach, but being inspired of
God, with a very fervent devotion he entered into the Order of this Saint,
notwithstanding his tender years, and the said infirmity which he never
discovered, till being present art the translation of the glorious Saint and
approaching near the sepulcher wherein his holy relics were to be placed,
he with a fervent devotion embraced the sepulcher whence that precious treasure
was taken, and was instantly cured of his wound, which otherwise was
incurable, every thing disposing it self conveniently, the very band falling
of wherewith it was bound; and in that ^ort were many persons cured of the like
infirmities by the merittes of this glorious Saint, as Brother Bartholomew of
Agubio, Brother Angelus of Todi, Sir Nicolas of Stichiam, John de la Foye, a
Pisan gentleman, one of the city of Ciperne, Peter Sicilian, a man of Spelle,
nere unto Assisium, and many others cured of like diseases, as also especially
Brother Angelus of Tudette, and a Priest of Sucane called Sir Nicolas, and an
other also called John de Fore, and a man of the city of Pise, an other of the
city of Cisterne, and one of Fspelle, one called Peter of Sicily, and infinite
others, that were, by the mercy of God, and the merittes of blessed S.
Francis, miraculously delivered.

He restored sight and hearing, and cured a woman extremly tormented and
afflicted.
A woman of Maremme had bin about five years troubled in her spirit, deprived
of her sight and hearing: yea was come to that point, that she rent her
garments with her teeth, and as enraged, feared neither fire, nor water, nor
other danger, and as besides fallen into that horrible disease of the falling
sickness. This miserable wretch it pleased the divine Majesty to favor, and
first to illuminate her interiourlie, for Saint Francis one night appeared
unto her, sitting very eminentlie elevated in a Royal seat, before whom
falling one her knees, she humbly prayed him to cure her. But the Saint
deferring to grant her request, she redoubled her petition, thereunto adding a
vow, and promised him that in the honor of God and him, she would never whiles
she lived, deny an almose to any poor person, that should demand it of her,
sofar forth as her ability would stretch, which Saint Francis accepting, he
made on her the sign of the cross, and she was cured both of body and soul.
Many others oppressed with like infirmities, have bin cured by this
compassionate Saint and particulerly a young maiden of Norcia, and the son of
a gentleman of the said city, who were delivered by almighty God, through the
merittes and intercession of this his humble servant.

Of other like miracles.
THE XVI. CHAPTER.
PEter of Fullignium, goeing as a Pilgrim, but with little devotion to visitt
the church of S. Michael the Archangell, and drincking water at a fountain,
the devil entered into his body, and so tormented him that he was as it were
utterly grinded, broaken, One posessed was delivered by the merits of S.
Francis.
crushed, and all black; he always uttered abominable matters, and used
certain gestures that were dreadful and fearful to all the beholdeis. And
being on day less tormented then of ordinary, he remembered to have heard the
marvelous worckes of saint Francis to be exceedingly recommended, and
particulerly that he delivered such as were possessed: He went unto his Church,
where with a profounde humility and devotion, he approached unto his holy
sepulcher, which having touched, he was miraculouslie delivered of this
oppression, for which he showed himself thanckfull unto God and S. Francis.

And also an other.
A gentlewoman of the city of Narnie, afflicted by the devil, was by the
compassion of the saint delivered, together with diverse others that were
tormented by the devil, which would be to long to committ to history.

And an other.
A gentleman of Fano called Bon, being afflicted with the palsy and leprosy,
caused himself to be conducted to the Church of Saint Francis where he prayed
him for his health, with such instancie and faith that by the merittes of the
saint he was heard of almighty God.

And a woman of a mortal bloody flux.
A young man called Accio of Saint Seuerin being a leaper, made a vow to the S.
caused himself to be carried unto his shrine, and was incontinently by his
merittes delivered. This glorious saint had many excellent virtues touching
the dressing and curing of this disease: for he had deputed himself unto their
service, for the love he had to piety and Christian humility.

A gentlewoman of the city of Sora, called Rogata, for four and twenty
years, endured, with extreme affliction the bloody flux, and this infirmity
was occasion of other diseases besides: she having bin long time tormented by
the Physicians, and finding no ease, but a continuation of her grief, and
diversity of cruel diseases, it reduced her even to death: for when her flux
was stayed, her her legs, and all her body did sweell, and whiles her flux
continued, it did so afflict her that she could not stand on her feet, so that
this poor woman knew not what to do other then to expect in short time the
end of her life; being in this perplexity, she one day heard a young man recou^t
the merueilles so admirable which God had wrought, and did worck by the
merittes of the glorious Eather saint Francis, which so moved her, that with
abondant effusion of tears, replenished with faith and hope, she began to say
to her self: O glorious Saint that art famous by so many miracles, if it
would please thee to have compassion of me, and to free me of mine
insupportable miseryes, thou know how much the great glory of thy clemency
would thereby be augmented; for it seems thou never did worck One also
^a^nned of one arm.
so great a miracle: which having uttered, she had an instant feeling of the
divine operation in her; for by the merittes of the Saint she was cured. And
together with her, a child of hers called Marck, maimed in one arm, who having
vowed to the Saint, was presently cured.

And an other of the flux.
A Sicilian woman, having bin afflicted with the bloody flux, was by the
merittes of this stander-bearer of JESUS, cured thereof. Praxede a Roman
gentlewoman, famous for her sanctity, in regard that she had lived exemplary
from her tender age, at which time for the love He cured S. Praxede of a
dangerous fall.
of her Spouse JESUS CHRIST she shutt her self for 40. years into a little
chamber: she I say, was favored of saint Francis; for goeing one day upon
occasion to the topp of her house, being surprised with an amazement of her
head, she fell down and brake her foot and leg, and disioynted her shoulder:
but the holy Father saint Francis incontinently appeared unto her, enuironned
with splendor and glory, and said: Arise my daughter and fear not: then
taking her by the hand, he lifted her upright on her feet, and presently the
vision disappeared. This gentlewoman thus amazed, went about the house,
considering with her self whither she were cured, or that she dreamed; and the
greatness of this miracle was such, that albeit she felt the truth thereof, she
nevertheless called for a light, whereby she assured her self that the divine
virtue by mean of saint Francis, had wrought this miracle in her, which she
related to her lay sister, and afterward to diverse that did visitt her.

Of the merueillous chasticementes which God has laid on those that have not
kept and honored the feast of this glorious S.
THE XVII. CHAPTER.
IN Poictou, in a village called Sime, there was a Priest named Sir Renald,
very devout unto S. Francis, and therefore, advertised A man refusing to keep
the feast of S. Fr. had his hands fastened to his hatchett.
his Parishioners of his feast, exhorting them to keep the same as of precept:
but one of them having little respect thereof, went that day to cut wood, and as
he prepared himself thereunto, he heard a voice that spoke unto him three
several times: Do not work, for it is a festival day; but the indeuout
fellow would no more obey the voice of God, then he had done the aduertissement
of his Curat; and therefore the divine power, for the glory of the Saint
proceeded with correction: for this man lifting up one hand to cut a forck of
wood which he held with the other, his left hand remained fastened to the wood,
and the other to the iron, without power to move his fingars: wherewith the
wretch was so confounded, that not knowing what to do, he resolved to go in
that manner to the Church where the people were yet assembled, who beholding
him in that estate, were extremely amazed at so strange and unwonted a
punishment. But the miserable fellow repenting his fault, and being admonished
by the Priest, he humbly fell on his knees before the altar, and heartily
reco^mended himself to the S. and according as he had bin thrice admonished by
the divine voice, he made three vows: the first was thenceforward to keep the
feast; the second, that during all his life he would be ever present on that
day in the same church, to praise and honor God and S. Francis; the third that
he would go personally to visitte his holy body at Assisium. It was
doubtless a matter worthy and admirable for all the people assembled in that
Church, to behold, that having made the said first vow, one of his fingars was
loosed from the iron instrument whereto his band was joined; having made the
second vow an other fingar was loosed; and after the third, not only the third
fingar, but both his hands formerly fastened, were absolutely set at liberty.
The people having seen the greatness of this miracle devoutly gave thanckes
unto God together with the man delivered, admiring the notable and singular
virtue of the S. that could so miraculously strike and cure in one moment. The
iron and wood whereto his hands were fastened, do to this present hang at an
altar in the said church, which was erected in honor of S. Francis and in
memory of this miracle: many other miracles wrought in the said place, and that
circuit demonstrate how great the virtue and power of this glorious saint is
in heaven, and how much he is to be honored and reverenced on earth.

In the city of Man's, a woman refusing to keep the feast of S. Francis, took
her distaffe and spindle to spin: but endeauou^ing to begin, her ^^ngars became
so stiff, and procured her such torment, that made her in manner furious; but
acknowledgeing her fault and the virtue and merittes of the Saint, she
hastened instantly to the church, wherere she played the Religious to recommend
her to God and the And a woman attempting on that day to spin ^ad an extreme
pa^ne in her fingars.
Saint. So the devout Religious offering their devotions for this woman, were
heard: for she was at the very instant cured of that extreme and insupportable
torment. There remained only a sign as it were of a burning, in memory of
this miracle. Many other like accidents have occured, as in the plains of
Rome, an other woman for refusing to keep the feast of the Saint. And in
Spain a man of Valladolid, together with an other woman in the city of
Pills: in which places the woman making no esteem of the feast of the Saint,
were rigou^ouslie punished: but having acknowledged their faults and done
penance for them, they were with more admiration delivered.

A knight of Borgo in the contry of Massa, without fear or respect contemned
the wonderful miracles of S. Francis, offering many abuses to the pilgrims
that went to visitt the Church where his body reposed* he even impudently
rayled against the Religious. It happened one day that blaspheming the glory
of this holy Father, he said: if it be true that Brother Francis be a Saint,
he will that my sword be my death, The punishment of a blasphem^e against S.
Franc.
and if he be not so, I shall remain without danger: O admirable effect of the
just i^dgement of God; some few days after this w^etch having certain
speeches with a nephew of his own, they grew from words to blows, and the
Nephew wresting his sword out of his hands thrust him through the body, with
which thrust he instantly dyed; God permitting his punishment to be conformable
to his horrible blasphemy, for an example to the temerarious that with over
presumptuous words, blaspheme the admirable worckes of SS. who meritte to be
honored and reverenced.

An other.
A Judge called Alexander, did not only condemn saint Francis and his
singular virtues: but did even with all possibility endeavor to withdraw his
holy reputation from the opinion of men: in respect whereof by divine permission
he instantly became mute, and so remained for six years: at the end whereof
acknowledging that he had bin punished in that member whereby he had offended,
he was so penitent for his crime, that he appeased the indignation of God and
of the merciful Saint in such sort that his speech returned, for which he
was thanckfull to God and to the Saint his intercessour: he failed not
thenceforward to consecrate that tongue of his, which he had abused in
blasphemy, to the praise and benediction of God and the glorious Father S.
Francis, to whom the said punishment had made him exceeding devout.

Of some other miracles wrought by this glorious S.
THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
IN the Borough Gallian of the diocese of Cales, there was a woman called
Marie, who with great devotion spent her time in One devout unto S. Fr.
miraculously obtained water in her necessity.
the service of God, and was merueillouslie deuouted unto saint Francis; she
one day constrained by necessity, went forth of her house, in a very hot
season, seeking her ^iuing by labor; and being upon a little hill she was
exceeding weary, as well through her ordinary abstine^ces, as by the present
extremity of the heat, and therwithall being very thirsty, she sat down on
the ground in that anxietie void of all comfort; and being there reduced nere
unto death, she with a devout spirit called on her Advocate, and humbly
perseuering in her prayer, with wearines she fell a sleep. Now God who always
assisteth them that truly putt their confidence in him sent the glorious
Saint to her that was devout unto him, who incontinently awaking her, called
her by name, saying: Mary, arise, and drinck of the water that by divine grace
is granted to thee and to many. This woman hearing the voice, with an
incredible force arose on her feet, and having taken a stone out of the ground
which the S. in her dream had showed her, and a little stirred the earth with a
staff, there sprung out a water most clear and of a very delightful taste,
which afterward by the will of God grew to a great fountain. Thus did this
woman quench her thirst, recomfort her forces, and washing her eyes which had
bin long time bleared and dim, they were thenceforward most pure and clear,
wherewith exceedingly comforted she returned to her house, manifesting to each
one this great miracle to the glory of God and to the said Saint, so that this
miraculous fountain being diuulged, the people flocked thither from far off,
the water thereof was proved to be of greater force and virtue then other
waters, in such sort that such as repaired thither with devotion to see this
miracle, confessed and contrite, drincking of the water, were cured of their
infirmities: This fountain is yet extant in the said place, where is A chery
tree of one devout to the said S. being dead and withered bare fruit. Of vignes
and corn that were preserved from certain worme^ that destroyed them.
builded a fair Church, where ordinarily the divine office is celebrated.

In the city of S. Facondus in Spain, a chery tree of one devout unto S.
Francis being withered, the S. against the ordinary course of nature made it
wax green, bear leaves, flowers, and fruit as before. He wrought the like
miracle for the inhabitants of a village near unto Vilely, freing their vines
from the worms called ^^nd-ea^ers, that did destroy and wither them, without
any mean to prevent them. Nee^e unto Valence there were little worms that
devoured the corn in the garners, and particulerlie of a priest very devout
unto the S. who not able by his industry to prevent such a dommage, he
affectionatlie and with a strong faith recommended the matter to the S. and
obtained that the said worms vanished and were never seen after. All the
iuri^diction of the lord of Male-pierre in Apulia, was by the holy Father S.
Francis delivered from the vexation and importunity of the locustes that
destroyed the whole country, consuming the grass, corn and fruit, the said
ge^tleman having with a true humility implored the help of the said saint.

One called Martin had two oxen, one of which where he was feeding brake a
leg, so that without any hope that it could be recovered, he went full of
despair unto his house, carrying with him wherewith rather to flea him the^ to
imagine of any cure: but departing from the field, and fearing that the wolves
might devour him whiles he went home, The ox of one devout ^^to him was cured
of a broken leg.
he inuocated the glorious Father S. Francis saying: holy Father, I commend
mine ox unto thy care this night: which he uttered with such a faith, that
arising very early the next morning, carrying with him something to dress the
ox, and having with him a freinde of his, if he chanced to find him dead, to
help to flea him, they found the ox when they came to the field as sound, as
if he had received no hurt, for which they yielded infinite thanckes to their
Pastor who had not only preserved him from the wolves, but had also healed him
of an incurable rupture. They conducted him to the house, publicly relating
this miracle. He recovered a lost horse for one devout unto him: and reioyned a
dish broaken in pieces.
This humble and glorious holy Father in all necessities assisted them that
with a fervent faith inuocated him, not disdayning even in base and mean
accidents to comfort the^. Which I speak, because being demanded in small
matters and so little consequence; he failed not to assist those who were devout
unto him to their great contentment and satisfaction; As he did a gentleman of
Amiterne, whose horse he recovered, it being lost. And a woman, out of whose
hands a dish had fallen and was broaken in many pieces which he reioyned
together. And an other of Mountolme in the Marquisate of Ancona, for whom he
reioyned a plough share, that was broaken in worcking.

Of other miracles of great piety.
THE XIX. CHAPTER.
IN the bishopric of Sabee, there was a woman about 80. years of age, whose
daughter dying, left behind her a sucking child: this old woman not knowing how
to bring up the child, not yet being of ability to procure it a nurce, she was
exceedingly grieved to see to this little one that did not thrive, for she gave
it nothing but baked aples to suck; living in this affliction void of all
humane help^, and one night bitterly lamenting, she had recourse to the
compassionate Father saying. Gracious Father S. Francis assist me if thou
please in this extreme necessity. The true lover of innocence, incontinently
appeared to this good old woman, and said: Woman that with so many An old woman
had milk to nurc^ a child by the merits of S. Franc.
tears have called on me, put the mouth of the child against thy breast: for
God will give thee milk abondantlie to nurse it. This old woman believing laid
the little child to her breasts, and found them to be full of milk, which
continued as long as was needful to give the child to suck* which is a thing
well known to be against the course of nature, but worthy of such an
Interc^ssour. This admirable fact was diuulged over all the contrie, whence the
people from all parts flocked to see this old woman and her son, as a matter
worthy of deep admiration: for which they praised God, and his faithful
feruant sain^^ Francis.

In the city of Spoletum, a man and his wife had but one only child, for whose
deformity they continually lamented: for he had his arms fastened to his neck,
his knees to his breast, and his feet to his hippes, and And a monaster was
cured.
briefly* so deformed that he seemed not the child of a man: in which respect
his Father and Mother beholding him, they seemed to see their reproach and
disgrace, and particulerlie the mother in beholding such an horrible creature
to be borne of her body: wherefore she often with sighs and lamentations
recommended herself unto God, inuocating S. Francis to be her intercessor,
beseeching him to comfort and relie^e a woman so much afflicted. As she one
night lamented upon this subject, Saint Francis caused her to sleep, then in
her dream appeared unto her, and with very compassionate words comforted her,
and a^tlength wished her to carry her child to a church very near thereunto,
and dedicated to his name, promising her that after she had washed him with the
water of the Couent-well, in the name of God he should rec^a^e his perfect
shape and health. But the woman (...) this to be an ordinary dream, affected
not the words of the S. who an other time appeared unto her redoubling the
same admonishment, which she no more believed then the former: The glorious
saint returned the third time, and himself conducted her fast a sleep
together with her son to the door of the Covent, where he left her and
disappeared. Certain great Ladies of devotion coming thither in the mean
time, awakened this woman who much amazed to find her self there, related
unto them the vision and so in company they presented the child unto the
Religious, who incontinently drew water out of the well, and the most
honorable and worthyest lady with her own hands washed the child, which
being washed; his lymmes miraculouslie became duly placed, to the wonderful
astonishment of those present, perceauing what the mercy of God was in our
behalf, by the great merittes of his servant.

Of the miracles wrought by S. Francis by the sign of the cross.
THE XX. CHAPTER.
S. Franc. cured one devout unto him of an incurable disease in his leg.
THere was a man in the town of Chora within the diocese of Hostia, which was
so deprived of the force and strength of one foot, that he could neither go
nor any way move the same: wherefore despairing by humane art to cure him, he
began one night to discourse with S. Francis as if he had bin present,
complaining before his altar in these words. S. Francis help me, remember
what I have done in thy service, carrying thee with such devotion on my ass, I
have kissed thy holy hands and feet, and have bin ever most devout unto thee;
I love thee cordiallie, consider therefore how I am tormented with this extreme
pain. The holy Father, as approving his discourse was moved with his just and
pious complaints, and as one that has a continual memory of those devout
unto him, he appeared with one of his Religious to his freinde, even whiles he
was waking, and said: Since thou have called on me, I come to thee bringing
wherwithall to cure thee: then coming near him he touched his place of pain
with a little staff, whereon was the figure of the sign Tau, the Greek letter
thus made in form of a cross, and presently the apostume brake out of his
leg, and his pain ceased, the said man remaining perfectly cured, and that
which more augmented the miracle was, that in the place where his grief was,
the sign of Tau remained What was the seal of S. Franc.
for memory of the same. It was the seal wherewith the holy Father S. Francis
sealed his letters, when he wrote to his freindes concerning any worck of
charity. Now here is to be observed, that whiles we discourse of the diverse
miracles of this glorious saint, it happens by divine inspiration and the
will of this invincible stande^dbearer of the cross, that we end our history
with the sign of Tau and marck of our salvation, for hence may we collect,
that as it was unto him a comfort and great meritt toward his salvation, in
following JESUS as his Champion, so being now triumphant with JESUS CHRIST, it
is become unto him an assured testimony of his honor and glory, for great and
admirable is the mystery of the cross wherein the gifts of graces, the
merittes of life, and the treasures of the wisdom of God, are very deeply
covered and concealed from the wise and prudent of the world which nevertheless
were entierly revealed unto this poor of JESUS CHRIST, who during his life
followed only the steps of the cross, and never conceived taste of any other
thing then the sweetness of the cross, so that in the beginning of his
conversion, he might well say with saint Paul. God forbid that I should glory,
saving in the cross of our Lord JESUS Gal. 6.
CHRIST: as also afterward, he might truly say, of his Rule: Peace upon them
and mercy that shall follow this Rule: but toward the end, he might more
truly say with the said Apostle: I bear the marckes of our Lord JESUS in my
body: and we should desire to hear those other words from him: The grace of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST be with your spirit brethren. Amen. The^ may thou O
glorious standerd-bearer of JESUS CHRIST, most assuredly glory in the glory of
the cross of JESUS CHRIST, because thou did begin by the cross, and
finally end by the cross, and for testimony of the cross it has bin
manifested to all the faithful, how glorious thou now art in heaven: so that
we may securely follow them that depart out of this cruel Egypt, because the
red sea being divided by the wood of the cross, they passed the deserts to
enter into the land promised to the living, leaving behind them the flood
Iourdan of mortality, by the merueillous carryer of this holy cross: to the
which blessed land of the the living, the infallible guide of our beloved JESUS
CHRIST crucified, conduct us, by the degrees of the ladder following, his
glorious servant being our Intercessour.

Here end the miracles of the glorious Father Saint Francis written by Saint
Bonauenture.
A treatise wherein is discoursed, how the holy Father saint Francis attained
to perfect contemplation, which has bin transferred hither from the 37.
chapter, to the end of the tenth book, this place being more proper there unto.
THE I. CHAPTER.
IT seems here to good purpose, in some sort to declare the order and
degrees, whereby the holy Ghost does raise those that are his to this great and
high union of spirit with God, as well for a more true relation and
intelligence of the perfect contemplation and union Lib. 14. chap. 18.
which the glorious Father S. Francis had with God, as for the greater comfort
of the souls who desire to follow and imitate his life and exercise. Now it is
to be noted, according to the doctrine of S. Augustine, that men lay two
foundations, the one of perdition which is self-love, and the other of
salvation which is the love of God; or else that men have two ends, some, in
God, and others in themselves, directing all their actions for themselves; our
will is governed according to these two ends: for if it convert it self unto
God, as taking him for its end, the more it disioyneth it self from creatures,
yea from it self, the nearer does it approach unto God by obedience and
charity; and perhaps with divine assistance, to the perfect contempt and
abnegation of it self, and to transform it self entirely into the love of
God which is our end, wherein consists all our perfection and glory. Our
Master JESUS CHRIST left us this rule in his holy gospel, saying: If any man
Matt. 16.
will come after me, let him deny himself, let him know how much he is
deceived that esteems himself of any worth, let him hate, and dye in
himself, that he may know me, love, and live in me, and I in him. And as the
nature of fire is to ascend on high, so the nature of a soul free and
disburdened from the weight of self and natural affection, is to mount and
ascend into God, which is her proper place where she was created, to repose in
him blessedly perfect and eternal: As it is the nature of a stone by mean of
his natural weight to decline unto his center; so is it natural to the heart
laden with love of it self and other creatures to fall by his own fault into
hell. Let the soul then that shall have placed all his end in God, and
desires to ascend to the throne of grace of the true Solomon JESUS GHRIST, who
being a most gracious and peaceable king, fitteth art the right hand of his
Father, in whom all the desires of Angels and glorious souls are absolutely
effected; let that soul, I say, behold in this days exercise, the ladder of
Jacob, whose hight touches the heaven, and that she the more easily, and with
better order ascend, she may make seven several degrees or steps, which are
so disposed by Vbertin. The first is the taste, the second the desire, the third
satiety, the fourth excess Seven degrees of perfection.
or spiritual ecstasy, the fifth asseurance, the sixth tranquillity, God only
knows the name of the seventh. We attain to the knowledge of these degrees
and exercises, rather by the effects and actions, as it is in other spiritual
things, then of themselves, they being perceived with spiritual eyes, whereto
althinges are apparent, but especially those that concern the sweet effects
and graces thereof. The soul therefore that will profitt in them, the more that
she shall find her sight clear to know her weakness, shall correct her
faults, and shall persevere in mortification and exercise of worckes of
charity, so much less sight, shall she have to cast her eyes on the degree or
on the height of her perfection, leaving the care thereof to God alone,
employing her self only in her humility; he that has any little knowledge of
spiritual things, will easily comprehend, that to search after that which
appertains only to God, to wit, to labor for perfection and not for
mortification; that it follows thereof that there are so few truly spiritual
and that deserve this name, though many by their profession or exercise,
pretend so to be.

Of the first degree and exercise of contemplation.
THE II. CHAPTER.
THe first degree then of contemplation, as we have said, is the taste, whereof
David seems to speak when the says: Taste and see how sweet God is: blessed
is he that has put all his hope in him. The Prophett speaks to smners, who
thinck to have no other gain nor taste but of the world. Taste ye sinners says
he, and see your errors, and you shall know what you loose even in this life.
And as the first step of the ladder raises a man from the earth, so the
exercise of this first degree, is to sequester one from sins and the indirect
way, and to loose the taste of lewd wordlie contentementes, yea to hate and
detest them, so to receive the taste, which God gives to the soul, of a clear
conscience. Therefore his divine Majesty to draw unto him the soul accustomed
to sensnall things, gives unto her spiritual consolations in the beginning,
for it would be very difficult to draw the cold and feeble soul to divine
things, without this new taste which is given her of God as a sensible Manna:
and therefore the other exercises of this estate are true contrition, frequent
confession, full satisfaction, and most profound acknowledgement of ones own
fault, ingratitude, malice, and rash presumption against God: Of which things
proceed desires to satisfy the divine justice: for satisfaction in other
respects should already be done, being never wearyed wi^h sighing and
repenting to have offended God, and so with a fervent zeal of just correction
for God, to addict himself to penance, to fastinges, disciplines, austerities
and wachinges, laboring with great patience, to offer such prayers as proceed
rather from the heart then the mouth. And because it will seem difficult to the
penitent to perform this, appearing repugnant to his nature, he must endeavor
to prepare and enable his heart by pious cogitations and meditations, and by the
remembrance and taste of God, as to thinck on death, on the general judgment,
on the fear thereof, on hell and the pain thereof, one Paradicice and the glory
thereof, on the benefittes and graces of his divine Majesty, as well in general
as in particular bestowed on all persons, and above all, let him not forgett
the passion of our Lord JESUS CHRIST as a sovereign benefitt of God bestowed
on us, wherein consists all our consolation and hope. When the sinner calls
to mind his great ingratitude toward God, in as much as lies in him by his
sins crucifying him again, and after he had bin so deerly redeemed with his
precious blood and most cruel death, destroying himself again by yelding
himself to the devil, to the great misprise and contempt of his God, he
cannot but carry a great hatred to his sins, and desire to do great
penance: therefore that he no more err from the way of God, he considers how
he ought to live, he sequestreth himself from idle and unprofitable
conuersations; he smothereth perverse inclinations, and appetites, endeavoring
to get an hatred of his own affection, a contempt of the world, and finally a
victory of him self to yield himself absolutely unto God, JESUS CHRIST taught
this first degree to his servant Francis. when appearing unto him at the
beginning of his conversion he told him that it was necessary for him to
chaung the corrupted and infected taste which he had, and to make him find taste
in that which till then he had misprised, and that what soever he had sound
pleasing should prove distasteful and bitter. I know not indeed of what Saint
are recorded greater exercices in this separation, deeper foundation of
penance, and more labors then of him; and doubles it was requisite for him,
for he was to ascend unto such a perfection, and to be an example in the
church, to fly the world, to make his habitation in solitary places, and desert
woods, to renounce money, and his fathers patrimony even to this shirt, to
displaint himself from his kindred and freindes, from conuersations, and
ordinary courses of life, even by the root, to trans-plant himself into God,
and with such courage that it was not needful for him to fly into the desert
thenceforward to sequester him self from the world. He powered out an abondant
quantity of tears and sighs, with a feeling compassion meditating on the
passion of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, whereof he learned to live in such nuditie,
fastinges and intolerable labors, and to have patience in such and so many
contempts, and thence also proceeded his desires daily to increase his
penance, and to support the greatest affrontes for the love of God. All these
things and many other, did not only enrich his soul, removing her from all
worldly and sensual taste, but did procure in him even a distaste of all
things present, yea caused divine things to be afterward more aggreable unto
him, and God always conserved him in this estate, and appeared often times
unto, would also afterward permit him greater afflictions and possess him
with greater crosses, for he prepared him to be a valiant and invincible
Captain of his penitentes, and an example of perfect and courageous warryers;
and also told him that the kingdom of heaven should suffer violence, Matt. 11.
and that the violent should bear it a way, not those of tender and delicates
spirittes.

Of the second degree, to arrive to perfection, called Desire.
THE III. CHAPTER.
Hom. 30. upon the Gospels.
THe second degree is desire, for as saint Gregoire, says, divine things
being tasted are desired, and not tasted, seem without savor: in worldly
matters it is contrary, for the desire thereof is always best. There grows in
the soul so extreme a hungar, and a such a thirst after this taste, and after a
trial of this divine sweetness, that no creature or temporal consolation can
satisfy her but God alone, whom she loves: And because she neither can, nor
does yet deserve to obtain the food of the great, knowing her own infirmity
and little meritt, she remains greedily hungry after temporal things, and
beggeth the mites of the table of God, seeking them on earth, meditating on his
life and conversation, worckes and examples, yea she seeks them in his
creatures where his steps, marks and traces are represented unto her, and in
his Saints where she finds most evident testimonies of her God, and often
times she hears his voice and sees his presence, and this estate is like to
that, whereof the espouse speaks in the Canticles: I adjure you, if Cant. 50.
you find my beloved, to tell him that I languish and loose my self for his
love. It is also expedient in this estate to make simplicityes in worckes and
words, for the great excess of new desires, as new spiritual wine: of these
desires, when thy are real, does grow, the imitation of the life of JESUS
CHRIST, and of his humility, as much as may be, that he may be found and
possessed: In that respect does our Lord call himself the path and way, for we
must walk by him, and his steps are, as himself affirms, humility,
meeknes, patience charity, prayers, and finally his cross and passion; for the
servant is not Joan. 14. and 15.
greater then his Lord, nor the disciple above his master. This is the sum of
whatsoever may be said or written. It is the light of the divine will, wherein
consists the rule and lesson of true wisdom. It is the shortest and securest
way that we can walk, which opens and discovers unto us the most eminent
master of truth, wherein walking, he taught men what way they should undertake.
Let no man thinck that there is an other way more direct, to obtain of God
true charity, then that of labors and the exercises of virtues. This exercise
consists in three points: the first, with a sincere heart to demand of God
the knowledge of ones offenses mortal, and venial; together with an interior
sorrow for them, and a shunning of all occasions of mortal sins, and
distraction of spirit: the second, to desire the good of our neighbor, as our
own, for whom God has so much endured, and to assist him corporally and
spiritually in our prayers, praying for our freindes, and ennemies, and for all
those whom God will have prayed for: the third, is to desire with a firm
resolution to imitate the life of JESUS CHRIST in his conversation, as well in
body as spirit, and to demand of God that he will unite him to his son, and
that nothing may be found in his bowels but JESUS CHRIST crucified, demanding
also the virtues that may in anysort make us like unto JESUS CHRIST, as
poverty, humility, and simplicity, for in this manner exercising our selves in
these virtues, we attain a true and fervent desire, and a true thirst of the
love of our Saulour JESUS CHRIST, and it will be no pain or trouble unto us to
be exercised in them, therbie to obtain the good which we desire.

The glorious Father S. Francis, ascended to this degree, when with a fervent
and perseuerant desire, demanding and finding his dear and beloved Lord, the
Evangelical perfection, and the Apostolical life were revealed unto him, and
as if he had thenceforward began, he covered himself with one only garment
shaped in form of a cross, desiring no other thing then JESUS CHRIST
crucified, esteeming himself never satisfied with poverty, humility, and
misprise, to imitate his Savior I. ^. He would not seem humble and holy, but
a sinner and wretched, he then exceedingly reioy^ed, when he was conte^^ed and
little esteemed and was much displeased, when he was honored: as other men
accustom to hate their enemies, and to persecute them, so one the contrary,
he loved with all his heart those that did persecute him, and hated himself as
his own capital enemy, and not others, well knowing that the world and the
devil as our principal ennemies make war against us with our own weapons,
and not with other instruments. Therefore ouercomming our selves, we shall
triumph over all our potent ennemies: he endeavored by examples of every kind
of virtue and with zeal of the salvation of souls, for which I. C. suffered,
to draw them to the estate of Evangelical perfection, he did not exercise his
disciples, but in the imitation of the poverty humility and patience of JESUS
CHRIST, and the meditation of his passion: for he well knew that the more
virtues we possess, the greater progress do we make in prayer, and without
the same none at all, such were his ceremonies and mortifications, such the
edifices and exercises of his first order, to find I. C. in continual labor,
abstinences, and prayers, and to carry the wounds of our Lord I. C. in his
body, with the difficulty of strict poverty, and with this innocence, purity
and Christian simplicity, he surpassed those that are clothed only with the
exterior leaves of ceremonies, to undertake the way of perfection: and checked
those that clothed themselves exteriourly with the said ceremonies, only to
cover their imperfections.

Of the third degree of perfection, called Satiety.
THE IV. CHAPTER.
THe third degree, is Satiety, when the soul comes to loath terrestrial
things, richesse, honors, yea the repose of his own life, respecting all as
naught, conceauing a dislike to see, or speak of any worldly matters, for
whereas the soul does love and desire only God, and finds no repose but in
him, having experience that the creatures hinder his service, though loving
them under pretext of devotion, they all nevertheless seem displeasing, and
withal knowing that all humane affections and motions, all liberal arts and
sciences, all subtility of spirittes, all exquisite theology, and other
curious sciences, cannot give peace nor satiate our heart, if they be used with
pride, and that only the divine love can perform the same in an humble heart,
and mortified in his proper desires and opinions, which will not be surprised
more or less, in any other thing, nor affects other power or knowledge, then
how to love his God, and how to rid himself of all vain cogitations, and of
his proper complacence and curiosity to comprehend lofty and secrett matters,
and to proceed in a singularity of life and exercises: the property of this
estate, is to support the tentations, the terrors and deceiptes of the devils
because our soul resists Ephesians. 6.
not flesh and blood only, but the spirittes and powers of darcknes*
surmounting all other creatures, yea himself, and possessing God alone in his
only desire. Our soul has an other property, not only seeking and
thenceforward finding her beloved in creatures, by meditations and
imaginations, framed by the understanding, but often, without attending and
knocking at the dote, the fervent desires and enflamed sighs which she
breaths out for her love, conducteth her in, and then she conuerseth with and
freely hears her God, because she incontine^tlie arriueth to that estate,
whereof our Lord JESUS CHRIST spoke: I call you no Joan. 15.
longer servants, but freindes: such are the effects of fervent loves that
transport the soul into God, to make her one spirit with him and one will,
and as this love is supernatural and divine, incomparably of more efficacy
then the natural, it does consequently with a fastened knott and bond of
charity, conioyne the spirit with God: So that we may say, in this estate such
a love worcketh three effects or offices; The first, to deprive the soul of
all kind and quality of love, except the love of God, that she may no more be
disioyned from him, conformablie Romans 8.
to those words of the Apostle saint Paul: No man can hereafter separate us
from the charity and love of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. The second is, to give no
place to idleness, for as says the moral saint Gregory. He that is idle loves
not, and therefore his worck is to labor with an appetite sweet and sauourous
in God, and to run unto him withal his heart, as to his sovereign Good, and to
keep his spirit settled and combined in him, continually enflaming his desires
to a cruel and continual war, upon such discord, that can never have peace
with the cares, disordinate passions, and natural desires, which labor to
satiate him in other places, whereas this love endeavors at least to keep
him always concerning the memory and the desires, being separated from all
terrestrial cares and conuersations, with the fear of the stain which
venial disorders leaves in the soul, and the impediment which they procure to
the continual amourous affection of God, which causes the soul especially to
love and desire solitude, and to be sequestered from all creatures; for as the
Adamant draws iron unto it, so God, being loved, draueth unto him the lover
into a solitary place, and sequestreth him from humane conversation, that he
may taste divine. The third office whence this second proceeds, is that this
love never ceasseth to grow no otherwise then fire, which having matter, never
fails to increase. As then our Lord I. C. is infinitely worthy to be loved,
and that charity always finds in him matter to increase, and more and more
every hour to dilate it self, so this augmentation of love has never end in
this life, so that the proper office of this love is, to constrain a man to
make progress in his perfection of life, and with a continual war, against
luke warmnes^e.

It is easy to be collected in diverse places out of the Legend, rule and life
of S. Francis, how much this degree of love and perfection made him always
joyful, and content in his poverty: it there appears how much he abhorred
and shunned the honors and contentments of the world, and with what union of
spirit he conceived taste and satisfaction in prayer; For this occasion he
would that his Religious should be always joyful exteriourly and interiourly,
as men contented in the true graces which they received of the mercy of God;
this satiety which he had in God, hindered him from desiring sciences and
honors for his Religion, as the greedy of this world desire and procure, but
he would that only the poverty, and humility of his Lord I. C. should always
be, and shine in his Order, and that there one should never satisfy and
content himself enough, in the following, imitating and loving of I. C. The
wicked spirittes could not not endure this love that burned in him perpetually,
and therefore they never omitted to tempt and terrify him; endeavoring to
distract him; but finding nothing in him whereof to take hold, he being naked
and deprived of all earthely things; they presumed by their horrors and
terrors to make him stopp and turn his course. The continual lentes which
he kept in perpetual silence, and in solitary places, discover how
incomparable he was, and his continual fervor, in the exercise of prayer, and
spiritual profitt in all kind of virtues, as also his ordinary watchfulnes
over his senses and his body, likewise his manner of life always apart, except
when he traveled for the salvation of souls, as one that had in God alone his
repose and satiety.

Of the fourth degree, to ascend unto perfection, called spiritual Excess or
Ecstasy.
THE V. CHAPTER.
THe fourth degree, is ecstasy, spiritual excess, or dronkennes of spirit,
which proceeds of the satiety of the soul, made droncken with the divine
love of the Holy Ghost, without any water of our imaginations, and humane
fantasies, which forsake us not without difficulty, if God take not the soul
by the hand and draw it unto him, causingal the senses to remain without,
deprived of their function, the soul being employed secretly with her God, yea
it see meth to the soul that she endures the like, for being with God, she is
more above then in her self, and therefore seeing she sees not; and feeling
she feels not. For she being pure and clear from all corporal images which
are her irons, and the matter of her prayers, she feels only the effects,
with the worckes of the divine presence and charity. And therefore he that is
raised to this degree of perfection, does accustom to exercise less
meditations, how pious soever, using them only, to creat in his soul
admirations, devotions, and feruours toward his beloved God, drawing the
sparckes of love from his heart with those meditations as with a perfect
fire-steele, which most commonly is in men more hard then a flint-stone, for as
the way of the understanding proceeds not of humane style, though it be
directed unto God, the knowledge notwithstanding proceeding in the soul, by
the love and the will, its charity is never so intentive in the contemplative
life, and in the proper mortification as unto the exercise of virtues, neither
is this kind of seeking and ascending to the admiration and devotion of God,
so perfect, it is more ordinary in the learned and prudent persons and of
subtle spirit, in whom the intelligence proceeds always unto the will,
and this love, by meditation and consideration: But the affectiue way is far
more breife to ascend unto God: the principal therein is the will, for she has
her exercises ordinarily in desires, in inspirations, and interior sighs in
very frequent manner unto her beloved, which she performs by iaculatorie
prayers, more ardent then long meditations of the spirit, whereof although she
make use as of the foundation, as it were to recomfort her own infirmity, she
notwithstanding uses them, to raise the soul to her God, by a desire of love,
which increasing, she uses the action of the will which is to love, because it
has more entry with God then the action of the understanding, which is to
know the way very breife for perfection, and easy to practice, because it
needs neither science nor many books, in which the most simple idiot
profits much more then the learned, God disposing according to his
liberality, that the soul of him who seeks him without mean, be rather
instructed by him unto his conversation: but this instruction is perticulerlie
necessary to them that are already arrived to the love which causes them the
ecstasies, to the end they setle not all their perfection in the devotion and
sensible taste which they receive (for finally it is an instrument only for
spiritual charity) and that those impetuosities of devotion, and subtle
conceited acts, make them not presumptuous, because this matter may be
obtained by natural exercise, and without grace: But let them diligently
regard and consider in themselves if they receive this divine grace with fruit,
and if they profitt in true mortification, and abnegation of their proper will,
so that it be prompt to execute the divine will, receiving with patience and
contentment of heart, what soever it shall please God to ordain, as well in
exterior as interior labors, even the loss of consolations, yea
temptations: For if it seem to them that they are less obliged to these later
then the other, they will have no care to seek the exercise of virtues, but
will apply all their endeavor to get this sweetness of devotion; though they
fall into ecstasy seven times in a day, they will profitt little; and will abuse
the divine grace wrongfully and to their damnation; for they satisfy their
pleasure with more diligence, then the will of God, and such shall find in
themselves rather, passionate cogitations, and words of presumpsumption,
esteeming themselves perfect, and resting assured to be in the way of
perfection, iudgeing others that walk not their way to proceed erroniously,
then to have true fear and humility. The property then of this way, is when
without deceit, as God sends mental ecstasies unto the soul, eleuating her
to the imbracementes of divine love, so the soul being returned to her self,
worcketh merueillous excesses of humility and patience, the example of all
virtues, and particulerly in the amourous compassion of the passion of JESUS
CHRIST, whose excessive torments being contemplated by the soul, she burns,
and cannot contain her in her self, for the great apprehension which she has
of such a charity, which is such, as she desires to repay JESUS CHRIST this
his glorious death, by her own life exposed to martyrdom.

We may conjecture in what perfection this degree of the love of the holy
Ghost, elevated S. Francis, wrought by frequent and excessive corporal
devotions, wherein he was swallowed up, being a figure of many greater eminent
conceated worckes of the spirit, so that for the most fervent love he carried
to JESUS CHRIST crucified, he traveled to seek martyrdom. But because his
admirable excesses of prayer, humility, and other virtues, have bin already
recorded, it is not necessary to repeat them, it suffices to have only
refreshed the memory of the readers therewith, as with a matter worthy to be
noted.

Of the fifth degree of perfection, called Asseurance.
THE VI. CHAPTER.
THe fifth degree is called asseurance because having in the precedent estate
tasted fervent chariry, it expels all fear out of the soul, which does not
repute her self only resigned and perfectly settled, as much as is possible for
her, in the divine will and disposition, but does even desire really and with
seruour to expose her self to all labors, to conform her self to her
labored JESUS CHRIST, and so she remains without cause of fear: for albeit
God should cast her into hell, the same should be her glory, it being the will
of God: and besides, she has such a strong hope, and assured persuasion of the
grace and favor of her God, that it is impossible for her to be separated Romans
8.
from him, saying with S. Paul: For I am sure that neither death, nor life, nor
Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, neither things present, nor things to
come, neither might, nor height, nor depth, nor other creature, shall be able to
separate us from the charity of God which is in JESUS CHRIST our lo^d. Let us
therefore know that this word Assurance is rather a name accidental, and of the
effect this estate, then essential; because the root and essence thereof, is the
coniunctiue love, which the soul possesses: but because this name has a
secrett and hidden signification, though diverse know it not, which is manifest
only to God, and the soul wherein it worcketh this merueillous union, we have
signified it by the name of the effect; whereby the soul attayneth to make her
self a spirit, by the continual norriture of grace and charity, and by the
merueillous vnio^ of her love with God. For as a drop of water mingled with
wine, loses its nature, and assumeth that of wine, as also the color and
savor; so the soul that perfectly loves in this degree, falling into the
infinite divine charity, without yet loosing her nature, is converted into the
divine love, according to the office and institution of life, and all her A
worthy similitud.
powers remain confected in the taste of the love of God: and albeit our nature
is not changed in this divine union touching her natural essence, yet does it
change many inclinations and conditions, and obtayneth others, beyond the
forces of nature created, as we see the fi^e worcketh in iron, which it
depriueth of the hardness, coldness, and blacknes, which are proper unto it, and
endueth it with other contrary and more excellent qualities, yet without
chau^ging the nature thereof: so the soul far more enflamed and united in the
divine love, being endued with other life, motion and force, remains without
any fear or dullness and without diffide^ce, so light and easy to tra^sforme
it self into God her beloved, by a unitive desire, as the divine fire that
burns in her, and makes her in that manner fervent in her spiritual
operations; in such sort the soul remains filled with this divine union, and
replenished with so great fervor, that she at their first arrival puts to
flight the flies of contrary temptations; and does more annihilate and mortify
her self in one act of the will, then others can do in much time. She
likewise receaueth a penetratiue virtue to participate with all creatures,
without any impediment because she easily is united to her God; thus does she
dispose her self to receive greater grace of God, because she approaches
nearer, and is raised unto the perpetual fountain, and to the Father of
lights, the eternal God. The property of this estate of Asseurance, is to
have God always in her heart present in every place, never separating her self
from him: which she performs by mean of a living love, and continual memory
of him: for she is present, and lives in his arms, freed from all action,
saving that wherein her beloved God employeth her, he being ever present with
her. The holy Father knew that he had attained this degree of unitive love, in
the continual memory, and divine communication, which he had without
disturbance, as well in the Monasteries as in hermitages, alone and in company,
were he employed in the doctrine of salvation of souls, or in prayer: And it
was even apparent that the holy Father S. Francis had obtained this degree of
perfection, in the conversion of his senses, powers, and inclinations into God:
for he seemed to be returned into the state of innocence, so much were his
interior powers submitted to the empire and domination of the soul, which was
so perfectly united unto her God in the light and frequent revelations which
she received of the divine presence, whence proceeded that he gloryed in his
labors, and in merueillous asseurance of his salvation, which was by special
divine grace revealed unto him.

Of the sixtdegre of perfection, called Tranquillity.
THE VII. CHAPTER.
THe estate of perfection called Tranquillity, is in the sixth degree where there
is such peace and contentment, that the soul lives as it were in silence and
repose as in a sleepy slumber on the breast of God, so that she may say with S.
Paul: that she no more lives in herself, but that JESUS CHRIST lives and
reigns in her. But three things should preceed this life so singular, this
sanctity and conversation with God, this perfect charity toward God and our
neighbor, this seeling of the divine familiarity; First, a perfect
mortification in worckes and affairs of the world, in such sort that the soul
for her own respect have no contentment in any creature what soever, and less
in her self, but only in her Creator; The second, that she be distracted
from all spiritual consolations, wherein she takes comfort and rejoices for
her own repose and taste: because often times in the spirittes even of them
that vtteirle shun spiritual things, do grow great affections and
spiritual delectations, wherein they find consolations for themselves, but God
seldom, or never: and so they shutt the gate to the true light, and this
happens because they propose not God for the end of their exercises purelie
and without mean of any creature. Now this sincere intention and renunciation,
as it is far more perfect, so is it much more difficult then the former:
therefore also the soul that doubts thereof holds her self absolutely in
the hand of God, as well for matters of the world as of the body and soul. The
third is, that with an assiduous dillige^ce she procures to convert her self
free and peaceable into this most pure and most simple good, which is God,
remitting her spirit into him not in part, but absolutely considering God, and
enjoying him as it pleases him to communicate himself unto her in this life,
for the excellency and divine prerogatives, by which we call him with diverse
names, Almighty God, most wise, most good, most just. For so much as the holy
scripture attributes unto him these names and qualities, for the diverse
effects which he worcketh in his creatures; whereby we come to the knowledge of
him, for the divine essence exceeds all titles, all terms and imaginations
of our understanding: and when the soul comes to contemplate God in the said
manner, she attayneth the quiet and peaceable estate of conte^plation, though
it be not continual but for a very short time in regard of the infirmity and
weight of the mortallity wherein she lives. The property of this estate is,
that the soul be instructed and addressed toward God, in all her actions and
cogitations, remote from the way of humane prudence, considering that God is
the guide and master of every estate of spiritual perfection, and that he
alone knows the necessities, the capacity, and the inte^tions of the spirit
of man, and therefore he alone can conduct and guide us in the most commodious
and most certain way. They therefore do err who by their counsel and
doctrine will, not only persist in their own opinions, but also admonish
others: for taking on them to be guides of the blind, they do not perceive
that themselves being blind and presuming to know the necessity of the feeble,
both the one and the other do often fall into the deep gulf of error. It is
also the property of this degree of perfection, that the man which has
attained the same is conversant in all the exercises of the other foresaid
degrees, and especially of humility, of the imitation and memory of I. C.
wherein he lays a deep foundation, that the edifice of his contemplation fall
not: but be conserved and augmented by the benignity of JESUS CHRIST.

Among other effects whereby the holy Ghost discovered to have communicated
this height of perfection unto his servant Fr. one was the manifest and almost
continual spirit of prophecy, wherewith he endued him whereby he seemed
peaceablyto enjoy the conte^platio^ of God and a divine conference and
familiarity. And by how much he was sequestered and disioyned from all the world
and from himself, so much was he perfectly and intentiuely always employed in
the exercises of the spirit. By reason also of them, his life and perfection
is praised and preached, considering that thereby he is admitted to the
tranquillity of the divine contemplation.

Of the seventh degree of persection.
THE VIII. CHAPTER.
THere is no man that with humane words can say any thing of the seventh
degree of perfection: which is a privilege rarely communicated of God, since
that the words of Angels would be defective and seem barbarous in the
explication thereof. Some SS. have experienced it in this flesh, God
communicating it unto the^ suddenly as to passengers, and now they enjoy and
possess it manifestly without limitation or measure of faith. It is that,
which the just do feel in glory, being of the number of those things which
the eyes cannot behold, nor the ears hear, nor Esaias. 64. and 1. Corrin. 2.
the hearts of me^ comprehe^d, which God has prepared for the^ that love him
perfectly. And as the co^te^platiue S. Bernard says, it is not permitted to
all, or in one same place and degree to enjoy the secrett and glorious presence
of God, but according as the celestial Father determines to each one, because
we have not elected God, but he us, who has given place proper to each one of
his SS. and each one is where he has bin placed. S. Mary Magdale^ found place
and to her was granted the feet of our Lord I. C. S. Thomas the Apostle was
admitted to his side, S. Peter to the bosom of the Father: S. John to the
breast of I. C. S. Paul was elevated to the third heaven: the sacred wou^des of
our Lord I. C. were communicated unto S. Francis. Who the^ shall presume to
have a desire to know the perfection and merittes of such a greatness, as S.
Mary Magdale^ reposed on the bed of true penance, S. Thomas in the light of
truth, S. Peter in the chair of faith. S. John in the fournace of charity. S.
Paul in the throne of wisdom, and S. Francis in the love and tra^sformation of
I. C. we cannot, for it is not permitted us: but only to follow and imitate the
SS. in the worckes and perfections which are mercifully revealed by our Lord I.
C. and therefore to give in finite thanckes to the author of all goodness, that
by the merittes of his saints, by their intercession and his divine grace, he
conduct us to that perfection in this life; and that in the other we may enjoy
the eternal glory. Amen.

The end of the third book, and first volume of Chronicles of the Friar
Minors, wherein is contained the life, death, and miracles of the Seraphicall
Father S. Francis.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES OF THE FRIAR MINORS.
CONTAINING THE MARTYRDOM of diverse Religious of the Order of the Seraphicall
Father S. Francis. Translated by the party aforesaid.
THE SECOND VOLVME.
How S. Francis sent certain Religious to preach the faith of Jesus Christ,
unto the Mores in Spain.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
IN the year of grace 1219. the glorious Father S. Francis kept the great
general chapter at Pentecost, whereat all the Religious of his Order
assembled, as it has bin amply declared in the first book of the first
volume of these present Chronicles. This Chapter was held eleven years after
that Pope Innocent the third had with his own mouth confirmed the Order of the
Friar Minors, and the fourth year of the Popedom of Pope Honorious the third
of blessed memory, who then piously governed the Church. In this Chapter, it
was revealed unto S. Francis, that he should again send his Religious over the
world, to preach the faith of JESUS CHRIST, as well amongst Christians as
Pagans, After this, the most capable Religious of the Order were chosen for
Prouincials, S. Francis applied himself to obey the holy will of God. And
because the rage of the Mores was spread over three parts of the world, Asia,
Africa, and Europe; he resolved to send his Religious into those parts to
preach the truth of the faith of JESUS CHRIST, to reduce the Pagans from their
damnable errors: And to make a beginning, he chose Asia for himself, whither
he went with eleven of his Brethren, and preached to the Sultan and the Mores
of his kingdom. He sent Brother Giles into Africa with Religious of like
fervor and devotion; who thincking to preach to the Mores; were apprehended by
Christians and very unwillingly brought back into Italy. He sent six Italian
Religious of very perfect life, into Spain, where the Emperor Miramolin of
Marocco persecuted the Christians. The said Religious were, Brother Vital,
Brother Berard, Brother Peter, Brother Adiutus, Brother Accursus, and Brother
Otto: of whom, the first, Brother Vital, was by the holy Father constituted
their superior, Brother Berard was an excellent preacher in the Arabian
tongue; Brother Otto, was a Priest, Brother Adiutus and Brother Accursus were
lay Brethren, (the rule so tearming the Religious that keep not the quiet.) Now
saint Francis having called them, said: My children, God has commanded me to
send you to preach the holy faith unto the Mores and to impugn the sect of
Mahomet: and therefore my freindes, hold your selves ready to execute his holy
will in such sort as you shall see cause. Go ye I say, my beloved joyfully
preparing your souls to the crown which it shall please his divine Majesty to
bestow upon you: performing his holy will according as you shall feel your
selves inspired. They as obedient children, only bended their heads, and
crossed their arms, expecting his holy benediction: but the holy Father first
made them this exhortation: My dear children, I have certain words to
deliver you, that you may the better effect this commandment of God, to his
glory and the salvation of your souls. Be ye careful to keep Exhortations
to certain of his Religious which he sent to the Infidels.
peace among your selves, and be not Brothers so much in habitt and profession,
as in spirit and will. Next, have special care to fly envy, which was the
first cause of our damnation; support with patience, and be joyful in
persecutions, and humble before God and men, and by this mean, you shall
obtain victory against your ennemis visible and invisible. Be ye mindful
to imitate with all your power, our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and to follow him in the
strictest manner you can in all the three vows: in obedience, obeying your
superior, as he one earth obeyed his parents: in poverty, living therein as he
did, for he would be borne, live, and dye poor, and did always preach poverty
to teach us the same: and in chastity, living and persisting chaste, not only in
body, but even in spirit: since our Lord so muchloued this virtue, that he
would be borne of a virgin, and presently after his Nativity, would have for
his first fruits, the holy Virgin Innocents: and being on the Cross, he
would dye between two virgins, his Blessed Mother, and S. John the Evangelist.
Cast all your cogitations and hopes in God, and he will assist and conduct you.
Carry with you the rule and the Breuiary, and say the divine office the most
devoutly you can: Let Brother Vital be your superior, and therefore obey him
entierly; but above all, be mindful to meditate continually on the passion of
our lord JESUS CHRIST: for that is it which shall make all incommodities sweet
unto you, and all travel pleasing in this long journey into Spain which you
are to attempt, and in the conversation and commerce which ye are to have with
the Mores, the ennemies of their Creator. Believe, I pray you, that there is
nothing does separate you from me, but the glory of God, and the salvation of
souls, for, but for that I would never disioyne you from me. And God knows
the grief and affliction which my heart feels for your departure, though in
deed, your prompt obedience does much comfort me, but it is necessary that we
prefer the will of our lord, before our own.

These good Religious began then out of love to weep bitterly, and
affectionatelie recommended themselves to his prayers, wherein next unto God
they reposed more confidence then in any other thing, saying unto him: Father
send us whither you shall please, we are ready to accomplish what soever God by
you shall command. But withal we beseech you to remember, that we go a mong
most cruel men, whose tongue is unknown unto us, as also are their manners
and behavior: besides we know them to be the ennemies of Christians, desiring
nothing more then to drinck their blood, and ours with so much more fury and
passion, when they shall know we endeavor to convert their people; for
accomplishme^t whereof, we acknowledge our forces to be most infirm and our
selves very insufficient, if the mercy of God do not by your prayers assist
us: and therefore we recommending us unto them, demand your holy benediction,
that we may undergo this obedience to the honor of God and the salvation of
our own and the Infidels souls. S. Francis then lifting his eyes all bathed
The benediction which S. Francis gave the^.
with tears toward heaven, blessed them in this manner: The benediction of
God the Father, the love of the Son our Redeemer JESUS, and the grace of the
holy Ghost descend upon you as it descended on the Apostles: conduct, comfort
and fortifye you in afflictions, that you may valiantly resist, courageously
assault, and gloriously subdue your ennemies, since God sends you for his
glory and service. And fear not, for God goes with you to be your protector.
So being full of tears he dismissed them: and these Apostolical Religious
took their journey conformably to the Rule of the holy Gospel, on foot,
without money, Luc. 10.
scrip, or staff, bare-foote, with one only coat, poor course and all
patched: but yet in exchange of all this, they had the grace of God, that
safely and securely conducted them into Spain.

How Brother Vital fell sick in Spain, and would that leaving him alone in
the hospital, his Companions should proceed on other journey: and of his death.
THE II. CHAPTER.
THese good Religious being arrived in Arragon, Brother Vital their superior,
fell sick and kept his bed, the others expected there some time to see the
issue of this sickness, which daily increasing, Brother Vital said to his
companions: My beloved Brethren, you see my sickness is violent, and what will be
the issue thereof, I know not: wherefore I will no longer detain you from
proceeding about that which has bin enjoined us: it having bin always my
desire to accompany you if it pleased God, who I suppose has ordained that I
proceed no farther, in respect that being too great a sinner, I am not perhapps
worthy of your company, or to be employed in so worthy an office. It is
therefore necessary, that you leave me in this hospital, and that you apply
your selves to this holy enterprise of the conversion of this people to God,
who has thus far conducted you by obedience: and be not greiued to leave me
here alone, for his divine Majesty will provide for me: Proceed then on your
journey, accomplish the will of God, and be mindful of the admonitions of our
holy Father, with a special care not to transgress them: and pray to God for
me, constituting Brother Bernard the preacher to be their superior. The poor
Religious having heard the said proposition, with extreme sorrowful and sobbing
sighs, that sufficiently discovered the bitterness that afflicted their spirit,
they bowed down their heads, calling God to witness of the grief they had
to leave him so alone: but because their obedience unto S. Francis and him so
required, they acknowledged themselves ready to obey: and so having received
his benediction, after they had lovingly and charitably embraced each other,
they departed, beseeching him by his prayers to obtain of God that they might
again see one an other at least in Paradise. This poor Religious remaining
then alone in affliction daily weakened, till having understood the martyrdom
of his companions, and given thanckes to God for it, he was so afflicted for
not perticipating with them, and for having lost that crown, that burning with
charity toward God, this fire in such sort augmented that by his good will
and desire, he shortly after received the ^ame crown in his bed, making of
himself a grateful and pleasing sacrifice unto his divine Majesty, and so
hastened to meet them in the other world. Thus much for Brother Vital. We must
now discourse of the combat of his companions, who still ma^ching further on,
into Spain, even unto Portugal, never ceased in time and place convenient to
preach unto both Catholics, and heretics, whereof then the number was great
in Spain, and every where produced fruit most pleasing to the almighty, whose
grace had conjoined them together.

How the five Religious arrived at Conimbria, where they prophesied unto the
queen her death, and their own Martyrdom.
THE VII. CHAPTER.
THe said Religious being arrived at Conimbria a famous city in regard that it
was the university of the kingdom of Portugal, as also being very anncient
and right noble, there they found the queen Vraca wife of king Alphonsus the
second, who incontinently invited them unto her, and entertained the^ with
great devotion, as exceedingly affected unto their Order, and then very
lovingly demanded of the^ whence they came and whither they intended, and
withal offered to releive the^ in all their occurre^ces. They breifely
answered her and discovered unto her their design: to wit, that they were
sent by their General Brother Francis, to preach the faith of JESUS CHRIST to
Infidels. But the queen not content with this slight narratio^, putt the^ into
discourse of diverse spiritual matters, as one more thirsty of the word of our
lord then a hind of fresh water. With whose discourse finding her self
exceedingly edifyed and comforted, and perceauing their extreme fervor, and to
what degree of the favor of God their merittes had raised the^; she drew them
a part, and co^iured them in his name for whose love they had resolved even to
endure death, so much to gratify her, as by prayer to procure revelation from
God of the time and hour of her death: not admitting their excuses which were,
that it would be a great temerity and presu^ption to seek to know the
secrettes which God for deep and great considerations would not have known
unto me^: adding withal that they were not worthy to obtain the same, and
diverse other such reasons; but she so importuned them, that they were at
lenght co^straynd to accord unto her: and having to this end applied themselves
to prayer, they understood from God that, and more then they demanded,
whereupon they went unto the queen, and thus spoke unto her: Madame, let it
not, if you please, be troublesome unto you to understand that which you have
so insta^tly required of us: and so much the less because we assure you that
no creature loves you so much as God, who will in no sort dispose of you but
for your good, and greater glory. Know then that you shall dye before your
husband and in short time, and we shall join with you near about the time,
whereof we will also give you an infallible token. You shall understand, that
within few days, we shall dye by the stroke of the sword, for the faith of
our gracious Redeemer, for which we infinitely tha^ck his divine majesty:
exceedingly rejoicing, that it has pleased him to elect us to be of the number
of his Martyrs. But when we shall have accomplished our course, the Christians
of Marrocco shall bring our bodies into this city, to the meeting whereof, you
and your husband shall come in great reverence and solemnity. When then you
shall see these things, hope and know that your term shall be expired, and that
you shall shortly be through love united with God, there to reign eternally.

How the five Martyrs arriving at Alenquer, the Infa^ta provided the^ shipping
and other necessaries, to go to Civil, and seculer habits, thereby to pass
unknown among the Mores, who otherwise would never have permitted them to
pass.
THE IV. CHAPTER.
THe five Religious having taken leave of the Queen, who gave the^ letters of
favor and commendation unto Ale^quer whither they intended their journey, in
which city there was already a Coue^t of Friar Minors whom they visited,
where for certain days they comforted one an other, in mean while they also
bethought themselves of commodious means to go to Lisbone, dista^t thence
about eight leagues; in which time they were advertised of a merchants ship,
wherein they understood they might pass, by the favor of the Infanta Sanctia,
the daughter of Sancho second king of Portugal; who resided in the same city
and there kept her Court, they presented unto her the leters of the foresaid
Queen, for whose sake she gave them a gracious welcome, being one of the most
pious and virtuous ladies that all Christendom did then afford, and had
rejected great matches, to conserve her virginity, whereof she made such
esteem, as she desired rather to be deprived of Paradise, the^ to have her
chastity violated. She was in deed, endued with all virtues, and lived in great
abstinence and fasting, wearing next her flesh a hair cloth in steed of a
smock, praying day and night, giving and distributing her revenues unto the
poor. She was a true mother unto the poor, considering the affection wherewith
she releiued, comforted, and assisted them. She then having heard related the
admirable worckes of S. Francis, and his Brethren, when they were there, the
year 1217. she called then unto her, and built them a Covent without Alenquer,
in a solitary place, against the river, by reason of whose ouerflowing, she
admitted them into her Palace, where she builded them a little monastery, as a
place more healthful, free from the inundations of the water, and more
commodious for her. The pious Infanta then having understood the holy and firm
resolution of these said Religious, commended it exceedingly, and for the time
of their being there, entertained them very courteously, discoursing always of
spiritual matters. She gave them seculer habittes, that they might travel the
more commodiouslie; for otherwise they might have bin entercepted in their
passage, neither would the merchants have admitted the^ into their vessels
together with them in their habittes, if they had in any sort discovered their
design, for fear to offend the Mores, whose disfavor they would not have
encurred for any thing whatsoever, as people more respecting their profitt then
their honor or salvation, and more hungry of money, then of the glory of God.
Therefore then did they remain some time in that city, in mean while their
hair did grow and increase, so that their crowns or other distinctions could
not be discerned from seculer persons: at length, commending their pious
desire prompt obedience, and fervor of charity toward God and their
neigbour, encouraging them also of her part, though needlessly, she sent them to
Lisbone as worldlings and unknown, there to embarcke themselves for Seuill,
having withal formerly furnished them with what was necessary.

How the said Religious arriving at Civil, and having cast off then seculer
habitt, did preach to the Mores, and of the beginning of their tribulations.
THE V. CHAPTER.
THe good Religious, not without much trouble arrived at Seuill, where they
disbarqued themselves. This city was then possessed and usurped by the Mores,
they lodged in the house of a Citizen, that was a Christian, rich, noble, and
devout, there they putt off their seculer habitts, took their own, and then
for eight days together applied themselves to fasting and fervent prayer, with
tears begging day and night of almighty God, that he would please to assist
and further them, that they might begin their enterprise to the glory of his
divine majesty, to their own, and those ruined souls salvation, and that he
would give them force to die for his holy faith. Now being deceived by the
exterior appearance of the devotion of their Host, they plainly discouerd unto
him their full intention, presuming of his advise therein: but they were much
deceived and amazed, for he repenting that he had lodged them, for fear both
of himself and other Christian marchantes that lived there, began to endeavor
to dissuade them, affirming that they would profitt nothing; but would rather
put themselves in extreme danger and manifest peril to loose their own
faith, by means of the terrible torments which would be inflicted on them.
Which these good Religious understanding, they instantly, without giving any
aunsweare or making him other reply, forsook his house, and as courageous and
valiant soldiers, went directly to give the assault to the fortress of the
ennemy, to wit, to the Temple of the Mores, where finding all their ennemies
in arms, praying to their Prophett, they began to chardge and strike them with
the cutting sword of the word of God, preaching and praising the faith of
JESUS. But the great multitude of ennemies seeing them in such base and straung
kind of habitts, thrust them out with the points of their daggers and strokes
of cudgels, using them as fools. This beginning of trouble redoubled the pious
fervor of the good Religious, making them active and desirous to suffer much
more for the name of JESUS CHRIST, wherefore they determined to seek to enter
into an other Temple greater the^ the former, and full of people, there to
convince and confound the Mohammedan error, and to preach the truth of the
Christian faith: but they were not permitted to enter there, but were very
rudely and with injuries far repulsed. They enflamed with great zeal, to
denounce and make known I. C. unto these infidels, were nothing terrified, but
to give courage to themselves, said to each other: Brethren what do we? let
us remember those words of our Lord I. C. Fear not, little flock, for it has
Luc. 12.
pleased your Father to dispose unto you his kingdom: therefore let us not
desist to preach his holy faith. Wherefore do we spend time with this simple
and inconsiderat multitude of people, considering the little hope we have being
so few, to suppress their obstinacy? let us rather repair to their king,
endeavoring first to conquer the head, so with more ease and facility to get
victory of the members afterward? Let us give him the on set courageously and
joyfully: let us go then, let us go preach and tell him the verity, of the
faith of JESUS CHRIST, of Baptism, and of penance, in remission of sins.
Let us boldly confess before him that JESUS CHRIST the son of God is true
God and man, who would be borne and dye for sinners, with his own blood
redeeming us from eternal death, and rising again after his death, ascended
unto heaven, and sits at the right hand of his Father, Judge of the living
and dead, where he expects us to croune us with his holy martyrs for ever.

How these five Religious preached before the king of the Mores, the faith of
Jesus Christ our Savior, and what sueceeded thereof.
THE VI. CHAPTER.
THese Religious being thus mutuallie animated, went directly to the Palace
of the king, at the entry whereof being intercepted by the guard, their
Captain who was a gentleman of note, demanded of them what they were. They
answered that they were Italiens, and desired to speak with his majesty, of
matters of great importance, as well touching his own particular as his whole
kingdom. Whereupon the Captain demanded if they had no letters or other token
of commendations to deliver him. They replied that their embassage was to be
delivered by mouth, and could not be written but in hearts, and by tongues. The
Captain willed the^ securely to commend the affair unto him, promising to
deliver it faithfully unto the king: they prayed him again for conclusion to
conduct them only to the presence of the king, where he might also understand
what they had to say: The Captain related the whole unto the king, who
commanded them to be brought before him; where being present, he demanded them
what they were; whence they came; who sent the^ unto him: and wherefore they
were come. Whereto they answered, that they were Christians: that they came
from Rome, sent from the king of kings, and Redeemer of the world, JESUS
CHRIST, to preach unto him his holy faith: so that their bussines te^ded only
to the salvation of his soul: which should be effected if he would no longer
believe the doctrine of Mahomet, but in JESUS C. the true God, receiving
baptism in the name of the most sacred Trinity, and that he could not be saved
by any other mean. The Mory king that expected no such greeting, became
despightfully furiours: for he esteemed the servants of God to have given him
an extreme affro^t, to whom he said: O ye poor braineles men, sottish and
miserable as ye are; how can ye possibly presume to utter this speech in my
presence, without more respect unto my crown, or fear of the loss of your
lives, already infallibly incurred, by the great blasphemy committed against
my most holy Prophet; But tell me, are ye come hither expressly and in my only
particular respect, or to preach also unto my people, and to delude them,
dissuading them from mine obedience and their alleagiance? Hereto the good
Religious with a bold and smiling countenance answered: O king know that we
are come to thee as to the chief of all this sect of Mahomet, filled with
diabolical spirit, and to him that in the bottom of hell shall be more
rigorously tormented then thy subjects that shall persist in obstinacy, to
the end that thou being reduced into the way of truth and salvation, thou
may be a mean of their conversion, as thou art now the cause of their
damnation; for avoiding whereof thou must believe in JESUS CHRIST our Redeemer,
who sends us unto thee, saying in the Matt. 28.
Gospel: Go and teach ye all nations, baptising them in the name of the
Father and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and adding afterward for the^
that would not yield thereunto: he that will not believe, shall be damned
eternally. This king stopping his ears, began to rage and cry out: O cursed
wretches, your former lewd behavior no doubt has brought you hither, where it
shall be rewarded instantly; neither is there any other mean to deliver and free
your selves, but that you unsay whatsoever you have now foolishly and rashly
uttered; and to receive and espouse the Religion of our great Prophett; for, so
doing, I will not only pardon you, but will also make you great and rich in my
kingdom, that it may publikelie appear how much we prise and esteem the
greatness of our Prophett: and how much we honor, respect and enrich those that
prefer our Religion before their own: but otherwise, you shall for your
sollie dye with infinite torments, or I will enforce you to believe me: The
Religious replied, if your law were not full of lies, false and impious, as it
is, but just and conformable unto truth, we would receive it, but because it
does eternally damn the followers thereof, we respect not all treasure, nor
fear torments; for false honors are the baits and delusions of you Mores,
who truly miserable, do end together with them, because they have no longer
continuance, and you are eternally damned: the meerlie contrary happening to
us, considering that by the poverty and contempt of our days of this life, we
pourchace eternal treasures and honors in heaven, as our Lord teaches us,
when he said: Heap not Matt. 6.
up your treasure in earth, where nothing is secure: but in heaven, where you
may for ever enjoy the benefitt thereof. And therefore O king, be thou converted
to receive this true and holy law, in regard of this recompense. And if thou
so much esteem a kingdom of this world, how much more ought thou to
esteem this eternal kingdom of heaven? turn thy heart to the sovereign and
true God, who has thus long expected thy penannce, and now sends us unto
thee, as his messengers to deliver thee from the eternal torments of hell,
which are prepared for thee and all them that follow the absolutely accursed
Mahomett. Take heed how thou misprise the grace which God by means of us does
offer unto thee.

How the five Martyrs were adjudged to death by the Morian king, who at the
instance of the prince his son, revoked his sentence.
THE VII. CHAPTER.
THe Morian king could no longer endure nor hear the preaching and
remonstrance of the Religious against his sect; but being exceedingly afflicted
and enraged, commanded them to be expelled his presence, and condemned them to
be cruelly whipped, and then to have their heads cut off. The Martyrs then
hastened to death, with a courage and countenance very joyful and contented,
as they that knew themselves near to the accomplishment of what they so much
desired, and to encourage each other, they mutually said: Behold brethren,
behold how God does benignely offer unto us, that which we have so long desired
of him. We are at the port, let us seek to arm us well to endure this little
conflict; henceforward we shall no more fear the terrible tempests of this
world, nor the winds of the temptations of the devil, nor the deceiptfull
singing of the alluring Mermaides of our flesh, the impious thenceforward shall
have no more power over this our feeble body, for we go into a glorious
country, to see again our first original, and to serve our Lord, whose
service is to reign: there shall we receive recompense of our labors, after
more then a hundred, more then the double, yea a thousand times more then we
deserve. Let us now then give praise to our God; enduring this little for his
love: let us restore this life to him that has redeemed it by his own death.
Uttering these good speeches, thy hastened to receive the martyrdom at the
place where they were to be executed, goeing before the executioner, who with
some other officers of Justice, seeing with what alacrity they hastened to
their death, began to have compassion on them as of poor foolish persons,
and therefore exhorted them to reflect on their own case, with these or the
like words; Do ye not consider your own misery, thus rejoicing, being so
near the loss both of this life and the other? deny that which you have
unadvisedly and impiously, or at least temerariously uttered against our law,
and against the person of our king; and to this effect we will seek to obtain
you favor, and to enrich you with temporal substance, and our Prophett
Mahomett, who is very merciful, will pardon you, and benefitt you in the other
life. The Religious hereunto answered: your richesse, delicacies, allurementes
of this world, are as false and deceiptfull as your law and your promises: and
therefore let them be your portion that give creditt to such delusions. For our
parts, we believe nothing more certaiue and glorious, then to endure for the
truth and the name of JESUS CHRIST, since that only is the secure way to
eternal life. Therefore do we so joyfully contemn the present life with all
the wealth thereof; considering with all that it is but a puff in comparison of
eternity. And the false Prophett whom you honor being in hell, can neither
obtain mercy for himself, nor for any others. There did accompany them
certain Christians, who much feared, that the extremity of the torments might
enforce them to renounce their Faith. The son of the said king of Seuill who
was present with his Father when he gave sentence against the holy Religious,
perceauing his fury to be somewhat appeased, said unto him: Upon what reason,
Father, have you so lightly given order for the death of these men? It were
not amiss (under correction of your better advise) that you commanded our
Preistes to be called, that they may convince the impious Christians, as well
by natural reasons, as by aucthority of the law: for mine opinon is, that
proceeding otherwise, you putt them to death unjustly even according to our
own laws. The king weighing what his son had said, and a little moderating
himself, commanded that they should not be executed, but should be imprisoned
in an high and strong toure, till it were more maturely concluded what should
be done against them.

How the Martyrs preached thorough the batlements of the tour where they were
prisonners, and therefore were shutt up into a deep dungeon, then presented to
the king, and at last by advise of the Counsel, sent to Maroccho.
THE VIII. CHAPTER.
THe Martyrs by this reuocation, felt in their hearts a double martyrdom,
fearing that God would withdraw from them his grace of suffering for him, by
reason of some imperfection which he saw in them: nevertheless entierly yelding
themselves into his hands, they resolved on their part to perform their due
obedience of preaching, what soever issue it should please his divine Majesty
to worck thereof: and to this effect, they mounted to the top of the tower,
and out at the batlements they preached unto the Mores that passed by, with a
loud voice crying unto them: Poor blinded people, believe in the true God and
Lord JESUS CHRIST, and abandon the superstition and impiety of your
unfortunate Mahomett: otherwise your law* and all you shall be eternally damned.
Now is the time of penance: God sends us to visitt you, receive his word of
sufficiency to save your souls: forbear to lend any more your ea^e to the
d^uill and to his illusions, if you will not be eternally tormented in hell.
Such and like matters did these holy Martyrs preach: whereof the king was
incontinently advertised, who commanded them to be thrust down into a deep
dungeon, where they persisted in continual prayer, the space of five entire
days preaching also to the other prisoners. After that, the king caused them
to be brought before him, supposing they had binreclaymed and repentant:
therefore disirous to gain them by menaces, terrors, promises and mercy, to
allure them to his sect, he said: O ye sottish and blinded, have you not as
yet acknowledged and abiured your error? Do no longer abuse my clemency, who
have so long expected your repentnace, as also my holy Prophett, who, though
you have blasphemed him, is so gracious, as he will not fail to pray to God
for you. Now I ordain and at this present pronounce, as a final sentence,
either death by the most cruel torments that without any delay can be
invented: or my grace with all the honors and richesse that my best favorites
enjoy. The glorious Martyrs very constantly answered him, as they had at
other times affirmed, that they nothing respected honors and temporal
richesse, and much less those torments, nor death it self; and therefore
would yield themselves to be disposed at his pleasure, considering that their
bodies and souls were so firmly grounded in the love of their Redeemer JESUS
CHRIST, that every hour which they expected to meet him in Paradise, seemed to
them a thousand years, knowing that there they should live eternally, without
fear ever to be separated: then they added: Our God is the sovereign good, and
not your Mahomett, for whom, as also for all his adherentes, are prepared
eternal torments, which they already experience, as you shall *one day, if
you be not converted, yea without hope ever to get out of hell, where you
shall call and cry, but none shall answer you. There shall you repent in
vain, that you followed not our Counsel which God sends you: there shall
you be in horror, grief, sorrow and eternal despair which God has prepared
for them, whom at the terrible day of judgment, he shall find to have bin
contrary to the true faith of his Son JESUS CHRIST, true God, and true man,
there to live in perpetual torments, as they who are his, shall live in
perpetual joy. Then O king, thou shall not escape his hands, though thou
seem now to have some power, which is a singular benefitt bestowed on thee by
God, to see and expect if thou will be converted unto him; and happy art thou
if thou can acknowledge it. The king already experiencing the force of the
holy Ghost that spoke in his servants, remained utterly perplexed:
Nevertheless retourning them to prison, he commanded that they should be laden
with irons, and that bread should be given them by the ounce, and water by
measure. They remained certain days in this pitiful estate, in mean while
nevertheless, he advised with his Galociers and Counsailers of estate, what was
convenient to be done with them. Some of them gave their opinion, that it was
not expedient to do them any hurt, because, said they, they are franctike and
senceles, as may be judged by their foolish and sottish discourses, so rashly
and indiscreetly uttered. Others answered the king, that it was not fit for
him to embrue his hands in such base blood, but better that he returned them
from whence they came* to which purpose there was fit commodity of a ship
prepared for Marroccho, where there were many Christians. The king admitted
this Counsel, and sent them away in the said shipping.

How the Martyrs arrived at Marroccho where they preached, and being thence
expulsed they returned again.
THE IX. CHAPTER.
THe Religious being arrived at Marroccho, in company of a Spanish knight
called Peter Ferdinando of Castro Castillan, who was then retired and dwelt in
Africa, in the Court of Miramolin king of Maroccho, by reason of some
disagreement which he had in Castile: this man conducted them to the Palace of
the Prince of Portugal, Dom Pedro brother to king Alphonsus, that then
reigned, who upon certain wrongs and iniuryes received of the said king his
brother, was likewise retired unto the said king Miramolin: he entertained them
with much contentment, fournishing them with all necessaries, being much amazed
to see them in a habitt so course, scantie, and short: their face so wanne, and
their other parts so thin, that their skin seemed to be sowed to their
bones, their eyes hollowed, and their shoulders crooked and bended by the
wearisomnes of their painful life, and mortification of their flesh; and
notwithstauding there appeared in their countenance so gracious a virtue, and
such a fervor and joy of spirit, that they seemed in deed Angels of Paradise,
exteriourly dead, but living and burning in such sort interiourly with the love
of God, that they esteemed death but as a play, and sought it as a precious and
wishfull thing, burning with charity toward their neighbor, and most zealous
of their salvation. Which the said Prince having well considered, as also the
affliction which he understood they had endured at Seuill, to pourchace the
crown of martyrdom, fearing that by attempting the like there, they might
trouble the whole Realm, he labored by many pregnant and probable reasons to
dissuade and divert them from their pious intention; but these glorious
Religious, already martyrs in will, perceauing the intention of the Prince,
very early the next morning without saying any thing unto him, went out, and
settled themselves where they saw most Sarrazins, to preach boldly unto them the
faith of JESUS CHRIST: and being afterward informed that their king was gone to
visitt the sepulchers of the kings near the city, and was incontine^tly to
return, and understanding which way he was to pass, they went out of the
city to meet him, where they made choice of a place somewhat high whither they
ascended to be better heard: Brother Berard, who had better knowledge of the
Arabian tongue then the rest, when he saw the king to approach, began with a
loud voice to preach unto him the Catholic faith, and what one must believe
to be saved, telling him that it was necessary for him to abandon and adjure
the sect of Mahomett. The king exceedingly admired to perceive the confidence
wherewith so poor a man did speak: and with other of his followers endeavored
to putt him to silence, but failing therein, and therefore reputing them for
fools, he commanded them to be retired to the land of the Christians. The
said Prince of Castile himself sent two of his The five Martyrs were 20. days
without meat or drinck.
people after them to accompany them even to Cepte, and there to further their
embarcking for Portugal, to prevent that they should not be abused: but they
conninglie escaped those Conductors, and returned to Maroccho where they
preached in a public place inducing the people to renounce the law of
Mahomett. Which the king understanding, he caused them to be cast into a deep
dungeon, and forbad to be given them either meat or drinck: in this manner did
they continue twenty days: in which time they were releiued only with divine
grace: in the mean time there befell such an intemperate heat of the sun
beating upon Maroccho, that it brought the people even near to death; the
Mores therefore fearing that it was a divine vengeance, made means to the king
by a man of worth that loved the Christians, and was in favor with his
majesty, to release out of prison those poor bare-foote Creatures, and to
committ them to the Christians, who should have chardge to banish them out of
his kingdom. The king called the Religious before him: but he was exceedingly
amazed to see them, after a supernatural and monstrous fast, so fair, so
gracious, so fresh and well disposed as they were; and therefore he demanded of
Brother Berard; who had given them to eat. Whereto he bouldly answered, that if
he would become Christian, he should know the omnipotent power of God, and how
he relieueth and nourishes his servants in this life, whom he conserueth
always to recompense them eternally in haue^. The king made no reply, but
only caused them to be delivered to the Christians for the end aforesaid, who
shutt them into a house, and afterward sent them in secure guard and company
(as they thought) to have them embarked at Cepte, upon the first occasion of
shipping for Spain: But they gave the slip to their keepers, and returned
to Maroccho as before; which the aforesaid Prince having understood, he caused
them to be apprehended, shutt up and strongly guarded in his own palace, for
fear that by their means the Christians of Maroccho and himself also, might
receive some trouble and disaster.

Of a notable miracle wrought by the five Martyrs in the army of the king.
THE X. CHAPTER.
THe king Miramolin at that time was advertised that the Arabians were entered
into his kingdom, where they made hauock and destroyed the whole country: Upon
which occasion he gathered his forces to encounter them: and by the help of
the said Prince, and of many gallant Portugal gentlemen, which he had with
him, he defeited the Arabians, whom he chaced far away, and so poursuing them,
they came into a valley where they could find no water either for themselves
or their horses: so that for three days they knew not what to do, being near
death with thirst. And because the earth seemed to be somewhat moist, they
licked it with their tongues: coming to the hight of a mountain, they burned
and became outrageous with thirst without any redress, and yet greater was
their despair when they found the widenes of the Country to be of greater
extent then that which they had passed in dryness: but considering that when
they should return, they should all dye with thirst before they should find
water, they knew not way to take. Now the said five Religious, having by the
providence of God again deceived their keepers, came to the Camp which they
found in despair, where perceauing the cruel thirst that afflicted the army,
they publicly with a very strong confidence which they had in the divine
majesty, offered to procure unto the Mores as much water as they should need,
on condition they would be converted unto the faith of JESUS CHRIST, assuring
them that if they would be Baptized with the water of baptisms, they should not
want water to drinck. This proposition coming to the ears of the king; he
said this dryness befell them upon no other occasion, but for neglecting the
punishment of the great blasphemies of the said Religious, against his great
Prophett Mahomett. These good Religious seeing the obdurate hearts of the king
and his people, to make known the omnipotency of JESUS CHRIST, and the truth
of the Catholic faith which they preached, resolving not to loose the occasion
presented to manifest the glory of God, for the salvation of the souls of
those people, applying themselves to prayer, Brother The five Religious
obtained of God water in an extreme necessity.
Berard took a staff, and therewith made a little hole in the earth, whence
issued out water most abondantlie and sufficiently to alay the thirst, not only
of the men but of all the horses and camels of the army of Miramolin, yea they
received thereof and made provision for the days following: which done, the
said fountain incontinently dried up. This gave so general an applause, and
the Christians and very Mores were so edified thereby, that they desirouslie
sought to kiss their habittes, and to honor them as saints of God, only the
king persisted obdurate, as an other Pharao, and a Priest of the Mores, that a
mong them was reputed for a S. who often disputed with the said Religious, and
particulerly against Brother Berard, and because he was ordinarily vanquished,
but especially by reason of this said miracle, he full of grief and affliction
fled, and was never after seen amongst the Mores in that country. The prince
sent the said Religious again into his Palace under strict guard, for fear
least if they should preach, they might more scandalize the king*

How the five Martyrs returned again twice to preach to the Mores, for which
the king delivered them over unto Justice.
THE XI. CHAPTER.
THey that had chardge of the said Religious, being Christians, did so
reverence them, that they could in no sort enforce them nor carry too wachful
an eye over them, by which means they escaped as formerly they had done. This
being upon a friday when the king according to his custom was gone to visitt
the sepulchers of his predecessors, they used means that he might hear their
predication at his return, as once before they had done, which they
enterprised: but the king so disdayned it, that he caused them incontinently
to be apprehended, and in extreme choler commanded a noble man of the Mores
called Abosaide, one of the principal of his Court, first to torture them, and
then to putt them to death: but it succeeded otherwise, for this noble More was
present at the miracle which these Religious SS. wrought in the army when they
satisfied it with water, and so out of devotion and compassion which he had of
them, he was content not to meddle with them from noone until night,
notwithstanding the express command given him by the king, whom he presumed
might be appeased and pacified by the frequent and humble petitions which the
Christian noble men and gentlemen would present unto him. But they perceauing
how much the king was incensed against them, for the injury which he pretended
those Religious had so often reiterated upon him, they all quietly retired into
their houses, where they carefully kept themselves close, not daring to
appear, for fear least they might freele the effects of the choler of the
king; whereof in deed there was apparent reason: for withal, the Mores were so
enraged against the Christians, that they had a will to massacre them all, in
revenge of the injury done to their sect and to their Prophett Mahomett. At
night the said noble man conuented before him the Religious, who came to his
lodgeing very joyful, all manicled and enchained. But were it upon necessary
and urgent affair that he had, or would he take occasion to defer their
condemnation, he was not then at home; wherefore they were delivered to an
Apostata More of our Religion, that had renounced Christianity, to be carefully
guarded; and very early in the next morning, they brought them again to the
lodgeing of the said noble man, whom neither then did they find, for they
understood that he was out of the city and the king also, and would not vere
speedily return; they then committed the saints to prison under strong
guard, who, albeit they were enchained, beaten, and exceedingly tormented, had
nevertheless their speech always free, which they spared not to employ for the
conversion unto JESUS CHRIST, of those that so strictly kept and rudely
entreated them, who in disdain thereof, gave them sound buffettes spett in
their faces, and abused them most outragiouslie. All this did not hinder these
good Religious from preaching both to them and their other fellow prisoners,
where they remained certain days in very extreme want of food and all other
necessities: but afterward the Christians provided them whatsoever was
needful, in the most secrett manner they could; and at length dealt so
effectually, and so gained those that had chardge of them, that they
condiscended to permit them to depart, on condition they should be securely
conducted even into Spain: for the said Christians feared and suspected the
hatred the king did carry them, by occasion of these said Religious, who
deceauing their keepers as before, escaped from the place they lodged the first
night out of Maroccho, and the next morning were seen again at a public
place preaching consta^tlie the faith of JESUS C. aduertising the Mores, that
if they did desire to discardge themselves from the sottish delusions of
Mahomett, and free themselves from hell, they must necessarily be baptized. The
Mores the^ ^a^ furiously on the SS. did beat and abuse the^ despitefully and
with tumult and exclamation; but these true Religious endured this affront;
like courageous and invincible lions. Then after infinite injuries and
beatinges, these simple and innocent sheep of JESUS CHRIST were led to the
lodgeing of the governor, in most ignominious manner: for they most rudely
threw them to the ground, trained and trampled on them, as if they had bin
brute beasts.

How the five Martyrs preached to the Governor of Maroccho.
THE XII. CHAPTER.
THe courageous Servants of JESUS CHRIST, being presented before the
parlemental seat of the Mores, with their hands manicled behind their
backs, all bloody and embrued with the blows given them by the people; the
chief president made them this demand: Obstinate men, and temerariours
ennemies of our faith, whence are you? whence come ye? what is your design?
whence proceeds such a presumption thus to blaspheme our great Prophet? The
SS. answered that they were by nation Italians, and came from Portugal: but,
said the president, who permitted you to enter into this kingdom, so
presumptuously and boldly here to preach a new doctrine contrary to the faith
of the Mores? Brother Otto a Priest, constantly answered, that as for their
preaching, it came from God, who is to be obeyed rather then men, because, said
they, our Lord JESUS CHRIST is the Creator, Redeemer, and sovereign master,
to whom whatsoever is in the world is subject, and none is able to resist his
holy will, he has left us this commandment, that we should universally
preach his holy gospel, therefore are we come to preach to your king and to
your selves, to denounce unto you the words of life, that being illuminated
with divine grace, you may discern in what error you are, to come afterward
to the true way of salvation, as we shall demonstrate unto you, if you please
to give us audience. Besides we are sent hither by our General, Brother
Francis, who as well by himself as by his Religious, trauelleth over all the
world to preach unto Insidels (by an exceeding love and desire of the salvation
of souls that induces him) the true way of faith, notwithstanding you carry
us so great an hatred. The president answered, you poor blinded and ignorant
wretches, deceived as ye are, to esteem them for utterly lost that follow not
your doctrine, but tell me a little, what is that truth which you have found,
and whither it be possible that there may be an other way of salvation then
what we profess. Brother Otto replenished with the holy Ghost replied: JESUS
CHRIST is the sovereign verity, and the true and only way that can conduct to
the port of salvation, by mean of his holy faith: which consists in
believing him to be God and man, God three and one, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost: and true man borne of the Virgin Mary, Creator of all this frame of the
world, true man conjoined to the divinity, and Redeemer of all the men in the
world, that were already lost and condemned by the sin of Adam, in which
humanity he conuersed with all, he instructed all, and saved all those that
would believe in him both then, at this present, and even till the day of the
last judgment, he suffered death and passion to pay by his precious blood, our
proper and particular faults, and incontinently after arose again to conduct
us all also to heaven: whence he shall come hereafter to judge on earth the
living and dead: he shall then come in his majesty, where neither humane
forces, nor richesse, nor kingdoms, nor Empires shall in any sort prevail;
man being obliged to stand naked and alone, accompanied only with his worckes,
good or evil, according to which he shall judge him, giving to his SS.
eternal glory in heaven; and to others that would not believe in him, eternal
fire in hell. The President smiling said: And how know you these things to be
so certain as you avouch them? Brother Otto answered: By the testimony of the
holy scriptures dictated by the holy Ghost, which have revealed unto us this
verity, by testimony I say of the Patriarchs and Proph^ttes of the old
testament, as also by the doctrine and testimony of our Redeemer JESUS, who is
the way, out of which there is none at all: the truth, out of which is nothing
but deceit: and the life, out of which is only death; likewise by the
predication of his holy Apostles, confirmed by many great miracles, which
propheties for the most part are fulfilled, and only remain those that are for
the end and consummation of the world: in such sort as we ought also to believe
their doctrine, and with greater reason and foundation then you have for your
superstition, considering that you believe only upon the writing of your false
prophett Mahomet which is not assured or confirmed by any testimony more then
his simple deceiptfull and lying word: and we besides the said confirmations
and accomplishmentes of matters foretold by our Prophets, have infinite
miracles wrought by our Savior JESUS CHRIST, and his hol^e Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors, and Virgins, that give us proof of the holy, yea most holy and
most assured faith; for we have seen to be cured an infinite number of
diseased persons, infinite possessed creatures delivered, the necessary use
of members restored to the maimed, the blind illuminated hearing and speech
restored to infinite deaf and dumme, leapers cleansed and purified, and
finally the dead already putrified to be raised, which you cannot avouch of
your false Mahomett; therefore rejecting this vain and abominable belief,
embrace ours, approved by so many tokens and testimonies divine and humane:
fly this manifest illusion, take from before your eyes this false cloud, that
obscureth them, only by reason that you are borne in such an accursed law, and
nusled therein; for believe that as soon as you shall begin to give place in
your heart to the holy Ghost, you shall interiourly feel such a light and
force, that you will after do more of your selves, the we can by words
express; and by your example you shall open then gate of salvation to the
simple people. Take knowledge therefore with me, I beseech you, how your
miserable prophett leads you together with himself to eternal damnation, by
means of many of his falsities and sins, that he has taught you, which are
out of the true and only way of salvation. And if you desire to save your
souls, you must necessarily follow the true light of life, which is ready to
illuminate each one, and resist no longer the holy Ghost that calls you to
his kingdom.

Of the constancy of the five Martyrs in their torments, and how they were
visited in prison by our Lord.
THE XIII. CHAPTER.
But the President hearing this notable discourse, and fearing the people might
be converted by such pregnant reasons, filled with a zeal toward his own
law, proposed unto the holy Martyrs one of these two elections, either that
they should yield honor and glory to his Prophett, for the blasphemies they had
uttered against him, and should freely preach his law: or else should prepare
themselves to endure such cruel torments, as should enforce their death.
Whereto Brother Otho, replenished with exceeding joy for the desired
advertisement they heard of Martyrdom, answered: if fear of death would
terrify us, we should perhaps advise to admit your law, as many miserable
wretches, that for fear to loose this tra^sitory life loose the eternal. But
our Redeemer has strengthened and Matt. 10.
fortified us against that pusillanimity, when he willed us, not to fear those
that have power only to torment this wretched, vile and frail body, but him
that can torment both our body and soul eternally Luc. 21. and 2. Tim. 2.
in hell: Therefore, for as much also as we know that he only shall be crowned,
who shall constantly persevere to the end, do what you will: for we hope in the
divine Majesty, that your executioners shall be rather be weary of tormenting us,
then we of joyfully enduring for the love of God: considering withal that we
repute this death received for JESUS CHRIST, as the gate of life, whereby we are
to enter. This judge seeing their constancy commanded them to be separated and
committed to several places, and cruelly whipped, and that after the
executioners were wearied, there should salt be put and vinegar powered in to
their wounds, and lastly shutt up in prison, all which was done: and the next
morning he caused the same to be iterated, and then he sent the^ to a public
place unto the people, that they might be reue^ged on them for the iniuryes
committed against Mahomett. They were brought thither naked, their hands bound
behind their backs, and cords about their necks: there, were their wounds
renewed and their passed afflictions redoubled: for besides that they were
cruelly beaten and scourged, they cast them upon broaken glass and sharp
pointed flintes: Cruelties of the Mahometans upon the 5. Martyrs.
whereon they roled and tumbled the^: afterward they cast boylling oil on their
bodies, omitting nothing that might exulcerate their wounds: each of them
esteeming it a great sacrifice unto Mahomett, to exercise most barbarous and
beastly kinds of tortures, or to invent them for dischardge of their fury
against the holy Martyrs, who notwithstanding, in the midst of the said
afflictions did with a loud voice praise and confess our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST,
demonstrating that they respected not the torments which they endured nor the
iniuryes disgorged against the^: for one cannot imagine that beastly, dishonest
and infamous words which were not then uttered unto them; but the most
insupportable unto them, were the blasphemies which they used against God. The
whole day and part of the night, was spent in this pitiful spectacle, the^
were they returned to prison, where with all their hearts they gave tha^ckes
unto God, and encouraged each other. Now the immensiue and infinite bounty
beholding from heaven his holy servants, voutsafed to give them a farther
consolation with his visible presence, appearing unto them in a most
resplendent light, wherein they found an inestimable sweetness and such, as they
utterly forgott whatsoever they had suffered and endured. This light so spread
it self, that it was also seen of the keepers, who therein seeing many shadoes
of persons were fearful, and suspected the prisoners were escaped therewith.
And therefore they hastened to a prisoner that was a good Christian called Peter
Hermand, to whom they related that they had seen the holy Martyrs escape and
ascend unto heaven in a bright and clear light. He coniecturing, that this
might be some notable vision seen by them, did comfort them: and bid them not
to fear, affirming that he had heard them all the night to sing and praise
God; which they being desirours to prove, as seeming probable, they went and
found them all in prayer very joyful and content in their prison, as if they
had not endured any affliction.

How they were presented before the king Miramolin, whom they putt to silence
and confounded.
THE XIV. CHAPTER.
THe next morning, the king retourning from the fields, and understanding what
had passed touching the Religious, heresolued to see the end of their
proceeding, and either to convert them to the law of Mahomett, or else to have a
most cruel revenge upon them. Which the foresaid Prince of Portugal Dom Pedro
perceauing, repaired to the said President, and prayed him that after the said
Religious should be dead, their bodies might not be committed to the
disposition of the Mores, but of the Christians: which he obtained. The said
Martyrs were then brought before the king, their hands manicled behind their
backs, their face swollen, blew, buffeted, rent and all bloody as was all the
rest of their body, with the blows of the day precedent, seeming rather dead
then living creatures: the king then beholding them with favorable eye, said:
Well, you now being in my presence, whither do you rather desirer to be mine
enemies and rebels, and as such cruelly to dye; or my freindes, and as such
advanced to the principal degrees of my kingdom? The holy Martyrs answered,
that he might well hold them for his good freindes, since they were come from so
far a contry only for his cause, and for the love of him and of his kingdom,
to save them from perishing and goeing to hell eternally damned, putting their
lives in hazard for the salvation of their souls and bodies. The king, upon
these words, considering the resolution and invincible fortitude of the holy
Martyrs, was utterly confounded in himself: wherefore as extremely enraged he
retired into his closet^ to consult what to do with them, since he could draw
them to nothing either by sweetness or extremity: the holy Martyrs on the
contrary praising God for that he had given them grace ever till then to preach
his holy faith, notwithstanding the buffets they ^ad received to putt them to
silence.

Of a conference between the said Religious, and a noble man of the Mores.
THE XV. CHAPTER.
THere was a warlike noble More, desirous to attempt if he could by fair
means and speeches gain them: but he no more prevailed then the others: for
he endeavored by sweet words to persuade them to obey the king, who was more
careful of their good then them selves, considering that being in his power to
torment them and prolong their tortutures in deferring their death, he
nevertheless endeavored to make them see their errors, notwithstanding the
iniuryes he had received of them, and their great blasphemies uttered against
his great prophett Mahomett; who all men know how grateful he is to God, since
with his own mouth he has dictated unto him his holy law, wherein if they
would live, he would in behalf of the king promise them they should be most
advanced in his kingdom, and should ever rule and govern in this world,
expecting, by the intercession of their great Prophett Mahomett, a double
croune of God after their death. Whereto Brother Otho with a zealous fervor
answered: Vade retro Sathana, auant from my presence thou hideous and
infernal devil: for we, with a firm and lively faith adore, and plainly
confess, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, God in Trinity and unity:
but thou miserable wretch, that art already condemned to the eternal fire,
where he is whom thou adorest, having compassion of thy self, and performing
thy duty, ought to be converted, it were more necessary for thee to show
they self more respective of thy own salvation then of ours: we having made
choice of this assured way the more readily to attain the eternal kingdom.
And having spoken this, touched with a just and zealous disdain, spett twice
upon the ground in token that he abhorred the Mores proposition: which the More
took so offenciuely, that in extreme fury, he would willingly have drawn his
sword to have slain him, but that it was death to draw a weapon in the kings
house; and therefore he only gave him a sound buffett, saying: go sir master
and learn to govern your tongue an other time. This good Religious then as a
true disciple of JESUS CHRIST, incontinently answered: Brother God pardon you:
for you know not what you do: then tuurning his face, he offered him the other
cheek, bidding him strike as rudely as he would, being as ready to eudure both
that and more for the faith of our Savior JESUS CHRIST. The More not well
hearing this reply, was exceedingly amazed when he was advertised thereof and
tourning toward his own people, he said: These lewd Christians shall not
escape the justice of our king, which this day shall sharply be inflicted on
them: But these miserable wretches understood not that kind of revenge, known
only to a few of the true servants of God.

How the king attempted again to stagger and corrupt the holy Martyrs* by
promises.
THE XVI. CHAPTER.
THe king in the mean time resolved to assault them with a new temptation,
whereby presuming to prevail, he reasoned with them in this manner: you would
repute your selves truly and really happy, if you knew the grace which God and
our great prophett offers you, in that they so pacify my courage as I cannot
revenge me on you in such sort as your offenses and demerites require; but on
the contrary, in steed of punishing you, I seek by all means to gratify you.
Hereupon the king freed his chamber of all the company but some few favorites,
and caused to enter five fair and young gentlewomen richely attired, then said
to the five Martyrs: Note well what is in my clemency: I know well, that your
extreme poverty and misery, such as your habittes do demonstrate, has
troubled your brain: but I hope by courtesy and my meree liberality to cure
you, for I will espouse you to these gentlewomen, with whom I will give a rich
dowrye, besides the portion of their parents, who are the greatest Peers of
my kingdom, and whose substance you shall enherit, upon this only condition,
that you accept of our Religion, which so many kingdoms and great personnages
do embrace. The holy Martyrs stopped their ears against these deluding
promises made by this subtle and creafty tyran, whom they freely answered: O
accursed of God, assure thy self these thy delights will shortly conduct thee
to the goulfe of hell, in the bottom whereof thy false messenger of God Mahomet
attends thee: to the end that as thou obeyest him in his law, thou eternally
accompany him in torments: And because thou art great in this world, thou
shall also be greatly tormented, and so much above others as thou have more
pleasure then they in this miserable life. Ah wretched and miserable!
acknowledge the error which thou so obstinatlie maintaynest. As for us by the
grace of God, we know well how to fly these false and transitory pleasures,
hereafter to enjoy those that are real and eternal in the glory of God,
which also we offer unto thee in his behalf with remission of all thy sins:
for our merciful Lord JESUS CHRIST, dyed as much for thee on the tree of the
cross, as for us. And if thou will not be ungrateful toward his divine
majesty, acknowledge his graces and repent thee of this filthy life thou
leadest, which has bin taught, by thy false Prophett, to thee and thine, whom
he leads as beasts by the nose of the senses after these carnal pleasures,
instead and recompense whereof thou shall eternally burn in hell. The king by
this answer perceived well, that his favorable words avayled no more then
his promises. Wherefore as half enraged with fury for the iniuryes uttered
against his Prophett and himself: since, said he, you will not conceive your
own good, I will make you prove what it is to offend the deity of our great
Prophett, and the majesty of a croune, for my self will revenge the same with
my own hands for him and me: which said he prepared himself to play the
executioner.

How the holy Martyrs were beheaded by the very hand of the king Miramolm, and
how they appeared to the Infanta Madam Sanctia.
THE XVII. CHAPTER.
But the beloved saints of our Lord, never in all their life heard more
welcome news: And therefore exceedingly joyful and content, and replenished
with an admirable consolation, as knowing themselves to be near their so
desired recompense, they with a great vehemence and fervor answered in this
sort: O king, our bodies only are in thy power, and therein consists the
greatest hurt thou can do us, which also redoundeth to our exceeding good
with God: therefore dispose of them at thy pleasure, for our glory shall be so
much greater in heaven, where his divine majesty prepares us his crown in
regard that we dye for his holy faith, in zeal whereof we again admonish thee,
and in as much as the salvation of thy soul is precious unto thee, do pray
thee to leave thy errors, wherein the devil has drowned thee, and to embrace
the faith of the living God and of his only son JESUS CHRIST, who seeks to
save thee: because this flesh which thou so much tenderest, shall shortly be
food for worms, and thy miserable soul, shall feel the cruel and eternal
pains which the damned endure in hell. The king heard not the end of this
discourse: but commanded them to be conducted to a place before his palace,
that there he might execute them himself: and that thereby the zeal he had to
the law of Mahomett might publicly appear, after that he walked thither with
his people, where taking his great hanger, he separated them, then cried out: I
am now to revenge the cause of our holy Prophett, and the derisions of our law,
with mine own hands: which said, full of diabolical fury, he gave to each of
the Martyrs a blow on the midst of the head, which cleaued it even almost to
the chinne, then he pleased himself in cutting their throtes glutting his fury
by the sight of their blood. So being devoutly on their knees, praying God to
pardon their persecutors, they by the hands of this great 1220.
executioner, yielded their souls unto God, the year of grace 1220. and the
fourth year of the Papacy of Pope Honorius the third, the sixth of January,
somewhat less then seven years before the death of the glorious Father S.
Francis. These were the first of his Order which he sent unto heaven. At the
same time, the five Martyrs appeared to the foresaid Infanta in the city of
Alenquer, about eleven of the clock in the forenoone, she being very devoutly
praying in her chamber. They had in their hands each of them a hanger in token
of triumph, and spoke to her in these words: God preserve thee, O true servant
of JESUS CHRIST: for so much as thou have encouraged us, and as it were sent us
to this our glorious victory, it has pleased the divine majesty to have us
appear unto thee in the same manner that we triumphed, to promise thee that in
acknowledgement of what thou have done for us, we shall henceforward be thy
Advocates in heaven. Which said, they disappeared, leaving the Infanta
exceedingly comforted and contented, yea more then ever encouraged in the
service of her sweet JESUS. In short time after she caused a Church to be
builded in the place where the martyrs appeared unto her, that thenceforward
that house might serve only for the praise of God.

How the bodies of the five martyrs were dismembered by the Mores, and how the
Christians recovered them and preserved them from the fire, that could not
annoy them, and of the miracle which God wrought when the Mores cutting them in
pieces thought utterly to dissipat and annihilat them.
THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
THe bodies and heads of the holy Martyrs remained in prey to the people, who
rejoiced to see them all murdered, and took pleasure to rent and train them
through the city, omitting no kind of inhumanity that might be imagined, to be
exercised on their poor bodies: they tossed their heads from one to an other,
as if they had bin balls or baloones: the Christians in the mean time praised
God, for the constancy which the martyrs had, and with loud voice thancked him
for the same: others endeavored to preserve or at least with their eyes to
follow their relics: which the Mores perceauing, they began so rudely to
drive them away by casting stones, that it might be attributed to a miracle
granted in favor of the saints, that the Christians could escape without
detriment into their lodgeing, where they were enforced to hide and keep
themselves close and secrett, during three days which the fury of this enraged
people continued, who of themselves would needs make a new massacre of them.
These Insidels more wearyed then glutted with tormenting the saints bodies,
cast them among the filthy ordure of the towne-sincke, whither the prince of
Portugal aforesaid sent his Cousin Sir Martin Alphonsus Theglio, and the
aforesaid Cheualier Peter Ferdinando de Castro, Castillan, to fetch them away:
but they yielded their souls unto their Savior and Lord JESUS CHRIST, in this
service so grateful unto him and to his saints: for they were slain by the
Mores that kept the bodies; which not satisfying them, they got permission of
the king, to burn them publicly altogether, and to this effect, they made a
pile of wood, and thereon laid the bodies and heads: but the fire being
applied thereto, could in no sort offend them, but retired to one side without
touching them: Which many Christian Prisoners (that adventured to be present)
did testify, and certaines Mores that were friends to the Christians, also
recounted the same as matter of admiration to the said Prince of Portugal. The
same may even to this day be justified by a head that is extant at S. Cross
of Conimbria, the hairs whereof were never touched by the fire. But the rage of
this barbarous nation not only was not qualified by this so evident miracle,
but was rather increased: Wherefore hewing these holy relics into small
morcels, they thought to reduce the^ to nothing, saying: Thus are the
blasphemers and ennemies of our holy law chasticed. But the divine vengeance,
which by extremity recompenceth tolleration, sodenlie sent from heaven such an
unexpected tempest and storm of hail, accompanied with very frequent
lightninges and thunderclappes, furious winds, and vehement rain, that the
utter ruin of the city seemed to be imminent, so that the fear and terror
which they had given to the Christians, returned upon themselves, yea in such
sort that being fled into their houses, they scarce held themselves secure.
Which gave courage, leisure, and commodity to the Christians, to gather up the
holy relics by the light of the lamps of heaven, which they incontinently
brought to the aforesaid Prince, none of them daring to take or keep them to
themselves. And by reason that the said extremity of the storm did not permit
them to find all the pieces of the holy bodies, they, partly by freindship,
and partly for money, got them of the Mores.

How the said holy relics were preserved, and of their miracles.
THE XIX. CHAPTER.
Punishment of one that would touch the said relics being in mortal sin.
THe Prince of Portugal having received the holy relics, presently prepared
shrines or reliquaries of very great price, to place and preserve them in: But
first he committed them to John Rupert, Canon of Saint Cross of Conimbria, at
that time his Chaplen and Confessor, a very pious and Religious Priest, to
whom he sent three young pages of his, who were very simple and virgins, that
they might assist him to dry and accommodate the said holy bodies, who in the
mean while never stirred out of his house, so to preserve themselves from
profaning the said relics in any sort, even in thought as near as they
could. These youths then dried the sacred relics in a very retired and
private place, by How pure one ought to be to touch the said relics.
commandment of the Prince, and separated the flesh from the bones, which they
put in a precious chest, to be carried iuto Portugal; then did it please our
Lord to illustrate them by miracle; For a knight called Peter de la Rose, not
considering what danger it is for sinners to touch the holy relics of the
servants of God, would presume to present himself, notwitstanding he kept a
wench whom he lasciuiously entertained, but he had scarcely ascended the
midst of the stairs, but he fell and lamed himself, without power to move,
till being contrite, repentant, and confessed unto the said Almosner of the
Prince, and recommended unto the Saints protesting to a abandon his vicious
life, he obtained mercy; for by little and little arising, he descended and went
half cured unto the Prince, failing only in his speech which he had lost: the
Prince therefore with a great confidence commanded his Almosner to putt one of
the sacred heads of the saints on his breast, which done he was at the same
instant perfectly cured. A squier of the Princes accustomed to handle certain
pieces of the said relics, which were laid to dry on a buckler of his,
without receiving any punishment, by reason that he was then free from sin:
But falling one time, by instigation of the devil, into a carnal sin, as he
thought to handle them, the buckler whereon they were so raised it self, that
he could not reach them: whereupon reflecting on himself, he went and
confessed, then retourning to the said relics (which was admirable) he
kneeled down before them, and the buckler being descend to the ground and
returned to the sun as before, they yielded themselves to be touched. This
fact cast such a fear into the hearts of the Christians of the Princes Court,
that thenceforward upon this occasion they were careful not to offend God
mortally. This has bin testified by Steven Perez, Marquarid de Santeren, who
was one of the three Pages that had care to accommodate the holy relics: he
affirmed and swoare the aforefaid, to Dom. Matheiw, Bishopp of Lisbone,
confessing that he oftentimes abstained from offending God, for fear to be
discovered as were the others, by the said relics which he was necessarily to
handle: Many of the Princes family, have also affirmed thus much, as being
present and eyewitnesses thereof.

How the Prince departed from Maroccho with the said relics, and therefore was
poursued by king Miramolin, and of three miracles wrought in the way.
THE XX. CHAPTER.
THe holy relics being will dried, the Prince caused the heads and flesh to
be dried apart, and the bones to be separatly putt in two shrines or
reliquaries exceeding richly adorned with gould and silver, and so placed in
his oratory, where he made often supplication to the holy Martyrs, that they
would obtain him the favor to escape the cruelty of the Mores, and without
danger to pass into Spain. For having determined himself to carry the holy
relics into Portugal, and having to that purpose diverse times importuned the
king Miramolin for permission, he was so far from obtaining leave, that the
king on the contrary was advised to putt him, together with all the Christians
that were then resident in Marroccho, cruelly to death: Nevertheless God did so
mollify his heart, that whereas he had many times denied the Prince himself,
he then of his own motion, having sent for him, told him that he would permit
him to depart against the advice of his Council, who held it requisite for the
good of his estate to putt him to death; but for his part he could not consent
to the death of a Prince, that not only had never offended him, but had
freely and willingly done him service. The Prince therefore taking hold of
this occasion, and loading a mule with the said relics, he with all his
family took his journey, suspecting that the king would not long continue in
this good mind, but would alter his opinion, as in deed he did. But the Prince
in such sort putt himself to travel, that he doubled the ordinary days
journey, yea he made such progress, that he was forced to spend one night in a
desert place, called Arossa, where haunted many lions, so that such as saw them
take that way, reputed them as persons devoured that night. The Prince was
not ignorant of all this, but reposing his full confidence in God, by the
merittes of the saints whose relics he had, he settled them in a place where
the lions were necessarily to pass in coming unto him; for they were so near
as that their roaringes so full of fury were easily heard, but the holy
relics being laid on the ground, their fury was so restrained, that flying
The lions respect the said relics.
thence they were from that time never seen there. Now the king Miramolin, not
having patience to endure the said relics to be carried away to be honored:
incontinently sent after the Prince, a great troop of light horsemen. Which
caused two great miracles; one was that the Prince inspired of God, as the
arcke of the testament was of it self conducted by the kine, that it migh rest
where it would, so did he putt the mule that carried the relics foremost of
the troop, which tourning them out of the direct way, conducted them through
places unaccustomed to travel, by means whereof the horsemen that poursued the^
The relics miraculously saved the Prince.
could not find them. But this was not all, for as these horsemen of the
Mores, were well mounted, desiring to please the king, and withal to satiat
their fury, they thought it not sufficient to make their scoutes about the
ordinary ways, but also crossed the feildes, where they so couriously pryed
after the Prince, that they found him; which chanced for another respect but
the more to manifest the glory of the SS. of God, and of God himself in his
saints. For having overtaken the Prince, and heard his people speak, they
were by the divine puissance so blinded, that they could never see them; and so
these Mores to their extreme amazement returned utterly confounded, and the
Christians proceeded on their journey, thancking and praising God, till they
arrived at Cepte; where the inhabitants with great solemnity entertained them.

How the said relics were carried to Conimbria, and of two miracles wrought in
the way, preserving the Prince from shipwreck, and curing one that had bin lame
for thirty years.
THE XII. CHAPTER.
AS soon as thy were arrived at Cepte, the Prince gave order to find out a
vessel readely prepared for Spain, which done, it was incontinently fournisht
which althings necessary thereunto: they were no sooner embracked, but they were
advertised that a troop of armed men of the king of Marroccho, sought them
throughout the City, whereupon they weighed their ankers, hoised sails, cut
their maine-cable, and made a speedy cut toward the strait of Gilbaltar,
with a fresh wind that was very favorable unto them, for which they thancked
God. But before they could attain the heaven the night surprised them, with
such a darcknes, that they could not guide themselves, in such sort that they
were in extreme peril of shipwreck. But falling prostrate on their knees
before the said relics, to implore the favor of God by the merittes of his
saints in this extremity, they were instantly illuminated with a clear light
which discovered unto them their dangerous course, in way to dash themselves
headlong against a rock: for which escape they presently gave thanks to God.
And so proceeding on their navigations, they arrived at Andalousia, at the
port of Algezire, without any danger, thence afterward at Tariffe, then at
Seuill; at that time the Mores possessed all those places, so that the
foresaid king Miramolin, had given order to the king of Seuill that the prince
arriving in his kingdom, he should apprehended him, send him prisoner unto
him, and put to death all his company; whereof the Christians of Seuill
instantly advertised the Prince, who whereas he intended to set a shore at
Seuill, sailed on to Galicia, where he landed, and thence went by land to the
kingdom of Leon, then possessed by Dom. Alphonsus his Cousin german; for he
was fled from Portugal, upon some dissension between him and his brother, who
was king. The Prince entering into the city of Astorga, lodged with a friend of
his that had bin thirty years sick of the palsy, whom he persuaded to vow
and recommend himself to the SS. whose relics he carried, recounting unto
him the maruells which by their miracles God had wrought. This poor man fell
on his knees before them, and notable to speak by word, having also for long
time lost his speech, he in heart and with a very strong faith vowed and
recommended himself to God, by virtue of the said relics; And at the very
instant in presence of diverse, he lept sound out of his bed, with a loud and
clear voice praising God. The Prince being by affairs hindered from present
goeing to Conimbria, he sent thither the said relics, conducted by a
gentleman of note called Asphonsus Perez, of Aragon, who attended them
accompanied by many knights and gentlemen. The king Alphonsus and the queen
Vraca his wife, being thereof advertised, sent unto them with Order to have the
said relics stayed in a place near the city, that they might present
themselves before them together with the Clergy, to give them such
entertainment as they worthily deserved.

How the holy relics were carried to the city of Conimbria in general
procession, where the king was present, and how they miraculously chose the
place where they would rest, and how they transported themselves to diverse
places, and of the conversion of S. Antony of Padua, which by example hereof
came to pass.
THE XXII. CHAPTER.
ALl things being fitly disposed and accommodated, the king and queen,
attended with all the nobility, the Clergy and people, went a foot in
procession with great devotion unto the said relics, with many crosses and
banners, in token of the triumphant victory of the holy martyrs. Coming to the
place where the relics were, having devoutly saluted them, they caused the
mule that carried them to go before, that she her self might choose her way,
as she had always done before. So without the conduct of any person, she
went directly to Conimbria, where she entered into Sampsons street, at this day
called the street of the old figtree, and then to the monastery of saint
Cross, at which gate she stayed till it was opened, though the intention of
the king were to place the said relics in the great church. The gate of the
said monastery being opened, the mule of her self entered into the Church, and
went directly before the high altar where she kneeled down, and so remained,
till she was disburthened of the said relics, each one admiring the miracle
whereby the holy martyrs did choose and make known, where they would have their
relics to repose: for which they were all thanckfull unto God, and there
ended the Procession. The king erected a sumptuous chapel, at the place
where the mule kneeled down, and a rich shrine, wherein were putt the greatest
part of the said relics, others in an other shrine in the cloister of the
said monastery, the little that remained was sent part to the Church of the holy
Ghost of Goueau, where there was a Covent of Religious of saint Francis Order,
and an entiere body to the monastery of saint Bernard of Loruant, three
leagues from Conimbria, becausse the Abbess of that monastery was sister to
the king* Now the very day that the relics were brought into the monastery of
S. Cross, they began there to shine by miracles: for they cured a great
multitude of diseased persons there present, and from that time the miracles
have so continued even to this day, that they delivered from peril all such as
recommended themselves unto them, upon which occasion it is, that so many
strange pilgrims do frequent that place. The greatest gain of that day
whereon the relics were received, was of S. Antony of Lisbone, called of
Padua, who was then a Canon Reguler of S. Cross, and as such, in the said
procession, gave praise to God among the rest, and solemnised the arrival of
the holy relics: for he merited to be inspired of the holy Ghost, who
anymated him with a great zeal unto his honor, in such sort as he resolved to
offer his life for the confession of the holy faith by the example of the said
martyrs, whom desiring entierly to imitate, he would begin by the habitt and
rule of saint Francis, whose true disciples these martyrs had bin.

Of the death of the queen Vraca, prophesied by the holy martyrs, as before in
the third chapter has bin recorded, and of a vision which her confessor had
thereupon.
THE XXIII. CHAPTER.
THe Queen Vrraca had great care of her death, because the holy Martyrs had
prophesied unto her thereof, yea she was in extreme affliction, considering that
their death and the translation of their bodies was effected as they had
foretold: but the issue of what she doubted did succeed: for as soon as she
came to the holy relics, she began to feel her self ill, so that she could
not accompany them, but was constrained to go to her bed, and the night
following she dyed. That very night Peter Nuguez, Canon reguler of the
monastery of saint Cross, a man of exceeding piety, and Confessor to the said
queen Vrraca, had this vision: He saw a great multitude of Friar Minors,
whereof five went before, but they were conducted by a Religious Father of their
Order that gave a very great splendor; and they entered in to the quier of the
said Church of S. Cross in procession, where they very melodiously sung
matines: he extremely amazed at what he saw, began to discourse with himself,
how so many Religious could enter, the doors being shutt as they were, and why
they sung matines, without any precedent ringing. Being in this vehement
admiration, he questioned with one of the Religious, asking him who they were?
how, and where they entered into the monastery at such an hour? The Religious
answered him: We are Friar Minors, and because thou were Confessor to the
Queen, and fear God, it has pleased his divine goodness, to reveal unto
thee this vision. He whom thou see to precede the rest with such glory, is
our holy Father S. Francis, whom thou have so much desired to see in this
life, and the five which thou see to follow him, are the five Martyrs of
Marroccho which are here shrined. Know besides that the Queen Vrraca is this
night departed, and because she exceedingly affected our Order, our Redeemer
JESUS CHRIST has sent us all hither, solemnly here, for the benefitt of her
soul and for her obsequies, to sing these Matines: doubt not of her death: for
as soon as we are departed hence* one shall come to advertise thee thereof: And
the Matines and praises of God being ended, this glorious procession
disappeared, and therewith one knocked at his door to advertise him of the
death of the queen.

How our Lord chasticed the city and king of Marroccho, for the cruel death
of his holy Martyrs.
THE XXIIII. CHAPTER.
THe king of Marroccho remained not unpunished, no more did his contry: for the
very same year did his arm and right hand which he had so wicke dly stretched
out against the holy Martyrs, wither, as also did all the right side of his
body, from the head to the feet. The people were punished in an other manner:
for in three years after this Martyrdom, neither in the said city, nor in a
great circuit therabout, did there fall one drop of rain, which caused an
extreme dearth and mortality of catell; then correspondently to the number of
the Martyrs, the plague continued for five years after, whereof dyed the
greatest part of the men of that miserable kingdom: but three years after the
want of rain, the king, together with his Council, acknowledged that God sent
that punishment upon them in revenge of his holy Martyrs, and therefore he
ordained a general assembly of all his people, in the place where the Martyrs
had bin tortured, and that in The king Miramolin some what acknowledges his
faults and satisfies the holy martyrs.
the same public place they should cry toward heaven, inuocating them,
asking them pardon, and imploring their mercy: which they performed with such
confidence, that presently there began miraculously to descend a gentle sweet
rain, by mean whereof the dearth and plague by little and little ceased. And
then did the king permit the Christians in his kingdom to have a bishop, with
condition that he should be of the Order of S. Francis and might publikly
preach our gospel, and withal consented to have a Church builded in
Marroccho, where the sacraments might be administered, conformably to our
Catholic, and Roman Religion.

How saint Francis having understood of the Martyrdom of his children, with
thanck fulness to almighty God, gave his benediction to the Monastery of
Alenquer.
THE XXV. CHAPTER.
THe greatest contentment that S. Francis had ever received of his Order, was
to hear of the Martyrdom of his five religious: whereupon having praised and
thancked God; he spoke these words: Now may I confidently affirm that I have
five Friar Minors. Then blessing the Monastery of Alenquer, because they having
long time resided there, departed thence to go to their Martyrdom, he said:
Be thou blessed, O place of the most high, which have as it were engendered and
produced to the king of heaven, five fair flowers of the color of the rose
and of blood, of a savor more then sweet, which are five true Friar Minors,
the first fruits of this Order. Would to God the Religious that shall be
resident here, might for ever exactly keep the rule of our Order.

Of a miracle wrought by the relics of the holy Martyrs, against an
Apostolic legate, that endeavored to withdraw the people from their honor and
veneration, because they were not as yet canonized.
THE XXVI CHAPTER.
At this very time, as the relics of the said holy Martyrs were exceedingly
honored of the Spainardes, it fell out that a legatt of the holy Siege was
present, who seeing what devotion the people had to the said holy Martyrs,
moved with an indiscreet zeal, not considering the canonization which JESUS
CHRIST had made in heaven of the Martyrs, that had bin publicly martyred, nor
the miracles that had followed thereupon, he began to cry to the people,
rebuking them as ignorant, and forbad them any more to make their prayers to
the said relics, and at the very instant he was advertised that his Mule
which waited for him before the Church was suddenly fallen dead, and thincking
to go fee the manner thereof, he was immediately surprised with so vehement an
ague that it enforced him to acknoweledge his fault, and the pride which caused
him so rashly to speak against the holy Martyrs, whose relics he went to
visitt, and falling on his knees among the people, acknowledgeing the
punishment of God, he cried out a loud. O holy Martyrs! I confess that you are
canonized in heaven, and because God will have you honored and reverenced on
earth, I repent and confess the error of my tongue, and beg pardon of you
for t, and do promise that I will henceforward, be the foremost and most
careful that shall visitt your relics, and in whatsoever place I shall be, I
will celebrate your merittes. A strange event! these words uttered, he arose
from the ground very sound, and his mule, formerly supposed for dead, to the
great astonishment and contentmet of each one, arose again: and this made the
relics of the saints more*famous.

How by the intercession of the said saints, a gentleman was delivered from
death.
THE XXVII. CHAPTER.
A Poor gentleman of Conimbria was unexpectedly assaulted by his ennemies,
near unto the Monastery of saint Cross, so that he ran toward it to save
himself: but being two forcibly followed, he could not time enough get in,
but was environed by them, so that, he having no other remedy but the
invocation of God, by the merittes of the holy Martyrs, they gave him as many
stabbes and thrustes as they would, without any defense of his, saving the
covering with his cloak, in such sort as he lay for lead in the place. The
people that came next that way, carried him ^pped in his cloak as they found
him, in to the said Church there to ^ury him: but as soon as he was entered
into the same, he stood up on his feet very sound, and confessed aloud that the
holy Martyrs had till defended him: and therefore, together with the people he
repaired o their chapel to give them thanckes.

Of the institution of the procession which is made every year in the month of
January, wherein the men go all naked to visitt the holy Martyrs of Conimbria,
for having bin by their intercession cured of the plague
THE XXVIII. CHAPTER.
IN the Bishoperick of Conimbria there is a town called Fala, where there fell
so cruel and contagious a plague, that it dispeopled the whole town, for the
inhabitants were all either dead ^r fled, saving one man, already infected
with the disease, and half dead, who seeing himself alone and in such
extremity, having always ben very devout to the holy Martyrs, he had then with
an exceeding strong faith, his recourse unto them, and made them this vow; That
if by their intercession he were cured of that disease, he would every year on
the sixth of January being the day of their feast at Conimbria, go visitt
their relics a foot and all naked, as long as he should live, and would take
order that after his death one of his family should go thitherin the same
manner, and withal would endeavor to persuade all the other families of the
said town to do the like. This vow being made, he was so effectually heard,
that at the very instant he found himself more sound and strong then ever;
neither did there any one more dye out of that place, whereto he caused many
from abroad to return, and so it was by little and little repeopled; afterward
his fellow Citizens accorded to his vow, yea this devotion so increased that
the neighbor inhabitants, and many persons of note, gentlemen and others
accustomed from thence, as is continued to this present, in procession, to
visitt the holy relics on bare foot, with an exceeding devotion in the most
rigorous season of winter. And how soever the season prove the sixth of January,
being the day of their Martyrdom, though it rain, freeze, or snow never so
much, they omit not this pilgrimage. Now the order of this procession is thus:
On the said day all the Confraternity assemble at the Covent of the Friar
Minors, that is without the city of Conimbria, on the other side of the
bridge, and there about nine of the clock, they stripp themselves naked,
sending their clothes to the Monastery of S. Cross, leaving on their bodies
only linen breeches of very mean cloth to cover their natural parts, and a
capuce of cloth to hide their face, or a handkirchefe, and so they go in
procession, through the midst of the cittye, to the said church of S. Cross,
where having offered their prayers very devoutly together, they pass through
the Cloister to enter into a great house adjoining, where they reattire
themselves, and then each one departs at his pleasure.

The 29. chapter is put after the 39. of this book, as a place more proper
unto it.
The history of seven Martyrs at Cepte.

How seven Friar Minors departed from Italy, to go to preach the faith of
Jesus Christ unto the Insidels.
THE XXX. CHAPTER.
Saint Antony of Padua and others have left in record, that seven Friar
Minors were joined together to go into Tuscane, a Province of Italy, whence
they demanded leave of Brother Helias, then viare general of the Order, to go
into Spain to preach to the Mores: he names of these Religious were: Brother
Daniel, Br. Angelus Br. Sa^uel, Br. Danulus, Br. Leo, Br. Nicolas and Br.
Vgolin; they arrived at Arragon, having elected for their superior Br. Daniel
Provincial of Ca^bria, having found a vessel ready prepared for that place,
could never ^btaine permission of the patron thereof to carry more then three
Religious with him, so that he was constrained to leave three to come afer him.
He being arrived at Cepte, with his three companions, did not begin to
preach to the Mores till the arrival of his Brethren, which was on the last
day of September, and in the mean time they preached to diverse strange
merchantes and other Christians, that from all parts flocked thither. When
they were all assembled, they began to discourse and confer together, what
might be the rediest mean for them to profitt in the salvation of the souls
of the Mores, or to pourchace Martyrdom, rejecting far all humane fear, and
fortifying themselves with a great fervor of spirit, and an ineffable zeal
of their neighbors good. And having till then remained without the town, with
other Christians that were not permitted to enter, they resolved to steal in
secretly, without the knowledge of any person, that they might not be hindered
by the Christians, who could have stayed them, or advertised the Mores, who
would have forbidden their entry.

How the seven Martyrs preached the faith of Jesus Christ to the Mores, by
whom they were abused and imprisoned.
THE XXXI. CHAPTER.
BEing thus encouraged mutuallie by each other in our Lord JESUS CHRIST, they
began one friday by devout and fervent prayers to prepare themselves, and on
the saturday the six were confessed by their superior, who confessed to an
other, then they communicated and received the sacred body of our Redeemer,
spending the rest of the day in pious devotions, And the sunday morning,
replenished with the grace of the holy Ghost they entered very early into the
city: where they began to preach freely and loudly unto the Mores, admonishing
them to abandon the false belief of Mahomet, and to embrace the true faith of
our Redeemer JESUS. The Mores admiring the confidence wherewith they spoke,
began first gently to reprehend them, then rudely to injury them; but seeing
these good Religious did persevere in this pious predication, they did buffet
and beat them outragiously; and then having bound them, they brought them
before the king, where they continued their preaching, freely confessing the
true faith of JESUS CHRIST, and giving him remonstrance of the deceatefulnes
and treachery of the law of the accursed Mahomet, which he must of necessity
forsake, if he would save his soul. The king beholding the^ so poorly attired,
and considering their fervor, judged them to be fools, as did all his
Courtiers; But in regard they had presumed to preach against his law, he
imprisonned them, and cast them into a dungeon, where they were laden with
heavy chains of Iron Manicles, and fetters, which exceedingly afflicted them,
for they remained there eight entier days, in which time they endured much,
and in diverse manners.

Of a letter which the 7. Martyrs wrote to the Christians of Cepte.
THE XXXII. CHAPTER.
NOw these holy Religious desirous to shun idleness, wrote this letter under
inserted to the Christians residing in the suburbs of Cepte, which they
addressed to Brother Hugo, Priest and Curat of Geneuois, and to other
Religious, one of the Order of Preachers, and the other a Friar Minor, who were
newly arrived in Africa, to administer the sacraments to the Christians there,
and to worck the salvation of their souls; the said letter was thus: Blessed
be God, the Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, Father of mercy, and God of all
consolations, who comfort us all in our afflictions, and appointed to our
Father Abraham the Ram he was to sacrifice, and permitted him to travel a
pilgrim on earth, and reputed his faith for justice, wherefore he merited the
title of the friend of God: teaching us thereby to appear and become fools
before the world, to please and prove wise in sight of the divine majesty. And
therefore says he unto us: Go preach the Gospel unto all Creatures, and tell
them the servant ought not to be greater then the master. And if you be
persecuted, that they have persecuted me likewise: with which words, we his
least and unworthy servants being moved, have left our contry, and are come
hither to preach for the glory of God, and the benefitt of our souls, to the
edification of faithful Christians, and the confusion of obstinate Infidels,
as the Apostle says, we being unto God a pleasing odor, we are to some an
odor of life, and to others an odor of death, which could not be understood,
but that our Savior said: If I had not come, and had not preached unto them,
they had not sinned. We are entered into this city of Cepte to preach his name,
and his holy faith before the people and the king himself, who reputing us
senseless has imprisoned us; it has seemed expedient unto us to advertise
you hereof. And albeit that by the grace of God we endure much here, we are
nevertheless exceedingly comforted in our Lord, in whose divine Majesty we
have a strong and assured confidence, that he will please to accept our life
for a grateful sacrifice, and therefore to him be given glory and honor for
ever.

How the holy Martyrs were again presented to the king, before whom they
constantly preached the says.
THE XXXIII. CHAPTER.
THe sunday following, which was the sixth of October in the morning, the king
caused the holy Religious to be taken out of prison and presented before him,
then prayed them to deny what they had uttered against his Prophett Mahomet and
his law. But they constantly answered that they could not say otherwise then
they had done, since it was truth it self; on the contrary they exhorted
himself to abandon his extreme blindesse, that held him in the hands of the
devil in this life, and led him to eternal damnation in the other: inducing
him to embrace the sole true faith of JESUS CHRIST our Savior, who, out of
pure love, being God vouchsased to become man, and to dye on the tree of the
Cross to deliver him from eternal death, and ascending into heaven, prepared
for him an immortal life. But this Morian king and his people, showing
themselves deaf to this discourse, determined to separate these Religious one
from an other, and then to each in particular were offered, in the behalf of
the king, richesse and honors, at lenght they were threatened with most
cruel torments, yea with death it self, if they would not accept of their
law. Their threats auayled as much as their promises, for God had so
transpearced their spirit, with the sweet nails ^om. 8.
of his love, that they all in their hearts spoke these words of S. Paul: Who
shall ever separate us from the charity of JESUS? shall the sword? afflictions?
worldly favors and richesse? the pleasures of the flesh, or any other allu
rementes? and withal courageously answered, and derided their threats,
accusing Mahomett, whom they termed accursed, and his law contemptible,
carnal, and damnable. A certain Preuost then drew his sword, and gave their
superior Father Daniel a dash on the head: then aiming his sword point at his
face, and at his heart, he said: convert thee traitor, or I will procure thee a
cruel death; which he did to terrify the other six, who were by the Judge and
the Counsailers there present, persuaded, not to misprise the favor of the
king, and to have compassion at least of their miserable lives: but they
confidently answered them, and exhorted them, that being old, and already as
it were in the mouth of death, so that they could not long enjoy the
contentmentes of this life, they would not persist in obstinacy, least their
souls were eternally condemned to hell, for adhering to men of this world, and
to a law, that their own consciences knew to be false, as apparently as a
thing to be touched with the finger. But these old men held themselves so
offended with this speech, though they had bin very favorable and respective
unto them, that they resolved their death.

How the seven Martyrs were condemned to death and beheaded.
THE XXXIV. CHAPTER.
THe judge thereupon gave Order that as enemies of the law of God, they should
be beheaded, wherewith the holy Martyrs exceeding well pleased, did encourage
each other: and then the six Religious addressing themselves to their superior
Father Daniel, and kissing his hands, gave him thanckes for procuring them
these marriages: each of them asked his benediction, and the grace to be the
first martyred for the love of God. This good Father having his eyes beteared
with joy, thancking God for such a singular gift, and giving them his
benediction he said. My deerly beloved children, let us all rejoice in God, in
this festival day which he has pleased to ordain for the last of our
pilgrimage, and be not terrified: for all his Angels are present prepared to
assist us, they have opened us the gate of Paradise, whither if he please we
shall this day arrive together, to receive the crounes of martyrdom and to be
eternally glorious. These words ended, the executioners stripped the seven
martyrs, invincible champions of JESUS, and having bound their hands behind
their backs, they conducted them out of the kings Palace, with a trompettt
before them as if they had bin attainted of some notorious crime. But these
holy Religious as meek lambs, went to the slaughter, and having their spirit
elevated to the sovereign God, ceased not preach to the Mores by the way.
Being come to the place of execution they fell on their knees, and recommending
themselves to God, they joyfully received martyredome, offering up their
innocent souls, vested with the pious purple of their very blood, with a great
admiration to the Mores, who as enraged were not satisfied herewith, esteeming
themselves (as indeed they had reason) rather vanquished, then to have
overcome. These Ministers of the devil took those holy bodies, dismembered
them, and trained them thorough the dirt, till they were weary; and then the
Christians secretly gathered them up and carried them into the suburbs, where
they were and are honored and reuere^ced for many miracles which by their
merittes God wrought there; whereof having no other asseurance then the
affirmation of the inhabitants of the place, I thought it not expedient to
committ them to writing, as determining to insert nothing in these chronicles
but what is most true and autenticalll. It suffices that Pope Leo the tenth,
granted and permitted the Freere Minors to celebrate their feast on the day of
their Martyrdom, which was the tenth of October 1227. a year after the death
of S. Francis. So is it at this day celebrated in the bishopprick of Brague
the Primacie of Spain, though in the office of Bracare it is put in the year
1221. but it is an error of the Printer. It is recorded in the end of the
legende that a Prince of Portugal, by a special favor obtained these
resiques, and carried them into Spain, but there is not to be found any other
particular mention of certainty in the books of the Order.

The 35. Chapter, is put after the 39. of this very book, as more proper unto
it.
The triumph of two Martyrs of Valencia.

How two Religious which S. Francis sent to Valencia in Arragon, were Martyred
there.
THE XXXVI. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father S. Francis sent two Religious of pious life to the kingdom of
Arragon, to wit, Brother John a Priest and Peter a lay Brother, who arriving
at the city of Teruel, they caused a chapel to be built there, wherein they
dwelt, employing their time in pious exercises, and prayers, and lived
virtuously, with exceeding edification, and by their preachinges filled the
city with a most sweet odor of their sanctity. The city of Valencia was then
possessed by the Mores, mortal ennemies of the Christians, and therein reigned
their king Azot, a most cruel persecutor of the faith of JESUS CHRIST, and
therefore these two servants of God, resolved to preach there, and to offer
their lives for the salvation of souls, so passionate was their zeal of the
faith and their desire of Martyrdom. So then goeing and entering in to the
City, they began to confess and resolutely denounce to that people the word
of God, condemning their erroneous sect, as pernicious and damnable. Whereof the
king having first made them all kind of gracious offers to allure them to his
law, them using terrible threats to fear them, and perceiving that he no more
auayled in the one sort then the other, he caused their heads to be cut off,
on the feast of the decollation of S. John Baptist, in the year 1231. and
their bodies were carefully gotten and buried by the Christians; God by their
merittes working many miracles.

How the relics of the said holy Martyrs, were afterward translated to
Teruel by the king of Arragon.
THE XXXVII. CHAPTER.
AFter this glorious Martyrdom, Dom James the first of that name king of
Arragon, began by the providence of God, to war against and always to putt
to the worst, the king of Valencia, subdueing him at each time that they
encountered, and taking prisoners a great number of the Mores, gaining daily and
possessing his lands and dominions; it happened one time that he took
prisoners certain noble men of the Mores, whereupon the Christians of Arragon
prayed their king to demand the relics of the said S. for ransom of the
said prisonners, by reason that by their means God did ordinarily worckmany
miracles, which caused the Christians to be very importunate to have them. This
request was easy to obtain; for the king of Arragon did exceedingly reverence
the said relics, and the king of the Mores was very desirous to retire his
principal champions, for a matter which he regarded nothing at all. Thus were
these relics solemnly placed at Teruell in a fair Covent of Friar Minors,
there expressly erected in acknowledgement of the favors and graces which in
respect of them the Christians have received of God; and to this day great
miracles are wrought there by them.

How the Morian king Azot became Christian, and gave the city of Valencia to
the king of Arragon, and in satifaction of his sin, he converted his Palace
into a Monastery of Religious of the Order of S. Francis.
THE XXXVIII. CHAPTER.
THe king Azot, perceauing his forces and kingdom daily in appearance to
diminish in such sort as he could no longer resist the king of Arragon,
resolved to enter into composition with him, and to render unto him all the
kingdom of Valencia peaceably, and withal to be baptized, reserving condition
of honest maintenance during his life: which the king James promised not only
to him, but even to all his people that would be converted; and to others
promising to permit them: peaceably to live in their law, or otherwise to
retire whither they pleased. Which being thus accorded, the king of Arragon
entered Valencia to take possession thereof, the year 1238. on the eve of S.
Michael: this was the second time that the Christians recovered it: for Ruy
Dias had once before taken it from the Mores, for the king of Castile, after
whose death it was lost again. Now the king Azot became Christian, having
obtained in gift of king James a rich Earldom, which his successors do yet
enjoy, all his moueables, and his palace, which incontinently after, with the
consent of the king of Arragon, he gave to the Friar Minors, there to build a
Church in the honor of the holy Martyrs, in satisfaction of their blood which
he had shed; and consequently there was builded a very beautiful Covent.

Of a Miracle wrought by the said holy Martyrs at Teruell
THE XXXIX. CHAPTER.
Certain years after the said Martyrdom, there repaired over the City of
Teruell and the neighbor places, such a quantity of locustes, that as a cloud
they hindered the beams of the sun in the air, and on the earth they covered
all the plains: the people made many processions to be freed of this
affliction, which yet ceased not to trouble them. But there was a good man
that consailed the people, to carry in procession the relics of the holy
Martyrs, which they did, and went in great devotion to an hermitage that was
out of the City, and at the return of that processio^, all the locustes
were vanished so that never after were seen more in those quarters then in
other places. This much augme^ted the devotion of those people toward the
holy martyrs.

The Martyrdom of five Friar Minors, with a multitude of Christians at
Marroccho. This was the 29. chapter of this book, transferred hither to give
place to the more famous.
ON an other time, diverse years after the foresaid, five other Friar Minors
were martyred at Maroccho, together with all the Christians, men and women
that then there resided, in a chapel where they offered their prayers to God
for the exaltation of the faith of JESUS CHRIST. This persecution was executed
on the sixteenth of September, with such rage and fury of the Mores, that there
remained not in the said city, so much as one living man that durst profess
himself a Christian: after this notorius Martyrdom or persecution, the Mores
saw a great splendor to descend from heaven, into the said chapel where the
martyerd bodies remained; and heard also all the belles to ring of themselves,
and the voices of Angels to sing with an inestimable sweetness; but their hearts
were too obstinatly hardened against God to benefitt themselves by their
conversion. The names of these Martyrs are not known on earth: it suffices
that they are recorded in the book of eternal life.

The Martyrdom of Br. Electus disciple of S. Francis; and of his companions.
Taken out of the 35. chapter, and placed here for the reason above proposed.
A Friar Minor died with his rule in his hand.
THere rests no other memory recorded of the Martyrdom of Br. Electus, then
this: The Mores took Br. Electus and many others (for preaching the holy
gospel) to putt them to death. He being brought to the place of execution,
took the rule of S. Francis in his hand, and said to his companion: Brother I
confess my fault before God and you, of what soever I may have offended and
committed against this rule which said, his head was cut off, then his
companions and consequently the others: after that, many miracles were wrought.
Touching his Iife it is recorded that he entered very young into the Order, in so
much that he could not perform the fast thereof, but forcing his nature he not
only in this co^bat overcame gluttony, but continually chasticed his flesh with
a shirt of iron: happy child that began so young to serve the almighty, and so
gloriously ended the course of his holy life.

The end of the fourth book of the second part of the Chronicles of the Friar
Minors, wherein are recorded the histories of 21. disciples of the holy Father
S. Francis,
THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES OF THE FRIAR MINORS.
WHEREIN IS CONTAINED THE LIFE, DOctrine, death and miracles of the glorious
Father S. Antony of Lisbone, called of Padua. Translated as the former.
Of the birth of S. Antony, and his education by his Father: how he left the
world, and became a Canon reguler in the Order of Saint Augustine.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
THE glorious Father S. Antony was borne in the noble and populous city of
Lisbone, the Metropolitan of the kingdom of Portugal, in the western parts
of Spain, his house was directly over against the great gate of the Episcopal
Church, dedicated to the Virgin Mary: this Church is very famous among other
respects in regard of the body of the victorious Martyr S. Vincent that there
reposeth. The Father of the said S. Antony was called Martin de Buglione, and
his Mother Teresa de Teuery, both of them illustrious in virtue and blood, in
which respect they were found worthy in the flower of their marriage to enjoy
this child. He was baptized in the said Church, of which parish also he was;
there was he first named Ferdinand, so that he was called Ferdinand, Martin
Buglione, till he took the habitt of S. Francis. He began his first learning
in the said Cathedral Church, with the Christian doctrine and the manner to
praise God: he served the quier both by night and day, offering the first
fruits of his age to our Lord JESUS CHRIST and to his most holy mother, whom
he chose for his particular Aduocatrise, even from his tender years. He
continued in this pious course fifteen years, in which time he learned the
study of humanity, afterward his blood began to heat, and his sensual
appetites to desire carnal and worldly pleasures; As soon as he perceived it,
he endeavored by the fear of God to restrain them: and because it is very
difficult to converse among so many thorns and not to be pricked, he resolved
to take a secure remedy. Wherefore abandonning all conuersations of this
perilous world, he repaired to the Monastery of S. Vincent, without the city,
where were Canon Regulers of S. Augustine, leading a life of very exemplare
piety, whence he never departed tlll he had taken the habitt, and made his
profession surmounting all the inconveniences and importunities of his kindred
and friends, that omitted no means to divert him from it: there did he
establish his foundation in the service of God. But in regard that his worthy
judgment and great prudence began to appear to his kindred and friends, they
repaired unto him for his counsel, and advise in their affairs and
difficulties, running unto him as to an oracle, in such sort that being unable
to endure that exceeding disturbance of spirit, having with very much
difficulty obtained the permission of his Superior, he retired to the devout
and Religious monastery of saint Cross of Conimbria, of the same Order,
having spent two years in that of Lisbone. And he so profited and proceeded
there, that it was to each one apparent that he was by a secrett and divine
virtue, not by a lightness of spirit, retired thither* For proceeding daily and
ascending from perfection to perfection, he aimed at a most perfect end of his
life: as being replenished with the spirit of wisdom, by his continual
reading and meditation of the holy scripture, wherein having for his instructor
the only and true master JESUS CHRIST, he made such progress, that his
learning was sufficient to shun vices and embrace virtues, to refute errors
and support the truth.

How for the desire of Martyrdom, he became Religious of the Order of S.
Francis.
THE II. CHAPTER.
ABout that time thefame of the holy Father S. Francis did spread it self over
all the world, as also of the Friar Minors his disciples, of whom, as is said,
there were already monasteries in portugal, they, by their poverty and
contempt of the world converting many people to penance; the holy Father Saint
Antony, as I have formerlie said, being one of the Religious of saint Cross,
that received the holy relics of the glorious martyrs of Marrocho, and being
as a noble Elephant, encouraged by the sight of the blood shed for the love of
God, he resolved also to enter into combatt for JESUS CHRIST, reputing his
repose wherein he lived for the service of God, to be nothing in respect of that
course: O spirit really happy, who not only was not terrified with the sight
of the bloody sword of the Tyrant, but was so encouraged thereby, that the
fervor of divine charity in him was greater then the imbecillitie of humane
fragillity. Wherefore thirsting to effect this good desire, he resolved first to
take the habitt, and therewith to imitate the life of those glorious Martyrs, by
the same mean to obtain the two crowns; and to ascend from one degree unto
an other, to that sovereign perfection of Martyrdom, exercising himself
before he entered into that conflict S. Antony becam at Friar Minor to go in
that kind to preach to the Infidels.
and combatt. Now there were two Religious of saint Francis, which ordinarily
lived in a Church of the title of saint Antony, without the City of
Conimbria, with which saint Antony having casually met, he discovered his
intention unto them, as to two Angels of Paradise; and they gave ear unto him
with great contentment and comforted him, then they appointed him a day when
they would repair unto him to effect his pious desire. Having taken leave of
them, he ceased not to solicit and importune his superior, to vouchsafe to
give free consent to this his holy intention, which as a thing perordinated of
God, he at length with much difficulty obtained. The aforesaid Friar Minors
coming on the prefixed day, they gave their habitt to saint Antony even in
the monastery of saint Cross; and then being clothed, they carried him with
them to their oratory. At his departure, one of the Canon Regulers that was
much disquieted therewith, said unto him; Well, go your ways in good time, it
may be you may prove a saint, giving him such reproach, as if he thought one
could not serve God but in the Religion of saint Francis: saint Antony humbly
answered him: If it should happen that I prove a saint, it may be you would
praise God for it. But doubtless these Religious should not murmr if God
transferred this saint from their Order to that of saint Francis, considering
that in their Church they possessed five of his martyrs, and with all it cannot
be denied but that the worthy and pious education of saint Antony, ought to
be attributed first unto God, and then to their holy Religion, wherein he spent
eleven years, so that he entered into the Order of saint Francis the 26. year
of his age, being then Priest, the year of grace 1220.

How the name of Ferdinand was changed into Antony, and how he departed for
Marroccho, with intention there to receive Martyrdom, and was by tempest
driven into Sicilia, thence he went into Italy, and thence to the general
chapter of S. Francis.
THE III. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father being come to the Oratory of the said Religious, knowing that
the title thereof was saint Antony, he prayed them to give him that name,
abhorring his own as seculer and too profane, and to the end that not being
so called of all, he might be much less known, and disburded of his kindred
and friends: besides we may well attribute this same to the worck of the holy
Ghost, since that many of his most note-worthie elect have* changed their name,
as first the Patriarchs, Apostles, and other ^his favorites. Having then thus
changed his name, he desired to effectuat the design for which he became
Friar Minor, and to attain the same, he travailed into Africa, there to
receive the crown of Martyrdom; but he being afflicted with a great and long
infirmity, began by divine inspiration to conceive, that his design was not
grateful unto God, but that he would employ him in the entreprise of peace,
where he must fight with a long and continual martyrdom, not as a private
soldier, but as a Captain and Doctor of many people; he therefore resolved to
experience and more clearly to inform himself of the will of God; And to that
end embarked himself again for Marroccho: but by a tempest he was driven
into the I Will of Sicilia, where being landed, he went to the Covent of Friar
Minors, where he understood that they made preparation to go to the General
Chapter at Assisium; wherefore, being assured of the will of God, he much
resisted his own proper will, and entirely resigned himself into the hands
of his goodness, and so in their company, he came to the General chapter: which
ended, it was noted that he alone by certain divine disposition, remained
vndemaunded of any Superior, wherefore coming humbly to the Roman
Proninciall called Brother Gratian, he prayed him to vouchsafe to demand him
of the holy Father saint Francis, and consequently to instruct him together
with the other Religious Nouices, in the ceremonies and observations of the
Order: So the true servant of God preserving the virtue of humility; made
himself generally to appear Great humility of. S. Antony.
ignorant. Thus having obtained what he desired, he was no sooner arrived at
the Covent with his Superior, but he prayed him to permit him to live
solitarily in some sequestered place; which was also granted him, and a
residence aloted him in a little hermitage upon the mountain of saint Paul,
where there was a little Covent of other Religious of their Order; there he
spent his time alone and in a private celle, serving God in continual
meditations and prayers, fortifying his spirit in his love against the
temptations of the devil, and chastising his body by continual abstinence and
fastinges, refecting only and rarely with bread and water, whereby he so
weakened and subdued himself, that his Brethren, walking sometimes with him to
confer of spiritual matters, did testify that he was so feeble as he could
not stand on his feet, so that he seemed always ready to fall. This elected
spirit of God, for a certain time thus conuersed as ignorant and simple,
amongst the simple, not presuming to aspire to any glorious act or notable
enterprise, for the glory of God and the salvation of faithful souls, as
being prevented of his first intention: But entierlie resigned himself unto
God, absolutely renouncing his own will, it being also the most secure way
that can be taken, and most pleasing unto God, who afterward in time and
place makes use of such servants, as he did of this.

Of his first preaching, and how he was afterward made preacher by saint
Francis.
THE IV. CHAPTER.
THe time of taking Orders being come, the F. Guardian of saint Antony being
to send certain of his Religious to receive them, himself would associat
them, and took saint Antony for his companion, so they were, with certain
Dominicans, together at Torlie, where the hour of collation being come, and
they all at table, the Guardian began to entreat the said Dominicans to make
some exhortation for the consolation of the company: but they out of humility
excusing them selves, the Guardian, inspired of God, commanded saint Antony
in virtue of obedience to speak some thing for their edification, according as
the holy Ghost should dictate unto him. The glorious Saint as much as he
possibly could excused himself, alleging that he had never bin accustomed to
any other thing in Religion but to wash the shooe-clowtes, to lay the bucke,
and dress the kitchen, and being ignorant he was less fit for such an office
then for any other: herein he spoke nothing but what his Brethren there present
knew to be true; so that he was easily believed: for none had yet perceived
his learning, he having no books, but he had a notable and assured memory,
and in his mental Prayers was of a very high contemplation, two particular
gifts, wherewith God and nature had endued him, and withal he had well studied
in former times; yet in speaking latin he was very sober and sparing. Being
then unable by his precepts to resist his obedience to his Guardian, who not
admitting his excuses as forcible, constrained him to satisfy his
commandment, he began to speak simply: But the holy S. Antony preaching
unprovided by obedience was known to be a notable preacher.
Ghost inspiring and worcking where he pleases, would not have this his clear
burning light any longer hidden, but that he should give light and illuminate
his holy Church, he I say, made him so to shine and appear, that his audience
perceauing his eloquence and his learning, both pourchased by practice and
infused by God, they were all astonished and amazed: but much more were they
edified by his humility, in that he had so long time concealed this talent. The
holy Frather saint Francis being hereof by the Guardian incontinently
advertised, giving thanckes to God, he aucthorised him to be a preacher, and
commanded him to make use of the notable benefitt which his divine Majesty had
bestowed on him, and so he was chosen of God, and deputed to the holy Ministry
of his word miraculously, and not by his own industry; he also confirmed his
doctrine by an entier and mere voluntary contempt of the world, and a most
simple innocence, by a perfect resignation of his will into God, by
mortification of his flesh, and by a very deep humility, together with his
charity toward God and his neighbor, having a most fervent will to die in
their cause, though God, for his greater croune, and the edification of the
faithful, disposed otherwise of the effect: When he began to preach, as before
he feared not to go among the barbarous Pagans, much less did he then fear
being among Christians, the power of Princes and Potentates of the world. So
that without acception of persons, indifferently he touched and stroke all
sorts of qualities with the sword of God, yet always using the meaner sort
more mildly, to avoid to scandalize them.

How, where and of whom he learned, and after read Divinity.
THE V. CHAPTER.
THis glorious S. was the first Religious of the Order of the Friar Minors,
that studied and read divinity, with consent and by permission of the holy
Father S. Francis, who sent him to Verselles, with an other called Brother Ada^
de Marisco, an Englishman, to hear the Abbott of saint Andrew, a most famous
divine of that time, and one that had lately translated and commented upon the
works of saint Denis Areopagita, out of Greek into Latin: then it was that
the University of Millan and Pauia, were transferred to Verselles; the said
Abbot gave those Religious a grateful countenance, for that he held himself
so edified by them, as he freely confessed that they taught him a doctrine, not
humane, but heavenly, and that he beheld in them, the hierarchies of Angels:
these good Religious in the mean time profited exceedingly: for they attained
that very year to such a sublimity, and elevation of understanding, that they
seemed not only to have formerly studied the said hierarchy, but even to have
seen and frequented the same. Whereupon the before said Abbot, in the third
chapter of his said commentary, oftentimes reiterateth these words: Love
penetrateth farther then exterior science can do, as is read to have appeared
in many Bishops, who not being learned, yet very subtly penetrated to the
deepest secrettes of the most sacred Trinity, as my self have experienced in
the holy Religious Br. Antony, of the Order of Friar Minors, by the familier
conversation which I have had with himt: for albeit he was little conversant in
worldly sciences, when he learned Mystical divinity, he so penetratiuely
understood the same, that I may truly say of him that which JESUS CHRIST
affirmed of S. John Baptist, that he was a burning candell, that illuminated
the world; in regard that he lightened the people exteriourly, by divine
knowledge wherewith he burned interiourly by a celestial love. Touching the
lecture which he read, the license which S. Francis sent him was thus: Br.
Francis, to his most dear Brother Antony, health. I am content that you read
Divinity to the Brethren, provided that it be in such sort as that the spirit
of holy prayer be not weakened neither in you, nor them, according to the rule.
He so reverenced, saint Francis (whom he called Bishop) that he would never
read Divinity, though he were by the Religious exceedingly importuned
thereunto, till he had received the said license of him, by virtue whereof he
first read at Montpellier in Languedoc, then at Bollonia, and at Padua: the
greatest part of his learning he had obtained of God, always eleuating his
spirit in him, as once it happened unto him intending to preach before an
Abbot of saint Benets Order, upon the words of S. Paul, written to saint
Denis, for at that time he continued a long space ravished in ecstasy.

How he preached in France, and of the miracles he wrought there.
THE VI. CHAPTER.
Saint Antony was sent into France, to be Guardian in the Covent of Limoges in
Aquitaine, by his works and predications to convert many heretics that then
were there, and to confirm the Catholics: which he so happily performed that
the memory thereof remains even to our days, besides many miracles which God
there wrought by him; whereof we will recount some few. As he preached the
Passion on Maundy thursday night or good friday morning, in the Church of S.
Peter of Quadruuio in Lymoges, at the same time that the S. A^^ony was twice
seen in diverse places at one instant.
Religious did solemnly sing Matines in the Coue^t, when they came to the
lesson that was to be read, he instantly appeared, and read it all yet without
leaving the pulpit where he preached void of his presence. It may be thought
that God interposed the ministry of some Angel, that entertained the people
whiles he sung the lesson in the Qiuer. Almost the like accident arrived at
Mo^tpellier, where he was Lector, for, preaching one day to the people, he
remembered that he had not appointed any one to sing an Alleluia in his place,
it being his office to sing it: whiles he was preaching, he stouped in the
pulpit as to repose himself, and was at the same instant seen to sing the
Alleluia in his Covent, yet departed not from the great church where then he
preached. This divine virtue in S. Antony is not to be so much admired, as if
the like had never bin, for the same arrived to S. Francis, when he was seen
in a siery chariott, and when he appeared in form of a cross at the Chapter
of Arles, as in his life we have related: And to S. Ambrose, when in a moment
he was present at the obsequies of S. Martin at Tours, though he was seen
at Milan the very same time.

How he delivered a Religious, and a Nouice, from great temptations.
THE VII. CHAPTER.
THere was in the said Monastery of Limoges, a Nouice called Brother Peter, who
was exceedingly tempted to leave his habitt. S. Antony as a right vigilant
Pastor over the flock of God, knew this temptation in spirit, and therefore
called and drew him a part, then causing him to open his mouth, he blew and
breathed therein, saying, My son, receive the holy Ghost. O admirable
accident? This Nouice fell instantly to the ground as dead. The other Religious
hastening to raise him, S. Antony took him by the hand and lifted him up. The
Nouice then affirmed that he had bin in heaven, and proceeding to recount what
he had seen, the S. bid him to keep it secrett, which he did, and was never
after tempted to leave his habitt, but was an example of piety to all his
Brethren. About the same time S. Antony being gone to the Abbey of Semoniaco,
depending on the bishopprick of Limoges, a Religious of the said Abbey, was
exceedingly tempted with the flesh, whereof finding no remedy by prayers,
watchinges, or whatsoever other mortifications; he resolved to have recourse
unto S. Antony, to whom in confession he discovered the secrett of his heart,
affectionatly beseeching him for the love of God to assist him. S. Antony
having heard his confession, putt off his own coat, and gave it to the
Religious to putt on, which having done, he so as if the very virtue which was
in the S. had bin in his coat, communicated unto him his chastity, that the
temptation for ever ceased, as the Religious did diverse times afterward
acknowledge and confess.

Of the miracles which he wrought in France, upon two that were very devout
unto him.
THE VIII. CHAPTER.
IN the same city of Limoges, an honest woman devoted unto him, and to his
Order, had a very perverse husband, jealous, and without the fear of God, who
did often beat and torment her because she did too readily addict her self to
the service of S. Antony, and of his Covent, as well in bestowing almose on
them, as in procuring it of others, according to their necessity. It happened
one day, that upon some affairs of the Covent, she privately retired her self
somewhat late, wherewith her husband was so vexed, that he cruelly beat and
abused her; for he took her by the hair, and pulled it almost all off, but
this virtuous woman carefully gathered it together, and laid it neatly on her
pillow as if she meant to make them grow again, then simply laid her self to
rest, and the next morning early, she sent for S. Antony, who came to her,
supposing she would be confessed. But she related unto him, what she had
endured for his service, showing him her hair; and adding with all that she
believed, if he pleased to pray to God for her, which she besought him to do,
her hair would take root again: the S. admiring hereatt, returned to the
monastery, where having assembled all the Religious, he recounted unto them the
affliction of this woman, and her request: and therefore invited them to pray
together for her, which they did, and at the very instant the hairs torn
from this woman's head were fast rooted as before, whereatt her husband By the
prayers of S. Antony hairs torn off took root again.
was so amazed and withal so satisfied, that he resolved thenceforward to be
as gracious unto his wife, as formerly he had bin cursed and cruel, believing
her to be an honest and chaste woman, and from that time he showed as much or
more affection to the Friar Minors then his wife. S. Antony had caused a Covent
to be built at Berne, a place depending on the said bishopprick of Limoges,
upon the declining of a mountain, whither he very artificially drew a conduict
of water: for descending from the same mountain, it issued out fair and
clear, as out of a fountain, sufficient for the use of the said Covent, which
never failed them: the S. often repaired thither, to live there more austerely,
and with better conueniencie to apply himself to contemplation. The cook one
day telling him that there was nothing to give the Religious A stream of rain
did not wett a maid employed in the service of the Friar Minors.
their dinner, he sent him to a lady exceedingly affectionate unto him, to
demand of her some Colewortes for the dinner of the Religious, aduertising her
that they also had nothing to eat. This lady commanded her chamber maid, to
gather some; but at the instant, there fell such a stream of rain that the
maid refused to go; which her mistress perceauing, she prepared,
notwithstanding the rain, to go gather* them her self, which her servant
seeing, she prevented her mistress, and speedily ran into the garden, to
gather the Colewortes. But it was admirable to see, that this maid went and
returned without one drop of rain falling upon her.

He knew the illusions of the devil, by divine inspiration.
THE IX. CHAPTER.
S. Antony foretold that the devil would trouble his sermon.
Saint Antony being one day to preach in the said bishopprick of Limoges, in a
Church of S. Julian, there assembled such a concourse of people, that the
Church being unable to contain them, the S. was enforced to ascend into a
chair seated on a scaffold, erected in a spacious place to that effect; and
before he began to preach, he advertised the people, that they should not
trouble themselves with any thing that might happen; during his sermon,
because he knew well that the devil with all his power would endeavor to
disquiett the^: but the end should be his confusion. So a little after that he
had begu^, the supporters of the scaffold brake with a great fear and cry of
all* the audience: yet none received hurt thereby, but being instantly
reaccommodated, the sermon was finished, and heard with great devotion,
especially in regard of the person that preached.

And discovered a lie of the devil to the same end.
The S. preaching an other holy day, there came a Post into the Church that
brought and presented a letter to a gentlewoman, whereby she was advertised that
her son having some discordious quarrels was slain by his ennemies: and the
manner how. But the S. cried out from the pulpitt where he preached, saying:
disquiett not your self, gentlewoma^, nor you people be not troubled, for this
traiterous Post is a devil, that which is written in the letter, is false, you
shall incontinently see her son: the devil has played this pranck to
disturb you. Hereupon the devil vanishing, his fraud was discovered to be
vain: whereof the gentlewoman praised and thancked God.

The S. being at prayer one night after Compline, according to his custom, it
being in the monastery of Limoges, whence some of the Reliligious being gone
forth, they saw a great field appertayning to one of their freindes and
benefactours, full of men that spoiled it, tearing of, the ears of the wheat
already ripe: they pitying the loss of their affected He also discovered unto
his Religious an illusio^ of the devil to divert them from ^^ayer.
friend, ran to the S. and very passionately recounted unto him what they had
seen. Whereto he answered: Trouble not your selves Brethren, with a matter of
nothing, but return to prayer: for they whom you have seen robbing, our
friend, are devils, that seek to trouble us, to divert us from prayer: know ye
that our benefactour shall now receive no detriment. The Religious obeyed their
Superior, expecting the issue hereof till the morning, when they saw the field
as free from dommage as before; whereby they knew it to be an illusion of the
devil; having therefore discovered his deceit, they thenceforward had a more
reverence to the devotion of the saint.

Of miracles wrought by the S. in his preachings.
THE X. CHAPTER.
AS Saint Antony was one day to preach at Limoges, there was such a conconrse
of people assembled, that no Church in the city could contain them, so that
he was enforced to preach in the open air. In the midst of his sermon the
sky began to be troubled and the weather changed, for it began furiously to
lighten and thunder, then did the air thicken with gross and very black
clouds, so that there was appearence of an extreme impetuous and instant
rain; which caused the audience to resolve of retiring themselves. S. Antony
prayed them not to stir, assuring them that no inconueniencie would befall
the^, provided that they put their confidence in him, who An extreme shower of
rain did not wet nor fall upon an audience of a sermon of S. Antony though it
ouerwhel med all the neighbor places. A fool having kissed the cord of the S.
was cured.
never frustrated the hopes reposed on him. On these words the people relied,
and heard out the rest of the sermon, which ended, each one goeing out of that
spacious place, where in former times had bin a very ancient Palace, called by
the Gentiles, the camp of Arcas, to retire to their home, it was admirable to
see that every where round about, the streets were all drowned and overflowed
with the abondant stream of the rain fallen from the sky, without so much as
one drop fallen in the said field, which was absolutely miraculous.

As he preached on a time, there was a fool that troubled all the audience, S.
Antony admonished him, and prayed him courteously to be quiett. But he answered
the S. that he would not desist, unless he would give him the cord wherewith
he was girded; which S. Antony putting of, delivered unto him. The fool having
it, did presently kiss it, and withal his foolishnes left him, and the use of
reason returned, and so he fell at the feet of the S. and demanded him
pardon, to the exceeding edification of the people.

S. Antony preaching in a town, a woman having taken a cawdron of boylling
water from the fire, to hasten to hear him, the devil being vexed therewith,
deprived her of her judgment, which God permitted for his greater glory, so
that in steed of putting her little child into the cradle, she putt him in that
fiery hot cawdron, and so ran to the sermon, which ended, her friends, as the
manner is, demanded of her how her child did; the poor woman presently coming
to her self, remembered that, thincking to lay her child in the cradle, she had
put him into the said cawdro^; for which, being utterly overcome and melting
into By the merittes of the S. a child being in a cawdron of boilling water was
not hurt. An other child raised from death.
tears, she ra^ with her other neighbors to her house, where she foud her
child playing in the said cawdro^, as if he had bin in a bath; which caused the
Mother and her company to praise and thanck God and his holy servant.

Almost the like accident happened to a woman, in regard of her desire to go
to his sermon, for retourning she found her child dead, stifled in the cradle
where she had laid him: wherefore retourning incontinently with her neigbours to
the S. she fell at his feet, beseeching him to restore her, her child. Whereto
the S. answered: Beloved sister, return to your home, God will comfort you:
which making the woman exceeding joyful, she speedily hastened home, where she
found her child alive and sound playing with little stones, which neither she
nor he had seen before.

A young man being converted by a sermon of the S. desired to confess unto him,
but the sobbinges, sighs and tears which by a deep contrition, he poured out,
would not permit him to utter one word, whereupon the saint said unto him: My
child, go and write your Effect of true contrition.
sins: which he did, and retourning to the Saint, and unfolding the paper to
read them in confession, he found them; by the divine providence, all blotted
out, wherewith, as may be judged, he was exceedingly contented.

Matt. 6.
Making one day a funeral sermon, upon the death of a notorious usurer, he
took for his text these words: Where thy treasure is, there S. Antony caused
the heart of a usurer to be seen after death a among his money.
is thy heart: which sermon being ended, he willed the kindred of the deceased,
for better confirmation of what he had said, to go to his house and look
where he had laid his money, telling them that there they should find his heart,
which was not with his body. So goeing with many people in company, they found
the very heart of the usurer amongst his money, yet hot, breathing, and beating:
this miracle, with many others is painted at the Bolonia chapel of the
Sarazins, entitled saint Perronelle.

Of the efficacy, virtue and fervor of his prayer.
THE XI. CHAPTER.
THe great virtue and efficacy of the prayer of saint Antony appears by
many examples, in that not only other creatures, The devil caused a stolen
psalter to be restored to S. Antony.
but the infernal spirittes obeyed him, as by the sequel shall be discovered.
When he did read divinity at Montpellier, a Nouice secretly ran from the
Covent, having stolen from him a psalter commented by his own hand, whereon he
studied to preach to his Religious, in which respect he much esteemed it, so
that knowing of this theft he was exceedingly troubled with all, and presently
had recourse unto prayer, where he enforced the Nouice to restore it. For as he
was to pass over a bridge, the devil appeared unto him extremely horrible,
hideous and fearful, and threatening to kill him with a sword which he held in
his hand, if he would not carry back the psalter to Brother Antony, he
constrained him to return, with such terror and contrition, that falling at
the feet of the S. he obtained pardon, and was again admitted to the habitt.

This S. having accomplished his prefixed time of prelature at Limoges, he
thought it convenient to return to the chapter. In his journey he lodged in a
town at the house of a poor charitable woman, where God intending to confirm
him in his grace, by some tribulation whereby his love might appear, permitted
this woman, the more to honor him, to borrow of her neighbor, a fair cup
of glass, which his companion taking slight hold of, fell out of his hands,
and brake in two pieces, and the wine was spilled on the table; which the
careful Martha perceauing (little respecting the glass) ran instantly and took
a bottell, and carried it to the Celler to fill with wine, for till then she
had only drawn in the said drinking glass, because she would not be too long
in filling the bottell, and make the Religious that were already at the table,
in the mean while to expect, determining to take the bottel when they were
eating: But coming into the Celler, she found that filling the glass she had
bin too hasty and forgotten to thrust fast the faucett into the vessel, so
that the wine was all run out; wheratt exceedingly greiuing, she returned all
weeping to recount this mishapp unto the Saint, who incontinently declining
his head upon his arm, prayed to God, and the glass of it S. Antony by his
prayers reunited a broken glass, and made wine return into a vessel that
was run out.
self was suddenly reunited; which the poor woman seeing, she thought that as
the glass was conjoined, so the wine might also be returned into the vessel:
wherefore running speedily into the cave, she found her vessel fo full, though
in the morning it were half empty, that it wrought, as if it had bin new
unrefined wine, and ran out at the bung: wheratt being utterly amazed and
half beside her self, she scarce took time to serve the Saint the rest of
his dinner, but that she retired herself to shun occasion of vaineglorie,
leaving the inhabitants of the town piously disposed, thenceforward to
entertain the holy servants of God, verily believing (as in deed it is true)
that wealth never fails, but rather increases by charitable almose.

How our Lord Jesus Christ was seen in the arms of saint antony.
THE XII. CHAPTER.
Saint Antony for certain days preaching in a city of France, he was
invited by a devout gentleman to accept a lodgeing in his house whiles he
remained there, alotting him the principal room entier to himself quietly to
spend his time in study and devotions: but this gentleman walking one night
about his house, and passing by chance before the chamber of the Saint, he
saw a great light issuyng out through the chinckes of the door, wherefore
looking in at the key hole, he saw upon a great book lying before the Saint
a very fair child, glittering and shininge with resplendant lightsome beams,
who casting himself on the neck of the Saint, did clip and embrace him: as
also in extreme amorous manner the S. did the like, being never satisfied with
beholding him. The sweet and gracious child in his amiable embracinges revealed
unto him that his host beheld them. The Saint knowing that he would not depart
as long as JESUS CHRIST, remained there, was willing he should for a time enjoy
his contenment in that admirable aspect, that rauisbed the soul of the
gentleman out of the world; and then this p ecious child vanishing, the S.
instantly opened his chamber door, and calling the gentleman, he coniu^ed him
by the love which he boa^e to him whom he had seen, not to discover to any
living person, what he had seen till after his death, which he promised and
performed, but as soon as he understood of his death, he could not satisfy
himself with recounting, and assuring it with tears and strong oaths; which,
in respect of the creditt of the gentleman, for his worthy qualities, and the
piety of his life, being generally believed, it gave occasion to paint the S.
with a child on a book in his arms.

Of his prophecy of a Martyr before he was borne, and of the same Martyrdom.
THE XIII. CHAPTER.
AS he visited a woman at Assisium, great with child and very nere her time,
after he had exceedingly comforted her, she recommended unto his prayers her
delivery, that it might be happy and easy. He not vnmindfullof her, recommend
her to our Lord, and the first time that he saw her again, he prophesied and
willed her not to fear, because first she should be delivered easily;
secondly her child should live; thirdly it should be a man child: fourthlie
he should be pious and fear God: fiftlie he should be a Friar Minor: and
sixtlie he should be a Martyr. Now the three first of the conditions being
easily verified, it shall not be out of purpose also to justify the other
three. The child then being borne, and baptized, was called Phillip, and living
in manner of an Angel until he came to convenient age, he became a Friar
Minor, where being fortified in the fear and love of God*, he travailed with
exceeding devotion in pilgrimage to the holy land. And being in Azoto, when it
was by treason taken from the Christians, who being in number two thousand were
all condemned to death, he obtained of those persidious dogs to be the last
that that should be martyred, they supposing that he would renounce and deny
JESUS CHRIST. But this Saint when this spectacle horrible to the world, and
grateful to the divine Majesty and to him began, did animate and comfort them
all with exceeding courage, crying unto them, that God had revealed unto him,
that the very same day he should ascend into heaven with more then a thousand
martyrs: wherewith being much comforted they all offered their heads, as
pleasinge sacrifices unto God, under the sword of the executioners, who cut
them off. Now it being reported unto the Sultan that he exercisced the office
of a preacher; he commanded all the joints of his fingers one by one to be all
cut off in presence of the Christians; which notwithstanding he desisted not
to exhort them all to that glorious victory, in such sort that they all
misprising the honors and riches offered them, by the Mores, and the tortures
wherewith they threatened them, being by the valor of the Saint confirmed in
JESUS CHRIST, they with one voice cried out, that they would follow Brother
Philip, on whose choice oflife or Martyrdom they relied; which the Sultan
taking very despitefullie, caused him to be fleyed alive, even to the Navel,
and then his tongue to be cut off, which supporting with inestimable
constancy and notable patience, he the more enflamed and moved the rage and
fury of the Mores, and the hearts of the Christians more willingly to suffer
death, as a momentarie matter, seeing him with an invincible heart to endure the
same, by such cruel torments, in the midst whereof he ceased not by the
gestures and motions of his body to exhort them, being unable to speak by
reason that his tongue was bereaved him; At length he was beheaded with the
rest, and in token of their croune (a thing which the Mores beheld full sore
against their wills) their bodies that remained many days in the street,
without buryall, yielded no offensive, but a pleasing savor: Thus was the
admirable prophecy of the glorious Father S. Antony accomplished.

Of an other prophecy of his, touching an other Martyr, and of his Martyrdom.
THE XIV. CHAPTER.
PReaching in France in the city of Puy where he was Guardian, as often as he
saw a Notary, that was impious of life and conversation, he removing his capuce
would do him very humble reverence. The Notary knowing himself unworthy to
receive such honor, by him that gave it unto him, having many times, endured
the same, he imputed it to simplicity, yet at length he sought to shun the
meeting of the S. turning from him a far of, because he would not be saluted
by him: but it one time happened that he could not prevent the Saints meeting
of him, who saluted him as before, yea more humbly; which putting the Notary
into great choler, he came to him and said: if thou were not a Religious man, I
would long agone have sheathed this my sword in thy body. But tell me thou
varlett, what cause have thou in this manner to flout me? The S. very humbly
answered him: My beloved brother, be you not troubled, I beseech you, but
believe that I salute you only to honor you, and the reason is such; having
desired to shed my blood in the service of the divine majesty, I have not bin
found worthy nor has it pleased God to satisfy me therein. But his divine
majesty having revealed unto me that you shall dye a martyr, I have ever since,
and still shall, yield you reverence. Besides I most heartily beseech you, when
you shall be in that glorious conflict, to be mindful of me wretched sinner.
Hereat the Notary changed his choler into laughter, and deriding him went his
way; but in short time after, it was justified. For being inspired of God, to
go with the bishop of the said city to adore the holy sepulcher, and in an
instant having changed his lewd conversation into the contrary, arriving there,
the bishop discoursing with the Mores touching our faith, and being rudely
refelled, the notarie for the first and second time endured it, but at length
being ashamed of the tepedity of his bishop, and fearing some worse issue, he
told him, that he did not defend our faith as he ought: and then himself very
courageously disputed against the Mores, and confuted them, affirming for their
reproach, that their Mahomet was the son of perdition, damned to hell by
almighty God, as themselves should be if they did not acknowledge their
errors: which having said, the Mores presently took hold of him, cruelly beat
him, and never ceased for three days together to torment him, which expired,
leading him to execution he confessed to his other companions, that S. Antony
had prophesied unto him that martyrdom: And they afterward retourning, have
testified the same to all the world, and so he consummating his martyrdom,
joyfully rendered his soul to his Creator.

Of the office of his doctrine, and his severity against sins.
THE XV. CHAPTER.
THis S. of God, with a very great diligence, and admirable prudence, sowed
the word of his divine majesty in the souls of the faithful, being never
wearyed by his continual labors, trauailling through diverse cittyes, towns,
villages and castelles, over mountains and vallyes, and this he did out of his
extreme zeal to assist the souls redeemed by the precious blood of our Lord,
as one instructed rather by heavenly then humane doctrine, he so disposed of
his documentes according to the necessity of his audience that they all were
satisfied: in respect whereof his sermons were reputed for so many miracles:
they that never heard him preach, were at deaths door with desire to hear
him, but especially the learned, as well in regard of his eloquence, as of his
exceeding subtility and viuacity of spirit, wherewith he admirably gave to
althinges which he handled, their proper signification, valor, number and
weight with a notable art. He also reprehended the great persons of this
world with such constancy and severity, that the most famous preachers
trembled with fear when they heard him, and did admire how it was possible he
could have such boldness: many would withdraw themselves as not able to hear
such open and manifest reprehe^sions, and those that remained covered their
faces. Yet these reprehe^sions were intermingled with a competent and just
quantity of salt, which is the admirable virtue of discretion, according to
opportunity of time, place, and persons. For albeit his discourse at the
beginning seemed sharp, yet the conclusion was gracious, mild, and
supportable to all, in such sort that without any scandal he terrified
sinners, comforted the weak, encouraged the pusillanimous, and made the most
obstinate to tremble.

Preaching one time at Bourges, where was held a Synod, he addressed his
speech to the arch-bishoppe concerning certain articles He knew in spirit the
error and heresy which a Prelat held in his heart and prudently putt him from
it.
of faith, whereof he interiourlie doubted, and so dexterously accused and
reprehended his incredulity, laying open unto him his errors by many
authorities of holy scripture, that the archbishop was not only not
scandalized thereby, though in deed he felt himself stung to the quick: but
even went directly at the end of the sermon, very penitent and contrite, and
freely discovered his heart unto him, who procured him such remedy as was
necessary for his salvation, so that he proved thenceforward very faithful
unto his God. And this Saint did not only assist the souls of the faithful
Christians by preaching, but in diverse other manners, God also favored and
furthered the ardent zeal which his servant had of the salvation of souls, as
when in the night he appeared unto them, enforming them of their sins, and
admonishing them to go to such or such a Confessor, telling them, how and by
whom he was sent unto them, which was a singular remedy for many sinners,
who through fear or shame durst not confess, for fear to manifest their
enormous sins. But by the example following may appear of what efficacy the
words of the S. were.

A citizen of Padua, called Leonard, confessing unto saint Antony; among
other sins that he confessed, he accused himself to have given such a blow
with his foot on his mothers belly, that she fell to the ground. The Saint
very sharply reprehending him for it, among other speeches told him, that the
foot which dared to strike the belly of the Mother whence it proceeded,
deserved tobe cut off Mat. 18.
alleging that sentence of JESUS CHRIST: If thy foot scandalize thee, cut it
off and cast it from thee, and such other things Great simplicity of a
penitent.
as might induce him to contrition. After the said demonstration, having given
him absolution, the simple man exceedingly grieved at his offense, supposing
that the Saint had enjoined him to cut off his foot, being in his lodgeing
took a little hatchett, and with a merueillous courage cut off his foot: which
done, the extremes of death assaulting him, the excessive pain he endured
caused him to cry so loud that his mother heard him, who with many of her
neighbors came running, and seeing the torment which he endured, adjoined her
cries with those of her son, who opening the cause of the disaster unto her,
she knowing no other remedy, went to saint Antony, and reproached him as
having slain A man having cut of his foot S. Antony reioyned it to the leg
whence it was cut.
her son, relating unto him the miserable accident. The Saint utterly
amazed, excused himself with the truth, affirming that he had not bin the
cause, having only told him that it deserved to be cut off, but not willed
him to cut or cause it to be cut off: but not content with answearing her he
went to see him, and being moved with his pious simplicity, after he had first
offered his prayers to God, he took the foot from under a bench, and joined it
unto the leg, whereupon he gave a benediction, and so reioyned them, that
there remained neither sign nor any pain^. So standing up sound and Iustie on
his feet, they all together gave thanckes unto almighty God.

How he reprehended the tirant Ezelin.
THE XVI. CHAPTER.
EZelin a tyrant of Padua, having by favor and support of the Emperor Federic
the second, gotten the dominion of many fair and great cities of Italy, he
exercised such crueltyes the like whereof have not bin heard, to make himself
more feared of his subjects, and none durst to reprehend him or demand him
the reason. Having one time without cause slain diverse gentlemen of note,
saint Antony resolved to go and perform his office unto him. And coming
before him, he spoke in this manner: Cruel tyrant and ennemy of God, when will thou end thy rage, and forbear to shed the blood of faithful Christians,
which without cause thou ordinarily spillest? Know and assuredly believe, that
the severe and terrible sentence of the justice of God does attend and will
fall upon thee, when thou least fear it. To these words he added many other
like, then obiecting unto him the graces and favors which he had received of
God, he opposed also the homicides, violences, robberies, murtherous assaults,
and insupportable tolles wherewith he afflicted his subjects, and how by his
permission, they endured the destructions of whole cities. As he spoke this,
his guard admiring this free speech, expected only the Tyrants command to A
Tyrant humbled himself at the remonstrances of S. Antony.
massacre him, thincking this his accustomed patience very strange, especially
upon such injuries: but the success was other then they expected, for the
Saint having ended his discourse, this cruel woulfe at the same instant
became a meek lamb, and having put off his girdle, he laid it on his neck,
and fell at his feet calling for mercy unto God and him for his misdeedes, and
promising for satisfaction to his divine Maistie, that he would accept and
perform such penance as he should impose upon him. The people present were
also in admiration at this Metamorphises of the Tyrant, as much as at the
raising of a dead. Now the Saint departing upon asseurance of this good
promise, Ezelin turning to his people, said unto them: Do not admire to see me
for the present thus humbled: for I protest I saw to proceeed out of the face
of this holy Father a beam of divine splendor, which did so terrefie and
quelle me, that I seemed to sinck into hell. But God minding to chastise his
ennemies by the hands of others of his ennemies, permitted that this Tyrant
kept not long his holy purpose, for he began to doubt of the virtue of the
Saint, of whom he would make a second trial. Knowing that he publikelie
preached against his cruelties, he sent him a present by some of his people, to
whom he gave chardge, that if the Saint The tyrant te^pteth S. Antony.
accepted the present, they should kill him: but if he rejected it, they should
patiently endure what soever he said, without giving him any reply, and so
should return. They having offered unto the Saint the present which was of
great value, with the greatest humility they could feign, praying him to
accept the small charity which Ezelin had sent him, and to pray to God for
him, thereby experienced what he was: for he answered them, God preserve me me
from receiving this present, which is but the blood of the poor of JESUS
CHRIST, whereof he must render a strict account unto God: and therefore have ye
speedily hence, for fear least this house fall and utterly oppress you, or
that the earth open and swallow you up. These words made them so ashamed and
mute, that without replying they returned to give answer to Ezelin, who
thenceforth esteemed him the true servant of God: and therefore willed his
people to permit him to say of him what he would, which was no small
restrainct unto him whilst he lived.

How at one sermon of his, he converted 22. thieves.
THE XVII. CHAPTER.
TWo and twenty thieves being assembled for robbery, retired into a very thick
and bushy wood, where they murdered the passangers: Italy was then (by reason
of the wars there) full of such thieves, who feared not to go disguised into
the cities, as did these of whom we speak, who resolved to prove if the
truth and effect answered the reputation given to the preachinges of S.
Antony: for they had heard, that as an other Elias, he burned the hearts of men
with the fiery light of the word of God: which they experienced in themselves:
for at the beginning of his sermon, they began to feel their hearts to
mollify: then by little and little to receive the heat of the Holy Ghost, so
that at the end of the sermon, they went all to confer with him, who after
he had given them necessary reprehension, told them that he would absolve them
on condition they would be very wary never after to return to their vomitt,
assuring the in the behalf of almighty God, that if they fell again they
would miserably perish: as it after arrived to some of them, who returned to
their filth again as before: others perseuered piously, and especially one of
them, who had seriously observed and made his profitt of the ends of both his
good and bad companio^s* who afterward affirmed and assured the same, and
said that he was enjoined, to go twice to Rome in penance, to visitt the holy
Apostles in remission of their enormous sins, saying that as he had
accomplished his penance, so did he hope to obtain remission of his misdeedes.

Of the conversion of many heritikes, by a sermon which S. Antony made to the
fishes of the sea, which gave him ear.
THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
ITaly being utterly disordered, by the afforesaid wars, and mingled with all
nations that embrued their barbarous weapons in the body of that contry, though
they were called in by the Italians themselves, that supposing to ruinate each
other, they might afterward be their prey, as in deed they were: In such
troubles of war, the Italians did not only diminish their former virtues,
which made them like terrestrial Angels, and more excellent then all other
strangers in courtesy and love, but they did also diminish that faith, for
which they had renounced the Empire of the world, submitting their neck to the
most sweet yoke of JESUS CHRIST, and of his immaculate and holy, Catholic
Apostolic and Roman Church; and besides that, (as it is incident to men to
admit the habitt of those with whom they converse) they dranck the horrible
cup of heresy and abomination, the heretics multiplying in Italy, by the
extreme liberty of life then there in use. Now saint Antony having so much
profited in France, where he converted a great number of heretics, as also in
Romania, whither then many were retired, of whom he converted a great part by
miracles, and particulerly their Arch-heretique called Bonuillo de Bimini, who
for thirty years had persisted obstinate and buried in the darcknes of
heresy: the saint therefore endeavored to displant all the rest of that
province which there were exceedingly augmented. Now as he one day preached
unto them, they refusing to hear him* because disputing against them he did
utterly confound them, and being without the sea shore, at the mouth of a
river called Matecchia, he called the fishes in the name of God, to hear his
holy word, since men, whom he had redeemed by the precious blood of our Lord
JESUS CHRIST his only Son, had refused it. It was a worthy and admirable
thing, to see almost an infinite quantity of fishes of the sea and of the said
river, instantly upon those words to appear on the water, which by little and
little asse^bling, sorted themselves according to their kinds and qualities,
placing themselves in admirable Order, so that the lesser drew nearest the
shore, and the greater by degrees without, in such sort that it was a most
pleasing sight to behold them. Being settled and accomodated, the saint made
them this sermon following: My Brethren fishes, who being the creatures Of the
favors which God bestows on fishes.
of the common Creator as we are, are also bound to praise him, considering
that you have received of him your being and life, and he has given you for
habitation the noble element of water sauoury and saltish, according to your
necessity and entertaynement. Further he has therein given you shelters and
retraites to shroud you from the ambushes of your persecutors. It has pleased
him also that this element should be transparent, clear, and pearceable to the
eye, that you may the more easily see what you are to accept and what to
shun: therefore also has he bestowed on you phinnes and force to guide you
selves where you desire: but you are especially obliged unto him, for that you
alone of all other creatures, were saved in the universal deluge; by means
whereof you are increased in number above all other. You were chosen to save
the Prophett Jonas, and having preserved him three days in your belly, you
restored him a live upon the earth. You have paid the due and tribut for our
Lord JESUS CHRIST, and for his chief Apostle S. Peter, you have also ever bin
his food during his life, and after his death when he was risen. For which
reasons and others which for the present are out of my memory, you are
exceedingly obliged to thancke almighty God. The fishes approved these words,
with all the gestures they could show, bending down their heads, moving their
tails, and making sign of desire to come near him. Upon which
demonstratio^s, the holy Father turned toward the rebellious and stony
hearts of the heretics, and, in presence of a great multitude of people (there
assembled by the recourse of such a number of fishes that stirred not,
expecting till the S. dismissed them) he said unto them: God be praised that
the very fishes do desireously hear his word, but you, wherefore demurre you
on your conversion? What other testimony do you expect more evident of the
virtue of the love of God? Are not you ashamed to appear of less virtue then
the fishes who are void of reason? All the heretics there present the^ without
farther expectation were converted to the faith, and the Catholics more
solidly confirmed. The fishes never stirred, but their number still increased
without any confusion of their order, till they had all had the benediction of
the holy Father, after which they divided themselves, and each one went where
he pleased, and S. Antony retourning into Riminy there converted the rest of
the heretics, that being there had not bin present at the miracle.

How he converted a very obstinate heretic by a miracle of the blessed
sacrament.
THE XIX. CHAPTER.
Saint Antony preaching one time at Tholousse (though some affirm it to be
at Riminy) against a very obstinate heretic, of the real Presence of JESUS
C. in the B. Sacrament, he many times co^uinced him even by reasons, in which
the heretic not knowing what to answer, told the S. that in deed he was
forced to yield in dispute: but the reason was, because he was more subtle, a
greater philosopher, and better learned then himself, which he acknowledged:
but could not yet confess and acknowledge that his affirmations were to be
believed: and therefore challenged him to prove by effects and show him by some
miracle of the B. Sacrament, whereby he might know that God was present there:
which if he could perform, he did promise and swear, to adhere to his opinion
and belief. The saint answered him that he should consider and bethinck
himself what miracle he desired, and by the grace of God he should see it
effected. The heretic replied that he would shutt up a mule, and keep her
three days without meat, then they both would be present together, himself
with ores and the S. with the B. Sacrament, and if the mule did leave the otes
and adore the B. Sacrament, he would be content also to adore the same. S.
Antony accepted this condition: And the third day being come, and they both
present at a public place, the holy Father having celebrated mass before he
communicated, he showed the sacred Host unto the people that held burning
torches in their hands, there being present the greatest persons of the
city, who attended him to the place where the proof was to be made. The
heretic was there ready with the hungry Mule, which already smelled the oats
which her master had brought and brayed after them. Saint Antonie then A
hungry mule left oases to adore the B. Sacrament.
commanded her, by the virtue of the living God, who was present in the Host
which there he held to adore it. Her master also cast before her all the oats
he had, yet leaving the oats, she came with her head declined very humbly to
adore the B. Sacrament, before which she kneeled down, to the exceeding
contentment of the Catholics there present, and the confusion of many
heritikes, especially of the aforesaid, who was converted together with them.

Of the conversion of many heritikes, by a miracle of S. Antonyes, eating
poisoned meat, without receiving any detriment.
THE XX. CHAPTER.
THis miracle so increased the hatred of heretics against him* that they
resolved to procure his death. And to this purpose one of them invited him to
his table: which the saint promised, in hope by some familier discourses to
convert him. Even as for the same end our Redeemer did eat with Publicans and
sinners. Saint Antony then being at table with many heretics, he knew by
divine revelation, that the meat set before him was poisoned, as also the wine
appointed for him to drinck, for which he modestly checked them, (...) their
treachery. But they, in steed of being confounded and acknowledgeing their
fact, with a brazen face answered him, that JESUS CHRIST Marc. 16.
in his gospel promised his disciples, that albeit they should drinck or eat
poison, it should not hurt them: And therefore (said they) had they done that
only to prove that speech, so that if he refused to eat thereof, he must
acknowledge the Gospel to be false: whereupon the holy Father, consulting with
himself what he should do, found therein some difficulty; for one the one side
he feared it might prove a tempting of God, who seemed to have revealed the
same unto him to the end he should forbear it: on the other side desirous not
to prejudice the gospel, he resolved to eat the poison, on condition they
would become Catholics, if it did not hurt him: whereto they accorded, and the
S. said unto them: Well then my masters, I drinck and eat your poysonned meat
and drinck, not with a will to tempt God, whose words I firmly believe: but
to manifest unto you the truth of his word, and also as zealous of his gospel
to whom althinges obey: then he dranck and eat thereof without receiving any
detriment, either then or afterward. Which the heretics perceauing, they were
converted to the faith of the gospel, the words whereof they had experienced
to be puissant, above all natural reason, and in deed it was reasonable, they
should expel the poison out of their souls, seeing corporal poison, by
virtue of the words of the gospel, to be annichilated.

How in one sermon and at one time, he was heard by many strangers to preach
in their several languages: and a woman heard him far off.
THE XXI. CHAPTER.
POpe Gregory the ninth published a great Jubilee at Rome, there to declare
the expedition of the Christians called Croisade, against the Mores, who then
had possession of the holy land: in respect whereof there was a great concourse
of people at Rome that repaired thither from all parts of Europe. S. Antony
one day preaching there before a huge assembly of people, the number being
exceeding great of French, Grecians, English, Italians, Almanes, Sclauonians,
Spaniards, and other strangers, they all heard him preach in their own
natural tongue, as heretofore the Apostles of our Savior had bin: which much
amazed the people. But besides this, the Pope having heard this sermon, called
him the holy arc of the testament, in regard of the merueillous copiosity of
h^^ doctrine and eloquence, wherewith he in such sort lincked* together, the
sentences and words of holy scripture, by new and high (...) whereby it
manifestly appeared that it was not he but the holy Ghost that spoke, who by
his holy servant taught these people the true mean to ascend to heaven. This
other miracle was also of no small consequence.

A woman exceedingly desiring to hear S. Antony preach, her husband not
permitting her to go, because it was a great league from the city, she went
up into her corne-loft, so to content her sight with beholding the place where
her spirit was, to wit, the Church where was the Saint, where her body could
not be: which performing very attentively and a long time, she admired to hear
the Saint begin his sermon, wherefore calling her husband, she protested that
from the place where she was, she miraculously heard saint Antonyes sermon,
using the same gestures that he did and relating his words, wherein she so
persisted to confirm her husband, that himself would needs make trial
thereof, and to that end mounting into the garrett, he putt his head out at the
windoe, and heard the end of the same sermon, then presently went to confer
with such as had bin personally present, and found that the words which his
wife affirmed to have heard in the beginning of the sermon, were the very same
that the Saint had uttered. And therefore astonyed at so great a miracle, and
repenting that he had hindered his wife from being present thereat, never after
withdrew her from her devotions.

Of certain miracles which he wrought upon some that were devout unto him.
THE XXII. CHAPTER.
Saint Antony incessantly laboring to gain souls unto God in the cities of
Italy, by his preaching, retourning one day from that exercise, and retiring
into his Covent, he took a secrett and unknown way, to avoid the honors
ordinarily given unto him, where he met a poor woman carrying her son*
that was utterly crypled and void of the use of his limbs, who having a far
off perceived him, came and fell at his feet, humbly praying him to have
compassion of her, and to voutsafe to make only the sign of the cross upon
her son, whereby she had great confidence in God, that he would recover the
use of his limbs: and the more the Saint excused himself, the more she
redoubled her petitions and cries, saying as the Chanan^an did to JESUS CHRIST:
have mercy S. Antony cured a criple, only with the sign of the cross.
on me: whereupon, together with the request of his Companion (who was a very
devout Religious) he made the sign of the cross upon the child; and
forthwith he was cured, retourning on foot to his pitiful mothers house,
whence she had brought him to the S. who prayed her to conceal this miracle
at least during his life: affirming that it was her faith, and not his
merittes, that had obtained this grace and favor.

And an other.
A girl of Padua was in such sort cripled, that she could not go but on her
hands, and besides, was often tormented with the falling sickness, which caused
her to foame and use strange gestures through the extremity of her cruel
affliction; her father having presented her to the S. and requested him, as the
aforesaid mother had done, he cured her by the sign of the cross also; wherein
is to be observed, that in such occurences the faith of those that present and
request, joined with the merittes of the Saints avails much, to obtain
grace and favor of God.

The holy Father goeing one holy day to preach in a spacious place, there being
no Church great enough to contain the people that A woman fell into a filthy
ditch without fouling her apparel, by the meritts of the S.
sought to hear him, a woman that followed the press of the people, was at
lenght so thrust, that she could not avoid to be overthrown into a ditch full
of filth, wherewith the woman being much greiued, not so much for the
apprehension of the hurt she might receive in her body, as for fear to foul
her rich apparel whereof that was the first time of wearing, and that her
husband who was perverse unto her would be offended with her, had recourse unto
God by the merittes of the S. that she went to hear, whom she devoutly
inuocated, and herewith she was seen to arise out of the dirt wherein she had
bin plunged, without any appearance of ordure on her apparel, to the exceeding
amazement of all the beholders.

Having written a letter to his provincial, an Angel carried it, and brought
answer thereof.
THE XXIII. CHAPTER.
THe Saint having spent long time in preaching, hearing Confessions, giving
counsel, and reading at Padua, he much desired to retire himself into some
solitary place, where he might more commodiouslie apply himself to
contemplation, and to that end, he wrote to his Provincial, the which he
accorded him: and having left this letter upon a table in his Cell, he went to
pray his Guardian to procure him some messenger to carry the said letter
faithfully to the Provincial, which the Guardian having done, he returned to
his cell, but found not the letter: which made him suppose that God had
miraculouslie taken it away, to the end he should not remove thence, wherefore
retourning to his Guardian, he told him he was otherwise determined: But
certain days after, in such a time as a messenger might carry the letter and
bring answer thereof, he found on his table the answer which his Provincial
had made thereunto, permitting him to retire; and doubtless there is great
appearance that this letter was carried, and the answer brought by an Angel,
God thereby giving us to understand, how pleasing and grateful the demandes of
his faithful servants are unto him.

How he was twice in spirit at Lysbone in Portugal, to assist his father.
THE XXIV. CHAPTER.
THe Father of the Saint was a gentleman of Portugal residing at Lisbone,
who having managed a good part of the revenue of the king his sovereign, had
also given a just account thereof unto his officers, and withal delivered them
in, the money without demanding acquittance or any dischardge, relying on them
as his freindes, attleast supposing them to be such: but certain months
after, these gentle companions, as worldly people, demanded again the money
they had received of him, and summoned him to yield a new account unto them of
the administration of the money he had in his chardge. This good gentleman was
exceedingly amazed, not knowing what to do, considering he had no specialty
to help himself against them in that which they required; wherefore knowing the
danger of his own case, he went to them, to endeavor to put them in mind of
the finishing and delivery of his accountes, thincking thereby to bring them in
the end to acknowledge and confess the truth. And being before them that sat
and held the place of justice, they most audaciously and impudently denied that
he had so much as presented his accountes, much less had he S. Antony caused
an acquittance to be given to his father which was delivered him and forwhich
he was much trobled.
finished them and delivered them any money. But at the instant S. Antony
appeared, and was present there, who gravely said unto them: Give an quittance
to this good man, of the money he delivered you proceeding of his chardge, and
of the receipt of the kings money, on such a day, in such a place, at such an
hour, in such and such sorts of coin: which if you refuse to do, God will
punish you for it. Which they having heard, exceedingly terrified, they gave a
sufficient dischardge to the Father of the S. who very joyfully returned home,
giving thanckes to God for that he had bestowed on him such a son, who
vanished as soon as he had uttered those words.

Some time after, there was a young man slain before the house of the Saints
Father, for whom his ennemies had laid wait in the night as he was to
return from the great church, which is near to the said house, into the
garden whereof the dead body was cast over the walls, where the next morning he
was found of the officers, by the trace of blood freshly appearing in the
street: whereupon the Father of saint Antony, with all his family were
imprisonned, and forth with condemned to death: and as he was conducted to
execution, He raised one murdered to make him testify that his Father had not
slain him, and to absolve him of an exco^municatio^, who afterward fell dead
again as before.
the S. being preachinge at Padua it was revealed unto him, who then resting
on the pulpitt wherein he preached, he went to relieve his Father, and at the
very instant of his coming to Lisbone, he raised the murdered party, and made
him publicly to confess that his Father had not slain him; yet not
discovering the murderers. The party raised then tourning to the saint
demanded absolution of him, of an excommunication which he had incurred, and
besought him to pray to God for his soul: which the saint having granted
him, he fell dead into the grave. And by this mean in one instant he delivered
his father from corporal death, and the murdered person from eternal; then
returned to his sermon, and being inspired of God, he revealed unto the people
where he had bin. Many of Padua wrote to Lisbone of curiosity to be informed
hereof, and were ascertained of the verity; by which mean those of Portugal
were more perfectly resolved of the matter.

How he endeavored to preserve his Order in the ancient and first observance,
and how for that end he caused Brother Helias to be displaced, who had bin by
the Pope, constituted and named General, after the death of Br. John Parent.
THE XXV. CHAPTER.
AS S. Antony himself most exactly observed what concerned the Order whereof he
made profession, so also could he not in any sort endure the dissolution which
he too manifestly perceived, wherefore now reprehending this Br. now that, he
suffered many tribulations at their hands, which he did not much regard, so
that he might effect what he desired, to which purpose he endeavored to unite
and gain unto him many ancient and fervent Religious, with them to resist the
relaxations of the principal Religious, who especially were those that
depraved the Order, and of these the principal was Br. Helias, as being also
chief of the Religion, made General thereof by Pope Gregory the ninth, after
the death of Brother John Parent, who being learned, very expert in worldly
affairs, and favored of many great persons, attempted, after the death of
S. Francis, to demand diverse privileges of the court of Rome, which he
obtained for himself and the Religious: wherein he wanted not such as would
second him for this new liberty of life, and the lardge way which he had
opened. So by the support and assistance of his followers and adherentes, he
cruelly persecuted those that did contrary him, and especially all the
companions and first disciples of S. Francis, and next to them S. Antony, and
Br. Adam his companion, as zealous of the Order, who at length no longer able
to endure such a ruin, opposed themselves against him publicly at the
Chapter, where they fouud not any one of their opinion, or at least that durst
speak a word, so that all the Religious there present arose against them,
chardgeing the^ that they murmured, caused and raised division in Religion, and
therefore they were so persecuted, that they were enforced to appeal touching
their abuses unto the Pope, and to that end to go to Rome; where being arrived
(notwithstanding the endeavor of Brother Helias, who sought to get them
imprisoned by the way) in presence of the said Pope, who was a singular
favorer and protector of the Order, they laid open the life of Br. Helias and
the relaxation of the discipline of the Order, which by his evil example he
perverted and brought to ruin. Which being well understood and considered by
his Holiness, he ordained a general Chapter to be held at Rome, wherein
himself in person was President. Now this chapter being assembled, S. Antony
proposed the cause of his appeal unto the Pope, alleging that it was upon
the persecution which B. Helias inflicted on those that were zealous of the
Order, as ennemies of the relaxation and liberty of his life and new rule,
which te^ded to the ruin and subversion of the Religion, contrary to the
obligation and duty of the General thereof. Br. Helias hereunto answered,
that he had bin forced by the Religious to accept of that office, that he had
advertised the^ that he could not go on foot, nor live in common by reason of
many necessities of his, and that in a General Cha* they had permitted him, to
eat what he would, yea, gold if it were needful. Besides, that having a horse
in the stable, he must of necessity have a servant, and consequently could not
be without money, whereof he had permissio^ from the holy Sea, as also for supply
of some necessities, and likewise for building the Church of Assisiu^ and to
relieve many Religious, in their occasions. S. Antony replied that albeit he
were permitted to use a horse, yet was he not allowed to maintain a horse in
stable of such a price as he did, and so well furnished, as all the world was
scandalized theratt, and though he were permitted to eat even gold in his
necessity, yet was it not granted he should horde and heap up treasures.
Brother Helias then answered S. Antony, that he had lied: whereatt the Pope
who was well informed of the truth of his life, did much admire, and would no
further testimony against him, then this his proud answer, which made clear
the rest: and therefore having commanded silence to all, with tears in his eyes,
he uttered these words; when I resolved to make this Religious General, I
thought it would have bin for the good of the Order: but alas I experience the
contrary, and see that he is a disturber and ruinour thereof. Wherefore I
deprive him of that office, and will that in his place be presently elected on
other, that is zealous and a protector of the Evangelical law. Which done,
the Pope exceedingly commended S. Antony, and gave him his benediction,
disapprouing and making void the sentences which Br. Helias had denounced
against him, and those that were zealous of the Order, then prayed and exhorted
him to assemble and committ to writing all his sermons, that they might be
printed and yield a public profitt: and that he might more commodionsly apply
himself thereto, he by special privilege exempted him from all other offices
and chardges of the Religion. and thenceforward was ever much affected unto
him, so far forth as after his death he canonized him.

Of the last lent that he preached, of the great fruit of his preaching, and of
his pious worckes.
THE XXVI. CHAPTER.
BEcause it would be perhaps more tedious to you to read, then to me
particulerly to describe all the Provinces, where this glorious S. has
preached, and consequently the affection, reverence and devotion, which all
persons, as well Princes, gentlemen, burgesses, as the meaner people carried
toward him, and how well, by his doctrine, life and miracles, he recovered to
almighty God the lost souls, I will endeavor, to make the same appear unto
you altogether by the only relation of the last sermons he made at Padua, in
a lent that he preached there. This saint then being exempted by the Pope as
before is said, the year of grace 1230. in a General Chapter held in the
month of May, that he might the more commodiously employ himself for the
salvation of souls, having passed and traveled over many Provinces, in all
which he sowed the word of God, he was at length by the holy Ghost conducted
to Padua, where he had formerly much profited; In respect whereof he was very
particulerlie loved and reverenced of the inhabitants of that city; and
therefore when he began to preach there again, such was the confluence of
people that pressed to hear him, that he was forced to preach in a spacious
field without the City, there being no Church capable of the people that from
all parts flocked thither, though there were some very great. Wherefore from
the beginning of Lent, the devil perceauing the great fruit which he did and
would produce, he took him, and so wrested and crushed his throat, that as he
after confessed to his companion, if the sacred virgin, whom he inuocated had
not assisted him, appearing unto him with a great light and to his confort, he
had bin strangled: but arming himself with the sign of the cross, and so
delivered from the ambushes of the devil, he gave infinite thanckes to God and
to his glorious Virgin mother. And being become more courageous (though he were
very feeble by reason of his abstinence and the labors which he ordinarily
undertook, which so depressed him, that he had daily a little fit of an ague)
his zeal of the salvation of souls, being more forcible with him, then
whatsoever other consideration, he ceased not to preach all the whole Lent,
and to spend all the rest of the day in spiritual exercises, as to hear
confessions and to give Counsel: but it was a worthy thing to behold the
fervor and devotion, not only of the Paduans: but also of the inhabitants of
the towns, borowes, villages, and castles there about, that in such abondance
flocked to his sermons, that some went with light in the night to take their
place in the field. The bishopp was present at his preaching with all his
Clergy, as also the principal of the City; married women, maids and young
gentlewomen frequented them withal comlines and modesty, and without any
pomp, whereby it was easy to judge with what spirit they were induced to hear
him. During his predication all the merchantes and artificers did shutt up
their shoppes: audience of justice was omitted, and all other offices ceased,
so that it seemed some solemn feast. In the time of his sermon the audience
was so quiett, that so much as one word was not heard amongst thirty thousand
persons there present: and it succeeded that they all returned replenished
with the spirit of compunction: He that could touch the saint or speak unto
him, esteemed himself happy: and if he had not bin purposlie guarded, they
would have rent and cut his habitt from his back and left him naked; for such
was the fervor of these people, that they seemed to see in him a true Apostle
sent to them by almighty God. By his mean notorious and inueterat quarrels
were appeased; prisonners set at liberty; debtes quitted and forgiven,
offenses and injuries pardoned and forgotten, and money and other things stolen
or ill got, were restored: Briefly what else? Effects of the preachings of S.
Antony.
men and women long accustomed to sin were publikelie converted, and did
penance for their sins, in such sort frequenting the sacraments, that the
Priests had scarce time to serve them. The glorious saint having filled the
Garner of almighty God with most pure corn, after he had tried it, and burned
the cockle, at the very time that he resided at Padua, and having finished
his three books of sermons upon the sondayes and the Quarantine or sermons of
Lent, and the book of the sermons of Sondayes full of very deep subtilitie
and moral droctrine, which he had undertaken and accomplished to satisfy his
holiness and the Guardian of Hostie, he began to feel that God intended to
call him unto* him, and by signs and miracles to demonstrate the merittes of
his most faithful servant, wherein the people had such confidence, that
whosoever could have a bitt of his habitt, held himself happy, and kept it
carefully as a precious holy relic.

Of his last sickness, his prophecy of his future glory, his vision of God, and
his death.
THE XXVII. CHAPTER.
THis lent being ended, S. Antony desiring to repose himself a little, retired
to S. Peter's* field a place appertayning to a gentleman of Padua, called Tise,
one that was exceedingly affected unto him, this place was near to the Covent
of the Friar Minors, which this gentleman in manner alone mayntayned. Now it
may well be imagined with what countenance he entertained the S. doubtless as if
he had bin an Angel of Paradise sent unto him by almighty God: understanding
his intention, he caused to be made him three celles of ozier, one for
himself, and the other two for Brother Lucas, and Br* Roger his companions and
familiers. He remained not long there till he felt himself assaulted with a
great feeblenes that daily augmented, but thincking to ease himself by
travail, he went to the next covent of Friar Minors, where his infirmity did
oppress and utterly overcome him. There did God reveal unto him, that, he
should soon dye, and what glory he should have both in heaven, and on earth.
Wherefore beholding and considering the amenity and good air of the plain, and
situation of Padua, that did neighbor the place where he was, tourning
toward his companion, he uttered these words: this plain shall shortly be
illustrated and honored with great glory; as in deed it has bin from after
his death till this present, yea more then he foretold, in regard of the great
confluence of people that have and daily do resort thither to visitt and
honor his holy relics. And doubtless, this city may be termed happy and
glorious, having in it such a treasure, that has not enriched only it, but all
the world, with singular gifts and graces obtained of God by the merittes of
this glorious S. Now the S. foreseeing that his hour drew near, he told Br.
Roger, that if in case he should dye of that infirmity he would not be
troublesome and chardgeable to the Covent where he then was: and therefore
prayed him to get him conducted to the Covent of the Virgin Mary at Padua,
where the Friar Minors were; which the Religious approving, he laid him on a
wagon, to the great coffeehouse of all the Religious of that oratory: And as
they conducted him to the City, they met a dear friend of his in the way,
who knowing whither he way carried, caused him to change his purpose and
persuaded him to go to a Monastery out of the City called Arcele, alleadgeing
that the visitations he should have at Padua would be very troublesome unto
him. Being then arrived at Arcele, and having there received all the
sacraments, God speedily called him; for having with his Religious said the
seven Psalms, and alone that worthy hymn: O gloriosa Domina, as the glorious
virgin Mother had always in his life bin very gracious unto him: so for his
comfort and defense he saw her at his death: then a little after he saw her
beloved son, whom very attentively beholding, and demanding of Br. Roger
whom he saw, I see, answered he, my Lord JESUS CHRIST. Whereto he added four
other words, for the comfort and edification of his Religious: after that he
reposed and was half an hour in contemplation, and then yielded his soul to
God. He seemed to sleep, and presently his flesh, that before was unpleasing to
behold, as well in regard The death of S. Antony and the chaung of his flesh.
of his abstinence, as his discipline, which had made it withered and wan,
became so white, clear, and bright, that it seemed rather his glorious, then
mortal body. He died the year 1231. the 13. day of June being friday, the 36.
year of his age, whereof he had spent fifteen in his Fathers house, two in the
monastery of S. Vincent at Lisbone, nine at S. Cross of Conimbria, and
about ten in the Order of S. Francis, where he lived very famous, in his life,
doctrine, and miracles.

How he appeared to the Abbot of Vercelles.
THE XXVIII. CHAPTER.
WIthin the very hour of his departure, he suddenly appeared in the chamber of
the Abbot of Vercelles, sometime his master and Governor, as if he had
privately entered, and told him that he had left his residence and was retiring
into his contry: which said, he stroke him with his hand under the chinne, as
if he would dandle him, and so cured him of a disease which he had there, then
vanished as if he had gone out at the chamber door: but the Abbot following
him, could not find him, and enquiring of his family if they had seen him,
they answered, no. At length sending to his Covent, and missing him there, he
began to understand that his contry whither he was goeing was not Portugal,
but Paradis, and that he dyed at the same instant.

Of a great mirache, whereby the death of saint Antony was discovered, and of
the dissension that arose about his sepulture.
THE XXIX. CHAPTER.
AFter the decease of S. Antony, the Religious resolved to conceal it till
they had determined how to dispose of his body, so to avoid the tumult of the
people. But God did manifest it, by the voices of children, that went by
troops, crying through the City: Our Father Saint Antonie is dead* which
induced many Burgesses to go to the monastery of Arcele, where they
understood the truth: and having found him dead, they presently placed many
armed men, to guard the body, and to hinder the transporting thereof. Then the
Friar Minors of the monastery of Padua also hastened incontinently thither,
accompanied with many honorable persons of the City, and required the
body, as appertayning unto them, considering that the saint in his life time
had declared his intention, which was, to be interred in their Covent, which
they made apparent. There were also other Competitors: which were, they that
dwelt on the other side of the bridge, who perceauing that the Oratorie of
Arcele was not secure, and that there might be disorder, endeavored by force to
take away the holy body, to carry it to a monastery of Religious women, near
thereunto: and the controversy grew to such a head, that they were ready to
fight, when as a third party and such as were newters there present, labored
to accord them, with condition to expect, the coming of the minister
Provincial, who should determine the cause. Notwithstanding, the impatient
people, could not expect, but would have the holy body carried into the
City: and to that effect thrice assaulted the Monastery to have the gates
opened for transporting thereof: but at each time they remained at the gate as
blinded and half benumbed, without any power or ability. For which cause (as
also in regard that it was feared the body might begin to savor, by reason of
the great heat that then was) he was taken from off his discovered coffin, and
putt in a square chest under ground, which did so mutine the people who
supposed he had bin utterly taken from that place, that they ran with their
swords in their hands, even to the celles of the Religious, whence they would
not depart till the holy body was shown them, which appeased them. Four
days after his death, the Provincial arrived, who was of opinion (with whom
joined the bishopp) that he should be interred in the said Covent in the City
according to his own ordonance in his life time. To this effect the Bishop
caused a very solemn procession to be made, and the Governor of the City
sent a company of foot men to guard a new bridge which he had caused expreslie
to be made of boats: but understanding that the inhabita^tes of the otherside
the bridge were resolved by force of arms to surprise the holy body, which by
right they could not challenge, and that they had already broaken the bridge
of boats, he proclaimed by sound of trompett, that no man nor woman upon pain
of death should stir out of their lodgeing, and banished from that contrie
and territory, the principal heads of this conspiracy, and by this mean
freed all the Religious of both sex in Padua from fear; for they were
extremely afflicted, and accused themselves, imputing the same to arrive for
their offenses: wherefore they besought our Lord JESUS CHRIST, to deliver them
from this affliction, which also had put the whole city into a great tumult.
So the glorious body of S. Antony was transported to the said Covent of Padua,
where it was interred in a sepulcher newly and miraculously discovered, the
fifth day after his death.

Of the resolution of his canonization, and of certain miracles there wrought.
THE XXX. CHAPTER.
TO speak the truth the dissension aforesaid was not without cause,
considering that they contested about so precious a treasure: it is also to be
considered how justly the Paduans possessed this holy body, since they hazarded
their life for it, before it wrought any miracles; as if each of them had bin
assured of the great number of miracles which God would worck by it, as he
began that very day, making this pacification to appear so much more
pleasing, and this treasure more dear and grateful, as the contention had bin
greiuous, by means of the recovery of all the diseased that only touched his
sepulcher, yea of those that, unable to come to his sepulcher, or into the
Church, inuocated his holy name without. This so notable and inexpected
success, spreading incontinently over all the neighbor places, the Bishop of
Padua unable to retain thedeuotio^ of the people, that publicly honored him
according to his merittes; he sent ambassadors to Rome in his name and the
Paduans, to beseech the Pope to canonise this S. which God had bestowed on
them. They being graciously entertained and heard, together with the examen
made by order of the said Bishop, and an other by the deputies of his
holiness, who were an Abbot of S. Benedict, and a Dominican Prior, upon the
life, conuersations, and miracles of the S. and finding more then sufficient
proof, he proposed to the Consistory his canonization at Spoletum, it being
not full, but near A Cardinal opposing against the canonization of the S. God
inspired him to change his opinion.
a year after his death. Whereto there directly opposed himself a Cardinal,
which caused further proceeding to be deferred, till the day following, but the
first night after, the Cardinal had this dream: It seemed unto him that his
holiness would consecrate an Altar, and to that end demanded holy relics
of him. But he not knowing what to give him, heard a voice that said: Give him
of the new relics of S. Antony. Whereupon, this Cardinal awakinge,
solicited the Pope more then any other, to hasten the canonization of the S.
as having bin by this divine voice, fully assured of his great merittes.
Besides the approbation of the under written miracles wrought after his death,
nor including those wrought in his life time, he cured nineteen that were
lame, five of the palsy, five that were crooked, six blind, three deaf,
three mute, two of the gout: he raised two to life, and cured diverse others of
sundry diseases. For which cause, the year 1232. on the day of Penticost he
was enrolled by the Pope in the Catalogue of Saints, with great solemnity.
The said Pope composed and sung that worthy antheme: O Doctor optime; and
ordained it to be sung in all churches the All the belles of Lisbone did ring
of themselves.
day of his feast, which was constitued to be yearly the thirteenth of June.
One the day of his canonization all the belles of his city of Lisbone did
ring of themselves, to the exceeding contentment of all persons, whereof they
knew no cause, but that they felt an inestimable joy in their hearts: but they
understood afterward that their contryman and fellow-cittizen S. Antony, had
bin that day canonized.

The bulle of the aforesaid canonization, taken out of the tenth chapter of the
sixth book, and here more properly placed.
GRegory bishop, servant of the servants of God, to our venerable Brethren,
Archbishops, Bishops, health and Apostolical benediction. As God says by
the Prophett: I will make you honored and praised of all people; and by the
sage, he promises that the just shall shine in the presence of God, as the
sun; so it seems unto us expedient that we also here on earth below, do
praise the saints which his divine Majesty has crouned in heaven; and
considering withal, that God is known and adored principally in them, who is
praiseworthy and glorious in his Saints, and that miraculously to manifest
his omnipotency, and his mercy toward our salvation, he even ennobleth here
below by miracles, his faithful servants, with whom he has concurred to the
meritt of eternal glory, and this, to confound the obstinacy of many
heretics, and to confirm his church in his holy Catholic, Apostolic and
Roman faith, and to expel out of lukewarm hearts, all sloth and negligence,
awakening them to good worckes, by these holy examples, and that the hearts of
heretics might be made pliable to believe by effect, what they seem not to
understand by the holy scriptures; and finally, that all Jews and Pagans, the
veil of blindness being taken from before their eyes, may see this transparent
light of the omnipotency of our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, and that they may not
allege for excuse, that they had no occasion deserving their conversion unto
him, and their acknowledgement of him for true God and true man. Wherefore my
beloved, we yield thanckes to this bountiful giver of all goodness, if not as we
ought, at least as we may, for that it has pleased him, for confirmation of
our holy faith, and the confusion of heretics, to bestow on us, holy and
famous men in these days, who by signs and manifest miracles have declared,
how true, inestimable and indubitable is the faith of the holy Roman Church,
since they who dye therein, so dye in the grace of God, that they glitter,
twinckle and shine in the world, as Suns in the firmament. Therefore being
therein but one faith, and the same, by this divine and manifest approbation
appearing most true, the falsehood of all others must be very evident. Of the
number of those that have meritted to worck miracles, before and after their
death, is the blessed Father S. Antony, of the Order of the Friar Minors, who
living in this world, was very famous for his great merittes, and living now in
heaven, he shines by many miracles which are ordinarily wrought at his
sepulcher, whereof we are assured, as well by very authentical worthy acts, as
by revelation of persons worthy of creditt: These two things, merittes and
miracles, suffice to give testimony among men of the sanctity of a man, yea
they suffice to make us yield to honor and invoke them, as our intercessors
unto God, which two things, are taken out of this text of the Gospel: They
goeing forth preached every where: our lord worcking Marc. ^6.
withal, and confirming the word with signs that followed. For this cause we
have given order to the abouesaid Bishop, to Br. Giles Iourdain, Priour of the
Order of S. Benett, and to Br. John, Priour of S Augustins, in the monastery of
the Iacobins of Padua, that they should make an exact examen, and approved
catalogue of the miracles of the said Saint, which we having seen to be
conformable to that which by our own experience we know to be very true
touching his life and holy conversation: that it may not seem we would hinder
or deprive him of his praise, being thereunto urged by the said Bishop of
Padua, and the reverence of the servants of God, which so notoriously deserve
the same: and by the advice of our venerable Brethren, the Cardinals of the
holy Roman Church, and of all the Prelates at this present near unto us: we
have enrolled him in the Catalogue of the SS. Wherefore the candell not being
set on the candlestick but to give light, we pray and command all those to
whom the knowledge of these presents shall come that in virtue of this
Apostolical Breuie they induce their subjects, and procure them solemnly and
reverently to keep and honor his feast, which is the thirteenth of June, to
the end that God being moved and appeased by his holy prayers, do give us his
holy grace in this life, and his glory in the other. Besides, that the
sepulcher of this worthy Confessor, who by the splendor of his miracles
beautifieth our holy Church, be, with the honor due unto it visited and
frequented; we trusting in the divine grace, and in the authority of the
glorious Apostles saint Peter and saint Paul; we mercifully remitte and
release a years penance enjoined them, to all those that truly confessed and
penitent, do on the day of his feast, and all the octaue of every year,
visitt the same. Given at Spoletum, the twelfeth of Iulie, in the sixth year
of our Popedom.

How his body was transported into the said church of Padua, then into that
where it now is, and wherefore,
THE XXXI. CHAPTER.
POpe Alexander the fourth, desiring to deliver many Cities of Lombardie,
from the cruelty of the Tyran Ezelin, that had usurped almost all the Venetian
territory, he sent to Venise as his Legate Philip de Fontaine, Bishop of
Rauenna, that having overthrown a mighty and potent army, he might assige
Padua, where the Tyran had placed a nephew of his, as lieutenant to guard that
place faithfully for him. God determining to end and cease the tyranny of
this cruel Prince, and to deliver that City by the merittes of saint
Antony, the night of his feast. The city being in this trouble, the Guardian
of the Covent of the Friar Minors, called Brother Bartholomew Corradin,
watching at the sepulcher of the Saint in fervent prayers and tears praying
for the delivery of that city, he heard a clear voice that seemed to proceed
out of the said sepulcher which said unto him: Brother Bartholomew, fear no
more, but be comforted and give thanckes to God: for I promise and assure thee,
that on my octaue day, this city shall be restored to her former liberty; which
came to pass: for Anselmus the Governor thereof, being terrified by the hand
of God, went out and fled with all his people, in such sort that the said
Apostolical Legate entered in, and restored all things to their former
splendor, liberty and freedom. The said voice was not only heard by the said
Guardian: but also by many Religious of the Covent that watched in the said
Church, who gave testimony thereof afterward. Wherefore the Paduans ordained that
thenceforward the said octaue day should be solemnised, as the day it self of
the feast of saint Antony, in acknowledgement of that singular benefitt.
Afterward they took him for a singular advocate of their city, consecrating
unto him the altar of their great church, wherein they placed his relics,
and there they celebrated his feast, on which day many worthy miracles were
wrought. Padua being thus delivered, the year 1259. the Paduans began to build
a great and sumptuous Church, wherinto were transported his holy relics the
year, 1273. the eve of Quasi modo, the Cardinal of Bolonia named Guy Charles
Bishop of Portuensis, legate of his holiness, with many ceremonies solemnised
the said translation. This Cardinal having bin delivered from death by saint
Antony, was exceeding devout unto him, and therefore offered unto him a fair
and rich shrine or reliquarie of silver, wherein he putt his holy head. Saint
Bonauenture General of the Order, was present at his translation, and opened
the shrine, wherein the glorious body of the Saint had bin thirty years,
which he found all turned to ashes saving the tongue which was very fresh and
vermillion as when it had life, which taking in his hands, in presence of all
the company with abundance of tears he uttered these words: O blessed
tongue which have always praised they God, and have labored others to do the
like, it very evidently appears that thou have highly merited before God!
then kissing it very tenderly, he put it again very reverently into the
said reliquarie. On a certain time after, a General desired to transport this
holy tongue from that place; but having taken it up, and thincking to carry it
away, he could never find the door where to go forth, nor A miracle of the
tongue of S. Antony.
had he power to carry it back whence he had taken it; wherefore he secretly
hid it in an altar, none perceauing the same, where it remained many years
after, till it pleased the Saint to discover it, so that, taking it thence, it
was put in a ve^ie fair and rich reliquary of crystal, where it is even to
this day shown pure and entier to all devout Pilgrims.

How he raised his Nephew that died at Lisbone.
THE XXXII. CHAPTER.
ANephew of the saints the son of his sister, called Paris, played one day
at Lisbone, on the sea shore, with many children his companions, all which
entered into a shallop, which for their recreation they lanched into the sea;
but there suddenly arose a storm, which raising the sea waves, presently
ouer-whelmed the shalop: all that were therein saved themselves by swiming
except Paris, who being the youngest, could not swim, but was drowned; which
his Father understanding, he prayed the Fishers to search for recovery of his
body, to give it Christian buryall. They more to satisfy him, then in hope to
find him, sought him sometime, and at length God permitted them to find him,
and delivering him to his Father, the kindred were of opinion to have him
buried: but his pittyfull mother, the sister of S. Antony, having good hope of
the life of her son by the merittes of her brother, would not permit him to
be buried, and therefore would be continually near him all the day following
and the night after; but the next morning the kindred purposing not to permit
the body any longer unburied, because it already exceedingly sauoured, the
mother resolutely said and auowed, that if they would bury her child, they
should bury her alive together with it. Then she made this prayer to S. Antony:
O my glorious Brother, if charity move thee as I believe it does, and if thou
be so careful and ready to gratify them that invoke thee, yea such as are
strangers, I beseech thee to have compassion of thy sister, and of thy Nephew,
who if thou please to restore him life, shall serve God in thy Order, when he
shall attain to age convenient and competent to that end, if so it please the
divine Majesty. The success was admirable, for as soon as she had ended her
vow, the child that had bin three days dead, arose before all the company, and
having attained age sufficient, he accomplished the said vow, taking the habit
of the Order of his uncle, wherein he piously perseuered.

Of two other raised from death by Saint Antonie, and of some others.
THE XXXII. CHAPTER.
A Queen of Leon in Spain borne in Portugal, having by accident of sickness
lost her daughter of eleven years of age, and having heard this foresaid
miracle recounted, would not have her daughter buried, but kept her three days
without buryall; during which time she A princess was raised by the merits of
S. Antony.
devoutly inuocated the helpeof S. Antony, with a fervent faith, for which she
deserved at length to be heard: but the child her daughter being raised said
unto her: dear Mother, I beseech God to pardon you for having troubled me in
the celestial glory, where I was amongst the virgins, though it be not for
long time: for I am restored to life at the instance of S. Antony but for
fifteen days: which so succeeded, for fifteen days after, she dyed again.

A gentleman that could have no children, vowed to the S. that if he would
obtain him one, he would every year visitt his sepulcher, and he was heard;
but goeing one day to accomplish his vow he left his son of seven years old
sick in his house, who by little and little so recovered health that he went to
play with his companions, in a channel where then there was no water, it being
bended an other way to water a certain plain, but the bank or bay being not
strong enough, gave such way to the violence of the water, that it returned
impetuously into the channel, where it drowned nine children playing there,
whereof two being found were presently buried. The said gentleman retourning
from Padua, of his first friends that he met, he demanded how his son did:
they unwilling to deliver him such unwelcome news, answered, they thought he
was well, because it was not long since he played thereby with his companions.
This poor father passed farther, and came to his house, where he asked for his
son. His servants seemed not to hear him, and endeavored to divert him
from such demand: but he said, he would neither eat nor drinck till he had
seen him. Which constrained them to declare unto him the unfortunate disaster
of his son; which having understood he became out of himself; but
afterward by little and little recovering his spirittes, he swoare and very
obstinately protested, that he would neither eat nor drinck till saint Antony
had restored him his son, which with a very fervent faith expecting, a little
after his son entered in where he was with other nine of his companions, that
by the merittes of saint Antony had bin saved with him, for which they praised
God in his saint and glorified him with heart and voice. It is found to be
recorded that the two other children companions of the foresaid, which were
already buried, were also raised by the merittes of the S. who had compassion
of the clamours that their parents made unto him.

In Apulia, in the city of Monoplia, a child did so undermine a pit,
neerevnto the Friar Minors, that the earth having no support brake down upon
him, where he was buried, without appearance of any relief* His mother
understanding thereof, ran instantly to the monastery of Friar Minors, crying
and often reiterating these words: O S. Antony, restore me my child. In mean
while they were busy in taking up the earth from the pit, wherein they found
the child alive, though much troubled, who was asked how it was possible that
so much earth had not choked An other covered in earth.
him? He answered, that S. Antony had still held his hand* under his throat,
to give him means to breath: which gave all those present occasion to praise
and thanck God in his saint.

Of many miracles wrought against such as* would not believe the glory of the
Saint.
THE XXXIV. CHAPTER.
A Chaplain belonging to the Bishop of Padua, hearing the first miracles of S.
Antony related, would not only not believe them, but even did jest and scoff
at them. But he presently felt the divine revenge; for he was stricken with an
extreme sharp A Chaplain incredulous of the miracles of the S. having recourse
unto him in a mortal infirmities, was heard.
and pestilencious fever, which did so enfeeble him and brought him to that
extremity, that he was in danger of death. Whereupon acknowledging his offense
and repenting, the third day of his sickness, he called his mother, to whom
he confessed his fault, and protested he was exceedingly grieved thereat; then
he prayed her to go to the sepulcher of the S. there to seek to obtain
mercy, and in his name to promise, that thenceforward in steed of incredulity
and dirision, he would firmly believe, publicly preach, and manifest the
glory of this miracle to all the world. It was admirable to consider, the
mother goeing thither, she inuocated the Saint, then made the vow: and in that
very instant the sick party was cured; leaping out of his bed to the great
admiration of all that were present.

A certain old gentleman that had bin an heretic from his infancy, setting
one day at table, heard many miracles recounted of saint A gentleman proved a
miracle by casting a glass against the (...).
Antony, whereatt gibing and reputing all fabulous, he took a drincking glass
of crystal, and threw it out at the windoe, saying: If saint Antonie can
preserve* that glass from breaking, I will henceforward hold him for a saint*
and the glass being very forciblie cast against the stones, was miraculouslie
preserved entier. This heretic seeing so manifest a miracle, was moved, not
only to* believe that Saint Antonie was truly and reallie a Saint, but was
also induced to forsake his her^sie, and abiuring it sincerely* to embrace our
faith* which he performed.

Diverse persons eating at table, fell into discourse of the miracles of the
saint, and after many relations, one of them recounted that of the glass
aforesaid, exceedingly admiring and wondering thereat; an other of them that was
a companion and scoffer doubting of this miracle, An other seeing withered
vignebranches to bear grapes in an instant and to yield wine
saw withered branches of a vigne, whereof he took a handful and in the other
hand a glass, saying: If Saint Antony would make grapes to grow out of these
branches, and that their juice and liquor would fill this glass, I would hold
it a miracle, and then would I beeleue the former miracle you recounted: Which
he had no sooner spoaken, but all the sprigges of the branches which this
scoffing fellow held, budded forth leaves, and then very fair grapes, which
being crushed together filled the glass with liquor, and by this mean the
virtue of S. Antony was acknowledged and confessed by those that formerlie
derided him.

Saint Antonie was become famous and reverenced at Padua, for the miracles by
him there ordinarily* wrought, wheratt nevertheless some heretics did
ordinarily scoff and gibe, and one time they purposed publikelie to deride
them, and to that end presented themselves at the Church dedicated to the
saint: and being before the sepulcher, they began to cry and lament, saying
that one of them (who had a hand kirchefe before his eyes, which they had
embrued with blood, that it might be thought his eyes were thrust out,
according to their cry) had in a quarrel unfortunately lost both his eyes,
and therefore they exhorted the people to pray for this wretched blind man, who
of his own part omitted not to pray to God, and feigned to invoke the saint
cunningly playing the hypocrite. Now after they had spent about an hour upon
this subject, the blind fellow purposed to take off his handkirchefe, to make
a show first that he was cured, as he cried and protested; that by this fact he
might afterward infer, that as often as any miracles An other iestingly
faining to be blind was bli^d in deed.
were wrought by saint Antony, they were supposed and suborned as that was.
But they were much amazed when they saw the two prunelles out of the Imposters
eyes, when as they determined and thought to deride the saint, and therefore
changing their laughter into tears, and their quibbes and scoffs into
prayers, they with such a faith humbled themselves, that at length they
obtained the recovery of their imposters sight.

An heretical soldier meeting a poor leaper, that went to the sepulcher of
saint Antony to be cured, said unto him: Friend thou loosest they labor and
time, for I assure thee, if saint Antony ever cure thee of thy leaprosie, I am
content to have it. The poor Leaper yet omitted not to proceeded in his
journey, and being at the sepulcher of A soldier had the leprosy of a leper, as
he desired dissuading him from goeing to the sepulcher of S. Antony.
S. Antony he fell a sleep. The S. appeared unto him in a dream and said: go
and carry thy clappers to the soldier that thou mettest in the way for he has
thy leproise as he said, and bid him use them. So being awaked, and finding
himself perfectly cured he carried his clapper by commandment of the S. to the
soldier, whom he found full of leprosy from the head to the foot: for which
he very hitterly lamented, and repe^ting what he had done vowing and
recommending himself to the S. he deserved to be heard, having learned by
experience, how great is the virtue of the Saints of God.

Of many other miracles, and of the Brief of S. Antony against the Devils,
which remained in the hands of the king of Portugal.
THE XXXV. CHAPTER.
A soldier by the merits of S. Antony being cured of a deadly hurt thincking to
be revenged had his wond again. Vows must be accomplished. One deaf and du^me
cured by the said S.
IN a combatt that happened between two soldiers, one of them was so strangely
hurt in one arm, that speaking humanely it was incurable, at least, saving
his life, he could not avoid a perpetual main. Now recommending himself to
S. Antony he was presently cured, the wound being so closed, it as if he had
never bin hurt. But as is said of the wicked, having past and escaped the
danger they scoff at the S. so the soldier began to consider by what means
he might be revenged, and diverse times discoursing thereof with himself, the
night before this lewd design, the said wound came into his arm as before:
the S. teaching him and all others, that the graces and favors of God are not
to be abused against his service, that is, employed in any thing which he
forbids, and is not pleasing unto him, as to the detriment of ones neighbor.

A child of Padua called Henry, having a swelling in his neck, vowed to the S.
and was immediately cured: but his mother that caused him to vow not regarding
to fulfill it, the infirmity returned, yet repenting and accomplishing the
vow, her son was cured again.

An Abbot having great compassion of his servant, that was deaf and dumme,
vowed in his behalf to S. Antony, that if he would please to cure him, he
would employ him all his life in the service of his Church; he was instantly
cured, for which he was not ungrateful: for he employed him in his church all
the days of his life in the City of Sautaren in the kingdom of Portugal, in
the reign of Don Donis.

There was a poor woman, who though she were very devout to S. Antony, yet
being sinful, the devil sometimes posessed her and tempted her to destroy her
self, persuading her that she could never satisfy God, for the many sins
she had committed but by voluntary killing her self; to this false
imagination, he added a false vision; for the devil appeared unto her in form
of a crucifix, telling her that for the love she boar him he would save her,
but she could hardly satisfy for her sins unless she would voluntary murder
her self; to which purpose he cou^sailed her to go that very hour to the
river Tage, and there to drown her self, and promised her to receive her at
the instant into his glory. This woman having had this vision, concealed it
sometime in her heart; now it happened, that when her husband excedingly checked
and rebuked her, among other injuries calling her possessed with a devil; she
partly in fury, and despair procured her by her husband, and partly urged by
the devil by remembrance of the said vision, resolved to drown her self, and
with that intention departed from her house; but S. Antony would not permit
such an act, so unworthy of a Christian to be perpetrated, especially on such a
day, it being on the celebration of his feast: for this miserable woman passing
before his Church, was inspired to enter into it: S. Antony hindered a woman
from drowni^g* her self.
which she did, and the^ very devoutly prayed the S. that he would voutsafe to
reveal unto her, if it were possible, whither it were the will of God she
should drown her self or not: having ended her prayer, she slept a sweet
sleep and so light, that she heard the voice of the Saint which in her dream
said unto her: look upon thy bosom and when thou have read the writing thou
find there, thou shall be cured. The woman presently awaking found on her
bosom a bitt of parchment, wherein was written in letters of Gold: Ecce crucem
Domini, fugite parts diuersae; vicit leo, de tribu Judah: Alleluia, Alleluia:
As soon as she had read the same, she was entierlie freed of her temptation.

The king of Portugal Don Donis, having bin advertised of this great miracle,
by the husband of the woman, demanded the said Brief or writing, which was
given him: but it was strange, this woman not having her writing, the devil
began presently to vex her: but having no means to demand it again of the
king, who had put it amongst his relics (having wrought many miracles by this
brief) the husband was advised to request a copy thereof, which by mean of
some Religious, he obtained, which having delivered to his wife, she was all
the rest of her days freed from the said temptation, living securely the space
of twenty years.

How he delivered from death the Princess of Portugal. Taken out of the
sixteenth chapter of the tenth book, to be more properly put in this place.
THe princess, Lady Aldoucia daughter of the king of Portugal and of queen
Teresa, by a very extreme and dangerous infirmity that tormented her,
approaching to her death, her mother had recourse unto saint Antony, to whom
she was much devoted, most affectionately recommending her daughter unto him,
and praying him to remember that he was borne in that kingdom, and that as he
had cured, saved, and raised so many in Italy, he would please also to deliver
her daughter from that danger of death. At that very instant, so strong and
violent a fit of the fever did assault the sick Princess, that every one
esteemed it her last agony. But then did the Saint appear unto her, and said:
daughter, God has sent me to thee for satisfaction of the frequent prayers of
thy mother, to putt it to the election of thy will, either to go now with me
to Paradise, or for consolation of thy mother to continue longer in the world.
The Princess having choasen the second; saint Antony delivered her his girdle
saying: Well, kiss this Cord: which she taking in her hands, and as she
thought holding it fast, she cried to her mother, Madame, Madame, come see the
glorious saint Antony whom I hold by his girdle, which he has delivered me
to kiss thereby to be cured: she coming and not seeing the Saint at all,
found her daughter perfectly well; wherefore she diuulged this miracle in the
City of Allenquor, where this happened, in the Church of the Friar Minors,
whither she with all her Court repaired to give thanckes to God and to his holy
servant.

Of certain other miracles of saint Antony
THE XXXVI. CHAPTER.
A Poor man being seduced by an Inchaunter, that promised to procure him an
instinct to know what soever he desired, entered with him into a circle where in
an instant he saw appear a great number of devils, who perceauing him to be
utterly amazed and terrified, did rent out his eyes and tongue, and then
vanished. This miserable fellow hastened directly to the Church of S. Antony,
where repenting A blind man had his sight and spech restored by the meritts of
the S.
to have consented to the Magician, he inuocated with his heart, not having the
use of his voice, his assistance. And upon these his humble prayers, in the
time of high mass, as the Priest sung. Gloria in excelsis, Benedictus qui
venit in n^^une Domini, his two eyes were miraculously restored him, which
being known, all the City of Padua was full of the bruit, each one desiring
to see him. Many of the more ancient and noble of the city held it convenient,
that all the people there present should join themselves in prayer that it
might please God to accompany this first miracle with a second, in restoring
his speech: To this effect they all fell on their knees and offered their
prayers, the Mass always co^tinuying: when the Agnus Dei was sung, his tongue
was also restored, whereby he began with a loud voice to praise God and his S.

A Religious unable to support the pains of purgatory which she had desired
obtained by the S. to be freed of them.
A Religious woman of the Order of saint Clare, having heard preached the
rigor of the pains of Purgatory, conceived such a terror of goeing thither,
that she prayed almighty God to grant her to suffer her Pugatory in this
world, and so long continued in prayer that at length God heard her. But being
unable any long time to support, so rigorous and insupportable torments, she
discovered the cause of her afflictions to the other Religious, whom she
prayed to make supplication to God by the merittes of saint Antony, that he
would please to moderate those so bitter torments which she endured: and so
all the Religious with such devotion and humility applied themselves to prayer,
that by the merittes of S. Antony she was eased thereof, and thenceforward she
was no more so rash as to tempt God; but entierly resigned herself to the will
of his divine majesty, casting herself absolutely into his disposition.

The Religious Br. Bernardine of Parma, by a violent catarre in his throat
became dumme, for cure whereof were applied all about his neck burning cauters,
all which nothing auayled: so that he became so feeble that putting to him a
little wax candle lighted, he could not with his breath blow it out: wherefore
his death and stifling being feared, he was carried to Padua, where the feast
of S. Antony was celebrated, to visitt his sepulcher. There was then a great
concourse of people, where in public presence he offered his prayer, shedding
abondance of tears: then he began to spett and to avoid such a quantity of
filthy and loathsome matter, that the beholders could no longer endure it,
their hearts so arrising at the sight of such insupportable stuff: and
withal he was cured* of the catarre and recovered his speech, for which he
heartily praised God and his saint.

And a child was raised from death.
The son of a poor woman about twenty months old called Thomasin, dwelling
near the said Church, fell one day unadvisedly into a pond full of water with
his head downward, and was carried home dead. His mother full of desolation,
hastened with great faith to the sepulcher of the saint, before which she fell
on her knees, beseeching him with all her soul to restore her child to life:
and promising every year, though she were needy, to give an almose to the
poor in his honor, of the quantity of her sons weight in wheat: who was
speedily restored to life to the exceeding amazement of all that were present,
who together with the mother gave thanckes to God for the same.

These miracles of S. Antony are approved to be very authentical, together
with three or four which he wrought with S. Francis, in whose life we have
inserted them, where by the use of the table they may be easily found, for
which miracles and many other, generally known, may truly be said: Mirab^lis
est Deus in sanctis suis: Amen.

The end of the Fifth book of the second part of the first volume, of the
Chrocles of the Friar Minors.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES OF THE FRIAR MINORS.
WHEREIN ARE CONTAINED THE LIVES OF twenty particular and special Disciples of
the Seraphicall F. S. Francis. Translated by the aforesaid.
The life of Br. Bernard Quintauall, the eldest spiritual child of Saint
Francis.
Of the conversion of Br. Bernard Quintauall, and of his poverty.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
BROTHER Bernard Quintauall, was borne at Assisium, of the most noble family
therein, where having considered the strangenes of life of S. Francis, his
admirable contempt of worldly commodities, his unchangeable assurance, his
invincible constancy in supporting iniuryes, and his exceeding patience, in
enduring the troubles and labors of this life, yea seeming daily more and
more to conceive greater contentment therein; He esteemed all this could not
proceed but by the will of God: which he experienced, as has bin amply
declared in the eight chapter of the first book and first volume, where his
conversion is related at lardge. Having then renounced the world, and sold all
he had in the marckett place of Assisium, and given the price to the poor and
beggars of JESUS CHRIST, following S. Francis, he deserved to be his eldest
child, as well in time as perfection; for by special privilege he had the
grace to be a true lover of poverty. And also S. Francis sometimes would say,
that Br. Bernard had founded his Order, selling his substance to give to the
poor, even to his very apparel wherewith he was clothed, so that his first
Religious habitt was made of almose: then being thus naked, he offered and cast
himself into the arms of JESUS CHRIST crucified naked, whom he imitated even
to his death. God also by a particular prerogative bestowed on him, a joyful
patience which merueillously shined in him, and particulerlie in those iornyes
he performed upon obedience, edifying his neigbour, and exercising himself in
virtues.

How Br. Bernard by the virtue of patience built a monastery at Bolonia, and
some others in Lombardy.
THE II. CHAPTER.
AFter the first confirmation of the Order by Pope Innocent the third, and
having received the precept of penitence, Brother Bernard was sent by saint
Francis to Bolonia, to edify the people with examples of piety. Being in that
City, the Children seeing him in so simple a habitt and so different from
other Religious, they followed him in the streets, crying after him,
reproaching him, reuiling him, and using him as a fool: which he endured with
immovable patience and contentment; yea to procure himself the greatest
disgrace and dishonor for the love of JESUS CHRIST, who was so much contemned
Patience of Br. Bernard.
for us, he would frequent those places where was the greatest recourse of
people, and there the idle and loytering companious scoffed at him, and
flouted him as a fool. But the patient and obediente servant of God, did
neither resist nor complain, but showed a pleasing and joyful contenance,
contenting himself for his food with a bitt of bread given him for the love of
God, and thus he continued for certain days, till it pleased our Lord, to
declare him to be his servant, which by this means came to pass. One of the
noblest of the City who then was the Judge, seeing and considering the life of
this poor Religious, said in himself, this man thus contemned, must needs
be some holy personnage in regard of his extraordinary patience. And therefore
he called him unto him, and having demanded what he was, and whence he came,
Brother Bernard drew out of his bosom the Evangelical rule which saint
Francis had given him, and which he had written no less in his heart then in
that paper: and without using any other words delivered it unto him. The judge
having seen the same, was stricken into an amazement, and tourning toward
many that were flocked thither to hear the Religious discourse: he said: This
rule doubtless teaches the most strict and rigorous religious life that is in
the Church; and in deed this man and all his companions that lead this life,
represent unto us the Apostolical College, and therefore are worthy of very
great honor. This being said, he conducted Brother Bernard to his house, with
such joy and contentment as if he had bin an Angel of heaven. A little after,
at his own expenses he built for him and his companions, a Covent without the
city but very near the walls as most commodious for them. He lived and dyed
as a devout Brother of the Order. In this sort was Brother Bernard the first
that began the Covent at Bolonia, which he did not seek to build sumptuouslle
and found with much rentes and possessions, but with the examples of a most
profound humility and patience; he built upon the firm rock of JESUS CHRIST,
who is our true and lively foundation. Br. Bernard being then thus seated at
Bolonia, the people by little and little knowing his sanctity, began to respect
him and desirouslie to hear his words, and to admit his Cou^sailes, in such
sort that in a short space, many did not only forsake their disordered life,
but also left the world, becoming Friar Minors in the said monastery. To be
short, he was generally respected of all as a saint, each one desired to see
him, and to kiss that habitt which formerlie they misprised; but he, as the
true and humble disciple of Evangelical humility, shunning these vain
honors, returned to the holy Father saint Francis, whom he besought to
send him some other where: wherein the saint was willing to gratify him, and
sent him into Lombardie, where he edified the people with admirable virtue, and
erected many monasteries, and recovered an infinite: number of souls that
resolved to follow the life and profession of the: gospel of JESUS CHRIST.

Of the pilgrimage of Brother Bernard to S. James in Galicia, and what happened
to him there.
THE III. CHAPTER.
WHen the holy Father S. Francis went into Spain to visitt the Church of
saint James in Galicia, he took Br. Bernard and certain other of his
companions with him. They found in theiriorney a poor sick person in a
place very miserable and discomfortable, and vttetly abandoned; there they
remained certain days to have care of him, serve and comfort him. But saint
Francis knowing his sickness would be of long continuance, left Brother
Bernard to attend him, and proceeded on his pilgrimage, whence retourning he
found the sick man recovered, and took Brother Bernard back with him into
Italy, whence shortly after he demanded leave of him to visit the Apostle
Saint James in Galicia, not having opportunity to go with him the other
time; and having accomplished his just desire, at his return he came to a
river which, by reason of the swiftnes and violence of the current which was
very deep, he could not wade over, wherefore he was enforced to stay at the
side thereof, where a little after, an Angel in very active manner appeared unto
him, and saluted him in Italian: Which Brother Bernard admiring, asked him if
he came from Italy, or whence he was: whereto he answered, that he came from
our Lady of Angels, where he had bin to admonish Br. Helias of his temerity in
desiring to make a new rule, and that he had rudely shutt the gate upon him,
for which God would punish him. Which said, he easily conducted Br. Bernard to
the other side of the river, and then incontinently vanished, leaving Br.
Bernard exceedingly comforted, who gave thanckes to God for having visited and
assisted him by his Angel. Being at Assisium he recounted to the holy Father
S. Francis and others, what the Angel had told him of Brother Helias: by
which mean it was known that he who was at the door of the Covent of our
Lady of Angels, and had spoken to Brother Helyas (as has bin related in the
100. chapter of the first book) was sent of God, to propose unto him the
question there set down, to give him occasion of amendment.

How Brother Bernard received of almighty God the grace of extaticall
contemplation and of the effects thereof, together with his abstinence.
THE IV. CHAPTER.
THis holy Father oftentimes retired himself from the worckes and labor of
the active life (wherein he spent a good part of his time for the salvation of
souls) to the repose of the contemplative life, whereby he obtained of God
such a sublimitie of spirit and clearness of understanding, that the deepest
learned divines repaired unto him, to demand solution of difficult and
obscure passages of the holy scripture: It seemed that his soul conuersed
continually in heaven. Sometimes he went over the mountains entierly
transported in God, ravished as a prophetical spirit in manifest sign of his
continual mental elevation. Fifteen years before his death, as he was
spiritually in heaven, he had also his countenance ever lifted very high: in
his iornyes, when he began to feel the force of spiritual ecstasy, he would
bid his companion to expect a while: then would turn out of the way and seek
some tree against which to rest, and so held himself firm and stable, that
his spirit might not wander diverse ways, till the ecstasy were ended. He one
time said to that great contemplative Brother Giles, that he made himself but
half a man, remaining as a woman, shut up in his Cell, and not goeing abroad
to teach men the right way of their salvation. Brother Giles answered him: O
Brother, it is not permitted to all men to eat and fly as swallows, as it is
to you, who goeing, resting, not stirring, and running in any place whatsoever,
do always taste the extaticall and divine consolation. For which cause saint
Francis took great contentment to discourse with him of matters concerning
God, so that, to that effect, they were sometimes found together in a wood,
both rapt in ecstasy, where they remained in that manner a whole night
together. As he one day heard Mass in the quier, he was so ravished in
spirit, that he remained till the ninth hour immovable and insensible, with
his eyes fixed toward heaven. When he returned to himself he seemed utterly
amazed, and tourning to the other Religious he cried out unto them: My
Brethren, is there any man, howsoever great, rich and noble he may be, that
will not esteem it easy to carry a sack full of dung, ordure, and carrion, if
therefore he be promised a palace full of gold? herby intending What is to be
don to gain Paradise.
to signify the immensiue treasure which God reserueth for those that are
contrite in heart. But it is a thing worthy of especial note in him, that in
fifteen years of his spiritual fervor, he never more then half satisfied
his appetite, though he did eat indifferently of every permissable thing set
before him: whereupon he would say, that it cannot be called abstinence for a
man to forbear that which he tastes not, seeing that this virtue fights
against the taste of that which pleases and seems good unto him: but because
few attain to that perfection, it is best to shun the occasions.

How this worthy servant of God was tried and exercised in patience and
endurance of temptations.
THE V. CHAPTER.
BEcause almighty has God often accustomed to prove his faithful servants by
a restraint of spiritual consolation, and of his sweet presence, he oftentimes
afflicted him in this kind: but afterward considering his notable
constancy, he could not but comfort him. He once past eight days, without
tasting any sweetness of divine conversation: that time by reason of his
exceeding love to almighty God, seemed unto him eight years: he kept himself
solitary, and very pensive, continually praying God with much fervor, to
restore unto him the consolation he desired, and the joy which by his presence
he received. Hereupon, there instantly appeared in the air, a hand bended, and
as it were in action of striking a viole, whence he felt so pleasing and
delightful a harmony, that it filled his soul interiourly with such and so
excellent a sweetness, that if the sound had longer endured, it had, (as to him
seemed) dissolved his soul from his body. Almighty God tried him also, and
exercised him exceedingly, by terrible and strange temptations: which was
revealed in prayer to the holy Father saint Francis, who recommending him most
affectionately to JESUS CHRIST, that he would please to assist him with his
grace, and to give him victory against such potent and mortal ennemies, he
heard a voice from heaven that said: Fear not, for the temptations which
assault Brother Bernard, are given him for exercise and for a crown, and at
lenght he shall have the victory over all his ennemies. Besides, know that
Brother Bernard is one of the elect of the table of our Lord* Saint Francis
was so comforted with this voice, that he could not satisfye himself with
giving thanckes to God: and thenceforth ever loved Brother Bernard better. He
related all to his companions, adding that God would deliver Brother Bernard of
all his temptations, and before his death, would so setle his spirit in peace,
that all the Religious which should behold him should praise God for it, and
that from here below he should ascend to JESUS CHRIST, in that peace and
spiritual tranquillity; which so came to pass.

The sixth chapter is put in the midst of the 67. chapter of the tenth book,
with this title: How saint Francis blessed Brother Bernard miraculously, in
imitation of the Patriarch Jacob. That place being more proper unto it.

Of the zeal of Religion, and the charity which Brother Bernard had toward
the sick.
THE VII. CHAPTER.
THe glorious Brother Bernard was so zealous of his rule and profession, that
he sharply reprehended every delinquent in that respect of what soever degree
of superiority he might be: He twice reprehended the General of his Order.
as, having one day seen Brother Helias General, on a very lusty, fair, and
fatt mule, he came behind him, and with a great zeal reprehending him, said:
Brother General this beast whereon you ride, is very great and fatt, whereas you
know our rule does not permit the same: then laying his hand on the rumpe of
the mule, he repeated the same words, adding also many other. An other time,
knowing that he was retired into his chamber, where with many other Religious
he did ^eat meats delicately dressed, he was much troubled with the evil
example of such remissness, wherefore he arose from the table of the refectory,
taking his earthen dish in one hand, and his cup in the other, and went to the
chamber of the General, over against whom he sat down at the table, and
said: Brother I entend to eat with you this good meat, which is the almose of
the poor of our Lord. Brother Helias with these words was not a little
troubled and confounded, yet he durst not reply a word, knowing that he was
esteemed of the Religious for a very holy man, and as such was generally
reverenced and honored. This good Religious Brother Bernard, was also very
charitable toward the sick. A Religious one day demanding of him why he gave
so much to a sick Religious person to eat, he answered: Brother, I do it,
thereby to dischardge on my part what is requisite, and what charity commands
me: you may well judge that the sick eats but according to his necessity.

Of the death of the glorious Brother Bernard.
THE VIII. CHAPTER.
WHen it pleased God to call his servant Brother Bernard out of this
terrestrial prison, to his celestial kingdom, he was assaulted with a
violent disease, in which notwithstanding he continued so intentive in God,
that he would not endure to hear spoaken or to thinck of any other thing. Upon
this occasion when sometimes the Religious that had care of him, putt vinegar
with rose water to his nose, or therewith washed his wrestes to recomfort him,
knowing that the same did withdraw him from his divine meditations, he would
not permit it to be applied unto him. If it chanced that by ach of his head,
or other occasion, some ill cogitation that was not of God troubled his mind,
reflecting instantly on him self, he would forciblie shake his head to expel
and drive it away. And that he might have no occasion to be separated one only
moment from God, upon the necessities of his body, he resigned all his will,
for the care of second causes and worldly respects, into the hands of his
Infirmarian, using unto him these words: My beloved brother, I will no more
think on the necessities of this body, I refer the care thereof to you;
wherefore use it as you shall thinck requisite, I will take whatsoever you shall
prepare me: If you give me nothing, I will thinck of nothing. Now because,
after the death of saint Francis all the Religious did reverence Brother
Bernard, as their Father, knowing this to be his last sickness, and that his
death was near, they for many respects came to visitt him* and among others,
that worthy contemplative Br. Giles, who finding him weakened to so low an
estate, said unto him: Sursu^ corda, Brother, Sursum corda. Brother Bernard at
these words exceedingly rejoiced, and awakening his spirit, answered:
Habemus ad Dominum: and willed one of the Religious to prepare some convenient
place for Br. Giles, that he might remain near unto, during the time he had
yet to live, that he might apply himself to the excesses of contemplation:
his sickness increasing, he would not be without a Priest, and at every
moment that anything occured to his memory worthy of confession, he humbly
acknowledged it to his Confessor. The last day of his sickness when something
was presented to him to eat, he called all the Religious and prayed the^ to eat
with him, saying: My Brethren I beseech you to celebrate with me this my last
hour: and then discovered unto them such a fervor of charity and devotion,
that many Religious admiring it, confessed that albeit they esteemed him a
saint, yet they never so much experienced the excellency of his virtue and
sanctity as at that time. After he had received the sacrament of extreme
unction, he settled himself decently, God assisteth in tribulations.
and said to all his Religious: My Brethren, I beseech you for ever to remember
this my hour, whereto you must all come in your degree. And I confess and
assure you that I have never bin a Friar Minor, but in temptations; considering
that in them I have ever found God to assist me: and now I feel such a
contentment, that I would not have omitted to serve God for a thousand such
worlds as this. Now I accuse my self to God and you, of all the offenses I
have committed: and in this my last hour do beseech you to love one an other,
for this shall be a sign whereby you shall be known to be disciples of JESUS
CHRIST. Admirable consolation at the point of death. S. Ioa^. 13.
After such and the like words, his face became so joyful and clear, that
they all admired: and in that joy his blessed soul passed from this vale of
miseries, to the repose of glory: his flesh continued so clear, tender and
plumme, as that of a sucking child, and his countenance appeared so lively, as
that the Religious could not satisfy themselves with contemplating (as in a
shadow) the great splendor which his soul was to receive in heaven: at
length he was solemnly enterred in the Covent of S. Francis at Assisium near
unto the sepulcher of the holy Father, where were present a great assembly of
people.

How the glory of Br. Bernard was revealed to Br. Leo, and Br. Ruffin.
THE IX. CHAPTER.
THe glory which God had ordained for him was in this mannea revealed to two
Religious the companions of S. Frrncis, at the same instant that he dyed: Br.
Leo, and Br. Ruffinus lay sick in a village near to Portiuncula, where in one
night they saw appear unto them a great number of Friar Minors goeing in
procession, among whom they saw one more note-worthy then the rest, out of
whose eyes issued beams more glittering then the sun so that they could no
longer hold their eyes fixed on him. They asked one of the Religious whither
they went, and they answered that they were come to seek a soul that should
accompany Br. Bernard to glory, who at that very Br. Bernard always judged
in the best sense.
hour was departed this mortal life, and that was he, out of whose eyes they
saw so much light proceed: which God permitted, because he always judged well
of his neighbor, and when he saw any poor people in ragged and pached
clothes, he would say to himself: these observe poverty better the^ thee Br.
Bernard, and judged as though they had promised to observe holy poverty. When
he saw men richly and sumptuously attired, he would say with great compunction
of his soul: It may very well be that these gentlemen wear under that
precious habitt, some hairecloth, whereby they weaken, mortify and chastise
their flesh: and exteriourly appearing to be full of vanity, they shun vain
glory: which thou, Br. Bernard, performest not with thy poor patched habitt,
though thou be generally esteemed a great penitent. And this glory also is
given him because what soever good he saw in the creatures, the same he
referred to the Creator, and gave him thanckes for it. Which said, the
procession disappeared.

The life of Br. Ruffinus, companion of S. Francis.
Of the virtues in general and sanctity of Brother Ruffinus, by the
restimonie of Saint Francis.
THE X. CHAPTER.
GOd adorned and enriched the first Friar Minors, with the apparent and
excellent virtues of Br. Ruffinus, as a shining rainebow through the clouds
with the beautiful variety of fair colors, and as a vermillian rose, for his
fervent charity, and as a white lilly for his purity, yelding a most pleasing
savor to the Church of God. This blessed Br. Ruffinus, was borne at Assisium,
of a very noble family, and nere of kindred to the glorious S. Clare. He was
converted to God by the examples and documentes of the holy F. S. Francis, he
took the habitt of the Friar Minors, and was professed for such, as is
formerly recorded in the 17. cha. of the first book and first volume: he kept
himself a true virgin, and obtained of God a singular grace of conte^plation.
He was of a gracious and amiable conversation among men. As one day he
returned from prayer, he passed before S. Francis goeing to his cell, who
seeing him coming a far off, demanded of his companions that were about
him, what soul in this world, was in their opinion most pleasing to his divine
majesty. They very humbly answered that they knew not, but it seemed to the^
that his soul was more pleasing to God, the^ any other that they knew in the
world, by reason of the singular graces which he had received of his divine
majesty. But S. Francis thus replied: My Brethren, I tell you and advertise you
that as for my self, I am the most vile and unworthy servant that God has in
this world, and he has revealed unto me that the soul of Br. Ruffinus is one
of the three most holiest in the world, so that I may securely call him S. even
in this life, since he has revealed unto me withal, that his soul is
canonized in heaven.

Of the ready obedience of Br. Ruffinus.
THE XI. CHAPTER.
THis good Religious B. Ruffinus, was as it were insensible of exterior
things, by reason of his continual exercise of prayer, he had as an other
Moses an unseemly grace of speech, so that his words seemed to be forcibly
drawn out of his mouth, and therefore he spoke little. Yet though in that
respect he were very unfit to preach, S. Francis nevertheless commanded him one
day to go to Assisium to preach what the holy Ghost should inspire him:
wherein he excusing himself, the S. to chastise his disobedience, caused him to
go thither without his capuce, which he joyful executed and preached to the
people. But S. Francis, to chastise himself for so strange a commandment,
followed him also without capuce (or as some affirm naked.) And in that manner
did end the sermon which Br. Ruffinus had begun, with such co^punction and
effusion of tears of the people, as if it had bin good friday: as has bin
more amply discoursed in the 30. chapter of the first book and first volume of
this first part; the great obedience of Br. Ruffinus requiring so admirable an
effect, to the spiritual profitt of the people.

How the devils feared and shunned Br. Ruffinus.
THE XII. CHAPTER.
THis Religious S. was for his great humility and purity so feared The devil
lest one that was possessed at the only sight of Br. Ruffinus.
of the devils, that they could not endure his presence, as in diverse accidents
has bin experienced, and one time particulerlie when he went a begging in the
City of Assisium, meeting many men that led one possessed very strongly bound
and tied toward S. Francis to be dispossessed, he seeing Br. Ruffinus cried
out very loud and gave such a strain, that breaking the cords wherewith he was
bound, he escaped and ran from the men that held him, who getting hold of him
again, and much admiring such an vnwounted act, asked him the cause thereof,
and he answered, I did it, because that same Br. Ruffinus which asked almose
has by his virtues and prayers so burned me, that I cannot remain in this
body: which spoken he presently fled and left the poor man delivered.

The holy Father S. Francis being one time in prayer on the mount Aluerne in a
sequestered cell, the deuilles labored to disquiett him, casting stones very
furiously and making such a noise, that the mountain seemed ready to be
overthrown: it chanced that in the mean time Br. And left to trouble S.
Franc.
Ruffin. passed that way, who coming to ask S. F. his benediction, called to
him a far, saying: God be praised, and incontine^tly the devils making an
extreme noise fled away. S. Francis that had heard the voice of Br. Ruffinus,
and had also heard the flight of the devils, suddenly goeing out of his cell,
cried unto the^: Ye Proud creatures, stay the coming of B. Ruffinus, that he
may chastise you, for he knows you very well.

Ten possessed persons fled from him.
It happened an other time that ten possessed persons which were abroad in
the fields, met there Br. Ruffinus, whom having scene they presently fled,
and being demanded of some that passed by why they hastened away, they
answered: by reason of that Br. Ruffinus, by whom wear pressed as grapes in
the wine press.

The thirtenth chapter which should follow here, is inserted before, to better
purpose, touching a greatt temptation of Br. Ruffin and how he surmounted the
devils by virtue of the prayer of S. Francis.
THE XIII. CHAPTER.
THis chapter is not convenient to be placed here, as well because the subject
thereof happened to him before he attained to such perfection, and therefore this
can be no proper place for it, as also because it is amply discoursed in the
45. chapter of the first book, and first volume of this first part.

Of the death of the glorious Br. Ruffinus, and of the apparition he had a
little before his death.
THE XIV. CHAPTER.
BRother Ruffinus and Br. Leo were both sick at one same time, as we have
formerly said in the last chapter of the life of Br. Bernard. Now as upon this
admirable vision they discoursed with themselves, of the soul of the said
Brother Bernard, and that they came for an other soul. Brother Leo thincking
it to be himself that should dye, because he felt himself very sick, he
arose out of his bed as well as he could, and went very joyfully to the bed
of Brother Ruffinus, to whom he said: Brother rest in peace for it is the will
of God that I now dye to go to his glory. Brother Ruffinus answered him:
Brother you are deceived, for the vision which you have had, and the words
which have bin spoaken to you, are to be understood of me, and not of you, for
our holy Father S. Francis, glorious as he is, came lately thither, accompanied
with a great number of Religious, who told me I was to pass from this
miserable life to the most blessed, in very short time: for earnest pledge
whereof, he gave me a sweet and gracious kiss, through which my mouth and
lips continue full of miraculous sweetness. And that you may believe me, come
near and you shall know it. Brother Leo coming near unto him, felt such a
sweetness of that precious odor, that he was fully assured of what Brother
Ruffinus had said: so the time of his departure drawing on, he called all the
Religious of the Covent before him, whom he animated to the observance of
their profession and to fraternall charity by most pious and excellent
discourses, in the midst of which his soul* departed to eternal peace, with
that glorious company which expected him in heaven: and his body was buried in
the Covent of saint Francis, where were already enterred some other of his
disciples and dear companions.

The life of brother Leo.
How Brother Leo was familier companion, Confessor, and Secretary to saint
Francis.
THE XV. CHAPTER.
BRother Leo was Confessor and Secretary to saint Francis, in which function
after he had much profited in the active life, by all kind of virtues and
perfections, he was by the divine grace brought to the delicious garden of the
contemplation and holy conversation of saint Francis, and in regard that he
was singulerly adorned and endued with the virtue of simplicity, the Saint
particulerly affected him, and rejoiced much in his familiarity. Sometimes he
would call him Brother beast, and simple sheep of God: and intending to
decipher a true Friar Minor, he would say that the Religious who had the
simplicity and purity of Brother Leo, was really a Friar Minor. Now as he was
almost always companion to saint Francis, so had he the favor to see him
many times in ecstasy, and his body lifted up in the air above the trees, and
then himself would fall on the ground in the very place whence the Saint was
elevated into the air, and demand of God mercy in favor of his Saint. It
was he alone that merited to be companion of the Saint that Lent, which he
kept of saint Michael Th'archangell, when he received the sacred stigmates on
the Mount Aluerne: where he was participant of all the merueilous apparitions
and revelations that did precede the seraphichal apparition of JESUS CHRIST.
And he was the first to whom the holy Father showed his sacred stigmates, as
to his most dear and cordial friend, and to the Father of his soul that did
daily dress them, as in many places of his life has bin very amply discoursed.

Part of the 16. chapter, which follows in the Spanish text, is placed in the
midst of the 11. chapter of the second book and first volume of this part:
because thy are certain revelations of saint Francis which saint Leo had,
the rest is that which follows.

How it was revealed to brother Leo, that unless we be assisted of God, we can
do nothing of our selves.
BRother Leo one time in prayer, had a cogitation of presumption, trusting on
himself and his virtues: And being in this cogitation, there appeared unto him
a hand, and he heard a voice from above that said unto him: Brother Leo, know
that without this hand thou can perform no good thing. Which Brother Leo
having heard, entierly enflamed in divine love, he arose on his feet, and
beholding heaven, he diverse times thus spoke with a loud voice: It is true my
God, that if thy puissant hand do not help and assist our infirmity, we can
do nothing of ourselves: much less shall we resist our ennemies, and obtain
the meritt of perseverance in thy love and service.

The 17. chapter is put after the last of the second book and first volume of
this first part, where is related a vision which Brother Leo had, of the
universal Judgment, as being a matter appertaining to the holy Father saint
Francis.

How Brother Leo burned the box which Brother Helias General of the Order had
set at the Church door, to gather almose for the fabrique, against the purity
of the rule.
THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
BRother Helias, who after the death of saint Francis for many years governed
the Religion as General, was he that very sumptuously builded the Covent of S.
Francis at Assisium, where Pope Gregory the ninth laid the first stone: the
almose of the people of Assisium not sufficing for so great an edifice, Brother
Helias seeking all means possible to find money for the worck, set a box at
the Church door with this inscription: The almose for the sabriq^e, which many
good Religious having seen, and especially Brother Leo, in regard that it was
a thing directly against the observance of the purity of their rule, being
zealous of the Evangelical Poverty, they repaired to the venerable Brother
Giles to consult with him, and to advise together by what means they might
prevent this inconvenience: who answered that he dwelt at our Lady of Angels,
and therefore though one built a Covent as great as the City of Assisium, he
would notwithstanding be content to remain where he was, and that was all his
care. But Brother Leo not satisfied with this answer, they added: we have a
purpose to burn that box: what think you of it? Brother Giles then with tears
of his eyes replied: If Brother Helias be dead, you may do so; but if he live,
let him proceed, for you will hardly endure his persec ution. But Brother Leo
and his companions leaving Brother Giles, took the box and burned it, which
Brother Helias understanding, and being extremely vexed therewith, he very
cruelly disciplined them all: and having detayned the^ some time in prison, he
banished them from Assisium: for which and other like matters, the Pope put
Brother Helias from his Prelature: as we have formerly related in the life of
S. Antony of Padua.

Of certain miracles, and of the death of the glorious Brother Leo*
THE XIX. CHAPTER.
WHiles Brother Leo resided at our Lady of Angels, it happened that a poor
woman of Assisium dyed in travail of child, whose mother was also a very poor
old widdoe, who being much afflicted at the death of her daughter, and not
knowing how to bring up the little infant that was left unto her, she went to
brother Leo for his counsel, to whom with tears discovering her grief, she
moved him to have compassion of her misery, so that he went and with fervor
offered his prayers, demanding of God assistance for that so desolate poor old
woman. His prayer ended, Br. Leo obtained milk for an old woman to nurse a
child.
he said unto her: Go good woman, and putt the child to thy breast, and hope
that almighty God will give thee the milk that he would have given the mother
of the child. Though this old woman was much amazed at this speech, yet the
infant being present, she obeyed: for she offered her breasts unto it, which
were found very full of milk to relieve the child. And the same continued as
long as there was use for it, and the child attayning to competentage beam a
man of the church. He often recounted that he had bin miraculously nursed by
the merittes of Brother Leo.

He foretold a young man that he should be a Friar Minor. With the sign of the
cross he cured an apostume. A piece of his habit cured the falling sickness.
He miraculously delivered a prisoner.
This servant of God meeting a young man in the way, and beholding his
countenance, said unto him: thou shall be one of our Religious: which words
had such efficacy in his heart, that he could never apply himself to any
thing, till he became a Friar Minor

A woman of Codale, in the valley of Spoletum, having an apostume in her breast,
which ordinarily yielded forth corruption, and being void of all help that
might any way releive her, she repaired to Brother Leo, with great devotion
praying him to make the sign of the cross one the place greiued: which being
done, the apostume vanished, so that no appearance remained thereof.

A young man being exceedingly afflicted with the falling sickness and a
continual fever, did secretly cut of a piece of the habitt of Brother Leo,
out of the great devotion he carried toward him, which having laid on his
neck, he was presently cured: but having lost it, the said infirmity returned,
yet having gotten an other piece, he was perfectly cured again.

A man of Treuy, being by commandment of the governor of Spoletum imprisoned
and enchained, he recommended himself to the prayers of Brother Leo who was
at our Lady of Angels, who appeared unto him about the time of noone, and in
presence of all that were there, vnchayned him, then drew him out of prison,
and commanded him to go as a Pilgrim to our Lady of Angels; which having
performed, he there found Brother Leo, at whose feet prostrating himself, he
thancked him for the great and singular favor received of him. But he
answered him, that he should only thancke the Virgin Mary, whose feast of her
holy purification was celebrated that day. Our lord wrought many other miracles
by the merittes of his servant Brother Leo, to manifest his sanctity to the
world, which would be too tedious to be inserted. That holy Father Brother
Ruffinus and Brother Angel us by commandment of their general composed the
legend of saint Francis, which was afterward called the legend of three
companions, whereof the most worthy and remarckable having bin extracted and put
in other histories of saint Francis, the same was afterwardy lost. Brother Leo
at length having in virtue and sanctity accomplished his days, he left the
desert of the world, and retired to his celestial contry. He was enterred at
Assisium, in the Church of S. Francis.

The life of Brother Siluester.
Of the conversation, merittes and death of Br. Syluester.
THE XX. CHAPTER.
THe good Father Br. Siluester, was the first priest that entered into the
Religion of S. Francis. In the first book and first volume of this first part
we have set down his conversion, and how he became a Friar Minor. This was
his eleventh disciple, who so increased and profited in the virtue of sanctity,
that he discoursed and conuersed with God, as ordinarily one friend does with
an other: which S. Francis often experienced, and diverse times gave testimony
thereof, as when he revealed unto him that the will of God was they should apply
themselves to preaching: And also when S. Francis commanded him to chase the
devils out of the city of Arezzo, which is amply discoursed in the fifth and
sixth chapters of the first book of this first part. Now this holy servant of
God, after he had perfectly served his majesty many years, reposed in peace,
and was buried at Assisium in the Church of S. Francis, with his other
companions.

The life of Brother Macie.
Of the holy conversation and obedience of Br. Macie.
THE XXI. CHAPTER.
BRother Macie of Marignan, was very prudent, and well borne, God gave him the
talent of commendable speech, especially when he discoursed of spiritual
things, and therefore S. Francis often had him in company, that they who came
to see and visitt him, might be so well entertained by the delightfulness of
his discourse, that they should not trouble him in his prayer. Now the holy
Father S. Francis, as a discreet pastor that continually watches over his
flock, considering that Br. Macie daily increased in virtue, to the end that no
vanity should cause him to fall from the hight of his prudence, he sought to
ground him well on the firm and secure foundation of humility; wherefore he
one day in presence of the other Religious said (...) Brother, these your
companions here, have obtained of God the grace of prayer and contemplation,
and you have received the grace of discourse: and therefore you are most fit to
entertain those without the gate that come to visitt us. Therefore I am
resolved that your Brethren here shall all apply themselves to contemplation,
and that you shall have care of the gate, of the kitchen, and of begging: so
that no other Religious shall be troubled with any temporal care. When the
Brethren shall eat in the refectory, you shall be without the do^e, that
strangers may be entertained by your good speeches, before they ring, so that
it may be no trouble to them to expect: all this shall you perform by the
merittes of holy obedience. Br. Macie very joyfully accepted all, and for a
time exercised it, till the other Religious having known the virtue he had in
prayer, and the other parts of his perfection, they obtained of S. Francis,
who also knew him ^ight well, that all the offices which he had might be
equally divided among them.

The 22. chapter, is placed after the 100. of the first book of this present
part, because it is a matter particulerlie appertayning to Saint Francis: it
is an exercise of mortification performed by Brother Macie.

How Br. Macie obtained of God the virtue of humility.
THE XXIII. CHAPTER.
BRother Leo entering one day into spiritual discourses with Br. Macie, and
some other Religious, among other things he said: I know a worthy servant of
God (meaning S. Francis) that has obtained many graces of his divine majesty,
as well in the active as contemplative life, and with his graces, he has so
profound a humility, that he thincketh there is not in the world so great a
sinner as himself. This humility makes him merueilously to increase in
sanctity, and so confirms him in the grace of God, that whiles he shall have
the same for his root, which he has already engrafted in God, it is
impossible for him to fall. As Brother Leo thus discoursed of humility*
Brother Macie that gave attentive ear unto him, became so affected to this
virtue so grateful to God, that he went to his prayer and having lifted his
eyes toward heaven, he vowed to almighty God that he would never take joy of
this world, till he knew and felt in his soul, that God had given him this
virtue of humility: and so by sighs and tears he afflicted himself before
almighty God, and seeming to himself that he justly deserved hell, if he did
not obtain this grace and virtue, whereby that worthy friend of God which was
full of all perfection, reputed himself inferior to all creatures, and
persisting continually in this grief, observing the vow which he had made, and
perseuering in his petition unto God, sacrificing himself by abstinences,
disciplines and tears, he deserved at lengh^ as he went one day alone to pray
on the mountain, to hear a voice from heaven that twice called him by his
name. Wherefore he knowing the voice of God, presently answered: Lord here I
am: and then God said unto him: What will thou give me, if I give thee the
virtue of humility, which with so great instance thou have demanded of me? Br.
Macie then answered: My God I will give thee all that I have to my very eyes:
But God answered: keep thy eyes: I will give three gratis a gift of what thou
have demanded. And from that hour Br. Macie had entier possession of the
humility which he had so much desired, together with such a divine light, that
he lived almost always in a continual spiritual joy, as if himself had no
longer lived, but JESUS CHRIST only in him.

How Br. Macie desired to obtain of God, to love his ennemies as his dearest
friends.
THE XXIV. CHAPTER.
But this joy continued not long, as it happens of the waters of God, the
thirst whereof augmenth the more by drincking thereof: for after he had received
this grace he became more sorrowful then before, by reason of the vehement
desire he had to obtain a greater: which the other Religious perceauing, they
one day called him and said* Tell us Br. Macie, are we cause of thy sorrow? or
what strange thing is happened? we were wont to see thee exceeding joyful,
and with a gracious and smiling contenance, but now we see thee very melancholy
and much troubled. Br. Macie answered them: My dear brethren you do not
cause or procure me any heaviness; but I will tell you whence it proceeds.
You must know, that some days past I have labored to obtain of almighty God
the precious virtue of holy humility, by mean whereof I thinck to acknowledge
my self the most vile and greatest sinner in the world, as in deed I am. And
because my humane reason (in respect of its pride) could not conceive that the
man which is day and night exercised in wachinges, abstine^ces, prayers, and
other practices of virtue, does not esteem himself much better then him who
is daily employed in speaking ill, or living idly, or brutishly, without
observing his promised vows: at length God, of his mercy has granted me
this humility, which by any spiritual exercise, by prayer, or whatsoever other
meritt can never be obtained. Know ye then, that the cause of my sorrow is,
that I cannot arrive to this degree: if any one should cut off my hands and
feet, and crush out my eyes, though I should pardon him and do him all the
services I could devise: I should not yet with so good a will love him as
before. This is that which I demand of my God, for the hight and perfection of
the grace which he has granted me: and then shall my soul be entierly
joyful and content, as I hope, being conformable unto his will, he will afford
me the same.

All this is spoaken to let you understand, what were the cogitatio^s, and
what the desires of the first Fathers of the Order of S. Francis, what were
their gold, their silver, theirtichesse, and their treasures, such were their
practices and negotiations, to wit, to learn only the mean to obtain the
perfection of virtues, which are the merchandise wherewith is purchaced the
kingdom of heaven, and are the precious stones which the wise and spiritual
merchant should seek: and the treasure for purchase whereof he should not only
sell all he has in the world, but even the desires of whatsoever he may have:
as also all temporal taste and self will, eating, drincking, and sleeping; and
by mean of very strict abstinence, of mortifications, watchinges, tears, and
prayers they obtained of God the virtues which they demanded: and having
obtained them, do possess and conserve them to the great glory of God, to the
profitt of their souls, and to the exceeding edification of their neighbor.

Of the counsel which Br. Macie gave to a murmurer, to correct his fault.
THE XXV. CHAPTER.
THere was a very devout man that ordinarily freque^ted the Covent of the Friar
Minors of Cybotoly near Perusia, and discoursing with the Religious, he
always murmured at the sins of his neighbors, committed in his City. Br.
Macie having often times heard him, could no longer endure him: for having
formerly forborne him in respect of the presence of the Guardian, at length he
drew him a part and said. My son I beseech you take the consaile that I give
you, as from one of years. Have always before your eyes and in your mouth the
life of the holy and virtuous, and always speak of their good conditions:
for, doing so, if thou be evil, thou will become good: and if thou be good,
thou will thereby become better. But be not delighted, yea shun with all
possible care, to speak or hear spoaken of the sins and defectes of your
neighbor: for at length, of good you will become evil, and of bad far
worse, and will do the same you heard spoaken of them. These pious words did
not a little profitt this miserable man, in regard that Brother Macie had such a
grace of delivery, that whatsoever he spoke was to each one gratefully
accepted, and imprinted in the hearer. Wherefore S. Francis describing a perfect
Friar Minor, among other conditions, he must have, (would he say) the religious
and good conceit, the natural science, and spiritual eloquence of Brother
Macie.

Of the prayer of Brother Macie, and of his holy death.
THE XXVI. CHAPTER.
BRother Macie was a Religious exceedingly addicted to prayer* yea more then
any other, shedding therein day and night abondance of tears, as to al his
Brethren was most manifest. He did eat only once a day, which was toward the
evening, the night being come he took his rest, about midinght he arose, and
continued in prayer till day, in which the other Religious heard him often to
repeat these words: My Lord JESUS CHRIST give me if thou please, true
contrition of my sins, and give me grace to amend, and to satisfy thee
according to thy holy will: which words he never ceased to repeat, till he
bathed and dissolved in tears: in the morning having heard mass, he retired
into his cell, and singing with a very devout tune, would say: My Lord IESV
CHRIST, permit me I beseech thee, to fear thee, and to love thee with all my
heart: then falling to prayer he was heard often to repeat, vh, vh, vh with a
contented, joyful, and fervent voice. In his contemplation, his countenance
was always very pleasing and joyful. Brother James of Falerone, a Religious
of exceeding piety, demanding of him one day, because he had often seen and
heard him in this spiritual joy to utter those words without change, why he
did not varifie his tune; he redily answered: because finding all good and
contentment in one thing, it is not needful to change the tune. Thus this holy
Father, replenished with many graces and merittes, passed from this temporal
life to the celestial and eternal, and was buried in the Church of saint
Francis at Assisium, where were his other companions: some are of opinion that
his body lies at Mur in the Marquisat of Ancona.

The lives of the holy Brethren, Brother Zachary, and Brother Walter.
How Brother Zachary and Brother Walter, were by commandment of the holly
Father saint Francis sent into Portugal, and of the first Monastery they
founded there.
THE XXVII. CHAPTER.
BRother Zachary and Brother Walter were sent by the holy F. S. Francis with
some other Religious, into Portugal, there, by their preachinges and good
examples to convert sinners to penance, where being arrived, they were ill
treated and entertained, as well because they were strangers, as for the
nouelty of their habitt: their defect of the Spanish tongue, was cause that
they were not gratefully heard, and that they did not willingly discourse, and
having no letters or patentes of the approbation of their rule and profession,
they could no where be received, for the Portugals feared that they might be
some heretics of Italy, where then were many: so that these good Religious
were constrained to repair unto the queen Vraca, the wife of Alfonsus the
second, to whom they recounted their persecution, and prayed her to bestow on
them some little church or chapel, where they might securely remain, and
celebrate the divine service. This queen having graciously entertained them,
she curiously informed her self of their life, estate, and rule, and the cause
of their coming into Portugal, and resting at length sufficiently assured
that they were the true servants of JESUS CHRIST, and professors of the
observation of the Evangelical life, she procured for them of the king a little
place nere unto the City of Conimbria, among the hermitages there, and also
permission to go to Lisbone and to the cittye of Guimaranes, where the
reputation of their sanctity being spread, came even to the Princes Saucia,
sister to the said king Alfonsus, a very devout lady, and inclined to all The
Friar Minors were established in Portugal by two Princess.
virtues, who had consecrated her virginity to JESUS CHRIST, and dwelt in the
City of Alenquer. She exceedingly desiring to see and know these Friar Minors,
which were so much spoaken of sent for the^, and having heard the^ discourse of
God, and observed and remarked their spirit and virtue, would not permit them
to depart from her, but lodged them in her own palace, and assigned them a
Church near to the water where there were many poor celles, such as they
required: and there did they remain with out desire of any other, or consent
to have them bettered they being proper to the true life of these perfect poor
of our Lord, the first founder of the sacred Religion of S. Francis. The place
which these first Religious possessed, is now the Church of saint Catherine,
at the foot of the City of Alenquer, as is found recorded.

Of the sanctity and miracles of Brother Zachary, who was the first Guardian of
the Covent of Alenquer, and of his death.
THE XXVIII. CHAPTER.
THe said Monastery being thus founded with exceeding poverty and sanctity, by
the virtue and exemplar life of the said disciples of the glorious Father
saint Francis, and namely of Brother Zachary, as being the most notable in all
virtues. This holy Father zealous toward God in worckes of charity, in
watchinges and prayers, did often offer his prayers before a Crucifix, which
was after in the Chapter of the said Covent of Alenquer till the year 1414.
by which our Lord advertised him of many things, as well concerning his own
as his neighbors welfare. The consolation and spiritual joy which he received
of this image was such, as he could not leave God miraculously provided for the
Friar Minors of Alenquer.
it but with great grief. Brother Zachary being Guardian, it one day happened
that there were but two loaves of bread in all the Covent: the hour of
refection being come, he enjoined all the brethren to prayer, then commanded
them to sit down at table, and the said loaves to be portioned among all the
Religious, and at the same instant there appeared an Angel at their gate, in
form of a beautiful young man, who brought them as many loaves as there were
persons in the Monastery, his grace and beauty was such as could be imagined.
He calling for the Guardian gave it unto him, who with the other Religious
knowing this present to come to them from the hand of God, who having care of
all his creatures, never forgets his true poor, they gave him thanckes for
it: Many kept of this bread as a holy relic: but namely the Princess Saucia
who would have her part thereof. Preaching on a time with great zeal of the
faith of JESUS CHRIST and of the salvation of souls, one that was incredulous
being partly contrite and converted by his sermon, would afterward confess
unto him, but by all the industry the good Father could devise, he could not
rid him of his doubts touching the Blessed sacrament of the Eucharist. Art
Netable miracle of the Sacrament of the Eucharist.
length having an exceeding desire to save his soul, he said unto him: Since
thou can not be cured by the words of God, come again to morrow in the
morning, with the greatest devotion thou can, and perhaps it will please
our Lord JESUS CHRIST, to illuminate and confirm thee by his divine presence:
and so dismissing him, and that day ended, the Saint spent all that night in
devotion, praying God to voutsafe to illuminate and confirm this poor man in
the holy faith. The next morning, he celebrated mass, this man being present
with great devotion, but the words of consecration being uttered, he saw the
sacred host converted into flesh, and so continuyng till the Priest was ready
to communicate: and then he saw it return to the form of an host as before
the consecration. This admirable vision entierly cleared his soul of all
doubts he had, and fully confirmed him in the Catholic faith. This glorious
Father The earth of the to^be of Br. Zachary works miracles.
at length yelding up his soul, it ascended to heaven, and his body was
buried on the right side of the cross of the Church of the said Covent in
Alenquer, with his other companions and the holy disciples of the glorious
Father saint Francis. The inhabitants of Alenquer at this present take the
earth of that sepulcher, and with great reverence apply it to the sick, who
thereby recover their health.

Of a Religious that was disciple to saint Francis, in the Covent of Alenquer.
THE XXIX. CHAPTER.
AMong all the Religious that were sent by the holy Father saint Francis to the
said Covent of Alenquer, there was one very devout and solitary, that, flying
especially all conversation and discourses with women, spent almost all his
time in prayer. Now it happened that one of the ladies of the Princes Saucia,
called Mary Gracia, noting this Religious to be so spiritual, began to have
particular devotion unto him; and therefore she desired to have some conference
witht him. But this holy Religious refusig all acquaintance and speech with any
women, shunned her with all endeavor. Nevertheless it once happened that the
Lady and the Religious in such sort met each with other, that the Religious
could not without discurtesie avoid to speak unto her: for she much urged him
thereto: but he said unto her: Madame, I beseech you before I spoke unto you,
cause to be brought hither some straw with fire; which having don, he willed
her to putt the straw and the fire together, the lady having so do^ the A
Religious ought to shun women*
straw presently burned, the Religious then said unto her: Madame, what issue
you have seen the straw to have with the fire, the like, believe me has the
servant of God with a woman speaking with her without necessity. Whereat this
lady was so shamefully amazed, that leaving this good Religious, she never more
insinuated herself by her curious devotion to trouble him. Wherefore as this
holy Religious perseuered in virtues, so at the end of his life, his dead body
was endowed with such a beauty and splendor, that all the Religious both
admired and rejoiced exceedingly, thereby having more perfect assurance of his
sanctity. At the instant of his death, S. Antony of Padua, who then was Canon
Reguler in the monastery of S. Cross in Conimbria, celebrating the mass, saw
in spirit the soul of this Religious mount into the air, and gloriously to
ascend into Paradise; having first passed Purgatory, as a bird that flies
swiftly.

Of the life, sanctity, death and miracles of Br. Walter, and of the ancient
custom of Portugal, to record matters that happened, by the years of
Augustus Caesar.
THE XXX. CHAPTER.
THe virtue and sanctity of Br. Walter, disciple of S. Francis are yet of great
fame, he having so piously and exemplarly lived, that in a short time he drew
all the neighbor contrye to be friends to his Order; he also converted them
from many vices and sins whereto the inhabitants thereof were much inclined
and addicted, and exercised them in virtues. It is said that this holy Father
being dead and enterred, there issued out of his tomb an oil of such virtue
as it cured many diseases, and perseuered till his body was transported to the
great Covent near to the said city. The day of his death, which was the
second of August, was a long time festiually solemnised; and in regard of the
great concourse of people that from every where repaired thither, to honor and
reverence the holy relics, there was kept a general fair. A long time
after, the Friar Minors having built their Covent The body of Br. Walter could
not be lifted.
very near the city, the Canons resolved to steal from them this holy body:
but though to this purpose they came thither with a great number of men, and
afterward with strength of oxen to draw away the tomb of the said S. entier:
nevertheless they could not so much as lift up the relics alone out of the
tomb, by what soever forcible endeavor, nor much less remove the tomb from
his place, notwithstanding the force of the oxen: so that at length perceauing
the miracle, and that neither the will of God, nor of the S. was, that they
should committ this theft, they full of shame and confusion departed, yet for
this respect they had the S. in greater reverence, though they went away much
discontented. The Religious having the next morning understood all the matter,
they went to the tomb, whence, without any impediment they took the sacred
relics, and carried them to their new Covent: and they that did accompany
them did exceedingly admire to see, that as soon as they put their hands into
the tomb to seek for the relics, they took them out without any
difficulty, which so many men and oxen together could not do before. Thus was
this holy body placed in the Church of S. Francis at Guimarames, where it is
exceedingly reuere^ced of the inhabitants, who in their sickness and
necessities accustom to recommend themselves unto him, and of devotion to take
of the earth of his sepulcher: they have also great experience of his merittes
with God, by the favors and graces which they daily by his intercession
receive of his divine majesty. The three first monasteries of the Friar The
original of the first monastery of the Friar Minors in Portugal.
Minors in the kingdom of Portugal, were those of Lisbone, of Guimarames, and
of Alenquer, two of the which were transported to the city of Guimarames, as
has bin said, and even the Oratory of Alenquer, as well in regard itt stood in
an evil air, as for the devotion of the Princess Saucia, was alss changed
and accommodated in the Palace where her self dwelt, upon the Mount nere unto
the City, and the third which is at Lisbone, is not so near the City as the
others. There is nothing found in the ancient Chronicles, touching the first
Religious of this monastery, but there is an epitaph in the first cloister of
the said Covent of S. Francis at Lisbone, whereby appears when this
monastery, of little and humble as it was in the beginning, was made so
sumptuous as it is: for the writing and inscription of the epitaph is such: In
the honor of the sovereign Monarch, of the glorions Virgin Mary, and of the
glorious paranymph Gabriel tharchangel: John Moguephi, Secretary and treasuror
of the noble king of Portugal, has erected thi^s Cloister, this church, and
this Chapter; his soul rest in peace. This epitaph was written the year 1310.
out of which number taking thirthy eight years, which the Emperor Augustus
reigned then from the incarnation of our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, (for the
Portugals then counted, as In Portugal theyeares were heretofore counted by
the year of the Emperor.
a long time after by the years of Augustus) would remain 1272. from the
Nativity of our Savior JESUS CHRIST. He that will read this epitaph shall find
it at the descent of the stairs that go from the gate of the Covent to the
Cloister on the left hand. It is said that the Church was built by the people
of Lisbone, in which time was also one of the first monasteryes of the Friar
Minors in Portugal, called S. Antony near unto the^ City of Conimbria,
wherein the glorious S. Antony of Lisbone denominated of Padua, took the habitt
and there resided some time, till he departed with intention to get
martyrdom. But it is not justified wherefore the Religious approached so near
to the City, where to this present they have a great Coue^t; but it is the
foundation of a chapel called S. Antony, which the City in honor of him
erected. Near unto it there was a very little cell of earth, whereunto the
people had great devotion, because it was said that S. Antony had formerly
dwelt therein, but it was ruinated to build in that place the Monastery of the
Friar Minors, of the Province of la Piete in invocation of saint Antony. This
place where the said cell was, is yet to this present the Chapter.

The life of Brother Angelus of Pisa, a Religious of worthy sanctity.
Now Brother Angelus of Pisa, was sent with Brother Albert of Pisa also by the
Father S. Francis into England, and of the ill entertainment they received of
a Priour of S. Benets Order.
THE XXXI. CHAPTER.
BRother Angelus of Pisa was a Religious of worthy sanctity, who having
founded the monastery of Pisa where he was Guardian, and as other affirm,
after he had began the Covent at Patis, was by the holy Father saint Francis
in the general division made the year 1219. sent into England, and with him
went Brother Albert of Pisa, who afterward was General, and some other
Religious given him for companions, by their doctrine and good examples to
edify souls in JESUS CHRIST; and also there to found monasteries of Friar
Minors. The third of May then these good Religious arrived in England, and went
to Canterbury, where they were cuteously entertained by the Dominicans who had
already a monastery there; thence they went farther to have speech with the
king, who was a very good Catholic, and favored all virtuous dessignes, and
therefore they proceeded on toward Oxford, and in the way they came to a
Monastery of Religious of saint Benedict before Arabud, scituat in the midst
of a great mountain, between Oxford and London, the night and abundance of
rain preventing them of trauilling further, and being withal cold, and having
nothing to eat, they there demanded of those Religious for the love of God
entertainment for that night, as well in regard of their wearines, as of the
rain and cold that hindered their farther travel. The Porter seeing these men
clothed in unusual attire and to speak a strange language, presently judged
them to be sycophants and sporting companions to get their commons, and
therefore instantly advertised the Priour of them; who was discoursing with his
Relligious, among whom were the Sacristine, the Steward, and a young Religious.
He commanded the Porther to bring them in, with intention to recreat himself
in seeing them play some sportes or tricks to content his Religious. The Friar
Minors coming before them, were willed to show some passetime to the company.
Whereto they very humbly answered that they were not Players or sportmakers,
but Religious professors of the gospel: The Priour moved with this answer,
believing them to be indeed Ieasters, commanded them with many mockeries and
dirisions to be incontinently and rudely thrust out of the doors. But the young
Religious man perceauing the proud commandment of the Priour, having great
compassion of those poor barefoot and half naked creatures, so entreated the
Porter, that he persuaded him for the love of God to permit the poor
strangers to enter in, when the Priour should be retired, and to lodge them
secretly in straw in the stable: which he did, and that Religious carried them
bread and beer: and so recommending himself to their prayers, he returned to
his cell.

How the said Priour was seuerily punished of God, and also the other two
Religious that were with him, for the discurtisie used toward his servants.
THE XXXII. CHAPTER.
THe same night the young Religious that had done that charity to the poor
Friar Minors sleeping, saw in a dream, JESUS CHRIST sitting on a merueillous
throne, who calling them all to judgment, said with a terrible voice: Bring
forth the Priour and the Religious of this place, and they being instantly
presented unto him, there came on the other side a contemptible poor man,
clothed as the Religious that were thrust out of the said Covent, who
complayningly with a loud voice and great fervor said to JESUS CHRIST. Most
just judge, he blood of the Friar Minors cries before thy divine Majesty,
which this night has bin shed by these Religious, that would not afford them
lodgeing and refection in such necessity and extreme peril: these poor Friar
Minors having left all thy had for thy love and goeing into England expressly to
procure the salvation of souls redeemed by thy precious blood, denying them
that which they would have given them if they had bin parasites and
sportmakers. JESUS CHRIST then with a terrible voice said to the Priour: Of
what Order art thou? OfS. Benedict, answered he: JESUS CHRIST tourning
toward S. Benett, asked him if it were true, that he was one of his
Religious: the Saint answered: Lord this is a destroyer of my religion, as
are also his companions, for my rule commands that the Abbots table be common
to strangers in necessity, and these have always denied things necessary to
the poor. JESUS CHRIST then condemned to death the Priour, the Stewerd, and
the Sacristine* and then he turned to the Religious that had this vision, and
had bin benefactour to the Friar Minors, and said: And thou, of what Order art
thou? he quaking and trembling for fear to hear sentence against himself,
having seen S. Benett adverse to his Religious, answered: Lord, I am of the
Order of this thy poor servant (meaning S. Francis) of whom JESUS CHRIST
demanded if it were true that this Religious was of his Order: he answered
that he was, and that he had already admitted him: and then very graciously
embraced him, and therewith he awaked utterly amazed and trembling at this
fearful vision. And arising from his bed, he presently went to the cell of his
Priour to relate him all: and entering in, he found him strangled in his bed,
having so deformed and hideous a face, as procured a horror to the beholders.
Whe^att this young Religious being utterly terrified cried out and ran to the
celles of the other companions of the Priour, whom he found also strangled
with the same fearful aspect. This made him almost besides himself with care
to find out the Friar Minors. But the porter had dismissed them for fear of
the Priour, so that this young Religious sought out his Abbot, to whom he
recounted this chasticement inflicted by God on his Religious, which was
instantly diuulged throughout all that contry, where this young Religious was
the fist that became a Friar Minour: and Br. Angelus and his companions were
with great charity received by the king of England into the city of Oxford.

How Br. Angelus caused Couents to be builded at Oxford and other where: of
his humility, and of his death.
THE XXXIII. CHAPTER.
THe kink presently appointed them a place near the walls of the city, and
not far from his palace, there to build them a Covent, permitting them to
break the said wall for the better commodity of their building: He also
permitted them to shutt up a street that went from the same place to S.
Fredesmond, that they might be the more retired, leaving only one gate for the
king to enter at his pleasure. Now the fruit that these Religious wrought
there, was such, that not only the great and notorious sinners, recalled
themselves: but even many gentlemen were converted and left the world, to
follow that Apostolic life which those Friar Minors professed, among whom
one was Don. Ridolfo a Bishop, who in a vision seeing S. Francis with his
companions on the right side of our Lord, sovereign Judge, to judge men, he
forsook his bishopprick and the world, by permissio^ of Pope Gregory the
ninth; and became a Friar Minor: as also did an Abbot, who together took the
habitt and lived in Religion with such humility, that they gave evident
demonstration to be true contemners of worldly dignities. When their monastery
was builded they carried on their backs, stones, lime, and whatsoever was
needful to the worckmen. This first provincial of England having admitted
into the Order many young men, he erected and constituted a place of study, that
the Brethren profiting in learning, might also in time benefitt in the gayning
of souls: and to that end he prayed master Robert of Osse, Doctor in divinity
to assist in government of the school of the Religious; which the Doctor with
great devotion accorded unto, and offered to direct and gouerue them till they
had a Religious that could read unto them. But Br. Angelus retourning one day
from visiting some other monasteries which he had erected in the same Province,
he thought good to examine the progress of these young Religious in their
study, and hearing them dispute of curious and frivolous questions, he began to
cry out: O miserable wretch that I am what have I done? since the simple and
idiotes are ravished in God, and these my Religious with their learning call in
question, if there be a God: And at the very hour dissolved and discontinued
the study, being of opinion that it hindered the repose of the spirit.

This holy Religious was endued with a profound humility, which made him very
grateful to God and men: It is recorded of him that he would never accept the
Order of Priesthood till he was constrained by a General Chapter: At length
the day after the feast of S. Gregory, the Pope, he yielded his spirit unto
God. After his death he wrought many miracles, as he had done also in his life
time. He was buried in the Covent of the Friar Minors in the city of Oxforde,
in a coffin of wood, to place him afterward in some honorable sepulcher.
Certain years after the people made him a sepulcher of marble, into which
attempting to put him, they found in his coffin a liquor like unto oil
sauouring as baulme; which was his very flesh in that sort melted and
dissolved: his precious bones did swim on the said oil. The Religious having
inconsideratly handled the said coffin, thincking to remove it, the bottom
fell to the ground, and that precious liquour ran out with all, yelding to
those present so delicious a savor, that it gave them all comfort and
consolation: and so his bones rested in the new sepulcher, and the said oil
was withal care possible gathered up: and therewith were cured many infirmities.

Of the glorious Br. Ambrosse of Massa.
Of the conversion and sanctity of the blessed Br. Ambrose.
THE XXXIV. CHAPTER.
BRother Ambrose was from his birth so beloved of the divine majesty, that
albeit he conuersed among worldly men even to his complet age, yet was he by a
special grace of God always preserved from vices and sins: but being by his
eternal majesty induced to shun the snares of the devil, having, for the
love of JESUS CHRIST given all he had to the poor, he in the time of Saint
Francis became a Friar Minor; and having obtained of God the grace of
contemplation and Evangelical perfection, he withal his iudustry labored,
that the same might not ^. Reg. 15.
prove vain and fruitless in him. He therefore much exercised himself in the
virtue of holy obedience, which is more pleasing to God then sacrifices. In the
most violent and extremest cold, being almost naked, he traveled for the
necessities of the Religious, he continually employed himself in prayer,
daily examining his conscience, for the most part his relief was only bread
and water with abondance of tears, and by such like abstinence, he mortified
the concupiscences of his flesh, to be able with more purity to offer up his
soul in sacrifice unto God. He was exceeding compassionate unto afflicted
persons, and with alacrity served the sick, not only Religious, but the
seculer also; If there wanted phisike he demanded it for the love of God, as
also all other things necessary: he was very humble, and therefore desirously
labored in the kitchen, washed the dishes, swept the house, and very willingly
busied himself in all other offices of humility. If by any word or act he had
given occasion of troubles to any one, he would presently put a cord about his
own neck and so go ask him pardon, though he endured iniuryes done to
himself as patiently as if no such thing had bin: he lived fifteen years in
such and the like exercises of virtue; and afterward in his death and since,
God has discovered how grateful the life of this his servant was unto him:
before his last sickness he revealed the day of his death and the place, which
he declared to one of his companions. He traveled to Ciuitadochia, where being
arrived, he fell sick, and few days after the term of his life being
exspired, one night at mattins he showed such an extraordinary joyful face,
as if he had some vision, that made him even exteriourly to rejoice. Wherefore
the Religious that attended him, demanded if he had seen any Angel of
heaven, or the holy Father Saint Francis, he answered that he had not seen
the holy Father S. Francis, but of the Angel he said nothing. Being in those
joys, he advertised his companions of the death of one devoted unto him which
was revealed unto him, saying that William was already departed out of this
world unto almighty God, and that himself should follow him the same day
between none and euensonge, which came to pass: for at the time foretold
this holy Religious Ambrose yielded his soul into the hands of his Creator.

Of many muracles wrought by this glorious S. Ambrose.
THE XXXV. CHAPTER.
THe number of miracles, by which our Lord would approve the life and sanctity
of his servant, Brother Ambrose; was such, that Pope Gregory the ninth by an
Apostolical breuie commanded the Bishop of Ciuitadochia, and the Priour of S.
John of the Order of S. Augustine to meet, and to examine the life and miracles
of the S. and having perused them to approve them for autenticall. This Brief
was given at the Palace of Lateran, the 13. year of his Popedom, by virtue
whereof the said Prelates having made a most dilligent search, they found that
fourteen lame persons had by the merittes of this servant of God bin cured, as
also four delivered of the falling sickness, one dispossessed in his life
time, and two after his death, six cured of mortal impostumes, and one of a
fistula. He restored hearing to one that was deaf, four men were cured of
several diseases, a woman of the bloody flux, and an other whose child had
bin four months dead in her womb: he restored sight to four that were
blind, and finally raised many from death. The said Prelates took notice of
these and many other miracles: but the death of the Pope perverted his
inscription in the catalogue of the SS. in the Church militant, though he were
recorded in heaven, where he reigns with JESUS CHRIST in his Church
triumphant, making supplication to his divine majesty, for those that in their
necessities have recourse unto him.

Of the life of Br. Iuniperus, disciple of S. Francis.
Of the exemplare humility and singular patience of Brother Iuniperus.
THE XXXVI. CHAPTER.
BRother Iuniperus was one of the first and most perfect disciples of S.
Francis: for he was so grounded in the firm and assured foundations of
humility, patience, contempt of the world and of himself, that no tormenting
temptations of the devil, nor persecution of the world could in any sort
remove or desioyne him from his estate of perfection, There was never any that
saw him troubled or disquieted, so courageously did he support all iniuryes of
words or actions: Which brought him to such misprise of himself, that many
seeing him in such poor appearance and so ill treated, not knowing his
perfection, esteemed him for a fool and senseless: But S. Francis that knew
him right well, reputing him in the number of the perfect, said, that he should
be a good and true Friar Minor, that attained the misprise of the world and of
himself, so far forth as had done Brother Iuniperus: and oftentimes
considering his simplicities, the contempt of himself, and patience in
reprehensions given him, he would say to the Religious present: My Brethren, I
desire, and would to God I had a great forest full of such Iunipers. This
worthy servant of JESUS CHRIST oftentimes found new occasions for exercise of
his patience to be misprised and reproached, yet without offending God, never
shunning to be reputed a fool: as when he one time entered into the city of
Viterbium, having made a fardell of his habitt bound up with his cord which he
carried on his shoulders and so went into the marckett place, where the
children seeing him almost naked, used him as a fool, reviled him with words,
cast stones at him, and berayed him with filth. After he had left these that
thus tormented him, he went to the Covent, where the Religious seeing him in
such pitiful estate, and understanding by him wherefore he had bin so
handled, they were much scandalized at what he had don, and took it in very
ill part, bitterly reprehending him for it: some told him he deserved to be
cudgelled, others, to be imprisonned, others, to be hanged, for the great
scandal he had given to the people: but he accepted all these indignities with
a very contented and joyful countenance, as matter much desired of him: and in
signification of the interior contentment he conceived, he took the fore part
of his habitt, and beholding those Religious that were most offended with his
fact, and rebuked him for it, said unto the^, My freindes, fill this I pray you
with these jewels: do so, fear not, for I receive them as precious stones and
jewels that cannot be sufficiently esteemed. So called he the affrontes and
injuries done unto him precious stones and of notable value with God.

An other time being in the city of Spoletum, he understood that there was a
feast to be solemnised at Assisium, whither would repair from most parts of
the world; and not minding too loose the gain he hoped to make there, he
determined to go to the feast in the fashion aforesaid, and being in the
city, he went, expressly to be seen and the more to be mesprised of the
people, into the principal streets: which was presently related to his
Brethren, as he well expected. Wherefore being come to the monastery, they all
chardged him with notable iniuryes, calling him fool, and worthy to be laid in
irons, for dishonouring their house and Religion: all concluding that he
deserved a great penance: Whereupon, the Guardian, having before all the
company given him a rough and rude chapter, said unto him: O miserable wretch!
what penance can I impose on thee correspondent and worthy the excess of thy
notorious fact: Hereunto Brother Iuniperus very humbly ausweared: Father the
correction you should give me is, to permit me to return in the same manner
I came, and the same way. Herbie the Religious understood well what had bin the
cause of his coming, and being qualified and appeased, they pray7s;ed God for
it.

How Brother Iuniperus abhorred honors, and consolations.
THE XXXVII. CHAPTER.
BRother Iuniperus being sent to Rome there to remain, where the reputation of
his virtues lived, some that were dear freindes to him and devoted to the
Order, understanding thereof, went out of the city to meet him, so to
entertayne him courteously and to honor him. But this holy Religious seeing
them coming, and suspecting the occasion, which he extremely detested and
shunned, he was at the first apprehension exceedingly troubled to resolve on
some mean to avoid that honor. At le^ght after he had some time discoursed
in his spirit of this subject, still goeing on his way, he found children
busyed in this sport following: they had laid a piece of wood cross upon a
wall, at each end whereof was a boy sitting astride, who by equal weight did
alternatiuely mount each other up and down. Brother Iuniperus got one of the
places and began to sport with the boy at the other end. His freindes and
affectionat, coming there, did not yet forbear very reverently to salute him,
well knowing his fashions and customs: but he persisting firm and constant in
his purpose, would not seem to see or hear them, so atttentiue did he appear
in that sport; and so long he continued and so resolutely, that trying their
patience, he enforced them at last to return home much discontented and
disedifyed at the inciuillytie and folly of their friend; and afterward he
secrecretly slipped into his Covent, very joyful in having so avoided the
vaineglory of that worldly entertainment.

An other time he having bin against his will commanded to go to the house of
a gentleman that desired much to discourse particulerly with him, he was
thereunto constrained by obedience: but by whatsoever means the gentleman could
devise to occasion him to discourse, he could not wrest so much as one good
word from him. Yet supposing him to be weary or distempered with some
indisposition, he for that night conducted him into a chamber very commodiously
furnished for his repose: but very early the next morning, without speaking a
word to any person he departed, leaving the bed and other furniture disorderly
and confusedly heaped together, to be esteemed a fool. Which the gentleman
having seen, he was exceedingly confounded and scandelized at this Religious,
that thus disgraced him: and complained thereof to the other Religious, who
exceedingly checked him for it. And then in their presence he reprehended
himself, acknowledgeing that he did not only deserve to be rebuked, but also
to be severely punished.

Brother Iuniperus discoursing one time with some Religious touching death, one
of them said: God grant, me the grace to dye in some Covent of the Order, in
the company of my Brethren, that my soul may be comforted, and assisted by
their prayers, and that my body may be buried with other Religious. Hereupon
Brother Iuniperus took occasion of speech saying; and I would that at the
hour of my death my body might be so loathsome and stinking, that no Religious
would adventure to come near it: but that they would therefore cast me into
some privy or smoke, and there leave me as most abominable: and afterward
being dead would not aforde me any buryall, but that fowls might devour my
body.

The humility of this holy Religious was so admirable, as also his desire to be
misprised for the love of IESS CHRIST, that he could never esteem himself in
any sort sufficiently burdened with reproaches, iniuryes, vilainies, and
infamies, in his life and in his death. In which repect, we may justly say: Non
est inuentus similis illi, that more precisely then he observed to repay this
law unto our Lord, in the same money and coin of reproaches as he suffered for
us, and with such ^oue as this holy Religious; and that more evidently
discovered in himself the perfection of S. Paul in effect: Mihi mundus
crucifixus est, and ego Galat^*
mundo: for he always contemned it withal the pompes and vanities thereof,
esteeming the world to be but a fool.

Of the remedy which Brother Iuniperus used, against the temptations of
sensuality.
THE XXXVIII. CHAPTER.
BRother Giles, Brother Ruffinus, Brother Simon, and Brother Iuniperus, being
on time together in spiritual conference and conversation, Brother Giles said
to the rest: My Brethren, I beseech you tell me, how you arm your selves
against the temptations of sensuality. Br. Simon of Assium answered: I
consider the loathsomnes of this sin, and how detestable it is, not only in
the presence of God, but even before men, who though impious, yet seek to
conceal and cover themselves from being seen in the exercise of such a filthy
act. This consideration procures in me a displeasure and detestation of this
sin, and delivers me of the temptation. Then Brother Ruffinus spoke as
thus: For my part, when I am tempted with that sin, I fall on both my knees
upon the ground, I implore the assistance of the divine clemency, and of the
glorious Virgin Mother, and so continue in prayer till I feel my self freed.
Brother Iuniperus then spoke to this purpose: When I perceive such devilish
temptations are represented to my senses forcibly to assault me, I instanly
shut the gates of my heart, whereto I constitue for severe guardes, holy
meditations and pious desires, for security of the castle wherein resideth the
soul: and when their ennemies make their approches to give an assault to that
place, I, that command in that forteresse, cry to them from within: Go your
ways, get ye gone, the place is possessed for others; ye are discovered, I
am fortified with whatsoever is necessary to give you repulse: In this manner
do I ever preserve my forteresse from being surprised by such base companions,
who by their entry would utterly ruinate me: or at least it would be very
difficult for me to expel them, for at the instant that I perceive them ready
to assault me, without permitting them to lay their siege, I enforce them to
retire with shame enough. Which Brother Giles understanding he turned to his
companions, and said: Brethren, I am of Brother Iuniperus opinion, and resolve
he^ceforward to make use of his stratageme of war; for it is most certain;
considering that in this sin the securest fight is to fly; by reason that the
traitorous appetite which is within the flesh, finds such a strong
concurrence of assistance in the exterior senses by an army raised by the
devil, and opposed against the soul, that the peril is extreme and the
victory uncertain, so that the securest is, not to permit this traitorous
domestical sin to enter into our heart.

Iuniperus being one time reprehended for having spoaken too lightly, the mouth
being the door whereat the spirit of devotion and prayer goes out, he
continued six entiere months in perpetual silence: the first day his purpose
not to speak was in honor of God the Father, the second for reverence of the
Son, the third for love of the holy Ghost, the fourth for the Queen of
heaven, and so each day proposing some saint, he strictly observed his
silence all that time with new fervor and devotion, though naturally he spoke
very little, which also was of spiritual things, for as he could not endure to
be flattered, so neither could he flatter, and so had no other discourse but of
God, and as a Religious perfect in humility, he would rather learn and hear,
then with words and exterior signs of sanctity teach others.

Of the great charity which Br. Iuniperus exercised toward the sick.
THE XXXIX. CHAPTER.
THis glorious S. had a great affection to the sick, and with an extreme
charity did desirously serve them: by means whereof happened a strange accident
at our Lady of Angels touching a sick person, of whom by order of S. Francis
who then was there, he had the chardge. This poor sick man was by the
continuance of his infirmity become so feeble, that he had not so much strength
as to eat, which would infallibly hasten his death: Br. Iuniperus having great
co^passio^ of him, prayed him with tearfull eyes to tell him whereof he could
willingly ear, and he would procure it for him. The sick party answered that
he thought he could well eat of a hogs foot in Vinegar, if he could get it.
Br. Iuniperus replied: be of good Courage Brother, I will presently bring you
one dressed as you desire, and taking a great knife out of the kitchen, he went
out of the house, and seeing many hogs feeding in a field near by, he ran so
fa^t after them, that he got one and cut off his foot, and therewith returned
to the Covent, where he presently dressed it with vinegar: then carrying it to
the sick, he did eat thereof with such appetite and courage, that recovering his
taste and appetite he began to amend: and by this mean escaped for that time
the danger of death. In the mean time the master of the hogs being by his
swineheard advertised, that a Friar Minor had cut off the foot of one of his
hogs, he, puffed up with choler went hastily to the Covent, where exclaming
as a maded man, he uttered many injurious speeches to the Religious: and so
far was he transported with fury that he disgordged against them a thousand
vilanies. Which the holy Father S. Francis understanding, he went to him and
sought to appease him, praying him for the love of God to have patience, and
offered to repair whatsoever dommage he had received. But the man, more
possessed with despite then with the loss, would hear no proposition: but
went away exceedingly scandalized at the Religious, of whom he bruted many
lies through the streets, and very seriously and vehemently threatened them.
These good Religious were in mean while exceedingly greiued at this accident,
and knew not the cause thereof: wherefore having long time discoursed upon it
among themselves, they at length addressed themselves to Br. Iuniperus,
suspecting that his simplicity and some indiscreet zeal had moved him to this
fact. But he respecting only God, contemned all those toys and respects of
the world. The holy Father S. Francis called him before him to understand the
matter and circumstances: and he very joyfully recounted unto him, that God had
directed and sent unto him that hog for the cure of the poor sick Brother.
Saint Francis exceedingly admiring said unto him: Ah Brother Iuniperus, you
have this day caused a great scandal: for the master of the hog has bin
here and in all fury has given us infinite reproaches: but I acknowledge that
he has reason, and do fear he will defame us over all the city. Wherefore I
command you upon obedience to run after him, to ask him pardon, and to assure
him that he shall be satisfied for his loss, and especially so to deal with him
as he be not scandalized at us. Brother Iuniperus much admiring that any one
should be moved to choler upon so charitable a worck, considering it to be
apparent, that temporal goods are give of God but for use of charity, he
answered: Doubt not Father but I will presently appease him: in such sort as
he shall have no cause to complain of such a charity done, as more concerns
God then himself. Which said, he went in great have to seek out the master of
the hog, whom having found full of choler, he related unto him how and for
what cause he had cut off his hogs foot: then added that he ought to thanck
him, because thereby he had given him occasion of meritt in an act so pleasing
unto God as by his mean was accomplished. In mean while the man abused him
and grew into such fury, as he was even ready to strike him: but the good
Religious fell at his feet, embraced him, and besought him for the love of God
to pardon him: which manner of proceeding so mollified his heart, that having
apparantlie seen and perceived his simplicity, and that what he had done
proceeded merely of charity, and not of malice, or to do him a mischief, as
the devil had put in his head, he entered into himself, and repented that ever
he had iniuryed the Religious and asked them pardon, acknowledging himself
auaricious and ungrateful for the benefittes he had received of God: in
satisfaction whereof, he presently killed the hog: and causing him to be
conveniently dressed, he sent him to the Religious, that for the very love of
God they might eat him in satisfaction of the injuries uttered against them:
and thenceforward was very devout and liberal to the poor of JESUS CHRIST.

How Brother Iuniperus gave all he had, and could have for the love of God.
THE XL. CHAPTER.
THis holy Religious was so compassionate of the poor, that when he met any
poorly clothed, he would rip off part of his habitt and give him: and because
he did thus often, and returned to the Covent half naked, his Guardian
commanded him upon obedience no more to give his habitt nor part thereof. After
this commandment meeting a poor wretched creature that asked an almose of
him: he, moved with compassion, said: I have nothing to give thee but this
habitt: but I am forbidden upon obedience to give it to any: yet if thou will
take it from me, I promise thee I will not hinder nor resist thee. The poor
man understanding these words, took off his habitt, and left him almost
naked: so retourning to his Covent, he told the Religious that a poor man had
taken his habitt from him: for which his Guardian knew not what to say unto
him. Now the thirst of charitable worckes being unquenchable in the seruante
of God, this thirst of pity and compassion so increased in Brother Iuniperus,
that he did not only give to the poor his habittes: but also, the books, the
ornaments of the altar, and the cloakes of his Brethren when he could get
them, and that occasion was presented: therefore when the Religious saw any
poor demanding almose of Brother Iuniperus, they would hide whatsoever was
necessary unto them. It happened upon one Christmas day in the Covent of
Assisium, that the Sacristine goeing to eat, prayed Brother Iuniperus in the
mean while to have care of the altar: before which being in prayer, there
came to him a poor old woman, demanding an almose for the love of God: to
whom Brother Iuniperus answered: Mother if you please to expect a little, I
will see if upon this altar so richli^ adorned, there be any thing superfluous
that I may give you: and perceiving silver frenge upon the ornament of the
altar, he took his knife and ripped it off, and gave it to the poor woman,
it seeming to him more necessary to cloth a living member of JESUS CHRIST
then an altar of stone: though in the one and the other the intention be pious
for the honor of God: He willed her presently to depart for fear that the
Sacristin coming should take it from her. Wherein he did very well, for the
Sacristin remembering the quality of Brother Iuniperus had scarce leisure to eat
two bittes, but he returned in great have to the Church; where looking
carefully if any thing wanted, he missed the frenge of the ornament: which
much disquieting him, he complained to Brother Iuniperus, who answered:
Brother be not troubled, I have given it to a poor woman that was in extreme
necessity. The Sacristine knowing that there was no mean to recover it, went
to complain to the General, who then was Brother John Parent, a very devout
Religious: who answered him, that the fault was his own, since knowing the
nature of Brother Iuniperus, he had left him to have care of the altar: Yet
intended to reprehend him, so to prevent the like an other time. He therefore
did so chapter and check him publikelie in the refectory and with such
vehemence, that he got the rheum and pose withal: which more grieved Brother
Iuniperus then the reprehension given him. Now after he had bin thus humbled,
he went into the city to seek some remedy for his General: and it being
late before he went forth, at his return to the Covent it was night, and
the General was retired to his cell to repose. But Brother Iuniperus omitted
not to go and knock, praying him to arise and take the medicine he had brought
him: and though the General diverse times with rude and sharp words rejected
him, he nevertheless so long perseuered, that his General at length overcome
by his charity, was enforced to open his door and to take a pottage that he had
brought him for physic, which presently cured him.

How Brother Iuniperus to confound the Religious of too much care for their
food, dressed them at once enough for 15. days.
THE XLI. CHAPTER.
BRother Iuniperus was once in a certain monastery, where all the Regilious
goeing upon occasion abrod, he alone remained in the Covent to have care of
providing their supper, which he willingly undertook. Being then in his care
of cookery, he began to consider how much time was lost in dressing of meat,
and therefore bethought himself and determined to confound them by a new
practice: which was he presently went into the city where begging he got great
provision of flesh, as of poultry, veale, mutton, and of cheese, eggs, herbs
and pulse of diverse sorts. And having borrowed a great cawdron he returned to
the Covent, and putt whatsoever was given him into it, yea the poultry with
their feathers, and putt much wood into the fire to hasten his cookery and to
make his meat to boil quickly. Hereupon the Religious retourning from abroad,
one of them went incontinently to the kichen, where seeing poor Brother
Iuniperus all watered with sweat, laboring exceedingly to farther their
refection, with a great and lardge board in form of a skreene fastened before
him, to keep himself from scorching: and seeing so much flesh, yea the
poultry to swim on that great boiling cawdron, he was so amazed, that without
speaking word he ran to fetch his brethren, who coming near Brother
Iuniperus, he said unto them: Be of courage Brethren, I have here at once
dressed you meat for fifteen days; that being sufficiently refected, we may
have the more time to spend in prayer. These words accompayned with the effect
did so confound the Religious, that not knowing what to answer, they went and
advertised the Guardian of what Brother Iuniperus did and would do, who willed
him to be called, and sharply reprehended him for this his folly and wast of
meat. But Brother Iuniperus falling to the ground with tears acknowledged,
that he deserved not only to be well reprehended, but to be hanged and hewed in
pieces, more then any malefactor whatsoever, since being in the world he had
committed such and such sin: this he performed with such humility and
misprise of himself, that the Guardian full of admiration dismissed him; and
then to the Religious used these words: would to God Brother Iuniperus would
every day wast as much meat as this day, on condition we might be so much
edified thereby as we are at this present.

How Brother Iuniperus was feared of the Devils.
THE XLII. CHAPTER.
BY reason of the great humility and simplicity that was in Brother Iuniperus,
the devils could not endure the virtue of his prayer, yet less his presence.
It once happpened that one possessed trauailling in the fields with some of
his freindes, he at their unawares escaped from them and ran more then two
leagues, none of his company having power to follow him. Having at length
found him where he stayed, and having coniured him to tell the truth, and the
cause of this his sudden and far flight, he answered it was by reason of
that great fool Brother Iuniperus that came the way directly toward us: for
I cannot endure his presence: they to know if this master liar then spoke the
truth, did curiously search, and found that Brother Iuniperus came that way
they were to go, so that if the possessed had no^ fled, they had directly met
him. When the possessed persons were brought to S. Francis if the devil
would not depart, he would thus threaten him: If thou do not presently depart
out of this body, I will send for Brother Iuniperus who shall chastise thee
according to thy deserts. The devil fearing the presence of this holy
Religious, would presently fly.

How the devil attempting to be revenged on Brother Iuniperus, did maliciously
torment him and brought him even to a gallows, to hang him.
THE XXXXIII. CHAPTER.
THis great servant of God was exceedingly afflicted and tormented by the
deuilles, according to their ancient custom to assault and torment the humble,
more then all other men, as those whom they know to be most pleasing unto
almighty God. And albeit we find not recorded the secrett and particular
temptations of this holy Religious; yet we cannot doubt but that he has had
exceeding great, since the deuilles for no other cause feared him, but in regard
that he often vanquished them: besides it being manifestly seen that he could
never be wearied with iniuryes, the more easily by his patience to suppress
the pride and arrogancy of the devil. Yet we observe a terrible temptation
which the devil weaued against him, which was such as brought him even to the
gallows ready to be hanged, having formerly bin cruelly tormented: whereby may
be coniectured what his other temptations were. The matter was thus: Brother
Iuniperus being to go to a castle where there dwelt a noble man very evil
minded in regard of his cruelties, called Nicolas, who warred against the
inhabitants of Viterbium, the devil transformed into the shape of a man, went
to this noble man, and having drawn him a part as to discover unto him some
secrett of importance, said unto him: My Lord I come to you as your servant and
friend to discover unto you that your ennemies of Viterbium have concluded and
determined your death in this place and to fire it, that none of your people
escape: and to this effect, they have plotted with a man and committed the
chardge unto him, who is already in the way to attempt it. He is disguised in
this manner: his habitt is very base and contemptible, all tome, on his head he
has a capuce of diverse pieces and patches. Therefore command him to be brought
before you, and you shall find about him a long aule, wherewith to stabbe you,
and a fire stone with maches to fire this castle. Which having uttered, he was
no more seen by the noble man, whose cogitation was only upon this
advertisement, that did extremely trouble him, as having bin delivered him by
so excellent and perfect an Orator: and he was therewith so terrified that he
did shake and tremble with the fear. He forthwith advertised the guardes of
his castle and others whom he sent forth with charge if they found any such
and so attired, to apprehend him and warily to bring him to him. Now Brother
Iuniperus according to the special leave he had, went alone, and in his way
met with young idle companions, that as birds wondered him and pulled him by
the capuce, whereof they still toare of some piece, so that by such entreaty and
his own often giving some little piece to the poor, entering into the castle
one would have taken him neither for Religious nor lay person: and being known
by the description given of him, the guardes laid hold of him, and brought him
before the noble man, who caused him to be searched, where was found about him
the aule wherewith he sowed his sandales, and a fire steel, to strict fire,
when he was some time in the forestes in prayer. Being then found with those
instruments fit to execute the practice whereof he was accused, they began to
torment him, to enforce him to confess who sent him, and what he pretended to
do: considering withal the whole description of the traitor was approved and
confirmed in him. First then his head was bound with gross cords fastened
with two cudgels, in such sort as they forced and strayned the natural
disposition of the bones (this extreme torment so wrought, that during the rest
of his life he had never more the head ach) after that he had given him
infinite strappadoes. Being demanded who he was, he answered that he was the
greatest sinner in the world, and being asked if he came not thither to betray
the castle, he answered that he was the greatest traitor that was, being
examined if he had not promised and resolved to kill the Lord of the castle:
he answered, that he should do wrose, if God would permit and abandon him.
Whereupon he was at length condemned to be drawn through the city at a
horse tail, so to the place of execution to be hanged and strangled. This
worthy mirror of patience Brother Iuniperus, never alleged one excuse or
reason to justify More admirable then imitable patience of Br. Iuniperus.
himself, nor gave no demonstration of his disquiett or vexation: but
resigning himself entierly to the divine providence, showed in the midst of
his torments a joyful and contented countenance. Now as all the people flocked
together to see him trained through the dirt, and consequently to be hanged as
a traitor, one of the ministers of justice, went incontinently to the Covent of
the Friar Minors of the same City, and prayed the Guardian to hasten instantly
for the relief and comfort of the soul of a miserable malefactor that was
conducted to his execution and death, yet nevertheless has no apprehension of
death, nor has care or speaks at all of confession. The Guardian speedily
hastened to the place of execution, where finding and knowing Brother
Iuniperus, he began to weep, and would have put of his habitt to cover him,
but he answered, that it was better to cover a poor living creature, then one
dead, so little was this holy Religious troubled with the torments past, the
ignominy present, and the apprehension of death at hand: but he appeared so
cheerful and so pleasant as if he had bin in a fair garden and plott of
roses, gilliflowers and other beautiful and sweet flowers. Which the Guardian
admiring, prayed the officers of justice there present, to suspend the
execution of this criminell, till he had spoken with their Lord whose favor he
would crave in behalf of him that he knew to be innocent, which they willingly
promised. Coming then to the noble man, he thus spoke unto him: Know my Lord,
the man whom you have condemned to so ignominious a death, is one of the most
perfect Religious of our Order of Friar Minors, and is called Brother
Iuniperus. This extremely vexed this noble man, who by reputation knew Brother
Iuniperus, having heard of his meruailes: wherefore he accompanied the Guardian,
even to the place of the city where he was, and there fell on his knees before
him, and bitterly weeping, besought him before all the people to pardon him.
The virtuous Religious did not only pardon him, but gave him thanckes for being
occasion of his meritt toward God, yea and thenceforwd he took it so
gratefully, that remaining in the Covent of the said place to cure and ease the
torments he had endured, many honorable persons presenting him many small
commodities, he always sent the most worthy and excellent to the Earl,
affirming that he did not acknowledge himself more obliged to any man in the
world then to him, because he had not found any that had more accomplished his
desires then he. The earl, on the contrary said, that he knew thereby that God
would shortly end his enormous sins, and that he should not live long, since
he had so unworthily tormented an innocent and so sainct-like a man, though he
knew him not, and that God would punish him for it. Wherein he was not deceived,
for a little after he was slain by his ennemies. Now this singular fact may
notify unto us the patience of Brother Iuniperus, the excellency of the
virtues which God discovered in him, with what faith, hope, humility and
fortitude he was armed, and the cross which he carried in himself, and wherein
only he glorified, and the small gain the devil got of him in this combatt,
where he was subdued by the patience of Brother Iuniperus, more like to that of
JESUS CHRIST, then to that of Job. Wherein appears how truly the holy Doctors
affirm, that almighty God is such a lover of our profitt and our glory, which
is purchaced by labor in his service, that he denies it only to those who
make themselves incapable to receive it.

Of a Companion of Brother Iuniperus, and that was under his government.
THE XLIV. CHAPTER.
BRother Iuniperus in his age had a companion, that was so obedient and of such
patience, that were he beaten and tormented a whole day together, he would
never utter a word of complaint. He was sent to beg at their houses who were
known not to be charitable, but to be churlish, scoffers, and injurious to the
Religious, whither he would willingly go, and with an admirable patience
support the affrontes and injuries offered unto him. If Brother Iuniperus
commanded him to weep, he would obey: if he commanded him to laugh, he would
incontinently laugh. He being dead, Brother Iuniperus bitterly wept for this
his dear companion, affirming that in this life there remained unto him
nothing of worth, and that in the death of this Brother the world was as it
were ruined, so much did he love and esteem the virtue of the patience and
mortification of this great servant of God, and his foster child.

How Brother Iuniperus in prayer saw the glory of God, and of his death.
THE XLV. CHAPTER.
AFter the death of this Religious, the glorious Brother Iuniperus being very
vigilant and fervent in prayer and deep contemplation, seemed to hate the
world, and already to dye with desire to go to the other life, such was his
endeavor to ascend unto almighty God. Being one time in the quier at mass,
he was so rapt in ecstasy, that the service being ended, the Religious left him
alone, where he so remained a long time, and when he was returned to himself,
he came to the Religious, to whom, with a notable fervor of spirit, he
uttered these words: Ah my Brethren, why do not we conceive a pleasure to
endure a little labor and pain, to gain eternal life? After that he uttered
many things of high consequence touching the humility, which deserves the
glory of the elect. These words gave sufficient cause to judge, that he had
had some communication of heaven. And in the end the true and worthy disciple
of saint Francis and singular friend of saint Clare, who called him the
passetime of JESUS CHRIST: because she found in him great consolation Br.
Iuniperus the passtime of Jesus Christ.
of spirit, and would have him near at her death: this good and holy
Religious, I say, after he had many years lived in great perfection in this
desert, passed from this life to the other, and was by almighty God transported
into his glory. He was buried at Rome in the Covent of Aracaeli.

The life of Brother Simon of Assisium, the Disciple of saint Francis
Of the holy conversation of Brother Simon.
THE XLVI. CHAPTER.
BRother Simon of Assisium was called of God to holy Religion in the life time
of S. Francis. This Religious was by the divine Majesty endwed with such
abondance of grace, and raised to such a high degree of contemplation, that his
whole life was a mirror of sanctity, and represented to all, the image of the
bounty of God, according to the testimony of them that conuersed with him. He
rarely went out of his cell, and if sometime he conuersed with his brethren,
his discourse was altogether of God. He always sought solitary places: and
though he had never learned the grammar nor other humane sciences, he
nevertheless discoursed so sublimely of God and of the most sweet love of JESUS
CHRIST, that his words seemed rather Angelical then humane. Brother James of
Massa and some other Religious, went one evening with him into a wood to
discourse of almighty God, and Brother Simon so sweetly discoursed of the
divine love, that having spent all the night in that holy discourse, and the
break of day already appearing, it seemed to them that he did but the^ begin.
When this Religious perceived the coming of any divine visitation, he would
cast himself on his bed as to sleep, or as sick of the Cant. 5.
disease of the Espouse, who says in the Canticles: Tell my beloved I languish
for his love. Sometimes in the said divine visitations he was so elevated in
God, that he remained insensible of worldly things: so that a Religious once
desiring to try whiles he was in ecstasy, if he had any feeling, took a
burning coal, and putt it on his bare foot, wherewith he did not only not come
to himself, nor felt the heat of the fire, but the coal dyed on his foot,
without leaving any sign of burning. The Saint accustomed when he did eat
with the Religious, to feed them spiritualy with the word of God before they
received their corporal refection.

How Brother Simon delivered a Nouice from the temptation of the flesh, and how
the Nouice became perfect in charity and of his death.
THE XLVII. CHAPTER.
THis good Father discoursing one day of almighty God, with such fervor
declared the obligation which we have to his divine Majesty and to our own
salvation, that a wordly young man there present, resolved to leave the world
and to become religious, (he was borne at Senseuerin, a city in the kingdom
of Naples) and forthwith took the habitt of Friar a Minor. But the devil by
whose blowing, the flames of temptations are enkindled, enflamed this Nouice
with so great a heat and sting of sensuality, that loosing all hope of force to
overcome so great a temptation, he diverse times required his apparel of the
said Father Simon to return to the world, affirming that he could no longer
remain in Relligion: but the good Father comforted him, and still deferred him
to an other time. Nevertheless his temptations increased daily. And as one day
he exceedingly urged him to permit him to depart out of relligion, this holy
Father having compassion of him, commanded him to sit down by him: which the
nouice having done, he laid his head on his lap, then lifting his eyes
toward heaven, he with such fervor prayed for him, that being rapt in
ecstasy, he was heard, in such sort that the Nouice was so delivered of his
temptations, that thenceforward his sensual heat was turned into the fire of
charity, whereof he made demonstration after he had made his vow, by this
accident: A lewd fellow was condemned for his misdeedes, to have his eyes
crushed out: this Religious having heard report hereof, moved with charity
toward his neighbor, went and most instantly prayed the judge, to temper
justice with mercy, and to mittigate the sentence given against that criminell.
The Judge answered, that he could not. This good Religious then fell on his
knees before the Judge, and with tearfull eyes besought him, that the sentence
then might be executed on himself, in regard that the party condemned, would
not endure the torment nor support the disgrace so patiently as himself. The
Judge moved with such words, and admiring the Charity of this Religious,
pardoned for that time the malefactor. This holy Father being in prayer in a
solitary place, many birds came over him and by their singing made so great a
noise, as they distracted him. Wherefore he commanded them in the name of God to
depart, and they redily obeyed. The hour of death of this worthy servant of
God being at length come, and his years being accomplished, he yielded his
soul to his Creator, adorned with virtues and sanctity. He was buried in the
Covent of Spoletum where his notable merittes have bin manifested, he having
obtained many graces of God, for the comfort and benefitt of infinity
persons that have implored him as their intercessour.

The life of the glorious Father, Brother Christopher
Of the mortification, charity, abstinence, and affliction of body of the
glorious Brother Christopher.
THE XLVIII. CHAPTER.
THe venerable Brother Christopher was borne in Romania: he was Priest before
he entierly left the world to follow JESUS CHRIST: he was moved thereunto by the
example and predication of S. Francis, who having admitted him to the habitt
and profession of the Friar Minors, sent him into France to the Province of
Gascone, the year 1219. there to edify souls and to plant the seed of
Religion. This Father was of a profound humility and simplicity and especially
pitiful to the afflicted. He succored assisted and served the leapers with
great devotion and diligence, washing their feet, dressing their soars and
ulcers, making their beds, paring their nails, and giving them comfort in
all their necessities. But how much he was pitiful in the behalf of others,
as charity commanded him, so much was he severe and rigorous to himself,
weakening him self by continual fastes, and wearing a gross hairecloth,
having besides for a long time worn a coat of maile the more to torment his
flesh. His perseverance in rigor of life was, such that being an hundred
years old he did eat but once a day, except the sondayes and principal
feasts of the year, so that albeit his body grew old and decayed, he was
neuettheles always young and firm in virtues. Notwithstanding such
mortifications and abstinences he had a face very cheerful, for the interior
joy shined and appeared exteriourly, and the most sweet and gracious love of
his heart toward his God, made all the afflictions sweet which his body
endured.

Of the divine consolations which he received in prayer and at Mass.
THE XLIX. CHAPTER.
THis holy Religious never spent his time idly, but ever employed himself
either in prayer, or reading, or in manual exercise in the garden, or in some
other service necessary to relligion. He was weary dilligent in prayer, and had
the grace of shedding many tears. And that he might the more commodiously
apply himself to prayer, he made choice of a very little cell, made of earth
and boughs of trees separate from the others, wherein he spent most of his
time (which was a thing in manner general to the first Fathers of that time)
and there was he often visited divinely: as also the glorious Virgin Mary
appeared unto him one time with her mother S. Anne, and comforted him that was
particulerly devout unto them. He every day said mass with great devotion and
abondance of tears: which was very grateful to IEVS CHRIST, as by the sequel
appears. This venerable Brother saying mass one morning, one of the candels
on the altar was casually putt out, and there was seen a light instantly to
descend from heaven that lightened it again. There was often seen a white
pigeon houering over his head whiles he said mass: the Religious that served
and assisted him did often see it, he was a young man very neat, and an innocent
disciple of his, called Brother Peter, who having forsaken his kindred, his
friends, his patrimony and all the world besides (on whose fallacious and
deceiptfull apparences he would not rely) entered into the Religion of Friar
Minors, where he ascended to such sanctity, that in regard of his pure
simplicity he merited often times to see and speak with his good Angel
Gardien. The first time that he saw the pigeon descend upon the head of the
glorious Br. Christopher, not knowing what it signified, he sought to drive it
away, wherein he exceedingly troubled his master, who was enforced to will him
to let it alone, and thereby it was known what it was. This venerable Father
one time calling to mind his sins committed in the world, extremely feared
the punishment they deserved, conformably to that which the scripture says:
Happy is he that always fears, and therefore he prayed this Angelical young
man Br. Peter whose conscience he knew very well, to demand of his familier
Angel, his estate touching his former sins: who made him this answer: Tell
Brother Christopher he need not fear his sins past, because God has
pardoned them entierly. But let him strive to persevere in his good worckes
begun, that he may meritt eternal life.

The rest of this Chapter is inserted in the end of the 71. chapter of the
second book, being a vision that this holy Father had of the death of Saint
Francis.
Of some miracles wrought by this glorious Br. Christopher in his life time.
THE L. CHAPTER.
ALthough this holy man did not publicly ascend into the pulpitt to preach the
word of God: yet did he deliver it to such people as he conuersed withal,
giving them profitable admonitions accompanied with severe reprehensions: so
that according to the etymology of his name, he carried JESUS CHRIST in his
body by penance, in his heart by seruent prayers, and in his mouth by divine
praises and words of his law, which he imprinted in the memory of sinners: And
God, by many miracles which he wrought by him, would demonstrate, how grateful
his worckes were unto him, and of what virtue and efficacy his prayers were
before his divine majesty.

Being in the city of Cahors in France, a child of eight years old, called
Remond, afflicted with so greiuous a disease that he was esteemed near his
end, S. Christopher, at the instancie of his mother prayed for him, and having
made the sign of the cross and laid his hand upon the child, he presently
spoke calling his mother, who came with great joy and gave him to eat, and so
by the prayer of this holy Religious, against all humane hope and appearance he
was cured.

In the same city an other child called Peter could not move his right arm
nor his foot, and besides had almost lost his sight, so that he was generally
judged as dead. This holy Father at the request of the mother came to visitt
him, and read the gospel over him, then made the sign of the cross from his
head to his feet, and the child was instantly cured.

A man of the same city, having bin long time afflicted with the falling
sickness, prayed the holy Father to give him his benediction, which having
received, he was entierly cured of the said infirmity.

A woman of Sauueterre in the same city was exceedingly vexed with a fieuer,
and having great devotion to the holy Father, she sent unto him to come visitt
her: which he having performed and prayed for her, she was cured by the sign
of the cross.

A Priest that was very sick, drincking of the holy water given him by Br.
Christopher that visited him, was instantly cured.

Again in the Bishopprick of Cahors a woman having left her child in the field
whiles she was reaping corn, by a sudden sinister accident he became dumme.
The mother having carried him to diverse churches, and recommended him to God by
the invocation of many saints, the child found no cure. At length full of
confidence and devotion she presented him to this holy Father, who having made
his prayer, and the sign of the cross upon him, he restored him to his mother
speaking as before: and she giving thanckes to God and his servant, returned
full of consolation unto her house.

Of the spirit of prophetie, and of some other miracles wrought by this
glorious servant of Jesus Christ.
THE LI. CHAPTER.
THere was without the city of Cahors a very high mountain, by which this
holy Father passing one day, he saw many men and women on the banck of the
river that ran under the said mountain, employed in diverse actions. Br.
Christopher said unto the^: Fly ye all from this place, and that instantly: for
the mountain will incontinently fall: some of them, seeing no appearance,
laughed first at this admonition. Yet the sanctity of this good Father being
manifestly known, they all retired from that place, which they had scarcely
done, but a great part of the mountain fell down without hurting any person:
wherefore they all gave thanckes to God for the benefitt received, and were the
more devout unto this saint.

A woman of the said city having bin afflicted with a long infirmity, was
visited by the saint; whom she prayed to obtain of God for her, either that
he would please to restore her health, or by death to deliver her from such
extreme anguishes. This holy Father answered her: fear not, but take courage
my daughter, for on such a day at the third hour thou shall depart out of
this life. On the said day he expressly returned at the same hour: whom she
seeing, said unto him: Father that which you told me seems not to be
accomplished, he replied: doubt not my daughter, for it shall incontinently be
accomplished, as in deed it was. For as they did ring at the third hour, this
woman being confessed and having performed what belonged to a Christian, in the
presence of this holy Father and of many others, yielded her spirit to our
Savior.

This servant of God in Marseilles saw two men in guise of Physicians coming
to visitt one that was sick: but knowing in spirit that this sick person was
in estate of mortal sin, and that the seeming Physicians were two devils, he
made the sign of the cross against them, and they instantly vanished: then
the holy Father admonishing the sick party, he sincerely confessed his sins,
and being contrite and comforted with a quiett conscience, he happily departed
from this life to a better.

In the said city a good devout woman, had a very auaricious husband and
sparing in worckes of mercy: whereupon she complained to this holy Father that
she had nothing to give in almose but wine. The S. bid her give securely of
that wine for the love of God. This woman obeyed him, giving thereof to all
poor that had need, in such sort that there was not much left in the vessel,
her husband drincking, knew by the taste of this wine that it was very low and
near the lies; wherefore he grew into choler with his wife, examining her what
was become of his wine: she full of trembling answered that there was yet much
in the vessel. The husband sent his servant to be truly informed what
quantity was left: she found the vessel full even to the bung: whereof she with
great joy incontinently advertised her master, which revived the soul of his
wife, that was dying with fear, and thereupon she boldly recounted all to her
husband, who resolved thenceforward to be more charitable toward the poor;
attributing the present miracle to the merittes of the glorious Br. Christopher
and to the virtue of charity, whose worckes our Lord does not only recompense
in the other world, but even in this also.

Of the glorious death of Br. Christopher.
THE LII. CHAPTER.
AFter that almighty God had ennobled and enriched his servant Christopher with
many merittes and miracles, and by the example of his holy life, had singulerly
planted the rule and Order of the Friar Minors in diverse places of France,
where he caused the erecting of many Couents which he furnished with Religious
of holy life and exemplare conversation: he would at length recompense him
with eternal reward, as he ordinarily does those that faithfully labor in the
vigneyard of his holy Church. The night when he passed from this miserable life
to that which is blessed, all the Religious being assembled about his bed, he
made them a long discourse of the kingdom of God, exhorting them to persevere
with purity in his holy service; they then demanded his benediction, which he
gave them very affectionatly, in the name of our Savior JESUS CHRIST, then
recommending his spirit to his Creator, he rendered it unto him; and his body
remained so ^elligiously composed, that he seemed to sleep. He dyed in the
city of Cahors, the year of grace 1272. (having spent fifteen years in the
Order of the Friar Minors) at six of the clock at night the Eve of Alsaintes,
to reign eternally with them. At the very hour of his death, two Religious
women ancient both in Relligion and virtues, did testify to have heard
Angelical music exceedingly mellodious, accompanying the soul of this worthy
servant of God, unto heaven. A man of the third Order, and of that city, in a
vision saw the soul of this glorious Father at the hour of his departure,
carried by Angels with great joy into Paradise. The same night a Burgess of
Cahors called Peter, saw in vision the soul of this holy Father sitting on a
very resplendant couch that did spread and sparckle glittering beams as the
sun: of whom demanding who he was, I am said he, the soul of Br.
Christopher, that have left my body on earth and am goeing to heaven. This man
suddenly awaked, and arising, likewise awakened all his family to whom he
recounted his vision; then went to the monastery where he found the body of the
holy Father already according to the custom, carried into the Church, thence to
be enterred else where. The day following, the death of this holy Father being
diuulged, there repaired such a co^course of people to see this blessed body,
that he could not be taken out of the hands of those that desired to touch
him, to kiss and tear off part of his habitt to keep for relics, and to
demand some grace of God by the merittes of him that had worn it. This body
being with much a do at length taken out of the Church, and embalmed with
precious liquours and aromaticall ointments, it was on the third day putt in a
coffin of wood, and enterred in the Church of the Friar Minors, with great
solemnity and reverence.

Of the dead raised, by the invocation of this saint.
THE LIII. CHAPTER.
ALmighty God voutsafed also to demo^strate the exceeding great miracles which
by the merittes of this his grateful servant he wrought in the bishopprick of
Cahors: for a mother having casually left her child upon a bridge, he fell into
the water and was drowned. The mother seeing her child dead, filled all the
village with compassion of the sorrow and grief which by her extreme
lamentation she did discover. At length she had recourse to S. Christopher, to
whom she vowed to visitt his sepulcher and to present unto it an image of wax
if he would raise her son. The vow being made, the child began to move his
lips, then to open his eyes, and by the merittes of such an intercessour in
presence of many people, he returned to life and ^afety.

A creature being wrested dead out of the mothers womb, was restored to life
by the prayers and intercessions of this saint, who was exceedingly importuned
and induced thereunto by those that were present.

In the same city, a mother had laid her child of two years old in bed
between her husband and her self: but awaking she found the child smothered
and dead: after many regreets she made vow to S. Christopher, that if by his
intercession the child might revive, she would carry it to his sepulcher, and
there would present a light and image of wax. Which vow being made the child
began to gape, then to move the arms, and at length opening his eyes it
returned to life.

In the same city and after the same manner, the S. being inuocated, for a
dead child by the father who was devout unto him, in these terms: O saint of
God raise my daughter and I promise thee to carry her to thy sepulcher, where I
will offer there an altar cloth and an image of wax; she upon this vow
returned to life, and the Father and others present gave thanckes to almighty
God and to the S. In a town called Concet near to the said city, there was a
youg man so weakened with a continual fever, that he was generally esteemed
for dead, no motion could be perceived in him not so much as of his pulse:
wherefore his mother in extreme affliction, perceauing all humane help to
fail, had recourse to almighty God, whom she inuocated by the merittes of S.
Christopher, of whom she had heard many miracles recounted, to restore her
sons health; vowing, to carry him to his sepulcher, and there to present an
altar cloth and an image of wax. The effect was admirable, for the presenting
of her vow being finished he began to amend, and in short time was entierly
cured, to the great astonishment and content of all his friends and kindred,
who failed not to give thanckes to God and to accomplish their vow.

Health was also restored to an other young man called John, desperately sick at
Cahors in the manner aforesaid.

A Relligious of the Order of S. Clare called Sister Mary, being so extremely
weakened with sickness that she could not remove her self in her bed, nor much
less take her rest therein, she expected only death: but having heard it
reported that the holy Father Christopher was deceassed, and that he wrought
infinite miracles, she bitterly lamenting presented unto him this request. O
holy Father that have often heard my confession, pray unto almighty God if thou
please, that I may recover my health, to serve him. Which spoaken she fell into
a sweet sleep, from whence the next morning she awakened full of comfort and
consolation, and went to the quier to communicate with her other sisters, who
theratt were much amazed: and afterward they all together gave thanckes to
the omnipotent bounty of God and to his holy intercessour, by whose merittes he
so compassionatly assisteth those that address their petitions unto him.

Of other miracles wrought in the cure of many dangerous and incurable diseases.
THE LIVE. CHAPTER.
Upon the Mount Abban in the bishopprick of Cahors, a child reduced near unto
death, and his mother extremely afflicted by despair of her sons recovery;
which having exceedingly weakened her by the great wearines of labor that this
sickness causer her, she fell into a little sleep, wherein she heard a voice
that said unto her: Woman fear no more, but make a vow for thy son to S.
Christopher, and God by his merittes will cure him. This woman awaking, and
having made her vow, her son was cured, and the mother carried him to the
sepulcher of the saint, where she thancked God and her Intercessour for it.

A woman of the said city of Cahors called Valeria, was so sick that the
Physicians judged her as dead, and withal had already lost her speech and the
motion of all her members, and was as black as pitch, a priest also coming to
hear her confession, was constrained to return without using his function:
for she could neither speak, hear, nor make any signs. But her kindred and
freindes that were present, greiued at the loss of a woman whom they
cordially loved, fell devoutly on their knees, lifted up their joined hands,
their contenances, and their prayers toward heaven, and recommended her to
the merittes of the holy Br. Christopher: and presently the sick woman began to
speak and to praise God in his servant, who had delivered her from the peril
of death, and restored her perfect health.

A Priest called Geffry, being by the Physicians forsaken as dead, and having
already for the space of two days lost his speech, a sister of his praying to
the S. for him, he began to speak, and afterward was perfectly cured.

A woman so lamed in her hands and feet that she could hardly go with
cruches, fell on her knees near the sepulcher of the S. and the e prayed him
to obtain her cure, vowing unto him a foot and hand of wax. Her prayer and vow
being ended, she was entierly cured, and went joyfully with other women to
carry lime and brick, to finish the sepulcher of the saint.

A young man called Arnold was borne with his feet so crooked and wrested that
they could not support him: his parents vowed for him to the holy servant of
God, affirming that they would really acknowledge him for a saint if he would
cure the lame party, who to the exceeding amazement of those present, stood
upright, sound and joyful, and his father himself conducted him to visitt his
sepulcher, publicly denouncing the grace and favor which our Lord had done
him, by the merittes of this glorious Intercessour. There are found recorded
many other miracles which God wrought by the merits of his holy servant Br.
Christopher, delivering many from death that were desperately sick, restoring
sight to the blind, curing feiuers, goutes, fistulaes, and other infirmities,
restoring speech to the dumme, hearing to the deaf, and finally relieuing all
that by his merittes inuocated almigthy God. But to avoid prolixity I forbear
hear to deduce them, esteeming the prealeadged sufficient to occasion the
faithful to believe the sanctitye of this servant of JESUS CHRIST. The miracle
following shall be for the incredulous only: A man called Ratier, being by
chance near unto the sepulcher of this S. and hearing his miracles related: I
cannot believe, said he, that a man whom I have seen in these days can worck
miracles. Those present having reprehe^ded him, he would not acknowledge his
error, wherefore he deserved to be chasticed of God, as he was, thereby to make
him know his temerity. For departing thence he had scarcely recovered his home
but he felt himself surprised with a vehement fieuer, the affliction whereof
opening his vnd^^standing, he also called to mind the arrogancy and temerity
of his words, which he exceedingly repented, saying: O S. Christopher, pardon
me, and assist me I beseech thee, I confess thou were and art a S. and in the
virtue of God can worck miracles, to whom thou have bin so faithful and
obedient a servant: I promise thee, if thou please to restore unto me my
health, I will presently visitt thy sepulcher, there to give thee thanckes.
This vow being made, he was instantly cured, and arose sound from his bed, and
went to accomplish his vow, giving thanckes to God and to his holy servant: and
thenceforward he became a faithful Professor and proclamer of the sanctity of
the blessed Father Christopher.

A summarie of the life of some other disciples of the holy Father S. Francis.
THE LV. CHAPTER.
IT would be a matter over tedious both to read, and to write the lives of all
the disciples and companions of S. Francis, wherewith, as so many precious
stones adorned with many graces and virtues, the said holy Father began to
build his Evangelical religion: considering withal that we have not such
authentical relation of their lives and miracles as is requisite and
necessary. In respect whereof we do not make a particular relation of each of
them; but will recount somewhat of certain of them who have so spent their
time, that albeit their fame be not equal to the aforenamed, yet are they not
of less sanctity and glory before God. The first of whom is the glorious Br.
Peter Catanius the second disciple of S. Francis, and his first Vicar General,
who was an eye witness of many Mysteryes that almighty God communicated unto
him, as in his life we have recorded. This holy Religious being dead, God had
already began by his intercession to worck many miracles, when the holy Father
S. Francis having commanded him to forbear the obtaining of such miraculous
graces from God, his miracles ceased, as has bin amply discoursed in the
hundredth chapter of the first book, where is likewise related wherefore he was
made Vicar General.

Brother Angelus of Rieta was the first knight that entered this religion, and
was one of the twelve first disciples of S. Francis, and his companion in many
worthy mysteries and miracles. The holy Father put from this good Religious an
extreme fear which he had of the devils, in such sort that he durst not
continue alone at his prayers by night: for he commanded him to go about
midnight to the top of a high mountain, and there aloud to cry out these
words: ye proud devils, come ye all now to me, and do the worst you can:
which having by due obedience performed, none of the devils ever after came to
annoy him, so that he was entierly freed of the said fear. And being fully
perfected in virtues and prayer, he passed from this life to God, and was
buried at Assisium, with other companyons of S. Francis.

Br. William an Englishman, was admitted in the number of the first twelve
Disciples of S. Francis, in the place of Br. John Chapel, that was an
Apostata, and did hang himself as Judas had done. The miracles wrought by this
blessed Br. William in his sepulcher, have sufficiently testified what he was:
for almighty God by his merits there wrought so many, that he seemed to
obscure the glory of his Father S. Francis, by whom he was buried: and
therefore Br. Helie who then was General of the Order, went to his tomb, and
commanded him by holy obedience to forbear worcking any more miracles.

Br. Moricke, who was first Religious of the Order of the Porte-Croix or
Crosse-bearers, was eminent under the discipline of the holy Father S. Francis,
and was most famous for his admirable abstinence, and for a long space woare on
his flesh an iron shirt, did eat no bread, but only herbs and raw pulse; he
never woare coat, but the only habitt during his life, and at his death he
left many signs of his sanctity and perfect life.

Br. Benett of Arezzo was also perfect in all virtues. S. Francis sent him to
be Provincial at Antioch. There are strange matters recounted of this
Religious, which being difficult to be believed, and not being satisfied by the
testimony of the writer, I have thought it best not to record them here, for
fear that they appearing indeed doubtfully, the like judgment should be given
of others here recorded that are most certain and indubitable.

It shall therefore suffice, to know, that this blessed Father had the spirit
of prophecy, as they testify who knew him: and that having perseuered in
sanctity of life, he reposed in peace. He was buried in Arezzo his own
country, whither, it is held that he brought from Babylon, one of the fingers
of the holy Prophett Daniel.

Br. Peregrinus of Faleron was admitted to the religion of the holy Father S.
Francis, who prophesied unto him, that albeit he weere learned, he should
notwithstanding apply himself to the active life, and his companion to the
contemplative, and so it arrived, for he was a lay brother: for which humility,
he obtained of God an exceeding great perfection in virtues, and particulerly
the grace of compunction and the love of God; for whose sake desiring
martyrdom, he went to Jerusalem, where he visited all the holy places, with
such devotion, tears, embracinges and most tender loving kisses, that in those
places he adored our Savior as present. Br. Bernard Quintaualle affirmed of
this Religious, that he was one of the most perfect of the world. And as he was
by name a Stranger, so was he also in his life: for the love of JESUS CHRIST
was so burning in his heart, that he never permitted any other thing to rest
there: but always walked and sighed toward heaven: thus did he ascend from
virtue to virtue, in such sort that he was exceedingly illuminated in his life,
and in his death, by diverse miracles.

Br. Ricerio employed himself in the contemplative life, according to the
prophecy of S. Francis; which made him familier unto him, and he instructed
him in many divine verities, he made him Provincial of the marquisate of
Ancona; many matters concerning this holy Religious are recorded in the life of
S. Francis.

Br. Augustine of Assisium, Provincial of the land of Labor, commonly called
Naples, was a Religious of such sanctity, that he merited, not only to be
companion in life and profession with S. Francis, but also in his death and
glory: for having in his last sickness already lost his speech, he saw the soul
of S. Francis ascend unto heaven, which encouraged him to cry out: Stay holy
Father, stay for me: and his soul forthwith leaving his body, it accompanied
that of his blessed Father to eternal glory.

Br. Roger the disciple of S. Francis, v as of such sanctity, that Pope
Gregory the ninth approved him for a S. and permitted commemoration to be made
of him in the Coue^t of the Friar Minors of Tiuoly; but because he was not
canonized with the accustomed sole^nities, the Religious never durst keep his
solemn feast. He was not canonized because the exame^ of his miracles,
appointed by the said Pope, was never accomplished.

Brother Philippe the Long, was also disciple of S. Francis. He was the first
Confessor, Visitour and Minister of the Religious of S. Clare. It is found
recorded of this S. that an Angel purged his lips, touching them with a
burning coal, as the Seraphin did to the Prophett ^say. 6.
Esaye, which was not a little necessary to him that was to administer the word
of God unto Religious women.

Br. Barbarus, Br. John of S. Constantin, and Br. Bernard of Viridante, that
were of the first companions of S. Francis, were exceeding eminent in their
virtuous and merueillous actions; as their worckes were written in the book of
life, so their souls for ever live in glory, and their bodies are buried in
the Covent of S. Francis at Assisium.

Br. Pacificus, companion of the holy Father, was of such perfection that he
merited to see many merueillous worckes, which our Lord secretly wrought in his
servant S. Francis, and because the glorious S. knew his perfection and
sanctity, he sent him Provincial into France, where he remained diverse years,
then dyed and was buried at Laon.

The end of the sixth book, of the second volume and first part of the
Chronicles of the Friar Minors, wherein particular mention is made of 25.
disciples of the holy Father S. Francis, all of very singular sanctity of life,
and of worthy miracles.
THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE SECOND VOLVME AND FIRST PART OF THE CHRONICLES OF
THE FRIAR MINORS.
WHEREIN IS CONTAINED THE LIFE AND admirable doctrine of Br. Giles of Assisium,
a Religious of great perfection, who was the third Disciple of S. Francis.
Translated as before.
Of the conversion of Brother Giles to the Religion of the Friar Minors.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
ALBEIT to read or hear the lives of all or any saints, exceedingly dispose
the spirittes to the contempt of temporal pleasures and induce them to
purchase true and eternal richesse: yet it cannot be denied but that the life
of some one more then an other does cause these effects, as I hope this
ensuyng shall prove of the glorious Brother Giles of Assisium, who was the
third that followed S. Francis: whose life being of singular note, it is
requisite it should be described more at lardge. The time employed in reading
thereof shall not be wasted: for the souls thereby shall be enriched with holy
doctrines, with divine examples and documents. But I omit to recount his
conversion, it being already handled in the ninth chapter of the first book
and first volume of this present part.

How Brother Giles went to visit the relics of S. James in Galu^a, and the
holy Sepulcher of our Redeemer Jesus Christ in Jerusalem.
THE II. CHAPTER.
IT was the custom of the first Fathers of this Order, to go often in
pilgrimage, not to seek their more liberty, nor to satisfy their appetite
with better cheer, but for the exercise of perfection, and to suffer hungar,
thirst, cold, heat, and the affi ontes which they often endured, as unknown
in that new habitt, and so did they dispose themselves to the incommodities of
obedience, and were courageous: for they went barefoot, withone single habit,
without wallets, edifying themselves in patience, and their neighbor in
charity. Now Brother Giles having gotten leave of the holy Father S. Francis
he went to visitt the church of S. James of Compostella, in which voyage he did
not so much as once satisfy his hungar, such a desire had he to feel in
himself the force of poverty for the love of JESUS CHRIST. Finding one day no
mean to get so much as bread (wherewith only he lived) having found in a barn
certain husks of beans left there after the threshing, he did eat them with
great appetite, and after took his rest in the same place. The next morning he
arose very early, as cheerful and well disposed as if he had eaten the best
and most delicate food in the world. He was thus accustomed to suffer, being
often in forrestes and solitary places, which were more to his content then the
conversation of the world, as less subject to distractions in his spiritual
exercises, and more commodious for spending the night in watching and prayer.
In this journey meeting with a poor sick creature full of soars, and not
knowing what to give him, he ripped of his capuce and gave it unto him: but this
charity enforced him to travel twenty days bare-headed, till at last was
given him cloth to make an other, and so did he walk with a habitt, according
to the common fashion of his Order, deformed, but entierly conformable to the
charity of the gospel. Being in Lombardie, he was called by a man, of whom he
thought to receive a charity, but coming to him, he took out a pair of
dice, and demanded if he would play with him: So did the wretch flout at this
good Religious, who went on bowing down his head without replying a word. In
this sort he was often the object of laughter unto the sloathfull and idle
companions, that made him their scorn, which he always endured with patience
correspondent. After he had also visited all the holy land, expecting commodity
of shipping to return into Italy, it being necessary for him to live upon his
labor as having no money, he carried water to passengers, for which service
they gave him bread, and remaining certain days in the city of Ason, he
employed himself in the labor of his hands making baskettes and cases of
ozier, and such little conceates, wherewith he lived; and if he wanted either
worck or matter, or knew not wherein to employ himself, according to the diverse
occasions of the places where he rest^^ed, his last refuge was to have recourse
to the abondant table of God, demanding almose at the peoples doors,
according to the documentes of his rule. He went also to visit the mount saint
Michael, then saint Nicholas of Bar; and in all these voyages into whatsoever
place he entered, he exhorted those that he found, to do penance for their
sins, and to apply themselves to the service of God the bountiful giver of
all goodness, and to do this in love and charity toward their neighbor. As
he one day trauailled, he became so weary and so oppressed with hungar, that he
was enforced to rest himself, and with wearines he fell a sleep. As he awaked
he found by him half a loaf which God had sent him of almose, which he
joyfully did eat, thancking his divine majesty: and being by mean of this
celestial bread reconforted, he cheerfully proceeded on his journey.

How this servant of God endeavored to gain his living by the worck and
labor of his hands.
THE III. CHAPTER.
S. Francis having sent him to remain at Rome, thereby the better to satisfy
his desire, which was to live upon his labor, he went to a mountain three
leagues distant whence he brought wood to the city: and for the price thereof
he was coutent with the gift of bread for his one days ^ustenance. He brought
wood to a woman, who knowing him to be Religious would give him a greater hire
then was conditioned, but Brother Giles for the same cause (to wit for the
love of God) would not accept it, affirming that he would not be vanquished by
avarice, wherewith this woman was exceedingly edifyed. He disdayned not to
undertake any service that might be required of him, provided that it exceeded
not the limits of modesty; and so misprising the vanities of the world, he
perfected and refined himself in mortification and humility. Assisting some
others one time to gather nuttes, and his days labor being ended he was paid
in nuttes, which being unable to hold in his sleeves, he putt off his habitt,
and tied the two ends of his sleeves which he filled even to the capuce, and
so carried them to Rome, where he divided them among the poor: to conclude
having imparted some share of his gain to the Religious, he also gave part
unto the poor.

Sometime he took of the water of S. Sixtus and carried to the Religious of
Quatuor Coronatorum, who gladly dranck thereof, and for the same gave him bread,
wherewith he lived, and what remained he distributed unto the poor. As he one
day carried water to the said Religious, a poor man in the way demanded of
him to drinck, and he gave him thereof: but unwilling that the Religious should
have the rest, he returned to draw more at the fountain which was a league
distant, such was his desire with his possibility to give each one contentment.
When any one hired him and entertained him to day-labour, he always
conditionally reserved time requisite with attention to say his canonical
hours, and certain other suffrages and devotions. He was very careful to
shun idleness, and therefore he always either spoke of God, or prayed and
contemplated, or used some handy labor in some little matter of vtility; whence
proceeded, that loosing no part of his time, he sufficiently provided both for
his soul and and body.

The Pope being at Rieta, the Cardinal Nicolas Bishop of Toscolan, desiring
to have Brother Giles in his company, out of great respect he had to his
simplicity and sanctity, he instantly prayed him to seiorne certaines days
with him, and to be content to eat as he did at his table, forbearing to seek
almose otherwhere: But Brother Giles willingly promising to remain in his
house, would not yield to eat of that he found there, and so went thither. Now
the Cardinal complaining unto him for that he would not eat of his bread,
Brother Giles answered Psalm* 127.
with this verse of David: Labores manuum tuarum quia manducabis beatus es and
benetibi er^t. The Cardidall not knowing what to reply, prayed him at least to
eat that which he received of his almose, or of his labor with his companion,
which he promised to do: and thenceforward he brought his begged bread to the
Cardinals table, where he did eat it, and if any remained he gave it to to the
poor. But there falling one day such a rain that Brother Giles could not go
abroad either to labor or to seek almose, the Cardinal was very joyful
thereof, hoping that day to have his desire, and that Brother Giles would eat of
his bread: but he was deceived, for Brother Giles exceedingly troubled for that
he could not gain his bread, bethought himself and went into the kitchen,
where asking the Cook wherefore his kitchen lay so uncleanly, offered to sweep
it for the gift of two loaves: which having gotten, he went to eat the said
bread with the Cardinal; who was again deceived the morning following, when
as it rained extremely, for Brother Giles unable to go abroad, found mean for
bread to make clean the dishes, which made the Cardinal admire his firm
resolution to li^e poorly, more then yet he had done.

How our Lord releiued Brother Giles in an extreme necessity.
THE IV. CHAPTER.
BRother Giles having thus seiourned a certain time in the Cardinals house,
the time of Lent drawing very near, he determined to retire with his
companion, into some solitary place, where his spirit might contemplate in
entiere repose: and to this effect took leave of this Cardinal, who therewith
exceedingly afflicted said unto him: Alas my dear friend whither go thou,
as a bird without a nest? But this good Religious ascended up to a mountain,
where he found a little chapel (having bin an hermitage) called S. Laurence,
far distant from habitation, and consequently very solitary: there he
resolved to spend his lent, but three days after he was there arrived, it did
so snow and freeze, that they could not possibly go abroad. The holy Religious
seeing there was no mean to go forth to seek bread, said to his companion:
Brother let us make petition to almighty God that he will please in our
necessity to send us bread, since there is none but he that can hear and
releive us. Then he recounted an history of certain Religious, who wanting
bread in the like necessity, had recourse to him and were heard. Being moved by
such an example, they began on the euenning to pray with loud voice unto
almighty God, and so perseuered till the break of the day following, when as
God inspired a good man of a neighboring place, who seeing the snow so
extreme, called to mind that he had seen at other times Hermites at S.
Laurence, and thought with himself, that if then there were any there, they
could not come forth to seek food; which moving him to compassion he went out
of his house with bread and wine, which he gave to the Religious, and being
returned to his house, he advertised his neighbors and friends of the
necessity of the said servants of God, and so procured that they wanted not
wherewith to live the rest of the lent, which happened to good purpose for them
in regard of their extreme necessity. Br. Giles desirous to acknowledge the
great charity used unto him by those people, he said to his companion: hitherto
we have prayed to God for our selves, to be relieved in our necessity:
heceforward we ought to pray unto him for our benefactors; so that persisting
night and day in these petitions, our Lord bestowed such graces and favors on
the inhabitants of that place, that never Friar Minor having bin formely seen
there, many among them nevertheless being moved by the example and pious
exhortations of the said Religious, forlooke the vanity of this world and
became Friar Minors; and such as could not, served God by prayers, and did
penance in their own houses: and by this mean for corporal benefittes they
gave in exchange spiritual in double mesure.

Of the humility and obedience of Br. Giles.
THE V. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father S. Francis cordially loved Br. Giles for his great perfection
in all virtues, and his promptitude in doing well: and therefore did often
observe him, and would say to his other Religious, that he was one of his
knights of the round table, so did he call the humble and devout Religious.
Now Br. Giles one day demanded obedience of S. Francis to go where he
pleased, or to remain where he was: the holy Father answered him, your
residence is provided, go where you will: whereupon having demanded and
received his benediction, he went and walked in this freedom four whole
days, but finding his spirit much disquieted, he returned to S. Francis:
Father (said he) I beseech you design me a certain place whither to go,
because goeing according to my own liberty I cannot have my conscience free:
the S. sent him to the Covent of Fabrian whither he went barefoote with a very
ragged habitt, though the season were extreme cold. On the way he met a
passenger that said unto him: I would not go so poorly clothed in so cold a
season, were I thereby to pourchace paradise: by which words the devil so
augmented the cold that he expected death thereby: but he incontine^tlie called
to mind that our lord JESUS CHRIST went barefoote and poorly clothed through
the world, and endured far more cold and other labors for our sakes: these
pious cogitations did in this sort warm first his heart, and then all his body
with a divine heat: wherefore he began to praise God his sweet lord, who had
thus warmed him not with material fire, but by the only burning heatof his
divine love. So Br. Giles remained many years in the said place, where one day
weighing his sins, he ascended on a mountain near by, whither he carried a
yo^g Religious, whom he commanded, with a cord about his neck to lead him
naked to the place where the other Religious were: and entering in this sort
before them, he began with tears to cry: Have compassion and pity of me
miserable and detestable sinner: The Religious beholding him in such a ghastly
plight, began all to weep, and prayed him to putt on his habitt: but he
answered, with bitter tears and extreme sighs, that he was unworthy to be a
Friar Minor: Yet if you will that I take the habitt again, said he, I will, as
an almose received of you, though I do not deserve it: and so he clothed
himself and there remained, laboring with his hands in making caskettes of
straw to cover or keep glasses, and little baskettes which he and his companion
carried to the neighbor town and villages, and in exchau^ge received what
they needed either of food or clothing; and with the rest he clothed other
Religious, saying that such almose done to any Religious prayed for him when he
slept and could not then pray himself.

This good Religious retourning one day from the fields, having in his hands
a reed and a hatchett, he past before a church, the Chappelaine whereof seeing
him called him hippocrite: which did so grieve and Admirable simplicity of Br.
Giles.
afflict Br. Giles that he wept bitterly. A Religious finding him thus
lamenting, demandindg the occasion of his tears, he answered him: because I
am an hippocrite, as a Priest, did now instantly assure me. The Religious
replied, poor man do thou then believe it to be true? Br. Giles answered
that he believed it because he was a Priest that avouched the same, and he
could not conceive that a Priest would lie. The Religious replied, Brother, be
no longer disquieted, for it may be thou art no hippocrite, because the opinion
of men is most often far from the judgment of God. Br. Giles with this
reasonnable answer was somewhat satisfied and comforted, saying that if he
were not such, it was by the pure grace of God.

Hearing one day relation of the fall of Br. Helie, that had bin General of
the Order, whence he was an Apostata, then living excommunicated thence in the
train and service of the Emperor Frederic the second, then a rebel unto the
Church, he with extreme grief fell flatt upon the ground, and there
contemptibly turned and tumbled himself, affirming that he would descend as
low as he could, because the other had wrought his own destruction by clymeing
so high.

This great servant of God being one day out of the Covent, he received a
letter and thereby commandment from his General to meet him at Assisium
whither he instantly took his journey: his companion putting into his mind
that it were good to return first to the Covent to advertise the Religious
thereof, he answered: Brother, I am commanded to go to Assisium and not to the
Covent, so much did he yield himself to obedience, that his only cogitation was
readily to obey.

The Guardian having commanded a Religious that was praying to go to demand
almose: the Religious thereat murmured exceedingly withhimselfe, and in this
distemper came to Br. Giles thus co^playning: Resolution of Bro. Giles touching
prayer.
Father, I was praying in my cell, and the Guardian has commanded me to go
beg, so that I must omit the greater good for the less. B. Giles answered
him: brother, you know not yet what prayer is: for the most true and perfect
is, that the subject do the will of his Superior.

How zealous Br. Giles was of his rule, and of holy poverty.
THE VI. CHAPTER.
THe blessed Br. Giles, as the true disciple of S. Francis was a great friend
of poverty. From his entering into Religion to the end of his life he had never
but one habitt, and that all patched. He went always barefoot, and made his
own cell with earth and branches of trees, shunning all such superfluous
celles as were more hansome and commodiously built. Coming one time to
Assisium to visitt the sepulcher of S. Francis, the Religious showed him the
Covent that was new built very great and sumptuous, showing him the great
edifice of the Church, and a fair structure of the altar that had three
stages or stories of hight, then the Cloister, the refectory, the dormitory and
other places newly built for the commodity of the Religious, who gloried in the
acco^plishment Grave and short reprehensions of Br. Giles against the
tra^sgression of poverty.
of so eminent a piece of worck. Br. Giles very attentively considered all
without uttering a word; and having seen all, he addressed himself to those
that guided him saying: Brethren, here is no want unto you but of women. The
Religious seeming to be much scandalized at those words, Br. Giles replied:
you should not wonder at what I have said, for you know well that it is no
more lawful for us to dispense with poverty then with chastity. So that you
having bid adieu to poverty, taking that for lawful which is directly against
our rule, I do much admire you do not dispense with your selves in the breach
of this other article, considering that both are vows by you equally made unto
God.

There was a Religious that came one day full of joy and contentme^t Bad
Religious more punished in hell then worldlinges.
to Br. Giles and said: Father I bring you good news. This last night, I saw a
vision of hell; and looking very curiously into it, I could not see any of our
Relligious. Which Br. Giles understanding, he sighing said: I believe thee my
child, I believe that you have seen none: and oftentimes reiterating the same
words he was ravished in spirit: then retourning to himself he added:
believe it for certain, my Child, that there are some* but thou saw them
not because thou did not descend low enough, where they are tormented,
wretched as they are for not having performed worckes conformable to their rule
and habit: for as holy Religious have, with the most perfect and glorious,
their residence in heaven, so those which are bad have their place with the
most wicked in hell.

How much Br. Giles affected the purity of Chastity.
THE VII. CHAPTER.
THis venerable Father continually afflicted his flesh, keeping it subject to
the spirit: Which he did to conserve in his soul the splendor of chastity,
and therefore he accustomed to eat but once a day, and that little and very late.
He would say that our flesh was like unto a hog that very greedily ran to the
dirt and filth delighting himself therein, or like the beetle that in all his
life does nothing but tumble and wallow himself in loathsome filthiness. He
would also affirm our flesh to be the most valliant soldier that our ennemy
has against us: by which words and other like, he demonstrated what an ennemy
himself was to the perverse inclinations of his senses, and what a friend to
Angelical chastity.

Being one day in the city of Spoletum, he heard a voice as of a woman that
called him: this voice being of the devil, suggested into his heart such a
temptation, as he had never experienced a greater. But as a valerous Champion
of JESUS CHRIST, he chased far away his ennemy and remained victorious, first
by cruel disciplining himself, then by seruent prayer.

A Religious Priest being exceedingly afflicted and tormented by the devil
with a cruel temptation of the flesh and getting no remedy by abstinences and
prayers, he said with himself, if I could see Br. Giles to discover unto him
this mine affliction, I am assured he would relieve met but he was so far
distant that there was no mean to come at him. Br. Giles (or his Angel for
him) appeared one night unto him, with whose presence the Religious being
exceedingly comforted, he opened unto him all his temptation, and demanded of
him some aid and counsel. Br. Giles said unto him, come hither brother, what
would you do to a dog that would bite you? The Religious answered that he
would cry at him and make him fly. Br. Giles replied, do the like to him that
tempts you, and I will pray to God to assist and encourage you therein
whereupon the Religious awaking, he found himself fully comforted and delivered
of his trouble some temptation. Other Religious were also in such sort molested
with the like temptations, that they became even desperate and in terms to
leave the Order* nevertheless they were delivered by the words and prayers of
Br. Giles.

A Religious came one time full of joy and contentment unto him upon a victory
gotten against a temptation of the flesh^ for he had perceived and heard a
woman come behind him, which caused him a very grievous temptation, and the
nearer she came unto him, the more did his temptation increase. But she passing
before him* and he having attentively beheld her, was freed of the temptation.
Br. Giles asked him if she were old or young: he answered, she was old and
deformed. Br. Giles replied (...) is a victory of chastity not to behold a
woman.
that it was no great marvel if the temptation presently ceased, and with
all added: know brother, that you got no victory but have bin vanquished* for
the victory consisted in not beholding her at all when she past by you: and
this is the securest remedy one can use in the conflict of the flesh. Therefore
herein be very careful hereafter, for fear that in steed of an old, you
behold a fair young woman, which would cause the temptation, with infamy, to
proceed further.

How Br. Giles went into Africa to preach to the Mores, with intention there to
suffer Martyrdom.
THE VIII. CHAPTER.
THe year 1219. wherein the greatest general chapter was held of the Friar
Minors, S. Francis deputing and disposing of all his Religious throughout all
Christendom and even among the infidels, Africa fell to Br. Giles his lot,
whither he hastened with many his companions of one same spirit. And to that
end they embarked themselves with an Italian merchant, and safely arrived at
Tunes; but the devil by divine pe mission prevented him in this sort of his
desired success in this voyage: In the said city of Tunes there was an old
More, a man of great authority with those Pagans, whom they reputed a saint*
he had for a long time opinatiuely forborne to speak: but as soon as Br.
Giles and his companions were landed, this More went presently preaching and
exclaming through all the streets and corners that certain Infidels were
arrived, who intended to condemn and calumniat their great Prophett and their
law* and therefore counsailled and commanded them to seek them out they being
Christians and to kill them. This caused a great rumor and tumult over all the
city, in such sort that in an instant they were all armed and prepared
themselves to murder these poor Religious. But the Christians having
understood the cause of this insurrection, and fearing the Mores would kill
them all, they forcibly thrust Br. Giles and his companions again into the
shipp, in which they came. But these true servants of JESUS CHRIST did not
omit to preach to the Mores out of the shipp: which putt the Christians into
such a fear, that they commanded the Marine^s of the vessel to hoyse their
sails: and so, being peruented of the effecting of their pious desires they
were returned into Italy.

Of the hight and sublimity of Br. Giles his contemplation.
THE IX. CHAPTER.
AFter this holy Father had spent many years in the active life, in affliction
and labors, it pleased almighty God to make him a new man, calling him to the
repose of contemplation, and priuiledging him above all men of his time. The
beginning of this his perfection was, when being in the Covent of Faleron near
Perusia offering his prayer one night he was touch^d with the hand of God, and
replenished with such a supernatural consolation, that it seemed to him that
God would separate his soul from the body. In this instant he felt his members
as dead, it seeming unto him that his soul forsook them and that being gone
forth she already delighted and pleased her self in the sight and
contemplation of her so great natural beauty, but much more of her spiritual,
wherewith the holy Ghost had already endowed her, whereby she appeared to her
self more beautiful then all humane consideration could comprehend, as
himself a little before his death did testify. In this ecstasy we^e revealed
unto him celestial secrettes so great, that he would never disclose them to
any: and therefore he would sometimes say: Happy is he that can conserve the
secrettes of God in himself: and it must not be objected unto me that God has
revealed them unto me to the end I should manifest them to others: for when it
shall please him that I reveal them, he will discover them unto me by other
means.

Of diverse apparitions of our Lord and S. Francis, to Br. Giles.
THE X. CHAPTER.
THe eighteenth year of the conversion of Br. Giles (wherein S. Francis dyed)
he went to dwell in the Covent of Crettone in Toscane within the Diocese of
Chiusi^the first night of his being there, there appeared unto him in vision an
Emperor that spoke very familierly unto him: this presaged unto him the divine
vision of the glory which God communicated unto him in that place, where
spending the lent of S. Martin in very a^stere fastes and continual prayers,
he had one night an apparition of S. Francis: to whom he said that he had a
great desire to speak unto him. The S. answered him: Brother sift and examine
well your self before hand: and so vanished. Br. Giles perseuering three entyer
days in prayer JESUS CHRIST appeared unto him before the feast of his holy
Nativity: and for as much as might be coniectured by his words, he was
ravished in spirit and with the eyes of his soul ^aw the glory of Paradise:
he neither could nor durst explicate this viion, which was not continual, but
by intermission till the eve of the Epiphany, at which time he was so
replenished with force and conso^tion both spiritual and supernatural, that
his weak and feeble huma^e body could not support it: for his soul seemed to
expire, so that he ^as constrained to breath out violent sighs, by reason of
the force ^f his spirit which his body could not sustain, and albeit he were
on he hight of a mountain in a cell very remote where he prayed, yet did he
other Religious sometimes hear him: and then would they se^d Br. Gratia^ to
assist and help him as there should be need. This Religious thus ^ming one
time unto him and asking him wherefore he co^playned, the ^oly Father answered:
come hither my child, thou art come in good ti^e, for I wished thee here: and
then recounted to him many things to his ^ceeding comfort. The next morning
retourning thither he found him bit^rly weeping, wherefore he prayed him not to
afflict himself in that ^rt, for it might weel shorten his days. Brother
Giles answered, Alas ^y friendly Brother, how may I refrain from tears, that
fear to (...) the ennemy of God? for having received so many graces of his
Majesty, I doubt I do not serve him as I ought, and according to his holy
will, whereof if I were certain, it would be more gracious unto me then death
it self: which he spoke in respect of the vision and divine revelation that
made such alteration in him, and therefore he said: Till this present I went
whither I would, and with my hands labored as I would: but henceforward I can
no more follow my fantasy, but must do according to the spirit that I find
to conduct me. This fear in this holy Faher was like to that of S. Paul when
he said: we carry this (divine) treasure in earthen vessels. Butt because the
certain peril of the loss of an eternal and infinite treasure, would cause
a diffidence and despair in any one by consideration of his natural
infirmity, he added: we know that the preservation of the divine treasure
consists in the virtue and power of God and not of us. The said Religious
then took occasion to comfort him, or rather the holy Ghost, for and by him
with the said sentence of S. Paul, saying, that though it were expedient that
the fear of God should be always in us, yet should it be there with faith and
full confidence in his bounty, who as he gives grace unto his servants, so
also he gives them force to preserve the same together with perseverance. Br.
Giles being by these words comforted, he proceeded in employing his days in
such hight of contemplation and spiritual consolation, as is not to be
expressed, demanding of almighty God, as a favor, not to be so ouer-chardged,
alleging that he being so great a sinner, an idiot, rustike and simple, was
not worthy so much grace but the more he reputed himself unworthy, the more
did almighty God augment his favors. There was a religious of pious life in
the same Coue^t, to whom God did some times reveal his secrettes certain
days before that Br. Giles had the said vision: this Religious saw in vision
the sun to arise out of the cell of Br. Giles, and there-ouer to remain till
night, and he afterward seeing Br. Giles so admirably changed, said unto him B
other, support and govern tenderly the Sun of God, and thou shall be blessed.

Of the graces which God bestowed on Brother Giles in the said vision.
THE XI. CHAPTER.
IF unto any it appear difficult to be believed, that Brother Giles saw
almighty God, not only in imaginary and intellectual semblance, but even in
his divine essence, as this worthy servant of God confessed, affirming that God
had deprived him of faith: let him read the epistle of saint Augustine unto
Paulinam, De videndo Deum, wherein he shall find that speaking of the vision of
God in essence, he says: It is not a matter incredible, that God permits
this excellency of divine revelation in his substance to certain holy
persons before their death, to the end their bodies be buried, he uses
these words, before they be dead for their sepulture, because as they who
manifestly see God enioyning his glory, are entierly and totally separated from
their mortal bodies, in the same proportion it is necessary for those that are
to receive such a reuolation, to be separated from their bodies according to
the cognitiue and sensitive puissance, at least to their actions: for this is
in a certain fashion to be out of the terms of this life. Whereupon saint
Paul said: Were it that my soul were in my body, or separated 2. Cor. 11.
from it I know not, God knows it, it was transported, ravished and elevated
even to the third heaven. Brother Giles, speaking of the said vision which he
had, affirmed that he was thereby so assured in the knowledge of almighty God
and of his glory, that he had lost the faith which he formerly had of him. He
also affirmed that he was directly of opinion, that his soul entierly
abstracted from the body saw almighty God. After his death he revealed unto a
Religious, that also in the same vision he had bin replenished with the gifts
of the holy Ghost and confirmed in graces: and doubtlesly the merueillous
effects that remained in the soul of Brother Giles confirm this verity: for
after this vision he was so often rapt in ecstasy, that there is hardly found
any other saint before or after him to have exceeded him therein. It appeared by
his exterior actions what esteem he made thereof: for he seldom or never went
out of his cell, but employed himself in fastinges and prayers, shunning all
idle words, and all fruitless conversation: and if such discourses were
forcibly used in his presence, and that any would needs make him some relation
to the prejudice of any other, he would hear nothing thereof, affi ming that
each one ought to be very wary and Admirable disposition to ecstasy in Bro.
Giles.
respective not to offend God, his neighbor and his own soul by such
discourses. And on the contrary when he heard speak of God, he was presently
rapt into ecstasy, and remained insensible and as dead, so that the fame of
this sublime and singular grace being diuulged and made known to all
persons, even to the contry people and to children, when they met him they
would say, Paradise Brother Giles, and at the instant and very place where he
heard that sweet and gracious word he would fall into ecstasy: in such sort as
if the Religious desired to talk with him of God and to receive his consailes
and doctrines, they must be wary not to speak of the glory of the divine
vision, least that being ravished in spirit they were frustrared of their
desire. And because he lived sequestered from the other Religious, Brother
Bernard therefore as zealous of his neighbors good reprehended him therein,
calling him but half a man, as regarding only his own good. But Brother Giles
answered, that it was more secure to content himself with a little then by
attempting too much, to endanger the loss of all* considering that upon a very
small occasion a great grace is often lost: so that one must be wary at such
time not to loose that in laughing, which is not purchaced but with much labor
and weeping.

Being one day in spiritual conference with Brother Andrew and Brother
Gra^tian two Religious of pious life and his spiritual children, he told them
that he was borne sower times, first, out of his mothers woombe, secondly when
he was baptized, thirdly when he entered into Religion, and fouerthly the day
that JESUS CHRIST appeared unto him, and manifested unto him his glory. Whereto
Brother Andrew answered that it was true, but if he should be in a foreign
contry, where it should be demanded of him if he knew Brother Giles, he might
avouch that he knew thus much of him, that it was twenty four years since he
was borne, and that he had faith before he was borne, but had lost it
afterward: Brother Giles replied that all this was true: because, said he,
before, I had not such faith as I ought to have: the which also God did take
from me and gave me a more clear and perfect knoledge of him and of his glory,
and among many graces which I have received of his divine Majesty, this is one,
that I have known and do know my self to deserve to have a cord fastened
about my neck, and to be in extreme disgrace trained through all the streets
and public places of the world, so to receive all the scorns and derisions
that can be offered to the lewdest man in the world. Whereupon Brother Andrew
made him this demand: Tell me Brother, if you have not faith, what would you
do if you were Priest, and were solemnly to sing Credo in vnum Deum? It
seems you should necessarily say: Cognosco vnum Deum patrem omnipotentem: and
incontinently he was rapt in ecstasy: all this he said, not that he had simply
no faith: but by reason of a greater light and illumination which God with
apparent evidence had given him.

How Brother Giles was rapt in ecstasy before Pope Gregory the ninth.
POpe Gregory the ninth being with his court removed to Perusia, and
understanding that Brother Giles, of whom he had heard merueillous things,
was near thereunto, he sent for him as desirous to know him. Brother Giles came
presently to Perusia. But being entered into the Palace of the Pope he felt
himself interiourly moved with the spiritual sweetness which ordinarily
arrived him before his ecstasy: wherefore considering that it was not convenient
he should in that estate present himself before his holiness, he sent his
companion to make his excuse. But the Pope not admitting it would know why
being within his Palace he would not presently come to him: so that his
companion was enforced to say unto him: Most holy Father, Brother Giles has
deferred to salute your holiness for no other cause, but that by signs
ordinary unto him, he foreseeth that coming in your presence he shall fall
into ecstasy. The Pope hereto replied: I come to Perusia more for this only
respect then for any other thing: and therefore bring him incontinently hither
which was done, but as soon as Brother Giles had in great humility kissed the
feet of the Pope, he scarcely began to speak unto him, but that he was
ravished in spirit and remained immovable with his eyes fixed toward
heaven: which the Pope seeing, he said: verily if thou die before me, I would
seek the knoledge of no other miracles to canonize thee. An other time the
said Pope goeing to the Covent of the Friar Minors of Perusia to visitt Brother
Giles, the Religious ran presently to his cell to advertise him thereof, but
they found him in ecstasy, which the Pope understanding, he went to his cell,
accompanied with many Cardinals and other noble men, who all continued a long
time beholding him, and to see if he would return to himself. But seeing it,
would not be in short time, the Pope with his company departed much admiring
and troubled that he could not speak with him as he desired. He commanded that
his ecstasy being ended, he should be told his holiness attended him to dine
with him, which was done, and at dinner time this good Father went to the Pope,
whose feet he most reverently kissed, and was with all courtesy entertained.
There was then with his holiness a gentleman that said unto him, that he had
heard report of Br. Giles his gracious and sweet singing, praying his holiness
to cause him to sing, thereof to receive some contentment and consolation. The
Pope as well in regard of his devotion toward him, as of his desire to hear
him praise God, said unto him: Son, I should be glad you would comfort and
rejoice us in God, by some gracious and devout song Br. Giles answered, does
it please your holiness that I sing? which having diverse times reiterated, he
retired himself into a corner, and was presently rapt in ecstasy. The Pope and
those with him, desirous to experience the force of that ecstasy, they felt and
found him withour pulse or heat. The Pope being exceedingly troubled that he
had lost the company and conversation of this holy Religious, sharply
reprehe^ded the gentleman that had persuaded him to cause him to sing. The time
of supper being come, and Br. Giles still in ecstasy, the Pope said to the
Cardinals present: I am sorry this holy Father is not here with us: but I am
resolved to try in him the virtue of obedience, whereof have bin seen many
experie^ces in the Friar Minors: then coming to Br. Giles he said unto him:
Because the Order of the Friar Minors depends immediately of us, we command
thee upon obedience to return inco^tinently to thy self. The success was
admirable, for at the very instant this man of God that had bin entierly
inse^sible and as dead, stood up right on his feet, and went and fell on his
knees before his holiness, with deep humility acknowledging his fault. The Pope
causing him to arise, took him by the hand and spoke unto him: then Br. Giles,
demanded of him how he did; the Pope answered that tha^ckes be to God he was
well, Br. Giles added: Holy Father, you have great need of the help of God in
the great and importa^t affairs which you have. For I suppose that the
inquietude and occupatio^s of the soul in exterior matters, are of great
labor. The Pope answered: My child thou say true: therefore do I pray thee
to treat with almighty God for me, that by mean of his grace I may the more
easily carry the weight of this burden. Br. Giles replied that he would
willingly do it, and submitted his neck to the yoke of the commandment of
God: and to that end insta^tly retired himself from the presence of the Pope,
to perform his obedience, and employed himself in prayer, where he was so
ravished in spirit, that he returned not thece in four hours after. In the
mean while the Pope and all his company praised God in his servant, to whom
he had imparted such a divine familiarity that he co^uersed more out of, then
in the world, though he were as yet in this mortal flesh. Now Br. Giles being
returned to himself, his holiness sat down at table and willed he should
eat with him: which was an incredible conte^tment to the Pope, who afterward
commended him to a chamber to repose. The day following his holiness
familierly discoursing with him asked him what should become of him. The holy
Father making his excuse of answearing thereunto: the Pope again urged him at
least to tell him what he should be. Whereto Br. Giles having likewise replied
that he could not answer therein; being still pressed by his holiness
commandment he said: holy Father, endeavor to keep both the eyes of your
spirit always very pure: the right eye continually to conte^plate high and
future things, wherein we ought to address all our actions, and the left to
order and direct present matters that are under our chardge, and do appertain
to the duty of our place and quality. He spoke many other things of notable
edificatio^ which are not exta^t, whereby appeared the great abo^dance of divine
light imparted to this holy Religious. The Pope therewith remained more edified
then ever, and was enamoured of this saint, as being the true and perfect
friend of God.

Of the exercises, and of the affection Br, Giles had to the contemplative life.
THE XIII. CHAPTER.
THis true servant of God had his face always cherfull and joyful, and when he
spoke to and answered any one, he always discovered himself to be full of
joy and devotion, and entierly elevated in God, yea sometimes he so exceeded in
this joy, that he often would kiss the very stones, and did such other like
acts, thereunto constrained by the love of his Creator: and perseuering in
such grace he was very wary not to contristate the spirit of God which he
possessed, so that it was exceeding troublesome unto him upon whatsoever
occasion, to leave the divine conversation and return to the consideration of
these humane affairs. He desired to entertain his life with leaves of trees
only, so to have more occasion to shun all humane consolation. When coming
from prayer he met with the other Religious, showing himself to be full of
joy, he would say 1. Cor. 2. Br. Giles devout to the constitutions of the
Church and to the Saments.
in a manner as did S. Paul: The eye has not seen, nor ear has heard,
neither has it ascended into the heart of man, what things God has prepared
for them that love him. By which words he confirmed and enflamed the spirit
of the other Religious in the love of God.

He held in exceeding reverence and devotion the sacraments of the church and
the divine service. And if any discoursed unto him of the co^stitutio^s and
decrees of the Church, he in this sort with great fervor praised the^: O holy
mother and Roman Church! Ignorant and miserable as we are, we do not know
thee, nor much less the zeal and bou^ty whereby thou labourest to save us.
Thou art she that teach us the way of our salvation, and directest us in the
right and secure path, wherein ^e that walks cannot stray, but he that seeks
and follows another, shall only find therein an eternal damnation. He was
present at mass with exceeding fervor. All sondayes and solemn feasts he
received his Creator, and employed those days entierly in contemplation of
the grace received: for goeing very early into the church, he would there
remain all the day in the company rather of Angels and Saints the^ of men.
Celebrating the feast of our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, and many other times in the
fervor of his prayer, he has bin seen rapt in ecstasy and elevated above the
ground, the hight of three handfuls or a foot and a half.

Of other such ecstasies of spirit recorded of the glorious Saint.
Five Prouincials did at one time with great devotion and reverence visitt this
blessed Father with Br. Gratian his companion, who advertised him of their
arrival, upon knoledge whereof, he presently met them, and having graciously
entertained them, he with great fervor of spirit began to speak unto them,
and beholding the heaven, with his arms opened as to play on a viole, he sung
in this manner: O Br. make a castle, having in it neither stone nor iron! O my
Br. build me a city without lime or stone! and thus singing he was rapt in
ecstasy. The said Prouincials knew not the signification of the words: But Br.
Gratian told them that by the castles and cities, he meant the holy Apostles
and martyrs of the Primitive church, who without the armor of iron and without
the help of any temporal matter generously builded the house of God in
souls: which zeal and intention had Br. Giles renouncing temporalities, to
become a castle of the living God and a glorious city, not of temporal
building or substance, but spiritual, of poverty and divine love. And because
they as Prouincials of the Religion were captains and furtherers of this
worck, he by this song gave them a notable document of their duty in their
vocation and office.

This holy Father being in the monastery of Agele by Perusia, he after supper
made an exhortation to the Religious in the refectory, with his ordinary
fervor, and with such sweetness that he enflamed the hearts of all his audience
in divine love, yea his own also, in such sort that he was ravished and out of
himself in the midst of his Brethren, where he so continued till the
cock-crowing, and in the mean time he shined with such a sple^dour which
environed him, that the brightness of the moon which then was in full, was so
obscured that the shining thereof being darckned by this new light, she appeared
not in that place, which put the Religious in admiration, who gave thanckes to
our lord for the admirable worckes demonstrated in his servant.

Brother Giles one day thus reasoned with S. Bonauenture who was General of
the Order: Father, God has bestowed many favors on you that are learned, for
you have knoledge of many matters by which you praise him But what shall we do
to save our selves, we, I say, that are ignorant and idiots? S. Bonauenture
answered: if God had given no other grace to men, but only ability to love
him, it would suffice: because love is more grateful to God, then any other
thing that can be offered unto him. Brother Giles hereupon replied: Tell me,
Father, if you please, can an ignorant person love God as much as one learned?
he can, said S. Bonauenture: yea I say more, a simple and poor old fellow may
love our lord as much as a Doctor in divinity. Upon these words Br. Giles
went with great fervor into the garden, and tourning toward the town, he
cried out: Poor and caitiue old wretch, ignorant idiot and simple, love thy
Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, and thou may be greater then Br. Bonauenture. Which
said, he remained three houresrapt in ecstasy.

Of an admirable dispute held by Br. Giles touching free will, against Br.
Gerardin, in the presence of many Religious.
THE XV. CHAPTER.
THe venerable Br. Giles being in the Covent of Perusia, a Roman gentlewoma^
called Seaue^-Sunnes, that was very devout to S. Francis both in his life time
and after his death: for she made her residence at Assisium to beneere unto
his sepulcher, came to visitt him to receive some consolation of his energicall
doctrine: there did she find Brother Gerardin, a Religious of exemplar life and
very learned, together with some other very spiritual Religious, who also came
to visitt Brother Giles, to hear of him some spiritual exhortation. Thus
discoursing together, they fell into dispute upon a certain passadge of holy
scripture. And among many other sentences alleged by Br. Giles for proof of
what he maintained, this was one: He that does not what he can, often endures
that which he would not. Br. Gerardin desirous to entertain Br. Giles in
discourse, to gratify the company and for his particular co^tentment, thus
began scolastically to argument against him: Br. I much admire that you affirm
that a man endures what he would not, if he do not what he can, considering
that a man can do nothing of himself: which is proved by many reasons,
wherefore I say, that the power presupposes the being, so that the action of
the thing be Gal. 6.
according to its being. And so much do the words of the Apostle signify,
where he says: If any man esteem himself to be something, where as he is
nothing, he seduceth himself: whence ensues that a man cannot do any thing,
since he is nothing: which I will prove unto you also by an other reason: If a
man of himself do any thing, it is either by his soul, or by his body, or by
both together; Now I will prove that he can do nothing by mean of any of
the^. First, he can do nothing by mean of the soul alone, for it is most
clear that the soul separated from the body can neither meritt nor demeritt:
neither can he do more by mean of the body only, because the body receaueth
all his operation of his form, and without the soul it has no humane being,
so that much less can it work, which is a thing proper to the form, and
finally, yet less can he do by mean of the composition, that is, of the body
and soul united together: and if he could do any thing, it should be by mean
of the soul: But I have proved that the soul being separated from the body
can do nothing, and now I affirm that it can much Sap. 9.
less united with her body, because the body being corruptible chardgeth and
burdeneth it: as for example, if a beast cannot go unloaded, much less can it
under a burden. Thus Br. Gerardin made his argument appear very probable
which procured to the audience an amazement and confusion. But Br. Giles very
prudently answered: My good Br. and friend, believe, I pray you, that you have
spoaken amiss: wherefore acknowledge therein your fault. Br. Gerardin having a
little smiled, acknowledged his fault: then Br. Giles again: This fault is not
of force. When the penance is not admittable and in due form, no grace can be
obtained thereby. But tell me, can thou sing? Br. Gerardin answered he could:
sing then with me, said Br. Giles, and drew out of his sleeue a little
instrument made of willow, like those little gitternes or fidels whereon children
play, whereof touching the stringes, he began to prove and demonstrate the
proposition of Br. Gerardin to be notoriously inuallible and false, thus
affirming on the first: Br. I speak not of the being of man before the
creation. I know then he was nothing, and therefore could do nothing: but I
speak of his being since the creation wherein man received of God a freewil,
whereby he might merit or demeritt, meritt consenting to good, and demeritt
yelding to evil: so that you have very erroniously spoaken: And I thinck you
intended to circumuent Scolasticall distinction of Bro. Giles. 1. Cor. 13.
me, for S. Paul in the place by you alleged, speaks not of the nullity of
the substance nor of the puissance, but of the nullitye of meritt, conformably
to what he says in an other place: If I have not charity I am nothing. Neither
did I intend to speak of the soul in separation, or of the body dead, but of
man living, who consenting to grace, has power if he list, to do well, and
being rebellious* to do evil, which is no other thing then not to do well.
Where as you say, the corruptible body burdeneth the soul, the holy scripture
does not yet say that the same takes away freewill from the soul, leaving her
no power to do good and evil: but the signification is, that it is an
impediment to the understanding, and that the affection and imagination of the
soul is employed and entangled in terrestrial affairs, therefore is it said a
little before: The terrestrial habitation depresseth the senses distracted in
many cogitations and in diverse scattered Sap. 9.
affairs, which permit not the soul freely to search the things of heaven,
where our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST sits at the right hand of the Father
almighty: because the sight is a subtility of the puissances of the soul,
which are made dull and obscure by the diverse inclinations and occupations of
the inferior and corporal powers. Thus did Br. Giles by order refute all the
reasons of Br. Gerardin, who much admiring the same, again with affection and
great devotion acknowledged his fault. Brother Giles then said: this is the
acknowledgement of the fault, Brother, that avails and strikes the stroke.
But will you that I yet more manifestly demonstrate that a creature can do
somewhat? Brother Gerardin answered, Father I heseech you: Brother Giles then
getting up on a grave, cried out: O thou damned that art tormented in hell!
Then himself in the person of the damned with a lamentable, horrible and
terrible voice that made those present to tremble, answered: Oh that I am
miserable! that I am wretched and accursed! then assuming his ordinary voice he
proceeded: Tell me caitife, wherefore art thou damned? And taking again that
lamentable voice he answered himself. Because I have not done the good I
could, nor shunned and avoided the evil as I might have done. He asked him
again in his natural voice: Thou damned wretch, what would thou do, or
what would thou give, if it were permitted thee to do penance? He answered
in the ghastly voice: if all the world were mine, I would give it and would
content my self to dwell in a fire for many worlds, provided that it were
such as by little and little I could endure, only to avoid eternal death: for so
my pains should one day at least have end, but my damnation is eternal.
Which said, he returned toward Brother Gerardin, and said: Well, have you
heard, Br. have you heard, how a creature has power to good or evil? And
after many other spiritual discourses, Brother Giles said to Br. Gerardin:
Brother that you may not esteem this to be a fiction, tell me, if a drop of
water fall into the sea; does it then give a name to the sea, or the sea to it?
He answered, that the substance of the drop of water being swallowed up, it
took denomination of the sea, and not the sea of it.

Br. Giles replied: You have reason; and for proof thereof he was in the very
instant rapt into ecstasy, so that he demonstrated by effect, that his soul
casting it self into the profound ocean of the divine love and glory, being
entierly swallowed up in God, changed her essence of grace, into that of glory.

How the blessed Br. Giles had the spirit of Prophecy.
THE XVI. CHAPTER.
A Dominican Friar being Doctor of divinity was assaulted with a grievous
temptation, for the devil would put him in doubt of the most pure virginity of
the virgin Mother of God; wherein whatsoever remedy he applied, nothing did
avail him: and perceauing that his learning nor virtuous exercises would
nothing profitt him, he much desired to be assisted by some spiritual person
that could deliver him of this grievous affliction. Wherefore having heard the
same of the virtue of Br. Giles, and that he was a Religious illuminated of
God, he repaired unto him, and at the same time the holy Ghost revealed unto
Br. Giles the coming of this divine and the occasion thereof, wherefore he went
out of his cell and met him. And entertayning him courteously, before the
Religious began to speak, he said unto him: Br. Preacher, she was a virgin
before her child birth, then with a little stick which he had in his hand he
stroke the ground, and presently there did spring up a fair lilly, then he
said: Br. Preacher, a virgin in her childbirth, and likewise striking the earth
with his stick, there sprung up an other lilly: and thirdly he said Br.
Preacher, a virgin after her childbirth: and having touched the earth as
before, the third lilly appeared. Then having made these three admirable
demonstrations, and the said Religious being entierly freed of the temptations,
the lillyes vanished. The holy Father with all speed retired into the
Monastery, leaving the Religious full of astonishment and admiration, who gave
thanckes to God for his miraculous delivery, from so troublesome a temptation
of the devil.

Certain Friar Minors determining to make a well on a mountain near to
Perusia where Br. Giles was resident, and not according together touching the
place, they repaired to him for his advice, and presently took a staff, and
went to the place that God had inspired him, where striking the ground with his
staff, there sprung up a most delightful violett, and then he willed the
Religious to dig there: which upon sight of that miracle they did, and there
found abondance of water wholesome and pleasant to drinck, and so they finished
their well to relieve their necessity.

How Br. Giles was visited by S. Jews king of France, and what passed between
them.
THE XVII. CHAPTER.
S. Jews the ninth of that name, and forty fourth king of France, goeing in
Pilgrimage to Rome there to visitt the holy Apostles, determined to see Br.
Giles, of whose sanctity he had heard notable report: being therefore at
Perusia, he went to the monastery of the Friar Minors with some few of his
nearest favorites, all vested in pilgrims weeds, where arriving, he told he
Porter that the desired a word or two with Br. Giles: the Porter delivered his
message that certain Pilgrims were at the gate, of whom one desired to
speak with him. Br. Giles understanding by revelation who it was that
demanded for him, he full of fervor of spirit went incontinently out of his
cell: and coming to the gate, the king and he fell both on their knees, and
very lovingly embraced each other, with entertainment of most devout and pious
mutual kisses in the face, as if their had bin a very inward and ancient amity
between them. After they had thus some time remained, and had shown many
mutual tokens of charity, they separated themselves in silence without the
utterance of one word between them. Now whiles these two SS. were united in so
spiritual a contentment, the Porter demanded of one of the kings followers,
who that Pilgrim was that with such great familiarity embraced Br. Giles: who
answered him that it was Jews king of France, who goeing to visitt the holy
Relics of Rome, took in his way the visitation of Br. Giles. The Religious
understanding who he was, were exceedingly troubled, because they had seen Br.
Giles not only, not to have given him the reverence due to so great a King, but
even, not to have uttered so much as one word; and therefore they went expressly
to the holy Father, whom they sharply checked and reprehended for this great
error, that should in no sort have bin committed against so puissant a Prince,
being also a Christian endwed with so religious a devotion and mansuetude, as
that he came expressly to receive of him some consolation. Hereunto Br. Giles
answered: Trouble not your selves dear Brothers, nor do you admire, if you
see me not speak to the king nor he to me; For when we embraced each other,
the divine light manifested unto us the interior of our hearts, revealing the
secrets of his to me, and of mine to him: and having fixed the eyes of our
souls in the resplendant mirour of the eternal light, wherein every thing is
seen more perfectly then in it self, we discoursed together as much as we
desired, with an extreme consolation of spirit, without any noise of words,
which would rather have hindered then furthered us, in regard of the sweetness
that our souls did feel. With this answer the Religious being stricken into
exceeding admiration and confusion, they acknowledged their faults among
themselves, repenting to have judged so admirable a work of God which they
did not understand.

How Br. Giles comsorted and encouraged a Religious whom he had converted and
brought to be of the Order, who complained that he showed not himself so
gracious unto him as before he received the habitt.
THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
AKnight much devoted and friendly to Br. Giles, by his pious admonitions
became a Friar Minor, but after he had taken the habitt, Br. Giles seemed to
have no more care of him, for he no more visited nor instructed him as before,
which was a great affliction to this Religious: wherefore he one day complained
thereof unto him in these terms: Father, I am extremely troubled, discontented
and do admire at you, that whiles I was in the world, you took such pain to
instruct me in what was necessary to my salvation, so that by your holy
admonitions I am come to be Religious, and principally upon hope the more
commodiously to enjoy your holy conversation, wherein I experience the contrary,
and find my self much deceived. For you give me not now so much as one word,
so that you neither counsel nor instruct me any more, nor give me any manner
of consolation; so that you seem to have utterly forsaken me: believe you
therefore I beseech you that my soul can receive no greater contentment, then
to understand by you the manner how to govern her self in this new kind of
life. Whereto Br. Giles answered, Brother, since you are of the house and
family of God, as my self also him, and that you and I as fellows do fight
under one captain and lord, it is not convenient for me that am your
companion, to command you to do this, and not to do that; because I know not
whither the will of God be that you do a thing contrary to that which I may
counsel you, and so I may persuade you to one thing, and God to an other.
Thus speaking he lifted up his face toward heaven and speaking with his
Redeemer in presence of this Religious, with a very sweet voice, and yet with
fervor he said: O my Lord JESUS CHRIST! how worthy and excellent a thing is
sanctity and chastity? how pleasing to thy divine Majesty? how well love thou
the soul that possesses it? how do thou hear her in the company of
Angels? and in what manner do thou recompense her with eternal life? then
sighing with gesture that discovered exceeding contentment, he said: Ah! ah! ah
my God* how pleasing and grateful is such a soul unto thee? and beginning
again, he continued: O my God, how pleasing is that creature unto thee, who
for thy love sequestreth his heart from the world, forsaking Father, mother,
kindred, friends and whatsoever he affected in the world? then discovering an
extreme joy, he sighed as before, saying: Ah! ah! ah my God! how greatefull
unto thee are the obedient souls, that have no other will then thine? O my
God* how does thy divine majesty love him, that with all his heart obeys thy
holy commandementes? and after these words, he sighed as before, and then
said: O my God! how pleasing is that soul unto thee, which being elevated in
thy love perseuereth in continual prayers, contemplating thy celestial
treasures and graces: But how much is that soul comforted of thee when in her
devotions she pours out abondance of tears very grateful to thy divine
majesty, and profitable to her self, because they bathe the conscience, and
open paradise unto her? Ah! ah! ah my God! how pleasing is that sold, and how
grateful is that person unto thee, that for thy love supporteth fatigations,
labors and affrontes, and carries on him thy cross, not refusing the burden
thereof, as our brother the ass, which complayneth not for being ouerloaden and
beaten, nor when one says, I would the wolf had eaten thee, or that thou were
fleyed: yea to such iniuryes an affrontes he answeareth not a word, to give me
a great example of patience. Now with this new kind of speech, this new
Religious was exceedingly comforted, yea and extremely encouraged to
perseverance in the service of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. And this may serve for a
general document to make appear what fear and discretion is to be used by
him that is to teach those souls, whose perfect Master is JESUS CHRIST alone,
who guides them according to their capacity and the grace which he has given
them for their salvation, knowing that the instruction ought to be more of the
spilitt and of God, then of any humane tongue, to touch and inflame their
hearts in the poursuite of virtue.

How Brother Giles defended himself from the devil, by whom he was often
persecuted.
THE XIX. CHAPTER.
THe wicked spirits were the more hateful and envious to this servant of God,
because he had knowledge and understanding of many sublime and divine
secrettes: for which respect they often tormented him, as within few days
after he had that divine vision, being alone praying in his cell, the devil
appeared unto him in so horrible and fearful a figure, that it presently
deprived him of his speech. But having in his heart called for help unto
almighty God, he was incontinently delivered: and afterward made very
fearful relations The virtue of the sign of the cross and of holy water.
of the lothsomnes of the devil. Br. Giles being once entered about midnight
into the Church of S. Appollinaris, in Spoleta, there to offer his prayers, the
devil lept upon his shoulders whiles he prayed, and held him so crushed and
oppressed for a time that he could scarce move, yet he so strugled that he got
to the holy water pott, where having taken holy water and signed himself with
the cross, the devil presently fled.

An other time as he was praying, the devil so tormented him, that he was
enforced as much as he could to cry out: help me my Brethren; at which call
his companion Br. Gratian came running, and he was instantly delivered. Praying
also an other night, he heard the ennemy with many other devils that were very
near him, who talking among themselves as men might do, said: Wherefore does
this Religious labor so much, fith he is already a saint, so agreeable is he
to God, and even in continual ecstasy. Which they said, to tempt him and
induce him to vain glory. The last year of his life, the devil persecuted
him more cruelly the^ he had don before; as he thought one night after prayer
to repose himself, the devil carried him into so straight a place, that he
could not turn him on any side, whatsoever endeavor he made to arise. Br.
Gratian hearing him complain, came to the door of his cell to know if he were
in prayer, or that some other accident were befallen him, and he perceived that
he was exceedingly troubled, wherefore he began to cry out: Father, what is the
matter? whereto this holy Father answered: Come quickly my child, come quickly.
But Br. Gratian being unable to open the door of the cell, said unto him: I
know not the reason, but I cannot open the door. Br. Giles prayed him to do
his utmost to open it speedely: which, after much labor he did, then coming
near unto him with all his power to assist him, he could not so much as move
him out of the place where the devil had thrown him. which Br. Giles
perceauing, he said: Br. let me alone in this case, and let us refer all
into the hands of God. So Brother Gratian, (though against his will) for
bearing to endeavor to deliver the holy Father out of this place, he fell to
prayer for him, where by, a little eased, he said to his companion: you have
done well in coming to assist me; God reward you for it. But Brother Gratian
complaining that he had not called him in this imminent peril of death wherein
he was, and relating the disgrace it would have bin to him, and to his
companions if he had so dyed, he said unto him: Be not troubled my child if God
by me be revenged of his ennemies: for you must know that how much the devil
resists God, seeking to afflict and torment me, so much more is he tormented
and discendeth deeper to the profundity of hell, and so when he persecuteth me
I am revenged of him: for the service which I have now done to almighty God,
had no beginning of me but of his divine Majesty, as the end shall be, if it
please him. Wherefore I am assured that the devil neither can, nor ever shall be
able to prevail against God: yet did not the devil omit to torment him, in
such sort that goeing at night to rest in his cell, he always went sighing
asif he would say, I expect, yea I go to martyrdom.

Of diverse answers given by Brother Giles upon sundry occasions.
THE XX. CHAPTER.
BRother James of Massa a very spiritual Religious, even in regard of his
particular grace to be often ravished in God, one day demanded of Brother
Giles how he should govern himself in that grace: and the holy Father
answered: Brother, neither augment nor diminish, and shun the multitude the
most you can. Brother James not well understanding him, asked him what he meant
by those words, and Brother Giles replied: when the spirit is prepared to be
conducted into the glorious light of the divinity, it should neither augment by
presumption, nor diminish by negligence; he should also with all possibility
love and seek solitarines, if he desire that the grace received, be well
preserved and augmented.

A Religious having asked him what he might do that might be most pleasing to
God: he answered singing: One to one, one to one: the said Religious
alleging that he understood him not, the holy Father replied: you ought
without any intermissio^ or whatsoever pretense, give one sole soul to one
sole God, if you will please him.

Br. Gratian that had bin twenty years his companion and disciple, testified
that in all that time he never heard him utter one only idle word. This
Religious as the discipline of so good a master had exceedingly profited by his
company in spiritual and edificatiue mortification, and had received many
other graces of God, wherein desiring not to fail, he one time demanded of his
master, in what worck and in what kind of the graces which God had granted him
he should most exercise himself: and this question he made because he was
absolutely resolved precisely to follow his counsel. Whereto the holy Father
answered: you cannot be more grateful to God in any other action, then in
hanging your self. Which the good Religious hearing, he was stricken into a
greiuous amazement, and with such an answer much troubled: wherefore Br. Giles
proceeding, said: Know my child, that a man which hangs himself, is neither
in heaven nor on earth, but is only lifted from the earth, and looks always
down. Now do you the like, since if you cannot be now in heaven you may
nevertheless so raise your self above earthly things (being exercised in
virtuous works and prayer) that humility always appear Luc. 14.
in you, and living so, hope in the divine mercy. By this counsel he
commended unto him two singular virtues, prayer and humility, as special
graces of a Religious that desires to please God.

A certain man talking one day with Br. Giles, said unto him: Father I am
resolved to become Religious: whereto he answered: if you be fully resolved so
to do, go first and kill both your parents: which the other hearing he
weeping replied: Father I beseech you oblige me not to committ such evil and
so grievous sins. The holy Father then said; what my friend are you so simple
and so ignorant as not to understand me; I meant not that you should kille your
parents with the material, but with the me^tall sword, because according to
the word of our Lord, he cannot be his disciple, that hates not his father,
his mother, his kindred and his Friends.

Two Cardinals one time visiting Br. Giles, to co^ferre with him of spiritual
affairs, retyring at length from the place of conference, they fervently
besought him to remember in his devotions to reco^mend the^ to God. Whereupon he
answered the^, my lords what need can you have of my prayers, since you have a
greater faith and hope then I? The Cardinals admiring this answer, asked him
what he me^t thereby, he answered: Because you with so much richesse, ho^nours,
delights and te^porall contentme^tes hope to be saved: and I with such and so
continual labors fear to be damned. Which so touched those Cardinals to the
quick, that they departed from him very co^trite in their souls, and their
faces bathed in tears.

A very spiritual Religious was troubled with a greiuous temptation, and very
humbly and devoutly prayed God to be delivered thereof: yet could he not be
heard. Wherefore he repaired to Br. Giles, who understanding his affliction said
unto him: Brother do not admire if God, of whom you have received so many
graces, will that you continually fight against this your ennemy. For when a
king armeth his knights, with better and surer armure, it is a sign that he
desires they should fight the more courageously for him.

Counsait and consolation foo those that pray which aridity of spirit.
A Religious one day demau^ding of Br. Giles how he could go with a good will
to prayer, because he ordinarily went without devotion and very coldly: he thus
answered him: let us suppose that a king has two faithful servants, whereof
the one is well armed, the other unarmed. He will that they both go to war
against his ennemies; he that is well armed goes with great security, as being
well acco^modated and furnished of what is necessary for the battle: but the
other says to the king, Sir, you see I am disarmed: nevertheless for the
affection I have to perform your service, I will not omit in this estate to
undergo this chardge with others. The king considering and taking notice of
the love and fidelity of this his servant, he caused presently to be brought
him such armor as he wanted and was needful unto him. So he that wants
devotion, and yet assisted with a strong faith, goes boldly to the war of
prayer, let him be assured that our Lord will not fail to furnish him, of
what he sees necessary for him to obtain the victory.

A man asking his opinion touching entering into Religion: The holy Father thus
answered: Tell me if a poor beggar knew a great treasure to be hidden in a
field, would he ask Counsel to go seek? whereto the other answearing,
truly no: Br. Giles replied: how much rather then ought a man run to seek
and purchase the infinite treasure of the kingdom of God? so this man with
this counsel departed, and having given all that he had to the poor for the
love of God, he presently became a Friar Minor.

Of other like answeares of the blessed Br. Giles.
THE XXI. CHAPTER.
A Certain good spiritual person said one day to venerable Brother Giles.
Father, I find my self exceedingly incombred, and I know not what counsel to
take: for if I do any good act, I am presently tickled with vain glory; and
if I committ any sin, I am so troubled that I am ready sometimes to fall into
despair: The holy Father answered: thou do well to lament thy sin, and
to have feeling of the peril whereto it leads: but it should trouble thee
with discretion, considering that the power of God is much greater to receive
One must not omit to do good for fear of vain glory.
thee to mercy, then thine is to cause thee to offend God. But the fear of
vain glory should never hinder thee from doing good deeds. For if the
labourer before seed-season should say to himself, I will sow no corn,
because the birds and worms of the earth may eat up the seed which I shall
sow before it take root in the earth, or when it is sprung up and green it
may be eaten by beasts before it ripen and be gathered in: if I say the
labourer should thus discourse with himself and conceive such frivolous
difficulties, he would never sow, and so consequently never reap, whence would
ensue that we should have no bread: but the prudent and wise labourer does till
and sow his land and does his endeavor, and commits the success to the
divine providence: So should you endeavor to proceed in good worckes without
fear of vain glory: for albeit it do a little trouble you for the time, the
better and securer part does still remain unto you.

Grace does profit more in Religion then in the world.
An other asking him if one could obtain and possess the grace of God
remaining in the world: he answered that he could: but I had rather, said he,
have one grace in Religion, then ten in the world: because in Religion grace
does easily increase and is better there conserved, a man being there
sequestered from the tumult and affection of worldly folies the capital
ennemies of grace: and with all the Religious his companions by charitable
remonstrances and by example of their holy conversation do with draw him from
evil, and inuit and induce him to goodness. But the grace which some may have
in the world may also be easily lost; because the solicitude of worldly
affairs and cogitations, which is mother of distraction, does hinder and
trouble the sweetness of grace, and other worldlinges by profane and dishonest
conuersations, by scandalous examples, and by diuilish hauntes and companies,
do divert him from good and allure him to lewdnes: so that as it were by force
they deprive him of his souls salvation, it being no part of their custom to
further a virtuous life, but indeed to deride and scoff at such as live
Christianly, nor to reprehend the vicious and ennemies of God, but to flatter
and sooth them. Whereupon I conclude, that it is far more 7s;ecure to possess
one grace with a help that may conserve it, then ten with such hazard, yea in
such imminent peril.

A seculer man having once requested him to pray for him, he answered: Brother
pray for they self: for since they self may have recourse and access to
God, why go thou not? why would thou send an other on thine arrant? this
man again told him that he acknowledged himself so great a sinner, that he
knew himself to far remote and separated from God: But he, being holy and
well beloved of his divine majesty, had more creditt with him, and had also
more occasion to perform the same, because he more often spoke with God in
prayer. Whereto the S. replied: Brother, if all the corners of the city were
full of gold and silver, and that it were cried by sound of trompett through
the streets, that whosoever would, might take thereof, would you send an other
to fetch thereof, or would you go your self? the man answered that in deed he
would not therein trust the best friend he had, but himself would go in
person. Thus, said Brother Giles, should thou do with God: for all the
world is full of his divine Majesty, and each one has power to find him, go
therefore they self with faith, and send no other for thee.

A duise for pilgrims.
An other telling the holy Father, that he was determined to go visitt the
holy relics of Rome, he answered: seek first to know good money from evil:
thereby insinuating unto him, that pilgrimages do not indifferently benefitt
all pilgrims, but only those that know and can discern good and resist evil;
calling sins and evil examples, bad money, and virtue, pure metal.

Consolation and counsel for the kichen.
A Religious was exceedingly troubled that he could not so well accommo^date
the diett for the other Religious as to give them all conte^tment, and therefore
repaired to Brother Giles to take his advice how to support with patience their
murmures: the holy Father answered: Know you my child, what is best to do?
when the Religious shall say, these potage they are too fresh, or such like
thing, take a dish-full of it, and eat it all, then make some show to have
found it very sauory, and say aloud; O excellent potage! the dish-full which I
have eaten is worth an hundred ducketres: thus doing in all other things, if
you believe me, as I thinck you will, you shall shortly live in repose, and
shall conceive such comfort: that nothing shall any more trouble you, but you
will pray to God that they often speak such things unto you.

Friar Minors are Pilgrims over all the world.
Two Religious being expelled Sicilie by the Emperor Federick, a rebel to the
Roman Church, they came to visitt Brother Giles, who having with great charity
entertained them, he asked them whence they were, and whence they came, and
they answered that they were Sicilians, and had bin expelled their contry by
the Emperor, an ennemy of the Church: which the holy Father hearing, enflamed
with zeal to their souls, he sharply reprehended them in these words: what,
are you so bold as to affirm that you are expelled your contry? doubtless you
should no longer call your selves Friar Minors, which sundry times with a loud
voice repeating, he with great fervor said unto them: Brethren, you have
grievously sinned against that great rebel to God, the Emperor Federick, of
whom having received so great a favor, you should also have compassion of
him, and pray to almighty God to voutsafe to mollify his heart, and not murmr
against him. And if you be true Friar Minors, you cannot truly say that he has
expelled you your contry, for Friar Minors have nothing whatsoever in this life
proper unto them: so that this Prince has taught you to be true Friar Minors
and Pilgrims on earth.

Certain pious discourses of the holy Father Brother Giles.
First, a discourse of the way of salvation, and of perfection.
THE XXII. CHAPTER.
IF thou desire to save they soul, said the illuminated servant of God,
demand not the reason of whatsoever befalls thee by means of any humane
creature. If thou will save thee, labor dillige^tly to remove and sequester
thy self from all the consolations and honors that creatures can give thee:
because the devils of consolatio^s are the more subtle, and more mischievous
then those of tribulations: therefore also the falls of man are greater and
more frequent by consolations, then by afflictions and tribulations.

All falls and greatest perilles, arrive principally by bearing the head to
high: as all good proceeds and is gotten by submission thereof. Wretched are
those that seek to be honored for their vices and lewd behauiours.

If thou acknowledge to have offended the Creator of all things, support with
patience the difficulties and grieuances arysing by each of them: for thou have
no cause to complain of them, since every thing arriueth unto thee from the
hand of God.

If any one contend against thee, though it seem just to thee to gain, yet
loose: for doing otherwise, when thou shall thinck to have gained, then shall
thou have lost.

If thou desire to see well, crush, and thrust out thine eyes: if thou will
hear perfectly, stop thine ears, and make thee deaf: if thou will speak
well and discreetly, cut off thy tongue, and become mute: If thou will do
every thing well, cut off thy hands: If thou will make perfect use of all thy
members, rent them, cut them off and separat them from thy body: If thou
desire to live, kill thy self: If thou will eat well, fast: If thou desire to
repose and sleep well, watch: If thou will gain much, learn to loose: O what
a great wisdom it is to know how to do althinges well! but this not permitted
to all.

Grace and virtue are the true ladders to ascend to heaven, as vices and sins
are the way and stumbling block that tu^bleth us into hell. Sins are the
poison and venime that murdereth the soul; virtues with good worckes are most
perfect treacle and restoratiues.

Grace does unite and incorporate to it self other grace, and assumeth not to
it self any vice. Grace will not be praised, nor will vice be checked or be
blamed. The soul reposeth in humility, whose daughter is patience. God sees
the purity of the heart, and devotion tastes him.

If thou love, thou shall be loved: if thou fear, thou shall be feared: If
thou acco^modate thy self to live well with others, they will comply to live
well with thee. Happy is he that loves, and yet desires not to be loved.
Happy is he that serves, and yet desires not to be served. Happy is he, that
knows how to live with all, and yet desires not that all live with him: But
because these things are great, they that have little judgment attain not
unto them.

Three things are very profitable to man, and no evil can befall him that
possesses them. The first, if he voluntarily support all the afflictions and
crosses that happen unto him. The second, if for whatsoever he does or
receives, he the more humble himself. The third, if he sincerely love that
richesse which cannot be seen with corporal eyes. Those things which are
most aba^doned and conte^ned by worldlinges, are most esteemed and honored of
God and his saints: For the sinful and miserable man abhors whatsoever he
should love, and loves what he should hate.

This worthy servant of God intending to declare to a devout man the obligation
we have to serve God, used this paraboll unto him: A man Notable discourse of
the obligation we have to serve God.
having neither feet, hands, nor eyes, had one day by a friend of his this
demand made unto him: Tell me, what would thou bestow on him that should
give thee feet? and he answered, that he would give him an hundred duckettes,
if he had so much. And if one would give thee hands? he answered, he would
give him al his wealth, moueables and immoueables. If one would give thee eyes?
to him, said he, I would oblige my self in service al my life. You must now
the^, brother, that in this world God has given thee feet, hands, and eyes,
and the whole body, with all thy te^porall and spiritual substance: and
therefore thou must endeavor to please him, and to acknwledge such and so many
benefits, for which thou ought to serve him all the time of thy life.

A discourse of Faith.
THE XXIII. CHAPTER.
ALl the things that can be seen, related, or imagined, are as nothing, in
comparison of those that cannot be seen, heard, or conceived. All the wisest
and most holy persons that have bin, are, and shall be, who have spoaken and
shall speak of God have said nothing nor can say any thing in comparison of
what he is, no more then the point of a needle in respect of the heavens, the
earth, and all the creatures therein contained, yea a thousand times less.

Two Religious of the Order of S. Dominick, one day visiting Brother Giles, and
discoursing which him of faith, one of them said: saint John the Evangelist
has recorded many merueilous things of God. Whereto the holy Father answered:
Brother, S. John has said nothing of God: The Religious replied Father,
consider well, if you please, what you say; for S. Augustine is of opinion that
if S. John had spoaken more highly of God, no mortal man could* aue understood
him. Br. Giles then again, I tell you brother, and once again I tell you,
that S. John has said little or nothing of God. These Religious being much
troubled and scandalized at the holy Father would needs be gone, and tourning
away, Br. Giles stayed them and showed them a very high mountain whereon was
the oratory of Cettone, near where unto they then were, and said unto them: If
there were one mountain made of a thousand together so great as that you see,
and at the foot thereof a little bird did eat of it, tell me, brethren, I pray
you, how much would he diminish of that mountain every day, every month every
year, yea in an hundred years; they answered him, that in a thousand years
he would consume so little as should not be perceived. The holy Father thervpo^
inferred: Know you my Brethren, that the eternal divinity is so immensiue, and
is a mountain of such eminent hight, that S. John who was as a bird, has said
little or nothing in comparison of the greatness of God. These Religious
acknowledgeing how prudently Brother Giles had spoaken, fell at his feet,
confessing their errors: and so returned exceedingly edified.

A pregnant argument against the infidelity of covetous persons.
Br. Giles one day discoursing of spiritual matters with a lawyer that was a
Judge in some place. O Judge, said he, believe you that the recompenses which
God promises his servants are great? the Judge answered, he did. Br. Giles
proceeding, said: I will prove that you do not. How much are you worth? the
judge answered: about a thousand crowns. Well, said the Father, se now how
you believe it only in words; for tell me, if you could give your thousand
crowns for an hundred thousand, would you not esteem it a great gain, and
would you not presently employ them? I believe you would, and yet you will not
give them for the kingdom of heaven. What follows then, but that you do not
much esteem, nor much value the glory of the heavenly kingdom, in regard of
the frivolous follies of this world? And the reason is, because you have no
lively faith. Yet the Judge unwilling to yield, replied to Br. Giles: Father,
believe you that every one worcketh as much as he believes? the holy Father
answered: he that believes well and perfectly, worcketh and perfo^meth
worckes correspondente, as did the saints, who did all the good they could,
and have accomplished, by pious desires what they could not perform in effect.
And if one have a perfect and lively faith, he would arrive to that estate, as
God would give him a perfect knowledge and assurance even of divine things, as
says the Apostle to the Romans: I am sure that neither death, nor life, nor
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, neither things present, nor Romans 8.
things to come neither might, nor height, nor depth, nor other creature shall be
able to separate us from the charity of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
And the man that assuredly hops this eternal and sovereign recompense, does
not regard any affliction: as on the contrary no good can satisfy him that
despaireth of the eternal good* in so much as a sinner should never despair of
the mercy of God whiles he has life; considering None ought to despair.
that there is no tree so thorny and disordered, but men if they list can prune
and rectify it. Much less can there be so great a sinner in the world, as
that God cannot adorn him with his graces and virtues.

A discourse of Charity, and of what the Prophet meant when he said, that all
his friends did deceive him.
THE XXIV. CHAPTER.
CHarity is the principal of all the virtues: happy is he that feels not in
himself any disgust of the things which he ought always to desire. Brother
Giles put this question to a Religious with whom he was very familier: do you
believe that I love you? the Religious answered he did. Well then, said the
holy Father, believe it no more: for a creature ought not sincerely to love but
the Creator, who is pure and infinite. An other Religious said to the holy
Father: I beseech you Father, make me understand how that must be interpreted
which the Prophet says: Every friend deceives. Whereto he answered: I deceive
Ierem. 9.
you, in that I do not search your good as I do mine own. For the more I
repute your good to be mine own, the less shall I deceive you, and the more a
man rejoices at his neighbors good, the more does himself participate
therein: and therefore if you desire to participate thereof, strive to rejoice
thereat, and to procure Charity is the truest and most sure way of salvation,
since that thereby one does not only rejoice at the good of his neighbor, but
is also grieved at his crosses: he believes and judges well of others, and
evil of himself: he honors others, and mispriseth himself. He that will
not honor an other, shall not be honored, and he that knows not himself
shall not be known: he that will not weary himself, shall not repose: also
the greatest of all labors and the most meritorious, is to labor in piety and
benignity: he that does a good worck without love and charity, is not
grateful to God nor to his saints: but he that for the love of God makes
himself poor of temporal substance, shall be rich of such as are celestial. A
man then ought to choose and love divine things and misprise particular
things, for what can be greater then to know how to praise the benefitts of
God, and to check himself for his proper malice? I would I had bin taught in
this school from the beginning of the world, and there would study to the end
thereof, if I were so long to live, there to contemplate the praise dew to the
benefits of God, and the reprehension and chasticement due to my evil
worckes. True it is that if I must committ an error, I had rather it were in
the consideration of my wickedness, then in the acknowledgement of the benefits
received of God. For if we see many that for some little service done them
return many praises and thanckes, how much more are we obliged in that kind
of acknowledgeme^t unto almighty God? And in deed a man ought never to make any
comparison with this love toward him that has a will to deliver us from all
miseryes and to conduct us to the fruition of al good, and that would even dye
to procure us to live.

A discourse of humility.
THE XXV. CHAPTER.
A Man cannot attain to the knowledge of God, but by mean of humility, since
that the true way to ascend on high is to debase ones self. All the evils and
all the ruins of this world proceed of pride, as is seen in the evil Angel
and in the first man, whereof the one was created in heaven and the other in
Paradise; which also may be observed Luc. 18.
in the Pharisie spoaken of in the Ghospel, and in many others: And on the
contrary, all good that ever has bin done, has bin wrought by humility, as is
remarqued in the most sacred Virgin, in the Publican, in the Thief, and
others. But good God, why do we not ordinarily carry on our shoulders some
weighty burden to crush down our hard head, and to debase and humble it? A
Religious one day demanding of Br. Giles how one might shun pride, he
answered: Brother, wash your hands, put your mouth where your feet are,
consider your sins, and have contrition for them, and then often incline your
self toward the ground. Wretched is he that desires glory and honor for
his own sins and vanities. A man is ascended to an high degree of humility,
when he acknowledges that himself is contrary to his own good. I also
esteem it a branch of humility to yield to an other, and not to appropriat to
ones self. I dare affirm that as one ought to attribute to God all goodness as
proper unto him, so to our selves all evil. Happy is he that shows himself
so vile before me^, as he is before God. Happy is he that walks faithfully
under the obedience and judgment of an other, as the holy Apostles did, after
they were replenished with the holy Ghost. He that will have peace and
tranquillity in him, let him repute al men greater then himself. Happy is he
that desires not to be seen in his words and behauiours that are
commendable: but rather in the compunction and abiection wherein the divine
grace puts him. He that is the holiest man in the world and reputeth
himself most vile, he has true humility. Humility knows not how to speak,
and dares not be talkatiue. Humility is like the brightness of heaven: for as
of the same brightness and of vapors do proceed thunders and earth quakes,
whereof in an instant no more is seen, so humility does ruin vices, wickedness,
and the high toures of her ennemy pride, and then causes a man after the
performance of great matters, to repute himself nothing. By humility a man
finds the grace of God, and peace with men. For even as if a mighty Prince
would send his own daughter into a far country, he would not mount her on a
restiue and proud horse, but on a gentle nagge that shall amble easily and
securely: even so God as sovereign king, gives not his grace to the proud, but
only to the humble.

A discourse of the sear of God.
THE XXVI. CHAPTER.
THe holy fear of God expels out of man impious worldly fear, and is the
guard of those goods which cannot be expressed, not so much as by imagination:
But to have this fear is a special gift, and not granted to all. He that
fears nor, shows that he has nothing to loose. The fear of God guides
and gouuerneth man, and causes him to find grace with his divine majesty, by
which when he has received this fear, he conserueth it, and having lost it,
does recover it. All reasonable creatures that have forgotten themselves in
foul disorders, had never fallen therinto, if they had this gift of God, which
is proper unto the saints. And the more one is replenished with grace, the
more is he humble and fearful. Now albeit this virtue is least esteemed of
men, yet is it not therefore less then others: for a man that in regard of his
enormous offenses committed against God, is worthy of death, cannot have any
assurance wherewith to show himself in his divine presence. Happy then is he
who acknowledges that to dwell in the world, is to be in a prison, and that
there one daily offends God. A man should always fear that pride conduct
him not into hell. Thou ought to have fear of thy self and thy like, and
to carry thy self respectively and warily: for a man that lives in the
midst of his ennemies, cannot be in perfect assurance. Our flesh is our
ennemy, which with the devil is continually adverse to our soul. A man should
more fear to be surmonted and overcome by his own malice, then by any other
thing: for it is impossible for a man to ascend to the glory of God, or there
to persevere without a holy fear. Not to have it, is a sign of perdition. This
fear causes one to obey with humility, and to stoop eue^ to the earth under
the yoke of holy obedience, and he that has the greater fear, is the more
devout in prayer, and he that has the grace to pray has obtained no little
grace of God. The worckes of men appear they never so great, ought not to be
judged by humane judgment, but according to the divine will and institution.
Therefore ought we (my Brethren in JESUS CHRIST) ever to live in fear.

A discourse of Patience.
THE XXVII. CHAPTER.
HE that for the love of God could support with patience all afflictions,
should in short time obtain abondance of graces, and should be Lord of this
world, and have one foot in the other. All thee good and evil which a man
does, he does it of himself: therefore thou should not be scandalized if
one do thee injury, but should rather have compassion of him. Support
iniuryes patiently for the love thou owe to thy neighbor: how much a man is
prepared for the love of God to endure abuses and affrontes, so great is he
before his divine majesty, and no more: and how much he is feeble and weakly
prepared to support the same things, so much less is he in the presence of
God, and does not know what God is. If thou hear any one speak ill of thee,
assist him; if he speak well of thee, refer that to God. If thou will make
thy part the better, make it ill, and that of an other, good: I mean thou must
praise the worckes and good words of others, and blame thine own. If thou will gain, loose: for in the end when thou shall thinck to have gained, thou
shall find that thou have lost, because this way is such, that though it seem
to lead to salvation, it tends to perdition. We do not orderly support
afflictions, and therefore are not fit to receive and support spiritual
consolations.

Do not wrong or injury to any, and if it be offered to thee, support it
patiently for the love of God, and in remission of thy sins: for it is more
meritorious to suupport a great injury for the love of JESUS To suffer injuries
freely is of exceeding meritt.
CHRIST without murmr, then to feed every day an hundred poor people, and to
fast much and austerely. What does it profitt a man to misprise himself, to
afflict his body by fasting, to pray, to watch and to use discipline, if after
all that, he cannot support an injury done by his neighbor, for which he
should receive a greater recompense, then for whatsoever he could endure by his
own election? To support tribulations and afflictions without murmr does
exceedingly purge the sins of a man, yea more then does a great effusion of
tears: and therefore happy is he that supporteth all these afflictions
patiently, in regard that he shall reap thereby a great fruit of consolation.
Happy is he that neither has, nor desires any consolation from whatsoever
creature under heaven. He does not hope for any recompense from God, that is
humble and peaceable, only, when althinges succed according to his will.

A mean to get patience.
He that has always his sins before his eyes, will not fail to make his
profitt of all the afflictions that befall him. Thou must acknowledge all the
good thou have to proceed from God, and all the evil from thy sins: for if
one man had done all the good deeds that all the men in the world have done,
do, or shall do, withal that, if he duly consider himself, he shall find
himself merely adverse to his own good. This holy Father being demanded by a
Religious what one should do, if those great tribulations forespoaken by our
Savior to arrive at the day of the general judgment, should come to pass
in our time, he answered: If the heavens should rain sharp stones and
flintes, they could not hurt us, if we were such as we should be. Know brother,
if a man persist in his duty, all the evil that he can endure, will turn to
his good: for as to him that has a disordered will, the good does turn into
evil, so to him that has a pure will, the evil does turn into good. And
all good is interior in man, so that it cannot be seen. The grievous
infirmities, great labors, and molestfull offenses which we endure, cause the
evil spirittes which are about us to fly. If thou will The exercise of the
virtuous is to do good, and to suffer evil.
be saved, never seek to have justice don thee against any creature
whatsoever, because holy and virtuous persons thinck only how to do well,
and to endure evil. If thou acknowledge to have offended God the Creator of
althinges, acknowledge also thy desert to be persecuted by all creatures, which
revenge the iniuryes thou have don to their Creator. Therefore ought thou
with much patience to support to be crossed and afflicted by all creatures,
thou having no reason to allege against them, in regard that thou deseruest
to be corrected by them. The virtue of a man that conquereth himself is in
deed great, for thereby he surmounteth all his ennemies, and makes purchase of
all good. It were a great virtue for a man to content himself to be overcome
of all the men of the world, for so he should become truly lord of all the
world. If thou will be saved, labor to remove from thee all hope and
cogitatation of whatsoever consolation may arrive unto thee by any mortal
creature, because the falls proceeding of consolations, are greater and more
ordinary, then those of afflictions. The nature of a horse is then esteemed
noble, though he fly with great fury and dexterity, when he permits himself
to be guided and governed by the discretion of the rider that stops him at
his pleasure, and makes him go whither he list. So when a man feels
himself spurred by anger, must he do, and permit himself to be governed and
directed by some one that is to correct him: yea he should desire to give as a
recompense for the love of God all that he has, to have given him spurns with
the feet, bastonades, buffettes, and to have his beard torn off, hair by
hair.

A Religious one day in presence of Br. Giles did murmr at a rigorous
obedience enjoined him: to whom this holy Father said. Brother the more you
murmr, the more you burden your self: and with the more devotion and
humility you submitt your neck under the yoke of obedience, the more easy and
light shall you find it: you will not be iniuryed in this world, and yet will be
honored in the other: you will not hear a displeasing word, and will be one of
the Blessed: you will not labor, and desire to repose: But you deceive your
self, for honor is purchaced by reproach, benediction by malediction, and
repose by labor: the proverb being true: Troutes are not taken with dry
hands: and therefore let it not trouble thee if thy neighbor sometime offend
thee, Troutes are not taken without wetting the hands. Luc. 10.
for even Martha, that was so holy, would provoke our lord against her sister
Magdalen, not without reason complaining of her: and nevertheless Mary was more
sparing of her members then Martha in the use of them, but she labored more
then she in contemplation, though without Martha, Mary had lost her speech,
sight, hearing and taste. Endeavor then to be virtuous and grateful to our
lord JESUS CHRIST, and sight courageously against vices, support patiently
afflictions, considering that there is nothing in this world of greater meritt,
then to conquer ones self, and that it is most difficult for a man to conduct
his soul to God, without this victory.

A discourse of Idleness.
THE XXVIII. CHAPTER.
THe idle man loses this world and the next, it being impossible to purchase
any virtue without diligence and labor. He that may rest in a secure place,
should not put himself in a place or doubt or danger. He is in a secure place,
that labors for God. The young man that will put himself to pain for God,
does also shun the kingdom of heaven. And if endeavor do not further, at
least let not negligence be an impediment and hinderance: for as idleness is the
way to hell, so good worckes are the way that leads to heaven. A man ought to
be very careful and diligent to conserve the grace he has received of God,
faithfully laboring therein: for oftentimes the fruit does perish by mean of
the leaf, and the grain by the husk. God grants to some, fruit, and a few
leaves, and to others neither the one nor the other. I do more esteem the
conservation of the benefittes received of God, then the getting of the^. He
shall never be rich, that knows how to get, but not to keep. Wherefore many
after much gain, have bin never the richer: because they knew not how to
conserve; yet is it not so great a matter to know how to conserve, unless also
one know how to get. There are some that gainning but little, become
incontinently rich, because they know well how to keep what they have gotten.
The rivers would not be so often dry, if running continually, they did not cast
themselves into the sea.

Man demands of God, graces without measure and end, and yet will make use
thereof with measure and end: but he that will be loved and recompensed without
end, ought to love and serve without end. Happy is he that employeth his time,
body, and spirit in the love of God, that attends no recompense under heaven
for the good he does. If one should say to a very poor man, Friend, I lend
thee this my house to make use thereof for three days, in which time, if thou
know how to employ it, thou may gain an inestimable treasure; this being
assured and confirmed unto him for most evident, would not he use all his
endeavor to make this gain? That which is lent unto us of our lord is our
flesh, our life, and whatsoever benefitt we can make therein, is in a manner but
as three days. If the grain of corn do not corrupt, it cannot only produce
no fruit, but it also withers and consumes entierlie of it self without any
increase: wherefore is it not better to make it to rott. to the end it may
spring, be gathered, threshed in due time, and then laid up into the garner of
eternal life.

A man does seldom take counsel to do ill: but being to do good, the first
thing is to take counsel of all the world. The proverb says, one must not
putt the pott to the fire in expectation of a promise: A man is not happy for
having only a good will, but he must rather with all possibility labor to
accomplish the same by good and pious worckes, because God gives his grace to
a man to the end he follow the same.

A man one time praying Brother Giles to give him some consolation, he
answered: Endeavor to do well, and thou shall be comforted: for if a man do
not prepare in himself a place for God, he shall not find him in his
creatures. What man is there, that will not do that which is best, not only
for his soul, but even for his body in that which concerns this life? I can
truly affirm, that whosoever shakes off the sweet and light yoke of our
Savior, shall find it afterward far more painful: and he that therewith
burdeneth himself most, at lenght shall find it most light.

Would to God all men would do that which they may acknowledge to be best for
their bodies even in this world: for he that made the other world has made
this also, and can give to man in this world the benefittes which he gives in
the other, and the body feels the happiness of the soul. A Religious
hearing Brother Giles to speak these words, said unto him: Tell me Father, if
you please, we may perhaps dye before we have any experience of any good: The
holy Father answered: The Furriers are known by skins, Shomakers by shoes,
and forgers by iron: But tell me, Brother can a man be known by an art that he
never practiced? Thinck you that Princes and Potentates bestow great favors
and prefermentes on sottish persons and without judgment? there is no
probability. Good worckes are the true way and mean to the fruition of all
happiness, as ill deeds to fall into all miseries, happy is he that feels no
scandal at whatsoever matter under heaven: and he that is edifyed with
whatsoever he sees and hears, and that amongst all things chooses only
those that he may use to the most benefitt of his soul.

A discourse of the contempt of the world.
THE XXIX. CHAPTER.
Unhappy is the man that setleth his heart, his desires, and his hopes on
earthly things, for which he loses all celestial happiness. If the Eagle
that soareth so high, had to each of her wings fastened one of the beams of
the Carpe^ters worck at S. Peter's in Rome, it is most certain she could not
mount into the air. As I observe many that labor for the body, so do I find
few that travel for the soul. Many take exceeding pains for corporal
affairs, breaking and cutting the marbles, digging mountains, laboring the
earth, furrowing the sea, and performing many other painful exercises: but who
is he that labors manfully and with fervor for the soul?

The auaricious is like the Mole, that thincketh there is no other good but to
dig the earth, and therefore therein sets up his rest: yet The auaricious
rese^bleth the Mole.
doubtless there is an other treasure unknown to the Mole. The birds of
heaven, the beasts of the earth, and the fishes of the sea content themselves
when they have sufficient to eat: but because man cannot content himself with
what the earth affords, he always sigheth after somewhat else. It is
certain that he was not created principally for these base things, but for
such as are high and supreme, for so much as the body was made for the soul,
and this world for love of the other. This He that has the greatest part in
this world has the worse.
world is a field of such quality, as the that has the better and greater part
thereof, has the worse share. This holy Father to this purpose alleged that
the holy Father saint Francis did not love the Antes, because of their over
much care to assemble their provisions: but loved the birds much more, because
they made no provision to live upon, but depending on the divine providence,
made only search from hour to hour according to their need.

A discourse of Chastity.
THE XXX. CHAPTER.
Chastity like to a glass.
A Religious demanded of the venerable Br. Giles, how a man might best keep
himself from the vice of the flesh: and he answered: he that will remove a
gross stone or beam, uses therein more industry then force: so must he do
that will preserve his chastity: for it is like to a most clear looking
glass, which may be blemished and stained in his brightness by one only breath.

It is impossible that a man can attain the divine grace, whiles he is
delighted in sensual pleasures. Consider althinges, behold, turn and
return up and down, and from one side to an other, you shall find at
lenght that nothing is more necessary then to fight against the fles^, which
seeks day and night to deceive and betray us: he that surmounteth it has
overcome all his ennemies, and becomes afterward assuredly capable of all
happiness.

He would ordinarily say, that if he were to make choice of the virtues, he
would choose chastity. Being asked what he called chastity, he answered: I
call chastity the conservation of all the senses of the body in the grace of
our Lord.

A man may be dronken with his own tun.
A married man that was devoutly affected toward him, was one day present when
he praised chastity, and said unto him: Father I desire to be resolved of you,
if living with my wife, and keeping fidelity toward her, I am secure touching
this point? Br. Giles answered him: what, do you not know that a man may as
well be droncken with the wine of his own tun, as with that of an other
man's?

A discourse of Temptation.
THE XXXI. CHAPTER.
A Great grace cannot be possessed in peace, but that there will arise many
contrarieties: yea the higher degree of grace a man has, the more shall he be
assaulted of the devil: but a man should not therefore omit to prosecute his
course of virtue, for the more violent the combatt is, the more excellent
shall be the crown, when he shall have overcome. And if any do miss this
employment, let him know that it is because he is not such as he ought to be;
besides this is to walk always in the direct way of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, in
which all travel and displeasure is sweet; but a man that follows the course
and way of the world, finds displeasure and labor even till death; so that
albeit the more a man shall be perfect in virtues, the more will vices be
contrary unto him: yet hating them so much, at every vice that he surmounteth,
he purcacheth a great virtue, and becoming victorious over all kind of vices,
whereby he might have bin tormented, he shall not fail of a great recompense
for it, and upon whatsoever occasion he omitteth to walk in the way of our
Lord JESUS CHRIST, for the same occasion he loses his recompense.

Comparison of spiritual exercises with laboring.
The burden of temptations, is often like to the travel of the labourer that
finds a great piece of land which he is to worck upon, covered with thistles
and thorns, so that he is constrained with great trouble to clear the same
before his labor be auayleable: in such sort that he often repents to have
enterprised so painful a business, in regard of the great expenses and bodily
labor that he is enforced to employ therein: For first he considers that he
must level and make even all the hillockes that are unequal with the ground,
and thereof sees not the fruit: Secondly he cutteth or burns the bushes,
thorns and thistles therein, yet sees no fruit thereof: Thirdly with much
labor and sweat he diggeth up the roots, neither yet sees the fruit.
Fourthly, he opens the earth with the plough-share to cleanse the same, yet
has no sight of the corn that is the ground of such his labor. Fifthly he
tilleth it the second time and makes it into furrows: Sixthly he sows his
grain. Seauenthly when the corn is sprung up he cleanses it and rooteth out
the weeds: Eighthly he does harvest the corn into his barn: Ninthly with
much labor and sweat he separateth it from the chafe causing it to be
threshed, winnowed, sifted and very diligently cleansed: Tenthly and lastly, he
transporteth the corn into his garner; and for the contentment he conceaueth
to see the fruit of his pains and labors, he then forgets them, and
purposes to undertake yet much greater, for the only joy he has of his
harvest. Now the like effect is in the temptations and labors which one
endures in this world, for the spiritual fruit and contentment, which he is
to reap thereof in the life everlasting.

Meritt of combatt with distractio^s.
A Religious having one time conference with Br. Giles, said unto him: Father
it is recorded that S. Bernard once said his seven penitential psalms,
without ever thincking of other matter, nor was assaulwith any distractio^s.
The holy Father answered: I would better esteem a castle valerously
assaulted, and more courageously defended.

A discourse of Penance.
THE XXXII. CHAPTER.
A Judge discoursing with Brother Giles of spiritual matters; asked him by
what means seculer persons might ascend to the state and glory of virtue.
Whereto the holy Father answered: A man ought first to procure sorrow and
contrition for his sins, then to confess them with bitterness and grief to
have offended God, and afterward to fulfill the penance that his ghostly Father
shall enjoin him. So being in good estate, he must carefully keep himself
from offending God, and shun all occasions that may induce him to sin, and
finally must exercise himself in good worckes. Blessed be the temporal
affliction that conuerteth to a man's happiness, and accursed be the pleasure
that tourneth to his misery. A man should endure and support affliction in this
world with a good will, since our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST has given us an example
in himself. Happy is he that has true contrition of his sins, and lamenteth
day and night, nor will seek his consolation in this world, but where all the
desires of his heart shall be satisfied.

A discourse of Prayer.
THE XXXIII. CHAPTER.
PRrayer is both the beginning and perfection of all good. Prayer Instance
requisite in prayer
illuminateth the soul, and by it good and evil are discerned. All sinners
ought to make this prayer unto God, that he will give the^ knowledge of their
own sins, of the divine mercy, and of the benefittes received of JESUS
CHRIST. He that cannot pray, knows not God. It is necessary for all those
that are to be saved, if they have use of reason, to apply themselves to
prayer, to obtain mercy of God. Let us suppose that a widow and lady which
were much retired, simple and chaste, had a son, that for some crime committed
were prisonner and condemned to death: This Mother though honorable and
retired, would she not repair to the Prince, with abondance of tears to seek
favor for her son? This urgent necessity, no doubt, for the extreme love of
this widow to her son (though she were very rarely seen to go out of her
house) would enforce her to run through the streets, with cries, weepinges
and lamentations, to solicit all those whom she thought might any way assist
her in saving the life of her son: which she would attempt without any fear
or respect of the modesty requisite to her degree and quality. In like manner
he that knows his sins, knows consequently to ask pardon for them with
shame and humility.

Humility necessary in prayer
There was one that growing as it were into despair, for that in prayer he
received not the grace of God which he desired, complained thereof to Br. Giles,
who answered him: Brother, I counsel you to go on sweetly, and to have
patience; for, as there being lees in a vessel, one does not therefore shake and
entermingle it together with the wine, which were it never so good would be
utterly spilled thereby: And as, though sometimes the millstone grindeth not
good meal, one does not therefore break it, but with time and patience
repaireth it: so must you do, and thinck your self unworthy to receive any
consolation in prayer: considering that albeit a man had lived from the
beginning of the world till this present, and were to live till the end thereof,
and Distractions in prayer are procured by the devil.
should every day in prayer power a quart of teare-water out of his eyes, yet
should he not at the end of the world be worthy to receive any consolation
from God.

An other Religious demanding of this his Father, why a man was more tempted
in his prayer then in any other time, he answered: When any one has a
process in a kings Court, and knows that his adversary seeks to get some
favor against him at the kings hands, he endeavors with all means and
possibility to hinder his repair to the Court: if he cannot, he procures at
least that the king give not ear unto him, or at least that he obtain not his
request; and then uses all his endeavors to procure judgment in his own
behalf: Thus worcketh the devil against us. And therefore when you discourse
with any one, you shall very rarely perceive the devil to war against you
with his temptations: but if you go about to recreat your soul with God in
prayer, you shall incontinently feel the shottes of the ennemy against you.
But you must not therefore give over prayer, but with great fervor and
resolution persevere, for there is the true and assured way, leading to the
celestial contry: and he that for temptations omitteth prayer, is like to a
coward that flies the combatt.

Consolation for the^ that pray without feeling of devotion.
An other Religious said to this holy Father: I see many that, when they are in
prayer, incontinently obtain the grace of devotion and tears: but my self
can never find any consolation. Br. Giles answered: Brother, omit not to
continue prayer with your accustomed fervor. For if God give not you his grace
at first, he can give it you at an other time: and that which he might have
given you in a day, or in a week, in a month, or in a year, he will give you
when he shall see it most convenient and most necessary for you. But in the
mean while fail not in your endeavor, and leave the care of the rest to the
providence of God. For the master Cutler gives many hammer-strokes on the
iron, before the ends a knife, and then at last finisheth it with one blow.

One must labor for salvation.
A man ought to have great care of his salvation, since that if it were possible
that the whole world were heaped up with men to the very clouds, and of all
them only one were to be saved, yet not one should omit to follow his vocation
and procure the grace to be that one: for, to loose the glory of Paradise is
not a matter of small importance, as to loose the lachett of a shoe, or such
other thing. But wretched as we are, there wants not one to give, but to
receive: the refections are prepared, but there is none ready to eat.

Many good worckes are commended in holy scripture, as to cloth the naked, to
feed the hungry and other like things, but prayer ought to be in spirit and
truth as our Lord JESUS CHRIST says. The Joan. 4.
holy Religious are as wolves, who seldom go forth in public, vulesse upon
urgent necessity, neither then do they long remain abroad.

A Religious that was very familier to Br. Giles asked him one time, why he did
not more often go abroad to visitt the seculers that desired to confer with
him. The holy Father answered him: I desire to satisfy my neighbor without
prejudice to my soul. Do not you believe that sometimes I would give my
neighbor a thousand ducats if I had them, rather then I would give him my
self? the Religious answered, that he believed him. Believe you not also,
said the holy Father, that I would give my neighbor four thousand ducats,
rather then my self? The Religious answered, I believe you. Br. Giles then
inferred: Our Savior says in the Gospel: he that forsakes Father; Mother,
Brothers, Sisters, kindred, friends, and all other worldly things, for my
sake, shall receive an hundred fold in this world, and in the other, life
everlasting.

This holy Father seeing a gentleman, that was esteemed to be worth threescore
thousand ducats, to enter into Religion said: The retribution which God gives
in this life is excessiuely great, since that to this man is to be deputed and
hundred times threescore thousand ducats, but we are blind and worse then
blind, that will neither know nor consider it.

This good Father on a time said: believe me if we should see a man replenished
with grace and virtues, we should not support the sight of his perfection: and
if a man were perfectly spiritual, he could hardly permit and endure to see or
hear any wordly thing, or to speak with any worldly person but upon urgent
necessity; but would affect to be always solitary. He said of himself: I had
rather be blind, then be the fairest, richest, wisest, and most noble in the
word. This Religious asked him the reason. Because, said he, all things are
apt to hinder my sure way; and this my blindness and want of sight, might be a
guide and assistance unto me.

A discourse of spiritual wariness, and of consideration.
THE XXXIV. CHAPTER.
IF thou will taste the chieffest good, thou must sequester thy self from all
sensual things: if thou will love thy self well^, thou must hate thy self:
If thou will live well, mortify thy self: if thou will be rich, make thy
self poor; if thou will live deliciously, afflict thy self: if thou will
live in security, persevere always in fear: if thou will be exalted, humble
thy self: if thou will be honored, despise thy self: if thou desire to have
that which is good, endure that which is evil: if thou will be blessed,
support maledictions. O how great is his wisdom that can perform this! but
because they are great matters, they are not granted to all.

Consider thy self.
If a man should live a thousand years, and had nothing to do without
himself, he should find business enough within him, yea he were not able to
compass all that was necessary to be done. None should desire to see, to
hear, or to speak, but what were a furtherance to his spiritual profitt, and
upon whatsoever occasion, should proceed no further. He that will not know,
shall not be known. But unhappy are we if having the gifts of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, we do not know the^: and they that have then not, seek not to have
them; a man imagines God according to his apprehension, but God is such as he
is.

A discourse of the Active and Contemplative life.
THE XXXV. CHAPTER.
AS no man can conveniently attain to the contemplative life, if he be not
sincerely and devoutly exercised in the active, wherein it is necessary that
with all his cogitation he apply himself: so he shall prove a true active man,
who if he could feed all the poor of the world, cloth them, and supply all
their necessities, and do good to all churches and hospitalles, and this being
done, each one should esteem him a lewd man, and he knowing so much, should
not at all respect it, nor forbear, but rather continue his pious worckes,
yea should the more voluntarily and with greater fervor exercise them; as one
that desires not any recompense in this life: considering that Martha, careful
to Luc. 10.
serve our Lord JESUS CHRIST, demanded assistance therein of her Sister Mary
Magdalen, and was reprehended of our lord, because she would distract her
sister from contemplation, who yet gave not over her good work: so he that is
truly active should not omit good worckes for whatsoever reprehension may be
given him; since he hops for no recompense but in heaven.

A Religious came co^plaining to Br. Giles, that his brethren made him to
labor so much, that he had hardly time enough to pray, and that for that cause
he was determined to procure license to remove unto an other Covent, where he
might with more repose serve God in prayer. Whereto the holy Father thus
answered: if you were in the Court of the king of France, and should demand of
him a thousand marck in silver, he might answer, what have thou don for me
that may move thee to demand such a recompense? but if you had formerly done
him some notable service, you might with fa^re more assurance make such
demand. Therefore if you will serve God, you must first labor in obedience;
since it is a greater virtue to do one thing at the will of an other, then to
do two, at ones own pleasure. Then he added: No man can obtain to
conte^plation of the glory of his divine Majesty, but by fervor of spirit and
fervent prayer, and then is a man enflamed with the fervor of the holy Ghost
and soareth up to divine conte^plation, when the heart is so disposed with the
m^bers, that neither can nor will thinck of other thing then that w ich it
possesses and feels. He shall be a perfect contemplatour who, having all his
me^bres cut off, yea and his tongue, would neither thinck, procure, nor desire
to have any other member, nor whatsoever other thing he can imagine under
heaven, and this by reason of the excellency of the most delicious and
ineffable odor and sweetness of contemplation. In that respect S. Marie
Magdale^ being prostrate at the feet of our lord IES. CHR. received and felt
such a sweetness of his words, that she had no member in her, that could or
would do other thing then what she then did. Which she sufficiently testified,
when her sister complaining at the want of her help, she answered nothing
either by words or figues. But our Redeemer as her Advocate and Procuratour
answered for her: and withal she was employed in his service more excellently
then Martha was. Now to contemplate is to sequestered from men, and to remain
united alone with JESUS CHRIST.

Br. Giles made this demannd to a Religious of his Covent: Brother what say the
Doctors of conte^plation? the Religious answered: they speak diuersely. Will
you, replied the holy Father, that I speak mine opinion thereof? the degrees of
conte^plation are, fire, unction, ecstasy, taste, repose, and glory: then he
added: a more express contemplation of God Notable similitude.
with the soul cannot be given, then that of the Espouse, with his Espouse:
for the Spouse, before he receaueth his Espouse, sends her precious stones,
jewels, and other ornaments of price to adorn her: but when they are
together, the Espouse leaves all those things to approach unto her Spouse: so
do good worckes and virtues adorn the soul as precious stones and sumptuous
attire, and prayer unites it unto God.

An ancient Religious demanded of Br. Giles, if the soul by ecstasy and
contemplation did sometime even in this life go out of the body, and he
answered, that it did: yea he assured him, that he knew a man yet living,
whose soul being lifred up in ecstasy, went out of the body, and forsook it,
yea already utterly forgetting the same. I believe said the Religious, that
such soul was exceedingly grieved to return into her body. Br. Giles then
smilingly replied: Brother that which you say is true, yea most true.

This holy Father would often, in prayer and at other times with exceeding
fervor, say: What art thou my God, of whom I demand this? and what am I that
ask it? I am a sack filled with dung, with loathsomnes and with worms: and
thou art lord of heaven and earth. And thus beginning his prayer, he would be
incontinently elevated and rapt into almighty God.

Of profitable science and unfruitful, of preaching and the interpretation of
those words of the scripture: Ego rogaui pro te Petre.
THE XXXVI. CHAPTER.
THe Venerable Br. Giles would sometimes say let him who desires to be
learned humble well his head, let him be exercised in good worckes, and let
him rent his body on the earth, and God will give him knowledge. It is a
sovereign wisdom to do good worckes, carefully to observe the co^mandementes
and to consider the judgments of God. He once said to a Religious that would
go to a lecture at a College: Tell me wherefore would you go to the lecture?
Know that the most worthy science is to fear and love God: these two virtues
will suffice you, a man has knowledge according to his good worckes and no
more. Be not only careful to profitt others, thou being obliged to be more
careful to benefitt thy self. We would often times know many things for
others, and few for our selves. The word of God is not of him that hears it,
nor of him that utters it, but of him that puts it in effect. Many not
knowing how to swimne throw themselves into the water to help an other that
they see in danger of drowning; but having adventured too far, they are
drowned together: so that whereas there was but one in peril, two are lost by
presumption: In purchasing above all things the salvation of thy own soul as
thou art obliged, thou shall not omit to assist others, but rather in doing
good worckes for thy self, thou shall also profitt them that wish thee well.
The Preacher of the word of God is a messager of his majesty, to the end he be
to the people a flaming light, a glittering glass, a standerd-bearer of his
warryers. Happy is he that conducteth others by the assured way, that fails
not to walk the same way, and that inducing others to run, stands not
still himself: and so if he help to enrich others, he remains not poor. I
suppose a good Preacher preaches more for himself then for others, and it
seems that he who endeavors to draw souls out of an evil course to setle
them in a good, ought to fear that himself be not seduced from the same good
way, and led to the way of the devil.

A Religious demanded of this holy Father, whither were better to preach well,
or to do well: he answered, tell me who does meritt more, ha that goes in
pilgrimage to saint James of Galicia, or he that shows him the way? I see
many things that are not mine, I hear much that I understand not, and I
speak much that I do not perform; and it seems to me, that a man is not
saved for seeing, speaking and hearing, but for well performing that which he
knows to be the best. Words are farther distant from deeds, the^ the earth
is remote from heaven. If any one would permit you to go into his vineyard
there to gather grapes, would you content your self with leaves? It is a
thousand times more necessary for a man to get instruction for himself, then
for all the world. If you desire to know much, do many good worckes, and
humble your self withal possibility. A Preacher should not speak
ouer-curiously, nor too grossly: but should use only common and ordinary terms.

Then the holy Father smilingly proceeded: there is great difference between
the ewe that bleateth much, and her that brings many lambs: that is, it is
not one thing to preach, and to putt in execution.

Br. Giles one day said to a Doctor, that seemed to glory much in his doctrine
and preaching: if all the earth were in the possession of one man, and he
should not labor it, what fruit would he reap thereof? Rely not therefore so
much one your learning, albeit all the knowledge of all the world were in your
head, because not performing worckes necessary to your salvation, it would
nothing avail you.

This holy Father prayed a Religious that went to preach at Perusia, to take
for the theme of his sermon these words: I kiss, I kiss, I speak much and
perform little. This is in his life a little before.

This holy Father expounding these words of our Savior JESUS Luc. 22.
CHRIST, I have prayed for thee Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith
fail not: and thou once couuerted, confirm thy Brethren: he thus interpreted
it: Almighty God, said he, would give to understand that a man should first
labor for himself, and then for others* And albeit the conversion of souls
be very grateful unto God, yet it is understood of those that can do it
without prejudice to the salvation of their own souls, serving God, as S.
Paul, whersoeuer they are. Therefore this holv Father would often with great
fervor of spirit, say: Paris, Paris, thou do ruinate the Order of S.
Francis. Which this good Religious said, seeing the disquiett and trouble of
spirit of many learned Friar Minors, that put confidence in their sciences.

Br. Giles hearing a quail and a dove to sing, said in fervor of spirit;
there is the way, there is the way, and not there: as if they said, let us
endeavor to do well in this life, and not expect the other: with reason
sister dove thou speak this, so sweetly groaning. But sinner whereon thinckest
thou? why make not thou they profitt of this aduertisment? Besides, it is to
be understood that Br. Giles speak this upon the allusion of the Italian^ and
Spanish tongue, with the note of the dove and the quail, which is, quaqua,
which cannot be applied to the French tongue.

A discourse of good and evil words.
THE XXXVII. CHAPTER.
HE that utters good words is as the mouth of God, and he that speaks ill,
little differs from the mouth of the devil. When What ought to be ordinary
discourse of the Religious.
the servants of JESUS CHRIST assemble together in any place to discourse,
they should talk of the excellency of virtues, that they may seem pleasing
unto the^, and give them co^tentment, and should also be exercised in the^. By
which act they shall come to love the^ more, and to perform better actions:
for the more a man is burdened with vices, the more needful it is for him to
speak of virtues; because by the frequent and pious discourse of them, he
persuadeth and easily disposes himself to put them in practice. But what
shall we say, the conditions of this world being so corrupted, that one cannot
speak good of good, Great virtue to know when to be silent.
nor evil of evil? We will then confess the truth, that we know not how to
speak of good, how good it is, nor likewise of evil how evil it is. Wherefore
it seems that neither of these to things, can sufficiently be comprehended.
So that I tell you, I esteem it not a le^^e virtue, to know how to be silent,
then how two speak well: and according to my judgment, a man should have a
long neck as Note this word.
a Crane, that his words pass by many joints, before it go out of the mouth.

A discourse of perseverance in good worckes, and of the memory of death.
THE XXXVIII. CHAPTER.
WHat does it profit a man, to fast, pray give almose, mortify himself, and
to have understanding of celestial things, yet with all this does not arrive
to the desired port of salvation? There has bin sometime seen in the main
sea a fair shipp laden with abondance of wealth, which near unto the haven,
surmonted by a little tempest, has miserably perished. What then has auayled
the bravery and richesse that it brought? But on the contrary has bin seen an
old vessel, unseemly and contemptible to each one, that has defended it
self from the perilles of the sea with her burden of merchandises, and
securely arrived in the port, and such an one deserves praise. The same
happens also to men of this world, and therefore ought they to live always in
the fear of God. For although a tree grow and is fastened in the ground, he
does not yet suddenly become great, and when he is great, he does not presently
flourish, he is not so soon fruitful, if he be, they be not ripe, if ripe,
they do not in every respect content the master. For some do rott, other are
beaten down by the winds of temptations, and are devoured by the worms of
the senses.

Two things I hold for great benefittes of God, when a man has his heart
remote from sin, and replenished with love toward God: which two things
whosoever shall possess without danger of any evil, shall be in possession of
all good: But he must persevere, because if one had from the beginning of the
world to this instant, lived in distresses afflictions, and now should have
abondant fruition of all kind of joys, all the miseries past would not offend
him: on the contrary, if one had always spent his time in continual iollyty
and contentment, and were at this present oppressed with diverse miseries and
infirmities, his pleasures past would nothing rejoice him. Wherefore each one
should level at that, where althinges are to end and determine.

A seculer person having told this holy Father, that he would be content to
live a long time in this world and to be rich and have his pleasure in all
things: he answered him: If you should live a thousand years, and were lord
of all the world, what recompense should you receive in the death of this
body, which you shall with so great affection and pleasure, have served; but
worms, stinch, and eternal death? Better were it for you my child, believe
me, to endure a little here, so to receive in heaven that incomprehensible
recompense, which by no humane tongue can be expressed.

A discourse of Religion and Obedience.
THE XXXIX. CHAPTER.
I Would more respect a little grace from almighty God in Religion, then much
more in the world: because there is more peril and less help in the seculer
estate then in Religion, and yet a sinful man has more fear of his good then
of his evil, because he fears more to do penance entering into Religion,
then to persist in sin in the world.

They that enter into Religion, and perform not what is convenient to their
vow, are like a common labourer that adorneth himself with the armor of a
brave soldier and when he must fight, knows not how to use it. I do not
esteem it much to enter into the Court of a king, and to get favor of him:
but I much esteem, to know how to live in a Court as one ought and so to
persevere: The Court of a great king, is Religion, wherein it is a small matter
to enter and to receive some gift of Almighty God: But to know how to live
there, and to persevere in holy devotion to the end, is a matter very laudable
and estimable. Wherefore I had rather live in seculer estate, with desire to
enter into Religion, then to be Religious with weariness and ircksomnes. The
glorious Virgin Mother of JESUS CHRIST was borne of sinful man and woman, and
lived not enclosed in any Religion, nevertheless she was, and is as she is. But
when a Religious has made profession, he must believe that he neither knows
nor can live out of Religion. It does undoubtedly seem unto me that the
Religion of the Friar Minors was sent of God into the world, for a great
benefitt and profitt to al men: but we shall prove extremely miserable, if we be
not such as we ought to be. I esteem the Religion of the Friar Minors, to be
the poorest and the richest of the world: but we have this de^ect, that we
aspire to rise to high: when a ship is broaken by a tempest, though the
affliction be great, he that can, strives to save himself. Considering all
the Religions that are, and have bin from the beginning of the world to this
present, I find none so reasonable, convenient, nor better then this of the
Friar Minors. He is rich that plays the part of a rich man, he is wise that
imitateth the wise, he good that imitateth the good; and he noble that is a
true follower of our most noble Lord JESUS.

Virtuous conditions open us the way to all happiness, and vicious to perdition.
And therefore the more a Religious submits himself under the yoke of
odedience, the more fruit does he produce; and the more obedient a Religious is
and more subject to his Superior, for the honor and love of God, so much more
is he poor of spirit and purged of his sins.

A Religious truly obedient is as a soldier well armed, and as a horseman
mounted on a gallant Courser^, who securely breaks through the midst of his
ennemies without detriment. The Religious that obeys with murmr is as a
disarmed horseman on a cowardly jade, that passing through his ennemies,
stumbleth, and is taken prisonner. The Religions that seeks to live according
to his will, desires to go to the fire of hell. When the oxen submitt their
neck to the yoke, then are the corne-loftes full with grain: but when they run
wandering over the fields and taking their pleasure, it is a sign that the
garners are empty. The more eminent and wise persons yield their head under
the yoke of obedience* but the il-aduised and ignorant, retire themselves and
contemn to obey. The mother does often bring up her son and raise him to
honor, and the ungrateful son disobeyeth his mother and derideth her: Many
Religious do the like to Religion their mother there. I more esteem to obey a
Superior for the love of God, then to Paradox of Bro. (...).
obey God himself: for he that obeys the vicar of JESUS CHRIST, with greater
reason would he obey God himself, if he command him.

He that submits his head under the yoke of obedience, and afterward
remoueth it to follow of himself the way of perfection according to his
fantasy, he discovers his interior pride. Wherefore it seems to me, if one
had obtained the grace to speak with the Angels, and were at the instant
called by his superior, he should incontinently leave his conference with the
Angels, and obey a man, to whom he has voluntarily made himself subject for
the love of God.

To leave God for to go to God.
Our Lord and Redeemer JESUS CHRIST has made the verity of this doctrine
appear in Br. Andrew, my devout companion, who being in fervent prayer in his
cell, his divine Majesty appeared unto him in form of a very beautiful child,
who by the splendor of his contenance, and the familiarity which he showed
him, filled him with an ineffable consolation. But in the mean whiles it runge
to Euensong: the poor Religious then not knowing what to do, resolved to
leave his God, and went incontinently to the quier, saying, that it was the
better to obey the creature for the love of the Creator, in this manner giving
satisfaction to both the one and the other. The sequel discovered how pleasing
this his opinion was unto God: for the euensong being ended, Brother Andrew
returned to his cell and there yet found the little child JESUS, who said unto
him: If thou had not gone to the quier, I had presently gone hence, and
never returned.

A discourse of virtues and vices in general, and of Prayer.
THE XL. CHAPTER.
Divine things make a man rich, and humane things make him poor. Wherefore
men should follow and love the one and the other. For as all the ways of the
earth are full of vices and sins, so they of heaven are full of virtues,
which being prepared for creatures, call to each one, saying: come and
entertain us, and we will teach you the way of salvation, but man miserable as
he is, has no mind that way. Whose fault is it then if he live in misery and
poverty, since being called of God, he will not take the pains, to come to his
presence? whereby he makes himself guilty of eternal death. For as virtues
and graces are the way and ladder leading to heaven: so sins are the downfall
descending into hell.

But it is very perilous to demand of God virtues and graces, because, if
having received them, we do not good worckes accordingly, we make his divine
Majesty more our ennemy, and provoke his wrath to chastise us for our
ingratitude: in respect that by how much greater the gift is which God
presents to his creature, the more ungrateful does he prove that conserueth
it not. The more a man is surmonted by vices and sins, the more ought he to
hate and abhor them.

By prayer a man does often meritt great graces and virtues, for he is thereby
illuminated in his soul, and fortifyed in faith, he takes notice of his
misery, obtayneth fear and humility, and purchases a contempt of himself: he
gets contrition for his sins, the gift of tears, and amendment of his
evil life. Prayer makes the science of a man pure, makes him constant and
stable in patience, and delighting in obedience, it makes him perfect in
mortification of himself; it purchases unto him an assured knowledge, the
gift of understanding, the gift of force, the gift of prudence, and finally
conducteth him to the knowledge of God, who manifests himself to them that
adore him in spirit and truth: for a man by prayer is inflamed in love, then
presently runs after the divine odor, and obteyneth the sweetness of
delight, then is elevated to repose of spirit, where he is admitted to the
glory of the sweetness Joan. 4.
of God. When he shall have laid his mouth to the word of the most high,
wherewith alone the soul is satisfied. Who can ever separate him from prayer,
which raises and eleuateth the spirit unto contemplation?

And that they, who shall desire to obtain the afforesaid things, may know to
attain thereto, let them, among all other well observe these six
considerations, as most necessary, whereof the first is touching his sins
past, for which he must have contrition: the second, to be prudent in his
actions present: the third, to foresee those to come: the fourth, let him
consider the mercy of God that expects man's repentance, not taking
vengeance on him, though he have made himself worthy of eternal torments,
according to divine justice, which he dessembleth, in expectation of his
amendeme^t. The fifth is of the benefittes of his divine Majesty, which are
innumerable, as the incarnation, and passion, and all for our benefitt, the
doctrine which he left us, and the glory he promises. And for the sixth and
last, he must consider what our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST has loved in this life,
as poverty, nakedness, hunger, thirst, cold, humility dishonor, contempt,
travels, wherein we must endeavor to conform our selves, and to follow him
with all possibility.

Of some other spiritual discourses of this glorious Saint.
THE XL. CHAPTER.
THis holy Father was once demanded by a seculer person, upon what occasion
man should be more inclined to evil then to good, he answered: It has bin
more apt to the earth, since the malediction thereof, to produce ill weeds,
then good herbs. But a careful and dilligent labourer, can by his industry
so husband it, that Notable answered to a curious parson.
those weeds shall not easily grow therein.

An other putting him a question of predestination, he answered: The water of
the sea shore is sufficient to wash my feet, yea my whole body; and I esteem
him a fool that this being able to content him, will cast himself into the
main sea: for I believe it suffices a Christian to know how to live well,
without search into matters so high. Then he added: you must pray to God that
he give you not too much felicity in this world, but that he send you great
combattes against your senses, and that therein he do not assist you by the
taste of his divine sweetness and suauity, for your greater recompense, and his
greater glory.

Hereby may be discerned whither a man love God perfectly, if with an earnest
care he endeavor to sequester himself from vices, seeking daily to augment in
good worckes, because it is a greater virtue to follow grace, then patiently to
support afflictions, for many have patience, but follow not grace.

Friar Minor, is as much to say, as one under the feet of all men, and the
greater the descent is, the greater also is the sally. We ought more to fear
temporal feclicity, then temporal evil; for the evil follows man, and
felicity is his contrary. We must so converse with men, as we loose not that
which God woorketh in us. But let us rather labor and travel to save our
selves with little, since that it sometimes happens that a man being skillful
in swimming, and will imprudently seek to help an other that is in perlll of
drowning in the water, they both are drowned, and so the loss is double.

A man shall be obliged to yield an account of the graces which he has not: For
as God creates a creature by his bounty and grace, he ought reciprocally
appear gracious and acknowledge the same; if not, let him know that he has
lost grace by his own negligence. For if he would travel and labor in the
grace received, he should obtain many other graces of God, which through his
own fault, he has not.

I desire, said this holy Father, first to obey even to death: then to be
humble under the feet of each one: thirdly I desire rigorously to chastise and
rent my flesh with my teeth, and so bind my neck with an iron chain, as I
would have no power at my pleasure to get loose.

How God wrought many miracles by the merittes of Brother Giles.
THE XLII. CHAPTER.
Our Lord by a notable miracle declared how much was the meritt of charity in
his servant Brother Giles, who meeting on the way to Assisium a gentleman that
was carried to By the sign of the cross he cures one wounded.
have a foot cut off, wherein there was a wound so eaten with a cancre, that if
the foot were not cut off, his life were in imminent danger: The gentleman
knowing Brother Giles, weeping, made him a pitiful relation of the occasion
of his journey to Assisium, then opened his leg, and showed him the wound, and
with great humility and devotion prayed him to make the sign of the cross
thereon: Br. Giles thereby moved with pity and compassion, made the sign of
the cross on the wound, then with great devotion kissed it, and the gentleman
was a little after entierly cured and returned to his house a foot, praising
and thancking God for such a grace, obtained by the meritt of his holy servant.

This good Father one time reprehended a Religious for a fault committed; and
he took this reprehension sinisterly and with little patience, but the night
following there appeared unto him one that said: Brother henceforward receive
with patience and in good parr the aduertisments Divine aduertisment for
receiving reprehisions.
and reprehensions which shall be given you: for he that shall believe and obey
Br. Giles, shall be happy. The Religious incontinently after this vision arose
before it was day, and came to the holy Father, acknowledging his fault of
impatience used unto him, and most humbly besought him to correct him often,
promising thenceforwaad to take whatsoever should come from him, not only with
patience, but with great joy.

A Religious that had never seen Br. Giles, but had heard such report of him,
desired to see both him, and some of his actions. But being exceedingly grieved
that the great distance between them, put him in despair of ever receiving
that happiness, he one night saw in a vision a book, wherein no other thing was
written but these words: This is he that prays continually for all the
people, and for 2. Match. vlt.
the holy. City: which the said Religious understood to be Brother Giles.

A woman of the city of Perusia, having no milk wherewith to suck her little
child, had recourse to this holy Father, to whom she was much devoted: but he
being in ecstasy, she could not speak unto him. And she not having leisure to
expect, came near him where he prayed, whose breast having with exceeding
faith and devotion, touched, she had milk sufficient to nource her child.

How God communicated to Br. Giles a most pleasing seeling of glory before this
death.
THE XLIII. CHAPTER.
THis holy Father a little before his death, retourning from prayer into his
cell replenished with a merueillous joy, said to his companion: My child, give
me thy judgment in this: I have found a treasure of such worth and excellency
as no humane tongue can express; and therefore my child, I pray thee again
speak thine opinion thereof. Which he diverse times repeated with an exceeding
fervor of spirit, and with such enflamed charity, that he seemed to be really
drunken with the wine of the love of God, and the abondance of his grace. But
this Religious having told him that it was time to go take his refection, he
joyfully answered him: My child, this is a singular refection and far better
then any other. The Religious thincking to tempt him said: Father, let us not
now thinck of these things, but let us to go to dinner. Whereto the venerable
Br. Giles replied that such speech was injurious unto him, and that he should
have done him greater pleasure to have stricken and wounded him to the blood.
Now one may piously presume that this holy soul had notice that it should
shortly leave the flesh, to enjoy that notable treasure of eternal glory which
it so much desired, there to have fruition and taste of the most sacred presence
of our Savior JESUS CHRIST. About that time a Religious told him, that the
holy Father S. Francis had said, that the servant of God should always desire
to end his life by martyrdom, whereto he answered. For my part I respect not
to die better then in contemplation.

Of the admirable prophesic he made of himself, and of his death.
THE XLIV. CHAPTER.
BRother Giles, besides his age being wasted by grievous insrmities, as ache in
his head and stomache, by a very troublesome cough, and burning ague, so that
he could neither eat, sleep, nor repose: The Citizens of Perusia out of great
devotion toward him, sent many armed men to guard him: that being dead, his
body might not be buried other where: well knowing that he did not only desire,
but would order to be buried at our Lady of Angels. Understanding then that he
was guarded with armed men, with great seruour of spirit he uttered these
words: Brethren, tell the Perusians that the belles shall never ring for my
canonization nor for any miracle of mine, and that they shall have no other
sign, but that of the Prophet lonas. Which the Perusians understanding, they
answered they would have him in their city, though he should not be
canonized: and so the eve of saint George at the hour of Mattins, as soon
as the Religious had laid him on a bed to repose, having received the holy
sacraments ordained by the Church, without any acke of his body, that might
discover and make appear the agony of his death, only shutting his mouth and
eyes, this contemplative soul was dissolved from the body, with great repose,
God having for all eternity elevated it unto his glory. This holy Father
departed this life the year of grace 1260. and of his conversion to Religion
52. haning merited to ascend unto heaven their to reign eternally, the same
day that he received the habitt of the holy Father saint Francis, becoming
his true follower and disciple. The Perusians after death seeking stones to
make him a tomb, found a sepulcher of marble, wherein was carved the history of
the Prophett Jonas, where they laid his body, according as he had prophesied.

Of the revelation of the glory of this S.
THE XLV. CHAPTER.
A Person of notable sanctity saw in vision the holy Br. Giles acco^payned with
a great number of souls of Religious and others that then were dead, and
coming out of Purgatory they with him ascended into heaven. He saw our lord
JESUS CHRIST with a great multitude of Angels that came to receive him with
music exquisitely melodious made by those Angelical quiers: these blessed
souls were with great honor entertained of our Redeemer into his kingdom,
were he seated them on a seat of merueillous glory. At the same time that Br.
Giles was sick of his last sickness, an other Religious fell also sick even to
death, who was instantly prayed by a third Religious his Friend, that if it
should please God to call him, he would reveal unto him his estate, if the
divine Majesty would permit it: which the sick Religious promised. Wherefore he
dying the same day that Br. Giles did, appeared to this his Religious friend,
and thus spoke unto him: Br. give thanckes unto God for that it has pleased
him to grant and give me his glory, delivering me with many other souls from
the pains of Purgatory by the merittes of Saint Giles. Which said he vanished.
This Religious not daring to reveal this apparition to any, fell grievously
sick: But conceauing that this sickness might be sent him for not diuulging the
glory of Br. Giles, he instantly called into his Covent some Friar Minors, to
whom and to many other Religious he recounted the foresaid apparition, and was
with all miraculously recovered.

Notable prerogatives of Br. Giles.
S. Bonauenture said of this holy Br. Giles, that God had given him one
special grace, which was, that whosoever did invoke him in matters
concerning the salvation of their souls, were heard. Our lord wrought many
miracles after his death, by his merittes and intercession. He cured three
persons of infirmities in their eyes, five that were lame, and two of pain
in their feet, that hindered them from moving: three of the sqinancie, a woman
in travel of child: two of agues, one of the stone, and many of diverse other
diseases.

The end of the seventh book and second volume, of the first part of the
present Chronicles.
THE EIGHTH BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES OF THE FRIAR MINORS.
WHEREIN IS DESCRIBED THE LIFE OF the glorious Virgin S. Clare, the institution
of her rule, the conversion of S. Agnes her sister, and of an other S. Agnes,
daughter to the king of Behomia.
Of the intention of our Lord in the vocation of S. Clare, and of her contry,
her father and mother. Of a revelation unto her mother touching her sanctity,
and of her birth.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
SIX years after the conversion of the holy Father S. Francis, and the fourth
year after the confirmation of his rule by Pope Innocent the third, the year
of grace 1212. the omnipotent Father of light, having framed and sent into the
world a new man, his servant S. Francis, by him to reform his faithful in
this sixth age, would also that a valerous woman should by his worck appear in
the world to accompany that his great servant, to the end that of those two,
should be newborn a perfect regeneration of the children of God. And as the
first natural generation came of man and woman, as of an united beginning: so
this spiritual generation of the imitators of the life and counsels of JESUS
CHRIST, proceeded, in all the Church, and in all the estates and qualities of
persons, of one same spirit of zeal, of perfection, of humility, and of
powerty, from one man and one woman. And to the end it might not be unlike the
creation, almighty God having first perfected his servant S. Francis, would
frame of the ribbe or side of his life, doctrine and sanctity, the glorious
Virgin S. Clare, his true and litigimate daughter in JESUS CHRIST for his
companion, as zealous also of perfection and Angelical reformation. With great
reason therefore has she her place in the Chronicles of the Friar Minors. For
she being a ribbe and party of the same Order, it is very requisite a special
mention should be made of her sanctity of life, as we shall here perform. And
if it be not according to her meritt, shall at least be done with the least
defect we can possible, being resolved to employ therein that little force of
spirit which God has given us, and this to the honor of his divine majesty,
of his holy servant, and to the edification of souls.

The country of S. Clare.
The glorious saint Clare was borne in the city of Assisium, scituat in the
province of the Valley of Spoletum, which is a territory appertayning to the
Roman Church. Her Father and Mother were noble, of a famous and very weathy
famility: her mother was called Hortolana (which in our tongue may be termed
Gardener) and not without mystery, considering she was to produce so noble and
virtuous a plant in the garden of the holy Church. This woman was exceeding
devout and complete in the fruits of good worckes, and albeit she were
married, and consequently obliged to the care and government of her house and
family, yet did she not omit, with all her power to be exercised in the
service of God, and employed in worckes of mercy. The mother of S. Clare
visited the holy land.
She was so fervent in the love of JESUS CHRIST, that with great devotion she
passed the sea with many other Pilgrims, and visited those holy places which
our Redemer JESUS CHRIST God and man had consecrated with his holy presence,
and returned exceedingly comforted and enriched with many merittes. She also
visited the Church of Th'archangell S. Michael on the mount Gargan, and with a
pious and fervent desire visited the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul in Rome: in
such sort did that virtue and fervor in those days shine, in many holy
persons, but now so weakened is the fervor of Christians touching visiting
holy places, and the relics of our Lord and his SS. that it is almost lost,
by the continual wars of heretics and of our sins. Now our lord began to
poor out the abondance of his celestial gifts on the root, that afterward
the sproutes of greater sanctity might follow and dispearse into bows. Neither
would he that this devout woman Hortolana should be deprived of the
consolations and knowledge of this grace: for being near her childbirth, she
one day with great fervor prayed in a Church, and before a Crucifix, where she
besought almighty God to deliver her from the danger of death in her childbirth
which she much apprehended; and she heard a voice that said: Woman, fear not,
For thou shall safely and without danger bring forth a light that shall
illuminate and lighten all the world. Being thus comforted and admonished by
this divine answer; so soon as she was delivered of a daughter, she caused
her to be called in Baptism, Clare, firmly believing that in her should be
accomplished the splendor of the light promised, according to the providence
and ordonnance of the divine bounty.

Of the education, charity, prayer, mortification and virginity of saint
Clare.
THE II. CHAPTER.
Saint Clare being borne into the world, she began incontinently to appear
and to shine as a morning star in the obscure night of the world, for in the
most tender years of her first infancy she already discovered evident signs
of notable and pious worckes, wherein she made appear her natural worth, and
the graces which God had communicated unto her: for being naturally of a very
delicate constitution, he received of her mother the first foundations of
faith: afterward being inspired of God, to apply her self to virtuous and
pious worckes, she showed her self to be a vessel aptly prepared for divine
grace: and as she abounded in interior piety, as well by nature as by grace,
toward poor beggars, so according to the small means which the^ she had,
she supplied their necessityes. And to the end her sacrifice might be more
grateful unto God, the most delicate meats that were given her, for the
nourishment of her little body, she hid, and gave it secretly to the poor. Thus
did piety augment and increase in her, and nourished charity in her soul,
preparing her to receive the grace and mercy of almighty God. Her greatest
contentment was in prayer, whereby she was often sustained, made joyful, and
comforted as by an Angelical milk, and in a most delicious manner elevated to
the divine pleasures of the conversation of our lord JESUS CHRIST. In these
beginninges, having no beads, she used in steed thereof certain little stones,
some to serve for the Pater noster, and others for the Aues, and so she The
first beads of S. Clare.
offered her prayers to God. Whereupon beginning to feel the first feruours of
divine love, she judged that she must contemn all transitory appearance and
painted flowers of this world: and being by prayer well enstructed of the holy
Ghost, she resolved as a wise spiritual merchand to have no more regard of
terrestrial affairs, acknowledging them unworthy to be esteemed: and with
this Spirit she did wear as an other saint Cecilie, under her gay apparel,
a hair-cloth, so exteriourly satisfying the world, and interiourly her Lord
JESUS CHRIST.

But having attained the age of marriage, she was importuned by her Father and
other kindred, to choose a husband. Whereto she would never consent, but used
lingringes and delays, putting off and differring what she could, all humane
marriage, and ever recommended to our Lord JESUS CHRIST her virginity, with the
other virtues when with she was endued, by such exercises endeavoring to
please almighty God, that he might bestow on her his only Son for her Spouse.
Such were the first fruits of her spirit, and such the exercises of her
piety, so that being anointed with such a sweet and spiritual ointment, she
yielded a most pleasing savor, as shop replenished with most delightful
liquors, whose savors though they be shutt up, discover and manifest
themselves. In such sort that this holy virgin began, without her knowledge to
be commended by her neighbors, the true same of her secrett pious worckes so
publishing themselves, that in an instant they were exceedingly spread abroad,
and every where diuulged.

How the virgin S. Clare had knowledge of the virtues of the holy Father S.
Francis.
THE III. CHAPTER.
THis virtuous virgin Clare hearing the great same of the admirable life of S.
Francis, that then renewed unto the world the way of perfection in the same
city, with a merueillous example of piety and virtue, and considering that
many gentlemen did follow him, and that his life was already approved by our
holy mother the Church, she exceedingly desired to see and hear this worthy
servant of God, thereunto inspired by the sovereign Father of spirittes, to
whom had already bin presented the first fruits of their devotions, though
differently. S. Francis having bin advertised of this her desire, and having
heard the bruit of her virtues and holy affections, desired also exceedingly to
see her, and to confer with her, with intention to frustrate the world of so
noble and precious a pray, to present her unto our sovereign Redeemer, to
serve him in some notable enterprise, as preordayned of God to despoyle the
great prince of the world. Neither did his divine Majesty fail, to open unto
them the means: and to at taine thereunto, he inspired this virtuous woman to
rely on a very honorable grave woman, that governed her in her house as her
mother. And to the end this holy purpose might be sinisterly enterpreted of
men, and to hinder public murmr, she went out of her Fathers house with
this good womau, and found out the holy Father, by the fervor of whose pious
discourses, she was presently enflamed with divine love, and moved by his holy
actions which she admired, as seeming unto her more then humane. And therefore
she began very exquisitely to dispose her self to the effecting of the words
of the holy servant of God, who having very lovingly entertained her, began to
preach unto her the contempt of the world, and by evident reasons to
demonstrate unto her, that all the beauty of things present is but a vanity,
filled with false and deceit full hopes. Then he persuaded unto her pure
ears, the honorable and amiable espousale of JESUS CHRIST, and counsayled her
to conserve that most precious pearls of virginal purity, for that glorious
Spouse, who out of love he bare to the world being God became man and would be
borne of a virgin. This holy Father solicited this affair and played the
procuratour as a Paranimph and Ambassador of the heavenly king. The holy
virgin on her side beginning already to taste the sweetness of contemplation, and
the proof of the eternal joys, the world began to seem unto her vile and
contemptible as indeed it is, she as it were melting for the love of her
celestial Spouse, whom she already desired with all her heart. Thencefoorth
therefore she desprised precious stones, jewels, gold, sumptuous apparel, and
all other worldly trash as filth and donge, and abhorring the detestable
delights of the flesh, she resolved intierly to dedicate her self a lively
temple to JESUS CHRIST, and to take him for the only Spouse of her body and
soul: and so submitting her self totally to the counsels of the glorious
Father S. Francis, him, next after our Lord, she took for guide and directour
of her life.

How S. Francis drew the virgin S. Clare out of the world, and made her
Religious.
THE IV. CHAPTER.
ANd to the end the most clear Mirror of her soul might not be stained and
blemished with the dust of this world, and that the contagious seculer life did
not corrupt her innocence, the holy Father prude^tly endeavored to sequester
this virgin from worldly people. And the solemnity of palme-sunday approaching,
the holy espouse of JESUS CHRIST, wit a great fervor of spirit repaired to
this man of God, and most instantly demanded of him, when, and how she should
make her retire from the world. Whereupon the holy Father S. Francis ordained,
that one the day of the said feast she should go to the procession of palms
with the people, decked and adorned the most richly and gorgiously that she
could procure, and the night following goeing out of the city and withal out
of all conversation of the world, she should change seculer pleasures into
lamentations of the passion of our Lord.

Palme-sunday being come, the glorious S. Clare went in the company of her
mother and other ladies to the great Church, where there happened a matter
worthy to be recorded, as not done without the providence of the divine
goodness. Which was, that all the other ladies goeing, as is the custom of
Italy, to take holy palm, and S. Clare, out of a virginal bashfulnes,
remaining alone without moving out of her place, the Bishop descended the
steps of his seat, and putt into her hand a branch of palm.

The night approaching she began to prepare her self for effecting the
commandment of the holy Father, and to make a glorious flight and honorable
retire from the world, in honest company. But it seeming to to her impossible
to go forth at the ordinary and chieffest door of the house, she bethought
her self to take the benefitt of a back door, which (though it were damned up
with gross stones and mighty blocks) she with an admirable courage, and a
force rather of a strong man then a tender young woman, her self brake open.
Thus then leaving her fathers house, her city, kindred and friends, she with
extraordinary speed arrived at the Church of our lady of Angels, where the
Religious that in the house of God, were employed in pious watchinges, received
with burning wax lights in their hands, this holy virgin, that sought her
Spouse and Redeemer JESUS CHRIST with a lamp not extinct and empty, but filled
with divine love. And incontinently in the self same hour and place, having
left and abandonned the immondicities of Babilo^, she gave the world the ticket
of defiance and repudiation before the altar of the sovereign Queen of Angels,
where the glorious Father saint Francis, inspired of God, and neglecting all
other worldly respect, cut off her hair: then he clothed her with a poor
habitt of the Order, rejecting the jewels and gorgious attire which she
brought, to be given to the poor of JESUS CHRIST. It had not bin in deed
convenient that the new Order of flourishing virginity toward the end of the
world, should otherwhere begin then in the Angelical Palace of that most
emminent lady, who before had alone bin a mother and Virgin, and consequently
more worthy then all others. In the very same place had the noble cheualrie of
the poor of JESUS CHRIST, the Friar Minors, their beginning under the valerous
Captain saint Francis: to the end it might evidently appear that the mother
of God in this her habitation engendered and produced the one and the other
Religion. And so, as this new espouse had raceaued the habitt and ensigns of
holy penitence before the altar of the most sacred virgin Mary, the humble
seruante was accepted by JESUS CHRIST for his espouse, and the glorious Father
saint Francis conducted her to the Monastery of saint Paul in Assisium, where
were Religious women of the Order of S. Bennet, there to remain till almighty
God provided an other Monastery.

How much the kindred of S. Clare labored to retire her from Religion, and how
she was conducted to S. Damian.
THE V. CHAPTER.
THe kindred of this holy virgin understanding what she had done, and the bruit
of her resolution being diuulged over all the city, many of the kindred and
friends of her Father and mother assembled and consulted, to prevent this
virtuous virgin of her holy resolution: and coming to the monastery of the
Religious of saint Bennet, whither she was retired, they purposed to execute
by violence what they could not compass by humane reasons, trying their forces
against that meek lamb of JESUS CHRIST, and by their malice and perverse
counsel, seeking to delude that simple dove: then did they make her
deceitful promises, exhorting her to retire her self from such base condition
and abiection, demonstrating unto her that it was a matter unworthy her noble
descent, and that never the like happened in the city. But the virgin firm
and stable in JESUS CHRIST, approaching to the Altar, discovered her hairelesse
head, alleging that she could no more be separated from the service of JESUS
CHRIST, for whose love she had already forsaken all the world and themselves
also; and the more they tormented her, the more was her heart enflamed in the
love of JESUS CHRIST, he supplying her with new forces to resist. Thus for many
days together disturbed with many iniuryes, she endured great contradictions
in the way of God: and albeit her kindred perseuered in their attemptes to
withdraw her from her pious design, her fervor yett did never wax cold, nor
her heart feeble: but on the contrary, so many injurious words and violent
threats did so confirm her confidence in God, that her kindred were
constrained to forbear any more to vex and disquiett her, retyring themselves
as all ashamed and confounded. Thus did almighty God make appear, how much the
power of those that are his, though of themselves feeble, did exceed the strong
and puissant of the world.

But in regard that her soul had not perfect repose in that place, she was by
the holy Father saint Francis placed in the Church of saint Damian, and there
as in secure harbor, she cast the anchor of her soul, without ever changing
place, neither in respect of the great restraint thereof, nor for fear of
solitude, this church being without the city. This was the Church in
reparation whereof the glorious Father S. Francis labored in the beginning of
his conversion: and where also he offered money to the Chappelaine to repair
it: this holy Father being also in this church and praying with abondance of
tears, merited to hear the voice of the crucifix, before which he was, that
thrice reiterated unto him: Go Francis and repair my house, which as thou
see is ready to fall. The glorious virgin Clare for the love of her heavenly
Spouse, shutt her self up in that little place, and there imprisonned her
self, during her life sequestring her body from the turbulent tempest of the
world. This siluered dove there building her nest in the concauities of that
church, engendered the college of Virgins of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, there
institued a holy Covent, and gave a beginning to the Order of poor Religious
women, and thus being settled in the way of penance, she battered the hard
turfes of her members, with the coulter of the cross, and perfectly sowed the
seed of sanctity and justice, making with her very soul steps and traces of
vertuoue progress for the^ that were to follow her.

How the Virgin Agnes, sister to S. Clare, was by her fervent prays converted,
and of the persecutions she endured by her kindred, and how she was miraculously
freed of them.
THE VI. CHAPTER.
Saint Clare had a younger sister, who both in regard of blood and of poverty
was really her sister, she exceedingly desiring the conversion of this young
virgin, never failed in her most fervent devotions, which in her first days
she offered to almighty God, the most devoutly she possibly could with a
perfect affection, to beseech him, that as she had lived with her sister in the
world, there might be also between them a union of body and will in his
service, most instantly Importuning him to make appear to her sister whom she
had left in her mothers house, what a notorious deluder the world is, and how
full of coffeehouse: and on the contrary how sweet and contentfull is JESUS
CHRIST, and that consequently he would please to change her desired resolution
of carnal marriage, and cause her to embrace the vnio^ of divine love, and to
take for Spouse the king of glory. Now in regard that our lord had already
settled such an amity between these two sisters, that their separation was
afflictiue and troublesome unto them (though then their desires and wills were
far different) he made no delay to favor this his devout suppliant, even in
this first petition, which she so instantly required of him, and which his
divine Majesty so readily granted. Sixteen days then after her conversion,
her sister Agnes inspired of God, with a strong and prompt resolution gave a
slipp and farewell to the world, and came to her sister Clare, to whom
discovering the secrett of her heart, she said, she was resolved to serve God in
her company. Which the glorious Clare understanding, she most amiably embraced
her, and with a very joyful and contented countenance said: My most dear
sister, I give infinite thanckes to our lord JESUS CHRIST, that it has
pleased him to hear me, and deliver me from the affliction I endured for your
sake. This noble conversion of Agnes by the prayers of her Sister Clare, was
seconded by as many contradictions of her kindred: for these blessed sisters
serving our lord JESUS CHRIST and imitating his steps, she that had most taste
of God and was in highher progress, instructing her sister Nouice: their
kindred knowing that Agnes was with her sister Clare, twelve men of their
nearest blood, as Brothers, Uncles, and Cosen germans, assembled to assault
them and to combat the espouses JESUS CHRIST. The day following then, with an
extreme rage and fury they came to these holy virgins, yett at their first
coming, dissembling their lewd intension, they showed them some favorable
countenance: then addressing them selves to the virgin Agnes, dispairing of all
opinion to withdraw S. Clare from her holy purpose, they demanded of her
wherefore the was retired into that place; then willed her to deliberate and
resolve to return with them to her fathers house. Whereto she answered, that
she was resolved, the grace of God assisting her, to remain with her sister:
which answer one among them disdayning, full of passion and transported with
choler, took her by the hair, and gave her many blows with his feet and
sistes, then used all his force to pull her out of the place, which at length
by the help of the others he performed: for taking her in their arms, they
forcibly trayled her out. But this little daughter of JESUS CHRIST, seeing her
self violently wrested by those furious lions out of the arms of her God, she
began to cry to her sister, help me sister, and permit me not to be separated
from our Lord JESUS CHRIST and your loving company. Her carnal kindred trained
a long the valley this virgin of JESUS CHRIST against her will, and in despite
of her feeble, though courageous resistance, renting her clothes from her
tender body. In mean while saint Clare unable by other means to relieve her
sister, had recourse to prayer, with abondance of tears beseeching God to
voutsafe to give a courageous confidence to her sister, that his divine favor
defending his faithful servant, humane forces might be overcome, and our lord
heard her: for at the instant of her prayer, the body of the virgin Agnes,
miraculously became so weighty, that her kindred were at lenght enforced to
leave her one the ground. And albeit so many men and their servants putt all
their forces to lift her up, yet could they never do it, but called laborers
and worckmen of the vineyards that wrought therabout to assist them, yet their
great number no more auayled then the lesser. Finally the forces failing of her
kindred and those that attempted to assist them: they acknowledged the miracle,
though scornefully, saying: It is no marvel that she is so weighty she having
bin all night, as lead, whereupon Signeur Monalde her uncle in extreme passion,
lifting up his arm to strike her he presently felt an extreme pain therein,
which did not only torment him for the present, but a long time after. Hereupon
S. Clare (after her prayer) arriving, besought her kindred to forbear in vain
to contend with God, and to leave unto her the care of her sister, who lay as
half dead. They perceauing that they would never stagger in their pious
resolution, being exceedingly wearyed, left the two sisters together. This
troup then being departed, the tormented Agnes arose from the ground full of
joy in JESUS CHRIST, for whose love she had fought and overcome in this her
first conflict, against the world and his Prince the devil, by favor and
assistance of divine grace; and her sister asking her how she felt her self,
she answered, that notwithstanding all the affliction they had procured her,
by buffettes, beatinges, spurns with their feet and fistes, tearing by the
hair, trayning her through stony ways, she had felt in manner nothing,
especially by the virtue and force of divine grace, and next by the merittes of
her good prayers. Shortly after the holy Father saint Francis cut off her
hair, leaving her still her proper name, Agnes, in memory of the innocent lamb
JESUS CHRIST, who offering himself in sacrifice to his Father, gave resistance
to the world, fought valerously and overcame. And so the holy Father instructed
her with her sister, and taught her the way of God, in such sort that she so
increased and profited in Religion, in virtue and sanctity, that she was an
admiration to all the world.

Of the humility of the Virgin saint Clare.
THE VII. CHAPTER.
PRofound humility was the first assured stone and foundation which the holy
Virgin laid in the beginning of her Religion, after she had began to labor in
the way of God, so to advance and set forward the building of all other
virtues. She vowed obedience unto saint Francis, which vow in all her life she
never transgressed; and for three years after her conversion she desired
rather, with great humility to be subject, then a superior shunning the title
and office of Abbess, taking more content to serve among the servants of
JESUS CHRIST, them to be served. But being at lenght by the holy Father saint
Francis thereunto constrained, she undertook the government of the Religious,
which bred in her heart more fear then presumption, so that she rather
continued and became a servant, then free from subjection. For the more she
seemed to be raised to the office and title of dignity, the more did she repute
and esteem her self vile, and the more showed her self ready to serve, and
made her self more contemptible then all her Religious, both in habitt and
base service. She disdained not to do the office of servants, giving water to
the Religious to wash, whom she made often to sit, her self standing and
serving them at table. When she commanded any thing, it was unwillingly,
rather desiring to do, then to command others. She performed to the sick all
kind of services, were they never so loathsome, as to make clean the
immondicities and filthiness, shunning with so worthy a spirit, the loathsome
actions, nor abhorring or disdaining the most offensi^e savors. She often
washed the feet of the lay sisters, when they came from abroad, made them
clean, and with great humility kissed them. It one time chanced, that washing
the feet of a servant, and offering to kiss them, the servant unwilling to
permit such humility, pulled away her foot to avoid it, but she did it so
rudely, that she gave the holy virgin a dash on the face. Yet so far was this
Saint from being offended therewith, that on the contrary she mildly took the
foot of the servant again, and kissed the sole thereof. Thus did this true
espouse of God accomplish the doctrine of JESUS CHRIST, and Ioa.
the example which he left when he washed the feet of his Apostles.

Of the voluntary poverty of the Virgin saint Clare, and of her zeal to that
holy virtue.
THE VIII. CHAPTER.
THis holy virgin made a union and correspondence between her pouertye in all
external things and her holy poverty of spirit, and first at the beginning
of her conversion she made sale of her patrimony and birth right, al which
distributing unto the poor of JESUS CHRIST, she reserved nothing to her self.
Having so abandoned all the world exteriourly, and enriched her soul
interiourly, freed of the burden of worldly affairs, she ran far more
lightly after JESUS CHRIST, and thetby contracted such an inviolable amity with
holy poverty, that she would have possession of no other thing then the
glorious JESUS CHRIST, nor would she permit her spiritual daughters to
possess any thing else. And with this Evangelical trafique, she purchaced He
is too covetous whom God does not suffice.
the most precious pearl of celestial desire, in place of all the other
things which she had sold, acknowledging that the same could in no sort be
enjoyed together with the distraction and occupation of temporal things.
Giving instructions to her Religious, she would sometimes say unto them, that
this their company should be then grateful to God, should become very rich in
poverty, and should by such mean conserve it self firm and stable, if it
were always fortified and environed with the rampires and strong bulwarckes
of poverty. She also admonished her beloved daughters in our Lord JESUS CHRIST,
to conform themselves to him lying poor in the bed of poverty, who was no
sooner borne, but was by the most sacred virgin his mother laid in the narrow
cribbe.

Now desiring to entitle her rule by the title of poverty, she demanded of
Pope Innocent the fourth the privilege of poverty, who as a a Magnanimous
Prelat rejoicing at the great fervor of this holy virgin, exceedingly
commended this her devotion, assuring himself that the like privilege had
never bin demanded of the Apostolic sea. And to the end a new and
extraordinary favor might answer this new and unaccustomed demand, the holy
Pope with an exceeding contentment wrote with his own hand the first pattent
of the privilege. Which Pope Gregory the ninth his predecessor, of holy
memory, had also done, who with a Fatherly affection loving this espouse of
JESUS CHRIST, once gave her counsel, in consideration of the diverse
alterations of matters, and the strange events of times, yea and in regard of
the perils of future ages, to be content that her Order might have some
possessions, himself offering to bestow it on them: but she courageously
withstood it, and as a true, poor, and legitimate daughter of the Patriarch
poor S. Francis, would never accord thereunto. The Pope alleging that if she
feared the breach of her vow, he would absolve her thereof. This Virgin very
humbly answered him in these terms: Holy Father, I shall be very joyful if it
please your holiness to absolve me of all my sins. But to free me from
performing the Counsels of God, I will accept no absolution. This holy virgin
with an exceeding joy received the morcels of bread which the Religious brought
from begging, and had gotten for the love of God: But she was much troubled
when she saw whole loaves. She labored much to conform her self in all
conditions of perfections of perfect poverty with him that was poorly
crucified: And in such sort that no transitory thing might separate the most
poor virgin from her beloved, nor hinder her from her most ardent fervor to
follow our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

Of the miracles of the poverty of the glorious S. Clare.
THE IX. CHAPTER.
With a little loaf she fed two families.
IT happened one day that the glorious virgin S. Clare knew that there was but
one only loaf of bread in her Covent, and so the hour of dinner being come,
she called the despensier, and willed her to cut the loaf she had in her
custodye in two, and to send the one half to the Religious that were without,
and to keep the other for themselves, whereof she should make fifty portions,
there being so many Religious, and then should set it on the table of poverty.
Whereto the despesier answered that the miracles of JESUS CHRIST were needful
to make so many portions of so small quantity of bread. But S. Clare replied:
Daughter do only what I command thee: the Religious went presently to effect
the commandment of her Abbess: who in the mean while, together with all the
Religious applied themselves to prayer, presenting their devotions and tears
to their Spouse JESUS CHRIST, and instantly by his bounty the little the morcles
of bread so augmented in the hands of the despensier that cut it, that they
sufficied to feed all the Religious.

It happened an other time that the servants of JESUS CHRIST wanted oil, so
that they had not sufficient to dress meat for the sick: S. Clare being
advertised of this necessity, took a pott, which as mistres of humility she
washed with her own hands, then sent it to the turn wheel, that a Religious
man there might take it to go demand oil for the love of God. Having to this
effect caused to be called a Religious man to send him (as matters do not
succeed as men propose, but according to the pleasure of the divine and
merciful providence) S. Clare having recommended this necessity to almighty
God, the said Religious found the pott full of pure oil; which perceauing, he
thought the Religious within had required it without need; and with a kind of
murmr he said: I know not why the sisters have called me, their pott being
full of oil: So the miracle was discovered. Almighty God did often also by
extraordinary means supply the necessities of his poor servants, by the
meritorious prayers of saint Clare.

Of the austere mortifications, abstinences and fast of S. Clare.
THE X. CHAPTER.
I Doubt whither it be not more expedient to conceal, then to diuulge the
admirable affliction and rude penance of saint Clare, because this holy virgin
has performed such extreme mortifications, that many who shall read them
acknowledging themselves cowardes and overcome in this conflict, (as al we are)
and putt into admiration at these merueillous acts, will perhaps call in
question her prowesses, which is to oppugn the very truth. Is it not a great
matter that using one only habitt all patched, and a poor cloak of the
grossest cloth, she rather covered her body then defended it from the
importunities of the seasons? But it is more admirable that she never woare
stockinges, shoes, nor other thing on her feet, after she became Religious. It
was also a strange matter, that she fasted daily and never failed for
whatsoever occasion that happened. She never lay on mattresse, though that were
no singular praise unto her, all her Religious doing the like. This espouse of
JESUS CHRIST woare more then the rest a haircloth as great as half a tunicle,
made of hogs hair, the hair next her flesh being half shorn: She also
woare a hair cloth, which a Religious very importunately once borrowed of her:
but proving it to be so rude and sharp, she restored it to saint Clare three
days after, more readily then she had joyfully borrowed it. Her ordinary bed
was the bareground, except sometimes she slept on dry branches or twigges,
using for a pillow a block of wood. But in regard that the rigorous life
wherewith she so afflicted her body brought her to sickness, the holy Father
saint Francis commanded her to lie on chafe. The rigor of her abstinence in
her fastes was such, that she could not maintain her body in life, so little
did she eat, but that it is easy to judge she was sustained by divine virtue.
When she had her health, she fasted all the Aduent and Lent; and from Alsaintes
to Christmas with bread and water the sondayes excepted: and which is more
admirable, three days of the week, monday, wednesday and friday of the lent,
she did eat nothing at all: so that the commandment of fast, and the rigor of
her voluntary mortification seemed to have a contrariety each with other,
because the eve of a perfect or commanded fast, she used but bread and water.
Neither must it be admired if such a rigor of so long continuance, bred many
infirmities in this holy virgin, which wasted her forces, and overthrew all her
natural strenght and health of body. The devout Religious daughters of this
holy mother, had exceeding compassion of her, and very bitterly lamented her
voluntarily procuring her own death. For remedy whereof, saint Francis and the
bishop of Assisium forbad her those three days of fast, which every week she
cruelly inflicted on her self, and commanded her not to pass one day without
taking at least an ownce and a half of bread to conserve her life. And
albeitt such grievous affliction of the body do accustom to breed also some
affliction to the heart, yet did the contrary succed in her; for she carried a
countenance so gracious and joyful in all her austerities, that she seemed,
either to have no feeling of them, or not to fear any inconvenience thereof;
Yea, she in a sort scoffed at corporal afflictions: which sufficiently
demonstrated that the spiritual joy wherewith she was interiourly nourished,
appeared exteriourly in her holy face, because the true love of the heart,
always makes corporal afflictions easy and light.

Of the devotion and spiritual profitt which the fame of the glorious S. Clare
procured over all the world.
THE XI. CHAPTER.
THe fame of saint Clare began within little time to spread over all Italy,
which caused women from all parts to begin to run after the odor of the
precious liquour of her fanctity. The virgins after her example approached unto
JESUS CHRIST and made him presents of their virginity. Married women
endeavored to live more chaste and virtuously: Gentlewomen and Ladies
contemning their fair houses and sumptuous tables, shutt themselves into
Monasteryes, esteeming it a great glory to live in strict penance for the love
of JESUS CHRIST. This Saint was also a spur unto men, to excite in them a
violent fervor, and principally to youth, that began to take courage in the
contempt of the world, and by example of the frayler sex, to fight against the
temptations and deceiptfull pleasures of the flesh; Many married persons with
mutual consent obliged themselves to continency, the men entering into
Couentes of men, and the women into monasteryes of Religious women. The mother
induced the daughter to serve JESUS CHRIST, the daughter the mother, one sister
an other, and briefly each one by a holy envy desired to serve JESUS CHRIST,
all seeking to participate of the evangelical life which by this espouse of
JESUS CHRIST, was demonstrated unto them. An infinite number of virgins that by
her fame were induced to piety, unable to become Religious, or to leave their
Fathers houses, endeavored yet to live therein religiously, leading a reguler
life without rule. S. Clare by her example produced such branches of salvation,
that it seemed the saying of the Prophett was to be accomplished in her: The
fruits of the desolate and barren, are far greater then of the married. Whiles
these matters thus proceeded in Italy, the descent of this benediction, which
destilled down in the valley of Spoletum, grew, by divine providence to so
spacious and lardge a flood, that the violent current thereof over flowed all
the cities of the holy Church, so that the nouelty of such admirable things,
was speedily diuulged over all the world, and with such praise and admiration
gave such luster, that the nature of her virtues filled with splendor the
chambers of great ladies, and penetrated even into the great palaces of
Duchesses, yea those most pure beams of her brightness pierced into the very
cabbinettes of Queens and Princesses, in such sort that eminency of blood and
hight of nobility submitted and debased it self to follow the steps of this
glorious Virgin, many rejecting the beams of their honor, and the sublimity
of their estates, so that some ladies that could have bin married to kings and
dukes, induced by the fame of saint Clare, took upon them the practice of
strict penance: and many already married to men of great nobility, desired in
their estate to imitate this servant of JESUS CHRIST. An infinite number also
of cities were in this example adorned with Monasteries of young women: The
fields, and mountains were ennobled and enriched with the structures of these
celestial buildinges. The exercise and honor of chastity did multiply in the
world, saint Clare carrying the standerd of the Order of Virgins, which being
almost extinguished, she restored to perfection reneweing it by the blessed
flowers of her example and conversation. But retourning to the history, let us
speak of the perfection of the prayer of this glorious Virgin, by mean whereof
she obtained of God so great graces for her self and her daughters.

Of the fervent and perfect prayer of the Virgin, S. Clare.
THE XII. CHAPTER.
AS saint Clare was mortified in her flesh, and far remote from all corporal
recreation, so did she continually busye her soul in devotions and divine
praises. This virgin had fixed and imprinted the subtility of her fervent
desire in the eternal light: and as she was remote from earthly occupations and
rumors, so did she the more lardgely dilate the bosom of her soul to the
influence of divine grace. She continued in long prayer together with her
Religious after compline, the rivers of tears that flowed from her eyes
awakening and bathing the hearts of her companions: When the sleep of others
gave her opportunity to be solitary, being often in prayer, she would lay her
face against the earth bathed with tears, kissing it sweetly and with such
contentmenr, that she seemed always to hold in her arms her Spouse JESUS
CHRIST, at whose feet her tears trickled down, and her kisses left their
impressions.

It happened one time, that as this holy virgin powered out her tears in the
silent of the night, the Angel of darcknes appeared unto her in figure of a
black young man, saying: If thou continuest this extreme weeping thou will
become blind. Whereto she answered: He that is to see God, cannot be blind.
Wherewith the devil being confounded vanished and fled. The same night this S.
being in prayer, after matines, all bathed in tears, the temptor appeared
again unto her and said: Weep not so much, unless thou will have thy brain
to melt and distill, in such sort as thou shall avoid it at thy eyes and
nostrels, and therewith shall have thy nose crooked. S. Clare with great fervor
answered him: He that serves JESUS CHRIST can have no crookedness, and
presently the wicked spirit disappeared. Many signs did discover and make
known the great alteration she received in her self, in the fervor of her
prayer, and how sweet and delectable the divine bounty was unto her in this joy
and holy conversation: for when she returned from prayer, she with admirable
contentment, brought words enflamed with the fire of the altar of God, which
kindled the hearts of her Religious, and procured in them a great admiration
at this extreme sweetness that appeared and flashed out of her face. It is
without doubt, that almighty God had coupled and conjoined his sweetness with
her poverty, and did manifest exteriourly in her body, that her soul was
interiourly replenished with divine light. In this manner did she ordinarily
live full of so supreme delights, passing over this deceiptfull world with her
noble Spouse JESUS CHRIST, and being on this wheel of motion, she was thereon
sustained with an assurance and firmity of virtue, very stable, and preserved
with the celestial elevation of her soul, in the hight of heaven, keeping the
treasure of glory securely shutt up, with in a vessel of flesh, here below on
earth. This holy virgin accustomed to call up the younger Religious a little
before mattines, and to awaken them with the ordinary sign, to excite them
very often to praise God. All her Religious sleeping, she did watch, lighted
the lamp, and rung at mattines, so that negligence found no entrance into her
monastery: nor sloth had there any place. She also, by the sting of sharp
repreprehension, and of her lively and effectual examples, expelled tepedity
and ircksomnes in prayer and the service of God.

How the Mores were expelled the Monastery, by the prayers of S. Clare.
THE XIII. CHAPTER.
THis being the place where we should record the miracles of this holy virgin,
it is not convenient that we pretermitt them in silence: for as the merueillous
effects of her prayer are veritable, so also are they worthy of honor and
reverence. In the time of the Emperor Federick the second, the holy Church in
diverse places endured great persecutions, but particulerly in the valley of
Spoletum, which being subject to the Roman Church, dranck of the vessel of
wrath of this mischievous tyrant, his capitaines and soldiers being scattered
over the fields as grass hoppers, with sword to murder people, and with fire
to burn their houses. The impiety of this Emperor did so augment, that he had
assembled all the Mores that dwelt on the mountains and among the deserts, to
make himself the more fearful unto his vassels: and after he had by lardge
promises gained these Mores, and disposed them into diverse places, he gave them
at length for retire a very ancient but ruined city, which yet to this
present is called, Moura des Mores, which they fortifyed, and then thither
retired about twenty thousand fighting men, who did much mischeife over all
Apulia, and in other Christian places. These ennemies of the faith of JESUS
CHRIST came one day unexpectedly toward the cittye of Assisium, who being
already close to the ports, a great number of them came to the Monastery of
saint Damian, as a lewd and dissloyall nation that continually thirsts after
the blood of Christians, and dares to committ indifferently all kind of
execrable acts, without either shame of men, or fear of God. These Mores then
brake even into the Monastery of saint Clare, where she was with her Religious
daughters, who had their hearts surprised with an extreme terror: but much
more when they heard the barking and cry of those dogs so near them, so
that they were even dying with the apprehension, not knowing where to seek
relief, nor of whom to hope for deliverance from so emminent peril, but by
the merittes of their holy mother, Whom with infinite sighs and tears, they
advertised of what they heard and saw. This holy virgin (though sick)
encouraging her Religious, caused her self with incredible constancy to be
carried to the gate of her Monastery, at the entry whereof in the sight of all
her ennemies, she with very great reverence placed the most blessed sacrament
of the Eucharist, in the pix before which falling postrate on the earth, she
with abondance of tears thus spoke to her beloved Spouse JESUS CHRIST: Is it
possible my God, thy will should be, that these they servants, who cannot use
material weapons to defend themselves, and whom I have here brought up and
nourced in thy holy love, should now be delivered into the power of the
Infidel Mores? Oh my God! Preserve the^ if thou please, and me likewise: for
albeit thy divine Majesty has committed the^ to my government, yet is it not
in my power to defend the^ from so great a peril, since this protection cannot
be but by a worck of thine omnipotency: Therefore do I reco^mend the^ to thy
divine Majesty, with all the affection that I am able. As soon as this holy
virgin had sent these prayers unto heaven, she heard a voice so delicate as if
it had bin of a sucking child, that said: I will protect you for eue^: The holy
mother did not yet give over to present her prayers, saying: My God, I humbly
beseech thee, if so it be thy holy will, to preserve and defend this thy city
of Assisium, which does nourish us for the love it bears to thy divine
Majesty. Whereto God answered: This city shall suffer much, but in the end I
will by my favor defend it. Saint Clare having heard so gracious news,
lifted up her face bathed with tears, and comforted her beloved daughters,
saying. Dear Sisters, I assure you that no evil shall befall you: only be
careful to have a firm faith and confidence in JESUS CHRIST. The divine
assistance made no long delay: for the presumption and rage of the Mores was
incontinently cooled, so that a sudden unknown terror having surprised them,
they speedily retired over the walls which they had scaled and over leapt, to
enter: They being thus by the virtue of the prayer of saint Clare expelled,
she privately called the Religious that had heard the said voice of God, and
commanded them, that howsoever it were* they should not diuulge what they had
heard, during her life.

How the city of Assisium was an other time delivered by the prayer of this
holy Virgin.
THE XIV. CHAPTER.
ON an other time, one of the principal Capitaines of the Emperor Federick
called Vital d'Auerse, a man very ambitious of glory, full of courage and a
notable Captain, conducted his troops to besiege Assisiu^, and having
enco^passed it, he exposed to wast and spoil the plain contry therabout,
making a total ruin even to the very trees which were hewed down, and then
framing his siege, he uttered menacing and vaunting oaths, that he would not
stir thence, till he had given the city a victorious assault: and so this
siege so long continued that the besieged began to loose courage, as wanting
many things extreemely needful unto them. Whereof this holy servant of JESUS
CHRIST being advertised, sighing in her heart, she called all her Religious, to
whom she thus discoursed: My dear sisters, you know that all our necessities
have ever bin supplied by the charity of this city; so that we should prove
very ungrateful, if we should not according to our ability assist them in this
extreme necessity: then she commanded to be brought her, ashes, and all her
Religious to discoife their heads, and to give them example she began to cover
her bare head with ashes, wherein all the other Religious following her, she
said: Go ye to our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and with the greatest humility and most
fervent prayers that you can possible, demand of him the delivery of your
city. It cannot be expressed with what fervor and tears these devout virgins
incessantly offerred their prayers and tears unto God, one entier day and one
night, demanding mercy in behalf of the said city besieged by their
ennemies. These prayers and tears were of such force and virtue, that the
omnipotent in bounty and mercy had compassion of them, and from the day
following sent them his puissant assistance, in such sort that the ennemies
camp was defeited, the Captain constrained shamefully and in despite of his
forces without sound of trompett to raise his siege: for he fled without ever
after troubling the Assisians, being shortly after slain.

Of the reverence and devotion which S. Clare had to the most B. Sacrament, and
of the virtue of her prayers against the Devils.
THE XV. CHAPTER.
THe devotion of S. Clare toward the most precious Sacrament of the Altar
was such, that she made it apparent in many of her actions: for though she were
most grievously sick in her bed, yet would she so dispose her self therein, and
be so propped and stayed up that she might conveniently spinne, an exercise
which she exceedingly affected, and wherein she desirously employed her self,
and did it delicately: and with the thread of her labor, she caused to be
wouen very curious and fine cloth, which she employed in furniture for the
chalice. She one time got made 50. corporals which she sent in cases of silk
to many Churches of the valley of Spoletun. When she was to receive the most
sacred Sacrament, before she presented her self thereunto, she was always
bathed in tears, and so with exceeding fear approaching, she did reverence
him that was hidden in the Sacrament, as acknowledging him to be the same that
governs heaven and earth. Therefore did the devils so much fear the prayer of
the espouse of JESUS CHRIST S. Clare, as they have sundry times declared.

A very devout woman of the bishopric of Pisa came to the monastery of S.
Damian to thanck God and his servant S. Clare, for having bin by her merittes,
delivered of five devils that possessed her, which in goeing out of her body,
confessed that the prayer of S. Clare did burn them, and to their great
confusion expelled them out of the humane bodies which they possessed.

Of a merueillous consolation which S. Clare received on the feast of the most
holy Nativity.
THE XVI. CHAPTER.
AS the glorious S. Clare was always in her sickness with a lively memory
mindful of her beloved JESUS, so was she correspondently visited by him in her
necessities. As once in the night of the Nativity when the world and Angels did
so solemnly feast for the birth of our Redeemer, all the Religious went to the
quier to Matines, and left their holy Mother accompanied only with her grievous
infirmity: wherefore having begun to meditate on the great mystery of that
night, and lamenting exceedingly that she could not assist at the divine
service, she sighing said. O my God, thou see how I remain here alone! and
ending this, she began to hear the Mattins that were sung in the Church of S.
Francis in Assisium, very distinctly understanding the voice of the Religious
and the very sound of the Organes: yet was she not so near the said Church as
she might humanly hear what was song there: but it must necessarily be
concluded, that this was miraculously don in one of these two sorts: either
that the singing of the said Religious was by the will of God carried to S.
Clare, or her hearing was extended extraordinarily, and by special grace of
God, even to our Lady of Angels near unto Assisium. But this S. was further
favored by a divine revelation, which exceedingly comforted and rejoiced her
for she was by almighty God esteemed worthy, to see in spirit his holy cribbe.
The morning following, her Religious coming to see her, she said: Dear
sisters, blessed be our Lord JESUS CHRIST, that it has pleased him, not to
leave me alone, as you have don: but know that by the grace of his divine
Majesty, I have heard all the solemnity and all the service that this night
has bin performed in the Church of our holy Father S. Francis.

Of the spiritual doctrine wherewith S. Clare nourced and elevated her
daughters.
THE XVII. CHAPTER.
THe virgin S. Clare acknowledged that she was committed to the Palace of the
great king, for gouernesse and Mist^esle of his dear espouses, therefore did
she teach them a sublime doctrine, and did comfort and assist them with such
love and pity, as with words cannot be expressed. First she taught them to
clear their souls of all rumors of the world that they might the more freely
attain to the high secrettes of God. She also taught them to have no affection
to their carnal kindred, and entierly to forgett their own house, the better
to please JESUS CHRIST. She admonished them also to surmount and misprise the
necessities of the body, and to get a habitt of repressing the deceiptes and
appetites of the flesh, by the bridle of reason. She likewise taught them that
the subtle ennemy, armed with malice continually addresse^h his hidden snares
to surprise the pure souls, and that he tempts the pious in other sort then
worldlinges. Finally she would have them so employed in handy labor for
certain hours, that they might afterward be more promptly prepared to the
desire of their Creator, by the exercise of prayer, which after their labor
they should undertake, not leaving for such pain, the fire of holy love, but
rather by it, expelling the tepedity of devotion already purchaced. There was
never seen a st^^cter observation of silence then among them, nor a greater
form and example of virtue. Never was there seen don in this holy house one
act of vanity, neither by word, nor signs, nor was there discovered by any
vain discourse any desire of lightness, so much were they mortified. Their holy
mistress gave good example by words and by her pious and brief documentes,
she taught her duciples fervent desires, admonishing them to possess and
conserve them under the keys and custody of strict silence. By mean of deuou^
Preachers she procured to her daughters, the holy word of God, whereof her own
was not the least part, she being filled with contentment and joy when she
heard the word of God preached, would with such devotion and consolation
rejoice in the memory of her sweetest Spouse JESUS CHRIST, that one time
hearing the sermon of Brother Philipp de Adria, a most famous preacher, there
was seen before this holy virgin a most beautiful child, which there remained
during almost all the sermon, comforting her with his joyful delectations, of
which apparition she received such a sweetness and delight, as she could no way
explicate.

Albeit this most prudent virgin had never studied, yet did she much delight to
hear a learned man preach, well knowing that under the words of science lay
hidden the sweetness of spirit, which her self more subtility obtained and
tasted with more savor. She accustomed to say, that the sermon of whosoever
preaching the word of God was exceeding profitable to souls, considering that
it is no less prudence to know how sometimes to gather beautiful and sweet
flowers from a mong gross and rude thorns, then to eat fruittes of a good
plant.

Pope Gregory the ninth one time at the instance of diverse Prelates, commanded
that no Religious should preach at the monastery of poor Religious women
without his express permission: wheratt the pitiful mother complaining, in
regard that thenceforward her daughters should seldom be spiritually fed with
holy doctrine, with tears she said: Let then all my Religions be taken hence,
since they are taken away who gave us the food of spiritual life. And with all
sent away the Religious that appertayned to her monastery to serve them in
getting almose abroad, refusing to have Religious that should provide them
bread to relief the body, since they were deprived her that gave them bread to
nourish their souls. Whereof his Holiness being advertised he revoked his
prohibition, referring all to the disposition of the General of the Friar
Minors.

S. Clare had not only care of her daughters souls, but of their bodies also
that were feeble and tender, for whose necessities she provided with exceeding
fervor and charity. For she often in the night when it was cold went to visitt
and cover them, whiles they slept. And if she found any overmuch benumbed with
cold, or otherwise in ill disposition through strict observation of the commune
rigor, she commanded them to take some recreation, till their necessities were
satisfied. If any of her daughters were troubled with temptations, or were
sorrowful or melancholy, she would call her a part and lovingly comfort her.
Sometimes she would fall to the feet of those that were heavy and afflicted, to
putt away the force of their grief by her motherly cherishinges, for which
they yelding themselves to this their holy mother, did not prove ungrateful.
They reverenced the office of Prelature in their mistress, and followed the
conduct of so diligent and secure a guide, and aiming their actions by the
espouse of JESUS CHRIST, they admired the excellency of such a sanctity and
charity.

Of the devotion which Pope Gregoire the ninth bad to the virgin saint Clare,
and of a latter which he wrote unto her whiles he was yet Cardinal.
THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
POpe Gregory the ninth had a merueillous confidence in the prayers of saint
Clare, having experienced their great virtue and efficacy, and often times
when he was in any difficulty, both whiles he was Cardinal and bishop of
Hostia, and afterward when he was Pope, he would by letters recommend
himself to this glorious virgin, demanding help of her, because he knew of
what importance her assistance was; this being in him not only a great
humility, but also worthy to be dilligently imitated, to see the vicar of JESUS
CHRIST on earth to beg help of a servant of God, in reco^mending himself to
her prayers. This great Pastor knew well what divine love could do, and how
freely pure virgins do find the port of the consistory of the divine Majesty
open. There is extant a very devout letter of this Pope, written to saint
Clare whiles he was Cardinal, which is here inserted to make appear that the
spirit of God made his residence in this Prelat, and what devotion he carried
to the sanctity of the glorious saint Clare.

To the most dear sister in JESUS CHRIST and mother of his holiness, sister
Clare the servant of JESUS CHRIST, Vgolin miserable sinner, Bishop of Hostia
recommendeth himself, what soever he is and what he may be. Well beloved
sister in CHRIST JESUS, since the hour that the necessity of my return
separated me from your holy speeches, and deprived me of that pleasure to
confer with you of celestial treasures, I have had much sorrow of heart,
abondance of tears in mine eyes, and have felt an extreme grief. In such sort
that if I had not found at the feet of our Lord JESUS CHRIST the consolation
of his ordinary piety, I fear I had fallen into such anguishes as my spirit
would have forsaken me, and my soul would have utterly melted away, and not
without reason, because that joy failed me, with which I discoursed with your
good company of the body of our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST and of his presence on
earth, celebrating the feast of Easter with you and the other servants of our
Lord. And as whiles our Savior by his dolorous passion and death was absent
from the presence of his disciples, they were possessed with an extreme grief
and affliction, so does your absence procure my desolation: and though I
acknowledged my self a grievous sinner, considering the prerogative of your
merittes and the rigor of your holy Religion, I know not out of doubt but that
the number and gravity of my sins are such, and so much have I offended God
the universal Lord, that I am not worthy to be united to the society of the
elect, nor to be sequestered from worldly occupations, if your tears and
prayers do not obtain me pardon of my sins. And therefore to you I committ
my soul, to you I comme^d my spirit, as JESUS CHRIST on the cross
recommended his spirit to his Father, to the end that in the terrible day of
the universal judgment you give an account for me, if you be not diligent and
careful of my salvation. For I confidently believe that you may obtain of the
sovereign Judge whatsoever by your devotion and your tears you shall demand
of him. The Pope speaks not of coming to Assisium, as I desire: but I
purpose to visitt you and your sisters at my first commodity. Recommend me to
Agnes your sister and mine, and to all your other sisters in JESUS CHRIST.

Of the confirmation of the first rule of saint Clare, inserted with her rule.
THE XIX. CHAPTER.
THe holy Father saint Francis by instruction of the holy Ghost, made a rule
for saint Clare, and the Religious that intended to follow her, distinguished
and ordered by chapters convenient, and conformable to the Rule of the Friar
Minors, which rule this holy Father imparted unto Cardinal Vgolin, then Bishop
of Hostia, who was Protector of his Order, and was after Pope by the title of
Gregory the ninth, who was very affectionate unto him, and confirmed the said
rule in the rigor of a strict poverty and austerity of life, not by bulle, but
only of his Apostolical authority, and viua voce. The Order of saint Clare
had not this rule confirmed by authentical bull, till the third year of the
Popedom of Innocent the fourth, which was the year 1245. when the said Pope
at the instance of certain Prelates and of certain Abbesses of the Religion
of saint Clare, instituted the second rule for the virgins of this Order,
under the title of the enclosed Religious of the Order of saint Damian, in
which rule he dispe^sed with the Religious touching their vow of poverty in
commune, and the confirmation of this rule passed in the city of Lions, which
dispensation exceedingly afflicted saint Clare and all her Companions, for
the zeal they had to the observation of the holy Evangelical poverty. And not
only the monasteries which desired the said dispensation and rule of Innocent
the fourth, did accept the same, but even other monasteries were enforced to
receive and follow it. But the Pope being afterward better informed, commanded
the General and all the Prouincialls, that they should in no sort constrain
the Abbesses and Religious of the Order of S. Clare and of S. Damian to observe
the rule which he had newly instituted: but willed and commanded that the first
rule given by the holy Father saint Francis at the beginning of his religion,
and confirmed by Pope Gregory the ninth, should be perpetually observed,
commanding and commending it to the Cardinal of Hostia Protector of the Order,
to see it observed, notwithstanding whatsoever appellations, and letters
obtained or to be obtained.

The bull of Pope Innocent the fourth, at the instance of S. Clare, for
renewing the grant made by Pope Gregory the ninth
That the Religious of S. Damian may not have goods in propriety. Taken out of
the 10. book and put here in due place.
INnocent Bishop, servant of the servants of God: to his beloved daughter in
JESUS CHRIST Clare, and to the other Sisters of the Monastery of saint Damian
of Assisium, as well present as to come. Health and Apostolical benediction.
Because it is manifest that desiring to be dedicated only unto God, you have
sold all your substance to distribute it among the poor, the better to
renounce cogitations and desires of temporal things, and that you have a
firm resolution not to posses in whatsoever manner, any kind of possessions,
nor immovable goods, in althinges following the steps of him that for us
became poor, the true way, verity and life: The necessity and want of
corporal things being unable to deter or separate you from this firm
resolution, Cant. 1.
because the left hand of the celestial Spouse is under your head, to sustain
the great weakness of your body, which you have subjected to the law of the
spirit with an exceeding fervor and charity. This Lord also Matt. 6.
that feeds the birds and cloatheth the flowers of the fields, will reward
you with himself in eternity, when his right hand shall embrace you in the
perfect sight of him. Considering withal that with great humility you demand
of us that of our Apostolical favor we confirm your said resolution taken to
follow most strict poverty: We by the to nour of these presents do grant
you, that you may not be constrained by any whoseuer, to take, have, nor to
retain temporal possessions. And if any sister either will not, or cannot
observe this rule, let her not remain with you, but let her incontinently be
putt in some other place. We ordain and command that no person, of whatsoever
quality or condition he may be, presume to trouble your Monastery. And if any
person ecclesiastical or seculer knowing this our* constitution and
confirmation, be so rash as to attempt in whatsoever manner against it, and if
after three several times reprehended and advertised, he do not amend, and
make satisfaction answearable to his default, let him be deprived of his
office, dignity and honor, and let such person be reputed as already
condemned for his impieties by the judgment of God, and therefore let him be
cut off from the most holy communion of faithful Christians, and be obliged
to the divine vengeance at the last judgment. But they who shall love you in
JESUS CHRIST and your Order; and especially the Monastery of saint Damian, the
holy peace of God be with them, that they may receive the fruit of their good
worckes, and find the recompense of eternal beatitude in the day of the
rigorous and last judgment.

The sequel of the aforesaid ninth chapter.
AFterward the same Pope confirmed the first rule v^uae vocis oraculo with his
own mouth, formerly approved by the said Pope Gregory the ninth his
predecessor, and by the Cardinal of Hostia Protector, who by commission
received from his holiness had approved the same, in such sort that this first
rule was renewed into force. This Pope Innocent afterward confirmed it by his
bull in the city of Assisium, the eight of August, the second year of his
Papacy. Whereunto he was enforced by the devotion and most humble request of S.
Clare.

Apostolical confirmation of the rule which S. Francis gave to S. Clare.
INnocent Bishop servant of the servants of God, to our well-beloved daughters
in JESUS CHRIST, Clare Abbess and to the other sisters of the monastery of S.
Damian at Assisium, health and Apostolical benediction. The Apostolical sea
accustometh to consent unto just desires, and liberally to favor the virtuous
and pious requests of them that seek the same. And because you have humbly
required us, touching the rule according to which you ought to live in common
in one spirit and vow of most high poverty, the same rule having bin given you
by the holy Father S. Francis and by you received of him with much co^tentment,
and which rule our venerable Brother the Bishop of Hostia of Veltre approved,
according as is more amply contained and declared in the letters of the said
Bishop, conformable to the commandment which we gave him to approve it by
Apostolical authority to that effect committed unto him, desirous now to
accord unto your requests, we confirm again by these prese^tes the said rule
by our Apostolical authority, causing the tenor of this rule to be written
word by word in these presents, as follows.

Vgolin by the grace of God Bishop of Hostia and of Veltre, to his most dear
mother and daughter in JESUS CHRIST, Clare Abbess of S. Damian at Assisium,
and to her Religious as well present as to come, health and Fatherly
benediction. For so much as you my well-beloved daughters in JESUS CHRIST,
despising the pompes and delights of the world, and following the warlike
course of JESUS CHRIST and of his most sacred mother, have chosen to dwell
corporally enclosed to serve God, we commending your pious resolution, are
willing benignely to grant with a good will and Fatherly affection your
demandes and holy desires. And therefore inclining to your pious petitions, we
by the Popes and our own authority do confirm, for you and all those that
shall succeed in your Monastery, the form and rule to live by mean of a holy
union and of the most high and sublime poverty, which the glorions Father
saint Francis has given you to observe, as well by word as by writing: which
rule is here under specifyed as follows.

The rule of the Religious of S. Clare, called Damiates.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
WE are to begin the rule and form of life of the sisters which the glorious
Father S. Francis instituted, which is in observation of the holy Ghospel,
living in obedience and chastity, without any propriety. Clare the unworthy
servant of JESUS CHRIST, and the little plant of the holy Father S. Francis,
promises obedience and reverence to Pope Innocent and to his successors
canonically elected, and to the Roman Church. And as she in the beginning of
her conversion together with all her sisters, has promised inviolable
obedience to his successors, let all her other sisters be in like sort for
ever obliged to obey the successors of S. Francis, and sister Clare, and other
Abbesses that shall succeed her canonically elected.

How the Religious must be received into Religion.
THE II. CHAPTER.
IF any Virgin or woman divinely inspired present her self to you to be
admitted to this course of life, let the Abbess be obliged to damaund advise
of her sisters: and if the greater part consent thereto, she may receive her,
after permission had of the Cardinal Protector of the Order. Bur before the
habitt be given her, let her very diligently examine her, or cause her to be
examined touching the Catholic Faith, and the holy sacraments of the Church.
And if she be found sincerely faithful in those matters, and do loyally
confess them, and promise entierly to observe them, and that she be not
married, or if having a husband he by consent of the Bishop of the Diocese
become Religious, having vowed continency, and she not having other
impediment, as ouer-aged or infirm, or want of judgment, and discretion to
observe such course of life, let the manner and rule of living be dilligently
declared unto her: then being found capable, the words of the gospel be
denounced unto her, that she go and sell all she has, and endeavor to
distribute it unto the poor: which if she cannot effect, her good will shall
suffice. And let the Abbess and other sisters be careful not to confound
their cogitations with her temporal affairs: but let them leave that care to
her, that she dispose of her substance as our Lord shall inspire her. And if
she demand counsel of them thereupon, let them direct her to some virtuous
person that fears God, by whose counsel she shall dispose of her goods
among the poor. After that, having cut her hair about her garment, and
discloathed her of her seculer attire let be given her three coats, one
cloak, and let her no more be permitted to go out of the Monastery without
profitable, manifest and probable occasion. The year of her probation expired,
let her be received to obedience, promising perpetually to observe the life
and rule of our poverty. None may wear the veil but after the year of
probation and nouitiat: the sisters also may wear a cloak, to be more lighty,
decently and commodiously prepared to labor. Let the Abbess discretly
provide the^ clothing according to the qualities of the persons, places and
time, and correspondent to necessity. The virgins that are received into the
monastery before their age convenient, let their hair be cut, and being
disattired of their seculer garments, let them be clothed with the same
cloth that the other Religious do use, as it shall please the Abbess, and
having attained age convenient, let them be clothed as the other, and make
their probation. And let the Abbess commend them, as also the other Nouices
to a mistress, whom she should choose of the most virtuous of the monastery,
who shall carefully instruct them according to the order of our profession.
Let the form aforesaid be observed in the examination made to receive the
sisters that are to serve without the Monastery, and they may wear hose and
shoes, and let no woman or maiden dwell in the Monastery among you, if she be
not received according to the form of your profession. My dear and well-beloved
sisters, I admonish, pray, and require you for the love of JESUS CHRIST, who
coming into the world was wrapped in poor cloutes, and then by his most
sacred mother laid in a manger, that you always cloth your selves with the
poorest and coursest cloth, and the meanest that you can possibly.

Of the manner of saying the divine office, of fasting, and of the time of
communicating.
THE III. CHAPTER.
THe Religious that can read, shall say the divine office according to the use
of the Friar Minors, when they may have a Breuiary, and shall read it without
singing, and they who sometimes upon some light impediment, cannot read the
office, shall say their Pater nosters as the others sisters that cannot read,
who shall say for their Mattins twenty four times the Pater noster, for Lauds
five, For the Prime, Third, Sixth, and Ninth hour for each seven times the
Pater Noster, for the Euensong twelve times, and for Compline seven times.
They also shall say for the euensong of the dead, seven times the Pater Noster
with Requiem aeternam, and for the Matins twelve times. And the sisters that
can read shall say the office of the dead. When any Religious of the Monastery
shall dye, the sisters shall say fifty Pater Nosters for her soul.

The sisters, shall fast at all times: but on the Nativity of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, fall it on whatsoever day, they may eat two meals. The young, the
weak, and the servants that live out of the Monastery, may be dispensed
withal for their fastes by mercy and charity, according to the discretion of
the Abbess. But in time of manifest necessity, the sisters shall not be
obliged to corporal fast.

Let them with permission of the Abbess, confess twelve times in the year:
let them be exceeding wary not to entermingle any words in their confession,
but what is necessary thereunto and for the salvation of their souls.

Let the sisters communicate seven times a year, to wit at the Nativity of
our Lord, Maundie thursday, at Easter, Ascension day, Whitsonday, on the
Assumption of the Virgin Mary, and Alsaintes: since the canonization of saint
Francis, for the eight communion, is added the day of his feast. It shall be
permissable for the chappelain to communicate the sick within the Monastery.

How the Abbess is to be chosen.
THE IV. CHAPTER.
THe Religious shall be obliged to observe the canonical form in election of
their Abbess, where they shall endeavor to have the General of the Friar
Minors, or at least the Provincial, who may by the word of God unite them,
and admonish them to agree, touching the election of their Abbess, to do what
shall seem to them most profitable aduertising them not to choose a Religious
that is not professed: and if one should be elected before profefsion, and made
Abbess by any other mean, let not such Abbess be obeyed, till she have made
profession conformably to the ordonances and to the rule of our poverty. And
the term of her chardge being ended, let an other be chosen. And if sometimes
after the election of the Abbess all the sisters judge her incapable of such
chardge for the good of the service of God and of their Monastery, let them be
bound and obliged to choose an other, as soon as they can according to the
said rule.

And let her that shall be chosen consider well what is the burden which she
has taken on her, and to whom she must yield an account of the sheep whereof
she has taken chardge. Let her endeavor to be rather Superior to precede
her Religious in virtues and pious conversation, then in honor and dignity: to
the end that the sisters induced by her example, obey her more for love then
for fear.

Let not her carry any particular affection, for fear that in loving one she
may scandalize others, let her comfort the afflicted, and be always the first
and last in assisting art divine service. Let her be the relief and recourse
of the afflicted, that if the remedies of salvation fail them, she at least
exempt and deliver them from the disease of despair. Let her have a very
diligent care of the comunalty in all things, but principally in the Church,
in the dormitory, in the refectory, in the infirmary, and in their clothing:
And let her Vicaresse be in like sort obliged to all the aforesaid.

Let the Abbess be obliged to assemble all her Religious in the chapter at
least once a week, in which place as well she as the others, shall accuse
themselves of all their public sins and of all their defaultes and
negligences. Then let her there treat and consult with her sisters of the
affairs of their Monastery, because God does oftentimes communicate and give
his spirit to the meanest of the company.

Let her not enter into great or important debt, but by the common consent of
all the Religious and upon a manifest necessity, and withal let it be by the
entermile and mediation of the Procuratour of the monastery. Let the Abbess,
as also the sisters, be careful not to receive any pledge or gage into their
Monastery in regard of the troubles, encombers, and scandales that often arrive
thereby. Let all the officers of the monastery be also elected by the common
consent of the Religious, the better to entertain peace and fraternall union
among them; and likewise shall be chosen and elected at least eight Religious of
the most discreet, of whom the Abbess shall be obliged to take counsel in
such matters as our rule requires. The Religious likewise may and ought, if
they know it to be necessary, put out such officers as are indiscreet and
incapable, and choose others in their places.

Of silence and of the manner of speaking in the speak house and at the grate.
THE V. CHAPTER.
THe sisters shall keep silence from Co^pline till the Third hour, those
except that serve without the monastery. But let it be always kept in the
dormitory and in the Church, as also in the refectory at the hour of repast,
saving in the infirmary were the Religious may always speak discreetly for
the recreation and services of the sick. They may also briefly and in a low
voice open their necessities. It shall not be permissable for any sisters to
speak at the speakehouse or grate with out permissio^ of the Abbess or of
her Vicaresse. And let not those that have leave to speak in the speakehouse,
presume to speak there but in the presence of two sisters, that may hear
whatsoever is there spoaken. But let them not presume to go to the grate, if
there be not at least three sisters present, sent by the Abbess or her
Vicaresse, who shall be of those that are chosen by the Religious to be
Counsailers to the Abbess. And let the Abbess and Vicaresse be obliged to
observe this order of speaking as much as shall be possible, and let not any
speak at the grate but very rarely, and at the gate never. Let there be
putt before the grate within to cover it, a curtain of black cloth, which
shall not be drawn but for more convenient hearing the sermon, or when a
sister would speak with any one: Let no Religious speak at the grate with
whom soever in the morning before the sun arise, not at night after the
sun is set. Let there be always a black cloth before the speakehouse
within-side, which shall never be drawn. Let no sister speak in the lent of
S. Martin, nor in the ordinary lent in the speakehouse but to a Priest, to
confess, or for some other manifest necessity, which shall be referred to the
discretion of the Abbess, or her Vicaresse.

That the Religious may not receive nor have any Possessions, nor any thing
proper, in their own, or any third persons Custody.
THE VI. CHAPTER.
Here is an adiunction of S. Clare, proper to her rule, which has bin here
annexed since the death of S. Francis.
IT having pleased he most high celestial Father to illuminate my heart with
his divine grace, that I might do penance by the example and doctrine of the
holy Father S. Francis, a little after his conversion, my self and my Religious
promised obedience unto him. Now the holy Father seeing that we feared no kind
of poverty, labor, affliction, or contempt of the world, yea that all these
things did exceedingly content us, having compassion of us, he prescribed unto
us a rule to live in this manner. Since you are become daughters and servants
of the most high, by divine inspiration of our Redeemer, and that you have
resigned and committed your selves to the conduct of the holy ghost, I will and
promise for my self and my Religious to have always care of you as of our
selves, and this with a particular care and diligence: which I will carefully
accomplish and observe during my life, and will that my Religious very
diligently accomplish and observe the same for ever. Now to the end we might
never leave the most holy poverty which we have undertaken, and that this might
be known to those that shall succeed us, a little before his death he left us
his last will in these terms: I Br. Francis poor wretch and caitife, will
follow the life and poverty of my most high Lord JESUS CHRIST, and of his most
holy mother, and therein persevere to the end. And I beseech all you poor
sisters, and counsel you to live always in this most holy life of poverty,
and above althinges to keep your selves from forsaking it, upon whose counsel
or doctrine soever that would persuade you the contrary. But now as my self
and also all my sisters have ever bin careful to observe the holy poverty
which we have promised to God and to our holy Father S. Francis, I desire also
that the Abbesses, which shall hereafter come to succeed me in this chardge, be
obliged, with all their Religious, to have diligent and inviolable care not to
receive possessions, inheritances, or other things proper whatsoever reserved
of their own, or from others that may give them, nor whatsoever other thing
that may be called proper, but that which shall be needful to a requisite
necessity of the Monastery. Nevertheless they may have and possess a little
ground to make a garden, to supply the necessities and services of the sisters.

How and in what sort the Religious must labor and exercise themselves.
THE VII. CHAPTER.
THe sisters to whom God has given grace and ability to labor, after the
third hour they may employ themselves in some decent exercise and convenient
to their profession, that may be for the common profitt, sincerely and
devoutly: yet in such sort that expelling idleness, the capital ennemy of the
soul, the spirit of holy prayer and devotion be not extinguished, whereto all
other te^porall things ought to serve. And what they shall have wrought with
their hands, they shall bring to the chapter before all the other Religious,
delivering the same to the Abbess or to her vicaresse. The same shall likewise
be done touching all the alms that shall be sent to the monastery, by whom
soever, that some prayers be offered in common, for such benesactours: and then
such things shall be distributed according to the common necessity, by the
Abbess or her vicaresse, with the consent of the discreet or Counsailers of
the Abbess.

That the Religions may not appropriat any thing to them selves, and of the
sick sisters.
THE VIII. CHAPTER.
Let not the Religious have any thing in propriety: but let them serve God in
this world as pilgrims and strangers in all poverty and humility, seeking
almose with confidence, and they must not be ashamed thereof, considering that
our Lord JESUS CHRIST became poor for us in this world. It is this sublimity
of the most high poverty, that makes and instituteth you, my beloved sisters,
heirs of the cestiall kingdom, making your selves poor of temporal
commodities, to be ennobled with celestial virtues. Let it be your part and
portion, to conduct you to the land of the living: whereto to arrive my dearest
sisters, for the love of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, despise and have no regard to
get any other thing.

Let it not be permitted to any Religious to send or receive letters, nor to
take or convey any thing in, or out of the Monastery without leave of the
Abbess. Let it neither be permissable to any Religious to keep any thing that
is not given or permitted her by her Abbess or Vicaresse. And if their kindred
or others send any thing to the Religious, let the Abbess cause it to be
delivered: And if that Religious to whom it is sent have need thereof, she may
use it: if not an other that has need may of charity use it. And if money be
sent, the Abbess by advise of the discreetes, shall therewith provide and
supply the wants of her to whom it is sent. Let the Abbess be obliged to
have care of the sick sisters, as well to comfort them, as to procure by her
self and others, that which their infirmity requires, touching their diett
and other things necessary, according to the possibility of the place: and
let them be provided for with charity and compassion: Considering that all the
Religious are bound to sssist, succor and serve their sick sisters, as they in
the like case would expect of others. And let one sister securely manifest and
discover her necessities to an other: in regard that if she that is a true
mother, do love and cherish her carnal child, with what greater diligence
and care ought a sister to love and cherish her spiritual sister? and therefore
it shall be permitted to lay the sick on beds of chafe, and to give them a
pillow filled with down or soft feathers, and they that have need to be laid
on Matteresses filled with wool, and to have coueringes, it may be granted
them. When the said sick sisters shall be visited by them that enter into the
monastery, they may briefly answer them in discourse of edification. And
let not the others sisters that shall have leave to speak, yet presume to do
it to those that enter into the Monastery, if there be not two of the
discreetes present to hear what they shall say, whom the Abbess or her
Vicaresse shall nominate: and let the Abbess her self and the Vicaresse be
obliged also to observe this form of speaking.

Of the penance fit to be given to the Religious upon occasions, and of the
manner of negotiation without the Monastery.
THE IX. CHAPTER.
IF any Religious be so forgetful as to sinner mortally against the rule or
institutions of your profession, by the instigation of the devil, having bin
once and twice reprehended and chaptered for it by the Abbess, and even by the
other Religious, without amendment: As many days as she remains obstinate
let her eat but bread and drinck water in the refectory, before all the other
sisters and upon the ground: afterward let her be enjoined to a greater
pe^nance, at the pleasure of the Abbess. And let her be prayed for, during
her abstinencie, demanding of God to illuminate her heart, and to reduce her to
penance. Let the Abbess and the Religious be wary not to be much offended or
troubled at the sin of any of their sisters, because anger and vexation, of
it self hinders charity toward ones neighbor. If it should happen, which
God, if he please, forbid, that the sisters should fall into contentious
wrangling against one an other, and should utter words of scandal, she that
shall be cause thereof, let her, before she offer any prayer to JESUS CHRIST, go
fall on her knees to the feet of the other, and not only demand pardon of her,
but let her entreat her to pray to our Lord to pardon her. And the party
offended, remembering Iuc. 6.
the words of our Lord, saying: If you forgive not with a good heart, no more
will your heavenly Father forgive you, let her most willingly and freely
pardon her sister all the iniuryes she may have received of her.

Let the lay sisters that serve without the monastery, and travel abroad,
never go forth of the monastery but upon some manifest necessity. Let them
go modestly and speak little, that the persons with whom they have
affairs, be edified by them: And let them have a special care not to be in
company that may be suspected, nor to entertain any evil counsel. Let them
not be Gossips to men or women, for fear that some occasion of murmr do
arise thereof.

And let them not be so bold as to recount unto the Monastery the news of
worldly matters and affairs, and let them be most strictly obliged not to
report abroad any thing done or spoaken in the monastery that may occasion
scandale. And if one of them do simply fall into one of these errors, it
shall rest in the discretion of the Abbess to give her a penance answearable
to her offense, yet with compassion, which she shall do by the advice and
counsel of the greater part of the discreetes.

How the Abbess ought to visit her Religious.
THE X. CHAPTER.
Let the Abbess visitt her Religious, admonish, reprehe^d and correct them
with charity, not commanding them any thing against their soul and the Order
of your profession. Let the Religious be mindful also that for the love of
God they have renounced their proper will: and that therefore they are obliged
in all things to obey their Abbess, according to their promise, provided that
it be not against their salvation and your profession. Let the Abbess use
such familiarity with her Religious, that they may comport themselves as
mistresses toward their servants: for in such sort must they live together,
as that the Abbess be servant to all her Religious. I also exhort my sisters,
and in the name of our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, I admonish them, to beware of
pride, of vain glory, of envy, of avarice, of cogitations and solicitude of
worldly affairs: not to speak evil of any, to shun dissension, murmr and
division: but let them be all careful to preserve unity of fraternal love,
which is the knott of perfection. Besides, they that cannot read, let them not
regard to learn, but let them only consider, that they ought above althinges
to desire to have the spirit of JESUS CHRIST and his holy operation, that they
ought always to pray unto God with purity of heart, and to be humble and
patientin afflictions and in their sicknesses, and that they ought to love them
that reprehend them, because our lord says: Blessed are they they that suffer
persecution for justice: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. He that shall
persevere unto the end shall be saved.

Of the duty of the Portresse.
THE XI. CHAPTER.
THe Portresse must be prudent and of good conversation ripe, of years and
fit to remain and reside all the day long at the cell of the port, the door
whereof shall be always open: She must have and keep with her a fit companion,
which shall be appointed her by the Abbess or Vicaresse, to call any, or to do
what occasions and occurances shall require. The port or gate shabe of two
folding leaves and fastened with two locks and padlockes which in the night
shall be shutt with two keys, whereof the Abbess shall have one and the
Portresse the other. The port shall never be without guard by day, and shall be
shutt with one key only. But it must be most dilligently guarded, very
respective care being taken that it never be open but upon necessity. When any
one comes to enter, they shall not be opened unto him, but upon permission
formerly had of the Pope or the Protector to enter into the monastery: where
it shall not be lawful for any person to enter before the sun rising, or
after sun set. Nor let the Religious permit any to enter into their
monastery but upon reasonable, manifest and inevitable occasion. If it be
permitted to a Bishop to celebrat within the monastery to bless the Abbess,
to consecrate a Religious, or for any other important occasion, let him be
content to enter with the least train and most decency that may be. When it
shall be necessary for any Officer or worckman to come in for some worck of
importance, let the Abbess place some fit person at the gate to admit only
those into the Monastery that shall have employment: and let the Religious
then use all endeavor to keep themselves out of the sight of those that come
in.

How the Monastery is to be visited.
THE XII. CHAPTER.
YOur Visitor ought always to be of the O^der of the Friar Minors, such as
shall be constituted and commanded by the Cardinal your Protector: and yet he
must be of a life generally known for pious and exemplar. His office shall be to
correct the excesses committed against the order of your profession as well in
the head as in the members. The said visitor must speak unto you in public
place, that he may be seen of all. It is permitted him to speak with many
Religious or with one alone, of matters concerning the visitation, as he shall
thinck most to the purpose. You shall have ordinarily without, yet near to
your Monastery, four Religious, whereof one shall be your Chaplen, who shall have
also a companion that shall be a Priest of good report and discretion, and two
lay brothers of virtuous and pious life, for the help and aid of your poverty,
as we have always compassionatly found the said Order of the Friar Minors:
which we still demand as a singular favor of the said Order for the love of
God and of the glorious Father S. Francis. And let it never be permitted to
the Chaplen to enter into the said Monastery without the other Priest his
companion. And let those that shall enter always remain in some public
place, in such sort as they may see one an other. And to hear the confessions
of the sick that cannot come to the speakhouse, to administer unto them the
communion and extreme unction, and to assist them in the agonies of death, it
shall be permissable for the said priests to enter in; and also for the solemn
Masses and obsequies for the dead, or for the burial, the Abbess may admit
into the Monastery persons of understanding and fit for that purpose. And
withal this, let the Religious be always obliged to have for their
Protector, Governor and Correctour, a Cardinal of the Roman Church, who
shall be by his Holiness appointed unto the Friar Minors: to the end they may be
always in submission and subjection to the feet of the same Church, firm and
stable in the Catholic faith, perpetually observing the poverty and humility
of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, any his most holy mother.

Thus ends the rule of the poor Religious women, given at Perusia the 16.
of September the 10. year of the Papedome of Innocent the fourth.
The sequel is the remainder of the 19. chapter.
Let not any perseon be permitted to break or rent this our letter and bull
of confirmation, and let none be so bold or rash as to contradict it. And if
any presume to do it, let him know that he shall incur the disgrace and
malediction of God and his holy Apostles saint Peter and saint Paul. Given
at Assisium the 9. of August, the 11. year of our reign.

The end of the confirmation of the rule of saint Clare, which saint Francis
instituted for her.
Of the the most fervent love of Jesus Christ which enflamed the heart of S.
Clare, and how the devil tormented her: of an ecstasy wherein she continued a
night and two days together.
THE XX. CHAPTER.
WHen S. Clare heard speak of the passion our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, she often
accustome^d to weep in compassion, in such sort that out of the sacred wounds
she would sometimes draw dolorous feelinges and affections, and at other times
joys and consolations of admirable sweetness. And the cross of JESUS CHRIST,
which with her Spouse she carried in her soul, and the weight thereof gave her
so much more taste of conte^tment as she felt more grief. The great abondance
of tears which she powered out for the passion of JESUS CHRIST, kept her
sometimes out of her self, and the internal love which she had imprinted in
her heart, in manner continually represented unto her JESUS CHRIST crucified.

She ordinarily gave example by worckes, of what she taught her Religious by
words. For admonishing them often and instructing them secretly touching some
exercise, before she had ended her discourse, she was seen to power out of her
eyes abondance of tears. Among the hours of the divine office that are sung
in the Church, she was present with greatest devotion at the Sixth and ninth,
by reason that at such hours she was crucified with her Redeemer JESUS CHRIST.

The holy Virgin retyring one time to her private devotion after the ninth
hour, the devil came to her, and did beat her outragiously, and even did so
hurt her in the face, that her eye was all bloud-shott and the sign remained
on her cheek: but S. Clare omitted nor for that to persevere in her prayer. And
to the end she might with the more devotion apply herself to the co^tentmentes
which she conceived in mediating of JESUS CHRIST crucified, she ordinarily
contemplated the mystery of the five wounds: and therefore she learned by heart
the office of the cross, as the true lover of the cross S. Fancis had taught
her. She accustomed to wear against her naked flesh a girdle of thirteen
knottes, whereto also were little stones fastened in form of knottes: which she
did for a secrett memory of the wounds and doulours of our Redeemer JESUS
CHRIST. One lent upon Maundy thursday, whereon our Lord JESUS CHRIST showed a
particular love to his disciples, at the hour of the agony that our Redeemer
did sweat blood and water in the garden, this holy virgin retired into her
oratory full of deep sorrow, and joined herself with almighty God in prayer as
if she had seen him praying, and as if, by contemplation of the soul of JESUS
CHRIST sorrowful even to death, she her self had felt and suffered his
prison, his derisions, his injuries, reproaches, affrontes, beatinges, sentence,
cross and most ignominious death, carrying in her memory a like sorrow,
wherefore as utterly transported, she sat on a straw-bed, and all that night
and the day following, she was so absorpt and rapt out of her self, that her
eyes being open and without motion, she seemed to hold them fixed in one place,
and remained so insensible being conioyntly crucified with JESUS CHRIST, that a
Religious familier unto her, coming often to see if she wanted any thing, she
found her always in one same manner. But on the night of holy saturday, this
devout Religious came to her dear mother with a candle, and partly by signs
and partly by words, she made her, the best she could, to understand the
commandment that the holy Father saint Francis gave her, that she should not
pass one day without taking and eating something. So in the presence of this
Religious, saint Clare, as if she came out of another place, said unto her:
what need have you to light this candle? is it not day? Whereto the Religious
answered: Mother, the night of holy thursday is past, as also goodfriday, and
we are now in the night of Easter eve. The Saint replied: my daughter, blessed
be this sleep which almighty God at length after my long desire has granted
me. But I admonish and command you, not to speak hereof to any creature living,
whiles I shall live in the world.

Of many miracles wrought by saint Clare by the sign and virtue of the
cross.
THE XXI. CHAPTER.
Our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST recompensed well the pious desires and good worckes
of his beloved Virgin saint Clare: for as she was enflamed with an infinite
love of the mysteries of the holy cross, so by the virtue and power of the
same cross, she became noble in the signs and miracles of JESUS CHRIST.
Oftentimes in making the sign of the cross on the sick, they were
miraculously cured, and indifferently of all sorts of diseases.

A Religious man called Stephen, having a hot fever that exceedingly afflicted
him, the holy Father saint Francis sent him to saint Clare, to make the
sign of the cross upon him, as one that well knew her perfection and virtue,
which he exceedingly honored. Now the Lady Hortulana mother of saint Clare
was then in the Covent of saint Damian: for a little before, considering that
her daughters had espoused JESUS CHRIST, she came to them to Religion, where
this happy lady served as a true Gardener in that Garden enclosed with those
virgins, our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, and with the glorious Agnes sister to
saint Clare, and the other Religious all replenished with the holy Ghost, to
whom the holy Father saint Francis sent many diseased whom they cured, after
having made on them the sign of the cross, which they most heartily honored.
The said Religious then being sent to saint Clare, she, as the daughter of
obedience being thereto commanded by the holy Father Saint Francis, presently
made on him the sign of the cross, then left him a little to sleep in the
Church, in the place where she was accustomed to pray, and the Religious having
a little reposed, arose sound, secure, and freed of his infirmity: then he
returned to saint Francis, by whom he had been sent to saint Damian, and
consequently was cured.

A child of three years old of the city of Spoletum called Matthew, had by
chance a stone thrust into his nose, whence it could not be gotten out, so
that the child was in extreme peril: whereupon he was brought to saint Clare,
who having made the sign of the cross on him, the stone incontinently fell
out of his nose, and he was perfectly well.

An other child of Perusia having a filme on his eye was brought to saint
Clare, who touching the eye of the child, and making the sign of the cross
thereon, willed them that had presented the child unto her, to carry it unto her
mother that she might also make the sign of the cross upon it, which having
done the eye became clear, and being purged of the filme that obscured it, he
was presently cured, whereupon saint Clare affirmed that this miracle was
wrought by the merittes of her mother, who finding such glory to be attributed
unto her, reputed her self unworthy thereof.

One of her Religious called Beneuanta, having had for twelve years together
an impostume under her arm, which did purge by five several issues, saint
Clare had compassion thereof and made on her the virtuous sign of the cross:
then with her own hands taking away the plaster, she was cured of her long
continued sores. An other of her Religious called Aimia, being for more then a
years space afflicted with the dropsy, together with an extreme pain in her
sides and a burning feeuer, saint Clare conceived a very strong compassion of
her, and therefore having recourse to her noble and infallible medicine, she
made on her body the sign of the cross in the name of her beloved JESUS
CHRIST, and the Religious was perfectly cured. An other servant of God borne
at Perusia, had for two years so lost her voice that one could scarcely hear
her speak: but having understood by a vision which she had the night of the
Assuption of our Lady, that saint Clare should cure her: the poor afflicted
creature having very impatiently expected the break of day, repaired with a
strong confidence unto that holy virgin, and by signs craved her benedictio^:
which favor having obtained, her voice which so long time she had wa^ted,
became as clear and shrillas ever it had bin. An other Religious called
Christina that had bin long time deaf in one of her ears, and had in vain
tried many remedies, S. Clare having made the sign of the cross on her head,
and with her hand touched her ear, she recovered her hearing as perfectly and
clearly as before. An other Religious called Andrea had a disease in her
throat, the grief whereof procured her much impatie^ce: it was admirable, that
among so many prayers enflamed with divine love, there should be a soul so
cold, and among such prudent virgins, one so indiscreet and vnco^siderate. This
Religious feeling her self one night more tormented with her infirmity then
ordinarily, afflicted and impatie^t that her pain did rather increase the^
diminish, she so crushed and pressed her throat, that she made appear her
intention to choke her self, thincking by violence to expel that swelling,
so to avoid longer torment and by ignorance attempting to do more then was the
will of God. But whiles that poor Religious busied her self in this folly,
saint Clare by divine inspiration had knoledge thereof, wherefore calling one
of her Religious she willed her to hasten down and boil an egg in the shell
and cause sister Andrea to swallow it, which done to bring her to her presence.
The Religious insta^tly dressed the egg, and forthwith brought it to the sick
party, whom she found little better then dead, having so crushed her throat
that her speech was utterly gone, yet she made her swallow the egg as well as
she could: then raising her from her strawbed, shewith much labor led her to
S. Clare, who thus spoke unto her: Wretched sister confess thee to God, and
have contrition for what thou intendedst to do, and acknoledge that JESUS
CHRIST will give thee health far better then thou with thy own hands had
purposed to do: change thy evil life into a better, for thou shall never
recover an other sickness that shall succed this, but shall dye thereof. These
words procured in this Religious a spirit of compunction and contrition, so
that she, being entierly cured of this grievous infirmity, amended her life;
and a little after she fell into an other sickness which saint Clare had
foretold, whereof she ended her life piously.

It does manifestly appear by these examples and by many other merueillous
things, which this holy virgin wrought by this healthful sign, that the tree
of the cross of our Savior JESUS CHRIST was deeply planted in her heart, and
that in a merueillous manner the fruits did interiourly recreat her soul:
since the leaves thereof did exteriourly worck such remedies, by the hands and
merittes of this glorious saint.

How saint Clare blessed bread, whereon the sign of the cross miraculously
remained.
THE XXII. CHAPTER.
S. Clare was a disciple of the cross, of such notable fame and sanctity, that
not only great prelates and Cardinals much desired to see her, to hear and
discourse with her, for which cause they often visited her: but the Pope
himself boar her also this affection, in so much that Pope Innocent the
fourth repaired to her Monastery, to hear of her, as a secretary of the holy
Ghost, celestial and divine discourses. And having a long time conferred with
her of matters of salvation and of the praises of God, whiles they entertained
themselves in so pious a discourse, S. Clare caused the dinner to be prepared,
and the tables for the Religious to be covered, causing bread to be brought
thither, with intention to procure the Vicar of JESUS CHRIST to bless it, to
be afterward kept of devotion. Their discourse the^ being ended, saint Clare
fell on her knees before the Pope and besought him to bless the bread; whereto
his holiness answered: daughter Clare, I will that you bless it your self,
making thereon the sign of the cross. The saint thereto answered, most holy
Father, pardon me if you please: for if I should do it, I should deserve
sharp reprehensio^ in presuming to give my benedictio^ in presence of your
holiness. The Pope again replied: well, that no presumption be imputed unto
you, and that you meritt thereby, I command you by holy obedience to bless
these loaves, making on them the sign of the cross. This daughter of
obedience presently lifted up her hand and made the sign of the cross on the
bread, whence ensued an admirable accident, for the cross remained on the
bread, whereof part was eaten of devotion, and the rest reserved as a holy
relic, which event filled the Pope with admiration, for which he gave
thanckes to God, then gave his benediction to saint Clare, who received it
with great humility, and was much comforted withal.

Of many infirmities of the glorious Virgin S. Clare, of her weakness, and how
she was visited by the Protector.
THE XXIII. CHAPTER.
THe Virgin saint Clare had now forty years run the race of the most eminent
virtue and practice of poverty, and broken the alleblaster of her body in the
most strict prison by fasting and rigours of disciplines, and by this mean
filled the house of the holy Church with the most precious ointment of her
virtues, wherewith she drew after her an infinite number of souls to the
service of JESUS CHRIST: and as she already approached to the recompense of
eternal glory, having supported diverse infirmities and consumed the forces of
her body in her first years by the rigor of penance, she was also in her
latter days oppressed and afflicted with diverse grievous sicknesses. But
because in the time of her health, she was in such sort enriched with the
meritt of good worckes, that being sick she gained the true richesse of the
merittes of patience, she yet enjoyed the fruits of her virtues that were
ripened in afflictions and molestations occasioned by diversity of diseases.
But the virtue of her patience does evidently appear in that having bin twenty
eight years together afflicted with diverse diseases, she was never heard to
utter the least murmr or complaint: but continually were heard to proceed out
of her mouth, pious words and thanckesgiuing to almighty God. Now being
exceedingly weakened with infirmity and every moment seeming to her the drawing
on of the end of her life, it pleased our Lord JESUS CHRIST to prolong it till
she might be visited by the eminent Officers of the Roman Church, whereof she
was a servant and special child. For the Pope being yett at Lions, and this S.
beginning to be more tormented by her infirmities then she accustomed to be, a
sword of sorrow through-pearced the soul of her beloved daughters. But a
virgin, seruante of JESUS CHRIST and a very devout Religious of the Monastery
of saint Paul, and Order of saint Benedict, had at that time this vision
following: It seemed to her that she did visitt saint Clare withal her sisters
at saint Damian, whom she saw in a sorrowful, yet precious bed, about which
they all lamented expecting her death: and withal she saw come to the bolster
of the said bed, a very beautiful woman, who said to them that wept: My
daughters, weep not for her that is yet to live, for she cannot dye til our
Lord and all his disciples do come. A little after the Roman Court was at
Perusia, where the increase of saint Clares sickness being diuulged, the
Cardinal of Hostia hastened with great diligence to visit the espouse of
JESUS CHRIST, whose Father he was by office, Governor by special solicitude,
and Fosterer and friend in most pure and chaste amity; and her he comforted,
applying and with his own hands administering unto her the most sacred
sacrament of the Eucharist, and then made a very devout sermon unto the
Religious: saint Clare with great humility and in the name of our Redeemer
JESUS CHRIST, besought him to accept in recomme^dation that her family, and all
her other poor sisters of other Monasteries: but above all she most insta^tly
besought him, to obtain of the Pope and the College of Cardinals, a
privilege and confirmation of holy poverty. Whereto the Cardinal gave his
word, and as a faithful Protector of her Religion, and one most devout and
affectionat to saint Clare, did afterward effect it: For Pope Innocent the
fourth at her most instant request, confirmed the rule which the holy Father
saint Francis had instituted for her, as is formerly recorded: of which rule S.
Clare had never till then other confirmation written then that of the said
Cardinal, because the Pope supposing to induce saint Clare, not to bind her
Religious to such an extreme poverty, did still defer to confirm her rule by
writing. But Innocent the fourth seeing the perseuera^ce and last will of
saint Clare, granted the same unto her by a bull, the eleventh and last year
of his reign, as we have before recorded. And the year being almost expired,
the Pope came, with his Cardinals from Perusia to Assisium, wherein the first
vision touching the death of the holy virgin was accomplished: for the Pope
being in his office more then a man, by the aucthority which he has of JESUS
CHRIST on earth, whose person he represents in the temple of the Church
militant, the Cardinals accompanying his holiness, represented the disciples
of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

How Pope Innocent the fourth visited S. Clare in her last sickness, and gave
her absolution.
THE XXIV. CHAPTER.
THe divine providence would no longer defer the accomplishment of the will
of S. Clare, but her Spouse JESUS CHRIST came to eleuate into his celestial
Palace, his poor espouse and pilgrim on earth, who desired nothing more,
that being delivered of this mortal body, she might have the sight and
fruition of her most glorious JESUS CHRIST in his kingdom. Now then the
members of this virgin being by continuance of her sickness as utterly decayed,
there befell her a new weakness, which being a token that she should in short
time be called of God, she also used it as a ladder to mount to eternal
salvation. Whereupon the Pope, Innocent the fourth, came to the Monastery of
saint Damian, accompanied with many Cardinals, to visitt the servant of God,
not doubting but she whose life he had already approved, was the most perfect
in sanctity of all women of his time, and therefore worthy to have her death
honored by his presence. His holiness then being entered, he went directly to
the glorious Virgin, and coming near to her bed, he tendered her his hand to
kiss, which favor saint Clare with exceeding joy received. But besides
that, she with great humility besought him to aford her his feet to kiss. The
Pope to content her sat down upon a little bench, and devoutly presented unto
her his Apostolical feet, on which this saint reverently laid her face and
mouth, most affectionatly kissing them, then with the serenity of an Angelical
countenance, she demanded of him remission of all her sins. Whereto the Pope
answered: would to God my dear sister, I had need of such a pardon: but
finally he gave her the benefitt of absolutio^, and the gift of his
benediction, then left her in peace. She having that morning received the most
sacred communion at the hand of the Provincial of the Friar Minors of that
province, with her hands joined and her eyes elevated toward heaven, she
weeping said to her Religious: My daughters, praise almighty God for the
benefitt it has pleased him to bestow on me this day, which is such that the
earth and the heavens are not of sufficiency to recompense it, since this day I
have both received the same Lord, and am esteemed worthy to see his vicar on
earth.

How S. Clare comforted her sister S. Agnes.
THE XXV CHAPTER.
THe daughters were all about their mother, without whom they were in short
time to remain orphans, the consideration whereof through-pearced their souls
with a most bitter grief. The heaviness of sleep, nor hungar could not draw
them from the presence of their mother: the contentment which they received in
her presence made them forgett to eat and to sleep, because all their exercise
was to weep and particulerly her most devout sister Agnes, who was expressly
come from the Monastery which she had newly erected at Florence, to be present
at her death. Being then in this anguish, she turned toward her sister, and
most instantly prayed her, not to deprive her of her presence. Whereto saint
Clare answered: Dear sister, whom I cordially love, since it has pleased God
that I depart, be you joyful, and weep no more: for I assure you, our Lord
will shortly come to you, to visitt you with an exceeding consolation before
your death.

Here follows the testament of the holy S. Clare. In nomine Domini Amen.
Amongst all other benefittes, which we have received of our bountiful
benefactour the king of mercies, and do daily receive of him: and for which we
are most bound to praise him, one is for our vocation: which by how much greater
it is, by so much more are we bound unto him: the Apostle says: acknowledge
your vocation. God has made himself a way, which he has showed by word and
example, and our holy Father S. Francis, a most perfect zelatour, and follower
of the same way has thaught us: wherefore my beloved Sisters we ought to marcke
the unmeasurable benefitt which God has done unto us: amongst the rest that
which he has vouchsafed to work in us through his servant our Father S.
Francis, not only after our conversion, but alsowhen we were in the captivity
and vanity of the world: for after his conversion (not having as yet any
Brethren or companions) being to repair the Church of saint Damian, where he
was visited with diuineco^solation, and constrained wholly to abandon the
world, filled with joy and illumination of the holy Ghost, he prophesied of us
that which our lord has afterward fulfilled; standing then on the walls of
the said Church he called with a loud voice in the french tongue, unto some
poor people dwelling thereby saying. Come help me in this Church of saint
Damian: for there shall came women of whose good life and holy conversation,
our heavenly Father shall be rejoiced in his whole Church. In this may we observe
the infinite bounty of God toward us: who of his abounda^t mercy and charity
has vouchsafed to prophecy those things by his servant of our vocation and
election: and not only of us has our holy Father prophesied these things, but
also of those who hereafter shall be called unto that vocation, whereto our Lord
has called us. With what care of soul and body are we then bound to keep the
comma^dements of God, and of our holy Father saint Francis, to the end that
with the grace of God we may pay the multiplied talent. And our lord has not
only placed us as an example unto the seculer, but also unto all our Sisters
whom he shall call unto our vocation, that we may be unto those who converse
in the world a mirror and example. For our Lord God has called us unto so
great things, that they may take example of us, who are given unto others for
an example, for which we are bound greatly to bless and the more ought we for
this to be stre^gthened in our lord to do well: wherefore if we live according
to the form above mentioned, we shall leave good example unto those which
follow us, and with short pain we shall receive the reward of everlasting
life. After that our heavenly Father vouchsafed through his great mercy and
grace to illuminate my heart in such sort that by the example and touching of
our holy Father S. Francis, I began to do penance: a little after my
conversion, I, with a few Sisters whom our Lord gave me* have willingly
promised unto him obedience, like as our lord through the light of his grace
inspired unto us by means of his merueillous life and holy doctrine. Saint
Francis then marcking that we were tender and frail according to the body, yet
nevertheless nothing dismayed with any necessity, poverty, pain, tribulation,
or contempt of the world, but that we esteemed all those thingees as great
pleasure, even as he had experienced by the example of his Brethren: he
rejoiced in our lord, and with great charity inclining toward us, he obliged
himself and his Brethren to have always over us a special and diligent care.
We also by the will of God and of our holy Father saint Francis, repaired to
the Church of saint Damia^ there to dwell, a little after which time, our lord
through his great mercy and grace multiplied us: and then was fulfilled that
which our lord had foretold by his servant: for we had dwelt before in an other
place: little after that, he wrote unto us this form of life, and principally
that we should persevere in this poverty; and it was not sufficient unto him to
have admonished us thereunto in his life, by many sermons and aduertiseme^tes,
to the end he might move us to the love and observance of this most holy
poverty: but he has also given us many writings, that after his death we
should not fall from the same holy pouertye, according to the example of the
Son of God, who living in this world did never leave the same: which holy
poverty, our holy Father saint Francis, and his Brethren did honor and observe
during his life; Wherefore, I Clare, servant and handmayd of Christ, and of the
poor Sisters of saint Damian, although unworthy, and the little plant of our
holy Father saint Francis, considering this with my other Sisters, as also the
highness of our profession, made unto such a worthy Father, and the frailty of
us and others, which we fear after the death of our holy Father, who next unto
God was our only pillar, and comfort: again and again we bind our selves
unto the holy lady poverty: to the end that the Sisters who are, or shall come
after my death, may by no means decline from the same.

This Poverty I have always bin careful (with the grace of God) to observe,
and to cause it to be observed: and for more surety of the same, I have made my
Profession thereof unto our holy Father Pope Innocent the fourth in whose time
we began, and have confirmed it by his successors: that by no means in no
time, we should decline from this holy Poverty, which we have vowed unto God
and unto saint Francis. Wherefore I bending the knee both of mine inward and
outward man: in all humility do commend unto the church of Rome, to our holy
Father the Pope, and especially unto the Cardinal, to whose protection,
together wit the Franciscans we are committed, that for the love of God, who
was laid in the cribbe, lived poorly in this world, and dyed poorly on the
cross, they will keep the little flock which God the Father has gained in his
church, through the words and examples of our holy Father saint Francis:
causing it to follow the humility and poverty of his deerly beloved Son, the
Father of wisdom, and of his holy mother, and that they will cause the holy
poverty to be observed which we have promised unto God and to saint Francis;
as also strengthen the^ for to observe the same. And like as God gave unto us
our Father saint Francis, for our founder and helper in the service of God and
of those things which we have vowed unto God and unto him to observe; and as
he was careful whiles he lived to exercise us his plants, by word and
examples: so I commend and leave my Sisters, who already are, as also those who
hereafter shall be unto the successors of saint Francis, and to the whole
religion: that they will be always an assistance unto us to profitt from better
to better, to serve God, and to accomplish and observe this holy poverty. If it
should happen at any time that the said sisters should leave their country or
city to go unto an other, they are firmly bound after my death in what place
soever they are, to observe the holy poverty, which they have vowed unto God
and to saint Francis.

Those which shall be in office as also the other sisters, shall be careful not
to receive more land then extreme necessity does require, as a garden for
herbs unto their necessity. And if for the defense or use of the cloister, it
weere needful to have more land, they shall take but only to supply the
necessity, and in this la^d they may neither plough nor sow. I admonish you
all my Sisters, who are and shall be, that you labor to follow the way of
simplicity, humility, poverty, and also the modesty of holy conversation, as we
in the beginning of our conversion, have bin taught of Christ, and of our holy
Father saint Francis through which (not through our meritt) but through the
mercy of the liberal giver; the Father of mercies has spread abroad the
savor of our good name, as well unto those who are far off, as to such as are
near.

And for the charity of our Lord JESUS let the^ keep the vnio^ of love. The
charity which you have interiourly, show it exteriourly by worckes, to the end
that through your example, the sisters who are called unto your profession, may
increase in the love of God, and mutual charity. Also I pray all those who
shall be chosen in the offices of the sisters that they study to excel the
others, rather in virtue and modest conversation, then in their office: to the
end that by their example, the Sisters that were called unto the religion
before them, be moved to obey them, not only in respect of their office, but
for love. The Abbess must be careful and discreet toward her Sisters, as a
good mother toward her children. She must also have a provident care of every
one according to their necessity, of the almose which it shall please God to
send her. She must withal be so sweet and indifferent unto all, that the
sisters may with out fear or doubt, declare unto her their necessity, and that
they confidently have recourse unto her, when the Abbess and the Sisters shall
think it to be necessary. The Sisters that are subject, let them remember
that for the love of God they have renounced their own wills, wherefore I will
that they obey their mother, as they of their one accord promised unto God to
do: to the end that their mother seeing the humility, charity, and union which
they have unto each other, may easily bear the chardge, with the office
shesustaineth: and because it is heavy and bitter they must through their holy
conversation, turn it into sweetness. And because the way is narrow and the
gate straight, which leads unto life, and few there are that walk in it, and
few that persevere therein: blessed are they that have received the grace to
walk in it, and to persevere unto the end: let us therefore be careful, if we
be entered in the way of our lord, that by out fault and negligence we do not
fall from the same: to the end that we committ not that injury unto our lord,
to this blessed mother the glorious Virgin Mary, to our holy Father saint
Francis, and to the triumphant and militant church: for it is written, accursed
are they who decline from your commandment. For to obtain this grace, I bend
my knee unto the heavenly Father through the merittes of lord JESUS, and of his
blessed mother; of our holy Father saint Francis, and of all the Saints: that
it well please him of his divine Majesty, who has given a good beginning, to
grant grace also, that it may augment and persevere even until death. Deerly
beloved Sisters, present and to come, to the end that you may the better
persevere in your vocation; I leave unto you this writing, and in token of our
Lords benediction and of the benedictiction of our holy Father saint Francis,
and of me your mother and servant.

The end of the testament of the glorious Virgin saint Clare.
Here ensues S. Clares Benediction unto her Sisters, present and to come.
IN the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Amen. My
deerly beloved Sisters, our lord give you his holy benedictio^, and behold you
with his holy eye of mercy, giving you his peace: as also to all those that
shall enter and persevere in this our College and monastery, and unto all other
of the Order, who shall persevere unto the end in this holy poverty: I Clare
servant of JESUS CHRIST, and little plant of our holy Father S. Francis: your
mother and Sister, though unworthy, do beseech our lord JESUS CHRIST, that by
the intercession of his most holy mother, of the holy Archangell S. Michaell,
and of all the holy Angels, of our holy Father S. Francis, and of all the holy
Saints, that it will please him to give and confirm unto you this benediction
in heaven, and in earth by multiplying in you his holy grace: and in heaven by
eleuating you into the eternal glory with his saints. And I give you my
benediction in my life, and after my death, in all that I am able, and more
then I am able: Withal the blessings, wherewith the Father of mercies has or
shall bless his spiritual children, both in heaven and earth: or that the
spiritual mother does, or shall be able to bless her spiritual chirldren.
Amen. Be always lovers of God, of your soul and of your Sisters, and be
always careful to keep that, which you have vowed to God. Our lord be
always with you, and you with him. Ame^.

Of the death of the blessed Virgin S. Clare, and of a vision which one of her
Religious saw.
THE XXVI. CHAPTER.
THe holy virgin, and servant of IES. CHAPTER was many days toward the end of
her life afflicted with diverse diseases. The faith and devotion which at that
time each one boar her, exceedingly increased, yea so far forth as she was
honored as a S. being ordinarily visited by Cardinals, Bishops, and other
Prelates. But, which is more admirable to hear, having bin seauenteen days
without force to receive any sustena^ce that was presented unto her, she was
nevertheless so fortified of God and encouraged of his divine Majesty, that she
exhorted all those that would comfort her to be prompt in the service of God. A
Religious man intending to comfort her and to persuade her to have patience in
so grievous a sickness that procured her so much torment, she with a smiling
countenance and clear voice answered him: Brother, since the time that I knew
the grace of my God, by means of his servant saint Francis, no pain has bin
troublesome unto me, no penance has seemed difficult, nor no sickness
ircksome.

And as almighty God approached near unto her, and her soul being as it were
at the door to go forth, the blessed virgin would have the most pious and
spiritual Friar Minors to be present, to discourse unto her of the passion of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and by their pious words to inflame her more in the
love of God. Wherefore some of them who were unto her true Brethren, in our
Redeemer CHRIST JESUS were present, and among others Br. Iuniperus, the
familier of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, who often uttered unto her, such fiery and
enflamed words of the omnipote^t God, that she by his presence being filled
with an extreme joy, one day demanded of him, if he then knew nothing new of
almighty God: whereupon Br. Iuniperus opening his mouth to answer her, there
issued out of the fournise of his enflamed heart, infinite sparckes of such
sublime words, that this holy virgin received thereof much consolation. Finally
turning her Angelical face toward her dear and beloved daughters and sisters
there present, bitterly weeping, she recommended unto them the poverty of our
Redeemer JESUS CHRIST in this her last passadge, praising and thancking God,
for the infinite benefittes which they had received of his divine Majesty,
which she particulerly recounted unto them; then she gave them all her
benediction, and also to all the Religious of her Monastery present and absent,
and to all those that should enter into her Order. There were present two
companions of saint Francis, Br. Angelus, who though much afflicted did yet
comfort the others, and the right simple Br. Leo, who ceased not to kiss the
bed of the holy virgin, that was leuing the world, who was lamented of her
daughters because they were left orphans and were no more in this life to see
their most holy mother, and therefore they acco^panyed her soul unto heaven
with abo^dance of tears, without power to admit any other consolation then to
desire to go with her: wherewith being so afflicted, they could not without
difficulty forbear with their nails to rent their faces; but it not being
permitted them to dischardge themselves of such grief exteriourly, it did
inflame in them a more burning fire within: For those espouses of JESUS CHRIST
were sufficiently morified by the rigor of Religion, albeit the force of
grief did constrain the^ to cast forth loud cries and sighs, and to power
out rivers of tears. The holy virgin at lenght being turned toward the^,
began very sweetly to say unto her soul, go my soul, go sorth securely;
thou have an assured guide to perform this voyage: for he that is they
Creator, has sanctified thee, and has always conserved thee, affecting thee
with a tender love, equal with that of a mother toward her child. And thou
my God, be praised for having created me. A Religious sister asking her what
she meant thereby: she answered: I speak to my blessed soul. Her most
glorious Spouse JESUS CHRIST was not far from her, and attended for her. The^
tourning to one of her Religious, she said: Do you not see my daughter, the
king of glory whom I see? Almighty God also laid his hand on an other
Religious, who saw with her corporal eyes thorough the tears that distilled
from them, a glorious vision; she being pierced thorough with the dart of
sorrow, cast her eyes toward the gate of the house, and saw enter a great
procession of virgins richly clothed in white, having each one a croune of
gold on their head: but one of them appeared more beautiful, sumptuous and
glittering the^ the rest: For she had on her head an imperial crown,
garnished with precious stones, out of whose countenance proceeded a light so
shining that it converted the obscurity of the night into clear and bright
day: It was with out doubt the glorious Virgin Mary, Queen of virgins, who came
to the bed of the espouse of her son, to whom enclining she graciously
embraced her, and incontinently she was covered and the bed also by the other
virgins with an extreme sumptuous mantell. So the day following, which was the
eleventh of August, this holy soul ascended to heaven, there to be crowned
with perpetual glory. Happy was her departure out of this miserable life, since
it was her entry into that of eternal felicity. For the fastes which this S.
performed in this exile, she is now joyful and had her fill at the
magnificall table of the citizens of heaven: and for the humility and
baseness of her habit, she is now gloriously attired with the glory of
Paradise. The continual sighs and desires which she had for the presence and
love of her deerly beloved Spouse, are accomplished by the blessed vision of
God face to face, and by the assured fruition of the sovereign good: leaving
the way open to the example of sanctity, that we blinded, and miserable mortal
creatures, rejecting these short, false and deceiptfull pleasures of this
world, may purchase the permanent, true and assured that endure eternally.

Of the honorable obsequies that were performed for S. Clare.
THE XXVII. CHAPTER.
WHiles the soul of S. Clare departed this life, the report of her deceasse
was incontinently diuulged through Assisium: whence both men and women in such
abondance speedily flocked to the Monastery, that none seemed to be left in the
city. Each one presently esteemed her a saint, and called her the espouse of
JESUS CHRIST, accompayning their discourses with great abondance of tears of
devotion. The officers of justice repaired thither accompanied with many
warlike Champions and a great number of armed men, which that night guarded the
monastery, for fear that precious treasure might be bereaved them. The night
following, the Pope with all his Court came thither, accompayned by all the
neighbor people.

The Religious men of S. Damia^ being ready to begin the office of the dead,
the Pope would have to be said the office of the holy virgins, wherein he would
have canonized her before her buryall: But the Cardinal of Hostia having
demonstrated unto him that it was fit in this affair to proceed with more
humane prudence, the Pope permitted the said Religious solemnly to proceed in
the office of the dead according to the custom.

The said Cardinal having taken for his text, Vanitas vanitatum and omnia
vanitas, made a very worthy and devout sermon to manifest the vanity of things
appertayning only to this world, where he exceedingly exalted that most eminent
Contemptrice of vanities: which ended, all the Cardinals and other Prelates
accompanied this holy body with an exemplar devotion. All the funeralles being
very solemnly accomplished, the citizens of Assisium thincking it not secure
that this precious treasure should remain so far out of their city, they
caused this holy body with exceeding great pomp to be transported, singing
psalms and hymns with the sound and melody of diverse musical instruments,
and in a very solemn procession they carried it into the Church of saint
George within their city, where the body of saint Francis had formerly bin
reposed. And it was very reasonnable that he who in his life, had given a
pattern of the way of life unto this holy virgin, should as is were
prophetically prepare her a place of sepulture* There was then a great repair
and confluence of people from diverse cities, towns, and villages unto
Assisium, to thanck JESUS CHRIST, and to pray, unto this blessed creature,
proclayming, this virgin to be really a saint, and glorious, who now lives in
Paradise with the Angels, having bin already so much honored of men on earth.
O blessed virgin, pray now to God for us, and gain our souls to JESUS CHRIST
in heaven, as thou have converted and gained so many, living on earth. The holy
virgin passed this transitory life to the other of rest, the year of grace,
1253. the twelfth of August, forty years after her perfect vocation to God,
and the 60. year of her age. She was enterred the 12. of August, on which day
her feast is solemnised at Assisium, and over all the holy Roman Church.

Of the miracles wrought by the merittes of S. Clare, and first of possessed
persons that have bin delivered.
THE XXVIII. CHAPTER.
THe cheifest marckes that saints can have, and the worthiest testimonies of
faith and reverence, are sanctity of life, and the perfection of good worckes:
for saint John Baptist, wrought no miracles during his life, and yet they that
have wrought many, shall not be esteemed more holy then he. And therefore the
notable renown of the religious life of saint Clare, might suffice to make
her appear such as she is, if the tepedity, coldness, and remissness of the
world, and partly also devotion did not otherwise require. But since this holy
virgin was not only in her life time by her merittes swallowed up in the depth
of divine illumination, but was also after her death of merueilous splendor
over all the world by the light of her miracles; and as the most pure verity
has caused the recording of many of her miracles, that they remain as
testimony, memory and denunciation of her sanctity: therefore also the multitude
of them enforce the rehearsal of some, that they may be generally diuulged and
known.

A child called James, seeming not so sick as possessed, in regard that
sometimes he cast himself into the fire, or into the river, fell rudely on the
ground, and with such fury did bite the stones that he brake his teeth withal,
forced blood out of his head, and wrested his mouth most strangely, yea
sometimes would seem a mo^strer, so dubling and folding his members, as his
feet would be on his neck. He was ordinarily twice in the day afflicted with
the like torments, in such sort that two persons sufficed not to restrain
him from tearing of his clothes, yea there was great difficulty to keep him
from murdering himself. Many Physicians having in vain labored to cure him,
at length his Father named Guidalot had recourse to the merittes of S. Clare,
affectionatly saying: O holy virgin honored of the world, to thee I adresse my
self, to beseech thee to obtain of God my sons health. Then full of
confidence he conducted him to the sepulcher of this saint, and laid him
thereupon, and he presently miraculously obtained the favor he desired, his
son being perfectly cured of all his infirmities, and was never troubled
after.

Alexandrina of the town of Frata, near to Perusia, was possessed and
tormented with an abominable devil, to whose power she was so left that he
made her fly as a byrd to the topp of a rock near to the river of Tiber, then
made her descend to a branch of a tree that did hang over the said river, then
to hang on that branch, there playing her idle pranckes. This woman had half
her body utterly benumbed, for which the Physicians could find no remedy: At
lenght she came with great devotion to the shrine of saint Clare, and
inuocating her merittes she was cured of all her afflictions: for she had also
the gout in her left hand, and her body half paraliticall was cured, and
withal she was entierly freed of the oppression and servitude of the devil

An other woman of the same place was cured before the said sepulcher, who was
in like sort possessed with the devil, and had withal many other diseases.

Of many that were miraculously cured of diverse diseases.
THE XXIX. CHAPTER.
A French youth, goeing to Rome in company of others his country men, fell sick
and lay by the way, and by the force of his infirmity lost his sense and
speech, and his body became deformed as it were a monster, then became he so
furious that he could not be held, so that he seemed ready to dye; which
spectacle did not only move his companions to compassion, but did also
exceedingly terrify them: and therefore they bound him to a biere and carried
him to the Church of saint Clare, where having placed him before her
sepulcher, they applied them all to prayers, inuocating the help of God and of
the S. who made such intercession for the young man, that he was in an instant
entierly cured.

A man of the city of Spoletum, called Valentin, was exceedingly afflicted
with the falling sickness, in which he fell six times a day in whatsoever
place he was, and besides he had one foot so wrested awry that he was utterly
lamed: he was brought on an ass to the sepulcher of S. Clare, where having
remained two days and three nights, the third day attempting to move his lame
foot, and none being near him, he made such a noise, that being heard by some
a far off, they seemed to hear the kreaking of a piece of dry wood, and the
man was instantly cured of both the one and the other his said diseases.

The son of a woman of Spoletum, called James of twelve years old,
beingblind, could not go without a guide: being once forsaken by him that
conducted him, he fell into a pit, brake one of his arms, and hurt his head.
The night following sleeping by the bridge of Varue, a woman appeared unto him,
and said: James, if thou come to me to Assisium I will cure thee. Arising early
in the morning, he much admired at the vision, which he recounted unto two
other blind men, who answered him: Brother, we have lately heard of a Lady
that is dead in the city of Assisium, at whose sepulcher God worcketh by her
merittes great miracles: which the blind youth having heard, he left the two
other blind men, and wiht a strong confidence hastened to Assisium: in the way
he lodged at Spoletum, where in the night he had the same vision, which
increased his hope of recovering his sight, and made him hasten in time to
arrive to the church of saint Clare. But he found it so filled with worldly
people, that he could not enter: which exceedingly troubled him. But seeing no
remedy, he rested at the door, and there remained till the evening, where this
poor blind youth being weary by his journey, and afflicted for that he could
not enter into the church, settled himsesfe the best he could, to rest upon the
ground, leaning his head against a great stone, and so slept: and presently the
third time heard the said voice, speaking: James, God will do thee good, if
thou can enter: and incontinently awaking out of that sleep, he began to cry
and beg of the people with abondance of tears, to permit him to enter,
which having a long time continued, they gave him place: and having discloathed
himself, putting his girdle about his neck, he went to the sepulcher of the
saint, before which with great reverence and humility he fell on his 'knees,
and having persisted sometime in prayer, beseeching saint Clare to intercede
for him, he fell into a gentle slumber, wherein saint Clare appeared unto him
and said: Arise James, for thou art already cured: and being awaked and raised
on his feet, the defect of his sight left him, and by the virtues and merittes
of this Saint he clearly saw, for which he glorified God, and gave him
thanckes for so admirable a work, exhorting all present to do the like, and
to praise our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, in his holy servant.

Of the lame and paralitiques cured by saint Clare.
THE XXX. CHAPTER.
A Cittisen of Perusia called John Martin de Buony, went one time with many
other Cittisens out of the city to fight against their ennemies of Tullinium:
the skirmish being ended, John found his hand exceedingly hurt with the blow of
a flint stone, and the bone being broken, he was thereby maimed: having bin at
extreme cost for the cure thereof, yet without any remedy, but still enforced
to carry his arm in a scarf, he always complained thereof as of a desperate
may me, and asked counsel about cutting off his hand, but having one day heard
speech of merueillous matters wrought by almighty God at the intercession of
saint Clare, he with a strong faith vowed to go to her sepulcher, whither
arriving he very devoutly and reverently presented her a hand of wax, then fell
on his knees and made his fervent prayers to God, that it would please his
divine Majesty, by the merittes of that holy virgin to cure him. The success
was admirable, for before this gentleman arose, he felt his hand entierly
cured, for which he gave thanckes to God and to the Saint.

A young man of Castrouitoly, called Petronius, was so consumed with a disease
which had for three years continually afflicted him, that he seemed to be
already withered and corrupted, yea he was thereby brought to such weakness,
that in goeing he stooped with his face as it were on the ground, and found
great difficulty to walk, though with a staff in his hand to support him. His
Father having already bin exceedingly chardged about his cure, continued yet in
resolution to employ the residue of his substance, out of his vehement desire
to see his son cured. But the Physicians having assured him that there was no
hope of cure by humane art, he had recourse to the new Saint: of whose virtue
having heard much report, he caused his son to be carried where the Relics
of saint Clare reposed. And having made his prayers by her sepulcher, he
recovered his former health, and miraculously arose sound and straight as if he
had never endured infirmity, yea he ran, leapt, and praised God and saint
Clare, inducing all present to have greater faith and devotion toward The
gifts of graces are distinct.
her.

In the town of saint Quiric, within the diocese of Assisium, a child of ten
years old, having bin borne lame, went so pitifully and painfully, that if he
chanced to fall to the ground, he could not rise again but with extreme
difficulty. His Mother had many times recommended him to S. Francis, yet found
he no redress: but understanding afterward that the virgin saint Clare was
very famous for infinite miracles which by her merittes were wrought at her
sepulcher, she caused her son to be carried thither, and incontinently after
he had bin there, his bones were settled in their places, and his members were
cured: that which saint Francis, entreated by devout prayers would not grant,
he referred to be obtained and impetrated by the merittes of his disciple
saint Clare.

A Cittisen of Augubia, called James le Franch, had a son of five years old
so lame that he could not go, which he very impatiently supported, it seeming
to him that the torment of his child was a reproach unto his honor and family.
When this child was on the ground, he would wallow and creep in the dust in
that sort to go: and if he would stay himself against any thing to arise, he
could not: for nature had given him only a desire, but no force and ability
thereunto. But his Father and mother consulted to make a vow for him, and to
offer him to the merittes of saint Clare, to whom they promised, that being
cured, he should be called hers. The vow being made, the espouse of JESUS
CHRIST cured this child, who began so well to go, that without any help he
went to the sepulcher of the said saint.

A woman of Castle Menany, called Plenaria, had bin long time benumbed, in such
sort as she could not go without a staff: but causing herself to be carried
to the sepulcher of S. Clare, and having there devoutly offered her prayers,
she the day following obtained what she there with faith demanded. So she
returned home on her own feet, who came thither supported by the feet of
others.

A woman of Perusia had a swelling on her cheek which tormented her a long
time, and besides had al over her body many ring worms and tettars, she had
also her neck greater then her head. And often thincking of S. Clare, she one
day went to her church, where withgreat devotion and a true faith she made her
prayers: and continuing by her sepulcher till even within night, she fell into
a great sweat, whereby the swelling began to wax dry and to shrinck, and so by
little and little she was so perfectly cured, that there remained no show of
scarre.

How two children were by saincle Clare rescued and preserved from the rage of
wolves.
THE XXXI. CHAPTER.
THe valley of Spole^u^ was accustomed to be much afflicted with wolves, who did
of^e^ proy there on huma^ flesh. There dwelt a woman called Bonna, on the Mount
Galien, within the diocese of Assisium, who having two children, had scarce
ended her lamentations for the one which the wolves had devoured, but, whiles
she was busy in her house they carried away the other. The wolf carried her
child to the top of the mountain, and grapled it by the throat when a labourer
in the vineyardes hearing the pitiful cry of the child, called the mother,
and admonished her to have care of her son, in regard he heard a crying voice
like to his. The woman not finding her son, presently believed that the wolf
had seized on him, and therefore began to raise her lamentation toward heaven,
devoutly inuocating the help of S. Clare in these terms: O blessed saint
Clare, have compassion on me miserable woman, and restore me my child. Alas
hear if thou please the prayers of an unfortunate mother! permit me not to
continue in this so rigorous desolation. Whiles this poor woman so recommended
her distress to saint Clare, her neighbors fournished with weapons hastened
after the ravening wolf, and coming to the top of the said mountain, they
found that he had left the child wounded in the throat, whose wounds a dog
was licking. And so the child was safely recovered by the merittes of saint
Clare, who was inuocated by his mother, to whom he was brought, and was
incontinently restored to perfect health.

A little girl of the town of Canary, being about noone abroad in the air
where she did some service to an other woman, there came a wolf, which being
taken by the girl but for a dog, he lept on her neck and took hold of her
head. The other woman and the mother of the girl there present, ran after, and
cried for help, inuocating saint Clare: and it was admirable to hear, that
the child being in the teeth of the wolf reprehended him, saying: Thou thief,
how can thou carry me farther I being recommended to that holy virgin? The
wolf as daunted with those words, gently set the girl on the ground, and as
a thief found and taken in the fact, he fled: and the girl returned without
any hurt unto her mother.

How diverse were delivered from drowning and danger of sea, having i^uocated S.
Clare.
THE XXXII. CHAPTER.
AShippe fraught with many persons departing out of the port of Perusia, for
the i will of Sardinie, the first night there arose such a terrible tempest, that
the force thereof leaked the bottom of the vessel: which made apparent to all
therein, that they were in most evident peril of shipwreck: wherefore they
began to invoke the Queen of heaven, and many other saints to assist them.
At length perceiving no appearance of their lives safety, they addressed
themselves to saint Clare, and vowed to her, that if by her intercession they
were delivered, they would go all naked to their very shirtes, with their
girdle about their necks, to visitt her sacred relics at Assisium, carrying
each a wax light of two pounds in their hands. This vow being made, they saw
three great lights descend from heaven, the one whereof settled on the forepart
of the shipp, an other on the poupe, and the third on the pumpe, by the virtue
whereof the leakes where the water entered did close, and the sea became so quiet
and calm, that with a gracious wind the vessel was accompanied and conducted
by the said lights to the part of Arestan, whither being arrived and landed,
and the merchandise all safely putt on shore, the said lights vanished, and
(which was admirable) the ship presently sunk and was cast away. They that
had gone out of her acknowledging the miracle, at their return to Pisa
devoutly accomplished their vow, yelding infinite thanckes to almighty God, and
to the virgin saint Clare, for the great benefitt received by her intercession.

How S. Clare was canonized by Pope Alexander the fourth.
THE XXXIII. CHAPTER.
POpe Innocent the fourth lived so little time after the death of saint Clare
that he cold not canonize her. The holy siege having bin two years vacant,
Alexander the fourth was chosen Pope, who being exceedingly devoted and a
friend to piety, protector of Religious, having heard true relation both of
the miracles which our Lord JESUS CHRIST wrought, for the glory of his holy
servant, and of the renown of her virtue, which daily more and more diuulged
it self in the Church: knowing also that her canonization was generally
desired, his holiness being also induced by the assurance of so many miracles,
therefore began to treat in the Consistory of her canonizatio^. Wherein to
proceed more maturely, there were elected prudent and virtuous men to examine
the said miracles and the irreprehensible life of the saint. Which being done,
and this holy virgin being found and proved to have bin in her life an
unspotted mirror of all virtues, and to have bin ennobled of almighty God
after her death by true and approved miracles, the day of her Canonization was
appointed, when were present with his Holiness many Cardinals, Archbishoppes,
Bishops, other Prelates, and a great number of Priests and Religious, with
infinite noblemen, gentlemen and others each in their degree and quality,
before whom the Pope proposed this sacred affair, demanding the opinion of
the Prelates: who with one accord gave consent, and affectionatly besought the
said saint might be canonized in the Church, as JESUS CHRIST had glorified her
in heaven. In this sort then, three years after her happy decease, Pope
Alexander caused her solemnly to be enrollod in the Catalogue of Saints,
ordayning her feast to be celebrated with solemnity in the Church, the 12. of
August. This Canonization was performed the year of grace 1255. and the first
of the reign of the Pope, to the praise and glory of our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST.

The life of saint Agnes sister to saint Clare.
The conversion of this Saint is described before in the fifth chapter of this
present book, and therefore to avoid reiteration it is here pretermitted.

How saint Agnes was by the holy Father saint Francis sent to Florence,
there to build a Monastery.
THE XXXIIII. CHAPTER.
THe virgin and espouse of our Redeemer IES. CHAPTER Agnes true sister and
companion of S. Clare, as well in blood as in virtue and Religion, perseuered
and persisted in notable sanctity of life in the Monastery of saint Damian,
and from the time of her entrance into Religion even to her death, she always
woare a very rough haircloth next her tender flesh. Her ordinary refection was
almost always bread and water; she was naturally very pitiful to every one.
Saint Francis finding this virgin to have obtained of God, by mean and
assistance of her sister, a worthy perfection, he sent her to Florence there to
found a new Monastery of poor sisters called Mount Celi, whereof saint Francis
made her Abbess. This holy virgin induced many souls to abandon the world to
serve JESUS CHRIST, which she did by mean of her pious conversation and
sanctity of life, by holy discourses and words of God, that sweetly flowed out
of her mouth: and as a perfect Contemptrice of transitory things and follower
of JESUS CHRIST, she planted in this Monastery (conformably to the desire of
the holy Father saint Francis and of saint Cla^e) the observance and
profession of Evangelical poverty: but being exceedingly grie^^d with the
absence of her sister, she wrote this letter following unto her, and to all the
Religious of the Monastery of saint Damian, wherein she had received her
education and spiritual nourriture.

A Copte of the letter which saint Agnes wrote to her Sister saint Clare,
and to all the others sisters of her Monastery.
THE XXXV. CHAPTER.
TO the venerable and beloved Mother in our Lord CHRST JESUS Clare, and to all
her Covent, humble sister Agnes, the least of the disciples of JESUS CHRIST and
of yours recommendeth herself unto you all, and prostrate at your feet does
yield you all submission and devotion, wishing unto you what is most precious
from the most high king of kings. To the end that all nature which has bin
created of God, do acknowledge it self to be such, as none can persist of it
self in its own essence, the divine providence most prudently permits that
when any one esteems himself to be in prosperity, then is he drowned and
plunged in adversities. This I tell you (my most dear Mother) that you may
know what affliction and extreme heaviness possesses my spirit, being so
tormented that hardly can I speak: and this because I am corporally separated
from you and my holy sisters, with whom I hoped to have happily lived and dyed
in this world. So far is this my grief from slacking, that it continually
increases: which as it had a beginning, so do I believe it will find no end
in this world. For it is so continual and familier unto me, that it will never
forsake me. I was persuaded that life and death should be a like, without power
of any separation on earth, amongst them who have one same conversation and
life in heaven, and must have one same sepulture, them I say, who one same and
equal natural profession, and one same love has made sisters. But as far as
I can see, being abandoned and afflicted on each side, I am much mistaken. O
my holy sisters! I beseech you to be reciprocally grieved with me, and let us
weep together, I being assured that you shall never experience any doulour
comparable to that which I now feel, in being separated from them with whom
JESUS CHRIST had conjoined me. This grief tormenteth me incessantly, this fire
burns my heart continually, so that being on each side afflicted, I know what
to think, neither does any hope remain but to be assisted by your prayers,
that Almighty God easing this affliction, may make it tolerable unto me. O my
most gracious mother! what shall I do and what shall I say? since I know not
that ever I shall see you more, or likewise my sisters. O that it were lawful
for me to utter unto you the conceiptes of my soul, as I would desire, or that
I could open my heart unto you on this paper, then should you see the lively and
continual dolor that tormenteth me! My soul b^rneth inter^ourly, being
afflicted with an incessant fire of love, and my heart groneth, sigheth and
lamenteth, with desire of your presence. Mine eyes cannot have their fill of
weeping, and albeit I seek some consolation against this bitterness, yet can I
find none: but every thing turns into grief: and much more when I consider
the means to see you. I am entierly steeped in these anguishes, having none
that can comfort me in this life, but that I receive a little consolation from
the liberal hand of our Savior JESUS CHRIST. Which causes me to beseech you
all to give thanckes unto his divine majesty for this favor and mercy extended
toward me, and for that through his grace I find in this Covent such
concord, peace and charity as by words cannot be expressed; these sisters
having received me with exceeding love and devotion, yelding me obedience with
extraordinary promptitude and reverence. They all with one accord recommend
themselves to our Lord JESUS CHRIST and to you, my sister, and to all the
sisters of the monastery; and I recommend both my self and them to your
prayers, beseeching you as our Mother, to be mindful of them and of me, as of
your daughters: and know you that they and I, will all the days of our life,
observe and keep your holy precepts and aduertisementes. Besides. I desire you
should know that the Pope has accorded to whatsoever I demanded him,
conformably to your intention and mine, and particulerly in the matter you
know; viz. that we may not possess any thing proper. I beseech you my most
dear Mother, to procure of the R. Father General that he often visitt us, to
comfort us in God, whose grace be with your spirit, Amen.

Of an ecstasy of S. Agnes, and how S. Clare saw her thrice crowned by an
Angel.
THE XXXVI. CHAPTER.
Saint Clare in her last sickness obtained that her sister S. Agnes might come
to see her in the monastery of S. Damian, to keep her company during the few
days she had to live. And so S. Agnes having left her Covent well grounded in
Religion and sanctity, she came to Assisium, where saint Clare being one night
in prayer a part from her sister, she nevertheless saw her, being also in
prayer, lifted from the earth, and an Angel to crown her head three several
times with so many crowns. The day following she demanded of her sister, what
player or contemplation she had made the night past: But she of humility
unwilling to manifest her prayer, being at length enforced by obedience, made
her this relation: I considered the great goodness and patience of almighty God,
whereby he supporteth such enormous offenses of sinners; which I considered with
a deep sorrow and compassion. Then I thought and yet do thinck on the love
which almighty God bears to sinners, and how he endured death to save them:
Thirdly I considered and do consider, and am with compassion exceedingly
afflicted, for the souls in purgatory and their great torments: and because
they cannot help them selves, I asked mercy for them of the most sacred
wounds of our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST.

How S. Agnes sent S. Clares veil to the monastery of Florence, and of her
death and translation to S. George of Assisium, with all her Religious, into a
new Covent.
THE XXXVII. CHAPTER.
AFter the death of saint Clare, saint Agnes sent her black veil which she
did ordinairily wear, to the poor Religious of Mount Celi, which she had
founded at Florence: which she did in regard of her great amity toward them,
and that they might inherit some relics of saint Clare for their comfort
and devotion. That veil is yet in the said monastery, where it is so carefully
preserved, that in substance and color it seems still new. There is likewise
to be seen in the same monastery a cloak of saint Francis, by which relics
our lord worcketh many miracles. A little after the death of saint Clare,
saint Agnes, also desired to be present at the marriage of the lamb, whither
she was invited: but she first received the consolation which saint Clare had
promised her, that before she departed out of this life, she should see her
Spouse JESUS CHRIST, as a taste of the eternal felicities whereto she was to be
elevated and conducted by her sweet Spouse CHRIST JESUS. She dyed the 56. year
of her age, replenished with perfect sanctity; and being delivered out of this
prison, she went to possess the kingdom with Angels and the holy virgins that
had bin consecrated to JESUS CHRIST, in which glory these two sisters and
daughters of Sion, companions in heaven by nature and grace, do praise God
without end. There assembled a great multitude of people upon the death of
saint Agnes, and they with great devotion ascended the ladder of the monastery
of saint Damian, hoping there to receive some spiritual consolation of
sanctity, but it happened that the chain which held the ladder did slip, so
that al those that were on it, fell down one upon an other: which made a great
bruit and clamor by those that were hurt, who having with a strong faith
inuocated S. Agnes, were all cured. The said holy virgin was enterred at S.
Damian, but afterward was transported into the Church of S. George, where she
still remains together with her sister in Assisium; by the which Church the
Citizens have builded a fair monastery entitled S. Clare, whither were
afterward removed the Religious sisters of S. Damian: which was don to prevent
many inconveniences that might arrive unto them, being without the City. The
said Religious brought from S. Damian many Relics, and particulerly the
Crucifix which spoke to S. Francis, at the beginning of his conue^sion, which
is extant in the said monastery of S. Clare: and the F^ere Minors are at S.
Damian.

Of many miracles that almighty God wrought by the merittes of S. Agnes.
THE XXXVIII. CHAPTER.
AGirle of Perusia had a cancred fistula in her throat, who having devotion to
S. Agnes, visited her sepulcher. The Religious there having unbound her soar,
at the entry of the Covent, and then having with a strong faith offered her
prayers, she arose sound, and returned to her house exceedingly comforted,
yelding thanckes to God and to his servant.

There was a Religious sister at our Lady of Angels, of Perusia, who had a
mo^tall soar in her breast, which the Physicians had judged to be incurable; in
it there were three holes, so that the Religious women exhorted her to bear
this affliction with patience as proceeding from the hand of God, and to
conform her self to his will. This diseased sister being always of mind to
recommend her self to S. Agnes, kneeling one day before the Altar, she with
much devotion commended her to the holy servant of God, demanding of her
redress of her infirmity. Where withal falling into a gentle and sweet
slumber, S. Agnes appeared unto her, and with her hand touched her mortal
wound, with which visitatio^ she was sweetly comforted and cured: and at her
awaking finding her self sound, she gave infinite thanks to God and to her
advocate S. Agnes.

An other Religious woman of the monastery of Venise, had an impostume in her
breast, which was opened by the Physicians and found so dangerous, that they
allotted her a very little time to live. This poor wretch therefore in this
distress, reco^mended, her self to the two sisters S. Clare and S. Agnes, and
about mindnight these to SS. as most skillful Physicians brought boxes of most
precious oyntmentes, and accompayned with many virgins entered into the
infirmary, where this sick sister was, which was seen by many Religious, and
drawing near to her bed, S. Clare said unto her: Sister I am assured that you
shall be cured by the power and goodness of God, and by the merittes of S. Agnes.
The sick Religious not knowing who spoke unto her, douhted of this revelation:
and the saints replied that they were P^isitions of Assisium. Then S. Agnes
anointed the soar with the ointment she had brought, and so the vision
disappeared, and the diseased sister was in such sort cured of her mortal
wound, that no appearance remained thereof.

An other Religious of the monastery of S. Clare in Assisium had bin for
sixteen years afflicted with such an infirmity, that the other Religious
always held her for a leapre; this diseased creature besought S. Agnes to pray
to the virgin of heaven for her recovery: And this prayer being performed with
a vow, the Religious was incontinently cured, and freed from all remainder of
her infirmity. A Burgess of Assisium had bin long time lame by a blow of a
stone received on his foot, and being hopeless of humane remedy, on the feast
day of S. Agnes, he went as well as he could to her Church, and with a strong
faith and devotion fell on his knees before her Altar. His prayer being ended,
he arose sound and Iusty, which he recounted to many and thancked almighty God
for it.

A Painter called Palmere being in a dangerous sickness, and by the Phisitio^s
given over as dead: one night after his speech was lost, his brother expecting
in his opinion, his last breathing, was exceedingly disquieted, and coming to
his bed side and lamenting him as already dead, he fell on his knees, addressed
his prayers to saint Agnes, and with abondance of tears and great confidence
made a vow, that if his brother by her merittes and intercession might be
cured, as often as he painted her image, he would set a crown of gold on her
head. This prayer and vow being ended, the sick party incontinently began to
speak: as if he had awakened out of a profound sleep, and called for meat, and
did hungerly eat, then arose from his bead, saying that two Religious women
came to visit him being in his agony and reputed for dead, and that the same
visitation had such force, as it left him perfectly cured as he appeared.

A woman of Assisium had a son of 12. years age, that had an impostume in
his breast, where the cancre was so increased, that it had made it in such sort
venomous as it exceeded the Physicians skill to cure it: This woman having
understood that by the merits of saint Agnes almighty God had cured such
diseases, she commanded her son often to visit her sepulcher, and devoutly to
recommend himself unto her: which he did, in such sort that approaching one
evening so near her sepulcher that his mortal soar touched the same, and
there falling a sleep, he so remained till the next morning, when awaking he
found himself entierly cured: for which having thancked God and his Saint, he
returned to advertise his mother, affirming that saint Clare and saint Agnes
appeared unto him in the night, and that saint Clare brought an ointment,
wherewith saint Agnes having anointed him, he was presently cured.

Of possessed persons delivered by the merittes of saint Agnes, and of
certain other miracles.
THE XXXIX. CHAPTER.
THere was in Assisium a child of 12. years age, who being among other
children, an unknown man gave him a green beane-cod, which the boy opening,
three of the beans fell to the ground, and the fourth only he did eat, yet as
soon as he came home, he vomited extremely, then began to tumble and furiously
to behave himself, tourning and rolling his eyes in his head, in such sort as
it well appeared that he endured extreme torment: and his gesture so terrifyed
them that beheld him, that they judged him possessed: and therefore his Father
and many other his kindred brought him the next morning to the Church of saint
Clare, where having offered their prayers for him, and inuocated the
intercession of saint Agnes, the child a little after began to cry and barck
as a dog, then cried out, take heed, there are two deulls already gone out:
Say an Aue Maria, and the third will be gone. Which being presently done, the
devil withal left the child.

A woman of Tullinium, being tormented with many wicked spirits, her Father and
grand mother vowed to go with her to Assisium, to visit the sepulcher of S.
Agnes, with faith and hope that by her merittes she should be delivered, and so
this possessed woman remaining before the sepulcher of the S. from the ninth
hour till euensong, she felt her self freed from the devils that possessed
her: this was done on the feast of S. Francis. The kindred of this delivered
woman offered an image of wax weighing two pounds to the sepulcher of the
saint, in acknowledgement of the grace and favor received.

A man of Perusia with a continual feiuer, had in his body an impostume,
whereof the Physicians gave their judgment he would in short time end his
days. Wherefore a woman called Celiola, admonished him to recommend himself to
saint Agnes, and to vow the visiting of her sepulcher. Which having done and
his prayers ended, his infirmity ended withal, being cured both of the one and
the other disease; for which not being ungrateful, he visited the said
sepulcher, and every where preached the pray^es of the holy virgin, giving
thanckes to almighty God for such a favor.

A Religious of the Monostery of saint Clare in Assisium, had lost the sight
of one eye, and was in danger to loose the other. But finding that no humane
application did avail her, she recommended her self to saint Agnes, and the
other Religious of her Monastery also prayed for her, who as she one time
prayed in the Church, saw a woman that came to her and said: Sister open your
eye, for your sight is recovered: and so opening her eyes she clearly saw, but
she could no more see the woman that spoke unto her; only she was assured that
it was saint Agnes, to whom she had heartily recommended her self.

Vitula, the wife of Matthew du Loup, at saint Francis gate in Assisium, had
a son called Martin, that had a deep soar in his throat, and an other in his
shoulder, both mortal, whence issued such an offensive savor, that it was not
possible to come near him. At length after many remedies had in vain bin
tried, his mother recommended him to saint Agnes, to whom having with a
devout heart offered her prayers, the S. one night appeared unto her richly
attyred with a diadem of gold on her head, and a branch of lilly in her right
hand, and said unto her: My daughter disquiett not thy self for they son,
for he shall be cured and delivered from peril. Which this woman having heard,
she arose full of comfort, and went to the Monastery of S. Clare, and recounted
this apparition to the Abbess and the Religious: then she heard mass, which
being ended, the Religious showed to the mother and the son the sacred
Relics of the saint, and at the instant the son was cured of the impostume
in his throat only. After that, S. Agnes appeared to him in vision together
with an other woman that brought a viol full of ointment. S. Agnes then said to
the child: My son, how do you? whereto he answered: I am by the merittes of
S. Agnes cured of the impostume in my throat, but that which is on my shoulder
procures me extreme affliction. The S. replied: I will cure this, as I did the
other in thy throat: then she unbound the said impostume, took of the
plaster, and cast it on the ground, then applied thereto the ointment which her
companion had brought, and instantly the child was perfectly cured. When his
mother came to see him, she found the playsters on the ground, and her son
sound and lusty, who particulerly recounted unto her the said vision, which
afterward was generally diuulged: This happened in the year 1350.

The life of an other saint Agnes, who was daughter to the king of Bohemia,
and Religious of S. Clares Order.
THE XL. CHAPTER.
IN the beginning of this Religiious Order there was an other virgin besides
the precedent called Agnes, as illustrious in sanctity as in blood, for she was
daughter to a king of Bohemia, who promised her in marriage to the Emperor
Federick* and this holy virgin having heard the worthy reputation of S. Clare,
who then lived, by such as ^ame from Rome and Assisium, being inspired of God,
she besought the king her Father, to give her leave to ^erue rather the
celestial, then a terrest^iall Spouse. But the king knowing that he could not
recall his word and that whatsoever excuse he should allege to break this
marriage, the Emperor would sinisterly interpret it, he utterly denied her. Now
the virgin having found the drift and cause of this denial, assured her Father
that if he would accord to what she demanded, she would undertake that the
Emperor should condescend thereunto, presuming confidently on the favor of
JESUS CHRIST. She knew well to deliver many other allegations with so good a
grace and with such persuasiue terms, that she purchaced her Fathers consent
to what she des^ed, without further seeking the approbation of the Emperor.
Whereupon this Princess presently sent for certain Friar Minors of Magnes,
where they had a Covent, who coming to her did shortly after consecrate unto
God this royal plan^, with many other gentlewomen of a great families of
Bohemia, to whom they gave the habitt of Religion, instructing the^ in the
life and rule of S. Clare. The king desiring to assign a good pensio^, and to
bestow on the Monastery where his daughter was a good revenue, to supply the
necessities thereof, she formally withstood him, purposing to live and dye
poor, and to be maintained by almose, co^formably to her rule, rigourously
observing the intention of the holy Father saint Francis and S. Clare, in the
vow of poverty, which is yet to this day in the same manner observed in the
said monastery, which is in Prague, the chief city of the kingdom of
Bohemia, with from this first foundation, laid by this holy Princess, has
always bin furnished with gentlewomen. Now the Emperor having understood that
his promised love had abando^ned the world, he was at the first apprehe^sion
exceedingly troubled: But considering with more maturity that she had not
forsaken him to take an other man, but for JESUS CHRIST himself, he was at
lenght satisfied, contented and comforted.

S. Clare being advertised of all that this Princess had done, and of her life
and perfection, who also had written and expressly sent a messenger to
acknowledge obedience unto her as to her Mother and mistress, auouching her
self her humble disciple, S. Clare answered her by a letter filled with much
fervor and consolation, and sent her in token of amitye and good will, a
girdle, a veil, a cupp of wood, and a dish wherein the S. her self accustomed
to eat, and many like small things, which the holy Princess with great
devotion accepted. Our Lord wrought many miracles by the said Relics, which
ever afterward were kept in the said Monastery in very great devotion and
reverence.

The renown of this Princess being diuulged over al Almania, there were
founded many monasteries of poor Religious in her imitation, which were filled
with many daughters of Princes, Dukes, Earls and other great Lords and
gentlemen of that contry, who in imitation of saint Clare and the said
Princess Agnes abandonning the world and the follyes thereof, espoused for
eternity JESUS CHRIST, serving him alone in poverty and humility. This saint
Agnes of Bohemia being illustrated by many virtues and miracles, having
assembled an infinite number of Religious in diverse Couents, and having with
them perseuered in all perfection of virtues, she left this transitory world to
take eternal possession of her glorious celestial Spouse CHRIST JESUS, who
honored her and made her blessed, as he has manisested by many miracles which
he has wrought by her great merittes and intercessions: The Emperor Charles
the fourth who was also king of Bohemia, was two several times delivered from
death by the intercession of this celestial Princess, and therefore at his
death he enjoined his son Wenceslaus and successor in the Empire, to procure
her canonization: But he was hindered by important and continual troubles and
affairs, that disabled him to execute the pious and just desires of his Father.

Of many other Religious that flourished primitiuely in the Order of S. Clare.
THE XLI. CHAPTER.
THere was an other holy Religious of the royal blood of Polonia called Salome,
whose sanctity was manyfested by diverse miracles, which God wrought after her
death, she by her merittes delivered many women from peril of death in travel
of child, many lame were restored to the use of their limbs, blind recovered
sight, and wounded persons were cured.

A holy Religious of Padua, called Helena, flourished in great perfection of
life in the monastery which was builded by the Seraphicall Father S. Francis,
and in which the blessed Father S. Antony of Padua yielded his spirit unto
almighty God. This holy Religious living in that place, after she had there
obtained of God many virtues, she was tried by JESUS CHRIST, and refined as
gold in the furnise of afflictions. For she kept her bed deprived of all
corporal force, yea and of her speech for 15. years, during all which time
she ordinarily demonstrated by signs and gestures an exceeding great alacrity
and joy in her heart. Our Lord revealed many things to this saint, which she
manifested to the Religious who curiously recorded the same to be kowne to
posterity. The said religious sisters being demanded how the infirm Religious
could make the understand those words, since she could not speak, they
answered that themselves then observed so strict a silence that they scarcely
spoke at all, but demanded and opened their necessities by signs, which were
well understood among them, for expressing whatsoever they desired to have
known. And in that sort had they understood the said S. whose body for many
years after, the said Religious sisters did show to such as in devotion
repaired to see it, remaining entire and incorruptible, yea her nails and
hair, did grow as if she had bin living. By her merittes God wrought many
miracles, and particulerly on the Marquess of Parma, who was of the family of
Lupi called Boniface, who being in the anguish of death, the Marquess his Lady
making a vow to this saint Helene for his health, it was perfectly restored
unto him.

In the beginning of the Order of saint Clare, there was also of it the
daughter of a king of Hungary called Cuiga, sister unto blessed saint
Elizabeth the widow, who having taken the habitt and made profession of the
rule of saint Clare, became so famous, after the death of saint Elizabeth,
in sanctity and miracles, both during her life and at her death, that question
is at Rome touching her canonization.

The end of the 8. book and second volume of the first part of the cro^icles
of the Friar Minors.
THE NINTH BOOK OF THE SECOND VOLVME AND FIRST PART OF THE CHRONICLES OF THE
FRIAR MINORS.
WHEREIN IS DESCRIBED THE INSTITVTION and rule of the third Order called of
penitents, made by the holy Father S. Francis. And the lives of many of the
said Order, especially of Saint Elizabeth, Queen of Hongary.
How the Order of the seculer penitents was instituted by the holy Father S.
Francis.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
THE Seraphicall Father saint Francis sowing over Italy the word and seed of
life, a good part thereof fell into the hearts of men that were bound by the
knott of Matrimony, and of persons of such like condition, whose souls could
not freely follow the spirit of penance as they desired, yet their fervor was
such, that sometimes eue^ whole towns and villages were dispeopled in
following the holy Father saint Francis, who purchased the salvation of their
souls. Whereupon this holy Father being requested, yea importuned generally and
particulerly, to institute an Order and rule wherein seculer and married people
might live to do penance, and to live in a more secure estate for their
salvation: The year 1221. he instiruted the Order of Generous Penitents,
whereof all Christians that live not in monastical Religion might yet be
members. The first that entered this Order was an holy man called Lucius, and
though no rule is found to be recorded at that time, nor form of living
prescribed by S. Francis, to these Penitents, yet it is most assured that he
gave them certain rules, according to which they should temporally and
spiritually govern themselves, were it to fast, or pray, more then other
seculers, to know what office and devotions they should use, what almose they
should give, how they should be clothed, and what rigor of penance they
should undertake: of which ordo^nances delivered by S. Francis and recorded by
them to whom he taught the same, Pope Nicolas the fourth cut off one part,
and left only that which was most easy instituting a rule, which here we will
insert, which was also afterward confirmed by the Apostolic sea, by three
most ample letters patentes. And albeit the first and ancient habitt of these
penitentes was afterward different in diverse provinces, yet is it most
probable, that the most common and general, was the same which those of the
third Order yet wear in Italy, as most conformable to their statue. The color
is gray like to that of the Friar Minors; but the form and fashion is as
others seculers do wear: and it is credible that S. Francis his will was that
the said Penitentes should wear this habitt, si^h in those places where this
Order was by him first instituted and where he most conuersed, this manner of
habit was used. These said Penitents may not wear the cord as the Friar
Minors. These of the third rul (which have succeeded those) who live in common
and are Religious by vow, can less avouch the wearing of a cord, but must use
a leather belt.

And it is to be noted that the Friar Minors cannot receive these Penitents to
the profession of Religious obedience, or to any vow but only may admit and
receive them to the said rule of life and company of the Penitents, exhorting
and admonishing them to observe the same. They may also assist them in
confession and other spiritual worckes as Co^freres and true Brethren of the
Order. Nevertheless the Religious may not be their Prelates or Superiors,
because they are subject to seculer and ecclesiastical jurisdiction. These
Penitents may yet, as is practiced in all their Co^fraternityes, create an head
or chief by the title of Minister, Rector, or Priour, who shall have care to
assemble the Brethren at certain times to consult of matters touching their
company.

It is also manifest that S. Francis alone, among al other authors of
religions, did institute and ordain the Brethren and sisters of the third
Order of Penitents. And because he had formerly instituted two rules, the one
of Friar Minors, and the other of poor Sisters, this Confraternity of
Penitents was called the third Order: thence is derived their denomination.
Since that time some others Orders, principally the Begging Freres endeavor to
imitate S. Francis, and to institute also other Confraternities of imitating
Penitents or what such other denomination they will, and submitting themselves
in some sort to the said Orders, they withal enjoy their privileges. But to
the end more apparent knowledge may be had of this first and true Order of
Penitentes, instituted by the holy Father S. Francis and the holy sea, and of
the fruit which they have produced in the Church, we will proceed in
declaration of this Order. First we will set down certain Apostolical
favors and concessions bestowed on this confraternity in the beginning thereof:
then, the rule which the said Pope Nicolas the fourth of blessed memory
compiled and approved: finally we will deduce the illustrious persons that
have flourished in the said Order in all sanctity, which will be a matter
grateful and worthy to be recorded.

The Brief of Pope Gregory the ninth, whereby he declared this Order to be
confirmed and favored by Pope Honorius the 3.
THE II. CHAPTER.
GRegory Bishop and servant of the servants of God, to all the Brethren of the
Order of Penitents instituted in Italy. For So Much as the detestable envy of the
ennemy of mankind does with greater obstinacy persecute the servants of CHRIST
JESUS, spreading his snares against them, and with all his power seeking to
withdraw and remove them from the service of the king of kings, by malicious
inventions, we knowing that these having forsaken the vanity of the world,
though they be yet with their bodies on earth, nevertheless in soul and spirit
they converse in heaven, renouncing worldly desires for the love of God; they
enjoy not only transitory pleasures, but eternal richesse; so much more also
does he torment them, no otherwise then did the Egiptians persecute the people
of God, that went out of the Egypt of this world, till they perished by divine
punition and a new manner of death, finding and receiving the end which their
worckes deserved. And after our Savior and Redeemer JESUS CHR. having Matt. 4.
received holy Baptism went into the desert, where having fasted 40. days and
40. nights, the same wicked spirit feared not to tempt him. Therefore he that
addicteth himself to the service of God, must according to the sentence of the
Sage, prepare his soul unto temptations. Which Eccles. 2.
being considered by Pope Honorius the 3. our Predecessor, and that doing
worckes of Penance you were afflicted by the children of this world by diverse
afflictions and crosses: and that therefore you had need to be nourished and
favored by laudable worckes, he embracing and loving your Religion in the
bowels of JESUS CHR. gratified the same with special grace, commanding all
Bishops and Archbishoppes of Italy to exempt and free you from such oaths as
are accustomed to be exacted of Governors of towns and other officers of
others places: and to protect you that you be not constrained to accept
public offices and chardges, or to be receauers of common rentes and such
like affairs. But because the children of darcknes (who by their humane
prudence have learned to repute darcknes light, and light darcknes, and this by
calomnie of sinister interpretation) have so afflicted you in the prejudice of
your privileges: that you are for more vexed and chardged then before you had
those privileges, for albeit the said Officers cannot exact your oaths, they
find other occasions to enforce you to swear; not permitting you to give your
revenues in almose where you please: Wherefore you have with great humility
demanded that we deliver you from the obligation of such oaths as you have
made, those accepted of peace, faith, and testimony, and that you may not be
chardged with impostes and contributions more then your other fellow Citizens:
and that you may employ your revenues in pious uses, and distribute it at your
pleasure, and may not be troubled for the debtes and faults of your
neighbors, but that you be obliged to answer the debtes of others for which
you shall be engaged. We then considering that you enter into the way of
perfection, and that the children of the world will so much the more hinder
you, as they are and know themselves different from your holy life, and that
they make a confused heap of perverse oppositions, to hide and obscure the
verity: do by aucthority of these present letters, give and grant to all you
in your university (of whose faith and Religion we hold our selves assured) the
permission which you demand of us in all the said matters: most expressly
commanding you, that yon endeavor to use the grace and favor well which we
bestow on you, and that none of you abuse the same: Unless you will be
frustrated and deprived of the privilege which we grant you: and therefore
let none etc. Given at saint John Lateran the 30. day of March, and second
year of our Popedone. This present Breife was given the year of grace 1228.
wherein appears that the Confraternity of the Penitentes was not exempted from
seculer or ecclesiastical jurisdiction, though in this Brief it be tearned
Religion; because this title of Religion is taken and understood lardgely, for
Christian Religion.

The Brief of the said Pope Gregory the ninth, whereby he permits the
Penitents of the third Order of S. Francis, to hear divine office in time of
interdiction.
THE III. CHAPTER.
GRegory Bishop and servant of the servants of God, to the Archibishoppes,
Bishops and Prelates of the church of Italy. It being evident, that the
intention of those who are mindful of death is, not to follow the vanity of
the world, but JESUS CHRIST, doing penance with an humble heart by true
contrition, chasticing and subiecting the senses to reason, and that their
intention is to apply themselves to the service of God: So that it were an
iniust thing, that these co^fraternityes should be separated and deprived of
the divine offices and Ecclesiastical sacraments: it being reasonable that
they receive some special favor of the holy Apostolic sea in these and other
matters that concern the service of God. There being then many through Italy
that observe this order of life which some call Brothers Penitents, we command
your prudence, by this our Apostolical Brief, that in the Churches of your
jurisdiction, wherein it is generally permitted you to say the divine office in
time of interdiction, you do admit and receive them also in to the Church in
the said time of interdiction, provided always that they be not cause of the
said interdiction: the which office nevertheless shall not be said but after
expelling the interdicted and excommunicated out of the Church, the doors being
shutt and no ringing of belles; and that you also admit them to the
Ecclesiastical sacraments and to burial in Churches or church yardes. Given
at Perusia the 2. of August, and third year of our Popedom.

An other Briese of the said Pope Gregory the ninth in favor of the Freres
Penitents.
THE IV. CHAPTER.
GRegory Bishop, to the Archibishoppes and Bishops of Italy. It does too
manistly appear, how the clemency of God is abused by such as hinder or delay
those who withal their heart desire and seek to serve JESUS CHRIST, in
converting themselves unto him. And yet no man doubts but they are accursed
of God, that spread their ambushes against the said servants ^o make them
stumble, disturbing them by diverse persecutions, as imitators of Pharo, who
having his heart obdurate, never permitted the people of God to depart out of
Egypt but by force of chasticement: and being departed, did not omit to
persecute them by tyranies and crueltyes, till himself and all his were
submerged by the divine right hand, leaving to all an example that his like
deserve the like punishment; you therefore must understand, that being come to
the knowledge of Pope Honorius the third, our predecessor of blessed memory,
that some in your quarters, very prudently considering their end, resolved to
do penance in their own howses or other where, and desirous more purely to
approach unto almighty God, they abandon the vanities of this world, and do
impose on their miserable flesh (the true daughter of Babylon) so much pain
and affliction, as it would impose on their souls the true daughters of God,
that by this mean the fault and punishment which they have merited, may by his
divine Majesty the more easily be remitted. But the Gouerners and Magistrates
of the Cities and towns where they resided, not considering, that they who
really serve God do not entangle themselves with affairs and business of
this world, wherewith the Espouse will not foul or defile the Cant. 5.
feet she has so well washed with the tears of penance: do, on the contrary
enforce them to swear to follow and accommodate themselves to the wars,
constraying them to accept and undertake public offices, yea they, who the
more commodiously to serve God, were retired into obscure places in villages
and hermitages, have bin by them enforced to return to the city: then have
they imposed on them new and the greatest chardges, taking pleasure to affront
and afflict those whom they ought more to honor and cherish, as the friends
of God. Wherefore our office of Pastor being to favor such as by such
resolutions and lanctity of life become the friends of God, after the example
of our said predecessor of blessed memory, we by this Apostolical B^iefe, do
command your fraternities, not to permit the said Penitents-besides domestical
affairs) to be without reason molested in all the afforesayd things, and other
like, wherein their holy purposes may be hindered, and that you restrain their
persecutors, by Ecclesiastical censure notwithstanding whatsoever oppositions
or appeals.

Of an other Brief of Pope Innocent the fourth.
THE V. CHAPTER.
INnocent Bishop, servant of the servants of God: to our well-beloved children
the General and Provincial Ministers of the Friar Minors of Italy and the
kingdom of Sicily, health and Apostolical benediction. We with a benign
favor do assist all such as being devoutly converted unto God, produce in his
Church fruits worthy of penance, to deserve at the hands of God an eternal
recompense. The Confraternities called the third Order of S. Francis being very
remarckable among them through Italy and the I Will of Sicilie, we condescending
to their just petitions, do by aucthority of these presents command your
prudence, to appoint unto them in time convenient, Religious of your Order of
capacity to be visitors, who instructing them in matters fit for them to do,
shall correct and reform them, as cause shall require, and shall chastise the
transgressors, and restrain them by Ecclesiastical ce^sures. Notwithstanding
whatsoever appeals. etc. Given at Lions, the fifth of August, and fifth year
of our Popedom.

Of the authentical institution of the first rule and form of life of the
Brethren Penitents of the third Order of S. Francis, ordained by Pope Nicolas
the 4. inserted with the said rule.
THE VI. CHAPTER.
NIcolas Bishop, servant of the servants of God, to our well-beloved children in
our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, the Brethren and sisters of the Order of Penitents,
present and to come, health and Apostolical benediction. The firm foundation
of Christian Religion, being already grounded and built on the Mount of the
Catholic Faith, the pure devotion of the disciples of JESUS CHRIST, boiling
with the fire of charity, and by the word preached to them that live in
darcknesse: this faith is that which the Roman Church holds and professes,
the foundation whereof cannot shake for whatsoever tribulation that may assault
it, nor fall, whatsoever violent tempest beat against it: because it is the
true, and right faith, without which none can be grateful to God, nor find
grace with his divine Majesty. It is the the same also that shows the way of
salvation, and that promises the recompenses and co^tentments of eternal
beatitude. And therefore the Confessor of JESUS CHRIST S. Francis, institutor
of this Order, teaching by word and example the mean to mount unto heaven,
denounced and preached the sincerity of this faith to his children, and
instituted this Order, willing them accordingly to make profession of the
Catholic Faith, to the end that they who faithfully observe the same walking
securely in the way of virtue, may meritt to be made possessors of the eternal
glory, after the prison of this present life.

Of the mean to examine them that will enter into the said Order.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
ANd for so much as we are willing to assist this Order with convenient favor
desiting the augmentatation thereof: we ordain that all those who are to be
received to the observation of this form of life, shall be formerly withal
diligence examined touching the Catholic faith, to see if they firmly
confess the said faith, and obedience to the said Church, the^ theymay be
securely admitted unto the Order. But especially dilligent care must be had
that no heretic, or suspected of heresy, and noted with infamy, be admitted
to this form of life. And if any should be received being known for such,
let him be presently discovered to the Inquisitor, that he may be punished and
corrected.

In what manner they ought to be received, who desire to enter into the said
Order.
THE II. CHAPTER.
WHen any one shall present himself to be admitted into this company, the
superior Ministers ordained to receive him, shall make an exact enquiery of
his estate and condition, and propose unto him the obligation of the company:
and particulerly restitution of goods iniustly possessed. Which done, and he
consenting, let him be clothed according to the Order, and let him endeavor
to satisfy his Creditors, if he owe any thing, either with ready money or
security of pledge: and let him at length find means to content and satisfy
them in some or other manner, and so be reconciled to his neighbor. Which
being accomplished, and the year of probation expired, if the discreet
Brethren be of opinion and hold it requisite to admit him, he shall be received
on these conditions: which are, that he promise to keep the divine precepts,
and to satisfy the statutes and constitutions whereto he shall be bound and
obliged: as also to perform the penance that shall be enjoined him, or the
punishment ordained if he prove obstinate and a transgressour: and to obey the
visitor, before whom he shall appear if he be called, and shall submitt
himself to his judgment: and to all this aforesaid he shall oblige himself
by subscription before public Notaries; neither shall it be permitted to the
provincial Minister to receive any, but upon the said conditions, except some
notable considerations do otherwise require, and that the quality of the
per^onne presented give just occasion of an extraordinary proceeding. Besides,
we ordain that none may retire from this confraternity, being once entered, to
return to the world. But we permit him to enter into an other approved
Religion. Married women also may not be received, without the consent of their
husbands.

Of the form of their habitt, and how they must be clothed.
THE III. CHAPTER.
Let the Brethren of this company be clothed with course cloth and of mean
price, of a color neither fully white nor directly black, except the visitors
find it good to dispense therein with any one for a time, and with the
Counsel of the Provincial Minister, upon some just and manifest occasion.
Their cloakes and other habits shall be as decency requires without cuttinges,
and their sleeves shall be simple, close, and straight: the sisters shall wear a
cloak and gown or coat of course cloth also, and under their cloak shall
wear a white or black habit, or a very long coat of linen cloth or canuas
without plaites. The sisters may be dispensed withal in the coursnes of the
cloth of their habits according to their need, the qualitye of the persons,
and condition of the places. They shall use neither buttons nor girdles of
silk, nor besides the said cloth, may use any furs other then lambs
skin:their purses shall be of leather, and their girdles plain, without any
ornament of silk, neither shall they wear any thing else, forsaking,
according to the behoufull counsel of saint Peter, all other vain ornaments
of this world.

That the said Penitentes may not haunt dishonest banquettes, nor comedies, nor
give any thing to stage players and comedians.
THE IV. CHAPTER.
IT is forbidden to the said Brethren to frequent and be present at
ba^quettes, plays, dances, and dishonest spectacles, and to give money or any
other thing to see such vanities: neither must they permit any of their
servants to give any thing to that purpose.

Of abstinence and fasting.
THE V. CHAPTER.
Let all the Brethren abstain from eating flesh four days in the week,
that is monday, wednesday, friday, and saturday, if they be not hindered by
necessity of sickness or infirmity. They that have bin let blood, may eat
flesh three times that week. They also that travel may eat flesh on the days
permitted by the Church; it is also permissable to eat it on principal and
solemn feasts. The days whereon is no obligation of fasting, they may eat
cheese and eggs: and when they shall come to conuentuall houses, they may care
with other Religious what shall be set before them. But they must content
themselves with two meals a day, except in case of necessity, travel or
weakness: for then this rule does not oblige. Let the eating and d^incking
of the healthy Luc. 2.
be moderate, as the Gospel teaches us saying: Be careful that your hearts
be not ouerchardged with surfe^ting and drunckennesse. Let the said Brethren
never sit down at table, but having first said the Pater Noster and Aue
Maria, and after their meal let them say it with the ordinary graces. And if
at any time they fo get the same, let them say three for one. They shall
fast all the fridayes of the year, it they be not hindered by sickness, or
some other lawful excuse. If the Nativity of our Lord fall on a friday, they
shall not be obliged to fast on that day. From the feast of Alsainctes to
Easter, they shall be bound to fast every wednesday and friday, besides the other
ordinary fastes appointed by the Church. They shall be also obliged to fast every
day from the le^t of saint Martin till Christmas: and from Quinquagesima
sunday till Easter, the sundays excepted. Women with child, if they will,
shall be exempted from all corporal austerityes and rigours from their time of
being great, till after their churching, during which time they shall be obliged
only to prayer. Artificers that labor with the sweat of their bodies, may make
three meals, from Easter day to S. Francis day, if they know it needful. They
that are hired laborers and have their dyett provided, may eat of what shall be
presented them except the friday, and other fastes commanded.

How osten in the year they ought to confess and communicate
THE VI. CHAPTER.
ALl the Brethren and sisters must be careful to confess their sins three
times every year, and devoutly to receive the Blessed Sacrament, reconciling
the^^elues to their neighbors, and making restitution of others goods. The
said times shall be Christmas, Easter and Whitsunday.

That they must not wear offenciue weapons.
THE VII. CHAPTER.
Let not the Brethren wear any offensive weapons, but for defense of the
Church and faith of JESUS CHRIST, or for defense of their contry, or with
permission of their superiors.

In what manner the said Bre. Penitents ought to say their Canonical hours.
THE VIII. CHAPTER.
THe Brethren shall every day say the canonical hours, that is Matins, with
the Lauds, Prime and other hours to the Compline. The Clarcks: to wit, they
that can read the psalter, shall for Prime, say Deus in nomine tuo saluum me
fac. and Beats (...) to the psalm Legem pone, and at the other hours, the
psalms following, according to the use of the Roman Church, with the Gloria
Patr^. And when they are in the Church they shall for Matins say the psalms
which the Priests or Cathed^all Church do say, at least they shall say 12.
Paters, and 12. Anes, with Glor^a Patrs, as they that cannot read: and for each
of the other hours 7. Gloria Patrs, and at Prime and Compline they that can
say the Apostles Creed and the psalm Miserere, shall add it thereunto: when
they say it not at the ordinary hours, let them say thrice the Pater Noster.
The sick shall not be obliged to say these hours, but as they will. They shall
endeavor to be present at Mattins at their parish Church in the time of
saint Martins lent, and the great lent, except some lawful impediment excuse
them.

That the Brethren who can, must make their will.
THE IX. CHAPTER.
Let all the B^eth^en that have any substance, be obliged to consider of their
estate, and within three months after their entry into this confraternity, to
make their testament, wherein they shall dispose of their substance, to the end
that none dye intestate.

How peace is to bemade between the Brethren when occasion requires, and
between strangers.
THE X. CHAPTER.
THe mean to appease quarrels and dissentio^s that may arise between^ the
Brethren and Sisters, and to accord the^, shall be in such necessity to follow
the advice of the Ministers together with the Counsel of the Bishop of the
Diocese, if he be near, and to proced according to the matter and occurances.

To whom the Brethren must have recourse being molested against reason and
their pra^ledges.
THE XI. CHAPTER.
IF it happen that the Brethren or Sisters be iniustly troubled and molested
against their privileges, by the Governors or other Commanders of the place
where they dwell, the superior Ministers must have recourse to the Bishop or
other Ordinaryes of the places, to demand and follow their advise how to
govern themselves in such behalf.

That the Brethren must withal poss^b^l^ty absta ne from solemn oaths.
THE XII. CHAPTER.
Let the Brethren very carefully abstain from solemn oaths, unless they be
thereunto constrained by necessity, except in cases contained in the confession
of the Apostolic sea, that is, for peace, faith calo^niation, and in giving
testimony, and also in contractes of buying, selling and giving, where it shall
appear to be expedient. But in common talk let them withal endeavor avoid
swearing: and if any shall inconsideratly swear (as it often happens in
talkatiue persons) calling it to mind in the examen of his conscience at
night, let them say thrice the Pater noster for such oath: and let every one
be obliged to exhort, instruct and educate his family in the fear and love of
God.

How the Brethren ought to assemble in congregation, and of their hearing Mass.
THE XIII. CHAPTER.
ALl the Brethren and sisters in whatsoever place or city they dwell must
every day, if they may, hear Mass, and every mo^th they shall meet and
assemble in some place deputed by the Minister Rectour, to hear a solemn
Mass: and there each of them shall give an almose to the Chappelain or other
elected to that end, which shall be distributed by the Rectour Minister, among
the Brethren and sisters that are in greatest necessity, and particulerly among
the sick. This almose shall also be employed in the burial and funerales of
the poor deceased: and what remains shall be distributed to the other poor.
Some part of this almose also shall be given to the Church where they assemble.
And every time that they meet, they shall endeavor to have some good Religious
to preach unto them, who shall induce them to penance and to the exercise of
charitable worckes. Let all the Brethren be admonished to keep silence and to
be attentive at prayer during the divine office, especially whiles Mass is
celebrated, and the word of God preached: unless the common good of the
confraternity otherwise require.

How the sick are to be visited, and what care must be had of the dead.
THE XIV. CHAPTER.
WHen any of the Brethren shall be sick, the superior Ministers being thereof in
the behalf of the sick party advertised, they shall visitt or cause him to be
visited at least once in a week, admonishing him touching the state of his
soul, as far forth as they shall find it requisite. And if he be poor, they
shall be careful to procure him what is necessary, out of the almose of the
poor: And if the sick person do dye, all the Brethren and sisters of the
Confraternity that shall be in the town or place where they dye, shall be
presently advertised thereof, to the end they be present at the funerals:
whence they shall not depart till the divine office be ended and the body
interred. The like shall be observed toward the sisters that are sick, and that
depart out of this life. Eight days after the death of any Brother, all the
Brethren and sisters of the Confraternity shall be obliged, to say for their
souls (the Priests) a Mass of the dead, they that can read, 50. psalms, and
they that cannot read, 50. Pater nosters, with Requiem aternam. Let also be
procured to be said three Masses every year for the Brethren and sisters
departed. They that can read the psalter, shall at their commodity say it
entierly every year, and they that cannot read, shall say 100. Pater nosters
adding Requiem eternam at the end of each one.

Of the Superior Ministers.
THE XV. CHAPTER.
Let every Minister and other officer on whom, in this form, order and rule
of life, any office shall be imposed, receive the same with devotion, and labor
to execute it piously, and let not the said offices be given and distributed,
but for certain time, and let no Minister Rectour be established for term of
life, butt let there be a certain time prefixed, which expired, let an other
be created.

How the Brethren Penitents that are faulty and delinquent, are to be visited
and corrected.
THE XVI. CHAPTER.
THe superior Ministers, Brethren and Sisters of every town or place in time
to that end appointed, shall assemble in some Monastery or Church there to make
their common visitation: where their visitors shall be Priests of some approved
Religion and of exemplare life, that they may impose on the delinquent,
healthful penance for their sins committed, neither let any other be
admitted to his office of Minister. And because this form of life had its
original from the holy Father Saint Francis: We counsel them to choose
visitors and reformers of this confraternity, of the Order of Friar Minors, who
shall conserve it and have particular care therefore. And when the Superiors or
Gardians shall be thereunto required, they shall freely accept thereof. This office
of visitation shall be kept at least once in a year, or oftener if it shall be
necessary. The obstinate, disobedient and incorrigible shall be first admonished
three several times: after which, if they will not amend, let them by the advice of the discreet Brethren, as incorrigible persons be excluded and
expelled their confraternity.

That the Brethren must avoid debates and contentions among themselves, or
others.
THE XVII. CHAPTER.
Let the Brethren and Sisters, to their utmost, avoid strifes, disputes
debates and contentions. And when any beginning of discord death appear, let
them incontinently seek to suppress and exting^ish the same: if not, let the
matter be brought before the Magistrate who has auctority to judge thereof, who
hearing the parties with patience, shall determine their discord by justice.

How the Brethren may be dispensed withal in their abst^nences.
THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
THe O^dinaryes of the places, or the Visitor shall have power to dispense with
the Brethren and sisters, touching the abstinences fastes and other austerities
of this rule upon lawful cause, and when they shall see it expedient.

That the Ministers must discover unto the visitor the manisest saultes.
THE XIX. CHAPTER.
THe Ministers shall aduettise the Visitor of the manifest faults of the
Brethren and Sisters, that the culpable may be punished: And if any be found
inco^igible after three several admonitions by the Minister, or by some of the
discreet Brethren, let him be denounced to the Father Visitor, who shall
expel him the confraternity, and publish them in the congregation.

Approbation of the Pope that none of the Brethren shall be obliged under mortal
sin to observe the points afor^said.
THE XX. CHAPTER.
But in all the afo^esayd things, whereunto the Brethren and Sisters of your
Order are not obliged by the commandments of God, or ordinances of the Roman
Church: we will not that they be bound under mortal sin: but let them with
prompt humility receive the penance enjoined them for the excess committed,
and study to accomplish it entierly.

The sequel of the confirmation of this rule.
Let no man presume to dismember the page of this our decree and rule, or
rashly to contradict it. But if any presume to att^pt it, let him know that
therein he incurreth the indignation of Almighty God, and of his blessed
Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul. Given at the Reate the 17. of August the second
year of our Pontificate.

The Brief of Pope Nicolas the fourth, in favor of the confraternity of
Penitents.
THE XXI. CHAPTER.
NIcolas Bishop the servant of the servants of God, to all faithful to whom
these presents shall appear, heal^h and Apostolical benediction. The only
son of God, by whose precious wounds we have bin redeemed and revived in the
fountain of his precious blood, founded and instiruted the holy Church on the
rock of faith instantly after his birth, and committed the jurisdiction and
power of his celestial empire to the blessed Prince of the Apostles and porter
of eternal life, giving to him and to his successors, principality and power
to bind and loose the dispea^ced of Israel, that by the mystery of his passion
are retired into his fold. And therefore the foueraine Roman Bishop successor
of the same principasitie of those principal watches and careful diligences,
and not of studyes and desi^es filled with vanities, is changed by Apostolical
obligation, that the Church always multiply with a new generation and race, to
be united to the well-disciplined flock, because the condition of humane nature
is easily broaken or dissolved (as an earthen vessel that is subject to
fragility) and with difficulty reformed. And therefore it is necessary for the
faithful of the same Church, to have especial care, as having bin diligently
educated in the innocence of sincerity and verity, not to deface and corrupt
the doctrine and constitutions of the Successor of the same Prince, or in
whatsoever manner by words of murmr to hinder the same: for as the Apostle
says: He is contrary to the Ordinances of God that resists his power. Since
then the holy servant of God and singular Confessor of JESUS CHRIST S.
Francis, enflamed with the burning fire of charity, disciple both in words and
worckes of the glorious Apostles, advancing himself with a spirit full of
verity, to augment the family in the house of our Redeeemer JESUS CHRIST, with
intention to reduce into the way of salvation the feet of such as walked in
darcknes, instructing them without learning, he has infrituted an Order with
the title of Penitents, to whom he has given mean to meritt eternal life.
We desisiring to favor the said Order, to the end the intention and zeal of
the said Confessor do increase in virtues, and that the Professors of this
Order by mean of our care, make good progress in the way of their salvation:
It has seemed unto us requisite, approving the said Order, that therein be
performed certain ordinaces worthy to be observed, as most behoufull, which by
our letters we have to that end perscribed unto them; and among others, where
we counsel and with a Fatherly affection admonish the said Brethren
Penitents, to follow and observe the said rule and form of life: and that so
doing, they with perfect charity by mean thereof conse^^e a mutual union and
affection. Natural reason and duty requiring, that for reverence unto this
holy Confessor, the Professors of the said Order be conducted and guided by
the doctrine and counsel of the Friar Minors, the said Saint having hin
institutor of these Orders: and therefore let them procure to have of the Friar
Minors to be Visitors and reformers of the said Religion: And for so much as
some of the said Order (which is lamentable) by their perverse will, being
doubtless illegitimate children, yea bastardes of the Church and of this holy
Confessor of JESUS CHRIST, do rebel against this our permission and
counselle, and have presumed to affirm and maintain that the Religious
receiving and observing that rule cannot be saved therein, and are so
temerarious as that without any fear they attempt to pervert, and at least
do persecut the^ that desire to follow our said consaile: We therefore
determining not to let this presumption with conniuence to pass unpunished,
do totally annull the process made, or to be made against those that follow
our counsel; and will that all they who with reverence accept and follow our
said behouful counsel, do participate of the grace of the Church and of our
benediction, and do enjoy the privileges granted to the same Order of
Penitents by the holy Apostolic sea, or to be granted hereafter. We further
ordain, that they who shall resist or hinder so holy a constitution, be in
such sort restrained by the Ordinaries of the places, that they enforce them to
desist from their turbulent impedimentes: Notwithstanding whatsoever
privilege, or under whatsoever form of words, obtained to the contrary, and
let the Brethren Penitents that shall follow our said healthful counsel,
have Ministers taken and elected among, themselves, according to the form
contained in the said rule. Given at Ciuita Veazia the 8. day of August the
third year of our Pontificate.

The life of S. Elizabeth the widow, daughter to the king of Hungary, and of
the third Order of S. Francis.
Of the Innocence and virtue of S. Elizabeth in her most tender youth.
THE VIII. CHAPTER.
THis blessed S. the daughter of king Henry of Hongary was royally educated in
her Fathers house: but being by divine grace illuminated, and opening the eyes
of her natural knowledge, she timely began to misprise the vanities of the world
and the apprehensions of youth, changing them into desires to serve God. And
from five years old she continued and perseuered in prayer in the Church, with
such mature gravity and such repose, that her Gouernesse had much labor to
withdraw her thence. And therefore she was often constrained to find occasions
to go into her chapel at accustomed hours, where she would spend such time
as she could, and make her prayer prostrate on her bare knees, using all
industry to induce her waiting ladies to do the like, and to pray, read
psalms, and be devout and honor the saints. She so used the matter that she
drew a spiritual fruit out of the very plays and pastimes that her Ladies
used: for she obliged those that lost, to say certain Paters Nosters and Aue
Mary's, or to give such a sum to the poor. And as her years increased, so
did also her devotion, purity and zeal in all virtues, choosing the sacred
Virgin Mary for her Advocate and S. John the Evangelist for the Guardian of her
innocence, to whom she was so specially devoted, that she denied nothing,
which being in her power to give was demand for his sake. She had her spirit
so elevated, that she took occasion of every matter presented, to stir her
self to devotion, in such sort that when she was constrained to be present at
assemblies of magnificence and sportes, she would often, in the midst of the
greatest pleasure and contentment that could happen therein, leave the company:
which she would do so dexterously and prudently, that it much edified all that
were present. She was clothed very decently and modestly, and did eat
temperatly: and then caused to be given to the poor (which then attended for
such almose at her door) the rest of the meat prepared for her: she would be
present at the divine service with great reverence and devotion. Whiles the
Gospel was read, and at the elevation of the most sacred Host, she would put
off her gloves, jewels, and other precious ornaments of her head, and lay them
on the ground, for greater reverence to almighty God. She never omitted her
ordinary prayers and pious exercises, and sometimes would watch a good part of
the night, to satisfye the omissions and employments of the day.

Of S. Elizabeth's perseverance in virtues after she was married, of her pious
behavior, and of her patience in her afflictions.
THE IX. CHAPTER.
THis heroical Lady being elevated and nourced in these pious exercises, she
by divine inspiration entierly resigned her self to whatsoever it pleased God
to ordain and dispose of her: for albeit she had resolved with her self never
to have other Spouse then JESUS CHRIST, yet did the divine providence otherwise
ordain: for so much as her Father to whom she was most obedient, enforced her
to mary Lantgraue, Duke of Toringe, of the greatest Princes and of fairest
possessions of Germany; disposing this marriage for the extreme necessity that
the Toringians had (being half barbarous) of some one to excite them to the
love of God, and to the practice of charitable worckes toward their
neighbor, and worthy merittes of the virtue of chastity. This holy princess
found much trouble with her husband the first year, not that he wanted
sufficient inclination to virtue, but by reason of the ill disposition of those
of his counsel, and of some particular servants and domestical officers of
his, who interpreted and reputed the great humility of this worthy Princess,
for sottishnes and want of ciuility and Courtly complements: and therefore did
contemn and persecute her to their utmost. But by her continual prayers she
obtained of God many particular graces, and namely that her husband should not
only not hinder her holy exercises, but should be very joyful, the which
incontinently came to pass. For being replenished with the fear of God, he
permitted her secretly to do whatsoever she thought to tend to the service of
his divine Majesty, comforting her ordinarily in the disgustes and
discontentme^ts that she might fall into by the subtility of the devil in
spiritual life, and by sweet words encouraging her for the good of her soul:
In such sort that albeit this holy Princess had changed her estate, yet did
she not desist from her pious exercises and holy intentions, always using very
rigorous penance, afflicting her body by disciplines watchinges and
abstinences, and did also very often arise from her husbands bed, and spent the
rest of the night in prayer unto God. And if sometimes sleep did overcome her,
she would only make use of a pillow on the ground to sleep on. And when her
husband was from home, she would employ the whole night in prayer, in the
company of her celestial Spouse. She secretly woare a haircloth, and very
often used disciplining to conform her self to her Savior, that would be so
cruelly scourged for us. She was so severe in her abstinence, and kept it so
perfectly, that in the midst of banquettes, of the abondance and delicacie of
the most exquisit dishes, she would often content her self with only bread,
and would entertain those that were with her at table with caruing and
presenting meat unto them, to the end they might not observe her, but might
thinck she did eat indifferently of every dish. Because she took no pleasure
to behold so much good meat, she would often send to a poor yet virtuous
servant of hers for some of his ordinary diet. whereon she would feed. Her
husband observing all these things did tolerat them with an extreme admiration
and devotion, and would say, that he would wilingly do the like, but that it
was necessary for him to conserve his house and estate.

Of the prayer, humility, poverty, obedience and forgetfulness of injuries, of
S. Elizabeth, and of the revelation which God made unto her of the remission of
her sins.
THE X. CHAPTER.
THis virtuous woman was so fervent in prayer, that she never prayed without
weeping, and yet in such sort as she kept it unknown. In her prayer she felt
both sorrow and joy in her soul: she would say that to weep with force and
heaviness was to show an evil countenance unto God. It once happened that
being according to her custom in prayer, her heart, eyes and hands elevated
toward heaven, her soul was so rapt and swallowed up in God, that burning
coals falling on a fold or plait of her gown, burned a good part thereof she
not perceiving it, and had burned yet farther, if one of her servants passing
by, had not hastily extinguished the same: in doing whereof she cried so loud
that she caused the pious lady to return to her self, who with her own
hands set a piece on that part of her gown which was burned. She would not
have her servants and the poor people to call her Lady, but would co^uerse
with them as their equal causing them to sit by her, and eating, spinning and
worcking with them without any ceremony. She so affected humility, that she
disdayned not or omitted the basest occurance for the love of God. In the
midst of the greatest prosperity that she ever had, she always desired the
estate of poverty, to imitate and follow that of JESUS CHRIST in this life,
shunning all pomp and worldly glory. By this favor and holy desire, she would
often being alone in her house with her friends and servants, cloth her
self poorly, affirming that if she fell into poverty, she would in that sort
be clothed. She would be always present at general processions and
litanies, bare foot, and attyred in linen, and with great humility would hear
the sermons among the simple people. When she went first to Church in the
morning, she would not go attyred according to her quality, but the most
simply she could, in example of the Virgin Mary, carrying her child in her arms
and laying it very reverently on the Altar, there offering a lamb and a
candell. Retourning home after the service, she would give the clothes she
woare at mass to some very poor woman. And the more perfectly to observe the
rule of humility, she promised obedience in that concerned the good of her
soul to her Confessor M. Courard a poor Religious, but of great piety and
doctrine, whose counsels, though generally virtuous, she so strictly
observed, as if JESUS CHRIST himself had commanded her. By this obedience and
upon a scruple of her conscience she would neither touch nor use any thing
bought with the money a^ysing of any gain made by the Officiers of Lantg^aue
her husband, fearing that it might be gotten of the blond of the poor
subjects. And albeit the same were lawful and permissable to that saint, in
regard of the simplicity of those times, yett at this present it may not be
done nor permitted to any.

To pray for ones enem^es is very pleasing unto God.
Having in her widowhood received a great injury, which exceedingly troubled
and disquieted her, she fell to her prayers, and began with great abondance of
tears to pray unto God for those that had done her injury, beseeching him to
bestow on each of them a grace whereby they might receive some consolation of
his divine Majesty. During the fervor of this prayer, she heard a voice that
said unto her: thou have never presented a prayer unto me more grateful then
this, which has thorough pierced my bowels. Wherefore I pardon thee all thy
sins, and give thee my grace. This holy Princess knowing the mercy which God
had showed her, considered with her self, what course of life she might
thenceforward undertake to become more grateful to his divine Majesty, and to
serve him more dilligently. But being in deep consideration herevpo^, the
ineffable searcher of hearts said unto her: hope in God, do good worckes, and
shun sin, and thou shall always have comfort.

Of the devotion of this S. toward the Friar Minors, and how, doubting of the
love of God toward her, he miraculously displanted a tree, and replanted it
where she desired.
THE XI. CHAPTER.
THis blessed lady was both a singular mother and daughter unto the Friar
Minors, as one replenished with the spirit of pouer^y and contempt of the
world, whereof they made profession: and the^fore having bin many days without
the sight of any she was exceeding melancholy. Her husband perceauing that she
was more sad then of custom, asked her the cause: whereto she answered, that
it was because she had not in a long time seen any servant of God, nor of them
heard the word of his divine Majesty: And therefore was she so heavy and
melancholy both interiourly and exteriourly. Which her busband understanding,
he presently sent for Friar Minors to comfort her: who being come she presently
resumed her former serenity and mildnes of countenance, and a long time
discoursed of the estate of her soul with one of them who was her spiritual
Father, and among other things thus spoke unto him: Father, that which most
afflicts my soul, is when I consider my sins to deserve that I be little
loved of almighty God, since I continually strive with my v^most ability to love
him; and yet I much fear that he ^eiecte^h me as unworthy his presence and his
love. The Religious thereupon assured her that she was far more beloved of
God, then he could be of her. Whereto the Saint replied: If it were so, my God
would not pe^mitt me to be separated from him one only moment, but would
ordinarily visitt me with some sicknesses or afflictions, which I desire, and
would exceedingly effect for the love of his divine Majesty. This good
Religious by very pregnant reasons demonstrated unto her, what and how great is
the love of God toward God infinitely surpasses us in love.
his creature, and how much it exceeds ours, in that his love is infinite,
eternal, strong, pure, and entier: and ours is slender, temporal, feeble,
impure, and imperfect. But this Religious discoursed to little purpose: for the
virtuous lady could not believe him, and therefore, showing him a tree on the
other side of a ^iuer whereby they were, she said: Father I would rather believe
that the tree which you yonder see could remove hither, then believe my self
to be more loved of God then I love him, being as I am at this present
separated from the sweetness of his true love. The sequel was most admirable,
for those words were no sooner spoaken, but the tree was displanted by the
roots and transplanted on the side of the river where they were. This
Princess then remaining as it were in ecstasy, experie^ced in her soul how
much the love of God exceeds ours, and so she acknowledged her self to be
vanquished by the love of God.

Of the great charity of this holy Princess, and how she spent her time in
worckes of mercy.
THE XII. CHAPTER.
THe lively waters of the worckes of mercy did continually flow out of this
fountain of divine love, wherewith the poor of JESUS CHRIST were refreshed,
who says that he will accept the said worckes as done unto himself. This
Princess was extremely sparing and frugall in what was for her own use and
pa^ticuler necessitie^ but exceeding liberal toward to poor, whom she
could not endure to want any thing necessary unto them: for which virtue the
people called her the true mother of the poor, who in regard of this her
piety, would often inuit her to be God mother to their children in baptism;
whereunto she would voluntarily accord, to have ^ore occasion to assist the^ and
to procure the education of their child^e^. She one time gave one of her gowns
to a poor woman, who with this almose thought her self rich, and conceived
thereof such an excessive joy, that at the instant she fell as dead to the
ground. And this compassionate Princess having prayed for her, she returned to
her self. She earned money by spinning and sowing with her maids, which she
distributed to the poor. She also employed her self in that exercise, to give
example of humility unto her women and maydnes, and to shun idleness. He^
husband being in Italy, there happened in her territories an extreme famine,
for relief whereof this pious woman gathered together all her revenues, then
got a note of all the poor of the City, and relieved them therewith. An other
time wanting money for the like supply, she sold her jewels, and with the price
thereof, ^eleiued the needy. She would often times withdraw things necessary,
from her self, her women and maids, to supply the necessity of the poor. She
caused an hospital to be builded at the foot of her castle, which was very
high, where she placed all the poor sick people, and every day went down to
visitt them, albeit the descent was very troublesome and difficult, and
releiued their necessities, exhorting them to patience and to purge their
souls by confession and communion. She served, attended, and dressed them
withan exemplar humility, supporting with an extreme patience, the loathsomes
that issued out of their soars, and sometimes having no other linen at hand
to make them clean, she would putt off her coife and disfurnish her head to
dry and wipe off the filthy matter of the said soars, which so strongly
sauoured that her Ladies could not endure them.

Of the death of the Duke her husband, and of many afflictions which she
endured in her widowhood.
THE XIII. CHAPTER.
Our Lord had by his grace and by the prayers and petitions of the Duchess,
converted the La^tgraue, so that albeit he were by the affairs of his estate
and his possessions exceedingly hindered from the service of God, yet did he
not omit to have good desires and with his utmost put in practice good
worckes. But because he could not persist in spiritual exercises, he permitted
his wife to employ her self therein for the honor of God and the benefitt of
both their souls. And this virtuous woman desiring her husband should employ
his forces, in defense of the Catholic faith, she induced him to visit the
holy land, and to assist the Christians in recovery thereof. He then to this
effect having with his troops for so laudable an enterprise advanced his
journey so far as Italy, rested at Brindes to attend convenient time and
weather to take shipping: But it pleased God that he there fell sick of a
mortal infirmity, so that he shortly after with an exemplar contrition, yielded
his spirit unto God. S. Elizabeth being advertised of his death, received her
widowhood with almost the like will as she had don her mariadge, resolving to
apply her self entierly to the service of her celestial Spouse. And so
almighty God began to visitt her with greater afflictions, as having a soul
more free, and was a little more sublime then ever. For as soon as the death of
the Lantgraue was diuulged, she was by his kindred and vassalles expulsed her
palace, as if she had bin a prodigal waster of the revenue of her estate: and
was so abandoned, that the night following (as a rejected creature) not knowing
where to repose, she retired in to a cottage employed for the shelter of
beasts. There she joyfully gave thanckes to God for her misfortune, which she
reputed as a great favor and most singular grace. The next morning, she
repaired unto the monastery of the Friar Minors, and prayed the Religious to
sing Te Deum laudamus in thanckes-giuing to God, for that according to her
desire he had afforded her the estate of poverty. After that she ordered her
children to be disposed into diuer*s places, to be instructed and educated
according to their quality and degree, having no mean to retain them any
longer with her, many iniuryes and affrontes being imposed on her by the kindred
of her deceased husband in his vassals, which she joyfully and with invincible
patience supported as a favor sent her by almighty God. An archibishop that
was her uncle caused her no small affliction, in that seeing her young and
reduced to such poverty, he resolved to bestow her honorably in marriage. But
the espouse of JESUS CHRIST, having laid a firm resolution rather to dye then
to mary again, obtained of God by mean of prayer, the victory in so strong a
conflict. Whiles she honorably remained in a castle of her uncles, the body of
her husband was brought from Brindes, which was received by the said
Archibishop with a very solemn troup and procession of the Clergy, and
accompayned by the said Princess with many tears, she thus speaking unto
almighty God: I give thee infinite thanckes, O sovereign Bounty that it has
pleased thee to comfort me with the receipt of the bones of my deceased husband
thy servant. Thou alone know my God, how much I loved him, because he loved
and feared thee. And nevertheless thou know also what consolation I have
received of his death, being deprived of his presence, even for thy love, in
that he went to serve thee for the recovery of the holy land: and albeit I
received an exceeding contentment to live with him, yet was it with condition
that we both together might travel as poor beggars over the world: But since
that may not be, thou know my God, that if it were in my power to restore
him to life, I would not do it, nor were it requisi^ for me to employ therein
one hair of my head, if I thought it not thy holy will. But I recommend his
soul and mine to thy divine clemency. The king of Hongary having understood
the death of the Lantgraue his son in law, and the miserable estate of his
daughter, and with what impiety she was persecuted by the subjects of her
husband, he sent one of the principal Earls of his kingdom, to bring her
unto him: who having sought her, found her spinning of wool among very poor
women, wheratt he so admired and was so g^ieued, that he began to break out
into exclamations, regrets and complaints: and at lenght delivered his cha
dge, aduertising her of the will of her Father. But in vain did he strive to
persuade her to return to her contry: for Psalm. 83.
she as a generous Princess, choie with the Prophett David, rather to live
abiected with the poor in the house and service of God, then honored in
royal delights, and in the palace of terresi^^all Princes.

How S. Elizabeth became religious, and founded a great hospital for the use
of poor sick people.
THE XIV. CHAPTER.
THis blessed widow had vowed that if she ouer-liued her husband, she would
spend the rest of her days in perpetual chastity, obedience and poverty,
which she failed not with much fervor to accomplish; and the^fore she took the
habitt of the Penitents of the third Order of S. Francis, and being clothed in
a coat and cloak of gross gray cloth, all patched with sackloth, she promised
obedience to her Confessor called Fa. Courad, a Religious of notable sanctity,
which she most exactly observed, even in worckes of penance, as fastes,
disciplines, and other mortifications, in which virtues this holy Religious man
did exercise her for the greater benifitt of her soul. And to the end she
might entierly deliver her heart in possession unto God, without being
distracted or hindered by any temporal affection, she besought his divine
majesty to setle in her heart such a misprise of al temporalities, as might
deprive her even of her love to her children, and give her force, to support
all the iniuryes of this life. Arising from this prayer, she went and thus
spoke to her companions: Know ye, that almighty God hearing my prayers has
granted me, that henceforward I shall never esteem all the magnificences,
amities, and other deceiptfull allurements of the world, more then filth, yea
neither shall I have any care of my children, more then of my neighbors, to
the end I apply my love to nothing but his divine majesty. After she had taken
the religious habitt, she with greater fervor addicted her self to prayer, as
also to worcks of mercy; and having received 2000. Marckes of money as part of
her dowry, she gave the greatest part thereof to the poor, and with the rest
builded an honorable and commodious hospital, to entertain poor sick people,
and there to have them cherished, attended and medicined: wherein her self, as
the most humble servant, served the poor sick creatures, yea with such charity
as she washed their feet, and made their beds: and then would say to her
companions that assisted her: we have this day received a great favor of God
in that we have washed, covered and served him, since it is he whom we serve in
his poor people. She relieved and assisted with such great fervor and
humility, that in one night she carried a poor blind and very sick boy, six
times to his necessities, albeit he was every where full of filth and
lothsomnes, and then joyfully washed the linen that he had fouled. There was
in this hospital a leapresse, whom she often purified, though she were so
covered with filth and leprosy, that one could not so much as behold her
without horror. But this Princess did handle her as if she had bin very
clean, dressed her meat, gave it her to eat, and applied her medicines, pulled
off her hose, and pared her nails with such promptitude as she procured a
strange admiration in all the beholders: She caused the sick ordinarily to
confess and communicate: and in like case a poor old and sick woman, that had
no will to confess, was by her corrected and made confess. She washed and
shrouded the dead bodies with her own hands, and with very great devotion
attended them to buryall. Our Lord by many miracles which he wrought by this
blessed lady, made appea^e how grateful this worck of mercy was unto his
divine majesty.

What order S. Elizabeth observed, and the miracles she wrought in the said
Monastery.
THE XV. CHAPTER.
Saint Elizabeth in her hospital ordained, that no poor person should be
admitted without being formerly confessed, because a man in mortal sin does
not deserve at the hands of God, the bread he eats. It one time happened
that a blind man demanded entertaynment in the said hospital, but because he
would not confess, he was not admitted: wherefore retourning he murmured,
blasphemed and tayled for that he was rejected thence. But being charitably
reprehended and admonished by this virtuous Lady and a Friar Minor, he was
converted and very devoutly confessed his sins, and then was admitted into
the hospital, where being, the Religious man said to S. Elizabeth: Since you
have received the blind man, and have given him to eat, you must also if you
please, restore him his sight. The S. as one full of humility, answered:
Father that which you require is a worck of importance, and such as none but
God can do, as he alone that illuminateth the blind: but since it has pleased
his infinite bounty so mercifully to grant him the light of grace, I shall be
glad that he voutchsafe him that of his eyes. And therefore Father, obtain you
of his divine majesty the light of one eye, and I will endeavor to pray for the
other. And so both of them with great confidence and fervor falling to their
prayers, the sight of one eye was restored to the blind, and a little after, the
other. Wherein God showed the difference of the meritts of the intercessors, in
that the sight restored to the second eye, was very much clearer, purer, and
sharper then the other.

The saint one day entering secretly into the hospital with two servants to
visit the sick, she found at the door a paralytique lying on the ground, who
was also deaf and dumble. She having compassion of this poor creature, asked
him with a low voice what he ayled. The sick man that could not year her,
moved his head and mouth as one dumb; and making signs with his hands, the
servant of God with fervor of the holy Ghost said unto him: I command thee in
the name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, to tell me where is thy grief: at which
word the paralytique arose on his feet and said: I have bin for many years
both dumb and lame as you see, and this is the grief I had. This saint
utterly amazed at such a miracle, speedily returned whence she came, to avoid
the notice and observation of the world.

As she went an other time to visitt the sick, it happened that she saw one so
much decayed, as by reason of his extreme weakness he could not eat. The S.
prayed him to tell her what he desired to eat. The sick creature sighing
answered her, that he could willingly eat of some fresh water fish: the
virtuous Princess, assuring him to procure it for him, left him much
comforted, and presently sent a servant of the hospital to get such fish for
the sick man. But retourning he advertised her that the river being frozen,
there was no mean to have any. Which this compassionate mother of the poor
understanding, having confidence in God, and being well instructed by the holy
Ghost, took a basin in her hand, and went incontinently to a fountain close
by the hospital, wherinto having dipped her basin she drew it out full of
water and fish, which with great pleasure she boiled, and gave to the sick
party that was half dead, who did eat with such appetite, that a little after
he arose from his bed sound, and gave thanckes to almighty God.

Of the contemplation of S. Elizabeth, and how she delivered her mother out of
Purgatory, and converted a very sensual young man.
THE XVI. CHAPTER.
THis holy Princess had ordinarily revelations and visitations of her beloved
JESUS CHRIST, by his most fervent love wherewith she was wounded. Being in the
Church one day in the lent, she so settled and fixed her eyes on the altar,
that she made it appear that she there saw the presence of the divine majesty,
so remaining many hours receiving celestial revelations. Retourning to her
self, she was constrained by so great weakness to rest her head on the lap of
one of her servants, and so remaining a while, she began to behold the heaven
at a window, discovering such a joy in her countenance, that it enforced her
to break out into a merueillous laughter: and a little after this laughter
turned into weeping, then again openning her eyes she showed the like signs
of joy as before, and shutting them she began again to weep, thus continuyng
without speech till Compline. And then she began to say. O my God: if thy holy
will be to remain with me, I most humbly beseech thee to believe that I affect
not nor desire any thing more passionatly then to remain eternally with thy
divine majesty. Her companio^s having prayed her to tell them for the glory of
God and the edification of their souls, what she had seen, she said: my
beloved sisters, I have seen heaven open, and my Lord JESUS CHR. benignely
bowing unto me, and showing unto me his holy gracious countenance. Whiles I
beheld him, I was filled with incomprehe^sible joy, but not seeing him I was
oppressed with inestimable grief: therefore did I so bitterly weep. And
therefore God ha^ing compassion of me he again comforted and rejoiced me with
remonstrance of his glorious face replenished with inessable splendor, who
asking me if I would remain with him, I answered as you have hea d. Her
companions further prayed her to impart unto them the revelation she had a
little before being before the altar. She answered: I may not tell you what I
have seen: yet I tell you I saw a merueillous matter of almighty God, and my
heart was filled with his joyful and gracious visitation. This S. was so visited
of God in diverse manners, though she revealed nothing to her companions thereof,
nor what she knew to be the will of God, who soueth the secrecy of his friends.
Our Redeemer would manifest the fervent charity of this blessed S. hearing her
prayers by diverse effects, whereof we will here record the two examples
following.

It happened one night as she slept that her mother appeared unto her in
vision, on her knees in this sort entreating her: alas my daughter, remember
the pains I endured in thy birth, and pray for me, for thou must know I suffer
extreme torment for having lived too negligently, and not done penance for my
sins. The S. with this complaintive voice awaking, and touched and moved with
compassion toward her mother, she fell on her knees and made her prayer to
God, demanding mercy of him for her mother. And after a long and seruent
prayer she fell a sleep, and an other time saw her mother in vision with a
joyful countenance, who said: My daughter I am by thy prayers, delivered of
the pains wherewith I was tormented in purgatory, and am now goeing to heaven.

This saint seeing a young man very sensual and full of vanity, had pity of
him, and prayed for him, whom also she persuaded to pray to God for himself,
whereto he accorded. So whiles they both prayed, the young man began to cry out:
Madame, pray no more for me: pray no more, forbear if you please. Which the S.
hearing, she redoubled the fervor of her prayers, and the young man began
again to cry louder: Madame, pray no more for me, I am all burned: which
exteriourly appeared: for all his body did smoke by the extreme sweat wherein
he was, which made him tremble, lift up his arms, and his countenance to
fail. They that found him there, touching his flesh, could not endure their
hands on it: his clothes were al wet with the excessive sweat that bathed
him, and therefore he still increased his cries, saying that he burned. But the
prayer of the saint being ended, this extreme and visible heat left the young
man, who retourning to the true knowledge of himself, was then so purged and
illuminated with divine grace, that the entered into the Religious Order of
Friar Minors, where he lived and died piously: and so God showed the force and
virtue of the prayer of his holy servant, not in these two examples only, but
also in many others.

Of the blessed death of S. Elizabeth, and of the great miracles she wrought,
and how Pope Gregory the 9. canonized her.
THE XVII. CHAPTER.
THe time of peregrinatio^ of this holy widow being expired, our lord appeared
unto her in vision, and very familierly said: Mine elect, come, possess the
celestial habitation. In the morning she related this news to her companions:
then by order she received with an examplar devotion all the sacraments of the
Church: after that, she prepared what was necessary for her obsequies, and the
night following tourning toward a corner of the bed, they that were near her
heard a clear voice most sweetly singing: whereupon one of her familier
companions asked her who it was that did sing there, and she mildely answered
that there was a little bird, which by the pleasing melody of his tune had
induced her to sing: then she began to cry, avoid, avoid, avoid wicked spirit.
So that the devil being come to see if he could find any thing for him in this
saint, vanished at that voice. And she having her countenance very joyful
and her spirit by prayer elevated unto God, demanded if it were not yet
midnight, at which hour our Savior voutsafed to be borne in the world, and
laid in the cribbe: then saying that the hour was come when God would inuit
her soul to the celestial mariadge, she suddenly mounted unto heaven. Her body
having remained four days unburied, continued so beautiful and yielded so
sweet a savor, that it represented rather a glorious then mortal body. There
appeared at that instant on the roof of the church a great number of birds of
strange kind, which did so sweetly sing, that they filled those that saw and
heard them with extreme admiration: this was to make known the feast which was
celebrated in heaven at the entertaynment of this blessed soul: her funerals
were filled with great clamours; complaints and lamentations particulerly of
the poor, for the death and absence of her that loved, attended, and dressed
them as amiably as if she had bin the carnal mother to them all. There repaired
thither a great confluence of people that with much devotion we^e present at
her obsequies each one entitling her a saint and blessed. He that could get
so nere her body as to have one of her hairs or part of her habitt, esteemed
it as a notable treasure. Then would our Lord make known the glory of this his
faithful servant, by many miracles which by her merittes he wrought, restoring
sight to the blind, curing the lame, cleansing the leprous, dispossessing the
possessed, giving also sight to one borne blind and her self being laid in her
grave, delivered many by her intercession from death. Whereof Pope Gregory the
ninth being ad^ertised, and authentically assured of the miracles Wrought at
the sepulcher of this holy woman to whom living he carried a particular
devotion, after due and ordinary information in such case procured, and the
examen of her life and miracles effected, with the consent of all the Cardinals
and Prelates of the Church that could be assembled, the said Pope enroled her
in the Catalogue of SS. ordayning her feast to be solemnized over all the
Catholic Church. This blessed S. departed this life the year of grace 1231.
the 19. day of Noue^ber. Certain years after, her relics being translated
her body was found in the cousin of lead where it was first laid in sepulture,
her flesh being melted into oil and most precious liquor, that yielded a most
delicious and pleasing ^auour: this oil restored health to infinite sick
people, and a very long time distilled from her sacred bones.

The life of the B. Elzearius of the third order of saint Francis, and S.
Delphine his wife.
Of the sanctity, mortification, abstinence, and virginity of S. Elzearius.
THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
ELzearius was Earl of Arian in Province, no less generous and noble in
virtues and sanctity, then eminent and famous in race and generation; for the
Ea^les of Arian his predecestors were of the most illustrious of Prouence. This
nobleman from thirteen years of age accustomed to fast often, and woare a cord
girded on his flesh, knotted with five knottes, which he used as a restraint
and bridle to carnal sensuality, and as a secrett memory of the five wounds
of our lord JESUS CHRIST. When he was ouer-wearyed with watching and was
overcome with necessity of sleep, he never putt of his clothes to take his
rest: and by day woare an hair-cloth, thereby to feel some affliction in his
body both by day and night, considering that without afflictions the fruits of
spiritual desires cannot be obtained. His rigours also served him to repress
the co^cupiscences and stinges of the flesh, and to obtain the fruits of true
wisdom. His age increasing, he addicted himself to a stricter rule of
abstinence, chasticing his body by fastes, to subject it unto the spirit. He
gave virtuous and pious instructions to his family, that they might live in the
fear of God, and not injury their neighbor, but might edify him, and that
God might by them be served and honored. This saint after his youth (though
he had bin delicately nourrished) was a great friend unto chastity, and so
continued even to his death, preserving in his soul and body the inestimable
treasure of virginity.

How saint Elzearius was married, and accorded with his wife, to conserve their
virginity.
THE XIX. CHAPTER.
S. Elzearius was married in his youth, unto a gentlewoman of noble family
called Delphine, who had a like intention with her husband to preserve her
virginity. She being past twelve years of age, and knowing she should shortly
be delivered and committed to Elzearious her Spouse, began exceedingly to fea^e
that notwithstanding the sanctity she knew to be in him, as not sufficiently
fi^me and resolute in this grace, he would overthrow the holy resolution she
had to co^serue her integrity. And consulting thereof with a Friar Minor that
was her ghostly Father, called Friar Philip Denguerre a man of notable piety,
he gave her full asseurance and satisfaction, with a prophetical spirit
telling her, that she should not only entierly observe her vow, but that her
husband and she should live together chastely and so persevere to the end. And so
the nuptial solemnities being ended, they lived together twenty seven years
religiously and piously, under the shadow of the name of mariadge, very well
united in spirit, but remote from the union of the flesh, preserving in this
vessel of earth, the inestimable treasure of most precious chastity, a virtue
not so much recommendable as rare, and so much more worthy to be imitated, at
least in part, as the contrary vice is damnable and ruinous.

Of the worthy and singular virtues of S. Elzearius.
THE XX. CHAPTER.
THis holy man duly considering that the principal virtue which the servant
of God can have, is the misprise of himself, and consequently humility, and
not worldly nobility: his spirit could never be raised to vain glory by the
great substance, honors and puissance which the eminency of his house did yield
him. His words were gracious and pleasing conformable to the spirit that
delivered them: and the better to attain to the perfect contempt of himself,
he would often, for the love of JESUS CHRIST, wash the soars and vlceres of
leapers with his one hands, and serve them with gteat fervor of devotion, and
with such charity, as if with his own eyes he had seen and served JESUS
CHRIST himself. He behaved himself toward his subjects and vassals, over
whom he had entier jurisdiction, as a just lord, iudgeing their causes with a
severe clemency, as one that could not be drawn from the right course of
justice by fear, hatred, favor or corruption. This holy man proceeded in all
actions by the virtue of discretion, wherewith he so te^pered his worckes of
mercy, that therein he with exceeding humility avoided worldly glory and favor:
and as a valiant and perfect warryer, he never desisted from his first
inte^tion: and as just, he withal his industry shunned the occasions of
offending God. This servant was so charitable and liberal to the poor, that
never any demanded of him an almose for the love of God, but he gave him a
reward together with good words. All his care was to feed the hungry, to lodge
pilgrims, and have care of poor sick and forlorn creatures, as one that
acknowledged the poor CHR. IES. in his poor creatures, and in sicknesses, the
painful afflictions which he endured for us miserable sinners. And as he was
replenished with the love of his neighbors, no less was he, but much more
replenished with the love of JESUS CHRIST. And knowing that the edifice of
virtues has its end in the perfection of holy prayer, in regard that it is a
conversation and familiarity with God, he applied himself with all his
endeavor to prayer and contemplation: he also said the canonical hours with
such devotion and attention, as if he had bin in the visible presence of JESUS
CHRIST.

How S. Elzearius had the true virtue of patience: of his death and
canonization, and the death of his wife.
THE XXI. CHAPTER.
THis invincible Champion, was so armed with the precious armours of patience
by the exercise of virtue, that, albeit he supported many things very
difficult to endure, yet none could ever disquiett him: so that he was never
perceived to be in choler, nor the least iott remote from his ordinary mildnes.
For he very patiently and humbly, supported and endured the iniu^yes and
affiontes directly or indirectly offered unto him, and was never heard to
proceed out of his mouth any word but of praise and thanckesgiuing unto God: he
with such sweetness and clemency pardonned his ennemies whatsoever offense they
committed against him, that he did not only make appear that he was satissied
and appeased, but proceeded in their behalf as if there had never bin cause of
coffeehouse.

Being at Paris, and having foreknowledge of the hour of his death, he with
great abondance of tears and exceeding devotion made his confession, then with
much reverence and in very exemplar manner received the sacraments of the
church. And albeit his life and the Countess his wives were stored withal
kind of virtues, yet in his last days speaking of her, being urged by the holy
Ghost he uttered to those present these words: The infidel man is sanctified
by the faithful woman, whom I leave a virgin in this mortal life, as I
received her a virgin and unspotted.

This holy Confessor of JESUS CHRIST, changed this life for a better the year
of grace 1327. Father Francis of Maronis, a famous preacher and Doctor was
present at his death. The very day of his departure he appeared in all glory
unto his wife, (who was them in her County in Prouence) to whom he uttered
these words of the Psalmist: The snare is broaken, and we are delivered, and
so without any other word he vanished. The Contesse the same day recounted to
all her company the death of her husband, it being the 27. day of September. He
was buried in the church of the Cordeliers at Paris clothed in the habitt of
the third Order, and the same year his body was translated into Prouence to
the Covent of Apt, in which his sanctity was by many miracles diuulged; for
which he was by the Apostolic sea canonized. His feast is celebrated the 27.
of September:

The Countess Delphine his wife, lived many years after him perseuering in
piety: being dead she was buried by her husband, having the the habitt of the
Friar Minors, as a disciple of the holy Father S. Francis, and of the third
Order.

At the death of this Countess and till her body was enterred, a most sweet
harmony was heard in the air, as they have testified and assured who were
near her body. It is piously believed that they were Angels singing as true
friends of virginal purity. Our Lord wrought many miracles as well in the
life time, as at the death of this holy woman, and in such quantity, as there
is no doubt but that our lord had canonized her in heaven.

The life of the blessed Yues, of the 3. Order S. Francis.
Of the holy exercises and mortification of the flesh of S. Yues.
THE XXII. CHAPTER.
YVes flourished in that time in the Duchy of Bretanie within the diocese of
T^iguier. He was a man of eminent sanctity, and led a merueillous austere life,
for which cause almighiy God made him famous by many miracles. This holy man
was the son of a very rich and virtuous man, by whose good example he was
from his tender infancy a pattern of commendable conversation. His Father
sent him to study humanity at Paris, thence to Orleans to study the Canon and
Civil law, but much more did he profitt in divine wisdom: for there
manifesting his doctrine he laid open to many the true knowledge and assured
way of justice. And being to return to his Father, the Bishop of Triquet
having heard the fame of his excellent virtues and sanctity, made him his
Official or commissary, with very ample aucthority. And albeit the holy man
withal his power withstood the acceptance of this cha dge: yet was he at
lenght constrained thereunto. He with such prudence Remarckable proceeding in a
man of iust^ce.
and without acception of persons administered justice, that the balance was
always equal; which he performed with such sincerity, that he would never
receive any ^ecompence for it in this life.

A little after by divine providence he became Priest, in which ministry he
offered his body a lively sacrifice unto almighty God. His habit was then,
according to his quality, common, decent and modest. But under he woare a very
sharp hayr-cloth, Whe^with he afflicted his body, and did weaken it by frequent
and austere fastes and by continual watchinges.

When he was admitted into the confraternity of the Penitents of the third
O^der of S. Francis, he rejected all his fine apparel (though most modest and
plain) which he ware according to his quality, clothing himself with very
gross and course gray cloth, and wearing rude and homely shoes as poor
Religious ordinarily use. He w^are upon his hair-cloth (that it might not be
seen) a shirt made of towe, raw or undressed. He slept very little, and then
only when nature was wearyed with prayer, study or spiritual exercise, or
burdened with natural necessity of sleep: his repose was short, and he always
took it clothed. His bed was the bare ground, a hurdle, or some g^osse
sticks wreathed together, his pillow the bible (an instrument of little sleep
and of much diligence) he being mindful and taking comfort of these words of
our ^at. 11.
Redeemer JESUS CHRIST. They that are clothed in soft garments, are in kings
houses.

Of the abstinence, charity, prayer, and the manner of saying the divine
office, of S. Yues.
THE XXIII. CHAPTER.
THis holy man did never feed on delicate meats, but such as were very gross:
which he did to reserve of his revenue wherewith to reliue many poor people. On
fasting days commanded by the Church he used only bread and water, and
ordinarily did with great abstinence fast the wednesday and saturday. He had
customarily strangers and pilgrims in his house: he was very dilligent in the
practice of the worckes of mercy: he entertained poor people, and particulerly
the sick and lame, with exceeding pity and compassion and conuersed with them
so mildly and familiarly as if they had bin his brethren, he served them and
made their beds, washed their feet, and did them all other services that they
could need. Being no less careful to administer unto them the spiritual food
of the word of God, then the corporal, he made them notable exhortations,
wherein he multiplied the talent of the Evangelical doctrine to those that were
under his chardge. The gifts of. S. Yues.
He was very prompt in according dissentions and procuring of peace with all
persons. He had the grace to convert sinners to penance. He was so addicted to
prayer and contemplation, that he would sometimes neglect to take his ordinary
repast and dyett. And one time he continued five whole days in prayer in his
chamber, without asking or being offered him any thing to eat. And yet when he
came forth his countenance was so pleasing, joyful, and vermillio^ as if he had
bin pampered with most exquisite meats.

As he celebrated mass with great fervor, so did he therein receive of God
notable feelinges and graces, as one day did appear: for as he elevated the
most sacred sacrament, there descended from heaven an admirable splendor and
brightness, which enuironned the sacred host together with the chalice. He red
the canonical hours with admirable attention and devotion, and did always
rise at midnight to say his Matins. He divided the office into all the hours
of the days, in imitation of the Prophett Psalm. 18.
David, who praised God seven times in the day.

Of the blessed death of S. Yues.
THE XXIV. CHAPTER.
THis holy Religious being complete in the perfection of all virtues, and
exceeding devout unto JESUS CHRIST, very austere toward himself, and extreme
courteous and charitable toward others, as he was by divine grace, of a
singular life and admirable in the worckes of charity, so was he honored of
God in this life by merueillous actions and miracles. For he expelled the evil
spirittes out of humane bodies, he cured all kind of diseases: Wherein was
accomplished the prophecy of his mother, who confidently affirmed that, he
being a child, it was revealed unto her that he should prove a saint.

The day of his death was revealed unto him three weeks before he dyed. And
thereupon he said to his people, that he was shortly by the divine will to
depart out of this life. And so the three weeks being expired being fortified
with the sacraments of the Church, making a end answearable to the worth of his
life, he yielded his soul unto God the year, 1303. the 19. of May, and 50. of
his age. His feast is celebrated the same month and day, and in some places the
27. day of October, by reason of his translation.

Of some other holy persons of the third Order of S. Francis.
THE XXV. CHAPTER.
THere have bin many other SS. of this co^fraternity of the third Order of
Penitents of S. Francis, the history and particular life of whom, would be too
tedious to be inserted. And therefore we will rest content with the only
rehearsal of the names of such as by many authors are recorded. Among the SS.
of this Order is reckoned S. Lewis king of France, and queen Blanch his mother
who was daughter to the king of Castille. The blessed Luchesius of Poggibongy
whose relics are in Toscane, in a monastery of Friar Minors, scituat on the
mount imperial, where they are exceedingly reuere^ced. S. Bonne-femme, the
wife of the said Signiour Luchesius. S. Lucius, who was the first that saint
Francis received into the third Order of Penitents. Nicoluccius Sienos, and
James de la Land Priest, by whom our Lord wrought many miracles; S. Peter
Romanus, who was martyred by the Sultan: Bonacius de Voltera: Peter de Colle:
Alexander of Perusia: Leo Archbishop of Milan: Walter Bishop of Tremise: and
Richard Bishop of Alexandria, doctor of divinity: Charles Dendono of
Manfelt^e: John of Rauerie: Torcello of Puppio, Bartholomew of S. Giminian:
Peter Petinarius: and of the blessed Thomas Vntius of Tullinium, who by
miracles and prophecy was very famous: All the aforesaid have bin famous in
sanctity of life, and in great reputation of virtues and miracles.

The names of many holy women of this Order.
S. Rosa of Viterbium: saint Margarit of Cortone: saint Aemiliana of
Florence: saint Clare of Mont-faucon, in whose heart after her death was found
a crucifix, with all the mysteries of the passion: and many other Ladies, among
who^ is placed an Empress: which women were very venerable and worthy of
perpetual memory. Which, if they have not obtained here below among earthly
people, they enjoy it with far greater glory among the Angels and SS. in the
celestial kingdom; by which fruit it appears that this holy confraternity
of Penitents, instituted by the holy Father S. Francis, was assisted by the
holy Ghost, to the end that Christians of free estate, married persons, and
widoes that cannot support the burden of Religion, may in their houses produce
fruits worthy of penance, to the salvation of their souls and for the love of
JESUS CHRIST.

The end of the ninth book.
THE TENTH BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES OF THE FRIAR MINORS OF THE SFRAPHICALL
FATHER S. FRANCIS.
WHEREIN ARE RECORDED MANY notable things happened in the first beginning of
the said Order.
An aduertisment of the first Translatour unto the Reader.
Devout reader, you must not marvel that in this book we have not followed
the order of the author: for we have thus done for a better disposition of this
worck, and for your greater satisfaction, placing the chapters that concern
the life of the holy Father S. Francis in their place, which I suppose the
author omitted, because wanting knowledge of them at first, he would not
afterward take the pain to change the method which he had with so much labor
begun, though we, for the glory of God only and your contentment, have
willingly undertaken the same. Know then, that,

The first and second chapter are placed after the last chap. of the second
book. The 3. chap. after the 27. of the second book. The 4. chap. after the
30. of the second book. The 5. chap. after the last of the book. And the 6.
chap. after the 30. of the first book.

Of what arrived to two Religious of S. Francis, with a Tyrant whom they
converted to pen^tence.
THE VII. CHAPTER.
WHen first S. Francis with the Benediction of God and his own sent his first
disci^les to preach penance over the world, to the end they might communicate
unto men the fruits of their good life, and by their example and the
edification of their pious worckes, renew the church of God, being in foreign
contryes among barbarous nations, they that saw the^, with admiration said,
what ^a^ity is this? we have never seen men thus attyred, barefooted, living
so austerely, and so different from all other Religious, that they rather seem
wild men, then other. Nevertheless when they entered into any particular place or
house, they would say: God give you peace: and would admonish the inhabitants
to fear and love God, as the Creatout of heaven and earth, and exhort them to
labor always in the observation of his holy commandments: to do penance,
and to amend their lives. And albeit few were found to whom these exhortations
were grateful, yet they met with curious persons that made so many demandes,
as they were much troubled to give them answer: As whence they were, whence
they came? Of what Order they were? how and whereof they lived? who was their
chief? And in fine, by what aucthority they preached? Whereto with patience
and humility thy answered that they were Religious of penance, of our Ladies
of Angels at Assisium: that their p^incipall head and directour was Brother
Francis: and that by ordinance and commandment of the Pope they preached
penance. Others seeing them so disguised, and hearing them speak with such
simplicity, reputed them fools, cousening or deluding companio^s, and would
not admit them into their houses, for fear thy would rob them: whence it
often arrived that none having compassion to harbor them, they slept in the
church porches or under pent-houses: and so perseuering, by their example of
poverty and humility, they at length moved the most obdurat hearts to
compassion and devotion, and left many places edified in the fear of God. And
the^fore the reputation of their virtues increasing, they daily produced
singular fruits of good example, among which this is one which we now intend
to relate.

It happened one time that two new Religious, but true children of the holy
Father saint Francis, traveling through a contry which they neither knew, nor
they known to any, they came to a castle that was a retuge to certain
thieves, of whom was captain a noble man of great family, but of most vicious
life: whither being come, weary, feeble, and half starued with hungar and
cold, not able to pass farther, they there stayed, without dreaming what
danger might there befall them, and sent to pray this tyrant, to entertayne,
lodge, and refresh them that night, for the love of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. This
noble man by divine inspiration, willingly received them into his house, and
commanded incontinently a good fire to be made them, then caused them to cat
with his people. At which time, one of the Religious that was a Priest, and had
a special grace in preaching well, perceauing that at this table there was no
speech but of robbing, killing and pilling, each one vaunting of his villainies,
and glorying in his murders and theftes committed, the good servant of God
resolved, after supper to make them an exhortation in the behalf of our
Savior JESUS CHRIST, with the greatest fervor he could procure. And so, grace
being said, unable any longer to retain his zealous spirit, he addressed
himself to the tyrant and said: Having received of you such a charity for the
love of God, we should prove too ungrateful if we did not beseech the divine
majesty to reward you for us, and did not endeavor to requite you by some
documents conformable to our poverty, that may benifitt your souls and your
peoples, whom I beseech you here to assemble together, we desiring to give to
you all, a spiritual refection for the corporal which you have given us. This
noble man having conuocated all his people, and they having settled themselves
to hear the sermon, the Religious began with exceeding fervor to discourse of
the glory of Paradise, in these termed: My beloved Brethren in CHRIST JESUS, if
the eternal felicities, for which God has created us, were known unto us,
and that we did often well consider them, what pain would we not undertake to
serve him, and never to offend him, for fear to loose that joy and glory
without end, for so base a trifle as the world? that sweet society of the
Angels? that life and security of the blessed? that glorious satiety of the
elect? that supreme light without night and darcknes? that perpetual peace and
amity without any fear or perturbance? and all the happiness that we can
desire, free and secure from all disaster, with that divine fountain of the
presence and glorious communication of the eternal God? And since that man (so
blinded and miserable) for so base and loathsome a thing, so short and of so
sclender value as is sin, will loose such innumerable and infinite
felicities: he shall deservedly go into hell, there to endure eternal hungar,
thirst, cold, all kind of torment, and perpetual affliction in the company of
cruel devils, serpents and dragons, where is a continual death without end,
and without hope of life, with palpable darcknes. And finally greater miseries
then we can imagine, considering that there is nothing but howlinges,
lamentations, despaires and eternal torments, and all evil void of all good,
wherinto my brethren you have merited to be thrown and imprisoned, for the
sins which you have perpetrated ^o precipitiously without any apprehension of
the divine justice, at least according to the inference of your discourses,
which have testified unto me your vicious and detestable life, you thereby
giving demonstration that you neither fear God, nor esteem of his
commandments, nor regard the doing of any good wo^ck. Therefore my beloved
brethren, do I admonish you in the behalf of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, who for
you was fastened on the hard wood of the cross, and pardonned the thief, to
give us confidence of his mercy: and do counsel you by the ^euerence of the
omnipotency of the Creator of althinges, not to make ship wrack and exchaung
of the celestial and eternal richesse, for the brief pleasure of sins,
which as you experience, vanish as a shadow. Return then with great
promptitude unto God, to the end he thrust you not into hell, denying you time
and space to do penance: so many years having fleeted away wherein he has so
patiently expected you, though you have given no sign of regarding it. This
Religious uttered these things and much more with such a zeal, that they
pierced the heart of the Tyrant, who being touched by the holy Ghost, and
already stricken with contrition, fell to the ground together with all his
people, bittetly lamenting their sins. They showed signs of penitence, and
after many tears the tyrant with great instancie required the Religious to
set them in the way to save their souls, since God had sent him hither for
their salvation. And the Religious advised them to make a general confession
of all their sin^es: Which being with notable devotion and contrition
performed, he said: It is now necessary, that for penance for your sins which
are enormous and in number infinite, you go in pilgrimage to visi^ the holy
places, and that you mortify your flesh by fastes, watchings and prayers,
giving many almoses and performing other worckes of piety. But you must begin
with satissaction, restoring what you ini^stly de^aine. Whereto he answered:
Father, I am content to satisfy whatsoever I am bound unto. But because I was
never out of this cont^y, nor can write, not read, no not the Pater noster, nor
can fast, I beseech you for the love of God to give me some other penance that
I may be able to perform. The Religious replied: I will for the love of God
do penance and pray unto JESUS CHRIST for you, that your soul be not lost. I
will not for the present give you other penance then for mortification, your
self to bring us hither a little straw whereon to repose our selves. The tyrant
becoming a lamb presently brought straw for the Religious to rest on, and
prepared their place himself: Then considering with himself the discourse
that the Religious had made him, and how speedily he had converted him to
penitence, he reputed him a saint, and resolved to watch him all that night to
see what he would do. Now the Religious at his hour laid himself to repose,
and when he thought they all slept, he arose and went out of the house, to do
penance for the penitent as he had promised him. Lifting then his hands to
heaven, he with many tears demanded pardon of almighty God for the sinner, and
praying with exceeding fervor, his body was elevated from the earth the hight
of a tour, and in that manner, bitterly bewailed the soul of that noble man,
begging pardon of JESUS CHRIST for his offenses in such sort and with a charity
so passionate, that he merited to be heard, as appears by what ensues: for
the penitent having seen and heard all this, not without exceeding terror,
contrition and abundance of tears, accompanied with consolation, perceauing
with what fervor the servant of God offered his prayers to the divine Majesty
for the salvation of his soul: very early in the morning he sell at the feet
of the Religious, praying him with great compunction to setle him in the direct
way of salvation, he being ready to execute whatsoever he should command him.
The Religious having consailed him to sell all he had, he did his utmost to
make restitution where he was obliged, and according to Evangelical counsel
gave the rest to the poor: then offered himself to God beco^ming a Friar
Minor, where he perseuered in virtues and piously ended his life: all his
people were also converted and did penance. So the holy simplicity of this
Religious produced a merueillous fruit, not preaching of high and subtle
matters, nor with elegant words, but only of the pains of hell and glory of
Paradise; as he had bin instructed by the holy Father saint Francis.

The 8. and 9. chapters are put after the 72. chap. of the first book, the 10.
chap. after the 5. of the second book, and the eleventh chap. after the 74. of
the second book.

Notable humility of a Preacher of S. Francis his Order.
THE XII. CHAPTER.
AN English Friar Minor and Doctor of divinity, preaching in the Monastery of
S. Damian, where S. Clare was Abbess in the presece of holy Br. Giles he as a
great friend of humility would make proof thereof in this Preacher, and so in
the midst of his sermon, he willed him to be silent because himself would
preach, and the divine incontinently held his peace, and Brother Giles with
exceeding fervor of spirit and to the great amazement and edification of the
hearers uttered matters of great sublimity and eminency touching almighty God:
then tourning toward the Divine, he willed him to proceed in his sermon:
which S. Clare perceauing, she was exceeding joyful and said: This day is
accomplished one of the defines of S. Francis, who would often say: I desire
that my Religious be so humble, as that a Doctor in divinity goeing into the
pulpitt, if a simple lay Brother make a motion to preach, the Doctor shall
gi^e him place. I tell you truly my Brethren; this Preacher has more edifyed
me, then if he had raised one from death.

The 13. chapter is after the 54. of the first book, the 14. chap. is after
the last of the second book.

Of a very terrible accident unto a Nouice, clothed by S. Antony of Padua.
THE XV. CHAPTER.
THere was a worldly man whose profession was to follow the wars, in which
practice he did much mischief: this man induced by the devil came to the
blessed Father S. Antony of Padua, then Guardian of the Monastery of Limoges,
and besought him to give him the habit of the Friar Minors, affirming a desire
to serve God therein. The Saint as zealous of the salvation of souls, after
diverse and several conferences with him, and always finding him firm in his
pretended holy purpose, heard his confession: then having piously admonished
him to do penance for his sins he gave him the habitt, and had a particular
care of his deportements: but this lewd wretch having promised the devil to
serve him with fidelity in whatsoever vocation he should take upon him, and
never to discover his intention to any person, did very strongly observe this
conuention; and in his general confession, ^sing his utmost dissimulation did
conceal this secrett of the devils from saint Antony, and indeed did always
in his heart excogitate matters directly opposite to his salvation, as his
master the devil had taught him. So that it is easy to judge that God had not
drawn him to Religion: but rather some coffeehouse, in that his worldly
affairs succeeded not as he wished, and hearing saint Antony preach, he
became Religious, yet omitted not to hope and expect some benefitt from the
devil. Saint Antony as a faithful servant of God, with exceeding fervor
made him many remonstrances, to enduce him to renounce the world with all his
heart, to resist chastise his flesh, to shun the devil, and to withstand all
his temptations; and to this effect gave him means to perform a sharp and
rigourous penance for his enormous sins. But this Nouice in all such virtuous
and pious actions did dissemble, as having no affection thereunto. This wretched
Nouice the^ goeing one day out of his cell, which was on a little hill separated
from the others, saw a very fair horse well harnised, with a complet a mour
upon him and a cloak bag on him behind: which at first sight and
apprehension amazed him; but after having without fear beheld the horse, he
had a desire to see what was in the cloak bag, and to that end laid hold on
the horse by the raines and drew him a side, where having searched the said
cloak bag, he found stoare of money and a saire suit of apparel, so that
having found a horse, apparel, armor and money, he reputed himself most
happily fournished withal that he desired: whereupon shaking off his Friar
Minors habitt, and putting on his worldly attire, and armor of a soldier, he
mounted on horseback, and so secretly rode away that none perceived him. The
same day he made such speed that he arrived at Bourges in Berry, where
alighting late at an Inn, the hour of soupper being come, he set himself
at table, and was attended by the daughter of the Host, who so well pleased
his fancy that he demanded her of her Father in Marriage, and to induce his
consent showed him the money he had in his cloackbag. The Host at the sight of
so much money was tempted with avarice, granted his daughter to be his wife,
and left them to complement together. The devil then presently leaving the
figure of a horse and having putt on the shape of a man, came about midnight
and knocked at the door of that Inn, where being entered, drew the master of
the house a side to speak with him, seining himself jealous of his honor,
and said: Sir, is it not true that you have consented to mary your daughter to
a stranger, it is said the host, the devil replied: know then that he whom
you have accepted for your son in law is a Religious man, who as alewd fellow
has deluded you and ravished your daughter. Therefore, since there is no other
remedy, follow my counsel: go whiles it is night he sleeping in his bed, but
so warily that he may not hear you, and you shall find his head bare, shaven
with a croune in manner of a Religious: so that it proving infallible what I
tell you, cut his throat, and take his money withal that he has, wherewith you
shall much better mary your daughter. Besides, there is no cause of fear, for
this fellow is not known in these quarters nor in any part of France: This
discourse putt the ^ost into an extreme anguish; but being at length overcome
by the passion of choler, and encouraged by the devil, he resolved to murder
his new son in law, if he found it true which his pretended friend had told
him, whom he prayed to stay till he had effected his counsel, to assist him
to bury the body, promising him a share of the money whereto the devil accorded
so this Host went so dexterously into the chamber of the nouice, that he found
him profoundly sleeping, and half naked, and perceauing the religious croune
conformable to what was told him, he would expect no farther proof, but
esteeming himself dishonored and deceived, drew out his dagger and cut his
throat: which done, retourning to the place where he left his pretended friend
that had thus counseled him, he could not find him in all the house, then
goeing to seize on the cloak bag, the armor, and apparel of the dead man,
he could find nothing, nor the horse in the stable: and therefore presently
suspected it to be a diabolical illusion, and with the most secrecy he could,
buried the body, then went and made his consession to S. Antony who then
preached in the same town of Bourges, who a little after publicly diuulged the
same, to make appear how dangerous it is to run out of the true way of the
fear of God, who permits them that will be faithful to the devil and
persevere in their sins to the end (thincking to deceive his divine Majesty)
to end their days most miserably.

The 16. chap. is after the last of the first book, the 17. and 18. are after
last chap. of the second book.

Of the humility and devotion of Brother James.
THE XIX. CHAPTER.
BRother James a gentleman and much honored in the world, becoming a Friar
Minor, was so devout and spiritual, that in his prayer he was often rapt in
ecstasy, wherein he was very frequently visited of God. He perceauing what
graces our Lord had endued him with all in prayer, entreated his Guardian, the
better to exercise himself in this grace, that he would please to dispense
with him for affairs of the kitchen and other offices, wherein, being a lay
Brother, he was in that Covent employed, which was granted him, to the end he
might with more repose and liberty apply himself to contemplation. Br. James
being thus freed from the kitchen, and other offices of the house, lost all the
graces which almighty God had given him in prayer. Which having experienced, he
with abondance of tears besought his Guardian to return him to his former
employments: wherein our lord again restored him his grace. He thenceforward so
profited in prayer joined with humility, that on Christmas day (to communicate
timely and to continue all the morning in the Church to hear mass and the
divine service) he prepared the dinner for the Religious in the night, and left
it over the fire. Now the Guardian seeing him continue so long time in prayer
and serving at mass, went admiring to the kitchen to see if he had made any
preparation for dinner. But he found the pots ouertourned and broaken and saw
that the cattes had eaten the meat: then presently goeing to Brother James, he
willed him to hasten into the kitchen. Which he did, and finding the pots
broken, the pottage spilt, the meat devoured, and every thing overthrown, he
was exceedingly grieved. Nevertheless falling on both his knees, he with
abondance of reares besought the omnipotent bounty, to assist in this his
affliction. The sequel was admirable: for his prayer being ended, the pots
were reioyned and filled again with pottage and meat like unto that which he
had prepared, as if it never had bin at all touched. Wherein almighty God
would make appear to this Religious, how much humility and prayer joined
together are grateful unto him.

The 20. chap. is after the last of the second book.

Of a Guardian that had little charity, and how almighty God did chastise him.
THE XXI. CHAPTER.
There was a pious lay Religious that endured extreme torments in his feet by
means of the gout that exceedingly afflicted him: but in the winter time more
then else, and yet did he not omit to labor in the garden in the coldest
season of the year. Notwithstanding his indiscreet Guardia^seeing him at
night by the fire to annoint his feet with an ointment (though the rigorous
cold was cause sufficient without any other infirmity, to warm himself) he
commanded him from the fire, and not to burn so much wood. Whereto the poor
Religious answered, that he had no other mean to ease the extreme torments he
endured procured him by the gout, then to warm his feet and to annoint them
with that ointment, which was given him for very remedious thereunto, and
besought him for the love of God and S. Francis not to take it ill. But the
Guardian would not hear him: so that the Religious retired doubly afflicted
unto his cell, beseeching God to assist and aid him with his grace. But the
omnipotent did not long defer to do vengeance: For he sent the Guardiam the
same torments which the poor Religious endured, wherein finding no other remedy
then to warm him by a great fire, he began to acknowledge his little charity
and confessed his fault, saying: My God have pity on me if thou please, and
assist me with thy mercy, for I acknowledge my desert of this torment, since I
have bin cruel toward my simple Brother, depriving him of his assured remedy
in his necessity. And sending for him, he said: Brother, warm your self both
day and night according to the need you have. For I am assured the fire is a
great help and ease unto your torments. This Guardian having done penance was
in few days after cured by means of this charity.

The 22. and 23. chap. are after the last of the second book.

Of the subt^l ty which two several times the devil used to reduce the Friar
Minors from the strictnes of their poverty.
THE XXIV. CHAPTER.
THe Friar Minors of those primitive days lived at Mont Alue^ne in the same
spiritual tranquillity and poverty as S. Francis had instituted and instructed
them. The devil unable to support such a virtue of prayer, abstinence and
austerity of life, nor able to disquiett the Religious, by desires of substance
and temporal affairs, invented a new subtility to induce them to remitt and
lessen the austerity and perfection of the spiritual life wherein they
perseuered, which was thus: There was in those parts a very rich gentleman,
that had no devotion to the Friar Minors, nor ever gave them any almose. The
devil taking on him humane shape became his servant and so diligently served
him, that he shortly committed unto him the government of his house and the
absolute disposition and management of his affairs, following his counsel in
all his business. Now as they one day discoursed together, the devil began to
praise the Friar Minors of Mont Aluerne, saying that they were SS* and that
whosoever were charitable in almose toward them did much merit with almighty
God. Then did he allege unto him so many pregnant reasons, that he wrought
the gentleman to be so devout and affected to those Religious, as that he
almost every day sent them for almose, bread, flesh, fish, fruit, and all this
in such abo^dance, that the Religious who formerly lived austerely began to
live bountifully and royally with this almose procured them by the devil.
Which being perceived by certain good ancient Religious, who acknowledged the
spiritual detriment that arrived unto them, one of them began to consider on
some means to remedy the same, and therefore he reco^mended himself to God and
besought him, not to permit his servants to fa^^ into such relaxation in their
manner of life. And so being touched with the spirit of God he went with his
companion to the house of this gentleman then benefactour, with whom having
discoursed of diverse matters touching almighty God, he demanded of him who had
induced him to such devotion toward them as to bestow on them such liberal
almose, considering that a little before he was nothing charitable toward them
at all. Whereto the gentleman answered that among infinite services which one
of his servants had don and still continued, he reputed this the principal,
that he had wrought him to be affected unto them for the benefit of his soul.
And had such a special care to put him in mind to send them some bountiful
almose, that there was never day wherein he failed to procure the performance
thereof. This Father admiring the exceeding charity of this servant, prayed the
gentleman that he might see him: whom causing diverse times to be called, there
was no means to make him appear before this holy Religious. But being at
length thereunto enforced, as soon as this good Religious saw him he knew who
he was. And he seeing himself discovered, vanished, and was never after seen
in that place. The Religious then having discovered the subtility of the
devil, and procured the gentleman's promise to send no more almose to the
monastery, he reformed it, and restored it to their former abstinence and
rigor of spiritual life.

The devil invented an other delusion in Portugal in the Covent of Alenquer,
to disturb and disquiett the Religious of that place. For having assumed the
humane shape of an excellent Physician, Surgion, or Apothicary, he went to the
Coue^t to demand the habit of a Friar Minor, which he did with great instance
and feyned devotion, pretending to serve God therein. Having received the
habitt, and being Nouice, he dressed, assisted and attended the sick Religious
with so extraordinary a charity and pro^ptitude, and therein was so diligent,
and also in assisting at divine service and prayer, where he appeared so
devout and in althings fained himself so humble, that the Religious were
exceedingly pleased in him, in whom thy perceived nothing deserving
admonition, but that he always made some excuse or cuasion to shun the
sacred communion with the other Nouices, lay Brothers and other Religious that
were not Priests, so that her never communicated all the time of his being
there. This fained Religious began of himself to publish unto seculer parsons
his qualities and sciences. So that there was always some one at the Covent
door that demauded certain water, receites or medicines for diverse
infirmities, he having already the fame of an excellent Phisician. Wherewith the
Religious were so disturbed that the Guardian who was one of the disciples of
Saint Francis, upon this inquietude gave himself to prayer, to know the will
of God in this behalf: where it was revealed unto him, that the Phisician was
a devil, and had putt himself among them to disturb them; whereupon he took
the habitt f^o^ that nouice and consequently expelled the devil. So that the
Covent returned to its former repose and poverty, which had already began to
grow to ruin by the great quantity of almose brought thither by means of the
Physician, to whom infinite people from all parts did resort.

How our Savior Jesus Christ, by the merittes of S. Francis, conserved
certain Religious in the Order.
THE XXV. CHAPTER.
AYong Religious being professed was so tempted by the devil, that he would
needs leave the habitt: yet would he not do it without the consent of saint
Francis, of whom he demanded leave to depart. But he denied him in these
words: Brother, since our lord by his piety has delivered you from the perils
and miseries of the world, you may by no means return again thereto. This
Religious being yet still tempted to leave the Order, went to the Pope to get
dispensation of his Holiness. But there also finding denial, he of him self
cast off the habitt, then wandering alone in the holds he met a man naked
having such wounds as our Redeemer JESUS CHRIST received for us in his feet,
hands and side, who showed him his wounds: wheratt the young man being utterly
amazed, asked him who he was and how he had received those wounds so like to
those of our Lord JESUS CHRIST? Whereto our Savior answered: It is my self
that have bin thus wounded for thee, and for mankind, and yet thou will
abandon me to follow the world, behold these wounds which I have endured for
thee. And at al times that the devil shall te^pt thee causing thee to endure
some contradiction against thy desire and taste, fix thine eyes on these wounds
and thou shall find consolation. Which said he incontinently vanished, and the
young man changing his purpose returned to S. Francis, to whom he acknoweleged
his fault, and having obtained pardon, he recounted to all the Religious what
he had seen, and piously perseuered in the Order to the end.

An other Religious was tempted with desire to visit his kindred, and leave
being refused him by the Provincial, he said to himself: I will go, and they
shall see who can force me to return: and presently without further license
departed. The Religious followed him far, most instantly praying him to
return; But rejecting their prayers ad admonitio^s and proceeding in his
journey, he was a little after surprised with such an extreme desire of sleep,
that he could not possibly resist it, and so falling to the ground he fell a
sleep. And presently he had this vision: S. Francis (who then lived and was far
distant from those quarters) appeared unto him, saying: how have thou dared to
misprise the yoke of obedience return incontine^tly to the Covent whence thou
art fled. And because he would not go, S. Francis stroke him soundly with a
wand which he had in his hand, so that awaking he still felt the pain of the
blows received; whereupon he speedily returned to his Covent, where his
Brethren having very charitably received him, he related unto him how S.
Francis had enforced him to return.

Sometime after a young gentleman of very delicat constitution being admitted
into the Order of the Friar Minors, began (by diabolical temptation) to have
his habitt in such horror, that he seemed to carry on him a most base and
abominable burden. This ircksomnes of religion increasing in him, he resolved
to aba^don it and to return to the world. Now his Master of the Nouiciat had
taught him, that as often as he past before the altar of the most sacred
sacrament, he should uncover his head, bend his knees, and crossing his arms,
lowly incline toward the ground. Which having done the same morning that he
had purposed to depart, he was as it were constrained to kneel before the
altar, and at the instant had this merueillous vision: He saw an infinite
multitude of Religious that passed two and two in procession before the altar,
clothed in most rich and gorgious attire, having their face, and hands, and
whatsoever exterio^ly appeared of their bodies more glittering then the sun,
with a countenance and gesture extremely joyful, and more excessive then can
be imagined, who did sing most melodiously. In the forefront marched two
Religious more notable then the others, so gloriously attired that they
astonished the beholders. Toward the end of this procession came a Religious
in habitt of particular glory, who was honored by the others as one newly
entertained into their company. The nouice not knowing the signification of
this procession prayed the hind-most to tell him who they were, who tourning
toward him, said: We are your Brethren Minors that now come from Paradise,
and asking them who were those two more glorious the^ the rest, they answered:
they are the blessed Fathers S. Francis and S. Antony, and he who is almost the
last, a^tyred in particular glory, is a Religious who is now dead whom in this
solemn triumph we conduct to paradise, because he has courageously battayled
against temptations, and perseuered in his holy purpose to the end. These
beautiful and sumptious habits which we wear, are given us for recompense of
the so rude asperity of the habitt which so patiently we woare in religion. God
has also endued us with this glory for the humble penance which we have
supported, and for the holy obedience, chastity and poverty which we have with
alacrity observed to the end. And therefore my child make no difficulty to wear
the sack cloth and habitt of our Religion, it being so profitable: in regard
that if thou combatt courageously in the habitt of S. Francis misprising the
world, mortifying the flesh, and resisting the devil for the love of our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, I know thou shall have fruition of this glory. Which said the
vision disappeared, and the Nouice finding himself full of comfort and
consolation in God, rejecting all the temptations, and resolving thenceforward
to esteem all the rigours and contempts of Religion as sportes and
contentments, he therein lived and dyed very piously.

The 26 chapter is after the 85 chapter of the first book. The 27 chapter is
after the 27 of the first book. The 28 chapter is after the 95 of the first
book. The 29 chapter is after the 39 of the second book. The 30 chapter is
after the 19 of the eight book. The 31 chapter is after the 48 of the first
book. The 32 chapter is in the midst of chap. 2 of the 2 book. The 33
chapter is after the 17 chapter of the second book. The 34 chapter is after
the 33 of the second book.
How a Lawyer by occasion of a vain word entered into the Religion of saint
Francis.
THE XXXV. CHAPTER.
BRother John Parent who was the first Minister General after S. Francis,
entered into that Order in the time of the said saint. Living in the world, he
was a Doctor of law and Judge de Ciuitate Castellana of the Province of Rome
whence he was native. Being one evening at a window of his house and
attentively beholding the trouble a s^vineheard had to make his hogs enter
into a stable, he heard a companion of the swineheards say unto him: If thou will make them enter, say these words: Hogs, hogs enter ye into the stable
as Lawyers and Judges enter into hell. Which the swineheard having said, the
hogs without any noise incontinently hastened into the stable, and were no
more troublesome to their guide. The Judge perceauing this, touched with an
extreme fear of the justice of God, incontinently rejected his office, and
became a Friar Minor, and one of his sons, with him, and spent his life most
exemplarly in that Order, in prayers and tears, and so austere in penance,
that being Minister General, he visited all the Order barefoot: so did he
gather so much profitt touching the good of his soul, even of a vain word.

Of an admirable vision that happened in the Covent of saint Francis of
Lisbone.
THE XXXVI. CHAPTER.
Many holy parsons flourished in Spain in the primative time of this Religion
and especially in the Province of S. James of Galicia, albeit of their worckes
and sanctity of life, particular records are exta^t of very few, among whom
is of one Br. John that resided in the Covent of S. Francis at Lysbone within
the province of Galicia, on whom our Lord bestowed many special graces, and
particulerly this, that in principal feasts, at the Euensonges, Matines, or
in Mass, he always communicated unto him some spiritual consolations. But
one feast of S. John Baptist, not having received the ordinary consolations
from Almighty God, at any of those hours he was thereat exceedingly grieved,
and therefore the Sixth hour being said, and the Mass ended, he remained alone
in the quire bitterly lame^ting, for fear that he had offended our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, in that he knew not the reason why he was deprived of those ordinary
graces, and in his heart, with sighs sobbes and tears he cried unto God: My
God, why have thou forsaken me? and thus perseuering till all the Religious
were in the refectory, he still demanded that ordinary spiritual almose of
almighty God. And then did he hear a voice that said: John arise, go to the
refectory, follow the co^munalty, and thinck not thy self better then the
others. Wheratt being utterly confounded, enclining his head, he went unto the
others into the refectory, and ^at down at table: but as soon as Grace was
said, he saw the heavens open, and an Angel discending thence, bringing a
golden pen, a table napkin, and a knife: this Angel entering into the
refectory, went directly unto the Religious that did read, whose breast he
opened with the knife, then dried it with his napkin, and on his heart wrote in
letters of gold, Johannes est nomen eius; the same he did to all the Religious,
till he came to one that had bin canon of the great church of the said city,
whom he would not touch, affirming that the night following he would abandon
the Order, which indeed he did, neither would he touch the Reader of the Covent
nor his companion, because in a feast of sole^nity they had left the Covent to
go preach in the city: but at lenght by the prayers of the said John, he
wrote the said words in their hearts. And so after he had written in them all,
he returned to him that did read, and shutt up his heart, the like he did to
all the other Religious, saying: Confirmatum est nomen eius, which was an
exceeding c^^^olation to this blessed Father.

A notable miracle of the B. Sacrament, wrought in the Covent of S. Francis at
Man's, a motive and cause of the erection of a worthy confraternitie.
THE XXXVII. CHAPTER.
THe Covent of the city of Man's, is one of the most ample and ancient of the
Order, there commonly resyding forty Religious or more, from the time that the
blessed Electus, one of the companions of saint Francis there laid the
foundation about the year 1215. A devout and ample confratetnity (perhaps the
most ancient of Christendom) was erected, and is honorably continued in that
Covent upon this occasion: A venerable and very simple Religious celebrating
mass, a spider of loathsome greatness casually (or to speak more Christianly,
by divine providence) fell after consecration into the sacred chalice. The
devout Religious at first apprehe^sion was much perplexed how to behave
himself in the holy communion (were it that the directio^s how to behave
himself in the holy communion (were it that the directio^s how to proceed in
such accidents were not then recorded in the Missall Rubriques as they are now,
or that he did not then reflect on them, for more ample manifestation of the
glory of God) he finally resolved upon that excellent promise of our Lord: If
they who believe in me as they ought, drink any mortiferous poison, they shall
receive no detriment thereby; and so coming to the sacred communion of the
precious blood of our lord, he in one draught refected himself both with
poison and the medicament of death and of life, so that even in this point
might be accomplished that which the Church sings at the resurrection of our
Lord: Mors and vita duello conflixere mirando, and as here Dux vitae mortuus
regnat viuus, so then did he grant that effect to this same precious blood
that it expelled the poison, and without pain the venomous spider passed
through the Priest a little after, when the other Religious of the Covent and
certain devout seculer persons there present, thought no otherwise of the
Celebratour (having by his relation understood what had happened) then those of
Malto conceated of the biting of S. Paul by the viper. Almighty God here
renuyng that ancient miracle, saving that this appears greater, by the
difference of an exterior biting of a viper, and the interior operation of a
spider no less venomous. The people of Man's that were ever very religious, did
by this miracle so augment their devotion unto the B. Sacrament of the Altar,
that at the same time was erected a Confraternity of innumerable persons of
all qualities, which is most devoutly entertained in that Covent, and has bin
since imitated in diverse other Cities and towns of the kingdom of France, to
the glory of God, the augmentation of his service, and the benefitt of
Christian people

The end of the first part of the Chronicles of the Friar Minors.
A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS CONTAINED IN THIS FIRST Tome of the
Chronicle histoire of the Order of Saint Francis.
ALMS.
SAint Fra. asked a beggar forgiveness. page 3. He put off his own clothes, to
cloth one ragged, p. 5. He sells his Fathers merchandise to repair S.
Damians Church, p. 9. At Rome he put off his own clothes, to cloathe a
beggar, p. 15 S. Fran. gives Br. Giles his cloak in an alms, p. 22 He gave
away his own cloak and his companions in the depth of winted, p. 92 Diverse
other like acts of charity, p. 93. 94. 95
S. Anthony of Padua.
The life of S. Antonie, p. 56. etc. Angelus. The life of. Br. Angelus, p. 530.
Ambrose. The life of Br. Ambrose, p. 534
Agnes.
The life of S. Agnes sister to S. Clare, p. 630. and 684. The life of saint
Agnes, daughter to the king of Bohemia, p. 692
Creatures.
The love and compassion which Saint Franc. had of unreasonable creatures, p.
182 He redeemed a sheep from amongst goats, ibid. He gave his cloak to save
the life of two lambs, p. 183. He cursed a sow for eating a lamb, ibid. The
entertainment of S. Fran. by birds on the mount Aluerne, p. 288. A flock of
sheep honor him, p. 290 How obedient a sheep was to him, ibid. A Sheep and a
lamb, show a will to honor God, p. 291 A Leueret, a Conny, and a Fish, became
tame unto him, ibid. Of many other miracles like to the precedent, p. 292. 293
Of the love S. Franc. boar to all creatures, p. 296 Of Antes, or Emmots, p.
300 Of the favors which God bestows on fishes, p. 477
Churches.
Three Churches repaired by S. Franc. p. 16. 17
Cross or Crucifix.
A Crucifix speaks unto S. Francis, p. 7. A Crucifix speaks unto him in the
Church of S. Damian, p. 9 A vision of the Cross to Br. Siluester, before he
was religious, p. 53 S. Fran. cured a priest by the sign of the Cross, p. 199
A Crucifix walks with him, p. 240 He multitude bread by the sign of the
Cross, p. 252 He tamed a wild wolf thereby, p. 293 He converted thereby water
in wine, p. 317 Many miracles wrought by S. Francis by the sign of the Cross,
p. 424 S. Anthony cured a criple by the sign of the Cross, p. 481. 482 Br.
Leo with the sign of the Cross cured an Apostume, p. 519 Many miracles
wrought by Br. Christopher by the sign of the Cross, p. 553. 554 The virtu of
the sign of the Cross, p. 588 Of many miracles wrought by saint Clare, by
the sign of the Cross, p. 663. 664. etc.
Contempt of the world.
S. Francis stripped himself starck naked to render his clothes to his
Father, p. 12 Of the contempt of the world, p. 602
Chastity.
Saint Franc. would not that his Brethren should behold women, p. 68. 69 How
Br. Gyles affected chastity, p. 571 Of Chastity, p. 603
Christmas.
How saint Francis once celebrated the feast of Christ's Nativity, p. 168 Of
the consolation which saint Clare received on the feast of Christ's Nativity,
p. 643.
Christopher.
The life of Br. Chistopher, p. 55^
Clare.
The life of S. Clare, p. 623
Devils.
Saint Francis commands the devils, p. 103 The devils hold a chapter,
against the order of S. Franc. p. 119 The devil enters into his pillow, p.
129 How he confounded them, p. 132 How he assisted his Religious from choking
by the devil, p. 135 The devil tempted him to make him leave prayer, p. 214
An assembly of devils against his order, p. 281 The devil endeavors to
kill him, p. 289 Diverse things discovered by S. Anthony of the devil, p.
465. etc. How Bro. Iuniperus was feared of the devil, p. 544 How Brother Gyles
defended himself against the devil, p. 588 Of one who had made a conuention
to serve the devil, p. 736
Ecstasies.
Saint Francis eating with saint Clare, both were rapt in ecstasy, p. 277 The
extaticall contemplation of Br^. Quintauall, p. 507 The admirable ecstasies of
Br. Gyles, p. 576. 580 The ecstasies of saint Clare, page 661 An ecstasy of
Saint Agnes, page 686
Elizabeth.
The life of Saint Elizabeth, daughter to the king of IIungarie, p. 710
Elzearius.
The life of Brother Elzearius, page 724
Gyles.
The life of Br. Gyles, p. 563 His visitation by Saint Lewis king of France, p.
585 Of diverse strange speeches, and admirable answers of his, page 581. 586.
589. etc. Diverse discourses of his, as, of faith, of charity, of humility,
and others. p. 595. 596. etc.
Humility.
Of the great humility of S. Francis, p. 138. 139. Of his exercises of
humility, page 144 How he exercised his nouices in the same, p. 145. A Bishop
forced by Saint Francis humility to let him preach, p. 149. Three thieves
converted by his humility, p. 151 His humility to a Bishop, that called him
idiot, p. 157 Remarkable humility and satisfaction in a Friar Minor, p. 266 Of
patience and humility, p. 308 The humility of Brother Macie, p. 521 Of Br.
Angelus, p. 532 Of Br. Ambrose, p. 534 Of Br. Iuniperus, p. 536 Of Br. Gyles,
p. 568. Of S. Clare, p. 632 Of S. Elizabeth, p. 713 Of an English Friar Minor,
p. 735. 736 Of Br. James, p. 738
Indulgence.
Of the plenarie Indulgence granted by Jesus Christ to the church of our Lady
of Angels, page 212 The day thereof miraculously assigned from heaven, p. 214
The publication thereof, p. 216 The same day a Dove was seen to fly in the
Church, and our Lady appeared in the same, page 218. Of miracles wrought in
confirmation of the said Indulgence, p. 217 Testimonies of persons deceased
touching this Indulgence, p. 218. 219. Diverse miracles of the same Indulgence,
p. 220. 221. 222
Injuries.
S. Francis taken prisoner by thieves, p. 4 S. Francis beaten and imprisoned by
his father, p. 19. Beaten of thieves, and thrown into a ditch of snow, p. 13
Injuries offered to those who were first sent by S. Fran. to preach to the
world, p. 25
Iuniperus.
The life of Bro. Iuniperus, p. 56 etc.
Lent.
Of the Lent S. Fran. Kept at the lake of perusia, P. 318 Item of S. Michael,
p. 319.
Leo.
The life of Br. Leo, see, p. 516. etc.
Leapre.
S. Fra. kisseth a Leaper, p. 7 He serves Leapers, his care of Leapers, p. 40.
By his humility he cu^^th a Leaper inwardly and out wardlie, p. 150
Luxury.
Luxuries. See Temptations*
Martyrdom.
How S. Francis went to Siria to seek martyrdom, p. 103 Also to Moroccho, p.
105 Five friar minors Martyred by king Miramolin, p. 418 Seven other friar
minors martired, p. 451 Two other martyred at Valencia, p. 452 Five other
martyred at Moroccho, with many christians also, p. 455 The martyrdom of
Brother Electus and his companion, p. ibid. The desire S. Antonie of Padua had
of Martyrdom, and his departure for Moroccho for this purpose, p. 457 etc.
Macie.
The life of Br. Macie, see, p. 520
Miracles.
S. Francis cures one of an ulcer in kissing it, p. 14 He obtains by prayer,
to see his religious that were dispersed far a sunder, p. 26 S. Francis and his
disciples afflicted with hungar, a man appears unto them laden with bread,
p. 48 How God sustained some friar minors miraculouslie, p. 120 Of one of their
benefactors whose money increased miraculously, p. 121 A capons leg, converted
into a fish, p. 160 S. Francis gathered white and red roses in January, p. 215
Diverse miracles concerning the Indulgence given from heaven to the church of
our Lady, p. 218. 219. 220. S. Francis multiplied bread by the sign of the
cross, p. 252 Dinner miraculouslie prepared whilst the cook was at the
Church, ibid. Diverse miracles wrought by S. Francis, p. 285 He was received of
a hard rock, as of soft wax, p. 289 How many unreasonable creatures
miraculouslie obeyed him, p. 290. 291. 292. 293 Fire lost his force in making a
cauter in the body of S. Fran. p. 294 Of a miracle of Aples, p. 298 A woman
carried away by the devil for troubling S. Fran. sermon, p. 300 A l ght
enlightneth him in a darck night, p. 301 Many miracles confirming the life and
doctrine of S* Francis, p. 316. 317 Many miracles of him after his death p. 353.
356. 357. 358. 359 Of the miracle of the St^gmates. p. 370. 371. 372. 373* 374
A woman dead, ra^sed by the merits of S. Francis, p. 375 Other dead raised by
the merits of S. Francis, p. 377 Others delivered from the danger of death by
his merits, p. 378. 379. 380. 381 etc. How he delivered many pilgrims from the
tempests of the sea, p. 384. 385. 386 Diverse also out of prison, 386. 387.
etc. Diverse women with child, p. 390. etc. Diverse blind received sight, p. 393.
394 Miracles of diverse sorts wrought by S. Francis, p. 401. 402. etc. Miracles
wrought by S. Francis by the sign of the Cross, p. 404 Of many miracles
wrought by the five martyrs, put to death by the hand of king Miramolm, p.
435. etc. Of many miracles of S. Anthony of Padua, 463. 464. etc. Of a foot a
man had cut off p. 472 Of the fishes of the sea who give care to his sermon,
p. 476 A miracle of the B. Sacrament, p. 478 Of his eating of poison, p. 479 Of
his miraculous preaching, p. 480 See more, p. 481. etc. The miracles of Br.
Quintauall, p* 507 etc. Of Brother Ruffinus, p* 514 etc. Of Brother Leo, p. 518
Of Brother Zachary, p. 526 etc. Of Brother Walter, p. 528 etc. Of Brother
Ambroise, p. 535 etc. Of Brother Christopher, p. 553 etc. Of Brother Gyles; p.
567 and 619 Of S. Clare, p. 635. etc. and 663 678 Of S. Agnes, p. 688 Of
saint Elizabeth of Hongarie, p. 719. 722
Mission.
Saint Francis sends his religious ^uer the world, p. 24 Item p. 110. and
119 He sends his religious to preach to the Moors in Spain, p. 421 Their
shipping at Alenquer p. 425 Their arriving at Civil, p. 426 Their preaching
before the king of the Moors, and their judgment to dye p. 418. 419 And of
diverse other things unto page 442 Of seven other friar Minors sent to preach
the faith to the Infidells, p. 448
Mortification.
Rigorous chasticements for inconsiderat words, p. 39 Of the austeritie of the
life of S. Fran. page 64. 65 How he cast him into a pit of snow, p. 67 A
parable he used touching the mortification of the eyes, p. 69 Of the great
austerities of the first Friar Minors, p. 118 He made one of his Bre. set his
foot upon his throat, p. 161 He wallowed himself naked on a bush of thorns,
p. 215 Wherein the true joy of a Friar Minor consists, p. 308. 309 The
mortification of Br. Iuniperus, p. 537 Of Br. Christopher, p. 551 Of Br. Gyles,
p. 565 Of S. Clare, p. 636 Of S. Yues, p. 727. etc.
Obedience.
Comparison of a dead body to one truly obedient, p. 78 The rigorous
chasticement of one disobedient, p. 80 Of Obedience, p. 307 S. Francis
commands a Saint deceased, to worck no more miracles and he obeieth, p. 207
The obedience of Brother Quintauall, p. 514 Of Br. Macie, p. 520 Of Br. Gyles,
p. 568 A discourse of Obedience, p. 614
Order, or Rule.
How S. Fran. tooks occasion first to begin his order, p. 18 Of the the first
Rule he ordained for the Friar Minors, p. 27 Of their habit, p. 28 Service,
their Fasting and Obedience, p. 29 Of correction in case of offending, page ^30
That they must receive no money, p. 32 Of their asking of alms, diet and
refection, p. 33 How the sick ought to be served, page 34 Against murmuring and
calumniation, p. 35 Not to converse with women, page 36 Punishments for the
sins of the flesh ibid. Of their manner of traveling thorough the world, p.
37. 38 Of the preachers, p. 38 How and when they ought to assemble, p. 40 Of
confession and communion, ibid. Of the miraculous approbation of the Rule, p.
44 A parable of S. Fran. to the pope to confirm his rule, p. 46 The popes
confirmation thereof, p. 47 Of the second Rule instituted by saint Fran. p. 224
The confirmation thereof by Pope Honorious the second, p. 229 Of the third order
of penitents, and of the first occasion thereof, page 279. 280 Of the
confirmation of the Rule of S. Clare, p. 647 The third order of saint Francis,
p. 695 Diverse breues in confirmation thereof, p. 679. etc. Of the holy persons
of the third order of S. Fran. p. 729. 730 How by the merits of S. Fran.
certain^ religious were conserved in their order, p. 742
APPROBATIO.
NOS IACOBVS BLAZEVS Dei and Apostolicae sedis gratia Episcopus Audomarensis
hunc librum cuititulus THE CHRONICLE OF THE FRIAR MINORS, a probo and Catholico
viro D. Guilielmo Cape in linguam Anglicanam versum, a Carolo Boscardo huius
Ciuitatis Typographo typis mandari ac diuulgari permittimus: cum ex fidedigno
testimonio teneamus illum, nulla ratione voluisse sciens and volens quicquam
corrumpere, aut a germano verborum sensu transfer. Actum Audomaropoli in
Palatio nostro Episcopali die xxij, Ianuarij 1618.

De mandato Reuerendissimi Domini Episcopi Audomarensis Praefati;

L. DESCAMPS Secret.


