TWO SPARE KEYS TO THE IESVITES CABINET. DROPPED Accidentally by some Father
of that Society and fallen into the hands of a Protestant.

THE First whereof, Discovers their Domestic Doctrines for Education of their
Novices.

The Second, opens their Atheistical Practices touching the present Wars
of Germany.

Projected by them in the year 1608. and now so far as their power could
stretch, effected, till the coming of the most Victorious King of SWEDEN into
GERMANY.

Both serving as a most necessary warning for these present Times.

LONDON, Printed by B. A. and T. F. for GEORGE GIBBES, and are to be sold at
his Shop at the Flower de Luce, by the little South-doore of St. Paul's Church.
1632.

THE DOCTRINE AND PRACTICE OF THE IESVITES.
WHen the time was now at hand and almost accomplished, wherein that rare and
heavenly man Paulus Florenius abandoned that perverse Fraternity of the
Jesuits, and returned from them to the public Society of men, and we two
were at that instant time walking together then thus spoke Paul unto me.

PAVL. FLOREN. Me thinks Christianus (says he) when I consider all
Circumstances impartially, comparing them one with another, this our profession
of Iesuitisme wherein we live is wholly compacted of Superstition, Hypocrisy,
and a great deal of dissembled and pretended Sanctity, being even devised of
the Devil himself in this elder and doting age of the world, purposely
thereby to make sale unto Mankind of all the Errors, toys and Superstitions of
Popery, and (to use a homely phrase against my will, but that it is most
proper and significant in this case) to take the stinking excrements of
Papistrie so odious in their own nature, and sauouring much more loathsomely
at this time, especially wherein they are so often stirred in, by many curious
and great Scholars, and by compounding and tempering the same with pretenses
of Holiness, and wrapping them up in a great number of obscurities and
subtilties to vent them once more to the whole Christian world for sweet Drugs
and Spices of price, and that after such a manner, that they will compel men
to be their Chapmen for them to buy whether they will or not. Yea, and the
matter is now carried in such sort, that nothing can be discovered in the
religion of Popery, how base, false, and abominable soever, which this
Society presumes not by some new devise or other, either through blinding the
eye of Understanding, or by crafty Conueyances, covering the absurdity and
falsehood thereof, to make appear both fair and true. Wherefore I suppose,
that it stands us much upon to consider seriously in what a profession we
live, least if we shall neglect to take notice of the falsehood thereof now,
our blessed Lord and Savior himself neglect to acknowledge us for his own in
the day of our general account, and afterward, we may do at that most
excellent Prophet JEREMY commands, Fly out of the Midst Iere^^. 51. 6.
of Babel and deliver every man his own Soul.


CHRISTIAN. FRANC^EN. Whereunto I replied thus: And is it true Paul? Can you
admit a thought, that the most Holy and Learned profession in the world at this
time, should be false and hypocritical? I assure you, I hold this Religion to
be the true Religion, and so consequently that our selves are bound to
continue in the same, as in our lawful Vocation, according to the Doctrine of
the holy Apostle, and not to depart a jot therefrom, or else all Religions in
the world to be false, and by all means to be avoided.


PAVL. I was of your mind Christianus, said Paul, before I entered into this
Profession, and therefore I burst violently out of the arms of this flattering
world (though she was unwilling to let me escape out of her clutches) and came
running as it were in have to this Society of Jesuits, as to the most holy of
all professions of Religion, and the most pleasing to GOD (as I supposed) and
the most comfortable to mine own soul.

But now, whereas I expected to find true and unfeigned Holiness therein, Woe is
me, I meet with nothing but mere Hypocrisy and Dissimulation.

And now even thine own self (O Christian) shall see apparently that what I
have spoken is not devised of hatred, or evil will, but that I speak it as a
man convinced in Conscience by the Truth it self, and even enforced thereunto
against my will, if forthwith thou do but search into the depth as I have
done, and into the very foundations of the Society, and relinquishing all
voluntary or (as our Society terms it) Holy simplicity and blindness of
heart, thou be guided by the pure light of reason, and beholding the same with
a sincere understanding, no way for stalled with Jesuitical Delusions, thou
can take a view of the Cozenage and knauerie thereof: which if thou do,
(as it is my hope that thou will;) I doubt not but that thou shall quickly
discern, by those spiritual foundations which are laid in every house of
Probationers amongst us for the Education of Nouices, and instructing them
according to the rule of that Society, that none at all is fitting to be
admitted into this profession, but such only as have a propense inclination,
either by nature, or acquired by servile Education, and suddenly resolved upon
in some sit of astonishment, of heart to hypocrisy and superstition; That is
to say, some such man as is well skilled, by an app^^^^nt Sanctity of look or
demureness of Count(...)nce, to make show in public of his Devotion (as they
term it,) which our blessed Savior has commanded to reserve for our private
Closets, and such a one as praying in public like a Pharisie at a Fast, can
cunningly change the coppie of his Countenance at pleasure, which manner of
behavior, howbeit indeed and in truth it be nothing but Hypocrisy, yet it is
styled by our Society, Edification forsooth, and Devotion.

Verily Christian, I do every day more and more plainly perceive, and do
exceedingly bewail to see, that this is the very foundation whereupon our
Society is built, nor will my Conscience ever suffer me to be at quiet, till
I have purged my self from these pollutions.

But if so be, that your self having your understanding forestalled with daily
Custom, which is a second Nature, do not yet perhaps perceive thus much. I
will undoubtedly prove unto you by infallible Demonstrations, how you may be
able to collect thus much by very touch and feeling, which though it be the
most stupid of all Senses, yet it is the most infallible and hardest to be
deceived.


CHRISTIAN. Indeed, said I, Paul, I do confess that I do not yet fully
understand thus much. Wherefore if you suppose me to be inveloped in a Mist of
Iesuitisme, be a means I beseech you that I may Discern, at the least by
touching the meaning of these things, whereof you have now begun to speak.


PAVL. Well then, said he, come hither unto me yet a little nearer, and by
calling thy memory to an account, lay thy hand (as it were) upon all that
Sanctity whereof thou have had experience hitherto, partly in thy self, and
partly in other Jesuits, and weighing the same deliberately together, with the
several dispositions of the people, as they are Italians, Spaniards, French,
or Dutch, ingenuous or blockish, freeborn, or base, consider them apart
seriously, so shall thou at last be resolved. I assure my self, that thou
have ever observed, and took notice of more frequent and outward expressions
of Jesuitical Devotion in Spaniards, and Italians, then in Germans, French, or
other Nations, and most usually in servile and blockish companions, much more
then in freeborn and ingenuous Gentlemen.

Now as touching the Spaniard himself, you shall find that this Disposition in
him, proceeds merely from his servile Education in the Christian Religion:
For there is in Spain (as your self know as well as I do) so strict a course
taken for inquiry into every particular man, touching his profession, at the
least of the Roman Religion, and the same is so narrowly watched for flying
away, that except the very Sons and Children themselves shall bring a Faggot
to the burning of their Fathers, (if once they be adjudged Heretics) and so
become little less then the Executioners of their Parents, they are generally
reputed Heretics, and worthy to fry with them in the same flame.

Whereby it is apparent enough, that the Spaniards of necessity must be
Superstitious, and very frequent in all outward acts of Devotion, and both in
life and death Roman Catholics. Yea, they had need to take heed, that they
do not so much as smell like an Heretic, when they are rotten in their
Graves, least if they have fallen short in outward testimonies of Religion,
they happen to be suspected touching the Faith, and come to be most severely
persecuted to the third and fourth generation.

How then can it be possiblely, that the Spanish Nation, being borne and bred,
educated and instructed in such infinite slavery of mind, being also by
Nature hot and chollericke, should choose but be most violent, or (if you please
to term it so) most Devout in his Religion?

Yea, how could the Devil himself if he were liable to the Spanish
Inquisition, how could he avoid it, but he must be compelled at all times to
transform himself into an Angel of light, and to acquire some habit, at the
least to put on an outside of Romish superstition and seeming Sanctity? From
this Fountain sprung that Ignatius de Loiola, who being a Soldier, and by the
valor of the French at the seidge of the Castle at Pampeloun, in the Kingdom
of Navarre, spoiled for following that profession any longer, and outstripping
all others in Superstition, became the Founder of the Jesuitical Order, by
whom he might in time to come, not only be revenged of the French, but also
make a Conquest of all the Christian world besides.

You shall also observe in Italians, that they are exceedingly frequent in
those outward acts of religious Devotion, and that through a natural
inclination which they have to hypocrisy and dissimulation, as a Nation which
ever has bin (as appears by all their ancient Monuments and Records) very
superstitious, and are to this day inclinable to worship a multitude of
Deities, and marvelous prone to Idolatry; insomuch, that it may easily be
demonstrated, how out of this Cup of Fornication, that people has powered out
many things into Christian Religion, and infected it throughout with deadly
poison. Wherewith the whole Christian world being for the most part enticed and
deceived, by the sweetness, delitiousnesse, Antiquity, and fair outside
thereof; is, in a manner quite inebriated, whiles day by day in the matter of
salvation, they resort to a Rabble of Romish Deities, and to a Numberless
number of Saints forsooth, substituted by the Popes of Rome, in room of the
Heathen Gods, and propounded to be invocated and prayed unto, and them
multiplied continually, though not in deed, yet in their names, as also to many
Goddesses feminine Saints, amongst whom questionles the Virgin Mary was brought
in as in the place of Ceres, whom the Roman Matrons in the time of Heathenisme,
did most religiously adore with burning tapers, at such time of the year as
the Feast of Candlemas or Purification of the blessed Virgin was enacted.

Which thing, I am the rather induced to believe seeing that for the increase
of their Idolatry, this very solemnity was purposely contrived to fall into the
month of February, that being the self same Va^ro. lib. 1. de Pop. Romans vita.
Macrob. lib. 1. Saturnal. ^. 13 Ovid. Fast. 2. 4.
time of the year the ancient heathen Romans kept their Feast called Februa,
offering up sacrifices for all souls, and for the purging or expiating of the
sins of the whole City.

For indeed, all the people of Rome, at that time of the year (as their own
Writers testify) was wholly taken up with making Oblations and Sacrifices,
with lighted Torches and waxen Candles about the Sepulchers of the Dead, for
obtaining of rest to the Souls of their friends departed. And finding the
Scriptures of God, unwilling of themselves to consent to this Idolatry, they
have forced and drawn them thereunto, (as it were) by the head and shoulders,
and having by chance stumbled upon one book or other that seems to approve
that opinion in some sort, they have made that book Canonical, that so their
opinion might be made altogether an Article of our Faith, in defense whereof,
as well as of other points, all the Doctors, (or rather Doddipoles) of the
Roman Church do labor till they sweat again, but all in vain, till at the
last perceiving, that they nothing advantage their cause, by all the new
Arguments they can devise, and rake up day by day, they retire in the end of
all to the traditions of the Church as to their short Anchor and only safe
harbor in that case: When as nevertheless, that very tradition it self is
for the most part (I may safely say altogether) underpropped by that great and
principal Idol of Rome, which with its greatness does (in a manner) reach up
to heaven. Yea makes it self equal to that ever to be adored and blessed
Trinity, by that triple Crown it wears, and that threefold gemiculation
which is expected from all such as dare to approach near unto him.

Neither indeed, can I suppose that the Germans and Bohemians, being
naturally and of themselves inclinable to true piety, did so easily fall off
from the Church of Rome, for any other cause so much as for this; to wit,
because in regard of that honesty and gravity of manners which is in them by
Nature, they have ever abhorred and cannot away with to this day a multitude of
Idols and Ceremonies, with all that leuity of Minnick representations and
superstitions, howbeit indeed they have defiled themselves for many years
together with this Idolatry and inconstancy, being ouerborne by the authority
of that Roman Idol, and that infallibility of Spirit, which they so brag
that they hold in Feesimple, or at the least have an everlasting lease thereof
to themselves and their posterities for ever. And though it be so, that some
men being caught by our Jesuits, with the glorious names of Hierome, Ambrose,
Augustine, Bernard, Thomas Aquinas, and other Saints, do return to their
former abominations, surely they are none but illiterate, and unexperienced
youths or none of the wisest and knowing men, but rather such as being
distracted with an importunate and confused rumor, of Learning and Holiness,
are not able to understand the mystery of this business, or to discern aright
of matters in question, nor do perceive, that forasmuch, as these Fathers of
our Society have made the Bishop of Rome an earthly Deity, by appropriating
unto him a sovereign Power, over all persons, and an infallibility of truth in
doctrine, so in lieu of this their Courtesy to him, this Roman-God-Almighty
has likewise conferred upon them, and by a free donation entayled upon them
and their posterity the name of holy Fathers, for ever and ever.

And all this only for this purpose that so godly a piece of Doctrine devised
by them, and tending so much to the upholding of his Fatherhood (I had almost
said falsehood,) might not seem any human device, but rather as it were a
Divine constitution and an Oracle from Heaven: and that himself evermore
relying thereupon, might by virtue of his Divine prerogative, have power to
create and ordain for the whole Christian world, what Articles of Faith he
pleased.

Last of all, who does not see, that servile and blockish Companions (for those
only remain in our Division) do for this very cause both more willingly fall
into, and more obstinately maintain this blockish and slavish Religion, as
more naturally agreeing to themselves and their inclinations.

But this point I am sure, your self understand perfectly, who have but a few
days ago (as you cannot choose but remember) expressed unto me your own
particular grief, for the rude and blockish qualities of our Collegiates, when
you related unto me not without indignation, that after you returned from
Italy into Germany, you were exceedingly molested in mind with Consideration
thereof, and did many a time wish your self out of this world, rather then to
live to be constrained to do any thing against your Calling, with this
thought, and the experience you had of the truth thereof, did wonderfully
weaken and infringe: to wit, that in these parts, there were none observed to
enter into or at the least to continue in that Society of Jesuits, but the
very Dregs of Mankind, such as were hardly capable of reason, much less of
true Piety and Religion: unto whom nevertheless, because they exceed in
number, you must conform your self in all things, if you desire to live in
peace abroad, and enjoy any quiet or content at home.

And thus I have made known unto you, the foundation of our Society, let us
now proceed unto the body thereof, the estate whereof is easily discovered from
the original, as it were, and causes thereof. For inasmuch as our Society which
most impudently arrogateth to it self the name of IESV, is composed of such a
sincke of Hypocrites and superstitious persons, it deserves rather to be
termed a Pharisaicall Religion: howbeit (as I have said) it be clothed with
the most glorious name of IESV, to the end that wretched mortals might
henceforth have the Enemies and Traitors of their own salvation, not only
lurking under sheep clothing, but also under the very ornament of Divinity,
that by this means the very Elect (if it could be possibly) suspecting no
falsehood to be under so glorious a name of truth, might be drawn into error.

Now the whole body of our society, besides their Father General, who is the
Head and Coriphaeus of this Order, comprehends only these six sorts of
persons.

The first, those who have professed 4. vows.

The second, suchas have made profession of 3. vows

The third, are spiritual Coadiutors.

The fourth, are temporal Coadiutors.

The fifth Scholars.

The sixth, Novices.

The professors of 4. Vows are so called, because that over and above the 3.
common vows of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, they make a peculiar vow of
Obedience to the Pope of Rome, and promise him, that they will disperse and
publish the errors and superstitions of the Roman Religion throughout all the
world, whenever he shall command, Non petito viatico, at their own cost and
charges.

And again, unto the Father General they vow, Ab negationem honorum, to
renounce all honors, forsooth, because they will not be made Cardinals out of
the Society, and yet therein they are made very Cardinals in the Society, as
out of whom only their Father General, who is in effect nothing else but the
Pope of that Society, must be elected, and upon whom as upon hinges, the
whole Society may depend and be turned every way for advantage. Which men also
may retain a public repute of being Learned and Holy men: and so this lying
and foolish Society, whiles it supposes that it auoydeth Ambition, or would
be thought so to do, falls headlong into it, not much unlike those foolish
Philosophers, whom Cicero mentions, who by setting their own Names upon
those Books, which they had written touching the Contempt of Glory, have
therein foolishly fished for vain Glory to themselves.

Now those who have professed three vows, are as very Bishops in the society,
and whereas in other Orders this degree is not distinguished from simple
Priesthood, but as many as are ordained Priests may also be Professors. In this
our society there is a distinction betwixt those two, to the end (forsooth)
that this degree may seem the higher, and more eminent, if many years after a
man has been made Priest he may be admitted to profession, as unto a
Byshopricke. By which distinctions they make it appear unto us evidently
enough, that they have converted the base show of Ambition, into a most
beautiful and glorious picture, or outside of vain glory, which might move
all all men living with its beauty, and might allure and retain unto it
self, a great number of persons of all estates, and degrees, and of both sexes.

Whereas, if men looking seriously into this outward Mark this.
form, and formal outside; and with the piercing eye of true understanding
should behold the inside thereof; questionless, they might there discover
closely concealed under our society, that second beast which makes all the
world to worship the first. Apoc 13. 12.

For by the first beast, I understand the Bishop of Rome, who in regard of that
secular power which he usurps, is indeed and in truth that Antichrist whom our
society now causes to be worshipped almost all the world over, and that it
must continue to do so ever lastingly, has bound it self by that their
fourth and more peculiar vow.

Now that which our blessed Lord and Savior Math. ^4. 22. Apocal. 13. 5. 12.
14. Dan. 12. 7.
and his beloved Disciple Saint JOHN, and the Prophet DANIELI do speak,
touching the short time of Antichrists reign, is to be understood of the last
persecution, which shall be, at such time as
that first beast the Pope, shall by that second beast our Society, in some
part have recovered Germany, Bohemia, and other Kingdoms, lately taken out of
their hands, and shall see many other Realms and Principalities reduced to
their obedience by the same. For then shall this society being grown rich,
magnify its own heart, and rise up against the King of Kings, and be crushed
to pieces without Dan. 8. 25.
hands.

Spiritual Coadjutors (under which name are comprehended all Priests and
professors of Divinity or Philosophy, and all and singular teachers of the
inferior Arts not yet having made profession) having first vowed Poverty,
Chastity, and Obedience, do assist this beast in perverting and seducing of
Souls unto the first Beast. Wherein as any one shall approve himself more apt
and ingenious then his fellows, so is he the more quickly admitted by
profession to be a Member of this Monster.

Now those who are called Temporal Coadjutors, have charge to provide for the
back and belly of this Beast, purneying and providing for the same and
intermedling with all Domesticke business,

Lastly, Scholars and Novices are maintained at home, to this end only, least
at any time there might prove a defect in the Body of this Monster. But that
as old eaten limbs shall happen to decay, and fall off, so fresh and new
supplies may be still made out of this Storehouse or Seminary of young
Jesuits.

Moreover, to the end this Idolatry and superstition In the Epistle of Ignatius
de Loyola, who is read every month at the Table.
may be for ever concealed free from fear of discovery, and that as it is
preserved, so it may be increased continually, this Beast is accustomed to
forestall the understanding of her whelps, if they have any, and to bind up
their very senses, admonishing or rather Commanding in good earnest, that all
things which the Superior shall Command, be performed with blind obedience, and
that whatsoever our superior shall do, be passed over with blind judgment,
without so much as Considering whether it be good and profitable, or hurtful
and damnable, which is enjoined or done, forasmuch as every such thought takes
away the merit and valor of obedience. In which particular, our Society
follows the steps of the Canonists those most pernicious flatterers of the
Popes, and seducers of the whole Christian world. For these were the only men,
who in times past persuaded all Christian Churches, that the Bishop of Rome was
of such Sovereign power, and authority; that albeit, he should lead the
whole world into Damnation, Distinct 40. Cap. 51. Papa.
no man had power to control him, no man might be so bold as to demand of him
a reason for so Deuilish an act.

And even thus altogether, or rather a great deal worse, does this Society of
ours instruct her Nouices, teaching that whatsoever our Superiors inioyneth to
be done or does himself, is not only not to be questioned (much less to be
found fault withal) out ever to be presupposed as holy and In the same
Epistle.
good, to use the very words of our Father Ignatius.

And all this only to this end (forsooth) that all their Foolery, Idolatry,
and Superstition, may at length obtain the name of Holiness, and be adored
as Ordinances of the Society.

And now (me thinks (I have brought thee about near enough to the Knowledge
and sensible feeling (as it were) of the sum of our Religion.

Neither do I doubt, but that now at last, thou understand how extremely
we have deceived our selves, and bin gulled in making choice of this kind of
life, and how venial a sin we shall commit, in withdrawing our selves from
the same.


Whereunto I replied. CHRISTIAN: These are monstrous and horrible things indeed
PAVL, and truly in my mind I have often seen such kind of Monsters in Italy,
but I blinding my understanding, as our own constitutions do enjoin us, did
suppose these things to be nothing, but devises of Satan, whereby to divert me
out of my course, and having but once shouldered me out of my calling, by the
loss thereof, to cast me headlong into everlasting misery.

Now you, for your part (so far as I discern) putting confidence in most
abominable prodigies, rather then the strongest arguments, endeavor to
disgrace both our own first Calling, and the whole Religion of Rome: which
thing, if I shall yield unto you as lawfully done, seeing you are but one man
in this kind, I see no reason why, the same liberty may not be granted to the
particular Sects of all others that cavil at Religion. Forasmuch, as there is
no opinion which may not seem to be proved out of holy Scripture, being
understood and interpreted by every man as shall best stand with his particular
liking.

But yet considering, that all thy relations touching these Monsters are
wonderful probable, and the other things also most evident, and such as do
convince the sense and understanding, I cannot herein dissent from you, nor
indeed may I with safety, seeing I know you to be as learned and ingenious as
our Society affoordeth any. I will rather endeavor to rouse up my self, and
call to exact account my best understanding in this case, which as you say, is
ouerclouded with Iesuitioall delusions, and unfold the most implicit notions
of my heart-touching the Society of Jesuits, that afterward you may express
more at large, what is the very Species, form, and Character of a Jesuit,
whom all the Christian world so much honors and adoreth.

And now to the end, that I may after your example fall out of hand upon the
fundamental points of the Society, hearken and I will relate unto you what
strange things I have seen and observed in these stranger times.

I did in my younger days (I assure you) suppose, that the foundation of this
Society was altogether Divine, and me thought I was no longer conversant on
earth, so soon as I was admitted into this society, as I think it is a
usual thing with all our Nouices, or the greatest part of them to be so
affected. For so great is the power of our continued meditations touching
divine subjects, that a man seems ever to be borne a new, not of natural
parents, but after a peculiar-manner borne a Jesuit in the Society of JESUS,
even as CHRIST our Redeemer was incarnate by the holy Ghost.

And thus the whole nature of man being in a manner Deified does witness, as
which does from that time forward, wherein it has given it self to
meditations of this nature altogether forbear to pamper and feed the body,
abandoneth all society of the flesh, by whipping and other voluntary
afflictions of the body, restrains and suppresseth pleasure as a blot of
infamy and dishonor, acknowledges in every Spiritual brother the Image of
the Lord our God, as our eighteenth Rule commands, and withal abjureth and
dispiseth riches, honors and all such things, as by the vulgar are accounted
most excellent and precious.

And this was indeed (without any dissimulation) my firm and constant
persuasion as touching the society of Jesuits, in the first year of my
admission thereunto.

But this other year, when by chance I met with our Iapan-Letters, and there
amongst other things had read, not without astonishment, that among them of
Iapan being our Antipodes, there are certain religious men, whom they call
Iamam buxa, or Soldiers of the Valleys, who purposely to at taine an opinion
of Sanctimony, do punish themselves grievously, do watch very much, do Fast
exceeding long, and do give themselves wholly to certain Meditations composed
of their own heads, and that they prevail so far by these things, that they
are believed many times, (as inspired with an holy instinct) to speak Oracles,
and are accounted by all to be perfect and Holy men; then especially, when as
they make no bones of it to kill themselves voluntarily for their Idol.

When I had (as I said) understood these and many other like passages out of
Letters, written not only by men of our Order, but also published in Print, I
assure you I was amazed, and did so shake as if I had newly fallen from Heaven
to Earth.

For upon a sudden it came into my mind, to think that nothing could be
devised more like to our Religion; and that therefore, it was vehemently to be
suspected, least all this our Spiritual course of life should not prove
Divine, but Human only and Pharisaicall. Forasmuch, as very Idolators and
Heathens wanting the light of the Gospel, do attain thereunto; and indeed
such Heathens, as are said to be wondrous like both in Nature, Manners and
Disposition, to our most ingenious Europians; I mean our Italians, and
Spaniards; so that now it is apparent, that the like Religions have bin devised
and established by men of like natures and inclinations.

And what a strange thing is it, that among those Ethnicks of Iapan, not only
our profession of Iesuitisme, but in a sort the very entire Government of the
Roman Hierarchy may be seen apparently, founded and established by an Heathen
Spirit.

For in the same Letters, it is related, that one chief man throughout the
whole Empire of Iapan, does hold the chief place of a supreme Judge in
matters Ecclesiastical, who is little less then worshipped as a God, and
generally reputed so Holy a man, that he may not be suffered to tread on the
ground, and Commands far and wide many times upon occasion, even contesting
with those heathen Princes: Moreover, this man has the ordering and making of
all the Tundi among them, who are in effect the Bishops of that Nation; albeit,
the nomination of them (as it is reported) be in some places in the Governors
power; which Tundi are thereupon, in great and singular esteem both with high
and low, and do confer Priesthoods, do appoint Fasting days, and grant
Licenses for eating of Flesh, to such as upon Holy days go on Pilgrimage to
the Chapels of their Saints and Idols.

Yea and further, the sects of the Bontij which arise among them, and are
nothing else but the Monks of Iapan, have no authority or estimation among the
people; unless this great man have approved him by his letters Patents and
testimonials: Furthermore, these Bontij are said to inhabit very large and
spacious Colleges, after the manner of our Monks, to live a single life, to
erect an Altar in the midst of their Chapel, whereupon they place a wooden
representation of Amida sitting upon a golden Rose, very gallant to behold.
Also that they have very great Libraries, with places wherein they eat and
drink together after the manner of our Refectories, and certain Copper works
which serve them instead of bells to call them up to their hours of prayer.

Again, every evening their president or chief man among them, propounds to
every one his particular subject for his meditations that night: and presently
after midnight they do before the Altar in their Chapel dancing by turns
say over their devotions out of the last book of Xaca.

Also, that every morning each of them spends an hour in Meditations; that
they build fair Cloisters in their chapels for their Fotoquij, who are a
certain sect of religious persons amongst them, that are shaven upon their
heads and chinnes, and do observe a great number of holy days in the year.
And yet for all this they write that these Bontij are most base fellows, in
their lives and conuersations and as coueteous as any men living upon Gods
earth, and as well acquainted with all devises how to rake up money. That these
Bontij do make sale unto the people of many writings under their hands, by
help whereof, the common people are persuaded that they are protected from the
Devil.

Also, that these Bontij have a custom to borrow money in this world, which
they promise to restore with large interest in the world to come, for which
they give the Creditor bills of their hands as security, which he at the time of
his death carries with him into the other world.

And lastly, that these Bontij are for the most part the sons of Noblemen, in
regard that the Nobility of Iapan, being full of Children, do usually take a
Course to procure these sons of theirs entered into the Order of the Bontij,
for whom they are not able to provide otherwise.

You might style these men Christian Monks, or (if you please) having respect
unto their qualities Clergy men and Prelates of the Church of Rome, if ever the
light of the Gospel had in any measure shined upon them before the coming of
our men amongst them: or if ever any Christian at all had gone so far as unto
them, whereby they* might have heard of these things and have imitated them.

Neither is prayer for their dead wanting among these Iapanezes, howbeit in
that they are a little more superstitious then we. For in the month of
August, they are observed to set aside 2. whole days for Adoration of the
Spirits of the Dead. And that a little before Night, they set up a great number
of Lamps and other Lights about the doors of their houses, with much
varieties of Paintings and trimmings. That afterward they walk round about
the City all night long, partly for Devotion sake, and partly to look about
them.

Also, that toward the Evening, a great sort of people do walk out of the
City to meet the Spirits of their Dead friends, now coming toward them* as
they (forsooth) imagine. When they are at a certain set place, where they
suppose that the Ghosts of their deceased Friends do meet them; first, they
salute them kindly, even as if they saw them; saying you are heartily welcome,
we have wanted your good Company long, I pray you sit down a while and
refresh your selves with some victuals, for we know you cannot choose but be
weary.

Then they set upon Tables (as a banquet for the Ghosts to feed upon) Rice,
Fruits, and other Viands, and when they have demurred about an hours space, as
if they thought it high time to make an end, they invite and entreat them to
come home to their houses; saying, we will go before and provide some good
cheer for you. Also* it is observed, that as soon as these two days are over,
they walk out of the City again both men and women with lighted Torches, to
conduct them (forsooth) who are now upon departing, least they should stumble
in the dark or hurt themselves against any thing.

Yet further it is observed likewise, that when they return into the City
again, they make a diligent search about all their high rooms, and tylings of
their houses, by casting up stones thereon, least any of the Spirits (of whom
they are in bodily fear) should remain behind in secret.

Moreover, it is written from thence, that when those Iaponezes were demanded
by our men, why they did set to those Spirits a banquet; they made answer,
that they are upon their way toward their Paradise, which say they, was ten
thousand Millions of miles, and was a journey that could not be ended in less
then three years time; and therefore they took up their resting place there
for a while to refresh themselves, and to enable them the better to hold out to
their journeys end.

But in all these things it is observed, that the Bontij, the Priests and
Bishops of Iapan do all in all, and that there is no family, though never so
mean, but it must offer one gift or other to the Bontij, for the peace of the
souls of their deceased Friends

I Omit for brevity sake, their Holy water, their pots of sweet odours set over
hot coals to make perfume, their many and large Indulgences which these Bontij
do tender unto the people, who are frequent at their preachments, and enrich
their Cloisters. Their beads to pray upon, which a great number of the
Iapanezes do daily run over, not only within their private houses, but
publicly also, carrying them about in their hands all over the City praying
to their Amida, and to their Xaca for riches, honors, prosperous health, and
everlasting Comforts. All which things verily are so true, that they are both
observed and written by men of our own Order, and I have in relating thereof
made use almost Verbatim of that translation, which our Father Petrus Maffaeus
has made out of the Italian into Latin.

And this indeed was an opinion of mine, or rather (as my Confessor told me) a
temptation of the Devil cast into my mind, touching the Society of Jesuits
and the whole Church of Rome, which, for all that I was hardly able in many
days to thrust out of my thoughts, by opposing through ejaculations of heart
(as they term them) and through fastings with other afflictions of the body, a
whole troop of Arguments of this nature, violently bursting in upon my
understanding day and night.

And now before this temptation was well disgested and overcome, behold upon a
sudden there fell upon me another of the same nature which so handled me, as
scarcely it left any life in me; For shortly after it so fell out, that we had
the 18. Chapter of the third book of Kings read unto us at dinner time, for
our Spiritual repast, wherein is contained the story of the Priests of Baal,
and how for the pleasing or appeasing of their Idol, they had a Custom to cut
themselves with knives and lances till they bled amain. Which words when I
heard our Chaplain read, for (I confess) I was not then a Divine, neither had
I ever as then read over the holy Scriptures, verily I did tremble and shake
all over, as if I had been taken with a sudden fit of an Ague, nor had I any
further stomach to my dinner at that time, as remembering (to be true to you)
our own whippings whereby as well as with knives and lances we our selves are
cruel to our own flesh, many times spilling not a little of our own blood, and
I cannot say, but as these Iapaneze Jesuits whom I told you of, that they have
named Iamambuxae, some of us at sometimes become guilty of our own deaths, I
am sure we spoil our healths by it. But I fear least these and five hundred
more spiritual doubts, mentioned by me touching the Society, may be trivial
to be propounded unto so judicious and grave a Divine, as your self, not
being worth your taking notice of. Wherefore letting other passages slip by us*
I will be bold to describe unto you only two; Holy, and Catholic, that is to
say, Italian Monsters and Idols, the maintenance whereof our Society has
peculiarly taken upon themselves, and concerning which, I am troubled and have
bin these ten years together, how I might make them Holy in my estimation, as
they are made Catholic long since. Out of which discourse of mine, you shall
perceive your opinion touching the Society of Jesuits and the Roman Church,
wonderfully confirmed and established.

The one of these Idols* I my self have seen at Rome in the Chapel of St.
PETER, which Idol, men usually call the Vicar of CHRIST.

And I assure you, when first I saw it, I was of an opinion, that it was either
CHRIST himself, or surely something more esteemed of then CHRIST; forasmuch,
as all the people which flocked thither for devotion sake, so soon as ever
they beheld it, set on high on a Throne and supported by the hands of red men
like Seraphin-Angels, (least perhaps it might dash its foot against a stone)
fell down instantly upon their knees beating their breasts, and performing such
outward acts of Devotion in that kind, as appertains to none but God only.

Oh holy CHRIST, (did my soul then instantly cry out in private) how long will
it please thee to suffer this, that as low as thy self being true GOD, have
humbled thy self on earth, so high thy Vicar being but a wretched and a
sinful man, shall extol and advance himself above all heavens? That whereas
thou had no kingdom here; yea, have said, that thy Kingdom was not of this
world, John. 18.
neither woudlst take upon thee any Kingly Majesty. Thy Vicar nevertheless,
should have right and interest in all Kingdoms, and should out strip all Kings
and Potentates; yea, even thee, O King of Kings, in wordly Pomp and heavenly
Majesty of State.

That whereas thy Disciple St. PETER, who is said to have bin Created the first
Pope, would not permit Cornelius the Centurion so much as to fall down at his
feet, much less to kiss them; but instantly Act. 10*
took him up, saying; Arise, for I also am a man: his Successor for all that,
forgetting himself to be a man should sit on high, as a very God Almighty,
whose feet all men must fall down at and kiss?

But yet I recalled my self by and by, and somewhat pacified my mind with
this Meditation: Surely, (said I) it is altogether necessary, that the Pope
should retain this his outward Pomp and Majesty, the better by that means to
draw unto him the proud Emperors, Kings and Princes of this world, and to
retain them in true Obedience; as also to dazell the eyes of the vulgar
people, to the end that what cannot be done amongst such men by Humility, may
at least be brought about by Subtlety and Policy, that whereas he is not
able to preserve his reputation by testimonies of his own Holiness and
virtue, as CHRIST and his Apostles and other Holy men have done, he may uphold
it at least by the outward glory of another, least that whereas the ancient
Romans were in times past Lords of the whole World, if the power of the Bishop
of Rome, should not extend it self fully both to Heaven and Hell, yea and
Purgatory also, a place devised for this purpose; the Pope might hap to seem
inferior to them, or at the least not greater.

That as Jupiter Optimus Maximus, the prime GOD of all among the Romans, is
supposed to strike some persons to hell with his Thunderbolt, so the Roman
Bishop should have in like manner, his terrible Thunderbolt of Excommunication,
whereby he might make the hearts of all Christians to shake, and might thrust
down as many as should but dare to lift up their tongues against this
Sovereign power of his, lower then hell it self if it could be possibly.

Last of all, that whereas the ancient Romans being Lords of all the world,
had a most honorable and stately Magistracy, clothed in purple, whereof some
were Governors of the City, others ruled as Vice-Royes in foreign Nations:
Even so the Pope of Rome, should have not only his Bishops as Princes; but
also his Cardinals as Senators clad in purple, who should be companions for
the greatest Kings, and out of whom alone the Vicar of CHRIST should be chosen
by the very instinct of the Holy Ghost. As if the Holy Ghost should not as well
be tied to the Cardinals, those base and beastly sinckes of Lust and Ambition,
as the Chair of PETER to the City of Rome.

For indeed it is true, that the Holy Ghost has said; That by his goodwill,
he cannot endure to dwell in any but quiet, modest and humble persons, and yet
(forsooth) of late, he is even constrained by compulsion, and (as it were)
half against his will to reside, wheresoever the Church of Rome shall be
pleased to confine him.

Howbeit, I must confess, in this case my Conscience did often tell me, that
they of the Church of Rome have not been able to tie the Holy Ghost so close
to themselves and their Sea, but that twenty and seven sundry times failing of
the presence thereof, they have raised those XXVII. Schisms which stand upon
Record in the Chronicles of their Popes: A thing which surely gives infallible
evidence, against their holy Spirit, and causes all the privileges and power
thereof, to incur a just Censure; For alas! what shall we say? Is it
possible, that the Divine Godhead can be an author of Error and Dissension?

But when they are held close to this Argument, then they answer; That the Holy
Ghost departed not from the Church of Rome, at such or such a time, but only
through the mistake of some, and ambition of others, the Church had gotten a
Monstrous head, having sometimes a double, sometimes a treble head, but that
only one of the rest was the true and lawful head of the Church.

Oh, what monstrous spirits have you, (the Romanists) what a monstrous Church?
Which can be compelled through Error and Ambition, to subsist so often and
with so many counterfeit Heads? To wear them so many years, and to enforce so
many poor Christian souls to accept and to believe them upon pain of
Damnation for true Heads of the Church, to their own mistake, the abomination
of all good men, and your own and their most desperate ruin.

Well, now I perceive plaingly enough, that this Monster which has so often
had two Heads, and sometimes three at once, may also through your monstrous
Lust and Ambition, as easily acquire Seven heads at once. But this may be
sufficient touching the first Monster or Idol.

The other Idol I have seen at Loretto, which the Italians call their Lady of
Loretto: And this is a Picture carved (as they would have men believe) by St.
LVKE the Evangelist. And for that cause, it is reported to be a worker of
wonderful Miracles. I am not able in words to express, in what infinite
estimation this Idol is held, what a report there is all Italy over, of the
Miracles that it works. This is the only Saint that all Italians have in
their mouth presently, whether they be amazed with any sudden fear of Death,
or taken Sick with any grievous disease whatsoever.

Unto this Lady of Loretto, do all sorts of people in such cases make Vows,
promise gifts, undertake to go on Pilgrimage unto her Temple. And if it so
fall out, that any man be delivered from any imminent danger, or disease, they
presently then cry out a Miracle, a Miracle, and resolve to perform their
promise, and straight ways they undertake a Pilgrimage to Loretto.

Upon these occasions, there is great resort to Loretto day by day out of all
the parts of Italy; daily are innumerable Offerings presented at her Shrine,
and painted tables hanged up in her Chapel expressing the whole manner of the
Miracles. And truly at the first sight thereof, the infinite multitude of
Tables did somewhat move me, and I was of the mind that some Divine essence
ruled in that place. But when I came a little to my self, upon serious
consideration of all the passages together, I easily discerned, that it was
nothing else but merely the dotage of the blockish people, who being only
guided by outward sense, labor to have a sensible God, I mean a Deity, which
they might see and feel: For upon the one hand I observed, a man pictured upon
the Rack, and valiantly enduring all those torments by prayer made to the Lady
of Loretto: hard by him was portrayed, a man falling from his Horse, and
escaping death by a sudden prayer made to the same Lady: On the other hand, you
might see a multitude of Sick people miraculously restored to health by
calling upon her Name: Not far from them, diverse Tables of people of all
sorts in a storm at Sea escaping the violence thereof, by a Vow made to the
same Lady; with many others of like nature not to be numbered.

Which follies, even CICERO himself, being a diligent obseruer of the Roman
Superstitions* did in his time seem to deride in his book De Natura Deorum,
touching the nature of the Gods of the Romans, wherein making mention of the
Philosopher DIAGORAS deriding the Roman Deities; he thus writes: That when
DIAGORAS upon a time was come to Samothrace, and that a friend of his had took
ocasion to say unto him; You Sir, who are of Opinion, that our Gods do not
hear the prayers of their Suppliants, and order human Affairs, do not you
observe by this multitude of painted Tables, how many men by prayer to the
Gods, have escaped the violence of tempests and storms at Sea and come safe to
Land?

It is true indeed, said the Philosopher, here is a multitude of Tables of
them which have escaped; For they are no where painted that have suffered
Shipwreck, notwithstanding, their prayers to these Gods in this kind, and
have perished at Sea.

Which answer of his, was witty and beseeming a Philosopher; for thereby he
did evidently enough declare, that such people had not bin preserved by the
help or favor of IVPITER, or IVNO, or NEPTVNE, or any other of their supposed
Deities, to whom they had directed their Supplications in this case. Forasmuch,
as many others beside, and such as perhaps were honester, and better men then
those who escaped, though they had made the same prayers had perished in the
waves.

But forasmuch, as all men generally were accustomed in any time of distress
to fly by prayer to one or other of those supposed Deities, and that it often
fell out, that natural causes being violently provoked, and threatening Death,
being either stopped in the midst of their course, or mittigated of
themselves, do upon a sudden yield hopes of deliverance. Thence is it, that
the effect thereof is without any good reason, ascribed to their fained and
imaginary Deities.

And even thus and no otherwise, stands the case with our people of Italy, in
adoring and believing on that Idol of Loretto, and offering unto it Tables of
Devotion; because, inasmuch as all Italy almost makes prayers unto her, and
that of necessity it must fall out, that by one means or other in so great a
Multitude of people, some few at the least shall obtain what they have prayed
for, either through the especial hand of God, or by the strength of nature;
And that nature at sometimes even seems to work a Miracle; all those things,
are by these stupi'd and blockish people attributed to their Lady of Loretto;
except perhaps men would deny, that in the same manner, and for the same end,
the Image of Ceres at a City called Enna in Sicilia, as the same Cicero
witnesses, has made open declaration of her power and Godhead (to use Tullies
own phrase) by many Miracles and wonders many a time, and full often even in
the desperatest cases afforded unto her suppliants present help and remedy.

But these things (as I have formerly said unto you) almost none but the
vulgar, and such as are like unto them do run after and believe.

For even the more learned of their own, Phisicians, Philosophers, and Divines
also, as many as have not their mouths stopped with some Ecclesiastical
preferment, do in their better judgments contemn and deride, not only these
Miracles of Loretto, but even the very Roman religion it self as false and
fained, as I easily and apparently discerned at my being at Naples, where they
had at that time obtained some restraint of the violence of the Roman
Inquisition.

Yea and moreover, these Atheists even to my face derided my name, because it
was Christianus, for in the Italian Dialect by the word Christian they are wont
to intimate a Blockhead, or silly foolish fellow; which thing (as I conceive)
they do for this reason, because in their judgment they hold no man fit or
inclinable to believe the Popish Chimaraes, but silly fools and blockheads.

And these are chiefly those things which came into my mind to speak and
relate touching the Society of Jesuits, and the Idols which it more
particularly believes in and adoreth, being rowzed up thereunto by your
discourse, and beyond all expectation illuminated therewith.


PAVL. At this word, Paulus looking steadfastly in my face, spoke thus unto me;
I will not (says he) henceforth any more enquire after the Causes of so great
blindness in the Jesuits. I will admit no more excuses. If in thee so great a
light of the truth could be depraved by Jesuitical Education and almost quite
extinct in thee, as I verily suppose it had been in all likelihood, if God had
not sent me hither; What may I imagine they are not able to work in the dark
and infatuated understanding of others?

When he had thus said, immediately the watchword was given, that it was time
to retire from our walk and recreation and both of us in private retired to
our private Chambers.


Here ends the first Book.
FINIS.
A DISCOVERY OF THE SECRET DESIGNS AND BLOODY Proiects of the Society of
IESVITES of later years.
WHat MARCUS CATO sometimes spoke concerning the Roman Southsayers; that he
wondered how they could forbear to smile upon each other, so often as they met,
may not unfitly be applied to the Jesuits: It is a wonder that one Jesuit
when he looks upon another does not straight way burst forth into a
laughing outright, they being amongst themselves privy to such impostures
practiced upon the people. I speak not touching your simpler sort of Jesuits,
from whom these more reserved and closer practices of the Society are
altogether concealed, either in respect they are not held wise enough
(forsooth) to be acquainted with them, or that they are thought too devout to
entertain them, or else in regard of their short continuance in that Society:
for all such are so kept short through severity of Discipline, that not one of
them, except he be wondrous quick of sent, can ever smell out in the least
measure what knavery is therein practiced under a show of Holiness. My
discourse only touches the prime and principal fellows of that Society,
their Regents, Fathers, Provincials, and Generals; all which, are so
universally and jointly tainted with all manner of wickedness, but especially
with Whoredom, Couerousnes, and Magic, that indeed any reasonable man may
think it little less then a Miracle, if a Jesuit of this rank meeting such
another upon a sudden, and beholding, as it were, another picture or lively
representation of himself, should have power to abstain from laughing
outright.

I therefore thought it not amiss, considering the premisse^, to lay open unto
the world some particular passages, and practices of that Society, of the
greatest part whereof my self have been an eyewitness, and some part whereof
has been related unto me by Jesuits whom I am able to name, and will
undoubtedly nominate, if they shall but dare in the least manner to lift up
their tongues against me, or to contradict what I have written. And howsoever
at this time I pass over things briefly, and do only (as it were) give you a
first draught thereof, I do purpose in due time (God assisting me) to do it
more largely and completely, with expression of all and singular circumstances
thereunto appertaining.

First of all then, at my entrance into my College of Jesuits; especially, if
it be situated in or near unto any large, and populous, and rich place. But
alas, why do I say, if it be built there? (Seeing they have no Colleges in
any poor, mean, or obscure place.) At your first entry I say into such a
place or College, take principal notice of the Porter of their Gate, and him
you shall find to look like unto the very picture of a very Charon, or rather
a Cerberus; For the most part you shall observe him to be a man of very great
years, or if he be younger, he is a fellow of most approved trust and
secrecy. And this is the man, if any such there be, who is well skilled in
all the mysteries of the Jesuits Caball, or reserved Divinity.

In this fellows keeping is great store of apparel both for Men and Women of
every degree and calling. And with this apparel do the Jesuits habit
themselves according to the quallity that every one finds himself ablest to
personate, and so practice wonderful Impostures in the world. For at sometimes
being habited like Soldiers very gallant, then walk in the streets and
highwayes Whoring and Swaggering in the public Stews. At other times in the
civil habites of Citizens, professing themselves to be of the reformed
Religion, they pry up and down and listen in Innes, in Play Houses, in
Tauernes, upon the Exchange, and in all places of public meetings, wheresoever
there is any frequent resort, what the people speak up and down concerning
them, what consultations are abroad, what matter of Action is set a foot in any
part. Another while, like Doctors of Physic, or of the Civil Law, with great
gold Rings on their fingers, avowing and purposely professing themselves to be
Papists; wheresoever they know any of the Common sort that is wealthy and has
sons, they devise some cause of business with them, and insinuate themselves
into their acquaintance by strange fetches, and in Conclusion do advise them
to bring up their sons in some School or College of Jesuits, affirming
that themselves have been Educated by them, and that they have so profited
under them, that (God be thanked) they never had cause to repent thereof: And
sometimes again apparelled like Noblemen, and completely attended, they cause
Coaches to be provided abroad, and frequent the Courts of Princes, as giving
attendance upon Ambassadors of foreign States, and serve as Intelligencers to
unlock the cabinets of great Potentates.

Nay further, I have known them to make show of being banished persons, and to
crave collections amongst Protestant Divines, purposely to learn underhand
what such men writ against them: yea such were those men for the most part, who
so miserably deluded so many Reverend men in many places by sinister ways
under that habit, furthering the designs of their Society, and breeding
disturbances in the reformed Congregations: of whom, to the end that all
honest-hearted Ministers may be more wary hereafter, I shall tell you
hereafter, what proiects at this day the Jesuits have a foot to this purpose.

But in the mean while perhaps you will say unto me, whereto, I pray you,
serves so much women's apparel, or what is their end in depositing so much in
the keeping of the Porter of their gate. Attend, and I will tell you: No
Pander, that ever TIRENCE or PLAVTVS mentioned in their Comedies, was so nimble
at the trade of winning pretty wenches, at are the Jesuits at this day, but
especially that Porter of their gate whom I mentioned but now.

For, that which the Confessors themselves are not able to wring out of them by
Auricular Confession in their Churches and Chapels, this fellow knows how to
win from them by flattering speeches, with wonderful pleasing and
delightful toys, especially if he meet with a poor widow, or any such
silly woman which sends her child to the College now and then for an Alms;
or with some Laundresse, or Spinster; for be she Lotrix, or Petrix, he will
make her a Meretrix. Whom so soon as this base Pander has once but allured to
come to his net, although her apparel be never so old and tattered, yet he
has gay Gowns enough in store, with accoutrements suitable, wherewith he can
make her both trick and trim, which when he has so done, he knows how
to convey her through many secret passages and by-ways to his Venerable
Masters, the Fathers of the Society. And yet he never does this in the day
time, but near upon the shutting in of the Evening, and then they make away
the whole night in Riot and Luxury, with reuelling and Dancing, the younger
sort and Nouices of the Society being kept far enough from Discovery thereof.

For they have for the purpose certain Vaults framed like Chambers, and rooms
under ground as had those ancient Romans, who first devised there Stews in
Vaults, whose inclination to all carnal lasciuiousnes was so great, and so
brutish, that the Senate of Rome, fearing the just anger of their Gods for the
same, utterly suppressed those Lupanaria or public Stews.

And thus much for the Jesuits Porter of their Gate: only I must not forget
to tell you this one thing, that if any party who by chance shall come to the
sight of such and so great a Wardrobe, do demand with admiration, what is the
end or use of it, answer is made unto them, that it is the wardrobe, reserved
purposely for acting of Plays: but that is the least part of their intention
to my knowledge.

Moreover, when thou entrest into any of their Churches, make account that thou
walk under an heaven of Iron: Bloody Mars is over thine head, not that
Prince of peace; below thee is the very pit of Hell, and a shop of Tormenters.

I now do relate in good earnest, what mine own eyes have seen; At Prague in
Bohemia upon the roof of their Churches, are thousands of Iron Bullets, Whips,
and fire bals, such as the Bohemians use: upon the sides are placed pieces of
Ordnance, with a great number of Muskets and Harquebushes, with Pikes and
Halberts. In the midst, where the Arches meet, are great heaps of huge
Bullets of stone* And the like preparation have they also made at Craconia. Nor
do I make question, but that upon due search their Colleges in other places,
would appear as well provided.

But some man may perhaps make question, to what end Religious men should make
such preparation, or what need there can be so to do. I confess, the matter
at the first sight astonished me, and to my best understanding was exceeding
strange: but thus stands the case.

The Jesuits know well enough, that the courses which they have taken
formerly, and now every day do take, are so indirect and turbulent, as makes
them odious, to all such as they live amongst; yea, to very Papists themselves,
at least to the wiser sort of them, in respect of many things which they have
done both tumultuously, and wickedly, wheresoever they have got footing in the
least manner. For they have no regard of any, they spare not to root up the
very Catholics themselves, so that they may pleasure the Popes Holiness
therein, though it were with the betraying of their Countries, and setting the
whole Christian world in a Combustion. And therefore because they are in daily
fear to be massacred by those among whom they live, they make this provident
and timely prevention by Warre-like preparation.

For indeed, they are afraid (as I my self have heard them confess) least it
might befall unto them as unto the Knights Templers, who notwithstanding they
were forward enough to serve the Pope at all times, and as good Catholics as
could be wished in the matter of Religion; yet, for their too much Ambition
and Covetousness, whereby they became insupportable, they were by the consent
of all Christian Princes, and not without approbation from the Pope himself
put to the Sword all at an instant, and utterly rooted out almost in a moment;
as sometimes were the Pythagorians, those very Jesuits in effect, among the
Heathen, served throughout Italy, and the Provinces adjoining.

Now the reason, wherefore they do make choice to lay up their Arms and
munition in their Churches* is only this: For if when any Insurrection or
rebellious tumult arises in a Province, the Papists come thither to help and
assist them, by this means they have Arms for them in a readiness upon a
sudden: but if any who are of contrary Religion come thither to do them
wrong* or to steal any thing from them, they have munition and stones above
head, to destroy them withal before they be aware. And is not this (I pray
you) he ready way to make the House of Prayer, a Den of Thieves.

And yet by your patience, if you will but attend, I shall relate things more
strange and horrible then these, in respect whereof, the things I have related
hitherto* may well see me tolerable, I may almost say Innocence,

Under the Pauement of their Church at Gratz, and elsewhere* to my knowledge,
are Vaults and buildings under ground; whereunto, there is no way but by
stairs, and steps; Here have they hoorded up (like to that Cacus whom Virgil
speaks of) all their prey and treasure, and do obscurely conceal a world of
wealth: so professing poverty, not only with public consent, but also with
incredible pleasure, suffering the same with admirable patience, and Cursing to
the pit of Hell, all such as are poor against their wills, as unworthy of so
blessed a Cross.

But as for this their treasure, for the most part it is so contrived, that it
is buried directly and perpendicularly under their greatest and chiefest or
most eminent and highest Altar, and so they shall be sure that when they Chant
Mass, they shall Sacrifice to MARS above head, and to MAMMON below.

Now furthermore, in their Vaults under ground they maintain a very strange
Library, of Cords, Halters, Rackes, Swords, Axes, Iron-pincers, Stocks,
Torches, Pillories, and souerall Instruments of Torture, wherewith and
whereunto poor wretches being tied fast, are joint by joint torn a sunder as
many as fall into the hands of these Tyrants, who are far more cruel in this
kind, then MEZENTIVS or PHALARIS ever were.

Nor are they without a Devils coat, and a long steeple crowned hat with
black feathers, a jagged doublet cut and slashed, breeches puffed out and
bagged like bellows, down to their anckles, such as would even make a man
affrighted to look upon them.

But perhaps, he that reads this Relation, will wonder to what end Religious
persons, who profess themselves the Disciples and followers (as they would
have all men to believe) of our most meek Savior JESUS, should make such
provision. I will resolve you this question also, if you please to attend.

With such instruments as these, does the Society captivate the understanding
of their Disciples, unto Jesuitical obedience. For if in the least matter,
they get any hinte of suspicion, against any of their Novices, that he will not
be constant, or that he desires to escape from them, and that he is likely to
betray the secrets of their Society, they clap up such a fellow, in a fair
pair of stocks, and having macerated him a long time with hunger, and cold,
and want of all bodily comforts; at the last, they make an end of him, with
some exquisite tortures, and killing torments. I do not belie them. I write
nothing but a truth. There was at Gratz, about three years ago, a young man
named IACOBVS CLVSSEVS, a youth of an excellent and pregnant wit; this man did
they lay hands upon, and miserably tormented him, by whipping and scourging,
for a matter of no moment, and because he told them plainly, that he would
renounce their Society, and complain publicly (if ever he got liberty) for
this and other such wicked dealings toward him, they clapped him up into such
a Prison, under ground, as aforesaid, from whence he was never seen to come
out again alive.

Nor did any of us that were Novices, make question, but that he was made an
end of, with most exquisite torments.

Which vnparalell'd piece of tyranny, I purpose in due time to divulge to the
whole world, with relation of all circumstances, being the thing which the
poor wretched Clussaeus, had a purpose to have done himself, if he had not
been hindered and prevented by death.

I shall withal make public unto the world, another such piece of Villainy,
committed by the Jesuits of Fulda in Germany, upon the body of one MARTINUS,
whom they stole away most basely from his Parents, who are yet living at
Miltenberg or Milberg.

And how many women think you, have been devoured and eaten up in the same
Gulf? How many young Children slain? How many young men, that have been sole
Heirs of very large and ample Patrimonies, have been made away by them? I do
not say, I think, but I believe, and am firmly persuaded, so often as
shrikes, and cries, sighings, and most woeful lamentations, were heard in the
night season, the hearing whereof; would put a man into a cold sweat all over,
and make his hair stand on end, though our simpler Novices, believed them to
be the Souls of some lately departed, it was nothing but the shrikes and moan
of children lately murdered, or then a murdering.

Moreover, that the extreme and Devilish malice of Jesuits, may be in nothing
defective, they are accustomed diverse times in those their Vaults under ground
to make the Devil very fine sport: putting on terrible disguises, they cause
some of their Novices to be called down to behold their Tragedy, upon whom
they will rush suddenly with an horrible yelling noise, to make trial,
(forsooth) of their courage and constancy.

For if they find any to be timorous and fearful, they admit not such a man
to the secrets of Magic, as accounting them cowardly and degenerate, but
appoint them to some of the inferior Arts: but such as appear to be of bold
and undaunted Spirits, they take especial notice of them, and reserve them for
serious employments.

And yet they are not always successful for all this, as appeared by that
which happened at Prague in the year 1602. For whereas there were five
principal Jesuits, who being habited as Devils made sport with their youth,
It so fell out, that there was found to be a sixth in their company, before
they were aware, and he questionless was a Devil indeed, who catching up one
of the personated Devils in his Arms, gave him such a kindly unkind embrace,
that within three days after, he dyed of it* The fact was common talk at
Bake-houses, and Barbershops, and at every table discoursed upon, all over
Prague.

And yet for all that, the rest of them, as nothing amazed with this Tragical
event, dare still in an height of obstinacio, proceed in that most ungodly and
Devilish study of Magic.

Now amongst that whole Society, the prime man for a Magician, a French
Jesuit, whom the King of France himself, had in so high estimation, that he
admitted him not only to his Princely table, but also to familiar conferences
in private; concerning whom, the Jesuits themselves did make their boast, that
he had a glass made by Art Magic, wherein he could plainly represent unto
the King, whatsoever his Majesty desired to see: insomuch, that there was
nothing so secretly done or consulted upon in the most private Room of of any
Cloister or Nunnerie of other Orders, which he could not easily and instantly
discover, and disclose, by help of this his Enchanted, or rather Devilish
glass.

And indeed it was by the Art and means of this Magician Jesuit, that their
Society was confident, that they should be able to draw on their side, one of
the most potent Princes of the Empire, albeit a Protestant: forasmuch, as he
was observed to be somewhat delighted in the Study of Magic.

Now, as for those whom they take in as Nouices to be instructed in this way,
they expound unto the^ those nine hundred Propositions, which PICVS, Earl of
Mirandula published at Rome: as also the Book of Johannes Tritemius, together
with a Tract or Treatise touching abstruse or hidden Philosophy, written by
Cornelius Agrippa: Likewise Theophrasius, concerning the Constellations and
Seals of the Planets, with the Steganographia of I know not what Abbot, and
the Art of PAVL to procure Revelations: meaning Saint PAVL, whom they affirm
to have been instructed in the Art Magic, and thereby to have understood
such high Revelations and profound Mysteries.

Yea, they blush not to affirm, that Saint JOHN was an excellent Magician: Nor
do they stick to say, that even our blessed Savior CHRIST JESUS himself,
was a most absolute and perfect Magician, as mine own ears have heard it
oftener then once or twice related by some of that Society, and such as I am
able to nominate.

And thus much for the Jesuits Church: Only, take this direction along with
you; those Vaults and Rooms under ground, which I mentioned even now, those
secret conueyances and Circean Dens, are for the most part contrived to be
under the Quire or Cloister, not where the people do walk or stand.

And now when thou shall pass from their Temple into their Study (for I will
say nothing touching their Parlour, or Chambers, Refectories, or places of
Recreation, instruction of Novices who are newly admitted, and the trayning up
of other Scholars committed to the Jesuits tuition; nor yet touching the
Method and Order of their Studies, but will reserve that for another
Discourse; seeing those passages are for the most part known abroad already,
being discovered by another.) When, I say, thou shall enter into their public
Library, thou shall find a most exquisite choice of Authors of all sorts, all
of them most curiously bound up in Leather or Parchment with fillets of
Silver or Gold: and as for such whereof there is daily use, they are laid in
order upon Deskes, fastened with chains upon a long table.

But as for the inner Library, that is only reserved for the Fathers of the
Society: it is free for none but them to go in thither, and to borrow thence
what books they think good. Those ordinary books, are only free for the
Iuniors of the Society, nor may they take a sentence out of the rest without
special leave obtained from the Regent.

Moreover, in this first Library, are no Heretical books (as they call them)
but only the Writings of most approved Authors and Catholics all* For they
hold any other unworthy to be placed amongst them, as fearing perhaps they
should infect the rest.

Look therefore upon thy left hand, and there thou shall see the wretched
books of Heretics, (as they term them) standing all in Mourning for the
faults of their Authors, bound up in black Leather, or Parchment blacked over,
with the very leaves thereof dyed in black.

Of these, not one of the Fathers themselves may make choice or use, without
leave obtained from the Regent before hand: but your inferior Jesuits and
younger Novices, may not be so bold, as to desire the sight of any one of
them, except he will before hand, with all virulencie and bitterness, rail
upon, and disgrace the Author, whom he desires to see, by some infamous
Lybell, and scurrilous Satyricall verse, or writing.

In the midst of these several Libraries, is placed a Study, being divided
into many Seats distinct, and separate one from another, with a blew covering:
on the right side whereof, sit the Fathers; on the left, the vnder-Graduates;
who have already taken some Degrees upon them. The other Novices, or (
Fresh-men as we call them) sit mixed with the fellow-Commoners, that they may
take notice of them, and every man in his turn, beating into them by
continual discourses* the sweetness and excellency of the Order of Jesuits;
especially, into such as are of the richer sort, or wealthy heirs.

I will say no more at this time* as touching their Studies, but I will
describe briefly, the manner of the Visitation, which every Provincial makes;
because it is a point, which as I think, and for any thing that I ever read or
heard, has been never hitherto divulged by any.

Now every Provincial takes his Denomination from the Province, or Kingdom
rather, which is committed to his charge, and oversight. His place is to visit
the several Colleges, to take an account of their Revenewes, and ouer-see
their expenses, exactly and punctually: to take notice, what Noble personages
do commit their Sons to the tuition of the Society, and how many they are in
number? Whether there be not yearly an increase of Scholars, as also of
their means and Revenewes? Whether there be any converted from Lutheranisme,
and how many such?

If there be no such thing, or if the Popish Religion have lost ground, or if
there be any decrease of their wealth, he sharply reproves their sloth and
neglect, and charge strictly, that they make an amends for the wrong they
have done, and loss they have received in this case. But if they have
bestirred themselves bravely, and converted (as they call it) or rather
perverted many Souls to Popery, if they have been frugall, and scraped wealth
together, he praises them very highly, and extolleth them to the skies.
Moreover, he demands, what is the opinion of the Neighboring Heretics
concerning them? What be the projects of the Nobles? What meetings they have?
How many? And where? What they consult upon? What they resolve to do? Whether
the Heretical Princes (as they term them) delight to live at home or abroad?
To whom they resort most frequently? What is the several disposition of every
one of them? In what things he is observed to take most delight? Whether he
take any care of his people or not? Whether he be a Religious Prince or not?
Or rather, whether he be not a man, who delights to take his pleasure in
drinking, Wenching, or Hunting? Whether he have any Catholics about him* or
that are near unto him? What the people report abroad, concerning their own
Princes? Whether the Churches of the Adversaries, be full of resort, or not?
Whether the Pastors of those Churches, be learned and diligent men in their
place and calling, or otherwise lazy Lubbers, and unlettered? Whether the
Profession of Divinity thrive, in the Neighboring University of Heretics?
Whether their Divines maintain frequent Disputations, and against whom
principally? What books they have published of late, and upon what Subject?

To these, and sundry such questions, if the Regent, and the rest of the
Fathers do answer punctually, he does wonderfully commend their industry and
vigilancie.

If he find them defective in answering to these or any such demands, he
reprooveth them sharply, saying: what mean you my Masters, do you purpose,
like lazy companions, to undo the Church of Rome? How do you suppose your
slothfulness in these weighty affairs, can be excused before his Holiness?
How is it, that you presume to take these places upon you, and to manage them
no better? What or whom are you affrayd of? Why do not you buckle up your
selves better to your business, and perform your places like men? These
things (if you had been such men as you ought to be) had not been to do
now. These things should have been done long before this time. Do you observe
the incredible watchfulness of the Heretics, and can you be lazy? And with
these or the like speeches, he whetteth them on to their duty.

At the last, he enquireth as touching the scholars, fellow-Commoners,
Novices, and the rest, how many they are in number? How much every one has
profited? To what study or delight each one is inclinable? Whether there be
any one amongst them that is scrupulous, or intractable, or not a fit subject
to bewrought upon. For he adiudgeth every such an one fitting to be removed
from the study of Divinity; except, he have bin very well exercised in the
disputations in Schools, and have a very great and good conceit of their
Religion beaten into him. Moreover, he enquireth if they have any one in the
College, who can be contented, for the advantage of the Catholic cause, to
undertake any laudable attempt, and to spend his blood in the cause, if at any
time necessity shall seem to require it.

And at last, he sends away all these informations being sealed up, unto the
Father General at Rome, by whom, they are immediately made known to the Pope
himself, and his Conclaue of Cardinals: And so by this means, an order is
taken, that there is no matter of Action set on foot, nothing almost consulted
upon, throughout the whole Christian world, which is not forthwith discovered
unto the Pope, by these traitors, that lurk in every state and kingdom. Also,
it is not to be omitted, that the Jesuits are translated by their Provincial,
from one College to another, and that for the most part once in three years,
that so the Provincial out of their several discoveries, may attain to
unlock all the secretest Cabinets of the Prince and State, where he does
reside.

In the last place, I will add in stead of a Corallary, some strange and
wonderfull*devices of the Jesuits, which being but of late newly hammered in
the forge, they have earnestly endeavored; yea, and at this day do labor,
tooth and nail to put in practice by public consent, for an Innovation to be
made both in the Church and State throughout the whole Roman Empire. To this
end, their chief and only aim is, how to set the Princes of the Empire
together by the cares, and by taking off some of the principal Doctors of the
Church, to bring the tyranny of the Spaniard, and the Primacie of the Pope,
into Germany. Concerning which very project, I have heard the Provincial
DEL-RIO himself, discoursing sometimes, whose plots and Machinations, were
such as follow. In the first place, (says he) care and pains must be used,
to estrange the effections of the Princes of the Empire, one from another.

Now the means (said he) to effect* that is, to work upon their contrariety
of opinions, in matters of Religion: And for this end let the Emperor be
incited to make a Declaration, that he will not grant liberty of Conscience in
matters of Religion, except there shall first be a restitution made of such
goods, as were taken from the Clergy upon the treaty at Passaw: for this is a
point whereat they will stick assuredly, and deny it.

Let the Emperor thereupon send his Princes, and demand the same of the Cities
of the Empire? They will either obey or deny: If they consent and obey, all is
well: If they refuse, let him proclaim them Rebels, and expose them to be
seized upon by the next neighboring Princes: but still let the matter be so
carried, that he be sure to oppose a Lutheran and a Calvinist, the one against
the other.

Moreover, some devise must be found out, that the Duke of Bavaria may fall
foul either upon the Elector Palatine, or upon the Duke of Wittemberg, for
then may the Emperor be easily won to proclaim him Traitor whom the Duke of
Bavaria shall distaste, and all means taken away of making pacification either
with Papist or Calvinist for the^; besides, thereby will be raised
unreconcilable divisions in the Empire, never to be quenched before an highway
be made for the accomplishment of our desires. For the further ripening of
which Design, the Jesuits vnbethought themselves further of this Stratagem.
It will follow (say they) necessarily, when any City of the Empire shall be
proclaimed rebellious, that every several Prince will be more ready and
willing to serve his own turn upon the spoil thereof, then to admit any
other that shall be emulous of the same booty to prevent him. This for the
Generality. More particularly yet, means must be found out, to set the Princes
of Saxony at difference, that their strength and power may be broken, or at
least weakened.

Now that may be most conveniently effected thus: first, if the Administration
of the Primacie of Magdeburg, which now is vacant, be given to the Bavarian
Elector of Colen, neither the Marquess of Brandenburg, nor the Duke of
Saxony, will easily grant their consents thereto.

Secondly, if that succeed not according to our desires, there must be some
cause pretended, why the Duke of Saxony either does seem worthy, or ought to
seem worthy to be removed from the Electorall dignity. For, if in times past,
the Princes of the Empire cast down Wenceslaus, from the Imperial Throne,
because they had adjudged him a negligent Prince: surely the Emperor may take
as just an occasion, to remove from the Electorall Dignity, the Duke of Saxony,
who is drunk every day. And in this respect, let his Imperial Majesty
restore and confer that Dignity, upon the house and family of the Dukes of
Weymar, And because these Princes are yet under age, let the Administration of
that Electorship, be committed to Henry of Brunswicke, a learned and vigilant
Prince. This project being once set a foot, cannot choose but beget infinite
distractions, throughout all Saxony, so shall it come to pass, that they shall
wast and weary themselves one against another, and by that means, become
utterly unable to withstand a common foe when he shall come upon them.

And as for the Marquess of Brandenburge and them of Pomerania, let means be
used to move the King of Poland who is the Emperors kinsman to covenant with
his uncle the King of Swetheland, that they two shall invade and divide
Prussia, and Canton the same: which thing the Marquess of Brandenburge will
oppose with all his powers. Now as concerning the Landgraue of Hessen he must
be urged and solicited daily to divide the inheritance equally with his uncle
Lodowicke and to resign the government of Hertsfeild to the Bishop of
Wirtzburg: if he refuse to do so, let him be proclaimed rebel, and let his
inheritance be assigned unto his uncle Lodowicke.

Moreover, as for the Duke of Wittemberge, and the Elector Palatine, they two
may with ease be set together by the cares, if the Duke be commanded to make
restitution of some Religious houses, or otherwise upon his refusal be
proclaimed Rebel, and some neighboring Monasteries be assigned to the
Elector Palatine, and amongst them one especially, which he has bin observed
to have aimed at long ago.

And these be those killing proiects of the Jesuits, which I have heard from
their own mouths, not without admiration even to astonishment, and they have
many more of like sort, all which I do not at this present remember.

Moreover, there has been a Consultation among the Jesuits to send abroad
some bold Assassinates, who by Poison or by the Pistol, may cut off the
principal Doctors of the Reformed Churches, fellows who are so absolute
Masters in that trade of Poisoning, that they are able so to infect Platters,
Saltsellers, Basins, Kettles, Pots, and Caldrons, and such like vessels of
ordinary use; that albeit, they shall be ten times over washed and wiped, yet
shall they retain the power and infection of most deadly and speeding poison.
Wherefore, I humbly advise all godly and religious Governors and Ministers of
the Church, that hereafter they be wary, and cautelous how they trust any,
but such as of whose fidelity they have had sufficient trial.

And these things could never have fallen within compass of mine
understanding, nor ever did, before such time as I heard them from the
Principals and Heads of the Society of Jesuits, together with many other
particulars, which I held my self bound in Conscience to reveal to the world,
for the good of my Country, and of the Church of CHRIST: which although I have
for the present only given you as in a rude and first draught; yet I purpose,
(God willing) in due time, to express the same at large, painting them out in
their Colors, with circumstances of time, place and persons.



FINIS.

