THE PRIVILEGES OF THE UPRIGHT IN HEART.

Expressed in brief Meditations upon the 84 Psalm: and more particularly upon
the 11 Verse thereof.

Studied for the use of the right Worshipful Company of Drapers LONDON.

By W. F.

The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom then shall I fear? The Lord is
the strength of my life, of whom then shall I be afraid, Psalm. 27.1. LONDON,
Printed by Tho. Harper for Richard Harper, and are to be sold at his shop at
the Bible

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Sir Maurice Abbot Knight, Lord Major, Master of the
Company of Drapers, and to M. Thomas Goodyer, M. Thomas Bewly, M. Steven
Burton, and M. David Edwards Wardens: as also to the Assistants and rest of
that Company, William Freake wishes all happiness conducing to this life and
a better.
Right Honorable, and Worshipful:
TO give a public account of the reasons moving me to make a private
dedication of these Meditations to your Company, may be expected by some: But
it suffices me, and I hope will content others that I acknowledge a loving
relation to your Company, which unto me is a strong obligation for a due and
thankful respect to you all. I must confess, some of you in your particulars
have deserved of me more then ordinary, but your Company in general above all
the Societies of this City, though diverse others well, to God be the glory for
it. Accept then I pray you this oblation of gratitude from him who is and will
be whiles God shall grant life, for the welfare and everlasting happiness of
you all.

A daily petitioner to the throne of Grace, William Freake.
From my study this sixteenth of February 1639.
THE PRIVILEGES OF the upright in heart.
PSALM. 84.11. For the Lord God is a Sun and a Shield: the Lord will give grace
and glory; and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.


THat we may make no disorderly entrance upon the exposition of this Verse,
the Porter which stands before the door thereof must first be spoken
withal, this causall conjunction. ^ox: For the Lord is the Sun and a Shield:
And he directs us to reflect our Meditations for a while upon the words of
this Psalm in the verses foregoing, the serious consideration and true
understanding whereof will open us the right door of entrance to that which we
desire. The Prophet David in this Psalm expresses an earnest longing after
the communion of the Sanctuary, in the 1, 2, 3, verses, because of the
blessedness of those that enjoy the same, as he expresses in the 4, 5, 6,
and 7 verses. And upon this Meditation, he lays the foundation of his prayer
to God, that he would be pleased once more to admit him thereunto, in the 8 and
9 verses: Adding two forcible Reasons of his earnest longing in this case; the
one in the 10 verse, the other in the words of this verse. In the tenth verse,
For a day in thy Courts is better then a thousand elsewhere: and I had rather
be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of
wickedness, that is his first Reason. The second Reason is expressed in the
words of this verse, For the Lord God is a Sun and a shield, etc. I have given
you the coherence and occasion of these words, now take the division of them.

Here is, first, the party spoken of: Domi^^^ (...)

Secondly, what is said of him: and that is in several particulars.

First, He is instiled a Sun: Dominus Deus Sol est: The Lord God is a Sun.

Secondly, He is entitled a shield: Dominus Deus clypeus est: The Lord God is
a shield.

Thirdly, He will give Grace and Glory: Gratiam and gloriam ministrabit.

Fourthly, He will withhold no good thing from them that walk uprightly.

These are the particulars, which I shall endeavor (God willing) to handle in
order as they arise under my hand. But first I crave your patience that I may
have leave to stoop and gather a flowere or two, as they grow in the way to our
Text: for so the first word thereof advises me, being a conjunction causall,
and directing us a little to look back upon the coherence. The Psalmist at such
time as he composed this Psalm, was driven out of Jerusalem by his rebellious
son Absolon, and now in this time of exile from the tabernacle, he is
possessed with frequent meditations concerning it, and is brought to set a larger
estimate upon the comforts thereof, carendo quam fruendo; by feeling the loss,
then by the enjoying the comforts of it.

1. Object. A disease that the best man may be subject unto. Before this storm
fell upon David, even when he had full freedom to to frequent the Tabernacle,
he could for all his thoughts thereof be too indulgent to himself, and his
lawless lusts in the case of Bathsheba. To let us see how too much peace and
prosperity is subject to befoole even the most sanctified soul. We have
David's own confession to this purpose, Psalm. 30.6, 7. In my prosperity, I said
I shall never be moved: thou, o Lord, of thy goodness had made my hill so
strong. A passage of holy Writ that much confirms the truth of that which a
Reverend Bishop of our own makes his observation: viz. The temptations on the
right hand are more perilous than those on the left, and destroy a thousand to
the others ten: as the Sun more usually causes the Travayler to cast off his
cloak then does the wind. The saying is old and true, Plures interimit crapula
quam gladius: More lives are cast away through wantonness in surfeit, then are
cut off by the sword: And I dare say more souls are undone by the pleasures of
prosperity, then are shipwrackt by the storms of adversity. I would to God
that the practice of these times did not prove this too true, even among our
selves. We wantonnize with the Gospel, and because the glorious Sunshine
thereof has continued without interruption for some scores of years, our souls
begin to loath this heavenly Manna, as did those lusting Israelites, Numb.
11.6. And if God should so deal with us as he has with our Neighbor
Churches, that we should be debarred the happy freedom and liberty of the
Gospel, as many of us as belong to God would find just cause to be troubled,
as David confesses himself was, when God upon the like occasion had turned
his face from him, Psalm. 30.7. and we should learn better to prize the Word
of God and his blessed Ordinances, when our souls find the miss of the
comforts of his Sanctuary, then now we do: Our souls would then son cry out
with David's in this Psalm, Oh how amiable are thy tabernacles, thou Lord of
hosts; my soul longs, yea, even faints for the Courts of the Lord, Verse 1,
2. Which extremity that our souls may never be driven to, let us make it our
suite daily to Almighty God, that we may know the day of our visitation: the
want whereof was Ierusalems unhappiness, Luke 19 44. And knowing the same we
may labor to bring forth fruits worthy of repentance, before our Candlestick
be removed out of its place. But I insist no longer upon this first
observation, I am yet but in the way to our text.

2. Whereas in the fourth Verse of this Psalm David describes the
blessedness of such as dwell in the house of God, because they have daily
opportunity to praise him, as those Priests and Levits, who by his appointment
were to minister before the Lord in his Tabernacle. I Chron. 16.4, 5, 6.
concerning whom in particular, the Hebrew Rabbis understand these words to be
spoken: It may serve to show us the duty and dignity of the Ministers of Gods
word, what their chief care should be, even to attend upon God in the duties
of their holy Function, for the glorifying of his Name by the winning of
souls: what their dignity is in that they are permitted to frequent Gods house
day by day, and there to sing praises unto his holy Name that by this double
meditation they may be every day put in mind Hoc agere, to do that whereunto
they are appointed, without giving themselves liberty to follow the pleasures
or profits of this bewitching World.

3. Whereas it is said in the fifth Verse, that the man is blessed, whose
strength is in the Lord, and in whose heart are his ways: which the Hebrew
Rabbis understand to be spoken of the people of Israel in general, who placed
the strength of their confidence in the protection of the God of Israel, and
set their minds upon those ways which from each quarter of their Land, tended
toward the place where the tabernacle was pitched. We may learn where the
confidence of a Christian heart should be placed, namely, in the Lord his God:
whom the Psalmist so confidently styles his rock, his fortress, his
deliverer, his God, his strength in whom he would trust, his buckler, the horn
of his salvation, and his high tower, Psalm. 18.2.

4. As also, whereas it is said: Blessed is the man whose strength is in the
Lord, and in whose heart are his ways: It may serve to teach us, that if we
expect protection from God as our strength, we must be mindful to keep our
selves in the ways of God, and to have them still in our heart. That precious
promise which God makes of preservation by the Ministry of his holy Angels,
is to those only that mind the ways of God, Psalm. 91.11 Mandabit Angelis,
etc. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways,
not in thy by-ways which are of thine own choosing, but in thy right ways, as
of Gods appointing: And this is the reason (as most of the Fathers conceive)
why the Devil when he tempted our blessed Lord with this Scripture, Math. 4.6.
left out that clause in viis tuis.

5. In which ways, albeit they lie through the valley of Baca, the vale of
tears, yet they that mind the way to Gods Tabernacle, even therein shall find
many sweet refreshments, Verse 6.7. That they faint not thorough thirst, they
shall have wels of water, and the rain shall cover their pooles: wels of water,
but of their own digging: They must use all good means afforded unto them, and
then the Lord from Heaven shall rain upon them: he shall comfort them with the
dew of his grace, he shall power upon them the continual dew of his
blessings. Wherewith being supplied in their journey, they shall walk from
strength to strength, till every one appear before God in Sion, Verse 7. Et
hic quoque succurrie gratia diuina, says Musculus on this place. Herein the
grace of God prevents and assists them, so abundantly strengthening those that
mind this way aright, that no difficulty in passage, no violence of
opposition, can any way take them off, but does rather inflame the heat of
their courage, making them constant unto the end, and their abilities both of
knowledge and practice, growing by the daily use they have thereof: so that they
walk from strength to strength until they appear before God in Sion.

6. Great cause therefore have we every one of us to pray with the Psalmist,
upon these grounds of Meditation, as Verse 8, 9. Oh Lord God of hosts hear my
prayer, give ear o God of Jacob. Behold, o Lord, our shield, and look upon the
face of thine anointed. Oh look upon the meritorious intercession of thine
anointed, thy Christ, our Redeemer, and for his sake give us strength and grace
to finish our course in thy ways, that we may appear before thee in Sion.

7. And that for these two Reasons which our Psalmist adds.

First, Because a day in thy Courts is better then a thousand elsewhere: and I
had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, to have employment there in
the meanest office that may entitle me Gods servant upon grounds of just
relation, then to dwell at freedom and liberty, in all height of pleasures in
the tents of wickedness, as ye have it in the words next before my text. That
is the first Reason.

The second Reason is in the words of my text, whereunto the way has brought us
in a direct course now at the last, upon which (by Gods blessing) we will be
bold now to enter; having the door orderly opened, For the Lord (God) is a Sun
and a shield, etc.

And here according to the division of this Verse, I begin with the subjectum,
the party spoken of, which is Dominus Deus, the Lord God.

8. The great Lord Paramount of Heaven and earth by right of Creation, the God
of Jacob, as he is styled, Verse 8, the GOD of his Elect and chosen people
Israel, the God of all true believers, the children of Abraham's faith, of what
Nation soever that the Sun shines upon. This is he for whose Tabernacle David
so longed, before whom all the travailing Israelites were carnest to present
themselves at the end of their journey, as their God in whose presence is the
fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.
last verse. And well might they long to appear before such a God in Sion: in
Sion, the beauty of the whole earth, as he speaks elsewhere, Psalm. 48.2. in
Sion, where God appears in perfect beauty, Psalm. 50.2. where was that beauty
of holiness, mentioned, 2 Chronicles. 20.21. such a beauty as could not be so
sufficiently conceived, nor expressed in any terms suitable to our capacity, as
by this Metaphor of the Sun in his strength, and therefore he says, Dominus
Deus est Sol.

9 Obser. A figurative speech, a Metaphor, as Rhetoricians call it, but a most
significant one, if rightly understood, fully expressing, that, what the Sun
the public eye of Heaven is to the World, the same is God to the soul of
every one that longs after him with David's affection. Sol ortu suo coeli
tristitiam discutit, noctis tenebras fugat, terram universam illuminat, says
Musculus upon this place. The Sun at his arising pulls of that sad mantle of
darkness, wherewith his absence had clad the Heavens, dispelleth the sable
clouds of night, restoring light and comfort to the whole earth. A passage
which is excellently described by the Psalmist, Psalm. 19.4. where he speaks of
the tabernacle of the Sun set in Heaven, out of which he comes as a
Bridegroom out of his chamber. A most clear demonstration of the glorious
work of God in the heart of a Christian, so far as our weak capacities can
conceive. Qui gratia suae aspectu, idem est piorum mentibus, quod Sol virtute
sua universo terrarum orbi, says the same Expositor: who communicates not
only as much comfort to the souls of the godly by the illumination of his
grace, but much more; then the Sun does to the World by the influence of his
beams. Hence is it that our blessed Lord, who by Saint Paul is termed the
express image of the Father, 2 Cor. 4 4. is by Saint John styled the true
light that lights every man that comes into the world. John 1.9. And it is
a thing whereof you cannot be ignorant that the Sun alone with the brightenesse
of his beams though he be but one, quite expels the darkness of the night,
which the Moon and all the Stars are not able to do without him: even so our
blessed Lord that perfect Son of righteousness, as the Prophet styles him,
Mal. 4.2 by the rays of his divine light, not only dispels those mists of
ignorance wherein all men naturally are inveloped, but gives the true knowledge
of that way to salvation, which all Philosophy and humane learning could never
lead a man unto: because indeed (as Saint Paul most truly delivers it) Colos.
2.3. in him alone are bidden all the treasures of true wisdom and heavenly
knowledge. Again, as in our Horizon when the Sun in our nightime is
subterraneous, all that light which the Moon or Stars have is borrowed by
reflection from the Sun: So in all opinions and doctrines that tend toward
Religion, if there be any light at all, it is by reflex from this Sun of the
World our blessed Lord Christ Jesus. Most significantly therefore is our God
styled our Sun, and our blessed Lord the Son of God, that life which is the
light of men, John 1.4. And most punctually true is that word of our Savior,
John 3.20, 21. that every one that does evil, hates this light, neither
comes to it, lest his deeds should be discovered: But he that does truth,
comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought
in God.

Use. That we may be persuaded, as our blessed Lord has admonished, while we
have this light, to believe in this light, that we may be the children of
light, John 12.36 and while we have this light to walk in this light, lest
darkness come upon us, ibid. v. 35. As never forgetting who it was that said
of himself, what could never be truly said of any but himself, John 8.12. Ego
sum lux mundi, I am that light of the World, he that follows me, shall not
walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life. So that now you have
heard how our God is a Sun, now mark how he is a shield also: For our God is a
Sun and a shield.

10. The shield is a piece of defensive Arms appropriated to fighting men. And
because Christians in the Church Militant have need of protection against the
manifold assaults of spiritual enemies, the Lord GOD who is a defender of all
those that fight his battails, is elegantly by the Holy Ghost styled, the
shield of his people that put their trust in him. David in his greatest
extremity at Ziklag, when his people upon the spoil thereof by the Amalekites,
spoke of stoning him, and the text says, he was greatly distressed, yet
comforted himself in the Lord his God, 1 Samuel 306. And trusting to his
protection as to his shield and buckler, consulted him by Abiathar the Priest,
and receiving a gracious answer, following the directions of the Oracle, he
recovered all again, as you may read in the sequel of that Chapter. The Lord
hereby giving just cause unto David thus to sing in that his (...) or
triumphant song, when God had delivered him from the hands of all his enemies,
and from the hands of Saul, 2 Samuel 22.1. at verse 35. Dedisti mihi clypeum
salutis tuae, Thou have given me the shield of thy salvation, as Saint Jerome
reads it. Thus was he David's shield. A pattern for religious Princes. Moses
and Aaron in the like distress, when the whole Congregation cried out to stone
them, were safe under the protection of this shield, and when all humane help
failed, were rescued by the appearing of the glory of the Lord, at the door of
the Tabernacle of the Congregation, before all the children of Israel, Numb.
14.10. Thus was the Lord God a shield to Moses and Aaron* A pattern for pious
Governors in Church or State. Abraham in all his peregrinations from Vr of the
Caldees unto and in the land of Canaan was safe under this shield, even as God
had promised saying, Genesis 15.1. Fear not Abraham, I am thy shield. A president
for all the faithful, the children of Abraham's says, whether Jews or Gentiles
in what distress soever that can affront them in this vale of tears: To show
them, that if they trust in the Lords protection in their ways of obedience,
they may sing with the Church, even when the world says of them, there is no
help for them: But thou, o Lord, art my shield, thou art my glory and the
lifter up of my head, Psalm. 3.2, 3. For thou, Lord, will bless the righteous,
and with favor will thou compass him as with a shield. Psalm. 5.12. For why?
Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in
his mercy, Psalm. 33.18. To deliver their souls from death, and to keep them
alive in famine, ibid. verse 19. upon which assurance Gods children may sing
joyfully, as ibid. verse 20. Our soul wayteth for the Lord, he is our help
and our shield.

Thus have you heard how the Lord is a shield also.

And yet this is not all the instruction that these words afford us.

II. For even in this conjunction of the Sun and Shield, is a mavelous
comfort laid up for true believers, if it be rightly considered, Deus Sol
illuminationis, Deus Clypeus protectionis, says Musculus, upon this Text, God
is the Sun of his Church to enlighten the same with saving knowledge, that his
people may understand the way wherein he would have them to walk, and to
direct all their goings: to make good that of the Psalmist, Psalm 37.23. The
steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, and he delights in his ways.
This Sun alone does light us into the way wherein himself would have us to walk,
and out of which way we may expect no blessing. And, because, even in this
warrantable way the afflictions of the righteous are many, Psalm. 34.19. God
contenteth not himself to be our Sun only to direct, but he is our shield to
protect us also: liberabit eos omnibus afflictionibus, the Lord will deliver
them out of all, as it follows in that part of the Psalm.

12. Again, because as S. Paul fpeaks, Act. 14 24. (...), etc. We must through
many tribulations enter into the Kingdom of God: therefore is our God our
shield, as to defend us from affronts under his protection, so, to enable us to
bear those we meet with, not suffering us to be tempted above our strength, 1
Cor. 10.13. nor yet our faith to fail, Luke 22.32. (...) the very hour of
temptation, be will keep us from the evil of it, Revel. 3.10. and in the
deepest distress thereby will make his Grace sufficient for us, that his
strength may be made perfect in our weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. In a word, the Lord
our God is a Sun to his Church according to the promise of our blessed
Redeemer, shining in our hearts by that spirit of truth, who guides into all
truth, John 16.13. And the Lord is the shield of his Church, being with the
same always even unto the end of the World, Matthew. 28, last verse, That the
gates of hell may never prevail against it, as our blessed Lord has promised,
Matthew. 16.18.

13. And doubtless we have very great reason to depend upon this truth, by
building our faith upon the illumination of this Sun, and protection of this
shield: seeing (as it follows in the next words of this verse) it is this Sun
alone that gives grace, this shield that gives glory. Deus enim Sol and
clypeus, dabit gratiam and gloriam. The Lord will give grace, says the text.
Most truly, whether it be the first touch and beginning of Grace in the heart
of a Christian, or it be the progress and increase of it, or it be the
perfecting thereof in the soul; it is freely Gods gift. Dominus dat, Saint
James affirms it positively, James 1.17. Every good gift, and every perfect
giving is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights, where it is
not altogether unworthy your noting that he styles God patrem luminum, in
relation to the Metaphor in our Text, where he is called our Sun, That we
may know that whersoever our God is not by the influence of his light, there is
all darkness without any exception, according to the sense of the holy Ghost
in our Text. If we look upon man in his natural estate, he is not only
lame, but dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2 1 By the influence therefore of
Gods Spirit, there must be created in us a new lise that was not, and not only
the former life excited which was, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm.
51.10. Create in me a new heart, o Lord, not only stir up that clean one
which has been somewhat defiled, says a reverend Bishop of our own Church, in
his Roma irreconciliabilis, cap. de libero arbitrio. Nay, I go further, and by
the warrant of Scripture too: The old heart which is naturally dead in sin
must be taken away, and a new heart by Grace put in the room thereof, Ezekiel.
11.19, 20. I will put a new spirit within you, and I will take away the stony
heart out of your flesh, and will give you an heart of flesh: that ye may
walk in mine Ordinances, and keep my statutes to do them. So absolute is that
truth which we deduce from the words of our Text, that the first touch and
beginning of Grace in the heart of a Christian is the free gift of God, and
that without the influence of this Sun, there can be no light of Grace in the
heart. Yea, but when the Grace of God is kindled in the heart of a Christian,
who shall blow it up to a flame? Is man able of himself to do it? Oh, no:
Without me ye can do nothing, says our blessed Lord, Ioh. 15.5. Without the
grace of God both preventing and assisting we are no more able to prosper and
grow in grace, then the branch which abides not in the Vine is able to bring
forth fruit, John 15.4. And, as for growing toward perfection, S. Paul
delivers it positively, that God the Father has by his Son our Redeemer
appointed the work of the Ministry for the perfecting of the Saints, for the
edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of faith, and
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4 12, 13. So that it is God alone who
by his blessing upon his holy Ordinances, the preaching of the Word, and
administration of his Sacraments conscionably waited upon, brings this work
to effect.

To speak yet more particularly. Every man by nature is both ignorant and an
unbeliever: who shall now give him spiritual understanding? who shall persuade
him to believe? The natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of
God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, says Saint
Paul, meaning, while he rests in his natural estate, because they are
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. It must be therefore a beam from this Sun
mentioned in our Text, that must lighten man's eyes that he sleep not in death,
Psalm. 13.3. For it is God alone that gives grace to understand the things that
belong to our eternal peace. As rouching believing the Gospel unto salvation,
which is only by a true and lively faith: this is not in the heart of man by
nature it is the gift of God only, who purifieth the heart by faith, as he
did the hearts of the Gentiles at their first conversion to Christianity. Acts
15.9. As touching Repentance, who can deny it to be the immediate gift of God,
that shall read what Saint Peter so positively delivers, Acts 15.31. How God
by his own right hand has exalted his Son lesus to be a Prince and a Savior,
to give repentance unto Israel for remission of sins. Take the word then as you
will, it falls out most true, that God gives Grace, the beginnings, the
increasings, the perfection of grace: the grace to know God aright, to believe
unto salvation, to repent and to turn from sin; it is God that works in you
both to will and to do, says Saint Paul, Phillip. 2.13. Inabling you to work
out your own salvation with fear and trembling, Phillip. 2.12. Dominus dat
gratiam, as it is in my Text.

14. And as he gives grace, so glory also. Hence is it that the Lord has
promised by the Prophet Isaiah, That he will be a crown of glory, and a Diadem
of beauty unto his people, Jsa. 28.5. as also, that the Sun shall be no more
their light by day, nor the Moon by night: but, says he, the Lord shall be to
thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory, Isa. 60.19. Hence it is that
Saint Paul to the Corinthians, makes mention of an eternal and exceeding
weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. and of Christ's bringing many sons to glory:
Heb. 2.10. That ye may know (as our Psalmist sings most sweetly) that it is
God alone who guides his people with his grace, and so fitteth them for glory.
Thou will guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to giory,
Psalm. 73.24. according to the words of my Text, the Lord will give grace and
glory.

15. And yet (which I desire you to observe with me out of the order of the
words) first, Grace, then Glory. For whomsoever God did for know, he did also
predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, says S. Paul, To. 8.29.
and whom he predestinateth to glory, the^ he calls by his grace to the
knowledge of himself: whom he calls, them he justifies, and whom he
justifies, them he glorifieth, ibid. v. 30. so that the high road toward
Heaven and glorification there, is the way of grace by sanctification here. The
Romans in their blindnes^e of Heathenisme had a glimpse of this, and therefore
they so contrived the building of the Temple of Honor, that there was no way
into it but by going first through the Temple of Virtue: that men might learn
to seek honor only by a course of virtue. Which should be the care of true
Christians much more, as who cannot be ignorant that except they live here the
life of grace, there can be no expectation of glory in the life to come, God is
the God of Order, not of confusion, and as in natural things he uses to
proceed from one extreme to another by degrees, through the means; so does he
in this spiritual work, the salvation of man's soul. The Sun does not at one
jumpe leap from his rising place to the highestpiton in the South, but in
process of certain hours accomplisheth it by noon. The seasons of the year
are not altered in one day from scorching heat to nipping cold, but by degrees:
so in spiritual things God never brings any man from his estate in sin to
the estate of glory, but through the estate of grace, for God gives grace and
glory. And no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly, as
it follows in the last clause of this verse, to which I now descend.

16. Nihil boni detraket in synceritate ambulantibus, He will withhold nothing:
For, all things are yours, says Saint Paul to his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.21.
Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things
present, or things to come, all are yours: And why? for you are Christ's, and
Christ is Gods, ibid. verse 22, 23. Nay, further, He will withhold no good
thing from them that walk uprightly. Nothing that his divine wisdom shall see
to be good indeed: nothing, that may truly and really be conducing to their
good for he has said in our Text, Nihil boni detrahit, No good thing will he
withhold from them that walk uprightly.

17. But here a double question comes to be answered. First, who are those
that walk uprightly? Secondly, How is this true concerning them, that God
withholds no good thing from them? To the first demand, who those are that walk
uprightly: I answer: Not those only who fulfill every point of the law in
their life and carriage in that exact manner and degree as is required, nor
those alone who are punctual in an outward habit of righteousness, as the
Pharisees among the Jews. Nor those Iusticiaries of Rome, who profess not
only to do all that is commanded, but to merit by works of supererogation:
but such only as walk before God, that is, live, as in his sight, with a
perfect heart, as David professed, Psalm. 101.2. such as walk before God, as
Abraham was commanded, Genesis 17.1. being perfect, or rather (as our margin
their reads it) being upright or sincere: Sincerus, a word borrowed from honey,
as the Grammarians will have it, which, the purer it is sine cera without wax,
the more pleasant and wholesome it is; denoting unto us, that sincerity of heart
in the midst of humane infirmities, as it is the greatest perfection we can
arrive at in this world, so it is that which God requires and accepts of us.
Because (as a Reverend Divine of our own said) great virtues not sweetened with
sincerity are no ornament unto us: and great infirmities not sowred with
hypocrisy, are no great deformities in the eye of Almighty God, those God
acknowledges not: these he imputes not. The many infirmities that escaped
David in his life time, were covered by the holy Ghost with the mantle of
charity, because his sincerity was (...) shaken with them, as it was with his
(...) murder: as you may read 1 Kings 15.5. where it is said of him that his
heart was upright in all things save only in the matter of Vriah. As were also
the Infirmities of Asa King of Judah in not taking away the high places, where
it is said of him in his story, 1 Kings 15.14. Nevertheles Asa his heart was
perfect with the Lord all his days. So that sincerity of heart, when it is not
divided as Os^a speaks, Osea 10.2. but is bestowed upon God in simplicity, as
it is the most, that man can perform, so it is all that God expects, and so
our first question is answered. To the second, How is it true that GOD
withholds no good thing from them that walk uprightly? seeing many of Gods
dearest children are often exposed to hard measures, and (...) of those things
which the wicked enjoy in abundance? I answer. First, we must leave it to God
to appoint what he sees good for us, not be our own carvers: submitting to
his divine will and pleasure in what distress soever, as David did when he
said, 2 Samuel 15.26. Behold, here I am, let the Lord do unto me as seems good
unto him. And, secondly, we must cast our selves upon his divine power and
love toward us; who is both able and willing to make all things work together
for good to them who depend upon him, Romans 8.28. And, thirdly, we must take
notice that though God in his divine wisdom has so appointed, that through
much tribulation, true Christians must enter into the Kingdom of God, Acts
14.22. because many are the troubles of the righteous, Psalm. 34.19. yet he
that keeps Israel neither slumbreth nor sleeps, Psalm. 121.4. and in the
deepest affliction his help is still at hand to supply all our wants as he
did for Elias in the wilderness, to moderate our sufferings that they may not
be more then we shall be enabled to bear, 1 Cor. 10.13. to uphold us by his
grace, making that sufficient for us, 2 Cor. 12.9. And lastly, to deliver us in
conclusion either by taking the trouble from us as he did from the three
children, that it shall not have power to destroy us, or by taking us from it,
that it may not have power to reach us, translating us into that paradise where
no Serpent shall have power to enter, so that every way he will make good his
word, we shall have whatsoever is good for us, if not in our own esteem, yet
in Gods al-disposing wisdom and government, and no good thing will he withhold
from them that walk upright: for the Lord God is a Sun and a shield: He will
give grace and glory, and no good thing will he with hold from them that walk
uprightly. And so I have done with the explication of these words, now for a
word of application, and so I conclude. This Text of Scripture, as you see,
has acquainted us with some of those prime privileges which our heavenly
Father by the power of his divine prerogative of his special grace and favor
has given and granted, and by these presents in this Text, does give and grant
to all his faithful children that endeavor to walk before him in sincerity and
uprightness of heart: And, that is, that he will be to all such a Sun of
direction, and a shield of protection: he will give them grace and glory, and
no good thing will he withhold from them as I have showed you at large. Now
had I the way or means to have procured from our Gracious Sovereign any
addition to the Privileges and Immunities of our Company, and could I now
present the same unto you confirmed under the broad Seal of England, I should
not doubt of a kind acceptance and love for my pains. Behold, I have here
presented you with better Privileges under the great Seal of Heaven, extracted
from the most sacred, and authentical Word of God, delivered unto you in his
Name, and as his Minister, whom God the Father has sealed, John 6.27. and I
give you a fair assurance of all those privileges in this Text to be
conferred upon all you that will sue out your Patent for the same, by the way
which God requires. And if any shall yet doubt which is the right way to have
his patent confirmed from the King of Heaven in this case, let him look upon
the last words of this Text, and they will tell you, he must walk uprightly
before God: And then all the privileges in this Text are yours, God has
promised them, and he will make them good: God will be unto you a Sun and a
shield, the Lord will give grace and glory: and no good thing will heo
withold from them that walk uprightly. Whereunto that I may prevail with
you to render your willing and constant obedience, take this one motive to
think upon when you see not me. So often as you cast your eye upon the Arms of
our Company, and thereby are put in mind that you are free Drapers, call to
mind this text of Scripture, and take notice, that the beams of that Sun
spoken of in my Text are a part of your Arms, and the shield therein mentioned
as a token of defense is denoted by that expression of a Sovereign Regal power
all-sufficient for protection, which the three Crowns may put you in mind of:
and that way of Christianity wherein you are to walk in uprightness of heart is
emblematized by the Cross, which is set as the Crest upon the head of your
Arms. And make you full account, that these words are not words of course
only, they have somewhat in them worthy your most serious consideration: you
see your devise is very significant, and may without much strayning be drawn
from this Text: Think it therefore not unworthy your Meditations at convenient
seasons, and call to mind what God has spoken unto you upon this Text and by
it, and suffer to this end a word of exhortation. As you desire to be directed
by the gracious beams of this heavenly Sun mentioned in our Text, in all your
fair undertakings, whereunto your lawful callings shall engage you in your
temporal affairs: As you desire the comfortable direction of this Sun to
guide you into all truth in things that concern your spiritual estate: As you
desire to be preserved from such erroneous courses, as your own dark
mistakings might expose you unto, whether in the necessaries of this life, that
your credit break not here, or in the eternal comforts of another life, that
you perish not there everlastingly: Have an eye to the directions of this Sun
of righteousness, in whom are hid all the treasures of true wisdom, and
saving knowledge: Let the Lord God be your Sun: As ever you trust to find
the protection of this heavenly shield to defend you from all oppositions in
your lawful way, seek daily direction from him who is your Sun, and walk in
the ways whereunto he shall direct you, as ever remembering that he has not
promised to be a shield to any, but to those who are careful to follow the Sun
of his directions; nor will he be a shield, but where he is a Sun. As you
expect to obtain true saving grace, seek it of him who is the only giver of
it, and seek it in the careful and frequent use of his holy Ordinances, wherein
he has promised to give it. For the Lord gives grace.

And as you expect glory in the life to come, seek it by an holy course, a
course of holiness in this life present, in the Kingdom of grace: For, the Lord
gives grace and glory. And last of all, as you expect that God shall withhold
no good thing from you, which his divine wisdom shall see necessary and
fitting for you, as conducing to Grace here, and Glory hereafter: walk
uprightly, and be sincere in his service: For, unto such only are these
heavenly privileges appropriated in my Text, For the Lord God is a Sun and a
shield, etc.

And that in so doing we may so find,
Let us pray as the Church has most piously instructed us.
MOst merciful Lord, we beseech thee to cast the bright beams of thy light
upon thy Church, that being enlightened by the doctrine of thy truth, it may
attain to thy everlasting gifts. And because the frailty of man without thee
cannot but fall, keep us always by thy help, and lead us to all things
profitable to our salvation: preserve thy household the Church in continual
godliness, that through thy protection it may be free from all adversities,
and devoutly given to serve thee in good works to the glory of thy name,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be
honor and glory now and for evermore. Amen.

Page 4. for Objection, read Observation.

FINIS.
Feb. 16. 1638.
Imprimatur.

Guil. Bray.


