AN HISTORICAL COLLECTION OF THE CONTINVALL FACTIONS, TVMVLTS, and Massacres
of the Romans and Italians during the space of one hundred and twenty years
next before the peaceable Empire of Augustus Caesar.

Selected and derived out of the best writers and reporters of these accidents,
and reduced into the form of one entire history, handled in three books.

Beginning where the history of T. LIVIVS does end, and ending where CORNELIUS
TACITUS does begin.



LONDON, Printed for William Ponsonby.

1601.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR THOMAS Sackeuill Knight, of the most noble order of
the Garter, Baron of Buckhurst, Lord high Treasurer of England, one of her
Majesty's most honorable Privy Counsel, Chancellor of the University of
Oxford. The Epistle Dedicatorie.
RIGHT Honorable, I hope your Lordship will pardon my fear transformed into
boldness, who having vowed by good right unto your Honor excellently deserving
of the more polite learning, and milder sciences, this small history, and so
much fearing or rather reuerencing your censure, that I did hold it better to
smother it with silence, then to endow it with light, since your Honor has
trauersed such an infinite sea of histories, when as I do but offer certain
shallow riuelettes and slender parcels of an history: yet now notwithstanding,
as if all were well accomplished, I presume to deliver it into your Lordships
hands. Therefore, that it may appear clearly and evidently to your Lordship,
what cause did especially move me to entertain this determination, I will by
your Honors favor, in few words, as becomes me, explane and unfold the
secret sense of my mind. The fortunes of noblemen, a man adorned with
nobility: the state and form of politic affairs, some eye of a common
weal: the aspiring Icarian Romans, he, whose authority is effectual for the
depressing of the Popish Phaetons, is only fit to censure and with judicial
style to note. And what did persuade me to this labor, being destinated to
another profession, and even then champing upon the unpleasant bark of the
study of the Law, which might easily procure a distaste of more delightful
learning, I do not purpose to conceal. Plutarch in that part or region of his
work, which is entitled Lucullus (for his whole volume does resemble the
hugeness of the world) has reported, and imparted to posterity, that
Lucullus, Hortensius, and Sisenna being famous for skill in Law, did by
covenant determine to write according to lot the history of that time. To
Lucullus was allotted the description of the Marsian war, who content with
this task, did with great commendation finish it: and he being a worthy
Conqueror, did in the Greek language display the notable conquestes of the
Romans: which thing having recorded and digested in my mind, I found by
infallible exexperience, that one studious of Law might afford some leasurable
time to the diuulging of an history. For I do not despair to follow these
Romans, though I do not aspire to their exquisite and industrious perfection:
for that were to climb above the climates: but to imitate any man, is every
man's talent. But this slender gift, of paper and small account (I would it were
worthy of your Honor, your birth, your place) yet flowing from that mind, of
which it was conceived, that is to true nobility most addicted, take (most
Honorable Lord) in good worth and above my desert or expectation, and not only
with looking, but with liking vouchsafe it. The Lord God support your Honor
with unchangeable safety.

Your Honors most humble to command. WILLIAM FVLBECKE.

The Praeface to the Reader.
Fourteen years are now run out sithence I fully ended and dispatched this
historical labor: for departing from the University of Oxford in the year
1584, and addressing my self to the study of the Law, I thought it more
convenient and reasonable at once to finish and perfect this work, which I had
already begun, then breaking my course with delays to be still striking on the
anuill, knowing that things begun, are more easily concluded then things
interrupted can be conjoined; wherefore in that very year and some few days
following, I did begin, continue and consummate the three books of this
history, since which time it has lain in the covert of my study, of my self
seldom looked on, of others some times read, who by urgent persuasion would
have moved me to offer it to the public view of my countrymen, to which I
would in no wise condescend, alleging for reason that it would be thought a
blemish of impudency in me to assay the description of such things, which by
Appian, Plutarch, Paterculus, and others have been excellently delivered; which
I took to be a sufficient fortress and support of my excuse and refusal, but
again I heard that all the Roman writers which have reported the accidents of
this history, are either in their narrations too long and prolixe, or else too
harsh and unpleasant, or else so exceeding brief that the coherence and
mutual dependence of things could hardly be discerned or coniectured in the
narrow compass of so strict desciphering. This I heard with patience, and
answered with silence, for I durst not oppose my blunt arguments to their
dainty appetite: the truth standing so in the middle way betwixt bs both, that
I could not with safe conscience in all these allegations dissent from them,
nor with sound opinion in all consent unto them, wherefore weighing more
precisely in mind, and ballancing with vnaffectioned thoughts the state of the
difference betwixt us, and beholding the naked pourtrature of the thing it
self without shadow of circumstances, I perceived that the great prolixitie
and the too exceeding brevity of the Roman historiographers could not well be
covered with the veil of any reasonable excuse: and further the objection of
others could not well be confuted, who do condemn in their writings great
disagreament and contrariety of narration, wherefore remembering my first intent
in the collecting of these historical reports, which was to single and
sequester the undeniable truth of the history from the dross and falsehood
which was in many places intermixed and enfolded in it: and to do this in such
sort, that my special care in avoiding the extremities of length and breuity,
two loathsome faults, from which notwithstanding few writers be free, might
fully and manifestly appear: and considering likewise that histories are now
in special request and account, whereat I greatly rejoice, acknowledging them
to be the teachers of virtuous life, good conversation, discreet behavior,
politic government, convenient enterprises, advised proceedings, wary
defenses, grounded experience, and refined wisdom. And being again solicited
by perswasible means, to commit the censure of this my historical collection
to the courtesy of others, I have at last yielded to this motion, reposing my
self rather upon kind construction, then rigorous desert. The use of this
history is threefold, first the revealing of the mischiefs of discord and
civil discention, in which the innocent are proscribed for their wealth,
noblemen dishonored, cities become waste by banishment and bloodshed: nay
(which is more) virgins are deflowred, infants are taken out of their parents
arms, and put to the sword, matrons do suffer villainy, temples and houses are
spoiled, and every place is full of armed men, of carcasses, of blood, of
tears. Secondly the opening of the cause hereof, which is nothing else but
ambition, for out of this seed grows a whole harvest of evils. Thirdly the
declaring of the remedy, which is by humble estimation of our selves, by
living well, not by lurking well: by conuersing in the light of the common
weal with equals, not by complotting in dark conuenticles against superiors:
by contenting our selves with our lot, and not contending to our loss: by
hoping without aspiring, and by suffering without conspiring. Let Rome in this
history be a witness, that a slipperie ascending was always accompanied with
a headlong descent, and that peace is a great deal better then triumph, which
will be an occasion I trust to my countrymen of England to be thankful to God
for this sweet quiet and serenitie of this flourishing estate, in which
England now stands, wherein the day strives with the night whether shall be
calmer: and let it move thee whosoever thou art, courteous Reader, to pray
with the earnest endeavor of thy heart, that the Iris which is the pledge of our
peace may still shine amongst us, that the happy Virgin which is the star of
safety in the Zodiac of this common weal may continue immovable, that our
Halcyon may still sit in this Albion, on this white rock to make the seas
calm, and the waves silent, and to preserve the league of heaven and earth, I
mean true Religion amongst us. From my Chamber in Graies Inn 13. October. Anno
Dom. 1600.

Thine in all sincere affection, WILLIAM FVLBECKE.

A Table of the Roman forenames written with one letter.
A. Aulus. C. Caius. D. Decimus: for Decius it cannot be, because that was the
name of a family, and in the monuments of the Greek writers, it is written
(...) and not (...) L. Lucius. M. M.' Marcus Manius. N. Numerius. P. Publius.
Q. Quintus. T. Titus.
Written with two letters.
Ap. Appius. Cn. Cneus. Op. Opiter. Sp. Spurius. Ti. Tiberius.
Written with three letters.
Mam. Mamercus. Sex. Sextus. Ser. Seruius. Tul. Tullus.
The names of the books and Authors out of which this history was derived.
Appianus. Augustinus. Cassiodorus. Caesar. Cicero. Dio Nicoeus and Dio
Cassius. Eutropius. Florus. Gellius. Gentilis Albericus. Hirtius. Iornandes.
Josephus. Liber de viris illustribus. Liber antiquitatum Romanarum. Libri
gentium and familiarum Romanarum. Liuius. Lucanus. Manutius Paulus. Obsequeus.
Orosius. Plinius. Pedianus. Plutarchus. Salustius. Seneca. Sigonius. Strabo.
Velleius Valerius Maximus. Zonaras.
CLOTHO, Or the first book.
WHen vainglorious Tarquine Tarquin banished.
the last of the Roman kings for the shameful rape of Lucrece committed by
one of his sons, was banished from Rome and Consuls succeeded, which as the
name declares, had charge of providing for the common safety and security,
the Romans changed gold for brass, and loathing one king suffered many
tyrants, scourging their folly with their fall, and curing a festred sore with
a poisoned plaster: for what could be more unjust, or more contrary to the
free estate of a city, then to subject the whole common weal to the rule of
many potentates, and to exclude the people from all right and interest in
public affairs? What could be more absurd then the Senators only to bestow
the Consulship, the sovereignty in wars, the supremacy in superstitious
offices, according to their fancy and affection, to call Senates at their
pleasure, to conuocate assemblies when it seemed best for their own profit,
and to have power of life and death upon the bodies of their fellow citizens,
and the people to live like their slaves, being barred and restrained from
marrying with the daughter of any Senator, as if that pray had been too high
for so low a wing, and being held in such disdain and disreputation that
common fellowship and mutual society was denied them, which was indeed not
to live like free men in a city, but like villains and bondmen in a wainscot
prison, and like silly birds in a golden cage: but when after long experience
they had found, that winter succeeded summer, and that the withered welfare of
their city could not be revived without some fortunate spring: to the intent
that moderation might be induced, and that the meaner sort might bear some
stroke with the mightier, that the people might enjoy the sweet of the city
as well as the fathers, they procured a new office entitled the Tribuneship,
whereby they might protect themselves as with a shield against the arrogant
endeavors and outrageous decrees of the Senators, and the^ the fellowship of
marriage was brought in with the Senate, which before was prohibited the people,
as if they had been stained with some co^tagious iandise, or infected with some
dangerous leprosy, and their suffrage was the^ made necessary to the election
of officers, which before was as rare in that co^mon-weale as a white skin in
Aethiopia. The people having thus erected their power, did by degrees more and
more enhaunce it, till by many alterations it was turned from an Aristocracie,
from the rule of them that were many and mighty, to a plain and visible
Democracie or estate popular, administered by the voices of the multitude and
magistrates, and by the united consent of the whole corporatio^. Now when the
people had by continual incrochments assumed and seized into their hands the
giving and bestowing of the greater offices, as the Consulship, that strong
tower of the Senatous authority, and besides that the Dictatorship, the
Censorship, the warlike Empire, the priestly dignity, and many other most
excellent honors, which before did solely belong to the Peers of Rome, and now
there wanted nothing to make their power equal, but only that Plebiscites,
that is, decrees made by the people, should bind the greater powers, as well
as the people themselves, from which at that time the whole company of the
Nobles were exempted. Therefore to make them general, and of like force
against all, they wrested from the fathers after much business, the law
Hortensia, by which it was enacted that in every important matter the people
should be equally interested with the Senate, and that the laws so made and
ratified by them, should stretch as well to the Senators, as to the people
themselves. After that the commonweal was brought to this good and temperate
constitution, many profitable laws were established, many victories followed,
many cities bowed unto them, many monarchies sued for their favor, many
tyrants feared their puissance, and many countries dreaded their invasion.
Then there flourished in Rome most admirable examples of abstinencie, modesty,
justice, fortitude, and which was the seal of their security, an universal
unity and agreement. Then the same of their Curij, their Coruncani, their
Fabritij, their Metelli, their Fabij, their Marcelli, their Scipioes, their
Pauli, their Lepidi, did ring in the world, whose great magnanimity and
wisdom in the tumult of wars, together with their singular temperance, and
loyalty in the calm of peace, is to be wondered at of all, and of all to be
reverenced. But when either the Senate or people did pass the lists and limits
of aequall regiment, the ancient and virtuous orders of the city were
immediately trodden under foot, and their good and laudable customs were
encountered and put to flight by dissolute and unbridled enormities: then the
Asiaticall triumphs did incorporate into the city a womanish wantonness, then
proud ambition mounted her plume of disdain upon the top of the Capitolle,
then their excessive pride and iouissance for their victories had against
Pyrrhus, for their conquest of Carthage, for the overthrow of Philip, Perseus,
Antiochus, mighty kings, for the winning of Spain, Sicilie, Sardinia,
Illyria, Macedonia and Greece, being as yet fresh in their memories, were as
bellows to puff up their swelling humors. The^ there succeeded a dismal
discord, which beginning when the estate was at the highest, did not end or
expire, till it fell to the lowest ebb, sticking fast in the sands of a
grievous desolation. If a man will retrospectiuely measure the space of former
times, and the whole compass of years, wherein the fortunes of the Romans
were by God his hand turned about, he shall find that all the weight of their
affairs, before the incohation of the Empire of Augustus, may be dispersed
into six ages; whereof the first containing the number of fifty years, was
spent in the making of a town; for that gorgeous seat which now we call
Rome, was then but a plot of Rome built.
ground, to which houses were wanting, but afterward a great multitude of
Latin and Tuscane shepherds, together with Phrygians and Arcadians, flowing
to that place, as to a temple reverenced by pilgrims and travelers, the
commonweal was compacted of these several people, as a body of diverse
elements. Romulus the founder of their city and empire, did delight wholly in
mountains, rivers, woods, marshes and wastes, playing perhaps the espiall, to
discover and find out in what place it were best to erect a city, and how to
convey things necessary unto it, and how to adorn it with continual increment
and addition of demeisnes; to such imaginations the fields and places desolate
were most accordant, and to his savage society this practice of life was most
acceptable.

The second age which chalengeth other fifty years, did engender in them
working spirits and lofty cogitations, which eneagred and inflamed their
minds, against the confiners and borderers: then it first began to bear the
countenance and shape of a kingdom, which was after enlarged to the shore of
the Midland and Adriaticke seas, which they rather used as bridges to other
nations, then as bounders to their own.

The third age whose steps were an hundred and fifty years, was the crown
and consummation of their kingdom, in which whatsoever was done was done by
the^ for the pomp, glory and magnificence of that estate: as yet the Roman
pride was in her blade, and in the tenderness of her minority, this threefold
age was spent under seven kings, differing by fatal providence in the
disposition of their nature, as the frame and condition of that commonweal
did especially require: for who was ever more fierce and ardent then Romulus?
Such a one they needed to invade Romulus eagrest in sight.
the kingdoms of others. Who more religious then Numa? Such the time did
ask, Numa religious.
that the fury of the people might be mitigated by the fear of God:
Wherefore was Tullus that artificial champion given unto Tullus an
artificial Captain.
them? That he might sharpen their valor by his wit. Wherefore Aucus the
great builder? Aucus a great builder
That he might extend their city with colonies, join it together with
bridges, enuiron it with walls. The ornaments; ensigns and Tarquinius his
ornaments
braueries of Tarquinius, did with rays of dignity illustrate and decore that
estate. Seruius Seruius taxes the Romans by polles.
taxing them by polles, brought to pass that the Roman common weal might
know her riches. And the importune domination of proud Tarquine did very much
profit, for Proud Tarquine occasioner of liberty.
the people afflicted by injuries, did force a passage to their liberty.

The fourth age was as it were the youth of the Roman monarchy, when the
flower of their prowess being green, and the blood of their minds blossoming
in their faces and arms, the shepheardly savageness did as yet breathe forth
the relics of an undaunted stomach. Then flourished these Roman hazards,
and miracles Cocles, Sceuola, Cloaetia, which chronicles do therefore witness,
that posterity may wonder. Then were the Tuscanes repulsed and the Latins and
Volscia^s daily and deadly enemies, vanquished by the triumphant husbandman L.
Quintius Cincinnatus, The speedy war of Cincinnatus.
which war he ended within fifteen days, as if he had made have to return to
his tillage. Then were overcome the Vientines, the Faliscians, and the
Fidenates: then the Galls a courageous nation, using their bodies for armor,
in all respects so terrible, that they might seem to be borne for the death of
men, and destruction of cities, were utterly vanquished: then were overcome the
Sabines and Samnites wasting and dispoiling The praise of Ca^pania.
the fields of Campania, being the goodliest plot, the Diamond-sparke and the
hony-spot of all Italy: there is no land more temperate for air, for it has
a double springtide: no soil more fertile, and therefore it is called the
combat of Bacchus and Ceres, no region more hospitable in regard of the sea,
here be the noble havens Caieta, Misenus, and the healthful bathes Lucrine and
Auerne, the resting places of the sea. Here the mountains clad with vines
Gaurus, Falernus, Massitus, and the fiery hill Vesurius: here the famous city
Capua third sister to Rome and Carthage does imperiously stand. They begirt
Samniu^ with war and blood on all sides, till they had ruinated her very
ruins, and reuilled in her bowels, and twelve several nations of Tuscana
waging hot and furious battle against them, in such sort and terrible manner,
as if darts had been thrown at the Romans from the coulds, were likewise
suppressed. In this age happened the Tarentine war, in which Pyrrhus fighting
against the Romans.
the army of Pyrrhus continually slaying was continually slain, and revenge
did live in the death of the Romans: so that Pyrrhus did think him self to
be borne under Hercules his star, who having cut off the seven heads of
Hydra, seven other did spring up. But from this Captain the Romans plucked
such spoils, that never fairer were carried in triumph. For before this day
nothing passed in triumph, but the herds of the Volscian cattle, and the
flocks of the Sabine sheep, the broken wagons of the Gauls, and the crushed
harness of the Samnites: but in this triumph, if you respect the prisoners,
they were Molossians, Thessalians, Macedonians, Brutians, Apulians, Lucans: if
you regard the pomp, it was gold, purple, curious pictures, tablets, and the
delights of Tarentum. Next to this was the victory of the Pisani and
Salentini: this age showed her force the space of two hundred and fifty years.

Then followed the fifth age, in which the body of the commonweal grew to
great strength, the ioints and sinews being by mature soliditie settled in
firm estate. Therefore the conquering nation having now attained to the very
manhood of manliness, and displayed her standerd round about the sides of
Italy, to the skirts of the sea, pawsed a little, as a great scalefire, which
consuming all the woods and groves in the way that it goes, is abrupted and
put out of course by a flood coming between. But soon after seeing a rich
pray on the other side of the sea, supposing it to be a piece of gold pulled
from her mass, they did so vehemently desire the same, that because it could
not be joined unto their dominion by bridges for the interruption of the sea,
therefore they resolved to join it by sword and battle: and so was Sicilia
subdued by the Romans, which was the cause and original of the first
Carthaginian war, which the wars of the Ligurians, Insubrians and Illyrians
did follow: and after the second Carthaginian The beginning of the second
Carthaginia^ war.
war, so dangerous and bloody to the Romans, that if a man compare the
loss of both nations, they which did conquer, were more like to persons
conquered. For it grieved that noble brood, and valiant people of Carthage to
be abridged of the sea, deprived of the Islands, to pay tribute, and to undergo
not only the bridle, but the yoke: to this age must be ascribed the circuit of
one hundred years, which may be termed the golden age of the Romans, and the
first age in which they showing their streamers on each side of the Ocean, did
transport their wars into all nations of the world, in whose years the
Romans were honest, religious, just, sincere, virtuous, and dutiful.

The sixth age containing 120. years was troublesome and ugly, bloody and
detestable, vices growing with their Empire. For with the wars valiantly fought
against Iugurtha, and Mithridates, against the Carthaginians, Cimbrians,
Parthians, Galls and Germans, by which the Roman glory ascended and pierced
the sky, the civil slaughters of the Gracchi, and of Drusus, of Marius, Sylla
and others were mingled and enterlarded: how mournful a spectacle was it,
that they fought the same time with fellows in league, with fellows in the
city, with bondmen, with fencers, all the Senate afterward contending and
being in hurliburly with it self? These times received of the other ages an
exquisite common weal, as it were a curious picture, which after mildring and
decaying by age, they did not only neglect to renew, with the same colors, but
they also forgot to preserve the outward form and lineaments thereof, for
what remained of the ancient manners, which were both unused and unknown: for
by their recent vices they lost the commonweal in fact, and in name retained
it. How lamentable was the face of things at that instant? when every man
confusedly being found in the field, in the streets, in towns, in houses, in
highwaies, in markets, in temples, in beds, sitting at the table or in the
porch, was suddenly and sauagely murdered? what howlings were there of them
that died? what tears of them that lived, and beheld this? The cause of these
miseries was too great prosperity. What made the people so earnest to extort
the laws of fields and corn, but very famine procured by riot on the one
part, and covetousness on the other? for such was the lavish mis-spending, and
excessive vianding of some, that it can hardly be defined, whether more did
perish by the blade or by the banquet, and such again was the covetousness,
and greedy exacting of others, that none can iudicially decide, whether the
Romans were more endamaged by the enemy in time of war, or by the usurer in
peaceable seasons. Hence grew the two civil broiles of the Gracchi, and that of
Saturninus being the third, and that of Drusus being the fourth, who maintained
the Senate against the Knights: and for the further abetting and auow of this
quarrel, he promised the freedom of the City to diverse Italians animated to
this attempt, so that in one City there was as much discord as in two several
The Italian war.
camps. This bred the Italian war, because promise was not performed. And
Mithridates an enemy to the Romans.
next ensued the war of Mithridates, seeing the Romans on each side entangled
with garboiles, which presently bred the enmity betwixt Marius and Sylla, when
Marius would have deuested Sylla of his Generalship given The contention
betwixt Marius and Sylla.
him by the Senate for the oppugnation of Mithridates. These two gave
Mithridates encoragement, by leaving the ribs of the comweale naked and open
unto him, Marius led an army, ambition led Marius: ambition I say engendered by
riches, did raise contention betwixt them: from this the war of Sertorius and
Pompey had his original, whereof the one was proscribed by Sylla, the other
protected. For Pompey was accounted Syllaes minion or favorite, whom he
therefore called Magnus, that himself might seem greater, being the Saint
whom Pompey served. Sylla was cruel in revenging cruelty, and his medicine
was worse then the malady itself. This stirred the dissension of Lepidus The
dissension of Lepidus and Catulus.
and Catulus, whereof the one would have ratified, the other reuersed, all the
acts of Sylla. Then Catiline whom his lust occasioned by Catilines rebellion.
Syllaes indulgence brought to beggerie, opposed himself to the Consuls. Then
Pompey Pompeyes great dignity in Rome.
entered the lists, as a follower of Sylla, who obtained excellent dignity in
these times, but civil, and such as the regular course of that commonweal
did afford, whose power and authority Caesar could not tolerate, because
Caesar cannot brook it.
he could not match it: which notwithstanding he being overcome and slain,
Caesar passed and transcended. But when this usurper had bleached the floor of
the Senate house with his own blood, who before had ouerflowed and deluged the
whole world, with the crimson goare of most admirable men, the commonweal did
seem to have rolled herself into the state of her pristinate liberty, and it
had returned unto the same, if either Pompey had not left sons, or Caesar had
not made an heir, or, which was worse, if Antonius the thunder-dart of fury
had not suruiued, being once colleague with Caesar in the Consulship, now
successor of his usurpation. But while Pompeys son strives for the honor of
the name, the sea ratleth with armor: whilst Octauius reue^geth the death of
his adoptiue father, Thessalie is again made the basis of tents and
pauillions, and all Europe and Affricke groneth under the weight of iron,
whilst Antonius in the habit of his mind diverse and discolored, does either
disdain Octauius or doat upon Cleopatra, whose beauty if he could have
exceeded by his chastity, his shame should not have blazed like a beacon at
this day in the eyes of posterity, but he had won the garla^d of conquest, not
meriting more then triumph. The army of Octauius having slain Pompeis son,
did in him slay enmity, and Cassius being overcome by fight, Brutus by
despair, they did extirpate faction. Yet Antonius not chalenging part with
any, but principality over all, imagining that he wanted no kingly thing save
only a kingdom, remained as a rock or gulf in the mouth of the haue^, whom
he with some labor subdued. And, as in the yearly conversion of the heavens,
it comes to pass, that the stars iogged together do murmr and threaten
tempest, so with the alteration of the Roman state, before Octauius founded
his Monarchy, the whole globe of the earth with civil and foreign war,
with fight on sea and land was terribly shaken. But the accidents and
occurrences of these last hundred and twenty years, in the sequel of this
history shall be, if God favor these lines, more particularly and distinctly
reported. The first that made the The valor of the former Scipio.
Romans mighty was the former Scipio that scourged Africa with continual
wars and vexations, and in the end subdued it: the first that made them
wanton and effeminate, was the later Scipio, by whom Carthage was subverted,
The prowess of the later Scipio.
yet not by his fault, but by the casualty of the time. For when the rival and
envious jealousy of the Carthaginian glory, was by his The Romans made (...) by
prosperity
matchless victory finally determined, the Romans did suddenly degenerate,
and with an hungry gorge fed on the poisonfull baits of bitter sweet
ambition, following wantons like wild horses, and addicted to pleasure as
their only paragon, the ancient government of the City was utterly
forsaken, the watchings of the camp were ended upon beds of down, their
heavy armor was turned to light and fashionable attire, and the wonted
business of the City was changed into idleness. Then did Scipio Nasica
build porches in the Capitolle, then did Metellus threaten the heavens with
haughty buildings, the^ did Cn. Octauius erect a most sumptuous forefront, and
then did the riot of the Commons imitate the magnificence of the nobles. In the
midst of this delicate iolitie, when the Romans were now in the ruff of
their pride, a grievous and despitefull war was raised in Spain by Viriathus
of Lusitania, a notable Viriathus an enemy to the Romans.
thief and ringleader to a multitude of rogues, which hong a long time in
suspense: but in the end when Viriathus was slain, rather by the couine then
courage of Seruilius Caepio, a greater danger ensued, namely the war of the
Numantines. The city of Numantia did The Numantine war.
never afford armor to any more, then ten thousand citizens at one battle;
but either through the fierceness of their nature, or the default of the
Roman captains, or the indulgence of fortune, they brought Pompey Pompey
enforced to strange leagues by the Numantines.
the first of the Pompeys that was Consul, a man of note and fame to most
shameful leagues, and Mancinus Hostilius, to a detestable truce, which upon a
remorce of mind, and change of opinion, against the law of Arms, and to the
great discredit of the Romans, he afterward broke: but Pompey escaped
unpunished by favor, Mancinus was punished by shame. The punishment of
Ma^cinus for breaking truce.
For he was carried and transported by the Roman Heralds unto the Numantines,
his hands being manacled, and so was delivered up into the enemies power, whom
they refused to receive, saying that a public breach of promise was not to be
punished by the blood of one man. This yielding up of Mancinus into the enemies
hands, did cause in the city a perilous and pernicious dissension. The
parents of Ti. Gracchus.
For Ti. Gracchus the son of the right noble man Ti. Gracchus, whose mother
was the daughter of Scipio Affricanus, by whose means and authority that
reprochful league was made, taking it grievously that any thing which he did
should be discountenanced, and fearing himself the danger either of the like
punishment or of the like judgment, being at that time Tribune of the people,
in life innocent, The praise of Ti. Gracchus
in wit pregnant, and in purpose guiltless: and furthermore adorned with so
great virtues, as either nature could afford, or industry could perfect, or
man's frailty could contain. P. Mutius Scaeuola, and L. Calphurnius Gracchus
swarueth from virtue.
being Consuls fell from virtue to vice, and extreme villainy: and having
promised upon a dissolute fancy, that he would enfranchise and receive into
the City any Italian whosoever, turned all things into a contrary state,
mingled virtues with vice, laws with lust, and brought the commonweal into
an headlong and hideous danger. Octauius his fellow in office, who stood
against him for the A Treuirate first made in Rome.
common good, he put from his place, and created a new state in Rome entitled a
Treuirate or Triarchie, that is the rule of three men, who were called Treuiri,
himself for one, his father in law Appius who had bin Co^sul for another The
family of Scipio Nasica.
and C. Gracchus his brother for the third. At that time flourished P. Scipio
Nasica, nephew to him, who was judged of the Senate in his life time to be the
best of the Romans, son to that Scipio who purchased great praise for his
good demeanor in the Censorship, nephew two degrees removed to Cn. Scipio a man
highly commended, uncle to Scipio Aemilianus whose commendation lies in his
name: this Scipio Nasica though he were nearly linked in kindred to Tiberius
Gracchus, yet preferring his country before his kindred, thinking nothing
privately commodious Scipio Nasica opposes himself to Gracchus.
which was not publikly convenient, standing in the higher part of the
Capitolle, exhorted all the Romans, which desired the safety of the
commonweal, to follow him, upon which words the Nobles, the Senate, and the
greater and better part of the Roman knights did run suddenly upon Gracchus,
standing in the floor of the Capitolle with his adhere^ts, and even then
conspiring with a frequent assembly of new-come Italians, he thereupon flying
and running down the hill whereupon the Capitolle was founded, his head being
crushed as he was running down, with a fragment of one of the boordes which
was in the Ti. Gracchus slain.
Senate house, did suddenly end his life, which he might have enjoyed with
great honor and quietness.

This broile and hapless dissension was the first conspiracy in which civil
blood was shed, and the first dispensation of drawing swords within the
walls: after that time right was oppressed by violence, and the mightier man
was accounted the better, the quarrels of citizens that were wont to be cured by
compromise and agreement, were now decided by sword and bloodshed, and wars
were not followed according to the goodness of the cause, but according to the
greatness of the pray. But it was no marvel, though this small beginning had
so great effect, and this odious faction so unfortunate consequence, for
examples do not pawse there where they begin, but being once received into a
narrow strait, they make way to themselves, raunging and spreading themselves
over the body of the world, and when men go once astray, they mind not how
far they go, thinking that nothing can procure dishonestie to them, which
has brought profit to others.

VVhilest these things were done in Italy, Scipio Affricanus of the house of
Aemilius, who destroyed Carthage, after many slaughters of his enemies in the
Numantine war, being now again made Consul, was sent back into Spain,
where his courage and Scipio is sent into Spain.
success did match and aequall his valor and fortune in Affricke, and within
a year and three months after his coming thither, he Scipio takes Numantia.
took Numantia, and caused every stone to be thrown to the ground, as a
notable monument of a Roman victory. There was never any man of any name or
nation, that by the sacking of cities did more aeternise his house or enlarge
his glory: for having rooted up Carthage, he delivered the Romans from fear,
and having razed Numantia, he delivered them from reproach. Being returned into
the City within a short time, after two Consulships, two victories, and two
notable triumphs, he was found dead in his bed, Scipio found dead in his bed.
his iaw bone being dissolved and dislocated. There was no inquisition made
afterward of the death of this invincible Captain: the body of Scipio was
brought out into the street Scipios body is brought out into the streets.
his head covered, by whose great labors and warlike exploits, Rome lifted up
her head over all the world, to the terror and dismay of other cities and
countries. His death was, as the most say fatal, as some say conspired: his
life doubtless was of that singularity, that it was overcome of no man's
glory, but only his grandfathers.

After the death of Ti. Gracchus, the same C. Gracchus a rebel to the state.
fury and rage of mind that possessed him, entered as it were by a kind of
transmutation into his brother C. Gracchus, a man as like to Tiberius in his
virtues as in his error, who when with great facility and ease of mind he
might have been the Prince of the City and the ruler of the Senate, took the
Tribuneship upon him to raise tumults, to license swords, and to revive
discord, to no other intent or purpose but either to revenge his brothers
death, or purchase to himself a sovereignty, and for the more hasty pursuing
of his drift, he bestowed the freedom of the City upon every inhabitant of
Italy: he interdicted and forbad by Tribunitial law, that no citizen should
possess more then five hundred akers of land, he erected new havens, he filled
the provinces The seditious acts of C. Gracchus.
with new colonies, he transferred the authority of judgment from the Senate
to the Nobles, he determined to distribute and divide corn amongst the people:
to be brief, he left almost nothing unaltered or undisturbed. This man was
slain by the sharp and hasty pursuit of L. Opimius Consul who was in arms
against him, and Fuluius Flaccus was Full. Flaccus a rebellious Senator slain.
likewise slain, one that had enjoyed both the Consulship and the honor of
Triumph, a man of a detestable meaning, whom C. Gracchus had denominated and
designed to be one of the Treuiri in the place of Tiberius his brother, being
his associate in all his enterprises, and defiled with the like dishonest
intendment. Opimius caused proclamation to be Opimius his proclamation
made, that whosoever could bring unto him the head of Gracchus, should have
the weight of the head in gold. Flaccus inciting his soldiers on the hill
Auentine, was there slain, together with his eldest son. C. Gracchus
committing himself to flight lest he might fall into the hands of them who^
Opimius had sent to take him, putting his bare neck under the C Gracchus
beheaded.
naked sword of his servant Euporus, was of him beheaded: and the same Euporus
was suddenly a slaughter-man to himself. Thus the two Gracchi finished the
course of their life, men that had a fortunate beginning, sinister proceedings,
and a cursed ending, to whom if they had embraced quietness, the commo^weale
would have offered these honors, which by tumult and disquietnesse they sought,
their mother Cornelia as yet living, a virtuous and Cornelia lamenteth her
children.
learned Lady; who having nurtured and trained them up in the study of
learning and virtuous demeanor, did greatly bewail, that her good endeavors
had so bad success, and that her two sons, whom nature praetended to be the
solace of her age, were so suddenly and shamefully disgraced, that she could
not see their bodies covered with earth, they being in most despitefull manner
thrown into Tiber, whose minds she had furnished and beautified with such
excellent learning, so was her joy overcome and surprised with grief, that she
must either loath her children, or else lament for them, but howsoever, for
ever lack them.

In that tract of time C. Marius waging battle in Numidia against Iugurtha,
who were both fellow soldiers and managed arms together under Scipio
Affricanus, sent L. Sylla his Quaestor to Boc^hus the King of the C. Marius
takes Iugurtha by Sylla his means.
Mores, to treat and capitulate with him about the taking of Iugurth, whom by
that mean he enjoyed, and being made the second time Consul, in the beginning
of his Consulship and in the Calends of January, he brought Iugurth in triumph
to Rome. The Cimbrians and Teutons at that time did cause great slaughter and
many massacres of the Romans in France, and having put to flight and
discomfited Caepio, Manlius, Carbo, and Silanus, they killed in fight Scaurus
Aurelius one of the Consuls, and other excellent men of memorable qualities.
The people of Rome did not think any General so fit to encounter these foes
as C. Marius: and whilst he was in these wars, he was continually Consul,
his third Consulship he spent in warlike preparation, C. Marius his third
Consulship.
thinking it not sufficient to have soldiers, but to have practiced and
skillful soldiers, training them by petty skirmishes, and encouraging the^ by
the conquest of base towns, to more haughty and valorous attempts: his fourth
Consulship was spent about His fourth Consulship.
the wars of Sextus, where he fought with the Teutons: and before that war
finished, he razed out of the world the whole progeny of the Teutons. In his
fifth Consulship His fifth Co^sulship.
he planted his fight betwixt the Alps and Rome, and in that battle Marius
him self being Consul, and Q. Catulus Proconsul, a fortunate victory ensued,
far beyond the expectation Marius his great victory which he had against the
Cimbrians.
of the Romans, and the admiration of strangers, an hundred thousand men being
brought into the power of the Romans whereof some were slain and some were
slaves. By this victory Marius deserved, that Rome should not repent her self
of his birth, nor requite his acts with reproach. His sixth Consulship C. Marius
his sixth Consulship.
was given him as the crown of his merits, yet he is not to be defrauded of
the glory, which during this Consulship did of right belong unto him, even by
the confession of the envious. Marius being the sixth time Consul, Saturninus a
broacher of sedition.
Saturninus one of the Tribunes of the people, did promulgate a law, that what
lands or demesnes Marius had gained in France by his expulsion of the Cimbrians
from thence, should be equally parted and divided amongst the people of Rome,
and that every Senator should swear to this, thinking to bind them by their
oath from dispossessing and disseising the people of these alotme^ts and
purparties. Q. Metellus a Senator, against whom Saturninus Q. Metellus opposes
himself against Saturninus.
had a burning stomach, denied to ratify that law by oath, whereupon he had
day given him to appear before the Senate. For Marius favors the law of
Saturninus.
Marius being wholly addicted to please the people in all things, which did not
oppugn his own profit, did greatly favor the law. Metellus though he were
supported in this action by many good and virtuous citizens, Metellus
commits himself to voluntary banishment.
yet fearing some bloodshed in the city by maintaining that cause, committed
himself to voluntary exile, and shortly after water and fire was forbidden
him, which was the title and style of the banishment used in Rome. This
Saturninus was afterward made the third time Tribune, and because he feared
that C. Memmius, who at that time sued for the Co^sulship, would with maine
force oppose himself to his actions and enterprises, he gathered Saturninus
causes C. Memmius to be slain.
a garrison of soldiers, and caused him to be slain. Marius presently rowzing
himself for the punishment and revenge of this proud Tribune, and by
Senate-councell authorized, charged his body with harness, and with a troop
of warlike citizens besieged the Capitol, C. Marius besieges the Capitol.
which Saturninus and the Praetor Glancias, together with Saufeius the Quaestor
his adherents did hold as the castle of their defense. But Marius cutting in
pieces the conduit pipes, enforced them to yield, and to C. Marius puts the
conspirators to death.
submit themselves promising the^ life, living, and liberty; but when he had
them in his power, he made havoc of them all leaving not Saturninus his house
destroyed by Marius.
one alive; the house of Saturninus he razed from the lowest foundation. When
the conspiracy of Saturninus was appeased, there began of fresh a new quarrel
betwixt the Senators an^ M. Liuius Drusus a noble Gentleman, eloquent and
modest, nature being as bountiful unto him, as fortune was injurious; he had
always a great desire to restore the former honor to the Senate, and to
transfer the judicial power from the Nobles: for they being possessed of that
authority by the law of C. Gracchus, which is above mentioned, did practice
extreme and brutish cruelty upon many excellent Senators and guiltless
Citizens, and amongst the rest was slain P. Rutilius, a man in that age
incomparable: yet the fortune of Drusus was such, that he was crossed The hard
fortune of Drusus.
and confronted by the Senate, in those matters which he moved for the good and
behoof of the Senate, they either not perceiving, or not willing to perceive,
that though the petitions which Drusus made as Tribune, and as of duty he
ought, sounded and indeed tended to the profit of the people, yet his drift to
be this, that the people having lesser things granted them, might permit
greater to the Senate, that so giving them a little the reyne, they might enjoy
the fruit of liberty, but yet might easily be plucked in if there were any
fear of disorder: which was the only mean to preserve the dignity of the
Senate, and to restrain the humors of the people, but the eyes of the
Senators were so dazeled with envy toward Drusus, with enmity toward the
people, and self-love toward their own persons, that they did more allow the
pernicious practices of the other Tribunes, then the dutiful meaning of
Drusus: despising the reverence wherewith Drusus did always honor them, and
yet digesting the injuries wherewith his fellow Tribunes did molest them: which
unjust and absurd dealing did evidently proceed from the gall of their envy.
Then this good Tribune having his mind surcharged with malcontentment, seeing
that his honest purpose was maliciously perverted, lacking patience to bear
his grief, and constancy to persevere in his commendable intents, resolved
suddenly in a desperate passion to maintain the faction of the Gracchi, to
entertain into his heart rebellion, to swerve from virtue, to prostrate
himself to the violence of fortune, and being guarded with a great multitude of
unknown soldiers, who were seditious Italians, whom Drusus labored to make
freemen of the Estate, he thought to terrify the city, but within a short
time he was slain in his own porch, his side Drusus is slain.
being pierced with a knife, which sheathed in his entrails, and was left
there sticking and filling the mouth of the wound, but when he yielded up to
the heavens his vital spirit, casting his eyes upon the company that stood
about him, and lamenting that dismal chance, he breathed out these words at
the last instant and with the surrender of his soul: Tell me my friends and
kinsfolk, may the commonweal at any time enjoy a more faithful citizen,
then I have heretofore been? This end of life had that noble Gentleman, who if
he had been armed with patience, might have triumphed over envy. Caius Marius
was now C. Marius in high reputation.
become the refuge and defender both of Senate and people: he was of body
hardfauored, in manners rigorous, famous for war, and odious in peace,
insatiable in ambitious desires, impatient in his wrath, and always attempting
some strange novelty: he did not long after valiantly endeavor to suppress the
flames and perilous scalefire of the Italian war, which because it was most
dangerously begun and continued, and with great difficulty quenched and ended,
I think it not amiss to make full description thereof, laying for my
foundation the cause which moved the Italians or Latins to revolt from the
Romans, and to break their faith before constantly kept. But the causes of
things are so secret and mystical, being the most remote objects, to which our
understanding may aspire, that we may easily be deceived by disguised and
pretenced reasons, whilst we seek for the true and essential causes. For to
report things that be done it is easy, because the eye and the tongue may
dispatch it, but to discover and unfold the causes of things, requires brain,
soul, and the best prowess of man's nature, wherefore to find out the causes
of this war, diligence must be used. This war is of diverse men diversely
named, some term it the Italian, some the Marsian, some the Sociall war: all
which have sufficient reason to make good their several appellations. The
Italian war it was termed, because it was raised by such Italians, as were
in league with the Romans, which was the occasion of the intercourse of many
good turns and benefits betwixt them and the Romans: for though they did not
enjoy the liberties of the city of Rome in such large and ample manner, as the
citizens or free men of that City, yet they possessed them in far greater
measure, then others which were mere strangers to that Estate, and that by
the law of society, which to the Romans was always sacred and inuiolate:
this war therefore upon their revolt was termed Sociale, as maintained by them
who had contracted and established a league of society. The Marsian war it was
called, because the first The Italian war first attempted by the Marsians
commotion was attempted by the Marsians, a free people of Italy. The cause
and the beginning of this war do in time greatly differ, for the cause has a
retrospect to the first times of the Roman monarchy, when the people of
Italy being greatly infested and endamaged by the continual invasions of the
Romans, did watch opportunity, and with serious expectation attended, if by
any possible means they might requite the Romans with the like, and recover
their ancient rights and jurisdictions, and at one instant break both the
league and shake off the fear which they then had of the Romans, and which
was the last mark of their enterprise, rather command then condition with the
Romans. But as there is no evil without excuse, and no praetence without some
color of reason, and no wiles can be wanting to malicious and wrangling wits,
therefore an occasion was sought for, whereby peace might be dissolved, and
discord warranted. Here now appears the error wherein Drusus was entangled.
For they made him an instrument or lure to draw unto them the free use of the
Roman liberties, which in truth they did neither greatly desire, not strongly
hope for, but they looked for a repulse, and thought that would be a good
occasion to ground their tumults upon, and as it were a veil for their lewd
endeavors: whereby it is evident that as the cause of this war is ancient, so
the beginning thereof is The repulse of Drusus the beginning of the Italian
war.
to be referred to the repulse of Drusus, which happened six hundred sixty
and two years after the building of Rome. These commotioners of Italy had
this purpose and intent, at their festiual meetings to join their heads and
hands together, and so to proceed to the City, there to work the death of the
two Consuls Sex. Julius Caesar, and Martius Philippus: but this matter being
discovered, they did presently put to death Seruilius Proconsull, Seruilius
Proconsull slain by the co^motioners of Italy.
who was sent unto them at the first beginning of their stirs, by peaceable
and reasonable means to appease and determine them, and all the other Romans
which were at Asculum, were slain. This bloody deed being reported at Rome,
did greatly plunge the minds of the Romans in doubt and sorrow. For this
slaughter was as it were an Adamant to draw the other Italians, who did not
conspire in this murder to their part, and as a fiery beacon to the Romans, to
give them warning not to prescribe too much in their prosperity, but to be
circumspect, and by all wary prevention to anticipate these evils, which if it
should have been neglected of them, would presently have turned to such a cloud
of inconveniences, that the fire which did before serve to give light, would
after have bent his force to burn and consume: for the next neighbor to
admonition is correction, and it is easier to avoid then to escape a danger.
But the Romans with provident care foreseeing that the defection and revolt of
them who were linked in society with them, might be a great maime to their
Estate, and as it were a ladder for foreign and professed enemies to scale the
walls of their City, did therefore in this war make special choice, both of
Captains and soldiers: for mean men were not to be employed in a war of so
great importance, and they that were unskillful, were not in the midst of these
eminent dangers, to be trained and taught. And because they saw that the
commodious ending and composing of this war, was the hinge whereupon the whole
estate of the Commonweal did depend; therefore it was decreed by Senate,
that both the Consuls (a rare thing in that Commonweal, and never done but
when exceeding danger was feared) should go in person to the managing of this
war. Neither were the Italia^s unprovided or unadvised: for they knew, that
if they were conquered, they should fall from the estate of fellows to be
slaves, and their league should never more be trusted, which them selves had
broken: and if they should enjoy the victory, that they should then have all
the wealth of the world at command. This golden booty being enameld with a
sweet desire of revenging old injuries (for they had written them in marble
with a pen of iron) did greatly incense their minds, and ravish their spirits
with a burning affection to fight. The Marsians who brought the first stubble
to kindle this flame, were governed by Silo Popedius, a man as it seemed by
destiny Silo Popedius a natural enemy to the Romans.
opposed against the Romans, to whose ears nothing was so delightful as the
report of a Romans death, hating that hour in which he did not impeach their
good estate. He in this respect was diverse from many of his countrymen, in
that he detested a Roman because he was a Roman. Wherefore having singled
out some of his faction, who were partly by the instinct of their nature,
partly by his instigation, obdurate and eager in hatred against the Romans,
having proposed and showed unto them the scope and drifte whereunto his purpose
did aim, and having disclosed the means, whereby he hoped to compass and
effect his designements, and lastly having declared unto them the rewards which
they might gain by their valor, he did labor by this speech to inflame their
fury, I am moved and enforced to this new enterprise, Silo Popedius his
oration to the Marsians.
not by any ambitious desire of enhauncing my estate, but because I see a
poisonful bait of deceit hidden under the pretense of Society, because I see
too great charges and burdens to be imposed upon us, because I see lewd
forreiners to be our commanders, and originarie Italians, though men of good
desert, kept under the snaffle, and placed in the sinke-hole. I see the credit
of our nation defaced, the liberty destroyed, and the state overthrown, and
for our great labors undertaken, and dangers sustained for the Romans, we have
this reward, that we are despised by them, and they have not thought it
sufficient to be aided by us, unless in the pride of their spirits they may
insult upon our necks, men of insolent minds, by nature injurious to all
other men and by fortune superior. If a man should examine from the beginning,
and as they say from the root, the degrees of their estate, what justice shall
he find? nay what injustice shall he not find? The two twins who Romulus and
Remus bastards.
were the founders of their city, were bastards, begotten by the rape of a holy
virgin, and by destiny were cast forth as of no regard, until a she-wolfe
feeling perhaps some savor Nourished by a wolf.
of her own nature in them, did with her dugs nourish them. After, when from
milk they were grown to meat, they were fed by a chough, and when they had
attained to man's estate, nothing would please then but a kingdom, and a regal
city, the foundation whereof was solemnized by an augurie derived from the
flight of Eagles. Thus a most ravenous bird did ominate unto them a monarchy,
thus a most greedy beast whose hungry teeth, and insatiable appetite no pray
could content, did give them milk, thus a most theeuish and busy brained
bird was their foster-father. These were the portents and signs of their
City, that it should be a daughter very like to the parents: these did
prognosticate unto us the spoils, rapines, invasions and violent incrochments
that should afterward be made by the Romans. And for that cause Romulus would
not make or appoint limits and bounds for his kingdom, that he might by force
enter into every soil as his own. But what would not Romulus do, which had the
heart to shed Remus is slain by Romulus.
the blood of his own and only brother? And thus was their city consecrated
by blood: but some of the Romans do with impudency deny this fact, some with
modesty do doubt of it, some with grief do conceal it, and they which by
clear proof are enforced to confess it, do with this imagination mollify
the fault, that it was done by the consent but not by the hand of Romulus. But
whether he commanded it, or committed it, he was a murderer. After this
heinous crime ensued the rape of the Sabine virgins, the rauishment The rape of
the Sabine virgins.
of whom they excuse, because they would not yield their frank consent to
marriage: surely they cannot justly be reproved, if they, being a noble people,
did deny marriage to such a base assembly of shepherds, heardsmen and
hoggards, newly crept out of the straw: for in that great assembly of new
vpstartes there were but an hundred men, who were lawfully begotten, and these
forsooth were at the first made Senators. But nothing does more bewray the
unjust dealing and lack of conscience in the Romans, then the lamentable
estate of the Saguntines, who had bin always very constant in fellowship and
friendship toward them, and whilst they did keep their faith to them, they
lost their City. Saguntus was fiercely besieged by Hanniball, which when the
Romans heard, they sent presently The Roman ambassadors are despised of
Ha^nibal.
Ambassadors to Hannibal to dehort him from the siege, but being despised they
went to Carthage, and there framed a complaint against Hannibal, pretending
that he had broken the league, but failing of their purpose, they returned to
Rome. Amids these delays, that poor city within eight or nine months after
the laying of siege was destroyed of the Carthaginians, when the inahbitants
were before The miserable famine of the Sagu^tines.
consumed with famine, and one of them did eat another carcass, and being
weary of the world, because they should not come as captives into the enemies
power, they made a common fire, into which, when one of them had slain another
with the sword, they were thrown. How manifest and manifold is the abuse which
they offered to the Carthaginians? They did incite Masinissa the neighbor of
the Carthaginians to quarrel with Masinissa quarelleth with the Carthaginians.
them, who praetended that the Carthaginia^s ought to have no more land then
Dido the Tyrian queen did enjoy, which was as much as could be measured by the
hide of an Ox being cut into thongs. But could their prescription and
possession during the space of seven hundred years be so easily dissipated?
by the same reason the Romans should content themselves with the cottages and
cabbins, which first they inhabited. But the Carthaginians being greatly vexed
by Masinissa and the Romans assisting him, did fall prostrate at the feet of
the Romans, and did grievously complain of the intolerable covetousness and
pride of Masinissa, and requested with tears, that of three things they might
obtain one: namely, that either they might equally debate the whole cause and
conrrouersie before the regents of some commonweal leagued in society with
them both, and indifferently affected toward them, or that they would suffer
them to defend themselves by just war against the unjust arms of Masinissa,
or lastly, if favor did more prevail with them then truth, that they would
once determine and certainly set down, what and how much they should yield to
Masinissa. But the Romans did not one whit help these afflicted persons, and
that good Affricanus, whom they so Scipio sent as vmpier betwixt Masinissa and
the Carthaginia^s.
much commended, being sent as an indifferent vmpire betwixt them and their
enemy, did make their discord a great deal more: and the desolate
Carthaginians, when they were enforced to provide for themselves, were accused
at Rome for the breach of league, and hereupon they were declared to be
enemies. They had strait commandment from the Romans to restore the Roman
hostages, to deliver their money and treasure into the hands of the Romans,
and by that mean to purchase the safety of their City: all this was done.
Well this was not enough: the Romans must have their ships, their munition
and weapons: they delivered these likewise: yet this suffised not: the Romans
must have their City, and the Carthaginians must build some other City far
from this: this was granted unto them, and Carthage The City of Carthage
burnt.
the fairest City of all Affricke was by them presently burnt, and turned even
with the ground. Here when the Romans were pressed and urged with their
promise, their answer was, that in speaking of the safety of the City, they
did mean the safety of the citizens and inhabitants, not of the City which
did consist of stone and timber: O snares! o impostures! o sophistry! can the
Romans without blushing object perfidiousnesse and treachery to the
Carthaginians? Surely as they dealt with them being leagued in ancient society
with them, so I am afraid they will deal with us. And I do the rather suspect
it, because I see they will still have a difference between them selves and us.
Herein lies a mystery, I will not say of the Punicke fraud, but of the
Roman art. And when it pleases them to draw the curtain, we shall be made
their slaves, and our goods their dearling. Wherefore I request you all with
all the vehemency and force of my mind, that you would with one heart contend
for the recovery and defense of liberty, and that you would at length aim at
such a commonweal, wherein right and law, not the private will of powerful
men may bear sway. To the which purpose I know all the other people of Italy
joined in league and fellowship with us, will afford the diligent assistance
of their persons, and the best wealth of their treasuries. As for me, such has
my birth, such has my education been, that I prefer the dignity of my
country, and the liberty of this commonweal before all things in the world.
Which if you do so desirously embrace, I am fully resolved to lay my life open
to all dangers, without any regard of estate or private respect: if not, I
will lay down weapons, and leave the estate of the commonwealth as it now
stands, to your own discretion.

The Marsians hearing the name of liberty, did greedily receive it, and
therefore applauding to Popedius, as informing them of that which was most for
their use, because there appeared in his speech no signs of covetousness or
ambition, but an earnest and vehement desire of public good, did resolve to
follow him as their general.

They had no sooner set up flagge of defiance against the Romans, but there
resorted unto them a huge multitude of all the provinces of Italy: so ready
are disloyal persons to cast off the yoke of obedience, or common society,
when they have gotten a head. The metamorphosis truly was very great, to see
the City of Rome environed on all sides by foes, which before was guarded by
friends, and there was none almost left to defend the City but the citizens,
and nothing to defend the citizens but the City. The people that revolted were
the Marsians, the Samnites, the Vmbrians, the Vestini, the Irpini, the Lucani,
the Marrusini, the Asculani, the Peligni, the Pisani: and they were led by
great Captains, men of valor and service, having as great desire to fight
with the Romans, as the Romans had to rule over them. The most of them were
of so choice courage and conduction, that the Romans had before in many wars
relied upon their service. But yet the name of a Roman was such a scepter to
their spirits, that they were still kept in awe and order without any thought
of reuolting. These men were now quite altered, as if they had lately been at
some mart of souls, and had exchaunged their minds with some men by nature
enraged against the Romans: and it is greatly to be wondered how the mighty
power of the divine Majesty, does sway the moments of things, and sorteth them
in peremptory manner to strange and unlooked for effects, making reason blind,
policy astonished, strength feeble, and valor dastardly, turning love into
hatred, fear into fury, boldness into trembling, and in the circuit of one
minute making the conquered person a conqueror. The Romans did not in any
war show more wisdom and courage, which two things are in common
understanding repugnant, because wisdom for the most part procures fear in
dangerous accidents, which is opposite to courage, and courage causes
rashness which is contrary to wisdom. But so were their fortunes crossed,
and the lot of war was so variable, that this war was resolutely undertaken
of them, unhappily continued, and victoriously concluded. The Roman army had
two Generals: namely P. Rutilius one of the Consuls, whose Lieutenants were Cn.
Po^peius Strabo, Q. Caepio, C. Perperna, C. Marius, Valerius Messalla: and L.
Caesar the other Consul, who had these Lieutenants, P. Lentulus, T. Didius, P.
Licinius Crassus, L. Cornelius Sylla, M. Marcellus, all famous Captains, men of
excellent desert and heroical qualities, and the most of them fit not only to
manage a war, but a kingdom, yea an Empire: yet of all these none did obtain
the victory during the first year of their fight, C. Marius and L. Caesar
only excepted, yet Caesar was not long before with his whole army
discomfited, and Marius did with great difficulty atchieue one victory, which
was the beginning of a greater war. The Consuls did thus dispose the
encounters of themselves and their Lieutenants, L. Caesar was opposed to
Vettius Cato, who led a wing of the Marsian army, but Caesar being over mated
by a man of greater wisdom and magnanimity, was enforced to fly, and after
the slaughter of two thousand of his men, being hotely pursued and enchased of
the enemy, was constrained (for necessity will afford no choice) to take
Aesernia for his refuge. C. Perperna did encounter C. Perperna discharged of
his Lieutenancie.
P. Praesenteius, who put him likewise to flight, and deuested him of his
army, for which cause he was discharged of his Lieutenancie, and now was C.
Marius sought unto by the Consuls, to whom he yielded such assistance, that he
rather seemed to be their protector then their champion. P. Rutilius to
revenge the death of Q. Caepio, who was slain by the Q Caepio slain.
ambush of Popedius, and the quarrel of his fellow Consul, upon the Marsians,
did assay them by battle, but lost a great number of P. Rutilius slain.
men, and in the end lost himself, being slaughtered in the midst of his
enemies. C. Marius with a fresh courage renewed the fight, and put C. Marius
puts Vettius Cato to flight.
to flight with extreme labor Vettius Cato the fatal enemy to both the
Consuls. But the messenger who brought the news of this victory of Marius to
the Roman camp, did meet there another messenger, who reported unto them,
that Egualius one of the enemies camp had surprised Venafrum a town of great
strength: that M. Lamponius another of their enemies had slain eight hundred
of the army of P. Licinnius Crassus, and had put the residue to flight, that
C. Papius Mutilus their enemy, had brought Nola a flourishing Colonie of the
Romans into his power, together with Q. Posthumous their Praetor, that he had
also taken Stauia, Minturna and Salernum, and did now besiege Acerra a chief
town. These news succeeding the other did make the Romans to hear with joy,
and to remember with sorrow. But no better fortune did ensue: for M. Marcellus
being assigned for the defense of Aesernia was taken prisoner by the Samnites,
who surprised that Colonie. Cn. Pompeius was by three Captains of the adverse
part, Iudacilius, Aefranius, and Ventidius fiercely encountering, driven to the
village of Firmo, and there besieged. L. Caesar had a prosperous victory
against the Samnites, but C. Marius fighting against the Marsians C. Marius
fought equally against the Marsians.
with doubtful event, did recompense the death of every enemy with the loss
of his own soldiers: so constant is the fortune of war in inconstancy. Now
was come the second year of this dangerous war, which continued old
broiles, and made new Consuls Cn. Pompeius Strabo, L. Portius Cato, both which
were by the decree of the Senate enjoined to take upon them the charge of this
war. They brought some new Lieutenants in the place of some that were dead,
and some that were discharged. The succeeding Lieutenants were A. Albinius,
Cosconius, Luceius, A. Gabinius, Sulpitius, L. Muraena, Caecilius Pius,
Mamercus Aemilius. It seems that Rome in these days was a very school of
warfare, which did yield the supply of such excellent Captains, after the
departure of Captains not much more excellent. C. Marius C. Marius disliked by
the Consul Portius.
upon a disliking conceived by the Consul Portius (private humor is always an
enemy to public good) was discharged of his place. But so it happened, that
the Romans changed their fortune with their Consuls, but the Italians were
more daunted and disanimated by the continuance of the war, then encouraged
by the increase of their victories. For a base spirit cannot joy in any
honorable matter, and nothing more deuoureth the heart of a rebellious or
treacherous person, then the inward fire of a glowing conscience. L. Sylla
Syllaes victore against the Sa^nites.
had a notable victory against the Samnites, and did ransacke their tents. Cn.
Pompeius Cn. Pomp. Strabo his victories.
did constrain the Vestini, the Peliani, and the Aesculani, and the Pisani to
yield unto him. Sylla did kill Cluentius a Captain of the contrary Sylla
kills Cluentius.
part at Nola, and he brought under his power the Irpini. A. Gabinius did fight
prosperously A. Gabinius after a prosperous fight is slain.
against the Lucani, and took many of their great towns, but when he would
have spoiled their tents, he was slain. Sulpitius having slain all the
soldiers of the Marrucini, Sulpitius brings the Marrucini to obedience.
did reduce that whole region into the subjection of the Romans. L. Muraena
and Caecilius Pius had many encounters against the Marsians, and in the end
enforced them to yield, but Popedius their Captain the author Popedius is
slain.
of this war was slain in fight, in which war Portius Cato was also slain,
not through Portius Cato slain.
his own default, nor by the valor of his enemies, but through the malicious
stomach of the son of C. Marius, who in revenge of his fathers quarrel, did
throw his dart at him, and with a deadly wound did make him fall prostrate to
the ground: but because he could not be discerned in such confusion of fight,
and in the heat of the battle, he was not impeached for this treacherous
murder. The Romans having enjoyed and accomplished all things according to
their desire, returned with the great joy and gratulation of their fellow
citizens. Ca. Po^peius Strabo triumphs.
Cn. Pompeius, for his ample victories and great desert was rewarded with a
triumph. Thus was the Italian war being left to the Romans as the legacy of
Drusus ended and appeased, which wrought two notable effects: for it brought
the Italians from society to servitude, and refusing the bridle they received
the yoke, and were ever after kept under the chain of perpetual command, but
the Romans it made glorious and invincible: for their just wars had always
good success, and their unjust wars or invasions, could not (as may partly
appear by this Italia^ uproar) by foreign war be revenged. But for the
cause hereof let no man make search or inquiry, since it is no where to be
found save only in God his decretall book, the contents whereof as I cannot
know, so the comments of man in this matter I may not believe. This thing
therefore as veiled with utmost darkness, I do with all humbleness leave to
him who has reserved it to himself: and this only I observe, which every
man may note in the sequel of this history, that the Romans were punished by
the Romans for their wrongs and injuries (if I may use conjecture in so thick
a mist) done to their neighbors and others. Not long after the death of Drusus
the Consulship invested upon Q. Pompeius and L. Cornelius Sylla is made Consul.
Sylla, who before his victory could not be too highly commended, and after
never sufficiently dispraised: so contrary and opposite he was to himself,
being more merciful in the combat, then after the conquest, and Sylla fighting
in the field was not so cruel as Sylla his contrary nature
Sylla triumphing in the town. He was nobly His descent.
descended, being the sixth man from Cornelius Rufinus, who was one of the
chief Captains in the war against Pyrrhus. For the glory and credit of
that family had been long intermitted, and was almost perished, till it was
raised and rampired up by Sylla to the ancient grace, and restored with an
overplus to the former dignity. Sylla did a long time behave him self so
modestly and contentedly, that he seemed to be without all intent for suing for
the Consulship, but after his Praetorship being much renowned by the Italian
war, and for his great exploits in France, having slain the stoutest
Captains of the adverse part, he took stomach by reason of his good success,
and making suit for the Consulship, was made Consul, not one citizen almost
withdrawing his consent, and that honor he purchased when he was eight and
forty years old. At that time Mithridates Mithridates an enemy to the Romans.
king of Pontus, a sharp and victorious soldier, being sometime great in
prosperity, and at all times great in courage, in counsel wise, in strength
mighty, in hatred against the Romans another Hannibal, had taken and possessed
Asia, where he put to death all the Romans that did there inhabit: the region
of Asia did by lot happen to Sylla as his province, he addressing him self
thitherward with as great speed as he could possibly make, came at length to
Nola, which he besieged, for that Sylla besieges Nola.
City did most stubburnly resist the Romans, reuolting from that faithfulness
which the Nolanes did religiously observe and exhibit to the Romans in the
Carthaginian wars: but not long after the laying of this siege, he was
abridged of his Generalship by Sulpitius Sulpitius a seditious Tribune alters
the state
a Tribune, who being in wealth, favor, friendship, wit, and courage great
amongst the Romans, having before sought dignity by desert, did now by his
lewd decrees and disloyal practices deserve to loose his dignity. He assigned
to C. Marius an imperial praeheminence, and the regiment of all the provinces
that belonged to the city of Rome, which honors as Marius did ambitiously
desire, so Sulpitius The ambition of Marius.
did injuriously dispose: and therewithal he enacted that Sylla should be
called from Asia, and Marius should be General in his place; many other
pernicious laws he established, both intolerable and detestable: for
conclusion, he ended in murder, procuring by his Murder committed by Sulpitius.
bloodthirsty servants the death of one of the Pompeys, son to Q. Pompeius,
and Syllaes son in law. Sylla hearing of this sudden change, and being
solicited by the letters of his dearest friends, made speedy return to the
City, which having taken by force of arms he drove out of it the twelve
authors Syllaes revenge upon the seditious
of this new and damnable faction, amongst whom was C. Marius and his son,
together with P. Sulpitius the first beginner of discord, Sulpitius being taken
by Syllaes horsemen in the Laurentine fennes was there beheaded, and for the
guerdon of his cruelty, his head being afterward conveyed to Rome, was erected
upon a pinnacle over the bar of the Senate house. C. Marius (a clear mirror
of this worlds inconstancy) to whom if you will place him amongst the
fortunate, you must assign the highest seat, if amongst the unfortunate, the
lowest, having before enjoyed all pleasures which prosperity could yield, and
now suffering all troubles which adversity could bring) after his sixth
consulship, and the sixtieth year of his age, for the avoiding of Syllaes
horsemen, stripped himself naked, and The extreme misery of C. Marius.
flying to a marrish of reeds did there hide himself, plunging so deeply
into the mud, that nothing could be seen of him but his eyes and nostrels, who
being afterward descried, was drawn by a thong of leather tied to his neck,
into the prison of Minturna. There was sent to kill him a captive slave, whom
Marius A captive slave sent to kill Marius.
had taken prisoner in the battle which he fought against the Cimbrians: this
bloody Cimbrian assaying to strike Marius, was suddenly amazed, and terrified
by the majesty of his countenance, though Marius was then full of years, full
of misery, and void of weapons: but the slave seeing so bright a star in so
dark a dungeon, reuerencing the man whom he had before feared, and persuading
himself that it was impossible for one man to work his death, who not long
before had almost destroyed the whole nation of the Cimbrians, left him alive,
and in trembling manner departed from his presence. The Minturnians because they
held the worthiness of Marius in high reputation, delivered him out of prison,
and attiring him with convenient apparel, The Minturnia^s friends to Marius.
bestowing upon him a pilgrims viande, which might for a season relieve his
hunger, dismissed him out of their City. He having overtaken his son at
Aemaria, directed his voyage unto Affricke, where he led a poor and wretched
life in the ruins and desolate re^nants of the City of Carthage. Sylla levied
an army and renewed his journey toward Asia, (the year wherein Sylla was
Consul, was the first year in which the Roman soldiers did slay their
Consul; for then Q. Pompeius being Q Pompeius slain.
fellow Consul with Sylla, was slain by the seditious army of Cn. Pompeius
Proconsull.) After the broiles of Marius and Sulpitius the tumults of Cinna
succeeded, who was not one jot more temperate then those disorderly Cinna
begins a new broyle.
and enormous quarellers, or rather furious and traitorous conspirers. He was
Co^sull with Cn. Octauius, who because one of them namely Cinna, favored
Marius, and the other Sylla, fell to a sudden jar, and maintaining several
armies in the City, caused much terror, and some bloodshed. Cinna was Cinna is
expulsed the City.
expulsed the City by the power of Octauius and the Senators, his Consulship
was abrogated, and in his place L. Cornelius Merula, Jupiters priest was
elected. Cinna having corrupted the Centurions, Tribunes and soldiers Cinna is
made Captain of a seditious army.
with hope of liberality, was admitted of that army (which was as yet about
Nola) for their Captain, and having sworn all his soldiers to obeisance and
loyalty, he marched in his Consul robes toward Rome, his army consisting of
three hundred bands of good soldiers amounting in the view of spials to the
number of thirty legions: but though he had many soldiers and much courage,
he lacked notwithstanding factioners and favorites to uphold him, and was
destitute of popular credit, which might bolster and support his doings. For
supplying of which want, he called from banishment C. Marius and his son,
with all Cinna calls C. Marius and his son from banishment.
the other Romans which were before by Syllaes horsemen chased out of the
City. VVhilest Cinna was thus preparing war against his mother town, Cn.
Pompeius father to that great state, of whom we shall hereafter speak, whose
worthy acts in the Marsian war, together with his victory at Asculum, was
very beneficial and commodious to the commonweal, being frustrate of hope
to continue the Proconsulship, showed himself Cn. Pompeius father to Pompey
the great his dissembling and inconstancy.
very indifferent and equal to the factions, doing all things for his proper
and private good, and lying in wait for opportunity to serve his own turn
and advancement, enclining his army this way and that way, now as a favorer
to Cinna, and now as a friend to Sylla, following fortune by conjectures, and
determining to join with him, who by all likelihood should be most puissant:
at length he A great fight betwixt Cinna and Cn. Po^peius
encountered with Cinna before the city walls, where after a maine sea of
bloodshed, the Romans that were upon the walls, beholding the slaughter of
their brethren, friends and kinsfolk under the walls, the battle was fully
finished, but the victory was doubtful. Not long after Cn. Po^peius died, by
whose death the soldiers of Cinna conceived so great joy and gladsomnesse,
that they forgot the final overthrow of their fellow soldiers, and the Romans
did bestow their revenge upon Pompey being dead, which they did owe to him
being alive. Cinna and Marius did not without great havoc of men and matrons
invade Cinna enters the city
the city: but Cinna entered first, and published a law touching the receiving
of Marius, then C. Marius entered the walls with a C. Marius recalled from
banishment, enters the city.
most fatal and dangerous return to the city of Rome. Nothing had been more
bloody then his entrance, if his death had not shortly ensued: for having
possessed the city, he was more unsatiate in his cruelty then any ravenous
tiger, and more merciless in his tragical punishments, then any fury,
breathing nothing but blood, and delighting in nothing but murder, neither did
the licentious rage of his wrath content it self with the blood of meaner men,
but it seized upon the states and stars of the city. Then did Octauius one
of Octauius put to death by the cruelty of Marius
the Consuls, a man of a mild and douelike humor, render up his life into the
paws of these wolves: and Merula, who a little before the return of Cinna had
through fear renounced the Consulship, cut in pieces his own Merula cutteth
in pieces his own veins.
veins, and sprinkling his lukewarm blood upon the altar, upon which he had
often sacrificed the blood of beasts, and entreating the gods for the
execratio^ of Cinna, to whom he had often prayed for the preservation of the
city, gave up his fainting ghost in a great M Antonius the Orator put to
death by Marius and Cinna.
agony of mind. M. Antonius the chief of the city, and the Phaenix of
eloquence, was slain at the commandment of Marius and Cinna, by the swords of
their soldiers, whom by the sweetness of his eloquence he did a longtime
restrain and delay from the killing of him. Q. Catulus a man famous for his
virtues Q. Catulus cause of his own death.
and valor in the Cimbrian war, the glory of which he did participate with
Marius, as we have above reported, when he was hunted to death by these greedy
bloudhounds, shut himself into a narrow closet that was newly pargited with
lime, and having there a fire of burning coals, which might raise up a sudden
dampe, stopping his breath with a vaporous and darkish smoke, departed this
world, rather according to his own wish then his enemies will: then were the
streets, channels, theaters, market places, and temples strewed and ouerspread
with carcasses, so that it could hardly be judged, whether these two tyrants
did slay more that they might obtain the victory, or more were put to the
sword that they might safely enjoy the victory. For every one to whom Marius
would not reach out his hand by way of salutation, was immediately slain. The
common weal was now in a tottering and ruinous estate: covetousness was the
cause of cruelty, and the more wealthy a man was, the more faulty he was
judged: the accuser of a rich man had his pay and reward out of the coffers of
him that was accused: and then was profit and honesty confounded and made
one. Afterward Cinna and Marius were Consuls, Cinna was now the second time
Consul, Marius the seventh C. Marius dies.
time, who in that consulship died, a Roman in war terrible to his enemies, in
peace to his friends, and at all times impatient of quietness: in his place
was chosen Valerius Flaccus. Cinna being now the sole regent of Italy, the
greatest part of the Nobility fled to Sylla into Achaia, who in the mean time
did so fight with Mithridates his Lieutenants and Coronels about Athens,
Macedonia, and Beotia, that he took Athens, and made great havoc of his
enemies. But if any impute the rebellion of these times unto the city of The
Athenians faithful to the Romans.
Athens, he is altogether ignorant of the truth. For the faith of the Athenians
was always so firm and inuiolate toward the Romans, that every action which
was performed without blemish or stain of promise, was said to be done by an
Athenian faith: but they being heavily oppressed by the insufferable usage of
Mithridates his host, were besieged of their friends, when they were held
captive of their enemies, and obaying necessity stayed their bodies within the
walls, though their minds were without, and entirely with the Romans. Sylla did
then conduct his army into Asia, where he found Mithridates very tractable and
Silla his hard conditions of peace concluded with Mithridates.
suppliant unto him whom he punished with the payment of a great sum of
money, and with the loss of part of his navy, enioyning him to depart out of
Asia, and out of all the provinces which he had unjustly invaded, and
constraining him to content himself with the inheritance descended from his
father, which was the kingdom of Pontus: he took from Mithridates the Roman
prisoners without ransom, and used great severity against the traitorous
reuolts, and runagates. Sylla having thus appeased and qualified foreign
affairs, went by sea toward Rome, and in the way met him certain ambassadors
from the The king of Parthia sends Ambassadors to Sylla.
Parthian king, which were sent to gratulate his victory, he being the first
of the Romans to whom the king of Parthia sent ambassadors. There was
nothing more worthy among Syllaes labors, then that whole three years space,
whilst the factioners of Cinna and Marius did besiege the towns of Italy, he
neither pretended any favor toward them, neither did he omit that which he had
in hand, namely the subduing and vanquishing of foreign enemies: for he knew
when external tumults were ended, he might with more ease extinguish
domestical enemies. Before the coming of Sylla, Cinna in a mutiny of his
own soldiers was slain, a captain more Cinna is slain.
worthy to be adjudged to death by the discretion of the conqueror, then to
loose his life through the fury of his soldiers, of whom it may truly be
said, that he adventured those things which no virtuous man would attempt, and
that he brought those things to pass, which none but a valiant soldier could
accomplish. His fellow Co^sul Carbo having no colleague did now praedominate
and bear sway. Sylla Sylla passes quietly thorough Italy.
having entered Italy, it was thought he came not as a revenger of war, but
as an author of peace, with such quietness and mildness he lead his army
through Calabria and Apulia, with a great and special regard of the growing
corn, of meddowes, of men, of castles, and cities, and indeed he assayed by
lawful articles, and equal conditions, to appease the discord, but peace
could not please them which were immoderatly covetous. Sillaes army did daily
increase, every good and discrete Italian making recourse unto him, and he had
a most happy victory about Capua against Scipio and Norbanus Consuls, Norbanus
being overcome by fight, Scipio being forsaken of his army, yet Sylla gave him
leave to depart, without hurt or hinderance, so unlike was he to himself in
his wars, and after his victory, for whilst the victory was fresh, he was
more mild then equity required, but when peace had taken root, he was more
cruel then any barbarous Scythian, for Q. Sertorious the fury and firebrand
Sylla dismisseth Sertorious without hurt.
of that rebellious war, which not long after ensued, being disarmed by
Sylla, was sent away in safety, and many others he did with the same clemency
entreat: of purpose, as I think, that he might give an example of a double
and diverse mind in one man, and by that mean shroud and cover the contents of
his heart. At that time to fill up the measure of public mishap, in the city
of Rome, where before men did emulate one another in virtuous actions, now they
did combat and contend in malicious practices, and he thought himself the
best man, that was most wicked and injurious. Sylla had three mighty
adversaries, Carbo, and C. Marius, the son of Marius that was the seventh
time Consul, which both were Consuls whilst Sylla rong an alarm at the gates
of Preneste, and Pontius Telesinus, who leuying an army of the Samnites, did
stoutly confront Sylla before the walls of Preneste, he was an Italian borne,
but was not free of the city of Rome, a valiant soldier and a great enemy to a
Roman name, who stood in defense of Preneste, but not with the Consuls. This
Telesinus conducting Silla fights with Telesinus a Samnite.
forty thousand fighting men joined battle with Sylla at Collina, and brought
both him and the commo^-weale to extreme danger: for Rome was not in greater
fear, when the tents of Hanniball were but three miles distant from her
walls. Telesinus did greatly encourage his soldiers, saying that the day of
their battle was the last period of the Roman glory, and he cried that Rome,
Rome must be thrown down, and razed from the foundations, adding therewithal
that there would* never be wanting inuadors of the Italian liberties, as long as
the wood stood where such wolves were harbored. At the first hour of the
night the Roman army revived their courage, Telesinus the next day after was
found half dead, bearing the countenance rather of a conqueror then of a man
subdued, whose head being cut off Sylla commanded to be carried along the
streets of C. Marius the younger is slain by Syllaes soul diers.
Preneste. C. Marius, his life being in a desperate case, was feign to creep
through certain holes of the earth to escape his enemies, but he was slain of
Syllaes soldiers that were appointed for that purpose, of which towardly
gentleman, what opinion Sylla carried, a man may easily conjecture: for when he
was slain he entitled himself Sylla the fortunate, which had indeed been true
if he had ended Sylla usurps the Dictatorship.
his life with his victories. For having entered the city and usurped the
Dictatorship, which had been an hundred and twenty years intermitted, (for
the last Dictator before Sylla was made the first year after Hannibals
departure out of Italy, so that it was apparent, that the Romans did not so
much desire the use of a Dictator, as they did fear his tyranny) he began
presently to broach the blood of citizens, having already drawn to the
bottom the blood of strangers: four legions of soldiers, who had been of
the contrary faction, and had now upon covenant of life submitted themselves
to his mercy, calling in vain upon the faith of a Roman soldier, he caused
to be slain: five thousand of that army which fought against him at Preneste,
Silla causes the soldiers of Preneste to be slain.
being promised life by P. Cethegus his Lieutenant, he put to a sudden and
unlooked for death, and caused their joints to be plucked in pieces, and
commanded that they should be dispersed and cast abroad in the wastes and
mores. After these great and extreme cruelties, he put in practice the heavy
penalty of proscription, which if it had died Proscription put in practice by
Sylla
with Sylla, would have been a great part of the Roman happiness: by that
means he brought to pass, that whose names soever he writ in the table of
proscription, should be upon their attacheme^t presently put to death, their
goods also were subject to sale, every one taking the benefit to whom Sylla
would grant it: neither was he content to rage against them only which had
before opposed themselves to him, but the most quiet and innocent citizens for
the greatness of their wealth he deprived also of life, and against silly
women did he bend his wrath, as not satisfied with the death of men: and, which
was a sign of a Thracian cruelty, as soon as the heads of the slain
citizens were parted from their trembling corses, breathing as yet, their faces
being not wholly deprived of a vital blood, he did gaze upon them, and toss
the^ in his hands that he mightfeed on them with his eyes, though he could not
crush them with his teeth. With what savageness did he behave M. Marius slain
by Silla.
himself in the killing of M. Marius, whose eyes were plucked out before his
death, and every part of his body was sundred and disioynted: and at that
instant he enforced his Sylla his rage against M. Pletorius.
sword through the bowels of M. Pletorius, because he seemed to be grieved with
the torture of M. Marius. O extreme punisher of pity and compassion, to whom
it seemed a crime not to consent to cruelty. Neither did The ashes of C.
Marius thrown into a river by Sylla.
he spare the dead, for the ashes of C. Marius the elder he caused to be raked
out of the grave and thrown into a river. Sylla whilst he sought the
victory, was to the Romans a Scipio, whilst he used it a very Mithridates.
Many other bloudsheds he did commit, and more would he have committed, had not
the terror of a guilty conscience followed him, with the blazing brand of his
vexed soul, which torment some call an ecstasie, some melancholy, some
madness, but I denying it to be any one of these, allow it to be all these,
doubtless it is a thing sooner felt the^ known, not to be avoided by medicine
but by true felicity. In this perplexity he died, and yet Sylla dies.
ceased not the civil or rather uncivil and unbrotherly discord: thus was
Rome the famous city of Europe, the mother and nurce of worthy Senators, the
miracle of nations, the epitomie of the world, the kingdom of Mars, and the
seauenheaded sovereign of many provinces exceedingly shaken with these
quarrels, stained with these bloudsheds, and grievously discomforted with the
death of her children, her babes were brought forth for the sword to glut
upon, the bodies of her ancients were made as pauements to walk upon, her
matrons became a pray and prize to every rauisher, her priests and devout
sacrificers were slain before the gates of the temples. Syllaes body was
conveyed in sumptuous manner to Campus Martius, in which place before the
burial the two Consuls, namely M. Aemilius Lepidus, and Q. Luctatius Catulus
Debate betwixt Lepidus and Catulus Consuls touching the decrees of Sylla.
did earnestly debate about the repealing and cancelling of the acts and
decrees of Sylla. Lepidus urged that they who were proscribed by Sylla, ought
incontinent to be reduced to the city, and there to have restitution of their
goods. Catulus together with the Senate defended the contrary, saying that
though his motion were good and honest, yet it might be the beginning of some
tumult, which would be most dangerous if it were suddenly done, because the
commonweal was but newly recomforted, and had as yet enjoyed but a short
pause of tranquillity. By this dissension they fell to weapons, Cn. Po^peius
and Q. Catulus having gathered an army Cn. Pompeius Magnus and Q. Catulus
fight with Lepidus and overcame him.
did proffer battle to Lepidus, and in a light skirmish overcame him. Not long
before the death of Sylla, Q. Sertorius rising in arms maintained war in
Spain: for when he saw that the faction of Marius which he specially favored,
was utterly defeated and dissipated by L. Sylla, he fled presently into Spain,
where before he had been Praetor, and there having gathered a great host and
contrived Sertorius leuieth armies in Spain.
an huge navy, fearing lest Sylla, who had put Carbo to flight and slain
Marius, should send an army against him, he caused Liuius Salinator the
Lieutenant of Sertorius slain.
Liuius Salinator his Lieutenant to encampe in the mountains of Pyraeneum, but
he was afterward slain by C. Anius the Roman Proconsul, who was sent thither
to abate the courage of Sertorius, and after him Q. Metellus was also sent, but
their proceedings were not prosperous. Wherefore Cn. Pompeius being as yet a
private man, had charge given him of the Senate to go into Spain. There came
at that time for the aid and assistance of Sertorius, M. Perperna with a great
multitude of soldiers. Cn. Pompeius made way for himself through the Alps,
betwixt the famous springs of Padus and Rhodanus. He immediately after his
coming into Spain, did enter into conflict with two of Sertorius his captains,
Herennius and Perperna, and not far from the city of Talentia overcame them:
Herennius was there slain, Perperna escaped by flight. Pompey did pass the
winter in the Pyrenae an mountains, Sertorius in Lusitania, and at the
beginning of the spring, Metellus and Pompeius did encounter with several
armies Sertorius and Perperna, in which battle Sertorius constrained Pompey to
fly, and Metellus drove Perperna to the like extremity, Po^pey was at that
time wounded in the thigh, afterward they met again at Seguntia, where
Sertorius did the second time overthrow Pompey, and Metellus Perperna: the
third time when Sertorius was coming against Metellus, Pompey meeting him in
the way, caused him to retire: Sertorius did again oppose himself to Pompey.
Having taking Segida a noble city of Celtiberia, where Sertorius lost a
thousand soldiers and Pompey as many: then they turned themselves to the
besieging of towns, Pompey did besiege Palantia, but Sertorius did raise the
siege, and of them which besieged Caliguriu^ he did slay three thousand.
Metellus and Po^peius with great stoutnesse and stomach took many cities that
were leagued with Sertorius and at Ilerda and Iliosca the towns of the
Ilergitanes they put Sertorius to a desperate plunge, but Caligurium the city
of the Vascons he did with much prowess and puissance defend. Sertorius was
like to Iugurth in his fight, and in his fortune not unlike to him, the
exploits and stratagemes of them both were singular and admirable, but their
end and last event was miserable and mournful. Iugurtha Sertorius is slain.
was taken by treachery: Sertorius by the treason of M. Antonius and M.
Perperna his captains was slain, as he was sitting at a ba^quet, in the eight
year of his rebellion, his empire was presently transferred to M. Perperna,
whom Pompey overcame, took prisoner, and put to death, and in the tenth year
after the beginning of this war, he took Spain. The Romans were in these
times busied and molested in Italy by certain fencers or sword players,
trained up in a shadowed fight under the government of Lentulus, but defying
their master, and stirred with an hellish humor to seat themselves in the
highest thrones of honor (for as fire is to gunpowder, so is ambition to the
heart of man, which if it be but touched with self-love mounteth aloft and
never be^deth downward till it be turned to ashes) they raunged themselves, and
drew to their ensigns a great multitude offorlorn men. For in process of time
their army did increase to fourscore thousand and more. The leaders were
Spartacus, Enomans, and Crixus, who making great spoil and saccage in Italy,
at length imbattelled themselves upon the mountain Vesurius. Against them were
sent Clodius Glaber, and Publius Varinius, but their armies were suddenly by
these enemies discomfited: therefore the year next ensuing C. Lentulus and L.
Gellius Consuls, and Q. Arrius the Praetor prepared against them. Crixus one of
these rebellious captains, was together with his whole army utterly
overthrown: but Spartacus, in whom was more vigor of sinews, courage, and
counsel, conducting his soldiers from the Apennine mountain to the Alps,
and from the Alps into France, was at the first enforced to retire by one of
the Consuls, by the other to fly. But afterward having animated, surueyed, and
marshalled his men, he did suddenly turn back Spartacus a fence-plaier, does
encounter the army of the Consuls.
upon the Consuls, gave them battle, in several places overcame them: and was
marching toward Rome there to possess himself of the Capitole, and to erect a
monarchy, but that the Consuls reuniting their dissipated forces, did hardly
with much labor and great slaughter of men restrain and hinder him. But he
having lost his purpose, yet not loosing his Spartacus takes the city of the
Thurians.
time surprised the goodly city of the Thuririans, where breathing for a while
and refreshing his army, and soon after reencountring the Romans, he
obtained a glorious victory, and a plentiful spoil. This success did
notably enhance the pride of Spartacus, who presuming now that he was better
then the Consuls, thought himself therefore fit to be a king. And as Athenio
not long before, a shepherd and drudge in the fields, having slain his
master in Sicilie, and mustred under ensign a great number of vagrant
persons, by whose means he did spoil, and lay wast many hamlets, castles, and
villages, and applauding to himself in this succesfull pillage and roguerie,
was adorned with a purple garment, strowted and walked along with a staff of
silver, and environed his head with a crown of gold: so did this rebel of
Italy assume to himself a regal pomp and title, and making fortune his
rest, which of all things is most unlike to it self, thought he might as
easily continue as begin a conquest. But the Romans who never could suffer
victory to warm her self long with the robes of a stranger, committed the
whole scope and M. Crassus appointed for the war against Spartacus.
charge of the war to M. Crassus their Praetor, a man ambitious and
venturous: he having joined battle with Granicus one of the rebel
chieftaines, did slay both the captain and thirty five thousand of his
soldiers, and after fighting with Spartacus did slay him, and with him forty
thousand, five thousand only escaped, whom Cn. Pompeius returning from the
Spanish war, did suddenly meet and presently put to the sword. After these
times M. Cicero being Consul, whose nouity and strangeness in Rome, the
nobility and rareness of his good gifts might justly excuse who for all his
excellent qualities was more beholding to nature then education, as for his
virtue famous, so for his eloquence most famous, by whom it was that the
Romans were not inferior to them in wit, whom they vanquished in war, the
conspiracy of Catiline was detected and determined, and Cicero for his
constancy, courage, and watchfulness, in suppressing the scalefire of that
war to the utmost cinder, was entitled by Cicero called Pater patriae.
the name of Pater patriae, the father of his country. But before I enter into
the discourse of his rebellion, I must make known the person of the traitor,
and the cause of the treason. L. Sergius Catilina was in face and Catiline his
qualities.
feature comely and absolute, in wit prompt and pregnant, in eloquence sweet
and delightful, in pomp and majesty princely and regal, in courtly
behavior quaint and delicate: and to set upon this gold a Diamond, of a most
noble parentage. There were certain families amongst the Romans, which
surmounted and ouerheaded the rest, being most ancient and of a worthy
original, and they are parted into two discents, some of them having the
Aborigines to their ancestors, and some the Troianes. The first and
principal of the race of the Aborigines, was the family of the Vitellij,
being descended from Faunus the king of the Aborigines, which did inhabit
Italy before the coming of Aeneas, and Queen Vitellia, which in many places
was worshipped as a goddess: the second was the family of the Fabij, whose
offspring is rightly derived from Fabius the son of Hercules: the third was the
lineage of the Antonij, issuing from Anton an other of Hercules his sons: the
fourth was the race of the Potitij, so named of Potitius, who did with great
courtesy entertain Hercules, when he was entered Italy: the fifth was the house
of the Mamilij, borne of Mamilia the daughter of Telegonus one of Ulysses his
sons begotten of Circe that notorious enchauntresse. The other families which
referred their beginning to the Troiane root, were ten in number: first the
house of the Iulij, who descended from Iulus the son of Aeneas: the second
the Aemilij, who took their name of Aemilius the son of Ascanius a Troiane,
and of that house was the matchless Scipio, son to Paulus Aemilius, who
being the Roman General destroyed Carthage. The third the Nautij of Nautes
one of Aeneas his companions: for when Diomedes having stolen the image of
Pallas, did perceive that it was of no use to him, after the destruction of
Troy he offered it as a present to Aeneas passing by his kingdom, but as
Aeneas doing then sacrifice was turning himself, Nautes did lay hold of the
image, and by that means did appropriate the use of it to himself, so that
the Nautij and not the Iulij did enjoy the mysteries of Minerua: the fourth the
Cloaelij of Cloaelius an other of Aeneas his companions: the fifth the Iunij of
Iunius The lineage of Catiline.
an other of his associates: the sixth the Sergij of Sergestus one of the
Troiane captains, of which family was L. Sergius Catilina, and before him
none of that name was ever tainted with any savor of rebellion. The seventh
the Memij of Muesteus, an other of the Troiane travelers, the eight the
Cloantij of Cloanthus a bird of the same fether, the ninth the Giganij or the
Gianij of the Troiane Gias, the tenth the Caecilij of Saeculus a Troiane also
who built Preneste. Catiline being adorned with the nobility above described,
made himself through his vices and misdemeanor ignoble and odious: his life
was the picture of licentiousness: to women he was so lewdly affectionate,
that every curtizane of Rome laid claim unto him. And to marie Aurelia
Orestilla into a vacant house, he committed the shameful murder of his own
and only Catiline kills his own son.
child: for two things he promised her, and performed for her, which were
tokens of a merciless heart, the balefull death of his son, and the change of
the state, in such sort that Aurelia Orestilla should be the Dictatresse of
Rome. And for the performance he bound himself by a cursed circumstance,
drinking man's blood to fill his bloudthirstie humor. In all his actions he was
a perfect Protean, framing and composing himself to all sides and sects: with
the grauer sort of men he would be sad and severe: with the riotous, prodigal
and excessive: with chaste matrons modest and buxome: with light huswiues wanton
and vain: with young gentlemen pleasant and active: with ancient fathers
demure and deliberatiue: to the baser sort courteous and pitiful: to the nobler
persons sociable and grateful: so variable and discoulored he was in his
doings, that M. Cicero did greatly marvel at his manifold dexterity. The
first sparks of Catilines conspiracy began to blaze and appear, L. Tullus, M.
Lepidus being Consuls, six hundred eighty and seven years after the building
Catiline greatly indebted.
of Rome. At that time was Catuline greatly indebted, and because he could not
discharge the sum within the time appointed and limited by law, nor bring in
an estimate or valuation of his goods, whereby it might appear that he was
able to defray the debt, he Catiline forbidden to make sure for the Consulship.
was forbidden to make suit for the Consulship, whereupon being stirred by a
reuengefull wrath, he sought by all means possible to execute his injurious
intent. There was at that time in Rome Cn. Piso, a man of desperate boldness,
poor and yet presumptuous, Catiline did open and impart his meaning to him and
Pub. Antronius, and they three determined to kill the Consuls, which were made
the next year after Catilines repulse. The inquisition of this matter was
deferred till it came to greater ripeness. Afterward they intended the death
of the most part of the Senators: the time was appointed when their accomplices
and confederates, abbetters, and assistants should meet in armor: but because
Catiline perceived that the number of these rebellious soldiers was not yet
sufficient to give onset to the city, he withdrew his hand for a time, and
dismissed the army. But a year after M. Cicero, and C. Antonius having entered
the Consulship, Catiline being now also disgraced with another repulse,
recollected into his seditious brain his ancient plots and former villainies:
then he conspired with P. Lentulus and C. Cethegus Praetors to work the death
of the Consuls, to slay the Senate, to burn the city, and to alter the state:
and for this purpose they did by letters inuit to this horrible massacre many
Romans that were employed in foreign service. This being apparently evident,
and dangers being now at the door, and in a readiness to pierce into the
city, unless some mature advise were presently taken, a Senate was appointed
in the temple of Jupiter Stator, unto which place shameless Catiline,
imagining that he might bleare their eyes by a pretended purgation resorted
also, and with an unchanged countenance shrouded under the habit of a
Senator, the heart of a serpent. And because the method of this history may
seem in this place to require some description of the Senatorie state, I will
briefly set down the constant and perpetual order of the Romans in going to
their senate house, though I cannot counteruaile with aequall terms, nor with
a perfect discourse the great majesty and pomp, that in this reverend
solemnity was observed. The first place in the proceeding to their Senate had
the Dictator, The solemnity which the Romans used in their proceeding to the
Senate
(when that office was in esse) the next the Consuls, the third the Praetors:
the Dictator was therefore preferred because his power was supreme, and was not
subject to the control of any other, the Consuls were in the second place,
because they were in praeheminence next to the Dictator, and all the decrees of
the Senate were ratified by the^, bearing date according to the dignity of
their persons: their triumphs also were signed with the same mark: such a
triumph was said to be done, such an one being the second time Consul, and
such an one being the third time Co^sul, according as their advancement was. In
the third rank of these greater Magistrates were the Praetors, because they
had authority to call a Senate as the Dictator and the Consuls had, which was
not permitted to the inferior magistrates: they had also jurisdiction to
examine any matter that was done within the hundred stone, after the vulgar
supputation, within an hundred miles of the city of Rome on every side. Before
the Dictator went twelve Lictors or Sergeants, who at the bidding of the
Dictator and Consuls did arrest offenders, and commanded strangers that met
them in sign of reverence to light from their horses, they carried in their
hands an ensign of terror, a double poleaxe environed with a bundle of rods.
The Dictator was carried in a chair of estate, being clad with a purple gown,
edged with a crimson border, and invested with a robe triumphall, which were
the ornaments of the ancient kings of Rome: the same attire had the Consuls
and Praetors, but the Praetors did wear a silver colored garment, and did
always ride upon milk white horses: after these the next place had the
Ce^sors, if there were any at that time, for they were in the number of
principal magistrates, their office being not of perpetuity, no more then the
Dictatorship. After these being the more worthy potentates, the inferior sort
of the authorized persons did immediately follow. The first of that order were
the Aediles of the chair, because they were conveyed to the senatehouse in a
chair of yuorie, which monument of honor, as it seems was permitted unto
them, because in ancient times they were trusted and adorned with the entire
regiment of the city: these were created of the body of the Senate: next to
them succeeded the Aediles of the people, which were raised to that dignity
from the root of the people: after the Aediles followed they which had borne
office, though they were not charged with any office that present year. All of
them severally marshalled according to the worthiness of their calling, the
Consulians, the Praetorians, the Aedilitians, the last place had the Senators,
which had not yet borne office. The number of them all in such an assembly did
some time amount to the number of six hundred all of them, these only
excepted who were borne in chaires of estate, riding on fair pampered horses,
and long traind gowns, the skirts of which were circumscribed with these
words, Senatus, populusque Romanus. When the Senators were placed, and every
one began to expect what should be spoken against the rebellious confederates,
M. Cicero aiming at Catiline with his eyes, did thus pierce him with his
tongue, and with this inuectiue reproved his manners.

Was there ever seen so great and notorious Cicero his Oration against
Catiline.
impudency, grave fathers and worthy Senators, that a dissolute and
disorderly rebel, a professor of prodigality and unthriftiness, a maintainer
of thieves, barrettors and seditious slaughterers, a proclaimed enemy to
temperance, justice, chastity, and the whole synod of the seuerer virtues, a
man or rather a monster of men, compacted of vices and vanities, should dare so
much as to stain this sacred presence with his profane person, and though he
conspire against us, yet amongst us to consult. To consult (said I) nay to
conceal his treachery. What should the iay do amongst swans, or the owl
amongst nightingales, or the vultur amongst amongst doves, or Catiline amongst
Catoes: do we not dread the thunderbolt when we see the lightening? and can we
love the traitor when we loath his treason? Can thou so dissemble Catiline
that we may not discern thy doings? Nay there is no deed of thine, no drift
nor devise, which I have not heard, nay almost seen, nay almost felt. Here,
here they be in this our assembly (worthy Senators) in this most grave and
solemn council of the world, which muse continually of our death, of the
downfall of Rome, and the desolation of Italy. But thou yet live Catiline,
and yet thou live not to abate, but to abet thy pride. What vanity has
been at any time absent from thine eyes? what villainy from thine hands? what
president of vice from thy person? what young gentleman has there been along
time in this city, whom, if he were once corrupted by the deceitful baits of
thy false entisements, thou did not animate and incite either to desperate
attempts, by carrying the sword before him, or to effeminate examples by bearing
the torch before him, and yet thou imaginest that thy doings are not misliked.
Of thee Catiline when the Romans keep silence they pronounce sentence, when
they suffer thy misdeedes they condemn them, when they are at rest with
themselves, they are at deadly war with thee. But why am I so earnest against
thee? Is it possible that any thing should amend thee? may it be hoped for that
thou will reform thy self, that thou will shake off these faults? that thou will banish these enormities? Thou art not of so good and virtuous inclination,
that honesty may reclaim thee from whoredom, fear from injustice, and
reason from outrage: to this madness nature has framed thee, frowardness
has exercised thee, and destiny has reserved thee, and for these deformities
of thy nature thou have been more feared then trusted, and indeed more wily
then we have heretofore been watchful. But at length noble Senators, L.
Catilina enraged with boldness, breathing out bloodshed, preparing in most
heinous manner a scourge for his country, threatening to this city fire and
sword, is sufficiently known and abundantly hated. No plague can now be
invented of that monster and horror of men within this city against this
city, but in that he has not drawn his bloody sword out of our naked
bodies, in that he has left us alive, in that we have wrested the weapon from
his butcherous hands, in that the citizens be safe, and the city secure, can
ye conjecture with what a bitter agony and anguish of mind he is vexed: and if
he begin hereafter to renew his fury, take courage my Lords, and lead out
against his broken and outcast band, the flower and the power of all Italy,
and consider with what foes we deal, which surfeiting in banquets, embracing
harlots, stuffed with meat, faint with wine, adorned with garlands, soupled
with ointments, weakened by wantons, cast from their contagious mouths the
slander of the virtuous, over whom I do hope there hangs some heavy
destiny: and that the punishment that has been long time due to their wicked
lust and licentiousness, is either now imminent or now approaching: whom if my
Consulship do chance to quelle because it cannot cure, it shall not procure a
short sunshine of peace to the commonweal, but whole ages and worlds of
tranquillity: that which may be healed by any means I will heal by some
means, that which must needs be cut off I must needs cut off, therefore let
them either leave the city, or leave their tumult, or if they will stay both
in this city and in this mind, let them look for their desert, and assure
themselves of the full measure of revenge, but if in stews and tauernes they
sought only beluing and baudrie, they were more to be spared, but yet wholly
to be dispaired of: but who can tolerate that cowards should determine
treachery against the courageous, wild brains against them that be wise,
sottish drunkards against sober Senators and sluggish drones against careful
magistrates? These men building like gods upon the earth, as if their houses
should be heavens, whilst they take their pleasure in sumptuous coaches, great
families, costly banquets, rich attire, and in the lewd company of lascivious
curtizanes, are fallen into such a gulf of debt, that if they would be free
from it, Sylla is to be raised from the dead. But they shall soon perceive, if
they still persist in their naughtiness, that there are in this city vigilant
Consuls, politic governors, a puissant Senate, that we have weapons, that we
have a prison, which our ancestors have made a revenger of heinous and
manifest faults. And now since you are delivered through my care and industry
from a swelling cloud of terrors, without battle, without bloodshed, without
army, without fighting. For this so great benefit noble Senators, I require
of you no reward of virtue, no ensign of honor, no monument of praise, but an
eternal record of this very time: I desire that all my deserts, all the
ornaments of my person, the fruits of my glory, and the good aestimation of my
diligence, should be registered and enrolled in in your memories. No mutenesse,
no silence, no secret whispering can delight me, by your remembrance worthy
Senators mine acts and exploits shall be nourished, by your words they shall
grow, by your writings they shall not only receive life but aeternitie.

Catiline having all this while itching ears, Catiline his impudent answer to
Cicero.
but a more itching tongue, made in disorderly manner this disdainful reply: I
have a long time marvelled and now with astonishment do wonder (ye noble Lords
and ancient progeny of kings) for as to the rest I will not be^d my self to
them but against them, that with so patient ear, and minds impassionate, ye
can digest the choleric railings of this rhetorical parot, whom since we
first promoted from the perch to the pinnacle, from the bar to the bench, from
the ground whereon we go, to the tribunal whereon we sit, the Senate
surfeiting long ago on his rude and unmannerly speeches, is now constrained to
make a diet of a disease: upon me as ye have plainly perceived, he has spent
the whole chest of his gall, who am as free from the crimes intended, as he is
far from the virtues which he ascribes to you. He thought perhaps (what
wickedness I pray you has he not thought) to blow me out of the gates of the
city, by the venomous air of his impoisened lungs, but maugre his malicious
throat. I stand before his lowering face, to the abashment of his frozen
forehead, and the confusion of his ill speaking eloquence, as one
irreproucable, being like a cage of crystal, upon which the more poison is
cast, the more clear it does seem. I am not made (Consul Marcus) of so
fleeting and brittle mould, that the gnashing of thy teeth should either fray
me or fret me: but if I were guilty of the faults alleged, why was I not
impeached of them before thy Consulship, but under the triumph of thy terms
must suffer this intolerable injury? Catiline is an Epicure forsooth, because
Cicero is a Stoicke, Catiline is wanton, because Cicero is jealous, Catiline is
lawless, because Ciceroes will must be a law to him: Catiline is prodigal,
because he has not bestowed any bribes upon Cicero: Catiline is rebellious,
because Cicero is fearful and timorous: Catiline is an enemy to the
commonweal, because he is not friend to Ciceroes private policy: mighty
accusations and unanswerable! Has he not drawn blood (trow you) of Catilines
credit? It grieueth me worthy Senators, and trust me, it grieueth mine heart,
that the hope of the Roman youth, and the sweet society of gallant gentlemen
your selves atte^ding, bearing, and forbearing, should by the spawne of a ragge
be so hainously disgraced: as for his distempered declamation it is no novelty
with us my Lords, for it is the usual method of his mercenare tongue, upon
poor and pitiful presumptions, to hazard the life and soul of his clients
cause. But what madness is it for one that is lately crept into the city to
talk of antiquities, taking matters in hand which are elder then his memory,
which were forgotten and dead before he was begotten and borne? Thou art not
ancient enough Cicero to speak of our ancestors, nor worthy enough to talk
of our worthies, thou art as a pilgrim in this city, thou art ignorant of the
orders and customs thereof, thou seem to wander in another country, and not
to bear office in the Metrapolis of Italy: thou threatnest us with
extremities, and layest on load with imprisonments, as if our bodies should be
anuils to thine hatred: but suffer not my sweet, mild and courteous magistrates
of Rome, that upon Ciceroes suggestion we should endure such reproach: the
ignominy of arraignment is miserable, the arresting of guiltless men is
lamentable, banishment is discomfortable, but the racking, rolling, tearing and
tormenting of men far be it not only from the body of a Roman, but even from
his thoughts, from his eyes, from his ears. For mine own part I confess, and
profess, and pretend, that Catiline lives not to please, but to displease and
displace M. Cicero, of whom when I speak, I speak of tyranny, of villainy,
of baseness, and assure thy self Cicero, that either the law of Rome, or the
law of reason shall be my warrant in this case, and to them that be
discontented in this city, thy fall will be a general s;atisfaction.

Catiline departed out of the senate house continuing his fury, and because
danger was feared, it was thought good that the Senate should be dismissed in
the night time. Catiline went with a slender guard to the tents of Manlius.
Lentulus, Cethegus, and diverse others that were privy to the conspiracy, and
did as yet remain in the city, were arrested and imprisoned, and being
convicted by manifest evidence, were presently put to death. The day wherein
the punishment of these traitors was decreed, did greatly illustrate and
beautify the worthiness of M. Cato. He descended from M. Cato the Prince of
the Portia^ family, after whom this Cato in degree of The lineage of M. Cato.
descent was accounted and numbered in the third place. This M. Cato was of all
the Romans The praise of M. Cato.
most sincere, and most like to virtue itself, and seemed in his justice and
integrity to be nearer to God then to man, who did not live honestly and
orderly because he would seem to be virtuous, but because it was against the
course of his disposition to be dishonest and disorderly, thinking that only
to be reasonable, which was just and lawful: he was free from fancies, and had
always fortune in his own power: he was then Tribune of the people, young in
respect of his years, but in wisdom and advise a father, and a right
Senator, who (when others persuaded that the conspirators should be kept alive
in several wards) being the last of them that sentenced the rebellious, did
inueigh with such force of mind and wit against the conspirators, that by the
vehemency of his speech he cancelled their opinions, which persuaded lenity,
and made their softness to be suspected: and the greater part of the Senate in
favor of Catoes gracious severity, did acco^panie C. Caesar inclined to
sedition.
him to his house. C. Caesar did at that time give some token of a rebellious
humor, whereof Rome tasted afterward too much, and himself in the end was
poisoned with the dregs. Catiline hearing what was done at Rome, gathered an
army, and making a laborious journey through the steep and craggie hills,
intended a voyage into that part of France, which is beyond the Alps: which
Q. Metellus perceiving, who was leader of three bands of soldiers in the Pice^
province, he removed his tents and pitched them at the bottom of the
Pistorian heath, from which place the army of C. Antonius was not far.
Catiline when he saw that he was on every side embayed with mountains and
armed me^, chose rather to fight with Antonius, who committed the vantgard to
the conduct of M. Petreius. Catiline in that battle gave a sharp onset, and
continued the fight with an undaunted stomach, but in the end was slain, and
dying with great indignation, was there trampled to death by the hoofes of
horses. Thus he that did defend himself in the Senate house, was confounded in
the field, and that by the justice of destiny, who with a scourge of steel
follows proud aspirers: this insolent Roman perceived at the time of his
death the deceitful gloss of his fawning fancy, and the vain sophistry of
bewitching ambition.



LACHESIS, Or the second Book.
CN. Pompeius for his great valor and magnanimity justly entitled Magnus, did
in course of time grow to an exceeding greatness of authority, and had
purchased through his worthy exploits, the love, applause and admiration of
the whole world, his father was Cn. Pompeius an approved soldier, and a
Consularian, his mother was Lucilia a Senators daughter: he was of a comely
personage, not so commendable for beauty, as for a pleasing and constant
complexion, which continued even to his last hour, his wisdom was of a
wonderful excellency, his life in all parts absolute, his eloquence but
indifferent, he was desirous to have honor offered, but was not ambitious to
usurp it, a fast friend and a religious obseruer of his word, in reconciling
me^ that were at variance most faithful, in receiving satisfaction for
offenses most easy, never using his power to impote^cie, nor his wit to
vanity, from his cradle a soldier, in his youth a conqueror triumphant, and
in all his wars courageous and dreadful. For though Sertorius did more
commend Sertorius fears Po^pey.
Metellus, yet he was more afraid of Pompey. And of the Spaniards he triumphed
when he was but a Roman knight, not having as yet borne any office of estate.
To be a knight of Rome was so much better then to be a common gentleman, by how
much a patritian Senator was more honorable then a nouitian, whose ancestors
were never of the Senate. And Pompey by degrees did endeavor to advance his
credit, and in the end by the conquest of many and mighty nations, became
peereles. Mithridates his power was enfeebled by Sylla, disiointed by Lucullus,
and broken in pieces by Pompey, after which victory Mithridates ouerthrown by
Pompey. Pompey entered the temple of Jerusalem.
he subdued the Jews, took their city, and possessed the temple of Jerusalem,
a rare and miraculous monument, which though he filled with his soldiers, yet
he restrained the^ from the spoil. In that war he partly recovered, and
partly subdued to the Roman power, Armenia, Colchis, Cappadocia, Cilicia,
Syria, and all the region of Palestine to the river of Euphrates. He overcame
beside Paphlagonia, Galatia, Phrigia, Mysia, Lydia, Caria, Ionia, and all that
part of Asia which lies about Pergamus. He committed the regiment of Armenia
mayor to Tigranes, the Island of Bosphorus to Pharnaces, Cappadocia to
Arioberzanes, Seleucia to Antiochus Commagenus: to Deiotarus and other
Tetrarkes Galatia with Armenia minor, to Attalus and Pylaemenes Paphlagonia, to
Aristarchus Colchis, to Hircane Palestine. And for a triple reward of these his
victories, he Pompey honored with a triple triumph.
had the blazon of three triumphs: the first was of Affricke, the second of
Europa, and the third of Asia. After these triumphs ensued the Consulship of
Marcus Bibulus and C. Caesar his original.
Caesar, issuing from the famous family of the Iulij, and conueying his
descent from Anchises the Troiane father to Aeneas: he was of excellent
beauty, and in vigor of mind most sharp and vehement, in his rewards
bountiful, in courage far above man's nature, or man's belief, in the
haughtiness of his thoughts, in the celeritie of his fight, in the suffering
of bitter events and casualties singular, in all his actions most like to
Alexander the great, to Alexander I mean being sober, and neither surcharged
with wine, nor overcome with wrath, using sleep and meat not for the
pampering of his lust, but for the continuing of his life. He was near in
blood to C. Marius, and was Cinnaes son in law, neither during Syllaes
Dictatorship could he by any means be moved to divorce Cinnaes daughter, though
M. Piso a Consularian, did for fear of Sylla sunder himself from Annia
Cinnaes widow, by which constancy Caesar did greatly endaunger himself; for
his death Caesar's death sought for by Sillaes officers.
was sought for by Syllaes officers, Sylla himself being ignorant of their
purpose. Caesar being made Consul, a league of sovereign society was
concluded betwixt him and Cn. Pompeius, and M. Crassus. Pompey did therefore
enter into that league, because he would have his acts and deeds, which he had
made in the provinces before mentioned, that were conquered by him, fully
confirmed and ratified by the Senate. Caesar by taking that course had a double
intent, to increase his own honor by yielding to Pompeis glory, and to
establish his own authority by charging him with the hatred of this treuirall
power. Crassus had this drift to maintain and preserve the aestimation which
he had already obtained by the power of Caesar, and the authority of Pompey.
There was also an affinity contracted by marriage betwixt Caesar Pompey
marries with Iulia Caesar's daughter.
and Pompey: for Pompey took to wife Iulia Caesar's daughter. Caesar had the
regiment of France committed to him by the Senate, after whose Consulship
ended, and before his departure into France, P. Clodius Tribune Clodius
Tribune of the people becomes seditious.
of the people began to give new edge unto quarrels, and did with maine force
bend himself against Cicero. For what agreement could there be betwixt them,
when their manners did so far disagree? The head of dissension was cut off
when Catiline was slain, the body also was mangled when his confederates were
put to death, but the serpents tail did as yet move: for Clodius did seek by
all means possible, to take revenge on Cicero Clodius seeks to revenge
himself upon Cicero.
for the sharp severity used against his friends which were of Catilines
seed-plot, and of that seditious league. But it was to be wondered at, that a
man convicted of so notorious and heinous crimes, durst proceed to such
impudency as to attempt the disgrace of M. Cicero, or any way to disturb his
quietness. At that time Clodius was infamous for his adultery Clodius
infamous for adultery with Pompeia Caesar's wife.
with Pompeya Caesar's wife, which amiddest the most religious and solemn rites
of Bona Dea, this unchaste Tribune committed: and these ceremonies, which it was
not lawful for any man to behold, Clodius in woman's attire did pollute. But he
was the author of greater lewdness then this, when with his own sisters he
became incestuous, two of Clodius infamous for incest with his sisters.
them being his sisters german, and married to two worthy Romans, the one of
them to Q. Metellus, and the other to L. Lucullus, the third was his sister by
the half blood, the wife of Q. Martius. For these and other his faults, he was
condemned by the several censures Clodius condemned by Senate.
of two hundred Senators at one Session, and this notwithstanding was absolved:
so that I do greatly doubt, whether the Consuls that did absolve him, or
Clodius that was absolved, did more deserve punishment: for by that mean such
a window of impunitie was then opened, as could not be shut in the space of
many years ensuing. But Clodius because he was Tribune, and because he was
Clodius, did think all time lost wherein Cicero was safe. He was then in great
favor both with the people and Consuls: for when any commodity was sought for
by the Consuls, which could not be prejudicial to the people, he would labor
earnestly for the Consuls, and when the people would have had any benefit
which did not concern the Consuls, he was wholly for the people: so that by
displeasing neither, he pleased them both. Upon this ground he adventured to
make laws, amongst which one was enacted against the^ who had put a Roman
citizen to death without the judgment of the people of Rome, which law though
it ran in general terms, yet in sense and meaning it was directly leuelled
against Cicero, who in his Consulship had by Senate condemned the confederates
of Catiline. Cicero perceiving this did clad himself Cicero mourns.
with mourning roabes, the Senators also were attired with black, as the
associates of his sorrow, the Roman knights did wear his color, the
inconsolate city did droope and deplore his state, and the forreiners that
heard thereof did enlarge the grief. For the redressing of this malady means
were made to Crassus, Caesar, and Pompey. But Caesar denied to stand against
Clodius, because he feared that the laws and decrees made by him the year
next before when he was Consul should be disanulled and abrogated by Clodius if
he maintained hatred against him. M. Crassus was moneys weathercocke, and an
hungry cormorant of coin, and therefore refused to meddle in this matter,
because they that craved the assistance of his authority, came not to him with
golden faces: only Po^pey did help, countenance, and comfort him, and
protested openly that himself would rather be slain by Clodius, then Cicero
should be abused: but the Consuls commanding the Senators and others to lay
aside their mournful sable, did so firmly lincke themselves to Clodius, both
against Cicero and Pompey, that neither could Pompey profit him, neither would
Cicero stay in the city. For how could he expect any better success, L. Piso
and A. Gabinius being Consuls, men of notorious naughtiness, and raked out of
the scum of Senators? Wherefore Cicero left the city, Cicero commits
himself to voluntary exile.
and in the very day of his departure, his house that stood on mount Palatine
was burnt by Clodius, and the soil was consecrated to Liberty: his goods were
confiscated, his lordships and farms bestowed upon others: there was a law
also made touching his banishment, whereby it was prohibited that he should A
sharp law made concerning Cicero his banishment.
not have the use of water and fire within the city, that none within five
hundred miles of Italy should receive him into his house, that none should
make any motion for him to the Senate, that none should deliver his opinion of
Cicero, that none should dispute of that which was done, that none should
speak of it, that none should go unto him, that none should write unto him.
But in the end Cn. Pompeius having undertaken emnitie with Clodius, being urged
by the earnest petition of Titus Annius Milo, and moved by the abundant
kindness of his heroical nature, did in his mind make special election of
this care to reduce Cicero from banishment. Wherefore the year next ensuing,
P. Lentulus and Q. Metellus being Consuls, Cicero by a Senatorie decree was
recalled from banishment Cicero recalled from banishment.
with the great desire of the Senate, and the great rejoicing of Italy. The
ground whereon his house stood, was exempted from religious consecration, and
his house was not so shamefully thrown down by Clodius, as it was sumptuously
reedified by the Senate, his possessions were restored unto him, and all the
acts which Clodius made in his Tribuneship Clodius persisteth to be an enemy
to Cicero.
were adjudged to be void. Clodius did greatly indignate at the return of
Cicero, and having aggregated unto him a rascal route of thriftlesse and
unconscionable ruffians, he partly drove away, and did partly maime and murder
the carpenters and workmen, that were busied about the renewing of Ciceroes
house, he burnt beside the house of Q. Cicero, Clodius burns, the house of Q.
Cicero.
he fought with Milo many times in the streets: he pursued Cicero with stones,
clubs, and swords, and arming all his men with bra^ds of fire in the one hand,
and swords in the other led them to the burning of Miloes house: but this
tempest and trouble of the city, who did bestow kingdoms and take them away,
and divided the world at his pleasure, which burnt the temple of the Nymphs,
that he might scorch the roll in which his shame was enregistred, which with
masons, architectes, and measurers of ground did survey almost every close and
plot that lay near unto him, hoping in the end to make it his own purchase,
and to dilate and extend his demeasnes from the gate of Ianus to the top of
Clodius threatens death to Sanctia.
the Alps: which threatened death to Sanctia a matron, as holy in her manners
as in her name, and to Apronius a young gentleman, unless they would sell unto
him their inheritance: who told Fursonius in plain terms, that if he would
not lend him so much money as he required, he would carry him dead into his
house. This enemy I say to all good men, to his neighbors, to forreyners, to
his friends, Clodius is slain by Milo.
to his kinsmen, was shortly after slain by Milo, for whose death he did lie
in awaite, and his body being conveyed to Rome was loathed of the beholders,
for it was the harbor of a foul ostridge.

Caesar was now in hot wars against the French, of whose exploits as they did
happen in nine years space, whilst he was President there by the commission of
the Senate, I will make a brief rehearsal as the times did yield them.

In the first year the Heluetians, when The Heluetians fly before Caesar.
Caesar had scarcely set foot in France, burnt their houses, and leaving their
country dispersed themselves in the fields of the Sequani, and so came to the
coast of the Tolossians. Caesar perceiving that their abode in that place would
be dangerous to the city of Tolossa, and being earnestly entreated by the
petition of the Ambarrians and the Allobroges, who did complain themselves to
be greatly vexed and disturbed by the Heluetians, remoouing his tents and
having overtaken them at the river of Arraris destroyed in pursuit all the
villages of the Tigurines. Caesar's horsemen which were sent before to observe
what ways and paths the Heluetians did take, were by them discomfited.
Afterward The Heluetians overcome by Caesar.
they gave battle to Caesar, and in that battle they were overcome, and
yielding themselves to Caesar's mercy, they were enjoined to resort to their
own country, and there to repair their houses. Then Caesar being moved by
the complaint of certain Frenchmen addressed against Ariouista the king Caesar
pursues battle against Ariouista.
of the Germans, whom he did pursue in battle to the river of Rhenus.

In the second year he waged battle against Caesar fights against the
Belgians and Neruians.
the Belgians, the most of which were slain. The like success had he against
the Neruians.

In the third year fighting on the sea against the Venetians, he caused the^
to yield: and P. Crassus his Lieutenant did subdue almost all the country of
Aquitania.

In the fourth year the Germans passing with a great multitude over the
river of Rhine arrived in France, whom Caesar assaulting on the sudden did
utterly destroy: then he made a bridge over Rhenus, and determined Caesar
overthrows the Germans.
to vex and exagitate the Germans in their own country, because France was
so much disquieted and molested by them, and having Caesar burns the villages
of the Sicambrians
burnt there many cities and villages of the Sicambrians, being also certified
that the Britanes did minister succor, and gave encouragement to the
conspiracies of the French, he sailed into Britain, and constrained the Caesar
over comes the Britains
Britanes by sharp onset to yield unto him. Caesar's navy that transported his
horse, was shrewdly shaken with a tempest, wherewith the Britains being
revived betook themselves again to weapons, and fighting with Caesar were put
to flight: at length they sued to Caesar for peace, which he taking hostage
Caesar reconciled to the Britains.
of them did easily grant, and returned into France, and the same year the
Morines and Menapia^s rebelling he reduced to obedience.

In the fifth year Caesar returning from Illyrium, to which place he went for
the stopping and beating back of an incursion made by the Pirustae, came to
his army in France, and addressed war afresh against the Britains having
broken truce, and enjoying Caesar renueth his war against the Britains.
there a prosperous fight, a great multitude of the inhabitants being slain,
and a great part of the Island brought into the power of the Romans, taking
hostages, and imposing tribute he set sail for France.

In the sixth year the Eburons did rebel against Caesar, Ambiorix being their
king and The Eburons overcome by Caesar.
Captain, who^ in many places Caesar fiercely and fervently pursuing, put to
the sword and dispersed the remna^t of that rebellious company.

In the seventh year Caesar went into Italy, upon occasion of a mutiny which
there did befall. The French thinking that he would be detained by domestical
war, and that it would be hard for him to return to his army during that
dissension, began now to take advise of renewing war against the Romans. The
Carnutians professing that they would be leaders to that attempt bound others
unto them by oath, and having appointed a day they repaired to Genabis, where
many of the Romans did negociate, and were earnestly occupied and busied about
their Treachery against the Romans in France.
trafique and merchandise, all which were slain by the French, which massacre
being certainly reported at Aruernum and other parts of France, the Pietons,
the Parisians, the Cadurcians, the Tureus, the Aulerci, the Lemonickes, the
Audians did join in armor and did confederate with the Carnutians. Caesar
hearing of this new enterprise made speedy Caesar his revenge upon the rebels.
return into France, and having placed several garrisons in the cities of
the Volscians, of the Artonikes, of the Tolossians, and in Narbo, which were
nearest unto the enemies, he took Vellannodunum the city of the Senones, and
Genabis the chief town of the Carnutians, which he spoiled and burnt, and
many other towns did he take, and seized upon many of the rebels, receiving
some of them into his mercy, and punishing very sharply the most notorious
offenders.

In the eight year he pursued the Carnutians to their uttermost overthrow: the
Bellofaci conducted by two valiant captains Corbius and Comius, were enforced
to submit themselves, and Corbius was then slain by Caesar's horsemen.

In the ninth year Caesar did not enterprise any warlike affairs, but
labored specially to cut off all occasions of reuolting: therefore honorably
emparling with the magistrates of the cities: bestowing upon the governors
great rewards, and burdening them with no new taxes, he brought France being
wearied by many wars, to a perfect and perpetual peace, and departed thence
to Italy, but was still guarded with an army of soldiers.

In the seventh year of Caesar's warfare in France, Iulia Caesar's daughter
departed this world, and Pompeis little son which he had by her, within a
short space after died also, which was a great crack to the concord before
continued. Pompey had already proroged his Praeside^tship in the province of
Spain Pompey his Presidentship in Spain proroged.
for five years: but the people of Rome did exceedingly grudge, that either
Caesar or Po^pey should in any foreign province have an army of soldiers at
their command, since all wars both foreign and domestical were ceased and
determined, because they thought by that mean some danger might grow to the
City: for Pompey being now in Rome, did rule Spain by Affranius and Petreius
his Lieutenants, having in several cities several garrisons, and C. Caesar
had in the bosom of Italy an huge host, and had then a garrison at Rauenna,
where he was personally reside^t: this did seem also inconvenient to many of
the nobles, and Pompey showed himself very partial: for he did fawn upon
them which would have had Caesar's army dismissed, but was very adverse to
others who would have measured him by the same compass, who if he had died in
Campania two years before the civil wars, where he was greatly assayed by
sickness, at which time all Italy did make special vows for his health, his
glory which was gained by sea and land he had carried untouched to the grave.
Upon these considerations L. Lentulus and C. Marcellus being Consuls, a decree
was made by the Senate, A decree made by the Senate, that Caesar should dismiss
his army.
that within a time limited Caesar should discharge his army, and if he would
not, that he should be accounted an enemy, for Caesar would have been made
Consul in his absence: but M. Cato did well answer, that no citizen ought to
praescribe laws to the commonweal: wherefore it was ordained that Caesar
contenting himself with one legion, should bear only the title of the
President of France, and that he should come into the city as a private man,
and in his suite for the Consulship, should wholly rely upon the voices of the
people. C. Curio an impudent orator, a man wickedly witted, and eloquent for a
public mischief, whose mind no riches could satisfy, nor any pleasures
sufficiently please, who first stood for Po^pey (as it was then accounted for
the common weal, which I do not speak to reprove, but that I might not be
reproved) and now was in show and appearance both against Pompey and Caesar,
but in deed and mind wholly for Caesar: this Curio Tribune of the people,
posted in have to Rauenna where Caesar was, and signified unto him the order of
the Senate, applying his eloquence as a brand to the inflaming of Caesar's
Caesar is incensed by Curio against the Senate.
fury. Curio came to Caesar at the entrance of twilight, when the cloud of
vapors and exhalations, is by nature disposed to turn men into melancholy,
which took so deep hold on Caesar, that making no answer to Curio, but
casting himself on his bed he did in this sort expostulate with the Romans.
The passionate speech of Caesar against the Senate.


Thus is Caesar measured with a scantling, dieted with a paring, and rewarded
with nothing. Vanish from me thou sad and ugly co^cubine of Erebus, thou grimme
and duskie night, which with thy black circumference do hood wink our
senses, driving the day from us before we can flesh our swords, contracting our
sinews when they are but newly stretched, causing us to lurk in our cabbons
when we should cleave to the throats of our enemies; vanish I say from me, and
delay not with thy lingering minutes my expeditio^ against Rome. Against Rome?
o the echo of my heart! nay for Rome, against the Romans, amongst whom is Cn.
Pompeius Magnus, but not yet Maximus, for he lacks a degree of that, and
before he can attain to it, there will be effusion of blood by succession. But
what cares he for that, was he not one of Syllaes whelps, whose sword reaking
with Italian blood he so greedily licked, that the taste thereof does as yet
relice in his ravenous and polluted laws? But learn of Sylla, learn of thy
Sylla Pompey, that a tyrant bathing himself in goare, shall at length sink by
the weight of his cruelties. What Caesar has done, I refer to the Oracle of
Bellona, what he will do I leave to the concealed decree of sacred vengeance:
what he may do, let the foredoming Parcae praedestinate: what he ought to do
let warlike justice pronounce. Was not Pompey made Consul without suing,
without seeking, without speaking? and shall I requesting, yea and humbly
requesting suffer a repulse? Fortune thou mighty and miraculous Goddess,
which in a moment do procure a world of varieties, whetting with thine anger
the points of our lances, shaking crowns and kingdoms with the spurn of thy
foot, triumphing over our victories with the speckled wheels of thy voluble
chariot, controlling our hope with thy frowning countenance: thou know great
goddess, that if Rome has at any time flourished: if it has at any times
tasted the pure and unmingled extract of sincere happiness, if it were ever
carried on the broad wings of fame, if it did ever swim in a flood of plenty,
it was through Caesar and his fortune, and yet we are now despised, and yet we
will not be despised, fortune is able to revenge the injury done to Caesar,
and Caesar will always fight for the praeheminence of his fortune. Therefore
for the honor of Aeneas against the defacers of his race, for the credit of
mount Palatine, against the unjust magistrates of Rome, for the glory of
Romulus who shines in the heavens like a giant-starre against the seditious
repugnants, I will shoot the sting of my wrath, and they shall well perceive
that Caesar aesteemes no better of his enemies, then if a sort of hares should
be harnessed, which would trust rather to their feet then to their force:
auaunt from me pity thou feminine passion, for I will derive my name of a
martial act, and will be called a caedendo Caesar, possess therefore my heart
thou dreadful Nemesis, ransacke my veins, rage within me wrath, assist me
fiends, furies, and ye deformed ghosts, subject to the severe edict of the
baser destiny, make your seats and circles in the wast of Italy, and never
forsake that place, till the fiery brightness of Caesar's supremacy do
deter you from thence.

Caesar in this rage of mind, carried away with the whirlewind of his turbulent
spirit, left Rauenna and passed over Rubicon: the Senate hearing of his
rebellion, decreed that Pompey should be General, and that he should Pompey is
appointed by the Senate General against Caesar
have money out of the common treasury. There was present choice made of
soldiers throughout all Italy, wars were proclaimed, and taxes were imposed
upon the confines, suburbs and confederate cities. Caesar having passed
Rubicon seized upon diverse towns of Italy, Pisaurum, Fanum, Ancona, Tignium
and Auximon, and he ran over all the Picene province, with his army which was
forsaken of Lentulus Spinther the governor there, and from thence he went to
Corfinium, which was held of L. Domitius Ahenobarbus, which he enjoyed having
Domitius also in his power, a most constant friend to Pompey, whose standard
was at no time advanced, but it was worshipped and followed by Domitius: whom
Caesar did in this Caesar pardons Domitius.
manner greet: Domitius I do franckly pardon thee and all those which belong to
thy charge, and with these words I make a perfect disclaim of anger and
emnitie, I give thee also free choice and election, whether thou will be a
captain in Caesar's camp, or still adhere to Pompey. Domitius not demurring
upon Caesar's offer, did incontinent fly to Pompey, Domitius flies to Pompey.
who was then at Brundusium, and there were many at that time which did observe
the like faithfulness to Pompey, to whom Caesar did more plentifully offer the
benefit of life, the^ they did thankfully receive it. Caesar hasted to
Brundusium to assault the Consuls in that place, but failing of his purpose he
addressed toward Rome: there was then in the city great fear and amazedness,
the people calling to memory the cruelty of Marius, the matrons with their
rented hair did display their fearfulness, the young damsels with salt
tears did blemish their faces, their skriking voices and deep drawn sighs,
did move the heavens to a sympathy. The silly babes flying as it were from the
face of Caesar, did cleave to the breasts of their parents, the sturdiest necks
did then begin to stoop, and the strongest hearts to melt, and nothing could
be seen in Rome but signs of sorrow: for as the earth when she is disrobed of
her budding and fructifying trees, and of her amiable verdure, which is her
only grace and garment royal, is like a naked table wherein nothing is
painted, so was Rome at that instant being bereaved of her young and lusty
gentlemen, even as if the springtide should be taken from the year: and a
great deformity did then also arise by the absence of the grave and ancient
fathers, who with their spreading shadow did shield and protect the body of
the city, and did nourish the rising plants of the generous brasill, gathering
strength and soliditie under the curtain of their boughs. Caesar having entered
Rome, used all sorts of men with great kindness and courtesy, and having
conuocated an assembly declaring and aggravating unto them the injuries of his
enemies, he transferred all the blame upon Pompey, and made a notable pretense,
that he was desirous of unity, and that peace was the virgin of his heart. But
Caesar's Diamond was nothing else but glass, and his words nothing but wind,
which at that present was clearly and evidently perceived, for he went in
great have to the temple of Saturn, where the treasury of Rome was before his
ransack inuiolably kept, and at the gates of the temple L. Metellus Tribune of
the people did boldly resist him, and with these words entertained him.

Caesar the laws of Rome have made this Metellus his speech to Caesar.
place sacred, thou shall not enter into this temple but through the sides of
Metellus, and no coin shall thou carry from hence without bloodshed: vnsheath
therefore thy blade, and fear not lest thy wrongs be espied: for alas we are
now in a desolate city, there be so few to condemn thy doings, that there be
almost none to see them: thy private and rebellious soldiers shall not have
their pay out of the treasury of Rome, and if thou would be rich by
violence, there be strange walls for thee to batter. Caesar in this sort replied
unto him.

Shameless churl as thou art, this righthand shall not vouchsafe thee so much
honor as that thy blood may shine upon a soldiers steel. Metellus, thou art
not worthy of my wrath, and where thou hoissest up the sail of laws and
customs, assure thy self Tribune that the laws of Rome had rather be
cancelled by Caesar, then confirmed by Metellus. In the end by the earnest
entreaty of his friends, who were addicted to Caesar rather for fear then
contrariety of opinion, Metellus gave place to Caesar, and he rushing suddenly
into Caesar seizes the treasury.
the temple, caused the treasury which in many years space was levied by
polles, which was gained in the Carthaginian war, and in the victories had
against Philip Perseus, and Pirrhus, together with the tribute of Asia, of
Creet, and the wealth which Cato brought from Cypris, and which Pompey
purchased by his wars, being carried before him when he triumphed, to be laid
on asses backs, and to be carried as the sinew and supporter of his wars.
This was thought the fowlest act that ever was committed by Caesar, and it was
never feared that Rome should be poor by Caesar. This captain being as glad
for this new booty as some of his friends were sorry, led his soldiers toward
Spain, where Afranius Caesar marches toward Spain.
and Petreius did rule the affairs under Pompey, but he did so masserate them
with famine that he possessed the greatest part of Spain, without shedding many
drops of blood: then he went into that part of Spain, which is now called
Andeluzia, where M. Varro captain to a great number of Veteranes, did hold a
forcelet, but he being daunted with the presence of Caesar, resigned all the
province into his hands: the^ he marched toward Dirrachio, taking by the way
Orichum and Apollonia an University town, where his Nephew Octauius was
taught at that time in the liberal arts and sciences, who is said to have
accompanied his uncle in the wars following, but because it is a tradition of
more antiquity then credit, I do rather note it then affirm it. The fortune
that Caesar had, and the credit which Pompey enjoyed in foreign nations, were
two enticing lures, that drew to their several camps a great multitude of
forrainers. To the assistance of Pompey from the coast of The forreiners which
were ready in arms for the assistance of Pompey.
Greece which lies about the rocks of Cyrrha, and the cloven hill of
Parnassus, came a great army of the Phocenseans, from Thebes and the regions
thereabout came the Baeotians, the Pisaeans, and the Sicanians: from the towns
that lie under Maenalus and OEte came the Dryopes, the Threspoti, and the
Sellians: from Creet and Gortyna a number of good archers did present
themselves to Pompey: from Dardania, from Colchis, and the shore of the
Adriaticke sea, the Athama^ts, Enchelians and diverse others: besides these
flocked unto him thousands from Babylon, Damascus, and Phrygia, together with
the Idumaeans, Tyrians, Sidonians and Phaenicians: there came also from Tarsus,
from Cilicia, from India, Persia, Armenia, Arabia, and Aethiopia. For the aid
of Caesar there came The strangers which were assista^t to Caesar.
many Scythians, Hircanians, and from diverse regions beyond the hill Taurus:
likewise the Lacedaemonians, the Sarmatians, the Lydians, the Essedones, the
Arimaspians, the Massagites, the Mores, the Gelonians, the Marmarians, the
Memnonians and they that dwell beyond the pillars of Hercules were ready in
armor and showed themselves serviceable to Caesar's command. Cn. Pompeius
partly to welcome the strangers that came to Dirrachio, and partly to
encourage the Romans which did follow him, and to make the cause of the
undertaken war manifest to them all, the Nobles and Senators sitting round
about him in harness, used this speech unto them.

Let it not any whit dismay you friendly Pompey his oration to his soldiers
forreiners, and faithful hearted Romans, that you are now far from the walls
of the taken city, and if the Italian ingenuitie, and the heat of the Roman
blood be as yet warm within the Romans, let them not mark upon what earth
they stand, so they stand upon the ground of a good and lawful quarrel. It is
I trust evident to you all that we are the Senate: for if we were in the utmost
climate of the world, and directly under the freezing waine of the Northern
Bear, yet in our hands should be the administration and regiment of the
affairs of Italy. When Camillus was at Veios Rome was there also, and the
Romans forsaking their houses, did never change their laws. Now is Rome
Caesar's captive, and a sort of sorrowful hearts has he there in hold, empty
houses, silent laws, and close courts: we are here as the punishers of Caesar's
faults* and the armor which we now bear, is but only the wrath of reuengefull
Rome. Caesar's warfare is as just as Catilines, and when he should be like to
the Scipioes, and the Marcelli, he falls into the rebellious faction of C.
Marius, Lepidus, Carbo, Sertorius: and yet in truth I honor him too much to
consort him with these. He makes account of me as of one withered, half dead
and foredone with years: but it is better for you to have an ancient captain,
then for Caesar to lead an army of spent and outworne Veteranes. And though
the age which hope does follow be far more plausible and acceptable, then
that which death does pursue, yet wisdom and experience proceed from elder
times, and the head whose hairs resemble the feathers of the swan is a Senate
house to a good army. And if I may not be a soldier, yet I will be the
example of a soldier unto you. The aestimation that I have always had amongst
you Romans, by whose means I have been extolled to that honor, above which
never any Roman citizen did ascend, may warrant my warfare. With us also are
both the Co^suls, with us the armies of many foreign kings and potentates. Is
Caesar trow you so venturous, because he warred so long against the unruly
French? why it was but a sporting practice, more fit to train his soldiers,
then to merit triumph: or has his fortune against the Germans raised his
courage, he went not so speedily to the Germans as he departed from them, and
rather fearing them then feared of them, he called the German sea the
whirlepit of hell? or does his blood begin to boil within him, because the
fame of his fury did sudde^ly drive the Senators out of their houses and
harbors? When I displayed my blazing ensign upon the Ponticke sea, the Ocean
was no more traced with the pirate ships, but they did all crowd into a narrow
corner of the earth. Mithridates that untamed prince, who long expected when
victory should fly from Rome, I enforced to take his pauillion, in which he
died like a fugitive coward, and therein I was more fortunate then the most
fortunate Sylla. There is no part of the world without my trophies, and what
land soever lies under the sun, has either been vanquished or terrified by
Pompey: and I have left no war for Caesar, but this which now he maintains,
in which though he overcome, yet he shall never triumph. Wherefore the nearer
Caesar does approach unto you, the more let your courage rise, or if words
cannot prevail, imagine that you are now upon the banckes of Tiber, and that
the Roman matrons standing upon the walls of the city, with streaming tears,
and dispersed hairelockes, do exhort you and entreat you to fight: Imagine
that out of the gates of the city the old and grayheaded fathers, that are
notable to weild weapons do prostrate unto your feet their hoarie heads,
requiring succor and defense of you: and think that Rome herself fearing a
tyrant boweth unto you: think that the infants which are already borne, and
which hereafter shall be borne, have mingled their common tears, and that they
which as yet never saw the light, desire to be borne free, and they which do
now live desire to die free: and if all this will not serve, then Pompey (if he
may so debase the majesty of a General) with his wife and children will fall
before your feet. But this is my last behest that I require of you, let not
Pompey who in his youth has always honored you, be dishonored through your
default in his dying years, for your selves, for your kindred, your freedom
and good estate. I protest thus much, that I will never return to Rome but I
will carry peace in my hand, and the Olive branch shall be my ensign. The
Romans were greatly emboldened hearing these words, seeing their General so
youthfully minded, and as it were refined in the mould of Mars. Wherefore they
expected Caesar with prepared minds. And Caesar having now praefected governors
over Orichum and Apollonia, made great have to Dirrachio, in which place at his
first coming Pompey gave him the onset, and Pompey puts Caesar to flight.
made him to fly having lost a great part of his army: and though M. Antonius
came not M. Antonius helps Caesar.
long after to Caesar with a fresh supply, ready to face and breast the enemy,
yet Pompey did so plague the^ with continual warring against them, when he saw
convenient time; that Caesar's victuals being almost wasted, he was feign
through penury of corn to fly into Thessali, and Pompey speedily pursuing
him in the champion plain of Pharsalia, pitched his tents directly against
Caesar's. In Pompeis camp all things were glorious, magnificent, and glittering
in show: in Caesar's all things powerful, active, and strong. The Romans being
thus divided both parties were greatly enflamed with desire of fight: Pompeis
soldiers were ready to deprive him of the ensigns, and to enter the field
without a General: so deliberatiue was that noble Captain of their welfare,
and so desperate were they and careless what befell upon them. In Pompey there
was this desire and thought to overcome with as little bloodshed as might be.
But what fiends and damned spirits did thou invoke Caius Caesar? what
Stygian furies, what infernal hagges, and what nightly terrors did thou
entreat? to what Eumenides did thou sacrifice, intending such a general
slaughter? Pompey being earnestly urged by his soldiers thought good to
marshall his men, and to set the army as might be most convenient for the
soil whereon they were to combat. The left wing of the army Pompey
marshalleth his army.
was committed to L. Lentulus, the leading of the right wing had L. Domitius,
the strength and midst of the battle did wholly rely upon P. Scipio: upon
the banks and sides of the rivers did march the Cappadocians and Ponticke
horsemen: in the broad field were Tetrarches, Kings, and Princes, and all the
purpled Lords that were tributarie to Rome: Pompeis squadrons were furnished
with many Romans, Italians, and Spaniards. Caesar seeing his enemies to have
descended into the plain, was heartily glad that so good occasion was offered
him, and that the day was come which with a million of wishes he called for:
wherefore departing out of his tents and marshalling his soldiers he made
toward Pompey. In this battle, the fathers face was directly against the
sons, the brother was preparing himself against his brother, the uncle was
the first that leuelled at the nephew, and he that did slay most of his kindred
was accounted most courageous. When the tru^pets denounced the wars, and
gave a sign of fight, the Caesarians did fiercely give assault The Caesarians
give the first assault.
to the Pompeians. The force and vigor of the war did consist in the lances,
spears, and swords, which Pompey had well provided against, by joining the
targets one with another, so that Caesar had much ado to break the array: but
fearing lest his foremen should faint, he caused the transuers legions to
follow his ensign, who as it were with a sidewind aduenturing upon Po^peis
army, stroke them down on each side so fast as they went. The barded horse
being incensed with the heat of the war, his heart being boared with the
point of the spear, exempted himself from the reine. The Barbarians being not
able to restrain them gave way to Caesar, and the foming steed being now the
regent of the field, the fight was confused and disordered: for upon whom the
dart did uncertainly light, leaving their horses perforce they lay groaning and
groueling on the earth, till the hoofes of the arrearing coursers did crush the
veil of their brains. Caesar was now come to the heart and center of Pompeis
army, but the night drew on which made both sides pause: Caesar did thank his
soldiers, and gliding through every troop and band of them, he did put
nourishing oil into their burning wrath. He took view of their swords,
curiously observing whose weapon was ouerflowed with blood, and whose was
dipped at the point, whose hand did tremble and whose was steadfast, who changed
the countenance through fear, and who through fury, and casting his eyes on
the prostrate carcasses, frowning upon them with curled forehead, as not yet
satisfied he fed his irefull looks with the desolate aspect of his slain
countriemen, but if he perceived a gasp in the flesh of his own soldiers, he
would endeavor to close it up with his hand, and giving them words of comfort
and encouragement did sooner heal them then indeed they were healed. At the
dawning of the day next ensuing, and at the first entrance of that mornings
bloody hours, when the welkin had put aside the vizard of the night, the
stars being covered and the earth discovered by the Sun, Caesar giving his
soldiers new swords, new darts, spears and lances, and awaking their
courage, giving them also to understand with the point of his lance, in what
part of the adverse army the foreign kings, the Consuls, the Senators, and
the nobility were placed, directed them as it were by aim, to gage the bodies
of many excellent men, who entangling their weapons in the intrals of these
noble enemies, did throw to the ground and to extreme ruin many princely
potentates: many reverent persons were buried in go are: many of the Lepidi, of
the Metelli, of the Coruini and Torquati: but amongst the rest the fortune of
Domitius was dolorous and despitefull, he as before has been said, was once
pardoned and dismissed of Caesar, but now was singled out by Caesar and
grievously wounded, but yet so great was his mind that he would not stoop to
beg a second pardon, whom Caesar looking upon like a tyrant, and seeing him
roll his fainting members in the moistened dust, did with this bitterness
insult, giving him the Caesar his speech to Domitius.
scornful gaze: L. Domitius now I hope at length you will forsake your master
Pompey, hereafter I trust you will practice no enmity against Caesar. But as
good fortune would, he had as yet breath enough to reply in these few words.
Caesar I die a free man, and I go to the region of Proserpina, not seeing thee
as a conqueror, but as yet inferior to Pompey, and even at my death am I
refreshed with this hope, that thou live to be subdued by the rigor of
destiny, which will take revenge both for us, and for thy son in law. Having
spoken these words his life fled from him, and his sight was taken away with a
dreadful darkness, by whose wounds so much blood was not lost, as there was
glory gained. For he gave a clear token of an honorable mind, accompting it a
great deal better to have dignity without life, then life without dignity.
But Caesar thinking nothing to be done if any thing were undone, ragingly and
earnestly did seek for the person of Pompey, and rushing into the thick of
his soldiers, never stretched out his arm without deaths warrant, and never
looked back but when he saw none to fight withal. Pompey standing a far off
on the top of an hill, seeing the fields to swim with blood, and the Roman
Senate to be nothing now but an heap of carcasses, and that his own decay was
sought for by the blood of a multitude, reserving himself to some better
fortune, forsook the field and fled to Larissa. Caesar perceiving it, Pompey
flies to Larissa.
thought it better to give some rest to his army, then with a sudden pursuit
to make after him: wherefore he retired his soldiers, and came to Pompeys
tents. When the wandering night was chased from the inferior Islands by the
recoursing day, and the Sun had imparted his brightness to our
vnder-neighbors, and the dreams were ready to possess the Theater of the
fancy, the wearisome creatures of the world declining to their rest: the
Caesarians having ransacked Pompeis tents, and refreshed their fainting bodies
with the viand there left, betook themselves to their ease, and reposed their
wearied limbs in these plots which the Pompeians did before lodge in. But how
shall I describe the deformity of that night, in which hell did breath out the
ghosts of them that were slain, the air was infected with contagious vapors,
and the stars trembled at the beholding of the uncouth Stygians? Sleep did
bring no quietness unto them, but flames, murmurs, horrors, and the hideous
sounds of the skriking The dreams and visions of the Caesarians.
Harpies. The ghost of the slaughtered Roman did appear unto them, and every
man's fancy was a fiend unto him: some did think that they beheld the image of
a young man, some of an old man, others did dream that their brethren were
come to take revenge on them, but in Caesar's mind were all these terrors: the
slain Senate did seem to enco^passe him on all sides, brandishing their
fiery swords, sweating, frying and dropping with rosen and sulpher, and the
greatest torment of all was a guilty conscience. He was now molested with the
powers of hell, when his enemies that suruiued slept quietly in Larissa. Pompey
after his mishap in Pharsalie made speedy voyage toward Egypt where Ptolome
Pompey trauelleth to Egypt.
did reign: for Pompey having procured the restitutio^ of his father to the
throne of Egypt, and with many other singular benefits having deserved his
favor, thought that the young Prince in a kind regard would have entertained
him according to his honor and desert: but who does busy his memory in
recounting benefits? and who will think himself beholden to one that is
distressed? and when does not fortune change friendship? Ptolome, unthankful
Ptolome, disleagued with the senseless litargie of foul ingratitude, when by
certain report he heard that Pompey had approached to the shore, sent out his
dire and dreadful messengers to deprive the aged body of the unvanquished
mind. And when Achilles that bold butcherer did with his glaiue portend the
last end of his days, Pompey whose excellent qualities might incline a
massagite to mercy, craved with constant countenance but a word or two of
them, and as for life he was content to leave it: the savage helhound would
scarcely condescend to this request, but at length his tigers heart yielded,
and Pompey in few words wishing to the Romans liberty, to his wife comfort,
to his sons safety, was beheaded by these Pompey is beheaded by the Egyptia^s
merciless Egyptians, and his head was born as a present to Ptolome, which was
far too good a present for so lewd a prince. But how false was this world to
Pompey, who had not now earth enough for his sepulture, to whom before the
earth was too little for his conquest: but rare is that bird whose feathers do
not moult, and happy is that man whose glory does not eclipse. Caesar made
have after Pompey with an hot and earnest pursuit, not knowing that he was
praeuented of the prize which he aimed at, and as the beasts which nature has
placed in the wilderness, when poor pilgrims walk by their solitary and
uncouth dens, run all together with one rage, hunting their footsteps, every
one thinking to purchase the pray, the Lion, the Leopard, the Bear, the Beuer,
the Tiger, the Luzerne and the Wolf, making the woods to ring with hollow
outcries. So the Caesarians did enquire and make after Pompey, amazing the seas
with sounding trumpets, drums, fifes, and shawmes, and never ceased their
pursuit till they were arrived in Egypt, where they were roially entertained
of Cleopatra Caesar entertained of Cleopatra.
the Egyptian princess, who with complaint and mournful melody, did allure
Caesar, admiring her singular beauty, to tame and suppress the pride of
Ptolome, who had then deforced her from her sovereign estate. Caesar did not
deny this fair Oratresse, having already persuaded him, if her tongue had bin
silent. Mars spent a long time with Venus, and before his departure from thence
Cleopatra was another Calphurnia unto him. But why do I name Calphurnia? For
what proportion can there be betwixt a chaste matron and a shameless curtizan.
Caesar laboring to restore Cleopatra to her former dignity was suddenly
assaulted by the king of Egypt with Caesar is assaulted by the king of Egypt.
an huge army, and in that war he was driven to many extremities, the
conduit pipes were cut a sunder, and he was besieged on every side being as yet
in Cleopatraes palace, but in the end wrestling out of these misfortunes, he
gave battle to the Egyptians at Pharoes, and conueying himself into a gallie
for the defense and safeguard of his fleet which was grievously tossed, he was so
vexed and shaken by his enemies, that he was feign to leave his gally, and
swimming a great way in the river of Nilus, returned with great difficulty
Caesar swimmeth in the river of Nilus
to his army, but at the last encountering the Egyptians at Alexandria, he put
the king and his whole army to the sword: and in these wars was burnt the
notable library of Ptolomeus Philadelphus, but much against Caesar's mind, who
as he was specially learned so he made special account of that monument of
learning. Caesar having raised Cleopatra to her pristinate roialtie, departed
from Egypt and hastened toward Vtica, but in the way being informed that
Pharnaces the son of Mithridates, whom Pompey when he had finished the war
against Mithridates, had made king of Bosphorus, had subtracted from the
Romans, and achieved to himself Cappadocia, Colchis, Armenia, and part of
Pontus: Caesar sent against him Domitius Caluinus, Caesar addresseth against
Pharnaces.
whose army was discomfited by Pharnaces. Caesar did then in person make
expedition against him, and assaulting him at Zelia, caused him at the first
joining of battle to fly, and having entered Bosphorus, he was Caesar puts
Pharnaces to flight.
slain of Asander the author of his invasions. VVhilest Caesar was marching
toward Vtica, M. Cato disdaining to receive life at the hands of Caesar, and
greatly perplexed in mind that a man so rebelliously bent should have so
prosperous fortune, did with violent hands M. Cato kills himself
determine his days. Caesar having taken Vtica as he was returning to Rome,
did encounter P. Scipio on the seas, who seeking by Caesar encountreth P.
Scipio.
all warlike means to preserve the slender sparckle of his dying life, was at
length slain. and Caesar sailing from thence enshoared in Sardinia, and making
no long tarriance in that place, came the five and twentieth day of that
month, which bears his name at this day to the city of Rome, where he was
welcomed with such applause, such gratulation, with such melody, with so rare
banquets, and with so gorgious shows, that Pompeis death was not bewailed with
half so many tears, as he was entertained with joys, and for the sealing of
their good affection toward him, they did grant to him by a fourefold triumph
to enlarge his fame. A triumph was a most excellent What thing a triumph was
amongst the Romans and how performed.
honor, which the captain who by battle had overcome his enemies, returning
with his army into the city did at the first enjoy by the decree of the
Senate, and afterward by the consent of the people. It was called a triumph
because the soldiers did cry along the street as they went to the Capitolle,
Io triumph. Surely the Romans did greatly advantage themselves by the using of
these triumphs, for by them men were animated to warlike exploits. But many
think a commonweal then only to flourish, when it has peace and plenty,
but being moved with the present face of things, and not forecasting the
sequel, they slip into error, and foster in their minds fond opinions, for
plenty breeds security, security war, war desolation. The state of a
country is then to be termed prosperous, when it is thoroughly furnished with
men able and sufficient to repulse foreign forces, with the prouentions of the
earth, and other treasures of husbandry. But how can thou assure thy self
of free and peaceable inioying of the riches of thy country, the space of one
month without military discipline? For all regions except those which are
situate under the extremity of the climates, are environed with the
circumference of other nations, from which war may arise as easily, as the
wind blows from the four quarters of the world, in which dangerous accident
the first and last refuge of humane helps is the soldiers arm. Doubtless the
Romans were exquisite in all heroical desert, but in their bounty and
beneficence to soldiers incomparably excellent: for they knew, that the
provinces and Islands adjacent could not be won by home sitting, or by a
treaty of words: but they must gird their armor, confront their enemies, and
exchange blood for blood, and when these countries were conquered, and they
had tasted the sweet of the vintage, which the soldiers had gathered, they did
not reward them with sower grapes, neither powered they vinegar into their
wounds, but assigned unto them pensionarie lands, for their maintenance, and
making the^ frank allowance of ample rewards, encouraged them with crowns of
glory, triumphs, honors and dignities, so that victory flourished there where
arms were favored. Surely Princes and potentates ought with tender indulgence
to respect the infatigable pains of the soldier, lest he murmur and say when
he goes to the fight, I shall either be overcome, or slain: and so be wholly
subject to the will and disposal of mine enemy, or else be partaker of the
victory, and return into my country, as into a pitched field, where I shall
fight with penury, contempt and unthankfulness, the last of which being
either in the enemies chains, or in the number of his dead men, I should never
have felt. But if the soldiers industry be not quickened and stirred up by
bounty and reward, he has no more will to perform any part of martial
service, then a dead coarse has power to arise out of the grave. For what can
be more precious to a man then his blood, being the fountain and nurse of his
vital spirits, and the ground of his bodily substance, which no free and
ingenuous nature will loose or hazard for nothing. And in truth there is great
ods in the event, for the soldier may either be slain and so die without
receiving of his salarie, or else be wounded and die under the cure, and so
receive his stipend to the half part. This account being thus cast, it falls
out that the soldier loses all or some part, and the Prince who is his
pay-maister, saves either all or some part. And whosoever shall argument or
discourse upon found reason, and infallible experience, may easily prove and
convince, that these commo^-weales have most prospered, which have liberally
maintained and had in singular regard military arts. The mentioning of
Caesar's triumph has occasioned me to use this digression. This word Triumphus
is derived of the Greek name of Bacchus (...), who having subdued India, was
the first inuenter of this honor. Of triumphs there were two sorts observed of
the Romans, one the graund triumph, which by praeheminence was called
Triumphus, the other was the petty triumph, and was commonly called Ouatio, of
these triumphs some were done on land, some on sea, some in the city, some on
mount Albane. It was therefore called Ouatio, because the victoriate soldiers
returning from the fight did showte, and double the letter O. An Ouation did
much differ from a triumph, because he which came into the city by way of
Ouation, was neither carried in chariot, nor cladde with robe triumphall, nor
with any ornament of estate, neither did his army march before him when he was
entered the city, neither was he crowned with laurel, nor brought in with sound
of trumpets, but walked through the city on foot, his head being adorned with
a myrtle crown, his soldiers following him, and the shawmes only sounding.
How the great triumph was celebrated, may be perceived by this of Caesar's which
was thus performed.

Caius Caesar sitting in a rich and sumptuous Caesar his triumphs described.
chariot, bordred round about with the crowns of Princes, his upper garment
being of purpled tissue, and bespanged with lines of gold, his victorious army
marching before him garnished with the spoils of Europa and Afric, his
captives being bound with chains, which were tied to his chariots tail, did
represent a wonderful majesty to the gazing people: the trumpets and the
clarions did sound on each side. His first triumph displaied Caesar's first
triumph.
with a most radiant standerd, the spoils and conquests which he had in
France: the images of Rhodanus and Rhene were wrought in silver, the streams
were curiously deciphered, and the waves did seem to rise with a natural and
real flowing. In the second triumph Caesar's second triu^ph.
stood the city of Alexandria, and after it the arms of vanquished Ptolome
were blazed, the river of Nilus was painted with a fair caelestiall blew: the
azured waves being compacted of costly glass. In the third triumph Caesar's
third triumph.
was a mask of Ponticke mourners, and the coarse of Pharnaces was then carried
in triumph: upon the top of the coffin stood a triple plume, on the one part of
which was written VENI, on the other VIDI, on the third VICI. In the fourth
triumph Affrike went as captive, Caesar's fourth triumph.
and the person of Iuba king of Mauritania, his arms pictured as having
mannacles of them was then also resembled. For his victory at Pharsalia there
was no triumph, because Po^pey was a Roman. When Rome with smiling
countenance had beheld these shows, Caesar accompanied with the Roman
nobility entered the Capitolle, and there with spiced fires and fragrant odours
did sacrifice to Jupiter. After his thanks, vows, and prayers performed, he
returned with the great applause and admiration of men, and amiddest other
solemnities, Crispus Salustius did greet him with this Oration.

I know that it is a difficult and hard matter Salustes oration to Caesar.
to give counsel to a king, or Emperor, or to any man that is highly
advanced, because they have store of counselors, and there is none so wise
and wary, who can give certain advise of that which is to come. Again, bad
counselles are many times better liked then good, because fortune dallieth in
things, and fancy in men according to their pleasure. But I had a great mind
in my youth, to handle matters of state, and in knowing of them I bestowed
great labor and travel, not to this end only, that I might obtain some
place of dignity in the commonweal, which many by evil arts and unlawful
means have compassed, but that I might also fully know the estate of the
commonweal, as well in peace as in war, and how much by munition, by men,
and by money it could do. Therefore tossing many things in my mind this was my
resolution, to praeferre thy dignity Caesar before mine own fame, and
modesty, and to put anything in practice so I might procure glory to thee.
And this I did not rashly or to flatter thee, but because in thee amongst the
rest, I find one skill very marvelous, that thy mind has been greater in
adversity, then in prosperity. But with others it is a matter of more account
and reckening, that men be sooner weary with praising thy valor, then thy
selfart wearied with doing things worthy of praise. Surely I hold it for a
rule, that nothing can be fet from the depth of invention, which is not ready
to thy thought. And if this purpose should only reign in thy breast to deliver
thy self from the fury of enemies, and how thou may retain the favor and
good liking of the people, thou should do a thing unworthy of thy virtue. But
if that mind be as yet resident in thee, which from the beginning disturbed the
faction of seditious men, which brought the Romans from the heavy yoke of
servitude unto liberty, which without weapons did confound the armies of thine
enemies, whereof have ensued so many and so glorious acts both at home and
abroad, that thy foes cannot complain of any thing but of thine excellency,
then receive from me such things, as of the sum or state of the commonweal
I shall deliver: which doubtless thou shall either find to be true, or else
certainly not far from the truth. There is no man brought up in a free
estate, who does willingly yield superiority to another, and though the
mightier man be by nature of a good and mild disposition, yet because when he
will he may be wicked and injurious, he is therefore feared: which happens
because many great men are peruersly minded, and think themselves so much the
safer, by how much more they do permit other me^ over whom they rule, to be
wicked and unjust. But surely a contrary course should be taken, when the
Prince is good himself, to labor and endeavor likewise to make the people
good. For every bad fellow does most unwillingly bear a governor, but this to
thee Caesar is of greater difficulty, then to others who have ruled before
thee: thy war has been more mild then the peace of other me^: besides they
which did overcome, do demand the spoil, they which are overcome are their
fellow citizens. Through these difficulties must thou pass. And strengthen the
commonweal for succeeding posterity, not by weapons, nor as against enemies,
but which is far greater and more difficult, by peaceable means. Therefore
to this point the state of things does call every man either of great or of
mean wisdom, to utter as much good as he can concerning this matter. For
mine own part this I think, that as by thee the victory shall be qualified
and ordered, so shall all things follow. Thou did wage battle noble Caesar
with an excellent man, of great power, and desirous of glory, a man of greater
fortune then wisdom, followed by some few, enemies both to thee and to
themselves, such as either affinity did draw unto him, or some other bond of
duty: for none of them was partaker of his dominatio^, Pompey could not brook
an equal.
which he could not tolerate. For if he could have brooked an equal, the
world had not been set on fire with war: but because thou art desirous to
establish peace, and upon this anuill thou and thy friends do continually
beat, consider I pray thee of what nature the thing is whereof you consult.
Certainly I have this conceit, that because all things which have beginning
must have end, when the fate and determined lot of destruction shall fall upon
this city, that our citizens will contend and make war against their fellow
citizens, and so being wearied and consumed will become a pray to some
foreign king or nation: otherwise, not the whole world, nor all the people
under the arch of the heavens being mustred or assembled together, shall be
able to shake or crush this flourishing commonweal. Therefore the good
effects of concord are to be maintained, and the evils of discord to be
banished and driven away: that may easily come to pass, if thou abridge the
license of riotous spending, and injurious extorting, because young gentlemen
in these times are inured to such a fashion, that they think it a glorious
matter vainly to mispend their own goods and the goods of other me^, denying
nothing to their own lust, nor to the shameless request of their lewd
companions: and their restless mind having entered into a crooked way, and
dissolute course, when their maintenance fails them, and wonted supplies are
wanting, do conceive a burning indignation against their fellow citizens, and
turn all things out of course. In that commo^weale all things are well
ordered, where offices and dignities are not sold, and where ambition enjoys
not the rewards of virtue: this and all other evils shall cease when money shall
cease to be honored, where riches are precious, there all good things are
vile: faith, honesty, modesty, chastity, because there is but one way to
virtue, and that is hard and rough, but to money there be many smooth ways: it
is gained as well by evil as by good means. Covetousness is a savage and
devouring beast, immane, and intolerable: which way so ever it wendeth, it
wastes, and destroys towns, fields, temples and houses: it mingleth holy
and humane things together: neither arms nor walls can stop the course of it.
It spoileth and bereaueth men of fame, children, country and parents: but if
thou debase the high account of money, the force of covetousness by good
manners will be abated. I have by reading found, that all kingdoms, cities,
and nations have so long enjoyed a prosperous estate, whilst true advise did
prevail in them: but whenever favor, fear, or pleasure was the stern or
motive of their counsels, then their wealth was first diminished, next their
dominion abridged, and lastly, their liberty impeached. Wherefore I beseech
and exhort thee renowned Caesar, that thou would not suffer such a goodly
dominion as this to be tainted with rust, or by discord rented in pieces. If
that thing happen, neither night nor day will appease the storms of thy mind,
but by dreams being rowzed from thy bed, thou shall be chased and pursued with
continual cares. I have dispatched in few such things as I accounted honorable
for thee Caesar, and necessary for this commonweal. The most part of men to
judge of others, have sufficient conceit, at least in their own conceit, and
to reprove an other man's deeds or words, every man's mind does burn with
desire. They think their throat is not wide enough, nor their tongue glib
enough to pour out of their breasts their malicious exceptions, to whose
censure that I am subject, does so little shame me, that it would have grieved
me to have been silent: for, whether it shall please thee to follow this course
or some better, I shall not be moved: since I have spoken as much as my
barrenness could bring forth. It remains for me and for us all to wish,
that such things as thou shall in wisdom effect, the gods would prosper.
Caesar afterward to match his four triumphs, was made the fourth time Consul:
his statue The great honors bestowed upon Caesar.
also was placed amongst the statues of the ancient kings: in the Senat-house
there was a throne of iuorie made for him: in the theater his room was such,
as it contained pleasure, pomp, and cost: his image was exquisitly painted in
the Orchester, a place wherein the Roman gentlemen did use to dance and
vaut: the month of July was then also consecrated to Julius, as the month of
March is to Mars. Caesar did not rest in these honors, but thought still to
propagate his fame by warlike exploits. Wherefore hearing that Po^peis sons
did raise great tumults and vprores in Spain, he made great have thitherward,
and at the town of Civil opposed himself to Cn. Caesar fights with Cn.
Po^peius the younger at the city of Civil.
Pompeius one of the sons of Pompey the Great, who was constrained to fly,
but Labienus met him at unawares, and having slain him, brought his head to
Caesar. Sex. Pompeius his brother escaped by flight.



ATROPOS, Or the third Book.
THe war in Spain being quickly dispatched, Caesar returned to Rome: and the
Romans did redouble his The Romans bestow many honors upon Caesar.
honors, for he was presently made Dictator perpetual, Censor perpetual,
Consul for ten years, and Emperor of Rome: he was called also the father of
his country. But Caesar's fortunes did soon after begin to decline, and these
diverse colored titles were but as reinebowes, which do glitter gallantly for
a time, but are suddenly extinct: his fatal hour was now approaching, and
envy stayed in the clouds expecting his end. But as a mighty and huge oak,
being clad with the exuuials and trophes of enemies, fenced with an army of
boughs, garnished with a coat of bark as hard as steel, despises the force
and power of the winds, as being only able to dally with the leaves, and not
to weaken the root; but the Northern wind that strong champion of the airie
region, secretly lurking in the vault of some hollow cloud, does first murmur
at this aspiring oak, and then does strike his crest with some greater
strength, and lastly with the deepest breath of his lungs does blow up the
root. So undoubtedly was it with Caesar, who disdained fear, and thought it a
great deal better to die then to think on misfortune: but destiny is no man's
drudge, and death is every man's conqueror, matching the scepter with the spade,
and the crowned king with the praislesse peasant. As none was more noble then
Caesar, so nothing was more notable, then the death of Caesar: for his dearest
friends became his greatest enemies, and their hands plucked him down, whose
shoulders did lift him up. Many causes were pretended of the The causes of the
conspiracy bent against Caesar.
conspiracy bent against him, the honors which were bestowed upon him, being
both many and great, did cause him to be envied of the Nobles: and likewise it
was a matter of cavil, because sitting before temple of Venus genitrix the
Senate coming to him to consult with him of great affairs, he did sit and
welcome them, and did not rise unto them: another occasion of quarrel was,
because M. Antonius would have set a Diadem upon his head: the fourth cause
was, because he deprived Epidius, Metellus, and Cesetius Flauius of the
Tribuneship: fifthly it was greatly murmured, because it was constantly
reported, that L. Cotta Quindecemuir that is a co^templatiue reader of
Sybillaes prophecies, would pronounce sentence, that because it was contained
in the prophecies of Sybilla, that the Parthians could not be overcome but by a
king, therefore Caesar should be highted the king of Rome. For these causes a
conspiracy being raised against him, in which the chief agents of the
Pompeians, were M. Brutus and C. Cassius, and of the Caesarians D. Brutus and
C. Trebonius, in the Ides of March, and in the Caesar is slain in the
Senat-house
Senate House, which was called Pompeyes court, he was pierced with three and
twenty wounds, which because they were many, and most of them were in the
belly, and about the midrife, Caesar as ashamed of such wounds, did let down
his robe from his shoulders to cover them, and fell as a sacrifice under the
statue of Cn. Pompeius Magnus. M. Antonius M* Antonius is spared at the time
when Caesar is slain.
and other friends of Caesar, were spared by the advice of M. Brutus, lest they
might seem rather to be authors of a faction, then of Caesar's death. After
this bloody exploit, they by who^ he was slain, held the Capitolle. I cannot
give Brutus praise for this, but I rather think that he deserves dispraise:
for had the cause of quailing him been just, yet the course and manner of
killing him, does apparently seem unlawful: for by that act the law Portia
was broken, The law Portia broken by the killing of Caesar.
by which it was provided, that it should not be lawful for any to put to
death any citizen of Rome indicta causa. The law Cornelia The law Cornelia
broken by the killing of Caesar.
de maiestate was also violated, by which it was made high treason, for any man
to take any advise, or make any conspiracy, whereby a Roman Magistrate, or
he which had a sovereign power, without judicial process might suffer death.
And that ancient law was also despised, by which it was forbidden, that no
Senator should enter into the Senate House armed with any warlike weapon, or
having about him any edged tool. Surely they that will end tumult with
tumult, can never be seized of good success or fortunate eue^t: for discord
may breed, continue and augment contention, but it can never end it: and to
expect that all differences should be calmely compounded by general accord, is
a thing not much to be hoped for, because it seldom happens. M. Brutus, the
chief actor in Caesar's tragedy, was in counsel deep, in wit profound, in
plot politic, and one that hated the principality whereof he deuested Caesar.
But did Brutus look for peace by bloodshed? did he think to avoid tyranny by
tumult? was there no way to wound Caesar, but by stabbing his own conscience?
and no way to make Caesar odious, but by incurring the same obloquie? Will
any man speak unto me of the wisdom of Brutus, when he thinks upon the
field of Philippi, wherein Brutus was like to the Comet, who feeding upon
vapors and vain opinions, at length consumed and confounded himself: and thus
were the two Bruti, I mean the first and the last, famous men of that
honorable name, both fatal to the estate of the Roman Commonweal: for the
former of them did expel the last king of the Romans, and the later did
murder their first Emperor. But if Caesar's death had been attended, till
natural dissolution, or just proceeding had caused it, his nephews entry into
the monarchy might well have been barred and intercepted: because these honors
were annexed and appropriated to Caesar's person. And if patience might have
managed their wisdoms, though there had been a Caesar, yet should there never
have been an Augustus. But by bloodshed to seek for peace, is by oil to
quench fire. When any innovation or alteration is to be hatched, the state of
things must be quiet and secure, that the wheel may be easily turned about,
without hearing any noise. For to commit the murder of a sovereign Magistrate,
and to defend thy self by arms, is as if a man should cover himself by water
from a shower of rain, or should descend into some hollow of the earth for
avoiding of infectious air: and if the most barbarous and immaine tyrant,
should trecherously, that is without warrant of justice be slaughtered, though
at his death he were utterly destitute of friends, yet his enemies should be
sure to find enemies: for no co^mon-weale can be without men of aspiring
humors, and when such a murder is wrought they find present occasion to
tumultuate, knowing that Anarchie breeds confusion, and that it is best
fishing in a troubled stream: making a glorious praetence to revenge the death
of a Prince, though in heart and in truth, they bear greater affection to the
monarchy remaining, then to the Monarke who is taken away: neither in regard
of supreme power and praeheminence, will I put diversity between the person
of a king and a tyrant; for he which attaineth to an imperial or regal
sovereignty, by warlike industry and victorious exploit, is no less a
Monarke, then he which comes to it by election, succession or descent: and he
that is made subject by sword, is as much subject as he that by birth is a
denison. But was Julius Caesar a tyrant? Surely there was more tyranny in the
slaughter then in the man slain: Caesar I grant was a traitor to the State
before the victory, but after he exchanged that base name, with the best title
of dignity, and of a traitor became an Emperor: yet did he not aggrauate to
himself that type of honor, the people offered it unto him, he accepted it with
thanks: many had offended him, he pardoned them, yea rewarded them with great
bou^tie. He was content to have a fellow Consul, he suspected none of them
which were the workmen of his death, he did neither depresse the Noble man by
slander, nor advance them of obscure condition by flattery and bribes: and
which is inco^patible to tyranny, he showed self-will in nothing, when he was
invested with supremacy; but questionless the Romans should not have
nourished this lion in their City, or being nourished, they should not have
disgraced him. The goared body of Caesar Caesar his body is transported to
Ca^pus Martius.
was honorably transported to Campus Martius. Afterward M. Cicero because he
was desirous to restore peace, and to reconcile the states, procured a decree
to be made after the example of the Athenians, which they called their
Amnestia, that the killing of Caesar should be forgotten and forgiven, and this
was ratified by Senate. But the conspirors would not in any wise lay aside
their armor, unless they might have certain assurance and security that
their persons, lands, and goods should be safe and untouched. Wherefore for
pledges they had the sons of M. Antonius, and M. Lepidus, and then they
descended out of the Capitolle. C. Octauius hearing of the great change that
had happened in Rome, came as some say from Epirus, as others from Apollonia,
to whom I rather agree: but he was welcome to all sides and sects. And by the
testament of his uncle, who had adopted him to be his heir, he took the name
of Julius Caesar. M. Lepidus was at that time made Pontifexmaximus in Caesar's
place. The Senate did assign the province of Syria to Dolabella, and Macedonia
to Antonius: but afterward when M. Antonius did show himself too imperious, and
would have resigned his charge in Macedonia, and have been Praesident of
France, he suffered a repulse of the Senate, whereupon he The Senate incensed
against M. Antonius.
appealed to the people, which did greatly incense the Senate against him, and
Octauius was also grievously displeased with him, because Octauius becomes an
enemy to Antonius.
craving his assistance against the enemies of his uncle, he was in gross and
odious terms abused of Antonius: Octauius therefore by the assent of the
Senate, being accompanied with his uncles veteranes, prepared war against
him. D. Brutus to whom the province of France was committed by Caesar, and
after his death confirmed to him by the Senate, that he might resist Antonius,
who was then making toward France, came with an army to Mutina, and there
suffered himself to be besieged. D. Brutus suffers himself to be besieged by
Antonius.
The Senate did afterward send messengers to Antonius, to treat with him of
peace, which were L. Piso, L. Philippus, and Seruius Sulpitius. But when they
returned without co^cluding any thing, war was proclaimed, and Hirtius being
Consul went against him, Octauius as Propraetor, Pansa the other Consul followed
them within a few days after. Caesar and Hirtius having brought Bononia into
their power, did pitch their tents near to Antonius, who leaving a sufficient
army to beat them from the walls of the town wherein his forces were, did
privily and closely go from thence to meet with Pansa, as he was coming to
Bononia, with whom he entered battle, and M. Antonius sighteth with Pansa.
had a prosperous victory, but as he was retur (...) will not do it. The
Pompeians were in truth wedded to too much partiality, for why had Brutus the
glory of triumph, unless it were because his life was saved by other men's
valor? And why were the bodies of Pansa and Hirtius solemnly and honorably
enterred, and Caesar who was living, and partaker of the victory nothing
regarded? Nay they did apparently despise him. For, sending messengers they
enioined them to parle with his soldiers and leave Octauius unspoken to: but
they did with great choler answer, that they would not hear any thing unless
their General were present. This perverse and preposterous dealing made
Octauius to enter the City in warlike manner, and as an enemy unto them, and
there he made himself Consul, and Q. Pedius his colleague. M. Cicero did then
M. Cicero does greatly commend Octauius.
in public assemblies greatly commend and extol Octauius, but he spoke one
thing and meant another: for if dangers had been once past, Ciceroes tongue
would have turned another way. Wise and circumspect he was to prevent a
mischief, but timorous and fearful to withstand it when it was befallen.
Afterward affinity was contracted betwixt Antonius and Caesar, for Caesar
took to wife Clodia Caesar takes Clodia to wife.
the step-daughter of Antonius. He was Consul before he was of the age of
twenty years, and in that Consulship held nothing in so curious charge, as to
take revenge upon the enemies of his adoptiue father: wherefore he requested Q.
Pedius his colleague to enquire of them by whose conspiracy he was slain, and
thereupon M. Brutus, C. Cassius and D. Brutus being absent were condemned. D.
Brutus to whom the Senate had committed the dealing with Antonius, being
forsaken of D Brutus is slain.
his army fled to Aquileia and was there slain. But the estate of the
Commonweal at that time shall appear by an Epistle of M. Brutus written to
C. Cassius, which I have here set down: whereby a man may learn how to
moderate and demean him self in common calamities, when justice is turned out
of course and the laws are silent. It was to this effect. M. Brutus to C.
Cassius sends commendations; according to covenant and promise my Cassius, I
write unto thee such news as I have received from Rome. Octauius as I hear,
has married himself to the daughter of Fuluia the wife of Antonius, for which
marriage, I am neither very glad, nor greatly sorry: many use such marriages as
pledges of reconciliation, and think them of sufficient force to change hatred
into love, but are greatly deceived. For it is one thing to make alliance, and
another to make amity, since they proceed from several causes, and having a
different course, must needs produce diverse effects, for allia^ce grows, by
bringing one kindred to the marches of another; but friendship either by long
conuersing together, or by a grounded opinion of good desert, or by likeness
of qualities where there is no inequality of estate: and he that seeks
friendship out of these praecincts, will never find it. Therefore by such
marriage emnitie will not fully cease, nor friendship firmly be setteled: for
it is rather a mean betwixt these two extremes, then either a mother to the
one, or a stepdame to the other. I received letters lately Antonius writes co^
tumelious letters to Brutus and Cassius.
from M. Antonius, directed to us (whereof I have sent you here enclosed a
copy) very contumelious, minatorie, and not worthy to be sent from him, to
us: but his threatenings I do not much regard. For amongst free men the
authority of him that threatens, is no more, then the law will permit: for
mine own part I could wish that he were great in the Commonweal, so he were
honest. I will not provoke him to emnitie, but will always praeferre the
liberty of my country, before his friendship: he obiecteth to us often the
death of Caesar, but he should consider how small a time Caesar reigned, not
how little while he lived. And Octauius forsooth digesting at length, the hollow
conditions of his father in law, seems greatly to stomach that we bost so
much of the Ides of March, when notwithstanding only one man was slain: yet
not so much as he vanteth of the Nones of December, at which time he
slaughtered more then one. Cicero once thought that the Commo^weale as a naked
orphane should be protected by arms, but now he praeferreth an unjust peace
before a just war: wherein he shows how unjust he is: he is fortunes page,
and favors them most who have most fauourors. A wise man, though by
opportunity he do alter his pace, yet still keeps his way, serves time for
advantage not for fear, and as the sun sets to rise again, so he
changes his course to continue his purpose: but to an unconstant man every
accident is a co^stellation, by which he is diuersified and driven from the
center of his thoughts. Though Octauius call Cicero father, use him kindly,
praise him, thank him, yet it will appear that his words are contrary to his
meaning: for what is more auerse from common sense, the^ to call him father
whom he will not fuffer to be free? By these lineame^ts I have shadowed unto
thee my Cassius the fickleness and lubricitie of Ciceroes variable mind, which
as it is not certain to himself, so it is not safe to us: let him live as he
does adulatoriously and abiectly: to me which am opposed to the thing it self,
that is, to a kingly regiment, extraordinary rule, domination and superiority
which would extol it self above the laws, no subjection can be such as that I
may brook it. There can be no valiant nor free mind without constancy, neither
can any thing be glorious without the judgment of reason. In the business of
the commonweal I would have nothing done, without the constitution and decree
of the Senate and people, neither will I arrogantly praeiudicate, or boldly
retractate that which they shall hereafter do, or heretofore have done, but I
account it more consonant to the good estate of the co^mon-weale, rather with
pity to mollify the miserable estate of distressed persons, then by granting
every thing to the desire of the mighty, to inflame their lust and
insolency. Surely the Senators are many times deceived in their hope, and if
a man have done one thing well, they presently yield and permit all things unto
him, as though a mind corrupted by their largess, and liberal offers, might
not be traduced and carried away to evil purposes and attempts: but they may
not bestow any thing which to men evil disposed may be either a praesident or
a protection, and I am afraid that Octauius by his late Consulship, do think
him self to have ascended higher, then that he will descend: for if Antonius
by the death of Julius Caesar took praesent occasion of tyrannising, how much
more will Octauius usurp, when both Senate and people do applaud to his
affection. Neither will I commend the facility and providence of the Senate in
this behalf, before I haueful experience, that Octauius will content himself,
with the ordinary honors that he has received: but if it otherwise happen, I
must needs pronounce the Senate guilty of the fault, which they might well
have praeuented. Yet if this young man do lay aside sinister and affectious
humors, and imbarke himself into the common cause with impartial thoughts, I
shall then think that the Commonweal will be able to support it self, by
her own strength and sinews, that is justice and integrity; and that
thenceforth, no offense, shall either be cruelly revenged, or dissolutely
remitted. Of our future affairs this is my determinate resolution, so it may
obtain thy approbation; if things happen to be in better plight we will
return to Rome, if the estate be as now it is, we will live as now we do, in
voluntary exile: if it decline from bad to worse, we must fly to arms as our
last and worst refuge, wherefore Cassius do not faint, nor despair, let the
hope of good things encourage thee, virtue only is confident. From Smyrna 17.
Kalend. April.

Caesar when by no mean he could be revenged of Brutus, who was Praesident of
Macedonia, and Cassius who had the regiment of Syria; he sent for M. Antonius
and M. Lepidus who were then in France, and they three meeting at Bononia, had
conference of ordering and disposing the common affairs, and there they agreed
to be Treuiri, for the constitution of the commonweal for five years space.
To the charge of Lepidus Spain and Gallia Narbonensis were allotted, to M.
Antonius the other parts of France, to Caesar Libia, Sicilia, and Sardinia.
After these consultations they came to Rome, and assigned offices to whom it
pleased them, asking no leave either of people or Senate. At that time many
excellent Lords and Gentlemen were proscribed, together with an hundred and
thirty Senators, among whom was L. Paulus the brother of M. Lepidus, L. Caesar
the uncle of Antonius, and he who did so much praise Cicero is put to death.
Octauius M. Cicero. But that was done by the venomous rancor of Antonius, by
whose means he was beheaded, and the head was Fuluiaes despiteful dealing with
Ciceroes tongue.
served in mease unto him, which when Fuluia the impudent wife of Antonius had
espied, plucking and renting from the chaps his golden tongue, she distained it
with the spittle and foam of her mouth, she pricked it with needles, launced it
with her nails, brayed it with her fist, racked it with her arms, and stamped
it with her feet. Foolish and senseless anger, to inflict revenge upon a thing
that was senseless, and for the misliking of the man, to hate the dead part of
his body. But thou did nothing Antonius (for the indignation of posterity
will rise against thee) thou did nothing by taking away the public voice of
the City and that all-pleasing tongue. Thou have dispoiled Cicero of a poor
remnant of days, thou have pared away his old age, thou have caused him to be
slain, when he wished for death, but his fame and the glory of his virtues
and excellent learning, thou art so far from abridging, that thou have
augmented it: he lives and shall live by the memory of all ages, and whilst
the frame of this world shall stand, and this body of nature shall continue,
which that only Roman did in mind contemplate, by wit understand, and by
eloquence describe, the commendation of Cicero shall always accompany it, the
succeding wits shall wonder at his writings, and every man's doom shall
condemn thy cruelty. But the misery of these times none can sufficiently
deplore, so impossible it is to express it by words. But this is to be noted,
that the care of wives toward their husbands, that were proscribed, was
marvelous, and in the highest degree: the fidelity of their freemen but
indifferent, the loyalty of their bondmen very slender, the love of their
children none at all, so grisly and loathsome is adversity to a man's own
bowels. Cassius hearing of the great tumults of Rome, went from Syria to Smyrna
in Asia, where M. Brutus was, to take advise of the ordering of the battle
against M. Antonius, and C. Octauius, who they heard did make expedition
against them. Wherefore Cassius having overcome the Rhodians, and
Ariobarzanes, and Brutus having subdued the Patareans, the Lycians, and other
nations of Asia, which did before molest them, they hasted to Macedonia that
they might there wage battle. And thither not long after came Caesar, and M.
Antonius with a huge host, and before the city of Philippi they faced their
enemies with the tents. That fight was very fierce and very doubtful, for
Brutus put Caesar to flight, and Antonius Cassius, and each of their tents was
ransacked of the victor. C. Cassius when Brutus, who he feared was slain,
returned a far off, with his horsemen, thinking that they were the enemies
that pursued him, did work his own death by the hand of one of his retinue.
Within a few days after M. Brutus being overcome in another battle, and
ouerborne with despair, enforced Strabo that fled with him to slay him with
his sword: which act, many noble Romans to the number of forty did imitate.
There were never any to whom fortune did sooner approach, the^ to Brutus and
Cassius: and never any from whom she did more suddenly fly: Cassius was the
better Captain, Brutus the better Counselor, Brutus was more to be loved,
Cassius to be feared, because the one excelled in virtue, the other in valor.
Who if they had conquered in this fight, it would have been more expedient for
the Romans to have been ruled by Brutus then Cassius, by how much it was more
safe to them in the end to be governed by Octauius then Antonius. The year
following there grew discord between Caesar and L. Antonius Consul, and Fuluia
wife to M. Antonius. They were offended with Caesar, because he shared that
part of Macedonia to his soldiers which M. Antonius should have had. Fuluia
was the more earnest against Octauius, because he had conceived a deep
displeasure against her daughter, and had thereupon divorced her. Caesar was
likewise incensed against Antonius, because he would not send to him that
supply of soldiers, which he ought to have. Antonius therefore in his brothers
quarrel, maintained war, Fuluia leagued unto him held Praeneste, and there
she behaved her self as the other Consul, co^temning P. Seruilius who was
indeed Consul, being like to a woman in nothing but only in sex: L. Antonius
with an hostile invasion entered the city of Rome, the army of M. Lepidus, who
was left there as warden of the City being discomfited, and afterward
departing thence toward France, was intercepted by Caesar, who besieged him a
long time at Perusia, in the country of Hetruria, Caesar besieges Perusia
and oftentimes making an eruption and suffering a repulse, he was constrained
to submit him self, whom Caesar pardoned, but many of the Senators and Roman
Knights were sacrificed upon the altar of Julius Caesar. He destroyed Perusia,
and having brought into his power all the army of the contrary side ended
that war, Cn. Domitius Caluinus, and C. Asinius Pollio being Consuls, Pollio
The praise of Asinius Pollio.
was a man of notable gifts, who howsoever matters befell, was loved of all
sorts of men. Julius Caesar did make great reckening and account of him, after
his death the enemies of Caesar did greatly favor him, M. Antonius had him in
singular aestimation, Octauius held him near unto his heart, an excellent
scholar, and a worthy soldier the only object of the learned, whom both in
prose and poemes, they have condignely commended, so that I need not to
proceed in his praises, this is my only doubt, whether he were more to be
extolled for his laudable qualities, then admired for his rare and wonderful
fortune; he was not long before with Antonius in Egypt, but seeing him so
vainly besotted with the love of Cleopatra, seeing him knight of the Cannapee,
who was erst Lord of the field, being ashamed of him as he was a Roman,
ashamed of him as a General, ashamed of him as now an unworthy companion for
Pollio, he left him in Egypt with his concubine, and came to Rome. Afterward
Caesar and Lepidus fell at variance, so that Lepidus was compelled to surrender
all his authority, and to stand to Caesar's mercy for his life. Caesar Octauius
Caesar fights with Sex. Po^peius
did then fight with Sex. Pompeius on the sea. Pompey being there overcome fled
to Sicilie, and afterward into Asia, and as he was preparing war against
Antoni, he was taken of M. Titius, Antonius his Lieutenant, by who^ he was
slain. The last civil war which was betwixt the Romans was that which was
fought by Caesar against Antoni at Actium. The occasion of emnitie betwixt them
was thus, Antonius did reprove Caesar because he had taken to himself the army
of Lepidus and that which followed Sex. Pompeius, which ought to have been
common to them three. Caesar did object to Antonius, that he did keep Egypt
without lawful commission, that he caused Sex. Pompeius to be slain without
his consent, that he cast Artauasdes a Prince, leagued with the Romans, and
taken by treachery, into prison, and dishonored him, with gyues and fetters, to
the great infamy of the Romans, that he was more familiar with Cleopatra then
became an honest man, that he had bestowed too great gifts upon her, that he
had called Caesar's surmised bastard begotten of Cleopatra, Caesarion, to the
great disgrace of that house. These things privately by letters and publicly
by messengers, were mentioned by mutual objection. Octauius reads the
testament of M. Antonius.
Caesar afterward did read Antonius his testament in the open Senate, which
came to his hands by this mean. Certain soldiers which did fly from
Antonius to him, told him that the authentike will or testament of M. Antonius,
did remain in the custody of the Virgins vestall, of whom Caesar did obtain
it, the tenor and form whereof was thus.

I M. Antonius one of the three states of The testament of M. Antonius.
Rome, and the son of M. Antonius, do by this my last will and testament make
and ordain Philadelphus and Alexander my sons by Cleopatra, the heirs of
all my wealth and substance, which I had by descent from M. Antonius my father;
but with this clause, and upon this condition, that if I die in Rome or
elsewhere, they shall solemnly convey my body to Alexandria in Egypt, and
bestow it there in a marble sepulcher, which by this my will shall be made for
my self and Cleopatra the Queen of Egypt. But if they fail of this or do
otherwise, without lawful or urgent cause, then I will that all these things
which I leave unto my aforesaid sons, be converted to the use and behoof of
the Nuns of Vesta, and my ghost shall implore the assistance of the
Po^tifex-Maximus, and the priests of Jupiter which are in the Capitol, to
solicit the spirits of vengeance to punish the unthankfulness of my sons, and
then I ordain and will, that the Pontifex Maximus shall cause my body to be
reposed in a convenient sepulcher, within the walls of this city, and I will
also that as many bondslaues as be now in my power, shall presently after my
death be manumitted and made free by the Praetor; and to every of my other
servants I bequeath a Sestertian, and a mourning garment. Lastly, I do
pronounce by this my last will and testament, that Caesarion the son of
Cleopatra, is the true, certain, and undoubted son of C. Julius Caesar. And
to the aforesaid Cleopatra, I give all my wealth and treasure, that I have
gained, purchased and achieved either in war or in peace. Done by me M.
Antonius vj. kal. Iul. Ap. Claudius, C. Norbanus Coss.

When the people of Rome had heard the purport of this testament, they thought
that Antonius his drift, was to give Rome to Cleopatra, for a special favor,
for which cause they were maruellously moved against Antonius. Caesar did
behave him self in this matter very wisely and warily, for in words he
praetended war against Cleopatra only, and caused it to be proclaimed by the
heralt, that the Egyptian Queen did intend the suppressing of the Romans.
That was done by Caesar, to the end that he might avoid the hatred of many
noble men, who did rather affect Antonius then him. But when Antonius for the
love of Cleopatra would neither come into the city to render account of his
doings, nor depose his Triumuiracie, but was wholly busied in praeparing war
against Italy, Caesar did furnish himself as well for sea as for land: he
therefore gathered many soldiers out of Spain, France, Lybia, Sardinia and
Sicilia. Antonius likewise did make an army of Asians, Thracians, Macedonians,
Graecia^s, Egyptians and Cyrenians. And in the year following C. Caesar and
M. Messalla being Consuls, Antonius and Cleopatra at Actium a promontorie of
Epirus, encountered Caesar, who having prosperous success in many battles
against them, as well on sea as on land, they being at length overcome fled to
Alexandria in Egypt. Caesar did sacrifice all the Octauius Caesar sacrifiseth
all the Pinnases to Apollo.
pinasses which he had taken in war, to Apollo, who was worshipped at Actium,
as a monument of thankfulness for his victory, and did also institute a five
years solemnity, which was called the solemnity of Actium, besides this he
built a fair temple to Apollo, and in the place where his tents were pitched
Octauius builds Nicopolis.
he founded a great city called Nicopolis, the city of victory. Asinius
Pollio did still praeserue the ancient amity that was betwixt him and M.
Antonius, for when Caesar at his departing from Rome, requested him that he
would join with him, in his wars against Antonius, he made this answer: The
benefits of Antonius toward me, will not permit me to be an enemy unto him,
and my merits at the hands of Antonius be far otherwise, the^ that Antonius
should be an enemy unto me, wherefore leaving both and leaning to neither, I
will stay here in Italy, and be the spoil of the conqueror. Caesar did
afterward besiege Antonius and Cleopatra at Alexandria, where Antonius being in
a most desperate plight, being in no possibility to recover Caesar's favor,
and hearing by a false rumor, that Cleopatra was slain, did suddenly stab
himself. Caesar took Alexandria, and with it Cleopatra, but because she would
not grace Octauius so much as to be led in triumph by Cleopatra killed by
Aspwormes.
him, she put Aspes to her breasts, and was by them done to death, though her
keeper had praecise charge to look carefully unto her. Egypt was then brought
by Caesar into the form of a province, and having made Cornelius Gallus
Praesident there, he came to Rome, where he had a triple triumph, the one of
Dalmatia, which he brought to conformity after his war finished against Sex.
Pompeius, the other of Actium, the third of Alexandria. When Caesar with the
great applause and gratulation of the Romans had pacified the whole praecinct
of the world, and for that cause had shut the temple of Ianus the third time,
and an augurie of safety was celebrated, which two things were never done but
when the whole Empire was in quietness, he purposed to depose the Empirie, and
to bring the commonweal to a good and perfect constitution. To depose the
Empirie, M. Agrippa did persuade him, but Maecaenas did dissuade him, whose
opinion he yielded unto. Wherefore endeavoring by law to confirm the Empirie,
and to win the favor and good aestimation, as well of the Nobles and Senators,
as of the people, he burnt all the letters which the citizens that were then in
Rome or out of Rome had written to Antonius, lest any Senator who did follow
Antonius his faction, should think himself to be hated of Caesar for that
cause, and so should attempt some mischief against him: he relieved the common
stock, which was greatly wasted by civil wars, with his own private
wealth, and them that were indebted to the common treasury, the bills of debt
being burnt with his own hands, he did free from the danger of the roll.
And whereas many things were done, in the tumults and seditions of the
citizens, against law and custom by Lepidus and Antonius, he did repeal them
by an Edict, and made his sixth Consulship, which he then enjoyed to be the
death-day of these laws; by which means when he had worthily drawn unto him
the hearts of the people, yet in one thing he pleased them above the rest,
which was done rather of policy the^ of plain meaning: for having singled
out a great number of Senators, whose love toward him was specially approved,
in a very frequent Senate, he did offer to surrender the Empire into the hands
of the Senators and people. But some of the Senators, because they suspected
that his words differed from his meaning, some because they did fear greater
danger by a popular estate, others because they feared his displeasure, if
they should agree unto it, they did with one voice refuse the offer, and joined
in earnest suit and humble petition unto him, that he would be the sole
governor and absolute Emperor of Rome, and for that cause they did decree
that the stipe^d of those who did guard his person should be doubled, that he
might be in more safety by that mean, both to his friends and to the
co^monweale. When by the frank assent of the Senate and people, he had thus,
not confirmed the ancient Empirie, but in deed created a new Monarchy, that
he might seem popular, he was content to charge him self with the weighty
affairs of the Empire: but the authority and dignity thereof he did
communicate with the people: and therefore unto the Senate and people he did
allot Numidia, Asia, Graecia, Epirus, Dalmatia, Macedonia, Sicilia, Creta,
Cyrene, Bythinia, Pontus, Sardinia and Hispania Betica: which were the more
peaceable and quiet countries. To himself he took the other parts of Spain,
and all France, Narbonensis, Lugdunensis, Aquitanica Celtica, likewise
Germania, Coelosyria, Phoenicia, Cyprus and Egypt. And that he might void out
of their minds all suspicion of Monarchy, the supreme authority that was
assigned to him he did only restrain to ten years continuance. The Romans did
bestow diverse honors upon Caesar, planting before the door of his Court a Bay
tree, on The Romans plant a bay tree before Octauius his door*
the top whereof they set a wreath of oaken boughs, signifying that he was the
man that had both overcome their enemies, and set their city in safety. They
decreed also that his Court should be called a Palace, so that in what region
soever the Roman Emperor did soiourne, his Court was called a Palace, and
that he should be called Augustus. For when many would have adorned him with
some title of excellency, Caesar had a great desire to be called Romulus
secundus, but because that did resemble too much the title of a king, he was
content to be called Augustus, that is, maiesticall or divine. Thus had Caesar
the power of a king the style only foreprised. In him all the dignities and
magistracies did meet, he was sole Consul, in determining iudicially of
public affairs, sole Po^tifex, for he had that special title, sole Censor in
taxing the Romans by poales, and fining them for faults, sole Tribune, in
abrogating these laws and voiding these acts which were made and done by other
magistrates: which though in show they were many, yet in deed there was now
but one Magistrate in Rome, one Emperor, one Augustus; but these honors did
not warrant Caesar's quietness, for he was endangered by many trecheries, and
being thereby too severe in punishing both the worthy and unworthy, upon
suspicion and surmise without any formal proceeding against them, he did
indeed minister oil unto the flame of their malice. Amongst the rest Cn.
Cornelius, whose grandfather was Cn. Pompeius Magnus, did with his accomplices
imagine and conspire the death of Augustus, whom Caesar would not put to death,
because he thought by that mean, he should gain no great security, neither
would he deliver them from imprisonment, lest others might take courage and
counsel to attempt the like. With this doubt and perplexity he was
grievously troubled, and cares did torment his mind both in the night and in
the day time; wherefore walking alone in his garden, and musing what to do,
Liuia the Empress came unto him, and prayed him of all loves to reveal unto
her, what grief had encroched upon his heart, and what was the cause of his
unusual dumpes, to whom Caesar made this answer. Can any man, Liuia, be of a
calm and contented mind; against whom on every side are laid the snares of
treason? See thou not how many do besiege my quietness, whom the
punishment of condemned persons does not only not deter, but, as if there
were some hope of reward, others rush desperately forward to unlawful attempts.
Liuia when she heard this, did thus reply. It is no marvel, my Lord, if you be
beset with dangers, partly because you are a man, and therefore borne to
casualtie, partly an Emperor, by whose authority, because many are put to
death, many that live do conceive hatred against you; for a Prince cannot only
not please all, but though he govern in most orderly and peaceable manner, it
cannot be otherwise, but he should have many foes. For there be not so many
just as injurious, whose humors can never be satisfied, and they which be of
the better sort do aim at great matters, which because they can not obtain,
and because they are inferior to others, are full of malecontentment, and for
that cause they are offended with their Prince. But the danger unto which you
are subject by them which do not conspire against your person, but against your
estate, cannot any way be avoided. For if you were a private man, none would
offer you injury, unless he received wrong before at your hands, but an
Empire, and the revenues thereof, they which have power do rather affect, then
they which are poor do loath. This though it be a point of unconscionable men,
yet as other faults, so this is the seed of nature, which out of some men
neither by rewards nor by threats you shall be able to extirpate: for neither
fear nor law can do more then nature. Which being thoroughly considered, it
will seem a great deal more convenient to strengthen and stablish your Empire
with faithfulness and loyalty, then with sharpness and rigor. Augustus did
thus reioyne: I know, Liuia, that the highest things be most subject to hatred,
and the greatest Emperors have the greatest enemies: for if our cares, griefs
and perils were not greater then the griefs and perturbations of private me^,
we should be aequal to the Gods; but this does chiefly molest me, that I cannot
devise any remedy, which may cure and conquer this mischief. All men have
enemies, and many have been slain by enemies, but the estate of Princes lies
so open to casualtie, that we are constrained to fear our familiar frinds and
our daily acquaintance, with whom because we must continually converse, we do
continually fear, and this malady is more hardly redressed then emnitie: for
against our enemies we may oppose our friends, but if our friends do fail us,
where is the^ our help? therefore both solitude and multitude is grievous unto
us, and it is dangerous to be without a guard, but to have an unfaithful guard is
much more dangerous. Apparent enemies may be avoided, but false hearted friends
we cannot any way shun: for we must call the^ friends, of whose constant
faithfulness we can not possibly be assured; for my self I do plainly
protest, that my heart abhors from the extremity of punishment, and the
necessity of torture goes greatly against my mind. Then said Liuia, You have
spoken well my Lord, but if you will be advised by me, and you ought not to
refuse my counsel because it proceeds from a woman; I will advise you of
that which none of your friends will impart unto you, not because they are
ignorant of it, but for that they dread your displeasure. Which Augustus
taking hold of, Tell it me Liuia said he whatsoever it is. I will, said Liuia,
and that as willingly as you would hear it, for I am made partaker of your
destiny. Caesar being safe I am Empress, and he being dishonored, which
misfortune the Gods auert, I am also disgraced, and bereaved of glory. That I
may not use an ambush of words, nor a labyrinth of circumstances: my theme
shall be one word, and that is, Clemency. Change thy course Augustus, and
forgive some of thy foes, many things may be healed by lenity, which cruelty
can never cut off. Neither do I speak this, as if disloyal and irregular
persons should generally and without difference receive mercy, nay they that
be notoriously stained, and branded with conspiracy, they that trouble the
quietness of the Commonweal, they that are ouerflowed with vices, whose life
is nothing else but leudnes, so that they are past hope or help, cut them off
my Augustus, as the putrified parts of a distempered body: but they which
either through the infirmity of youth, or the imprudency of mind, or through
ignorance or mischaunce have offended, or which against their wills have been
drawn into danger, admonish them, but with minatorie speeches: and let them
find grace but with condition. Some thou may punish with exile, some with
infamy, and some with money: and that none may be unjustly condemned, nor by a
fained accusation suffer death, let the truth be tried by such proofs, as may
worthily be approved. For it behooves thee Augustus, not only to be free
from doing wrong, but even from show and semblance of injury. Private men have
done enough if they have not offended, but a Prince must endeavor not to be
suspected of faults. Thou rulest over men, not over beasts, over Romans, and
not over Barbarians, and the only mean to lincke their hearts unto thee, is
to benefit all and to oppress none. For though a man may be constrained to
fear, yet he cannot be enforced to love; for when the subject clearly
discerns that his Prince is bountiful, he is soon persuaded: but when he is
once resolved upon manifest praesumption, that some be unjustly put to death,
lest the same thing happen unto him, he may justly fear: and who^ he so
fears, he hates with the strength of his heart. But a Prince is the
privilege of his subjects security, that they take no harm, neither of
forreiners, nor of their fellow subjects, much less of their Prince and
protector. And it is a great deal more magnificent and glorious to save then
to kill: wherefore laws, benefits, admonitions must be used, that men may
become circumspect, and wary, and further they must be so diligently watched
and observed, that though they would be, yet they may not be traitorous; and
they which are green in conceit, and as it were flexible wax to the stronger
powers, must have perpetual conseruatiues lest they be corrupted: and to
tolerate the offenses of some, is both great wisdom and great manhood: for
if every man's fault should be his fall, the earth would soon lack
inhabitants. Think my good Augustus, that the sword cannot do all things for
thee: it cannot make men wise, it cannot make them faithful: it may constrain
them, but it cannot persuade them: it does pierce the heart of him that is
slain, but it does alienate the mind of him that does live. Wherefore alter
thy opinion noble Emperor, and by using clemency they will think that all
that thou have heretofore done was done by necessity and against thy will, but
if thou perseuerest still in the same mind and purpose, they will impute all
that has been done to the austeritie and soreness of thy nature. With these
speeches of Liuia Augustus being moved, pardoned many, and used as much lenity
as his own safety would bear: whereby he purchased the entire love of the
Romans, and all his life time after there was never any treason attempted
against him. Thus after civil emnities extinguished, foreign wars fully
ended, justice recalled, destiny satisfied, strength was restored to laws,
authority to Magistrates, dignity to the Nobles, majesty to the Senate,
safety to the people: the fields were without hinderance trimmed and tilled,
the sacrifices celebrated and solemnized, quietness returned to men, and
every possession to his lawful owner: good laws were made, imperfect laws
were amended, bad laws cancelled: the Senators were severe without
currishnesse, the people honest without constraint: and with this harmony
peace pleased the Romans.

A Table of the principal matters contained in this history according to the
number of the Pages.
A Ancus a great builder.8 M. Antonius the orator put to death by Marius and
Cinna.65 M. Antonius: he helps Caesar 138. He is spared at the time when
Caesar is slain. 169 He fights with Pansa. 175 He fights with Hirtius. 176.
He fights with both the Consuls. ibid. Octauius becomes an enemy unto him.
ibid. He writes contumelious letters to Brutus and Cassius. 180. The testament
of M. Antonius.193
B D. Brutus suffers him self to be besieged by Antonius. 175. He is
slain.179
C Campania: the praise of it.10 Carthage: the beginning of the second
Corthagia^ war. 12 Masinissa quarrelleth with the Carthagimans. 45. Scipio is
sent as Vmpier betwixt them and Masinissa. 46. the City of Carthage is
burnt.47 Q. Caepio is slain. C. Julius Caesar: he is inclined to sedition.
103. his original 107. his death is sought for by Sillaes officers. 108. the
Heluetians sled before Caesar. 116. they are overcome by him. 117. he pursues
battle against Ariouista. ibid. he fights against the Belgians and Nerrians.
ibid. he overthrows the Germans ibd. he burns the villages of the
Sicambrians. 118. he overcomes the Britains ibid. he is reconciled to the
Britains. ibid. he renueth against them. ibid. the Eburons are overcome by
him. 119. his revenge upon the French rebels. 120. a decree made by the Senate
that he should dismiss his army. 122 he is incensed by Curio against the
Senate. 123. his passionate speech against the Senate. ibid. he pardons
Domitius. 127. he seiseth the treasury. 131. he marches toward Spain. ibid.
the strangers which were assistant to Caesar. 133. the Caesarians give the
first assault to Pompey. 140. his speech to Domitius. 143. the dreams and
visions of the Caesarians. 145. he is entertained of Cleopatra. 148. he is
assaulted by the King of Egypt. 149. he swimmeth in the river of Nilus. ibid.
he addresseth against Pharnaces. 150. he puts Phanaces to flight. ibid. he
encou^treth P. Scipio. ibid. his triumphs are described. 156 Salust makes an
oration to him. 157. the great honors bestowed upon him. 165. he fights with
Cn. Pompeius the younger at the City of Siuille. ibid. the causes of the
conspiracy bent against him. 167. he is slain in the Senate house. 168. the
Law Portia broken by the killing of him. 169. the Law Cornelia also
broken.ibid. Q. Catulus: the dissension of Lepidus and Catulus. 16. 76 Q.
Catulus cause of his own death.66 Portius Cato is slain.55 M. Portius Cato
Itichusis his lignage. 102. his praise. ibid. he kills himself.150 Catiline:
his qualities. 83. his lignage. 85. he kills his own son. 86. he is greatly
indebted. 87. he is forbidden to make suit for the Consulship. ibid. his
impudent answer to Ciceroes oration.98 Cincinnatus his speedy war.9 L.
Cinna: he begins a new broyle. 62. he is expulsed the City. ibid. he is
made Captain of a seditious army. ibid. he calls C. Marius from banishment.
63. a great fight betwixt him and Cn. Pompeius Strabo. 64. he enters the
City. ibid. he is slain.69 Cicero: he is called Paerpatriae. 83. his oration
against Catiline. 92. he mourns. 112. he commits himself to voluntary
exile. 113. a sharp law is made concerning his banishment. ibid. he is
recalled from banishment. 114. he is put to death. 185. Fuluiaes despitefull
dealing with his tongue.186 Cleopatra killed by Aspworms.196 Clodius: he being
tribune of the people becomes seditious. 109. he seeks revenge upon Cicero.
110. he is infamous for adultery with Pompeia Caesar's wife. ibid. for incest
with his sisters. ibid. he is condemned by the Senate. ibid. he persisteth to
be an enemy to Cicero. 114 he burns the house of Q. Cicero. ibid. he
threatens death to Sanctia. 115. he is slain by Milo.ibid. Cornelia: she
lamenteth her children.27
D Drusus: his hard fortune. 32 he is slain. 34. his repulse is the beginning
of the Italian war.38
F Full. Flaccus a rebellious Senator slain.26
G A. Gabinius: after a prosperous fight he is slain.23 C. Gracchus: he is a
rebel to the state. 25. his seditious acts. 26. he is beheaded.27
I Italy: the Italian war.15
L M. Lepidus: the dissension of Lepidus and Catulus.16
M C. Marius: the contention betwixt him and Silla. 15. he besieges the
Capital. 31 he puts the conspiratours to death. ibid. he destroys
Saturninus his house. ibid. he takes Iugurtha by Sillaes means. 28. his 3. 4.
5. 6. Consulships. 29. his great victory against the Cimbrians. ibid. he is in
high reputation. 34. he puts Vettius Cato. to flight. 52. he fights
equally with the Marsians. 53. he is disliked by the Consul Portius. 54. his
ambition. 59. his extreme misery, 60. a captive slave is sent to kill him.
61. the Minturnians are friends to him. ibid. being recalled from banishment he
enters the City. 64. Octauius is put to death by his cruelty. 65. he
dies.67 Mancinus: his punishment for breaking truce.20 Metellus: he opposes
himself against Saturninus. 30 he commits himself to voluntary
banishment.ibid. Metellus his speech to Casar.130 Merula: he cutteth in pieces
his own vein.65 Mithridates an enemy to the Romans. 15. 58 Numa
N Numa religious.8 Numantia: the Numantine war.20
O Octauius his request to the Senate. 177. he reconcileth himself to M.
Antonius and M. Lepidus. ibid. M. Cicero does greatly commeend him. 178. he
takes Clodia to wife. 179. he besieges Perusia. 190. he fights with Sex.
Pompeius. 191. he reads the testament of M. Antonius. 192. he sacrifices all
the Pinasses which he has taken to Apollo. 195. he builds Nicopolis. 196.
the Romans plant a bay tree before his door.200 Opimius his proclamation.26
P C. Perperna discharged C. of his lieuetnancie.52 Asinius Pollio: the praise
of him.190 Cn. Pampeius Strabo: his victories. 55. he triumphs. 56. his
dissembling and inconstancy. 63. a great fight betwixt him and Cinna.64 Cn.
Pompeius Magnus: his great dignity in Rome. 16 Caesar cannot brook it. ibid.
he and Q. Catulus fight with Lepidus and overcome him. 77. Mithridates is
overthrown by Pompey. 106. he enters the Temple of Jerusalem. ibid. he is
honored with a triple triumph. 107. he matcheth with Iulia Caesar's daughter.
109. his Presidentship in Spain proroguid. 121. he is appointed by the Senate
general against Caesar. 127. Domitius flies to Pompey. 128 the forreiners
which were ready in arms for the assitance of him. 132. his oration to his
soldiers. 134. he puts Caesar to flight. 138 he marshalleth his army. 139.
he flies to Larissa. 144 he trauelleth to Egypt. 146. he is slain by the
Egyptians.147 Popedius. Silo Popedius a natural enemy to the Romans. 40. his
oration to the Marsians. 41. he is slain.55 Pyrrhus fighting against the
Romans.10
R Rome built.6 Romans: the Romans made wanton by prosperity 19. the Roman
Ambassadors are despised of Hanniball. 44 the Athenians faithful to the
Romans. 67. the solemnity which the Romans used in their proceeding to the
Senate. 89. treachery against the Romans in France. 119. what thing a
triumph was amongst the Romans, and how performed. 151. they bestow many honors
upon Caesar.166 Romulus eagrest in fight. 8 Romulus and Remus bastards. 42.
nourished by a wolf. ibid. Remus is slain by Romulus.43 P. Rutilius is
slain.52
S Saturninus: he causes C. Memmius to be slain. 31. his house is destroyed by
Marias. ibid. he is a brocher of sedition. 30. Q. Metellus opposes himself
against him. ibid. Marius favors Saturninus.ibid. Saguntines: the miserable
famine of the Saguntines.44 Sabines: the rape of the Sabine virgins.43 P.
Scipio Affricanus the elder his valor.18 P. Scipio Affricanus the younger: his
prowess. 18. he is sent back into Spain. 24. he surpriseth Numantia. ibid.
he is found dead in his bed. 25 his body is brought out into the street.ibid.
Scipio Nasica: his family. 22 he opposes himself to Gracchus.ibid. Seruius
taxes the Romans by poles.8 Seruitins: he is Proconsull and is slain by the
commotioners of Italy.38 Sertorius: he leuieth arms in Spain. 77. he fears
Pompey. 106. Liuius Salinator the Lieutenant of Sertorius is slain. 77.
Sertorius is slain.79 Spartacus: he being a fenceplayer does encounter the
army of the Consuls. 81. he takes the city of the Thurians. ibid. M. Crassus
appointed for the war against him.82 Sulpitius: he brings the Marrucines
to obedience.55 Sulpitius: a seditious Tribune alters the state. 59. murder
is committed by him.ibid. L. Sylla: his victory Samnites. 55. he kills
Cluentius. ibid. he is made Consul. 57 his contrary nature. ibid. his
descent. ibid. he besieges Nola. 58. his revenge upon the seditious. 60. his
hard conditions of peace concluded with Mithridates. 68 the King of Parthia
sends Ambassadors to him. ibid. he passes quietly through Italy. 69. he
dismisseth Sertorius without hurt. 70. he fights with Telesinus a Samnite.
71. C. Marius the yoonger is slain by his soldiers. 72. he usurps the
Dictatorship. ibid. he causes the soldiers of Praeneste to be slain. 73. he
puts in practice proscription. 73. M. Marius is slain by him. 74. his rage
against Pletorius. ibid. the ashes of C. Marcus thrown into a river by Sylla.
75. he dies.ibid.
T Tarquin banished. 1. his ornaments. 8. proud Tarquin occasioner of
liberty.9 Treuirate: a Treuirate first made in Rome.21 Tullus an artificial
Captain.8
V Viriathus an enemy to the Romans.19

FINIS.
Faults. Page Correction. Monarchies. Page 4. Monarchs. Cloaetia. page 9.
Cloaelia. Massitus. page 10. Massicus. couldes. page 10. clouds. Glancias. page
31. Glaucias. Eguatius. page 52. Eguatius. Staria. page 53. Stabia. Petiani.
page 55. Peligni. Talentia. page 78. Valentia. Enomaus. page 80. Enomaus.
Consulians. page 92. Consularians. it greeueth my heart. page 100. it grateth my
heart. the Pictons. page 119. the Pictons. the Tureus. page 120. the Turens. the
Audians. page 120. the Andians. Achilles. page 147. Achillas. aggrauate. page
173. arrogate. Atia was. page 176. Atia, who was.


