ANTIPROGNOSTICON that is to say, an Inuectiue against the vain and
unprofitable predictions of the Astrologians as Nostrodame. etc. Translated out
of Latin into English.

Whereunto is added by the author a short Treatise in English, as well for the
utter subversion of that fained art, as also for the better understanding of
the common people, unto whom the first labor seems not sufficient.

Habet and musca splenem and formicae suabilis inest.

1560.

Henry Bennet Calesian. Sonnet.
THe Poets write, that Atlas did sustein
On shulders huge ye massy heue^s frame
So feign they not, that Saturns heavenly reygne,
And state he knew, or could express ye same
Thastrologers, that never crept so hye,
Do^ vaunt they know, what God doothe work in throne.
Affyrmyng that to know this mystery,
None can atteyne, but only they alone,
Whose fancies Fulce with book of perfect skyll,
Confutes with such as vaynly do profess
Themselves to know, of god the secret will,
But if I might to these reward address,
I read the rout, that eyes unlearned bleares,
Should for their cunning wear king Midas ears.
Willyam Painter.
A Foul fall dontles Fulce does give thastrologers each one:
Because no firm foundation they build their art upon.
Who do surmyse and fondly feign, men's fortunes to foreshewe.
And make the simple forte believe, that they their fates can know.
But al thos^ bragges this book does break and make them seem full cold,
With arguments achieved by art with reasons manyfolde.
Though Cunyngham the same do carpe or Uaghan vain it judge,
Or other such, with scornful scoff thereat do bear some grudge:
Since Grindall grave the grist has ground and Molens molendine,
The meal has made, whence bulted was and brought this flower fine,
The less we need their force to fear, we have such stuff in store,
Comparisons are odyous, therefore I add no more.
Comparatio omnis odiosa.

To his loving friend W. F.
OUR familiarity is such, that neither we have need of preoccupation, nor
yet of many words in vtteryng our request. These circumstances therefore being
cut of, I shall even at one word, desire you, that this translation of your
Antiprogno^ may be publisshed and made common for all men, that either have
need thereof to understand their error, orels shall have pleasure therein to
see the vanity wherewith they have been blinded. The rather thus tra^ slated,
because a great number of the busiest and most curious Astrologians in England
understand no latin at all, orels so symply, that they can not perceive the
mind of a Latin writ^r, and also that the common sort of well disposed men,
may hereby take, some profit. But if you thynk good to add some what in this
edition for the understanding of the common people you shall do well in my
opinion. Thus fare you well.

From Seuenoke xxii. of Octobre. Your familiar friend Willyam Paynter.

SVCHF is the nature of mankind, carnestely desprous to have knowledge of
things to come, that in seeking out and inue^tyng of such arts as n^ight seem
to pertain to the certain thereof, she has taken great and laborous pains.
For trauailyng to get out a science of Divination, or foreseeyng, out of every
element, she has brought forth unto us Pyromancy, which is to for show
things by the Fire: Hydromanci^, to declare of things to come by the water:
Geomancie by the Earth: and diverse other arts of this kind, promisyng the
knowledge of hy^de and secret matters. And lest the practisers of these arts
should at any time being destitute of their books and instruments, not be
able to tell of things to happen: she has found out that handlom art of
foreshewyng by the hand (which is an instrument, that every man car^eth about
with him) so that by this science of Palmestry, at no time nor place, they
shall be to seek of diuina^ion or (as they term it) Fortune tellyng* Finally,
there is nothing so vain or of so lyt^l importance, in which she has not
boulted o^som cunnyng of forshewyng, seeing she has already set forth.
Capnomancy a^ Sciomancie, whereof the one teaches to have understanding of
things to come by smoke, the other by shadow. These things peradventure might
seem somewhat tolerable, so long as man's wit is occupied in matters that are
near to him (I mean the elements and such like) if that those false
diuinours would not draw heaven it self and the stars, to their superfluous
rules of Divination, of whom a great number do not this modestly, and as it
were dius^yng or gessynge; but arroga^tly do pronounce their oracles as though
they had been given of Apollo Pithyus, the god of foreshewing. It were a small
matter if they told only of rain, and wethers, but also they must ^yl the
whole world at their pleasure with war, sycknesse, and rebellion. What shall
we say that they are not content to set out their oracles generally and
universally, but they must also thretten the life of every particular man, (as
it were the goddesses of destenie) manifest^ly against the order of all
learning and philosophy. Neither is it enough for them to have lordshy^ and
dominion over menne^ bodies, except they did also charge they^ minds and
souls with virtues or ^es, according to their own precepts and rules. gross
error to desect, vanite to open, and au thoritie to eleuate and extenuate, I
thought it worth the labor, because they so shameful ly now adais, do set
forth their wares to sell among al me^, partly because they so proudly with all
their force inuey against such me^ as contemn and despise these and such like
their predictio^s. Yea some are not ashamed to commend a necessary use of their
diuinati ons. But that only is necessary (if we believe Cicero) without the
which we can not live. Then how many thousands of men be there, which not only
live, but also live well, and yet never have regard or care so much as ones to
see prognostications. Other some there be, which call all men that be desirous
of goodly arts and sciences, to their Almanach, as to a storehouse, replenyshed
with all precious iewelles. Finally what sign of arrogance or boastyng can be
named, which in the book of these pro phecies may not easyly be perceived?
There fore who soever dare be so bold as ones to open his mouth against these
oracles, straight way shall be called an ignorant person, a detractour, and a
sycophant. And this is the cause that so few have taken upon the^ to detect
and open their trifling in pro gnostications, lest he should incur the
reproaches and contumelies of the proud and arrogant rabble of
Prognosticatoures. For in our time (as far as I have knowledge) among al men,
the most famous and excellent Doctor, Peter Dacquet only has both learnedly
and plainly declared, that the use of this feigned art is altogether
unprofitable for the works and practices of phisike. But I being (as I
think) sufficiently armed against all the assaults of all prognosticatours,
having also gotten convenient leisure (except my tongue or pen do fail me) will
endeavor my self utterly to overthrow this tower of Astrology, when is they
behold the signification of the planets and stars, that no piece nor parcel
thereof that remayn. Neither am I so ignorant of that knowledge (if any such
knowledge be) as they would go about to persuade the common people, that all
such are, which despise their for showing and premo^stratio^s: neither being
moved with the desire of evil speaking or envy, do I address my self to
writing: (for I am assured, that I do pro uoke waspes) but seeing many which
are desirous to learn the sciences, to have also much set by this
celestial divination, I thought good to admonish them by this little treatise,
that they labor not in vayue, hopyng for that, which the place it self will
not suffer them to have. that when they have throughely seen and considered
the whole matter, they may leave to have in admiration these inuencions of the
prognosticatours: and if they will needs have knowledge of secrets and things
pertainynge to the future time, they may learn to seek it out of such things
as are more nere and better known unto them. For as it is said and not
without a cause: Those things that are above us, perteyne nothing unto us:
and those things which are above our reach, are not to be sought for, with
much curiosity. Neither let any man slander me, as though I went about to
impugn or assault the most beautyfull and certain science of Astronomye, as
the Prognosticatours themselves, (such is their malice) cry out, if any man
speak boldly against the vanity of Astrology: But that science as of all
humayn sciences it is the most divine, so would I wish that it should be
embraced, learned, and perceived of most men, especially of all such as bear
and profess the name of Philosophy. And let not them be troubled with their
proud brag, which say, that their calculation is thend^ and scope, where
unto the noble science of Astronomy does tend, seeing there is no community
or fellowship between certen^y and uncertainty, neither can truth and feigned
falshod, at any time be coupled and joined together. And as for the studious,
they shall not be compelled in vain to con sider the course of the stars
(although this divination be clean banished away) seeing the knowledge it self
(if we trust Aristotle) is an end and scope of it self. Moreover be side the
most pleasant co^templacion of the whole workemashyp of the world, does not ye
sciens it self bring with it infinite profits and vtilities? What neade I to
speak of so many kind of Dialles, so many differences of times and years?
finally so many varietes and degrees of glystering lyghtes.

One star (which is the son) as it were the image of one god,
communicates his light to all the rest, whom so long as the residews of the
stars behold, resplendishynge with most bright beams, they ^hine over the
whole worloe: But if any of them by the envious shadow of the earth, be
dep^ued of his sight, straight way as it were mor^yng, and without light, it is
void of all beautye and glory: Does it nothing avail to know the cause of so
diverse forms and shapes of the moon? Such varieties of days in length and
shortness? So many differences of heat and cold by reason of the Sons
coming near or departing far from us? They therefore which styffely
affirm, that Astronomye cannot co^siste without Astrology, and that the
knowledge of the one is unprofitable without the use of the other, are here
reproved of a manifest error, or rather convicted of a shameful lie. Lest
therefore under the bewtifull and glorious cloak of this sciens of Astronomye,
they should any longer proceade to commend their false and hyppocriticall art,
I would wish that this little book were but ones perused and red over of all
such as seem to favor this deceyte: and except either their wilful and per
uerse affection, or else to gross ignorance did let them, I am assured they
would utterly forsake and reiecte this kind of forshewynge by the stars.
For long time under the pretexte and color of Astronomye, this auguration or
diuinotion has been cloked, in so much that the professoures thereof have
not doubted openly for Astrologians, to call them selves Astronomars. Other
some confoundynge the names of Astrology and Astronomy, both in teaching and
also in writing, have so mixed the one with the other, as though they were not
distincie sciences, but the one of them did hang of an other, after the manner
of relatiues. And herein they are ^ot unlike to men of ungracious living,
which to the intent they may with less danger and suspicion commit he
ynous offenses, will gladly use and frequent the company of such as be taken
to be good and honest men: but the difference of those arts, I think is
manifestly known to all men, so that I am certainly persuaded, it were but
lost labor to stand long in putting a diuer ^e between them. Wherefore it
shall suffice to admonisshe the simple sort, lest when we speak against the
art of foreshewyng by the stars, they should unadvisedly think that we
dispute against the course of the stars, their law, order, or learning. But
whereof shall I take my beginning, or of what part shall I chiefly go about
to publyshe and desorte so great vanity, whether of the vncertainte, thereof*
(...) of the unprofitable, yea hurtful observation thereof that so much
troubles the common wealth, or rather of the impossibility, shall I show
that there is no such science of divination? If that which is uncertain
deserve not to be observed, for what cause, I pray you, do you cleave to the
do^yng of Astrology? If that which deserves not so much as to be considered
is worthily called vain, or of none effect, wherefore shall men more trust
the divination of the stars, then they will credit the unconstant waves of
the sea? It shall not be needful in this place to allege Aristotle's opinion
of the future continge^t, nether to vouche thauctoritie of other philosophers,
concerning the uncertain and unknown procedyng of matters. For who does not
see clerer then the son at noone days, that not the fourth part of those
presages or fortellyngs come to pass, as they before have pronounced them? Yea
who is so forgetful, or of lyttel memory, that can not record and remember,
that the most part of their predictions have chanced clean contrary to
their calculations. It is not therefore without a cause, if we m^ uayle with
what face they dare he so bol^ to propounde such vayn and folyshe
varicinatious, to be considered of wise and discrete persons. Certainly every
science, of what sort soever it be, consists on things that be true certain
and immouable: but Astrology which stands on things that most commonly are
false, but always un certain and unconstant: Tell me all you
prognosticatours, by what reason it may^ be called a science? but if this your
method and rule of prophesieng be not to be noumbred among those sciences,
which consist of thin ges certain and immutable, what other thing is this your
knowledge but folishnes so great, that folly her self could not light lie
invent a thing more fond and foolyshe. But peradventure your predictio^s, be
they never so uncertain, yet they may be profitable to the public wealth, so
yt which your art lacks of certayntie, it recompenceth with utility: Nay
rather with how great euyls do you burden the city (I speak not of the
horrible wonders that you threaten to fall on them) but what a dearth of
vitayles youcause in the comme^ wealth, while the farmers of the country (as I
have good understanding) beleuyng your oracles of the imte^peraunce of wethers
do so craftily dyspose their wares, yt in abundaunce of al things, the common
people suffer a great and grievous scarcity. What? is it to be kept in silence,
how slowlye and coldly the people in the last year, seduced by the foolyshe
prophesye of Nostrodamus addressed them self to set up the true
worshippynge of GOD and his religion, good Lord what trembling was there? What
fear?

What expectation? What horror? Lest all things suddenly should be turned
up sydowne, so that none almost of them that gave any credit to
prognostications, durst be bold to open their faith and religion, which they
bore in their hearts. Yea this Nostrodamus reigned here so like a tyrant with
his south sayings, that without the good luck of his prophesies it was
thought that nothing could be brought to effect. What shall I speak of the
common peoples voice? This day the Bishop of Rome must be driven out of the
parliament. To morrow the Queen shall take upon her the name of supreme head.
After xx. days all thing shall ware worse. Such a day shall be the day of the
last judgment, that except the true prechers of Gods holy words had
sharpelye rebuked the people for creditynge such vain prophesies, there
should have been none end of fear and expectation. But our craftye
Nostrodamus, that could wrappe his prophesyes in such dark wryncles of
obscur^ye, that no man could pyke out of them, either sense or understanding
certain. Without double he has herd of the oracles of Appollo, which the
denyll at Delphos, gave out of an ydoll to them that asked counsel, which were
obscure, double, and such as might chance both ways, As that which was
answered to king Pyrtus, demaundyng of him: I say that Aeacides the Romans
may overcome.



Neither is that unlike, which the rich Cresus entendyng to make war
against Cyrus, had given him, that is: Croesus percyng through the city Halis
shall overthrow great riches.



So that you may wrest them to what sense you list. For Pyrrus while he did
promise himself victory over the Romans, might have also understood (as it
came to pass in deed) that he himself should be overcome of the Romans.
Likewise Cresus, while he turstyng thoracle, persuaded himself, that he should
overcome Cyrus riches, that were so great and abundant, brought his own
kingdom, riches, and what soever he possessed into utter ruin and destructon
The same trade of fortelling Sibylla Cumana did also deep, of whom Uergile
reports, that the recorded fearful circum stances and doubts, resowndynge
in her cave. Finally, all they which inflamed with the diuelles sprighte,
told of things to come, gave either dark or doubteful answers to them that
required their oracles. The same manner of foreshewyng in dark and double
riddles our prognost^ catours, as it were received of the heathenyshe prophets
do observe and keep unto this day fornot only Nost rodamus tells things
darkly and doubtfully, but diverse others: yea many of our countrymen, an
Cunyngham, a man otherwise both learned and honest, Hill, Lou, Uaghan, and not
long ago Askham, with six hundred more of that sort, among which, the before
named, may challenge the chief place, not that they prophecy truer then
other, but that they have more exactely (as they say them selves) formed their
calculatio^s to the course of the stars. And lest any man should think that
I sclander them, I entende to rehearse certain things out of their books, in
which we will plainly note a double doubtful forshewynge. By reason of Saturn
in Cauro (say they) and the eclipse in April, there shall follow mur muryng
among the common people: but Mercurius, with his eloquence does pacify
them. Likewise Mars this year shall save England harmless from many evils,
except the Eclipse of the Moon do somewhat abate his courage. After the some
manner do they pronounce of wheat, bar ley, and otes, that they shall prosper
well, except the heat, moisture, or other vnsea sonable weather do endamage
them. Finally this almost is general, if they foreshewe a thing to come
without exception, it is false: if they pronounce it with exception, how
soever the game go, their error is without danger of reprouyng. Moreover they
them selves confess, that there bediuers impedime^ts which cause yt many
things to come not to pass, not only about in the heuens, but also here
beneth. O good ly science, O divine knowledge, which so many causes do
frustrate, and bring to none effect. To what purpose then serve so many
prohibitions against the surgeo^s, that they take nothing in hand, but in a a
prescripte time? Shall they tarry seven days before they let a man bloudde
that is sick of the Pleuresie: Why do you not by the same reason forbydde
them that be poisoned to take any medicine, before the sign apt to comfort the
virtue expulsive. But these matters by doctor Da^quet are so plainly set
before men's eyes, that onelesse these Prognosticatours even yet did give
such cautions, it were but (...) vain for me asmuchas ones to make men cion
of that super^tious abuse.

Hitherto as (as I suppose) we have sufficiently spoken of the inconstancy and
un certainty of these pred^ons, yea and enough also of the vn^rositable
observation and credityng of the same.

Now therefore let us prepare our selves to that argument, which is all the
prognostitators, what soever they be, and where soever they be, ar able without
al couin or deceit to remove: they shall not only defend their are, which
otherwise must needs fall down and utterly decay, but also they shall hau^ the
writer hereof, with shame enough, to retract and recant all that he has
hitherto against Astrology said or written.

And that we may by little and little proceed to the effect of our matter, we
dare bebolde to affirm, That this is common to all sciences, that they may be
demonstrated. For although the principles and grounds in every art, be of
such nature, that they can not be showed and confyrmed by things more
general, and therefore it is said, that they can not be proved, yet by
demonstration or induction they may be so plainly set before our eyes, that
no man need to doubt, but that they are most true and certain. For either
they are showed by a manifest figure that they must needs be true, and that it
were impossible to think otherwise of them then so, or else by recital of all
the particulers, one universal is evermore concluded. Therefore of such
foundations every art is grounded, which being surely laid, meruallous works
are builded upon them. But if the sou^datio^s which ought to be most strong
and sure, in any point do fail, streighte way yt whole buildyng with great
weight falls down and is destroyed. For dately experience teaches us, that
no structure can be firm and of continuance, except the foundatio^s thereof be
first surely laid. And reason teaches the same lesson, which with open
mouth cries, and bids always to beware of the beginnings. Which thing
although we see daily in buyldyng of houses, yet may we see it also, if we will
use a little diligence in every art and science. As in Geometry, it to a
principle, that from one point to an other, you may always draw a streighte
line, this now by exaumple may be demonstrated very easily. Likewise it is an
other ground that all the three angles or corners of a triangle, how soever
they be taken, are equal unto. ii. rectangles. If this be showed in every
particular kind of triangle, as Orthogonius Oxygonius, Aequilaterus Scalenus,
and such like, we shall plainly understand that which is required. And that
we have here said briefly in a few, the same to be true in all other
propositions, he that has but meanly trauayled in the sciences can bear
witness. But perchance some prognosticatour will start up and say, that
although this is easy to be showed in such things as almost we may perceive
by our senses yet the same in things farther of; can scarsly be declared, As
yt greatness of the stars, or their distance from theearth, or from themselves
one from an other: Do not learned men teach, that the Sun is an hundredth
sixty and six times greatter then the earth? and that the Moon is thirty and
nine times lesser tha^ the earth? We grant that these matters be difficult,
and such as hardly can be per swaded to the common sort: yet as difficulte as
they be, and hard to know, there is a mean whereby men may come to the
science and understanding of them. We have the shadow of the earth as it were
a ladder, whereby we ascend into heaven, and behold many things, whereunto
gross wits can not frame. But by no way is it possible, that the principles
of this art of Astrology, may be either demonstra^d or proved. There is no
mean whereby ma^s wit may atteyne to so great knowledge, there is no method,
no inductio^, yt ca^ main tayn truth of th^se propositions, which they take
for their principles.

Now therefore (as I have said) the foundation of this tower, being shaken,
the whole weyghte of Astrologye, must needs have a great and saubdeyne
fall. And as Capitaynes expert (...) feactes of war, whenne they determyne
utterly to subuerte and overthrow a tower, castle, or other fortress of
their ennemies, with vnderminyng they loose the foundations of it, orels
setting under it a quantity of gunpowder, blow away the whole substance: So
we autendyng not only to prove, that your art is vnproufytable, but also to
condemn it to perpetual prison of Oblinion and forgetfulness, go about to
show, that there neither is nor can be any such art of diuynation or
forshewynge. For by what reason are ye able to demonstrate or show, that
Saturn is so hurtefull, malicious, and pestilent? By Induction? What if he
have do mynyon as you term it) in the Nativity of a Prince, a warryoure, or
a Sanguyne? Nay, there is nothing does oftener fail, then Predictions of
natiuities: How then are you able to prove, that this Planette does so
much, and so great euylle amongst men. I for my part, could rather prove
by probable reason they contrary. For it is nothing like, that Saturn which
is farthest from the earth, should have the most earthely nature. Beside
this, he that is far higher then Uenus, and nearer to the immense and
large. Fyrmamente, which the Hebrews do call, A stretchynge abroad, by no
means can be counted worse. Wherefore is the Planette Iupyter, more wholesome
than Saturn? In whose time (while that he reigned or ruled on the earth, the
same antiquytie wytnessethe, that the golden world was, the which flattering
their king Jupiter, oscribeth to him better effects then to his father. But
how unjust a thing is it, and against all reason, that the Son it self,
without whom the other planettes have no more beauty then the earth, can
searcely of them be compted among the good ^holsome stars: where as he,
which with his heat gives life, with his ^hynynge light, and with his
beholding, gladness to all living creatures. (If an arre of astrology were to
be inuen sed according to reason) should have the thiese rule among all
stars, as well planettes as fixed. Likewise the Moon whi the governs
humors, should be second to the Son, specially in dominion of lynyng
creatures, for as much as by these two, that is, Heat and Moisture, whereof
the Son rules heat, and the Moon moist nes, all life is proserued and
nourished. By what argument are you persuaded to prefer a trine aspecte
before a quartile, where as the number of four among the Pytha^rsens, which
had the exact know Judge of numbres, and to them referred all things, was
more reuerentely observed then the rest: in so much that by four they were
wont to swear. But you will say^, that for the holy ^rinities sake the
number of. iii. is preferred. Tha^ grantyng the number of three is good, booth
it follow that the number of four, in which God concluded the elements, their
qualities and all perfect essences to be eu^l? What persuadeth you to thynk,
that the. xii. signs of the Zodsake have so diverse qualities, and according to
resons judgment, contrary to nature. For you will have Aries to be fyery,
which is the beginning of the spryng: more over you teach, that Taurus which is
a sign of the spryng, should be of earthly nature. Which thing how much it
strives against reason every man may perceive, that knows aptly how to
refer the spryng time to the element air. Cancer also the beginnynge of
Summer is safed to be a watrie sign. How fond therefore (...) vain are your
principles, which you are not able by any reason to demonstrate or prove, euvn
fools may easily understand, seeing you so foolyshly refer fire to water,
and air to earth. Besides this, it is no small matter in your cunnyng, to
attribute to every plnner his propre signs. But here also how much you diffre
from your own doctrine even Chor^bus himself if he were present, would
perceive, When you ^iuide the. xii. lignes of the Zodiake into sowed orders or
bands. To some you ascribe a nature erthy, to some watery, to some ayry, and to
sum fyery. Likewise when you give to every householder (as you call the
planettes) their serving signs: you grant sem to Saturn some to Jupiter, and
so forth to every one their propre signs. But this I can not pass over with
silence that almost every householder will maintain and keep in his service any
seruan ^es that are so reyugnant from his own nature and disposition. That is
they use them as ministers in bringyng their works to effect, I marvel how
they do not rather execute their own will, than the will of their masters. As
for example, Saturn which is said to be earthy, has Aquarius to wait upon
him, which all together consists of asry qualities. Jupiter reported to be
ayry, has two servants, Sagittarius and Pisces, of whom sagitarius is fyry,
and pisces warry. Likewise Man that is whose and dry, is content with the
service of Scorpio, that is cold and moist. Uenus boyng full of cold and
moisture, has Taurus an earthy sign, and Libra an ayry sign, dooyng her
service. I leave here to speak offeigned the distinctions and difference of
howses, angles, dignities, and other like of this kind: of all which if they
can prove but one principle by good and sownds reason, the way should be
more easy for them to depend the rest. But now seeing they have nothing that
can testify of the truth of their principles, it remaynethe, that the art it
self being grounded of fall propositions, and of them heaped to a huge and
great buildynge, this so selender and weak a foundation being taken away,
must needs fall down, and lie prostrate.

These things I do the oftener repete, that all men may know what vayn
bragges they make, whiles they take that whi che is no cause, in stead of a
sure and certain cause. For by what reason Saturnus should sygnifie this or
that, neither they them selves, nor any man else can show, and that we
have spoken of Saturn, the same also may be said of all the rest of
portendynge signs. Except peradventure they will boaste of sum revelations
to be given unto the snuen^rs of their art, which if they be not ashamed to
confess (as is their mad boldness they shall turn the folly, which now a
little, repentance would correct, into mer^ madness. Let us grant them their
private revelations, visions, and fantasies, for so we shall encreace their
follisshenes, with pride and vaineglorie, yet we are sure they are not to be
trusted. And to declare that more p^ninely, because all revelations are not of
one sort, let us deuyde them into two kinds: for some are given of good
angels, and some of evil: They that are given of good angels are such, as the
nature of good spirits is wont to be, that is to say true, profitable, and to
be thorte, generally good. The oracles of ^uyl spirits agree in quality with
the geuers of them: that is, they be false, hurtful, and evil. Now of whether
sort this revelation is, by which the principles of Astrology at the first
were reveled: let us in few words consider. Now uncertain these principles
are, and to speak plainly, how false, we may both see by daily experience,
and also we have sufficiently above declared. Seeing then it appears, that
your science is not derived from a good angel or spirit, when there you will
have it to come of an evil spirit, or of neither, the choice at this ^yme (O
Astrologians) shall be yours. In the mean season either cease to boaste of your
rotten and cancred art, orels by some way persuade your principles to be true,
to such as without proof can believe nothing. whether you entend to do, we
that shortly perceive: for if you bold your peace we have overcome, and will
celebrate a triumph for ouerthrowyng your mighty giant Atlas. But if any of you
be so ^ham les, that he dare enter into battle again^ truth, and us, that
maynteyn her quarrel, if he be found it ^onger in arms then we are, we will
give place, and yield, but if he be not able to abide our strokes, we will take
the castle of Astrology, and destroy all things that makes resistance, with
weapon, fire, and famine. Now we have cast our darts both in number and for
sufficient among the thickest of our ^mies, it remains that we beat back
the weapons thrown of them, or at the least take them clean away, that they
being destitute of them, may run about as it were fightyng and beatyng the air
with vain strokes. And to begin of that part, in w^che they put no small
confidence: I have herd many which boasted, that they were able to prove their
divination out of holy scripture: which me^ when by reason of co^ten tion they
were compelled to bring forth what they could for their defense, would sain have
concluded their vaticination out of the first chap. of Genesis. For when God
the most excellent wise workman, of nature had crea ted heaven and orth, with
his almighty word, had put also a difference between the light which he had
made, and darkness: more over had placed the firmament in the midst of the
waters: Furthermore gathered ye waters, yt before covered ye whole face of ye
earth for preservation of living cretures that he ente^ ded to create into one
place, and finally had garnished the earth with a most pleasant ve^ure of
trees and grene herbs, the fourth day determinyng to create lights, to make
distinction between day and night, appointed then their propre use, saying: The^
shall be unto signs unto appointed seasons (for so the Hebru word sou^deth)
unto dais and unto years, and the lights shall be in heaven to give light upon ye
earth, whose eternal will theffect straight way followed. For god made two great
lights, a greater light to rule ye day, and a lesser light to rule yt night,
and also ye stars. Here the prognosticators take no small cou rage, ye god
ordened the lights, ye they should be unto signs. But how little these signs
make for yt purpose of their predictio^s, he ye ^rarketh yc order and discourse
of yt words shall easily ^cesue. For yt which follows of appointed sesons,
likewise yt which follows of dais and years, these seem to me to expon^d what
manner of signs they shall be, ye is, they shall be tokens of sprig, so^mer,
au^u^ne, and win ter, of dais natural and artificial, long or short of years,
according to ye sons course, or to ye moons course, and so of yt rest. And
whereas here is chiefly mention made of ye son and ye moon, if we will needs by
signs, understand for showing, they shall be unto signs of he^ when yt son
oraweth nere to us, of cold wh^^ ^h departs, of abu^da^ce of humors when yt
moon increases, and ye contrary when she is in the wane or decreasing. But vf
of necessity you would have us to understand fatal ^dictions, notwe standing
the argument is in force, seeing you know not what ye stars do signify, you can
not by their aspects tell of things to come. But there be some, whi che as they
think will defend their science we much more strength, requiring that we should
grant them yt al things in earth ar ruled and governed by the power of ye
heavenly signs. Truly I am not so hard to be entre^ ted, ye. I would deny the
Astrologia^s being oppressed we such calamite so little a matter but rather I
will give the^ more the^ they de ma^d, and such thigs as I would beni the^ if
they were obstinate and stubburn, now flying to their shoot an^re and last
help, I will gentilly grant them. All higher things says Aristotle,
woorketh in the lower bebies. Let all the power in these lower things be
confessed to come from above. Nei there will we greatly at this time strive
against that deriuation of causes (devised by M^rcutius Trismegistus) from God
to the angels, from them to the heuens, that it perteyneth to Fortune or fate,
which he calls (...), neither do I see how it should hurt our cause that
we have in hand, if we granted them that which they most desire, and most
earnestly require, that is, that the stars have dominion and exercise their
power on men's matters contingently, that is, as it were a certain inclination
or some secret motion, (for if destenye consisted of the stars it could not
be changed) but as for the signification of the stars both we learn by
experience, neither do the Prognosticators deny, but that they may, by diverse
means be auerted or turned to some other effect. Therefore seeing we have
granted this, that could not be compelled, I long to see what help you can
from thens transfer to your selves. And now me thinks I hear an
Astrologian triumphyng on this manner: If the course of the stars, their
reuolutions and aspectes do so strongly work in these lower bodies, that they
should be causes of many effects in the earth: what fellow is this, that will
deny a proposition bearing witness to so many learned men's writings being
allowed by so many authorities of all ages, That the cause being granted, the
effect must needs follow, by what reason dare he affirm the cause, and deny
the effect^? But these so thretnyng words, what are they at the length but
very words in deed? For geuynge to every cause her propre effect, yet will I
not grant effect to that which is no cause: or if it be a cause, I will not
grant that to be the offect which they will have. For they know not what the
stars do cause or sygnifie, but embracyng an art delivered of their
ancestors, without any sure ground or foundation, have it in estimation as a
divine knowledge which contains in it no more divinity and truth then the
rest of the Chaldeans superstitions that yet remain: of whom this science was
received: which learned and wise philosophers in all ages contemned and
utterly despised. And not only heathen men as Porphyrius, which to Iamblicus
says, That it is impossible that a manu^ should know the signification of the
celestial reuolutions. Iamblicus himself whi che denies, that any virtue or
power descends from the stars, and diverse other contemned the vain
ostentation of this art: But the prophet Hieremye himself with loud voice
forbyddeth the Israelites to fear the influence of the stars, as the heathen
do. But therefore (say you) do they signify nothing? Wherefore I pray^ you, are
they not to be feared? either because they signify nothing, or because the
signification of them to men is uncertain and unknown? What, doothe not Paul
thapostle of the Gentiles exhort his scolar Titus, that he regard not foolyshe
and su perfluous questions of Genealogies and natiuities? F^r what cause then
does Jeremy forbydde to fear, and Paul to regard Predi^ions of Astrologye,
if in them were any thing either to be feared or regarded? Go your ways
now, and make the people afraid with horrible threatenings, proclayme great
calamity to follow^: Of pestilence, bat tail, and famyne: or if any thing
be more grievous then these? Warn them of a sodayn destruction that shall
fall upon them. As two years ago Cunyngham threatened to Egypt, Babylon,
Constantinople, and the Cities of Italye a most lamentable and utter
subversion. Had not the Italyans, Egyptians, Grecian^, and Chaldeans great
cause to fear, consyderyng that by the judgment of astrologians so great
ruin hanged over their heads? Who would not in this case have be^ afraid,
except it were such as (I can not tell how preposterously) would prefer
Hieremies pro^hecie before Cunyngha^^ prognostication? Likewise he that had
rather give credyte to the Prognosticatours then to saint Paul, should he
not having his nativity cast, forsee by it, what good things, and what
euyll^ things he should in all his life attain? so shall he deuyse to avoid
the euylle, and bring the good things to effect. O blockeheade, that must
have thy Nativity cast, how dooest thou determyne to lead thy life, like a
brute beast, that thou will suffer all things to work upon thee.
Wherefore serves thy reason which thou do not use? nay rather which thou
dooste abuse in such vanities. ^wynge thy fortune (ye say) by thy nativity
thou will endeavor thy self to seek for good things, and avoid evil
things. Why would thou not have done so, although thou had never asked
counsel of the (...)? Alas, when will the world leave to have in admiration
such curious vanities. But now an other objection. Berosus the Chaldean, a
most ancient histo riographer reports, that the holy Patriarch Noah did
forsee the universal flood by the aspect of the stars: and to the intent
that he might avoid the danger thereof, he made the arc to preserve the life of
himself, his sons, and their wives, and beasts of every kind. Then is not
so ancient a science much profitable ^omans* life, which the holy patriarch
did practice, and by help of which ma^kynd, beasts and what soever in all the
world was pleasant or profitable in time past was preserved from utter
destruction? This no light or contemptible author has reported, but even
Be^osus the Chaldea^. But Moses the Hebrew, being also a most just law geuer
and historye writer, as most ancient, so most faith worthy, witnesses,
That the Lord God spoke unto Noah, and foreshewed the universal ^loude,
commandynge him to make the Arc. And lest the Astrologians should dream of a
revelation by the stars, prescribed unto him a determinate form and measure
of the ship that he willed to be made. Then where is your boastyng of the
antiquity and necessarys use of Astrology? where be your bragges of the
patriarch Noah, whom you would have to be a patron of your folly? Shall we
believe Moses, which write that, which was reveled by God? orels Berosus
which studieng to advance an art invented of the superstitious Chaldeans,
imagyned and fained, that the floude was foreseen by the practice of that art.

Now therefore which way will ye turn the sail of your safety? The Patriarch
Noah does renounce you, Hieremie and Paul does hate you: Porphy^ius and
Iambli cus, does contemn you. Who shall then be your standard bearer? or who
the trompettour to blow out your praise? Ptholomeus ascribes as much
certainty to you as to the wind: For he affirms, That your prediction^ do
not bind any man, but only draw them that be wyllyng. Then by this reason
their will should be cause of those things that chance, and not the stars.
For against them that will not, the stars can do nothing: and them that he
willing they can not let to ^oo what they will. If this be true, as it is
most true what power is left to the influence of the stars: We grant, say
they that of those accions which a man does, his will is the next cause: But
of those actions which be not in a man's power, that is such, as he can not
bring to pass as he would, the stars be governors. But then to what
purpose or end dryueth that notable saying, which being sprung from anercellent
learned manne, all men by their consent do^e allow, that is, (A wise man shall
rule the stars) Is not this meant, that the signification of the stars
although they were known, have not so greatte power in men's mattiers, but
that a wise man's prouydence is of much greatter force, so that not without a
cause, A wise manne is said to re^ls the startes, that is to say, the
Iufluence and signification of the stars.

Yet sommetyme it comes to pass, that in casting a man's nativity, you
do hyt^e right of his lyse or manners. And we will not greatly str^ue against
you, but seeing you do so often and so diverse things foretell to every mann^e
by his nativity, yt were impossible, but that some what must needs chance
according to your predictions: yet this is by chance and not by art: for he
that wisely and ^ly gently reuolueth in his mind, that hen uenly revolution,
can not be certainly per suaded, that so momentaneous and short face of the
heuens should work any thing strongly so long time after: for in the moment of
an hour it is continually chau^ ged from one to an other: and this is the
cause, that Iamblicus thynkethe, that the differences of time, which the
Astrologiaus observe, avails little or nothing to the effect of strong and
meruaylous works. Besides this a certain Astrologian or Palmester, Johannes
Indagine affirms, that this short and momentaneous revolution of the heue^s
is of less effect and power then that, which he ^l leth natural astrology,
reducyng all fortes of men what saeuer they be^, unto xii. horoscopes,
according to the number of the twelve signs. Therefore as well he as the other
do ascribe so many and so diverse qualities to every manne by his nativity,
that of necessity some of them must be in every manne, As he whythe
says, That a man shall be apt to anger, Pride, Love, Pytye, and such
like: where as there is no man but he shall find these and such like qualities
in himself, if he enter into his own mind.

But to proceed, how every star has a name, which oftentimes seems to be
given by the signification thereof. Wherefore it shall not be out of the way,
sum thing to tarry in resonyng of their names, left perchance the
Astrologians of them (as of a gnatte) would seem to make an Elephant. First
therefore that the names whereby the stars are called, are not of their own
nature, but given to them by men. Johannes de sacro Bosco, sufficiently
hears wytnes, with whom Uer^ll agrees in his first book of Georgikes,
saying The shipman first then gave to stars their number, and their name:
The Pleiades, Hyades, and Lycaons, hear of worthy fame.


Nevertheless all the stars had not their names given them of the same
occasions yet they were al devised for difference that they might be one known
from another, as Bernardus Syluestris says very pretily. Lest that without^
distinction the co^mmon word should go,
The names whereby the stars be called, by men were termed so.
But of the names some were attributed unto them for the form which they seem
to bear in heaven to them that behold them: Of that sort ar the wain, the
crown, the ship, the serpent, the harp, and such like. Some bear their name
of their propre place, in which they be set: As Aries the ram first of
the stock, and first of the signs. Cancer the crabbe, (...) beast that goes
backewarde, gave name to that sign, in which the son retourneth to the
lower hemispher. Libra, the ba lance, that makes eue^ weight, so being the
name of a sign, it makes nights and days of equal length. Aquarius, the
water he arer and Pisees the fishes, for the abundance of water, that is, when
the son keeps his course in those places, gave name to those signs. Caper
the goat, which in fedyng lifts up himself, and seems to hang on the
rocks, was thought a mete name to be given that sign, in which when the Son
is, he daily rises up toward us from the Antipodes, or men that go with their
feet right against our feet. A great number also of the names whereby the
stars are called, were given of the Eth^kes, partly flattetyng their princes,
and partly beleuyng that their sowles being translated after their death into
heaven, had the do^mon of certain stars, and thereof from ancient time came
the names of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, O^ion, and such like. The men of
later time perchance think that they either have changed or retained certain
names, by reason of the qualities which they ascribe to the stars them
selves. But this is specially worth the markyng, that they are accustomed not
of the qualities to give the names, but of the names to derine their qualyties:
as to the Crabbe, which is a fyshe by the water side (although he be a sign of
the summer, yet being in heaven, they ascribe a wa^ry nature. Likewise to the
Bull, which is a melancolike beast even among the signs, they attribute an
earthy dispolition: The ra^me in deue^ also they will have to bear domini on of
the pe in earth, like as the bull of oxen. So also to Saturn which of the
poets was feigned to be a lur king god, they ascribe melancolike qualities,
but Jupiter which in the Fables is found a gentil and favorable God, is also
judged to be a well willing planet. Venus which was gentyl and amiable, even
among the stars is said to keye ye same nature still. Mereurius which is
reported of the poets to be a these and a crafty fellow, being translated to the
number of gods, is also unstable and inconstant, applying himself to every
company, for with the good, he is also good, and with the evil, agreeable in
quality with them. And now by this means we have veriued the significations
of most part of the planets, from the very fountain out of which they are
drawn, whereby every man may se upon what reason their principles both consist,
out of which they feine themselves as it were gods, to have knowledge of thin
ges past, things present, and things to com. But abide for, bid not the. iij.
wise men by aspect of a star in the east, understand, that Christ was borne,
and by leadyng of the same, come to the place of his birth, to worship him, how
then do you cry that the predictions of the stars are to be contemned? If you
entend to wrest this to the con firmatio^ of your art, by ye same reason you
shall conclude ye inumerable wonders which at yt time cha^^ed in all places were
done by ye order of nature. But at ye time al things ministered unto god: and ye
his power might appear, Nature her self went our of her ac customed place. For
at that time great and wondrous marvel happened, in so much ye the diuinors,
soothsaiers, magitians, and all they that were wont to tell the significations
of such matters, being demanded what these wonders meant, answered, That Nature
was in trauail with the LORD of all things created. There testeth no more
now, but to dissolve Cunynghams confutatione (set forth by him iwa certain
Epistle, which he calls his Inuectiue) by like force as we have done the
test. Master Cunyngha^ thinks yt he has reduced al adversaries calu^niations
unto ij. points: The first is, that yt knowledge of Astrology, is enemy to the
most laudable science of phisike: The other, That the Astrologia^ can not
foreshewe things to come by his stars. Concerning the former part he
sends us over to Hipocrates the prince of phisike, in his book De aere, aqua,
and locis. Seeing therefore it was needful for me to read over that book
(although not agreeable with my study and profession) yet having one lent me,
according to the small leisure that I had, and the little capacity of my poor
wit, I read him over both in Greek and latin. And truly as far as I
remember the notes of the margent in the latin translation proclaimed open war
between Hipocrates and me: but when I looked nerer to him self, I found no man
so friendly to me, which prescribed so profitable necessary use of astronomy
(not ones dreaming of fatal signs, as they would seem to have him. But seeing
peradventure I shall seem to dispute on these matters beyond my cunnyng, I
would said learn of doctor Cunyngham what argumentt to confirm Astrology
he can gather out of that book. In the mean time such things as I read and
understood, I will briefly recite. Hipocrates speaks much of the risyng of
certain signs and stars, as of the Pleiades, Arcturus, Canis, and such
other, all the which sayenges are most plainly to be referred to the state of
Time that is, when those signs rise or go down. And not here only, but also
in his Aphorisms, Hipocrates dryuethe to the same end. Wherefore he
concludes, That the knowledge of Astronomye, not of Astrology, is profitable
to the science of phisike Because that by the course of the stars the
physician may forsee many things ne cessary to his science. Not that the
stars ^oo foretell him of any thing, but that their risynge or falling is
coincident with such state of time. Secondly, master Cu nyngbam concludes,
that things to come may be forsene by aspect of the stars, by this argument.
If the Maryner by his signs can forshe we the tempest to follow, the Physician
by his tokens, can forsee the increace or declination of the liknes. The
husband man by his argument can fortell the state of the year to follow, why
may not the learned Astrologian by his stars have knowledge of things to
come? As for example, Mars is whotte and dry, now yt he see many fyery
things mete with him, may he not boldly pronounce that the year following
shall be much inclined to heat. But of how small force this argument is, we
shall understand by the easy solution thereof. For granting that the maryner,
physician, and husband man can forsee things by his certain signs and
tokens: Yet what fatal necessity (in gods name) compels us to think
likewise of thastrologians. For the example that is brought to confirm the
matter, is more doubtful then the matter it self: for we can not tell of what
nature Mats is, nor thastrologians them selves, so that is they will prove any
thing by this argument, they must first show by what reason they call Mars
whote, or Saturn cold.

For except they be sure of this, that they make their priciples true, they may
at their pleasure conclude what they list. But their propositions shall have no
more credit then truth and certayntie. Wherefore not because the phisitia^ or
the mariner can know any thing, therefore the astrologians shall do the like,
except they fetch their premo^ strations of as sure grounds as the other do.
But lest we should to insolently inuey against these false tellers
(foretellets I would say, master Cunyngham has given us ensaumple of two years
that chanced according to the predictions of moisture, 1524, and dryness.
1540. But here I appeal to Cuninghams wisdom, why he brings exaumple of two
years only, and them so long ago past? and why he did not she we exaumple
of three years last paste? if he will boaste that his art is certain and
true, why doothe he not declare, that the event of every year was such, as
thastrologia^s for showed it should be, whether because all men with one
voice would say nay^or else because of time long paste he may feign, and no man reprove him. but there shall need no such co^ tention we will grant. xx.
years sens astrol. first began, which happened according as the prognosticators
fortold them: wylyon then boast that your diuinatio^ is true, be cause of.
2000. years only, twenty serus for your purpose. But these things being so
clear I omytte.

And that we may make haste to the had uen that is not now far of, seeing
this ap^she art is unprofitable to the works of phisike, to the profit of
the students, to the state of the common wealth: and seeing that without
principles nothing can be known: but astrology consists either of no
principles, or of false, in is soft labony that is spent in thobseruation
thereof: in vain it is to credit their predictions, vnsust it is, that she is
of the unlearned people reverenced, more worthy to be buried under the channel
of Lethe, the river of ob liuion, than that she should enioyeng the clear
light of men, be had in any estimation. But if there be any Prognosticatour
that will take upon him to defend Astrology thus battered in pieces, let him
make haste to do it, before she utterly false to ruin.

FINIS.
Herafter follows a short Treatise, as well for the utter subversion of this
fained art, as also for the better understanding of the common people.
The preface to the Reader.
COnsyderyng with my self, (gentyl reader) that so manynotable workmen at this
time, has by their cunning, and also by their dilligent labor, have laid
the foundation of a most worthy buildynge: and also brought the same a good
way above the ground, intending by gods help not only to finishe the
plain work thereof, but also to garnishe it with such ornaments as might
beseem so princely a palayce: I thought it not my part for the good
affection that I heart to the work, to stand altogyther ydell, if by any
means I might be profitable in the same. And walking about to see the
compass and fasshion of it, I perceived that the great stones which pertayned
to the structure were such as neither by my strength I was able to list
them, nor yet by my cunnyng in that kind of mas^ ry to place and join them:
but as for hewyng or fashionyng them, I saw it was so far above my knowledge
and understanding, that I did not ones apply my self to have any medlynge
with them. At the last when I had ^ewed all other things sufficiently, I
espied a little heap of rubbyshe which not only hyndered them that went to
and fro over it, in specdynge their work, but also seemed to be no small
deformity to the leuelled playnesse of the statte form, whereon the buyldyng
should stand, I might see also that some of the master masons them selves had
taken pains in remouynge the same unprofitable Chaos: which caused me to
think, that I could not be better occupied then to conney the same quight out
of the way, that it should neither be a let nor an ill sight, in the
procedyng of so necessary busynes. Wherefore I prepared and made for my self
as it were a little wicker baskette, which I might easily bear, so carry away
this hyndryng heap, where it shall be confused and utterly dispersed abroad.
And although the substance of my bas kette be simple and weak, yet it is good
enoughe to carry tubb^ ^he and such light stuff as I put therein. But as soon
as I began to turn up the upper part thereof, I understood, that because it
had lyenge long compacte together, there is was bredde in it a great number of
toades and snakes that began to hysse and spewe out their poison against me,
because I diseased them of their nesle and barrborowe. But God be thanked I
come not naked among them, I have an armoure called Veritas, that is able to
withstand the malice even of dragons, and crocodiles. Some men percha^ce would
marvel why I would not strike ^eim, that so furiousely have gone about to
stynge me. In deed I have prepared al ready moderate defense, but I stay upon
certain doubts that are these:

First, whether it be the point of al^ned manne to rail or no^

Secondely, whether the conclusion in Syllogismo litigiolo be good or no?

And thirdly whether there be a kind of argument called Syllogismus
conuciatorius, or no? these doubts resolved I wold^ proceed. As for Uaughan I
have nothing to do with him, but to wysshe him his tyghte wits and a good
tongue.

I have taken upon me to dissolve this mass at astrology, and that by gods
help I will do to the vttermoste of my power, so that my contention is
against no man. But my labor is to remove this obstacle out of good menues
ways, and if any ill men hereafter exercise their malice upon me, I must needs
say as Socrates said: Though an ass spurn against me, I will not go to law
with him. Therefore they that have delight in railyng, let them rail and spare
not: They that have pleasure in scoffyng, let them scoff and flowte till
they have proved them selves common parasites and sycophantes in so dooynge, I
will not ones be moved with such unhonest means. But if any man shall
propounde any probable argument to maintain this cause, I will do the best I
can to answer it, and if I be not able (as I have always offered) I will yield
unto him. Wherefore gentle reader, if thou cansts find thy self eased with
any of these two small trauayles, I have my request.

TO begin plainly as we entende to proceed, we must first call to
remembrance, what matter we have in hand and then with like plainness
declare, what plain order we ent^nde to take in discussyng of the same.
Therefore omyttynge all colors of rhetor^ke, and all impediments of painted
speech, our pur pose is (to speak it at one breathe) utterly to overthrow
the science of astrology. Astrology (lest any man should doubt, because it
is no English word) is said to be a knowledge, whereby the practisers of it
say, that they can tell of all thing that are not come to pass, before they
come to pass, by the course and mouyng of the stars, or else to describe it
more plainly, is yt knowledge by which the prognosticatio^s be made, that
tell of rain and fair weather, sickness and health, war and peace, plenty
and dearthe, with such like: By which also they cast your natiuities, tell
you ^oure fortunes, pretend to give you knowledge of things that be lost: and
last of all appoint you days and times good or evil, for all things that you
have to do. As, for works of phisike, to let blood to take purgations, and al
other medicines for other common matters, to sow, to plant, to journey by land,
to journey by water, to bye and sell, to marye, to begin any work, and
finally to attempt any thing that men use commonly in their life to do. Our
intent is therefore in this short Trea tise to persuade all such as he thereto
being deceived by a false opinion of learning, have given credit unto them:
that herafter (if they see that all is not only vain, but also ungodly) they
clean forsake them and their prophesie^ as things that let them to prosper
well in their business and also hinder them to put their trust in God and his
promyses. For what confidence has be in god or his word, that dare not take
in hand any honest and ver^ous affairs (in which God has promised to aid
and set forward all them that love him) except ^e must first ask counsel
of a blind southsayer and Astrologia^? And let them not be offended though I
call them blind, for according to the proverb, Who is so blind as, he that
will not see? But perchance so^me will say^, that because I am blind and
ignorant in so goodlye a science, therefore I (...) dysprayse it. As towchynge
that matter, they have no cause to say so, for be it spoken without
diswoorshyp of any of them, and with small pride in my self, I know what the
art is as well as they, and so much the rather do I condemn it, lest
seeing the vanity and uncertainty thereof, I should be counted as they are,
wylfully blind, and not seeing when their eyes be open.

Thus much for our entente, our order shall be such, as best may be
perceived. For we will first speak^ against the wholle knowledge generally,
and then particularly against every membre and parcel thereof. And because
we will spend no paper in superfluous sentences, we must remember what was
said in the former book, that it was impossible for any man to have any
knowledge of thynge^ to comme ^y the course of the stars. Whereunto we will
add for playnner ^nderstandynge this that follows. As towchyng t^ mouynge and
course of the hea^ens, because men may see th^ym, they might also (as they
have doo^) by long and dilygent observation find out a learning, that should
^each the truth of the^, but seeing the stars be all of one form or facion,
yt is sphericall or round like a ball, (although some be greatter then some
also some higher then some) it can not be, that a man beholding or lookyng upon
them, should understand of what qualities or significations they are. As for
the color of them (although to speak exquisitely by the rules of natural
philosophy they have no color) is ^o like in most (exceptynge the son and
the moon) that in so small variety of colors, a man can not discern so
diverse and many qualities. And not withstanding that they ymagine the
planette Saturn to be black or blewe, and Mars to be read or fyery, they
can if they were disposed (I mean the learned sort) give an other reason of
their color, nothing serving for the auauncement of their pretende^
knowledge. By this it is manifest, that by seeing, lookynge, or beholding the
stars, no man can know what they signifye, forasmuch as by the sight
nothing can properly be perceived but color and fashion. Then what way is it
possible, that a man should understand what those high bodies all of one colour^
and fashion should betoken? Some will say peradventure, that as the course of
the stars was found out by diligent observation, so likewise their
sygnifications were learned by earneste markyng wha^ chanced always under
every sign or planet. How untrue this is, we shall part ly now declare, and
partly leave till we come to the particulars.

First therefore that their significations could not so be learned, it is
manifest by this reason: That those things which chance or come to pass be
infinite, that is innumerable to men, how then could a certain number of men
know or learn whether all those things came to effect as they had marked in
a few? for although they had taken their observation in as ma ny as they
could, yet were there many mo, yea ten thousand times as many which they
knew not of, that might happen clean^ contrary to their devise. Does it not
then plainly appear, that by observation no man could discern what those
signs and heavenly bodies did forshew? Then if neither by beholding the^, nor
yet by marking or observation of the^, it might be that man's wit could find
out their signification: there remains no way how to know them, but that
fond fantasy of revelation by some spirit or aungelle. Which I have not
without a cause before touched (although some would think that I ymagin that
objection of my self) because that of some it is so objected, not only in
words, but also in writynge.

Concerning revelation we have some ^ynge said all ready, whereunto we will
join this, that God vse^ not by his mynysters to reveal any knowledge unto
men, but such as is to his glory and their profit. Now what avails it to
Gods glory, that mortal men should have understanding of all things that
he purposes to do, as who should say, he would have men as cunning as him
self, or as thowghe he should rule the world by their prognostications. And
no profit can it be to men, to have such knowledge, which if it were
true, (as it is most ^alse) they were not able to preuente. If, God therefore
does not reueals any thing which is not to his glory, and the proufyte of
his creatures, me think that vain objection is clean put out of the way.
Let this suffice for our purpose of inueyenge generally. Therefore proceed
we to the particulars, which although there be as many as there be diverse
actions, yet we will entreat only of two^ sorts: the one of foreshewynge the
states of things and times, that other of chusyng days and oportunyties. And
to begin with that which seems chieffest among them, to prognosticate of
war and peace, I marvel that men are so mad, as to look for war out
of their predictions, knowing that the cause thereof proceeds not of the
stars, but of the devil, which always labourethe to break the bonds of
unity and concord, that should be among christian men. And where doothe he
plant the cause thereof, but in the king, whose heart the scripture witnesses,
that as the divisions of waters, so is it in the lords hand, and whether he
will, he moves it. Seeing therefore that the king is not subject to the
influence of the stars, neither is any thing that proceeds from him,
governed by them, and then consequentlye and necessarilye it folowethe, that
all matters concerning the commune wealth, as war and peace, discord and
rebellyon, laws, and such like, can neither be forshewen nor foreseen by
Astrology: dearthe and plentye be caused by reasone of seasonable weather, or
unseasonable: Then if the stars have nothing to do with wether, they have
less to do with plenty or scarcity, which are caused thereby As for clouds
whereof rain comes, they are drawn up in thynne vapors, by the heat of the
son, into the myddle region of the air, and there, by cold, are made
gross, then by some wyndes they are dissipated and driven abroad, or else by
some resolved and drop down. And this is the cause for the most part, of
rain and fair wether, so ye except the uncertainty of the wynd may be known
by the stars, rain and fair wether can never be foreshewed. But whereof
comes the wynd* I am sure they will not deny the Philosophers definition
gathered out of the second book of his Meteors, which is, that the wind is
an exhalation whot and dry, drawn up by the heat of the Son, and for the
weight of it self falling down, is laterally or sydelonges carried about the
earth. By this definition all power of signifying stars is clean excluded.
And as towchynge the place from whens the wynd blows, the same philosopher
does also declare, that as it happens the matter thereof to be carried, so from
that place it moves. And here by the way where as I use the words of Happen
and Chance, you must not take me, that I mean the thing should come by
blind fortune or case: For I am of opinion, that nothing comes to pass
without a cause, but my meaning is, that by the causes and occasions thereof, so
it came to effect. But to return into the way again, seeing the cause of the
wind is not forsene by the stars, no more can the wether that is partly
caused by it, nor yet the dearthe or plenty which chances by occasion of
the weather, be by Astrology foreshewed. Then wi^ al those ^ut of your
Prognostications, for what should they do there, of which it is impossible
that you should prognosticate. Sycknesse and health depend upon diverse
causes, but nothing at al upon the course of the stars. for what way soever
the stars run their race, if there be in the body abundance or defect, or
from outward by corruption of the air infection it must needs be sick: and it
none of these be, though all the stars in heaven with all their oppositions
and evil tokens should meet in the house of sickness, yet the body should be
whole, and in good health. But you will say, that those causes of sickness are
wroughte by the constellation of the stars. Well ones we have a good con fort
of Hieremy the prophet, that those are not to be feared. And to answer this
objection I would have taken pains, (...) that the most part of
Astrologians ar by profession physicians, which if they be in deed as they
profess, and have learning according to their degree (which I doubt not but
they have) they know assuredly, that the causes of sycknes and health hang
nothing upon mouyng of the celestial bodies. The more shame is it for them,
if they stiffely and stoutely maynteyn and defend that which they know to be
most vain and false. But leave sycknesse and health to them that have
chiefly to do with them, and comme to Natiuytyes or Fortune tellynges.

If I had not been my self seduced by such a vain credyte that I gave to
the wrytyngs of Astrologians, I would never believe, that any manne endewed
with common sense and reasone, should have respect to casting of Natiuityes,
or Fortune tellynges. For what madness is yt to think, that being but
twelve signs and seven planettes, every syngular manne has of them his
singular constellation. I confess that every syngular manne by the providence
of God is guyded and preserved, but that every man that is borne has his
syngular influence, it is to much incredyble. For I dare be bold to say (and
if I were driven to it by good reasone prove it) that at one instant or Nunc,
there is sometime borne a king and a sclaue, a warryour and a cowarde, a wise
man and a fool, a learned manne, an unlearned person, a true man and a thief,
a rich man and a poor, a Christian and a Pagan, a man and a beast. How
then shall the Astrologian tell all these their Fortune, by one
constellation? Furthermore what a strange matter is it, that one constellation
should work to so sundry effects? as if an Astrologian had erected a
figure for one man's natiuytie, a another comes to know of a thing lost,
at the same instant, the third comes to hear if a sick man shall dye or
recover, All these must have their aunsweres shapen them out of one figure.
But they will say perchance, that all these can not happen at ones, then
let them answer me to this question: Is there but one kind of thing done
in the whole world, or under one meridian at one instant or moment? And be
allother idle for that time* As for example, when one steals, is there
nothing done at that time but ^alynge: When a king is borne, is none borne el^
but kings? Or when a sclaue is brought forth, is their none else that season
brought forth but sclaues? Therefore if they can not avoid the mischefe of
this answer, let them be ashamed to practice any more such vain
predictions, yea let them be astayde to use tellyng of fortunes, lest they be
counted in that point as ill as wicked Ma^asses, of whom the scripture
reports, that among other his sins he had also regard to soothsayenge and
fortune telling. As for Consurynge, I will not charge them, because their
predictions are not so sure as they are wont to make.

But perchance they will say that all that I have yet said, either against
their art generally, or against these particulars, y^ of no more strength then
stubble or straw. Wherefore to shut up the gappe, I entende to lay a great
block in their way. And I shall desire, them when they make answer, (if
they make any at all) that accor ^ynge to the proverb, They will not stoumble
at a straw, and leap over a block. And the block that I will lay is of the
heavy burden that the Lord by the prophere Esays 47. Chapter threatens unto
Babylon the inuentresse of this art, where h^ says: Now let the heaven g^sers
and beholders of stars, the moon prophets come and deliver thee, yea and
let them show thee, when these things shall come upon thee: Behold,
(says he) they shall be as straw, which if it be kyndled with sire, no man
may rydde it from the ^hamence of the flame.

Do you not hear, O you Astrologians, that the prophets says, that you
can have no knowledge of things to came, as of war, syckenesse, dearthe,
unseasonable weather, destruction, and such other, which he threatens unto
Babylon. For it is manyfests, that this phrase or manner of speaking, which the
Prophet uses, Let them show when these things shall come to pass, is a
stronger ^gation or denial, then if in plain words he had said: They
can not shew^ the^, when these things shall comme to pass. Mark also what
reward is promised to the users of this foreshewynge, that they shall be^ in
Gods wrath as straw^ kyndeled with sire.

But I leave this to their wysedom and discretion to consider, and will
proce^ede to the second kind of particulars, that is Elections or chusynges of
days. And here have I nothing to do with Galeues ((...)) for it is marvel if
that it be not objected against me, but I begin with good days to let
blood. And what is the cause of bloudde lettynge? surely I think either to
dyminishe humors in the body, or else to abate heat, or at least some such
cause in the body. which if it be urgent, will not stick to kill the body,
without consideration of sign or planet, orels if it be not so vehement will
hurt the body, without respect of good days or ill. Therefore seeing this
abundance of blood will not tarry for good dais or ill, but will proceed to
annoy the body: wherefore should the body tarry for good signs to be rydde of
it? And likewise of purgations, what sort soever they be: If any thing be
needful to be pourged, yt will not cease from annoyeng upon good days, and
work his malice only upon tuyll days: but who so ever is troubled with any
such thing, shall feel that his disease little regards the course of the
stars, and he, if he be wise, will as little regard them in sekyng for
remedy. Who so should narowly mark this gear, should find out among them
grievous absurdities, but we entende to make but short work. Now therefore
must we leap from phisike to husbandry.

Good days to sow and plant, I think be when the earth is moderatly
moystned, and gentilly warmed with the heat of the son, which must bring up
these seeds or plants nourished with humors, and pleasauntly resolved with
the southweste wind, or other of like nature, As for the sign or
constellation if the aforesaid lack shall never prosper or increase, the
seeds sown or plants planted, nor endamage them, if these causes d^o not
sail, and although both mete together, it is as much healpe unto the seeds
as it was ease for the Camel whenns the Fly leapt of from his back.

To journey by land is good when so ever a man has honest and necessary
affairs, the better if the weather be fair, and the way clean, specially if
he be a foot manne. But he, that having urgent busynes will tarry until he
have a good day, is worthy to come to late, or as they say, A day after the
fair. For he that will not take hold of occasions hear that is before him,
when she has ones turned her back may clawe on her bare skulle, and find
never an hear to take hold of.

Good days to iourneye by water, are partly as they are to journey by land,
and also it is required, that they have a good (...) and prosperous wind. With
which i^ they begin their course, it is a great (...) that they shall have
good success. If any manne having wind and weather, ty^ and tide convenient,
will tarry for ^erre or planette, sign, or constellation, (...) leese those
former oportunities, though he had all the favorable stars in heaven an
his side, shall have a troublesome voyage.

Good days to bye and selle, be market days, and all other whenever a man can get a good bargayne with honesty. I think but sewe marchantes
will leese their mart in waightyng for heavenly healpe from the stars.

Evil days to bye and sell be holydais, and such times as men should be
occupied in prayer, and hearing gods word. Ill places to bye and selle, be
Churches, and other places appointed for prayer and preaching. Other days and
places be indifferent, if the bargayns he good.

Good days to mary are all the days in the year of their nature, in as much
as to do a good thing it is good at al times: The marriage it self takes not
effect (as these superstitious diuinours say) of the day or time but of the
cause and circumstaunce in which it is contracted. For if those be naught,
not Uenus nor Jupiter nor all the loving signs can make that marriage good:
And if thou marry in the fear of God, though Mars and Saturn satte over thee,
and though it were on the most dismal day that ever Egyptian or Chaldean
observed, thou shalt be sure of the Lords blessing, which he promises to
all them that in his fear and love enters into that honorable estate. So
much the more is their unwholesome harmony to be hissed out, that appoynts
certain days, in which if a man should marry, the parties should never agree
or love one the other.

But I leave the rest until such time as I shall be driven to answer them,
where if they keep not modesty, as I think I have done, I will yet utter
more to the confusion of them, and their art.

But to close this part of Elections as we did the other with a sure bar,
wherewith God would bar the Israelites, in the, xviii. chapter of
Deuteronomie, saying by Moses, Chere shall not be among you any choser of
days or soothsayer. For those nations whithe the Lord casts out before you
among other abhominatio^s have regard to choosers of days, and sorcerers.
Therefore if this seem not enough to keep out the Astrologians, but they will
needs enter with their predictions and Elections, at the least let all
them that now even with their hands feel and handle the truth, hereafter
suffer them, as they are false prophets, so to prophecy to them, which in
the myddest of light and truth, will peruersely embrace falsehod error and
darkness.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Henry Sutton dwelling in Pater noster row at the sign
of the black Boy. The. 23. day of December. And are there to be sold.

Perused and allowed according to the Queen's majesty's injunctions.




