A LEARNED EPISTLE OF M. JOHN FRASER: BACHLER OF DIVINITY TO THE MINISTERS OF
GREAT BRITANIE. Wherein he shows that no man ought to subscribe to their
confession of faith. And that their presumed authorite to excommunicate any
man, especially Catholics, is vain and foolish.

Permissu Superiorum.

1605.

TO THE ^VRITAINE MINISTERS OF GREAT BRITANIE HIS COVNTREYMEN John Fraser
wishes upright mind tovvarde both God and Prince.
HEARING of your extraordinary dealing, according to the nature of your
extraordinary calling, in outward show only against Catholic men, In very
deed against o the God and Prince. I thought it my duty or the public good,
to write some thing ouching that subject where by ye might nderstand how ye
deceive your selves, and buse others in that matter; which is this: ^e labor by all means to constrain men, ^ho at Catholic (for as to others men ye ^ not
very careful) to approve swear and ^bscribe your confession of faith; and in
case they refuse, ye take upon you to exco^municat them. Wherefore with Godds
grace we shall latt you see, that no honest man, true subject or good Christian
with safe conscience, can approve swear or subscribe your forsaid confession:
and that ye have no power at al to exco^municat any man: and although ye had,
yet could ye not excommunicat Catholic men.

2. As a plain dealer without further preface I will enter in the matter. The^
to the first head, it is certain that whosoever will swear and subscribe your
new confession, contrary to the duty of an honest man, puts him self in
hazard to be mensworne, and that in the very entry of his oath: for their be
your words, if I rightly remember: we al and every one of us under written
protest, that after long and dew examination of our own consciences in
matters of true and false religion, ar now thoroughly resolved in the truth by
the word and spirit of God. Many faltes in few words, if men would long
time, and duly examine them in their consciences before they approve,
subscribe or swear them to be true: for first every man here answers for his
companion and fellow saying: we al and every one of us etc. where if any of
the number has spoken against the verity or his conscience, all the rest ar
liars. Nixt, what examination can be long in so weghtie a matter? certainly
not forty days, yea not forty years. When these things comes in
controversy we may well say without reprehension Deliberandum est diu, quod
statuendum est semel. Thirdly, how can any man duly examine his conscience in
matters of true and false religion, seeing that his conscience or judgment can
not be a just square of religion, because it surmounteth al human reason, and
is comprehended only by faith, not of our own forgeing, but of Gods free
gift? or how can he duly judge upon true and false religion who never has
seen, heard, or read the reasons of al parties? For as a temporal judge, not
without great reason, may be thought to judge very rashly, if he pronunce his
sentence and decreit before he hear both the parties, not withstanding the
matter be of small importance and value, and that he have judged according to
the right, because he has judged before he knew the ground of the matter, and
so if he has done well, it was more by hap then good reason. So the spiritual
judge may be esteemed rash and foolish, if in matters of religion and faith he
decreit any thing, except* al reasons be well discussed. Wherefor he who would
duly examine his conscience in matters of tr^w and fals^ religion (seeing he
take^h upon him the charge and place of a judge) should with great discretion,
quiet spirit and humble mind, without any passion try both the true and false,
read al books touching that subject, weighing the reason diligently: because
the profit is great to them that goes right, and the danger likewise to them
who goes wrong. Now how the greater part of your swears and subscribers can
do or execute this charge truly I see not, yea can not guess, seeing that a
good number of your selves, who ar ministers, and should be best armed at
destitute both of books and good learning. Certainly ye can not justly ask
of gentilmen, or others of meaner degree making profession of arms or
housbandry, that which, ye your selves who do make profession of letters can
not do: ye may easily judge that gentilmen and commone people for lack both
of learning and books can not duly, and for lack of time can not long and
vvorthly examine their conscience in sic things their affairs ay hol^ing them
occupied otherwise; meikilles to swear that they have done that, which neither
have they done, nor could they do at any time. Albeit there were no othere
reason but this, yetafter my judgment, it were most just and sufficient for
any man to refuse your subcription and swearing, and should move you not to
urge men there to, except perhapes ye seek only their utter ruin and
damnation, for doubtless they are mensworne who swears that to be true* which
in their conscience they know to be false, or are not assured if it be true, of
which nature ar these things which are contained in your confession, seeing they
proceed of men who ar subject to error and false opinion, and so can gif no
good assurance, where upon men may establish their faith. Which cannot be
certain and firm except it have an infallible ground and fondament free from
all suspicio^ of error. I may with many weighty reasons prove that honesty
could not stand with sic manners* and shall bring them if it be needful.

3* For the feconde head it is ^ar against the duty of a true subject
toward his Prince and liege lord, to whom he is obliged from the first moment
of his birth to his last breath, wherefor can not gif his band of ma^red, no^
oath of fidelity to any other but with exception of his sovereign, which
notwithstanding ye desire of your subscribers: for speaking of the word of God
(for so ye call your interpretations) and doctrine of your reformed kirk, ye
say thus, to the which we join ourselves willingly in doctrine, faith,
religion, discipline and use of th holy sacraments as lively members of the
same in Christ our head, promising and swearing, by the Great name of the
Lord, that we shall continue in the obedience of the doctrine and discipline
of this kirk, and shall defend the same according to our vocation and power
all the days of our lives, under the pains contained in the law, and danger
both of body and soul, in the day of Gods fearful judgment. There be here
an absolute oath and without any exception, made to you and your reformed kirk,
not only in matters of religion and doctrine, but also in government and
discipline. It is not my intent at this present to examine the manyfold
absurdities of this new form of oath, in passing I say only, that it shall be
very hard to any of your swearers to behave him self well with other
protestant ki^kes, who are both in doctrine and discipline far different from
you: shall he enter incontinent in desence of your reformation? shall he
trouble all states where he does come? Truly all men have that opinion of
your religion, that it brings every where seditions with it, as the most
turbulent sect that ever yet was invented in our country. Ne long exempla
petantur Betonio primi maduerunt sanguine muri. Or shall he following the
maxim of your faith call all in doubt not withstanding of his oath, because ye
are but men and may err, except ^e may gif some good and sure reason, why ^e
only say true, and all the rest of the world false, and that nothing can
proceed out of your mouth, but verity: for your oath imports no less with
it. And certainly without that pretogatiue of assured verity bound to your
heads and tounges, to astrict men to your doctrine and discipline formed or
reformed by you, neglecting the authority of your reformed kirk in general,
may seem somewhat against reason, and very preiudiciable to the Prince and
common wealth. For by this oath all must depend upon you as upon the
sovereign magistrate, the solemn oath and absolute promise being made in
favor of your doctrine and discipline, which ye have in your hands and
ministration. This may be easily seen by the oath made to the Kings Majesty,
or rather against him, which ye set down in this form. And because we
perceive that the quyetnes and stabilitie of our religion and kirk does depend
upon the safety, and good behavior of the Kings Majesty as upon a
confortable instrument of Gods mercy granted to this country sor the
mainteining of his kirk and ministration of justice among us. We protest and
promise with our hearts under the same oath, handwrit, and pains, that we
shall defend his person and Authority, with our geir, bodies, and lives, in
the defense of Christ's Euangell, liberty of our country ministration of
justice, and punishment of iniquity, against all enemies within this realm
or without, as we desire our God to be a strong and merciful defender to us
in the day of our death, and coming of our lord Jesus Christ to whom with
the father and the holy spirit be all honor and glory eternally Ai^^ Let us
consider the parts of this new oath. Because (say ye) we perceive that the
quyetnes and stabilitie of our religion and kirk does depend upon the safety
and good behavior of the Kings Matie? etc. Well begoune truly; that ye
mistak not your selves, ye lay down the cause why ye will do or at lest
appear to do some service to his Majesty, as long as ye perceive things that
please you, that is as long, as al things at done according to your fantasy,
ye will be good and obedient subjects, or rather masters, seeing ye prescribe
conditions to him who truly is your Master: and reasons why ye will bestow
any thing upon him. What if any reformed imaginations take you, or some
extraordinary zeall of your heavenly discipline trouble your brain, and make
you perceive according to your passion (as drounken men does see two candels
where there is but one) any other thing in his Majesty? What if ye find not
that good behavior ye looks for? Must he dress all his actions to your
fantasies and good pleasure? will ye be censours and comptrollers of his doings
if he use not your counsel and aduys^? If your perceauing of things to you
agreeable be the ground and cause of your promise and protestation, how soon ye
preceaue in your fantasy the contrary, ye ought him nothing (I mean
according to your opinion) sublata causa ^ollitur effectus if I serve you
because ye nurish me, if ye cease to nurish me, I am no further obliged to
serve you. what shall become here of your hearty promises and protestations
when your sight shall be changed? to what state shall the common wealth be brought
when your foolish affections show a rule to the Kings Majesty and honorable
con^ell to govern his realm? many things appears to us otherwise then they are: and reasons being known, they are found good, that seemed ill before: we
say commonly there should Artis ig^arus.
no hyndman half work see. ye do many things in your house perhapes well and
honestly, which were neither expediet nor decent to be deuulgated to every man:
as also ye have some secret counsel touching your affairs, which ye should
loosse, if your intention were publikly known. Think also that King^s and
Princes according to their great ranks have secrets, which should not nor can
not be published without prejudice of both Prince and state, the which can not
be co^serued sometimes without the evident damage and hurt of some particulare
men (as by the loss of one member some time we preserve the rest of the body)
by which we should not esteem and mesure the princes actions but by the publik
utility, which they procure better then we can see or understand: because
their authority and experience gifeth them the wisdom and knowledge which we
can not have Caesaribus virtus contigit ante diem. There be certain arcana
imperij whereto we can not penetrate, and therefore like fools often times we do
judge rashly, and condemn things which we understand not. Wherefor we should
do well not to enter in judgment of so high matters. Quam quisque nouit artem
in ea se exerceat. but your extraordinary calling makes you masters in all
crafts, and your new discipline will not suffer you to have so long patience.
Ye who enter in Gods cabinet when ye list, must know all things at the first
instant: nothing should be hid to you. ye have received the spirit of
discretion, nothing should be done without your approbation. Ye ar in the
chair of verity, ye may speak what ye will; judge whom ye please, comptroll
whom ye list: approve or improve as ye think good or ill: ye have taken the
power: ye have received the oath: all men ar your subjects, so the Prince is
subject to your perceauing, the principal rule of your new populaire tribuna^.
But ye will say that my conclusion followed not upon your antecede^t. I would be
glad it were so and that I were deceived in my opinion, so willing I am to
hear that there were no traittour in our country. But if we will consider the
solemn oath passed before in favor of your new reformation, to defend and
observe the doctrine and discipline thereof under so horrible a promise, or
rather imprecations and execrations as we have noted before, it followed very
necessarily: for ye may extend (as ye do when it pleased you) the borders of
your discipline, as far as it seemed good to you, and interpret your doctrine
as ye think most expedient, and so perceive what ye please, where ye shall
acknowledge or not, his Majesty as ye shall think it most fit for your present
place, or proper for the advancement of your reformed kirk, to whom ye will
have all men obliged with so terrible oaths without any exception or
restriction. A very hard obligation and law, principally being at the
execution and will of tippertin witted young fellows (who commonly at rash and
foolhard^e in all their doings) or in the hands of ambitious and seditious men,
who willingly do trouble all to come to their de^yre, to which by good means
they can not easily atteine. your holy poets Buchanans pamphelet, has many
notable maxims to thi^ purpos, where upon men may build a world o^ seditions
and discords: But if your poets authority (whose advise not the less ye have
so skilfully followed that ye may seem ^ather masters then disciples or
prentises) can be no prejudice to your pretended innocence Kno^.
and good mind, at lest your prophe^s words may serve for witness of your upright
intentions. Ye shall have the argument of the second blast of the trompette
written and set out by him self 1558. at your holy city of Geneua foster
mother of all seditious spitites and unquiet heads. Hear then your good
Apostle: because many are offended at the first blast of the trompette (behold
how this holy saint is become penitente of his former offense) in which I
affirm that to promote a Woman to bear rule or empire above any realm nation
or city is re^ugnant to nature, cont^mel^e to God, and a thing most
contrariouse to his revealed and approved ordinance: and because also, that
some has promised (as I understand) a consutation of the same ^ have delayed
the second blast, till such time as their reasons appear, by the which I
either may be reformed in opinion, or else shall have further occasion more
simply and plainly to utter my judgment. yet in the mean time for discharge
of my conscience (behold the holiness of this ex^raordinarie patriarche, who
thinks him selue greatly burdened in his conscience if he trouble not the
whole state of the common wealth) and for avoiding suspicion, which might be
engendered by reason of my silence, I could not cease (o the good nature of this
man, who can not cease from ill doing, sed quis Deus in fraudem?) to notify
these subsequent propositions which by Gods grace I purpose to entreat in the
second blast promised.

1. It is noth birth only nor propinquitie of blood that makes a king lawfully
to reign above a people professing Christ Jesus and his eternal verity; but
in his election must the ordinance, which God has established in the election
of inferior judges be observed. autos epha. all princes shall be subject to the
peoples judgment, and the people to the ministers.

2. No manifest Idolater, nor notoriouse ^ransgressor of Gods holy precepts
ought to be promoted to any public regiment, honor, or dignity in any
realm, province or city, that has subjected it self to Christ Jesus and to
his blessed Euangil.

3. Neither can oath nor promise bynd any s^ people (call you these your
hearty protest^tions oaths and promises) to obey and main^^^^ tyrannes (so ye
call all Kings that will not follow your fantasy) against God and against
(...) truth known. that is your new forged faith.

4. But if either ra^hly they have promoted (...) manifest wicked person, or
yet ignorantly have ch^sen such a one, as after declares him self vnvvorth^
of regiment above the people of God (and such be a^ Idolaters and cruel
persecutors) most justly may the same men depose and punish him that
vnaduysedl^ before they did nominat appoint and elect. Is no^ this a most
notable argument to be handle^ by a true subject, and a man affectionat to the
quyetnes of his native country? yet goo^ sire John Knoxe being in his own
opinion a prophet could not have wanted many texts of the scripture to prove
the matter. According to this exemplere and pattern of ^ chosen or rather
imaginary King, ye have formed your oath: for neglecting birth and blood, ye
will that the Prince be made by election, at lest subject to observe the
ordenance that God has established to be observed in inferior judges and
magistrates, who may be deposed and punished if he pass the rules prescribed by
you. For ye will the people be free from all obedience, promise and oath to
have no place if the Prince go from your religion, or as ye call it, refo^med
kirk, the declaration where of depended upon your discretion and wisdom seeing
ye ar made judges above all men. ^owbeit good reason would gif liberty to the
Prince as well to leave you, as ye have left the Catholic kirk if ye hade not
alreddie occupied the place to command over all without appeall. I will not
further insist in the examination of this blast of wind, seeing it sauoureth so
ill that no true and modest subject can abyd it. I say only that your oath is
as lyk this proiecte as ever dauther was lyk the mother, and lacks but
things which may very easily be understood as we shall show after.

4. But ye will say that I am ^alignus alien^ voluntatis interpres a maliciouse
interpreter of other men's minds. What was your meaning, I pray you, when ye
took your Prince, emprisonated and at last chased her out of her owen realm
and pursued to the death? What was your meaning when during his Majesty's
minority ye caused strick money, marked with a sword and this inscription pr^
^e, in me s^ mereor? What was your intent now of late years when ye beseeged
the toulbrigh of Edinburgh? was it the blad^ of rebellion or sword of Gedeor
that was drawn out that day? Why did ye cry at that time God and the kirk, if
it was not to withdraw the people* hearts and obedience from the Kings
M^iestie to for ti^ie your plottes? a course mo^^* dangerouse where the Prince
and whole common wealth were put in hazard upon your ^olie reformed word. If
I be not deceived, ye would have signified by God and the kirk your doctrine
and discipline, to which ye will have all men subject, with no further
obedience to others then ye think expedient, and so no place for the Kings
Majesty and his officers till it please you to employ them to execute your
plottes, which only charge ye would leave to them, and that because ye are not
able of your selves to execute sundry things that ye have inverted* But ye
will say, reason would that all things should be subject to God: It is most
true: But ye ar no Gods, yea not have no charge nor command of God, as we shall
show here after and although ye hade, why should ye, under pretense of your new
forged or reformed discipline, ^rouble the whole state to the utter ruin of
the common wealth. Think ye that God and a King can not be in one realm to
gether? or that God is accoustumed to destroy Kings, where he comes? if your
reformation proceeded of God, we might very justly so think* seeing it troubles
all Princes where it has any credit. It was well said by an ancient Scottish
priest twelve hundred years since: Non ^ripit mortalia, qui regna dat
caelestia. but he was a priest of the Roman kirk, and not a brother of your
reformation mother of your detestable paritie, grandmother of your present
confusion, where upon is builded your sinagoge: permit me to say so seeing ye
force men to enter therein, because your calling has no power nor strenght to
inuit them. This can not stand with Princes lawful authority. Hear Jesus
Christ him self saying: date Caesari, quae sunt Caesaris, and quae Dei, Deo.
Certainly all me^ of quiet spirit should esteem them enemies both to God
and good reason, who thinks the one contrary to the other. There were never
yet any people that hade a religion without civil gouuerment: we have seen in
all common wealths these two joined together, but most perfectly where Kings
have ^ade the s^ueraigne power, because the unity is greater. Ye would perhapes
gladly say here (if ye hade the Christian liber tie, that ye so earnestly
desire, that is license to do as ye will) that ye at all priests and Kings,
and as ye have cast out the priests of the kirk for their misbehauiour, so would
ye cast Kings out of their throanes and realms for lyk cause. assay again
the play. assure your selfs that knavery will not ay have good success* If I
be not deceived ye shall now find Kings more vigila^t, admonished by others
men's exe^ples, then ye found the priests whom ye violently cast out, not by
your virtue and strenght, but by their fault and negligence. God will cast the
schourge in the fire, when he shall think it good.

5. But to return again to your words, As upon a confortable instrument of
Gods mercy, granted to this country for the mainteining of his kirk and
ministration of Justice among us. With what reverence obedience and modesty ye
have received that instrument, I leave it to his Majesty's memory and your
consciences: and if a few of you ministers gave him not more pain and trouble
then all the rest of the realm. If I see you over forgetful I may well call
some things to your memory, although your daily behavior might very well
release me of that labor. Truly I think there be no subjects in Europe more
obliged to their Prince then ye ar to his Majesty considering your de^^^tes:
nor no Prince who have hade more rebelliouse subjects then he has hade of some
of you, so far as it did ly in your power. ye will do well in times coming to
mend this, for fear ye be constrained to render count of all together, gifts
abused may justly be called beak: Your daily railling against the present form
of policy in England shows well that your sickness do increasse. We protest
and promise with our hearts (good and friendly words truly) under the same
oath, handwritt, and pains (quid dignum tanto foret hic promissor hiatu?) that
we shall desend his person and Authority with our geir, bodies, and lives.
Parturiunt montes nascetur ridiculus mus. good Sires will not your new Euangell
suffer you to do more for the Kings Majesty? only to desend his person and
authority? I praise your wisdom to advertise what ^e may look for at your
hands: yet sure I am, that ye your selves would not be content to have a servant
in your house with so small service, as ye offer here to your sovereign whom
ye would seem to have greatly obliged. But at the lest may his Majesty assure
him self of your assistence in defense of his person and authority? No truly
but in certain cases, which ye lny down to him by writ that he may crave no
further, to Wit, in defense of Christ's Euangell (I think as it is now
reformedly preached and interpreted by you the discipline having it sull
course) liberty of our country (every ministe^ being master) ministration of
justice (in chasing away sic as will not acknowledge you in all affairs) and
punishment of iniquity: principally if any man gainesay you. Nothing at all
for the Prince? Nothing surely, if there comes none of these things in
question the Prince may stand alone for you, so far as I can see. Only when ye
have a do, he shall be assisted to do you service, otherwise he may do for him
self, if he thinks it good. But if he touch your Euangell, yea with the
vttermoste of his finger, ye will put both person and Authority in hazard,
ye ar so mightily governed by the reformed spirit. I will not guess further
your minds. Which bears witness, who so well does. But ye will suffer me to
say that the subject not only is obliged of duty civil, but also in
conscience before God to defend his Princes person without any exception
because he is vnctus Domini and one of the chief magistrates established by God
him self. Therefore we never did read that the Christians were blamed for
defending of the Emprours persons, not withstanding that sundry of them were
most cruel persecutors of the Christian and Catholic faith, and did seek by
all means to destroy the verity. The Christians refuses only to be
executers of these detestable designs of the Emprours: yea I think it shall
never be found that the Ancient Godly fathers did lay to any Christians charge
as a crime, that he has guarded and keapt the person of Julian the Apostata*
for that never was against God, nor reason; seeing they were obliged there to,
as to a thing both honest and Godly, which they could not neglect without a
great blame. These only were accused as cursed and misch^euouse men, who were
instruments of his abominations. Certainly the Princes person should be
holy and inviolable; and we more careful there of, then of our own lines.
Lykwise we may say of his Authority which comes of God, and has ay God for
revenger, if any man be so bold as to touch it irreuerently. Ye mesure the
Princes person and Authority according to your fantasy, making them great or
small, to be observed or dispysed, as ye think proper to your purpose and
passion. But ye will say that it is well done to defend the Princes person
and authority. that is very true. who so ever is owing a hundred crowns,
does well to pay one crown, but not enough except he pay the whole sum, so
your duty is not complete in these few heads. These fashions of oaths a^
invented only to exempt by litill and litill the people from the due
obedience oght to the Prince* for the people thinking that the oath is the
only sure rule of their due obligation toward, their sovereign: and that they are not further bound then the oath shows: if in their opinion any thing pass
that bounds, they may think them sell es free and discharged from further
obedience as not contained in their oath. For when I have done that, where to
I am obliged, it is in my hand if I will do any further: If I do more, I merit
thanks; if not, I merit no reprehension, nor blame, much less punition. Ye
will not be offended, if I say some what yet of your oath, which has been
formed either with a great malice or extreme simplicity (which of these two be
most proper for your sect I leave the judgment to others) which will be more
clearly seen if we show the true form of oath which should be given to the
sovereign Prince. The subjects of Emprour or King being as va^^^les (which we
call commonly lieges) should make to their Prince the oath simply and without
any condition, yea so far that swearing fidelity against al men they should
not except them selves. And therefore the oath of fidelity which the lawyers
call sacramentum fidelitatis should be made without any condition or
restriction: for if any sic thing be put in the form of oath deceitfully, or
craftelie couuert with words, where by the subjects may with draw them selfs
from the fidelity toward their Prince or attempt what so ever thing against
him, under what so ever pretext, they should be accounted as rebels, lacking
reithe^ occasion, then an evil mind. And for that same cause it is not law
fall to put the reason in the oath, that he, who swears, may have no cloak
nor excuse to break his oath: E^t enim form fidelitatis actus legitimus
conditionem non recipiens. when the oath of fidelity is made to him who is
only lands lord and not sovereign, the vassal puteth no condition although
he put an exception of the Emprour or King, as may be seen in this form. Ego
Titius iuro super haec sancta E^angelia, quod ab hac hora in antea vsque ad
vltimum diem vitae meae, ero fidelis tibi Ca^o Domino contra omnem hominem,
excepto Imperatore vel Rege. But the form of fidelity and oath made to ^he
Emprour or King, or any other soue^aigne Prince, should be set down in most
^imple plain and clear words, without any ^eceit fraud or guyll. For as the
Kings Em^ire is free and absolute, subject to no other, ^ the oath of the
subjects should be ^ltoge^er simple and without any restriction. I ^ay all good
and true subjects, not only for their duty, but also for their conscienc^
cause, compare this with our new reformed or reither deformed form of oath,
and consider if it rasted not of rebellion and conspiracy against the law^ull
Prince, and if this be not a beginning and foundament to bring in the Swisers
common wealth where the sovereign magistrate at the years end is answearable
to the people, by whom he is chosen. Doubtless these craftesmen have had before
their eyes Bruti vindicias, Buchanans precepts, Knoxes blasts of the trompette
of sedition, Goodmans discourse how superior powers ought to be obeyed of their
subjects* Knoxe histories of treasons etc. or else the King of Poles oath, Si
sacramentum violauer^ nullam nobis regni incolae obedientiam praestar^
debebunt. the Poloniens may desire of their future Prince, what oath they
please seeing he is at their election and choice. But to prescribe to your
selves, how and what ye will swear to your Prince, to whom ye, your fathers
and posterity ar allreddie obliged whether ye will or not, I know not how ye
can be excused except ye ministers esteem your selves in the same rank with
the ancien^ arrogant Aragoniens, who in reception o^ their king were wount to
say in this manner Nos, qui valemos tanto comme vos, y podem^ m^s que vos, vos
elegimos Re, con estas and estas conditiones intra vos y nos, un que manda mas,
que vos. We, who ar as good as ye, and may more then ye, choose you our king,
with sic and sic conditiones betwixt you and us that one may command more then
ye* would ye not think your selves brave men, if ye might truly use ^ic speech
to his Majesty. But ye do meikill ^orse, seeing in effect ye gif him no thing
but assistence to do you service, without any further honor or profit. A great
servant truly, if ye were wo^^hie m^isters. Certainly if the King were at your
choice (as God forbid he were) ye could gif him no less then ye do here by
your oath: yea what less can ye gif to your moderator of one day, then defend
his person and authority, as long as he is in charge, for ye do nothing
therein, but maintain your selves. The Mu^iners in the wars offer no less
to their new choisen head, not for his cause, but for their own. I am assured
that there is no people in the world so seditiouse or rebelle, but would bestow
more upon their Prince o^ head whatso ever, then ye b^stow here upon his
Majesty: In promptu ratio est, his Majesty's forces can not agree with your
folies. But ye will say perhapes that the Kings Majesty does acknowledge him
self In his speech to parliament.
to be made for the people and not the people for him. he speeketh lyk a noble
wise and most worthy Prince acknowledging what he owes to God, in whose
place he is established, whose person he does present, and in whose
authority he does command. On the other part, why will* ye not lyk true and
good subjects acknowledge* your duty, toward him, to whom ye ar obliged, as
to Gods lieutenant above you? or ar all men obliged to you, and ye to no man?
it is lawful to you to be more familiar with his Majesty, then he is with him
self. More over ye are not the wholl people being but only the tribunes at your
owen making, and albeit ye were, yet should ye not presume so far of your
selves, as all should be done by you, and at your appetite. It is certain
that the head is made for the body (as also the body for the head) yet should
not the body be master and command above the head nor yet prescribe laws or
conditions to it, but should obey it in all thing without contradiction as
being subject and not superior. The physiciens do teach, and (as I think) not
without good reason that the wholl strenght of the body, and all the functions
thereof comes of the head, where the senses at chiefly, and wits ar only.
If we would credit you and your reformation, we should shortly see a deformed
government through all the world. I am assured that it would be better dwelling
among the ancient Cyclops, if there were any, then among you: and if ye be
curiouse to know why, I shall make you a description In the sessions
presbiteries synodes and general counsels.
of your selves, where ye may see a part of your beauties with out a mirror: Ye
have been so impudent and shameless, as to ask for your ^eformed kirk an
absolute oath of all the Kings Majesty's subjects, yea of him self (whom in
his tender age ye did ci^cumuent) that he should defend your doctrine and
discipline, that is, embrace your inventions and execute your plottes, so that
his Majesty and all his subjects of what so ever quality or condition. should
only be vestrae voluntatis imo tyrannidis ministri, to trouble and persecute
all these that will not obey you, albeit it were both against his Majesty's
honor and state. Which I think his Majesty will suffer no longer to be done,
because of the danger that may eusue there upon. For what can be more
perniciouse within a realm, where obedience and modesty ar most necessary,
then to suffer the subjects to be corrupted either by monopoles or periuries or
damnable opinions tending to a new form of government and state? or to permit
a ^orme of common wealth within an other, as a cotadaill or fortress within a
town, to hold the Prince and all his subjects bound s^aues to you. A thing, I
know not whether more dishonorable to the Prince, or more dangerouse. I say
only that the mo^e his Majesty bears with you the more ye at presumptiouse
and the reddier to attempt some new interprise. Ye contented your selves before
to raill against the state and government of Scotland; now, as if your
jurisdiction were amplified with his Majesty's empire, ye ar entered in England,
all Britain is fallen to your lot: ye will comptroll all men's actions there,
ye will assist your brethren of that nation, defend them, their doctrine and
discipline according to your reformed ministerial oath, for why should any man
be so bold as to touch in any wise your inheritance? or meddle with your
affairs? or command within your jurisdiction? A surplice, a square cappe, or a
Bishop may serve you for a most just reason to trouble all, so lively is your
faith finding Idolatry in any thing that mislyketh your humor. O tribus
Anticris caput ins^nabile. It were best his Majesty sent you to the unfound
lands, where there is no man yet, that ye might form a common wealth at your
own fantasy without other men's grief or trouble. Certainly if ye were sent
over sea five, or six years to seek your meat as others have done, ye would
perchance be more modest, and understand how bontifull and patient his Majesty
is suffering you so long to reign and raill without ryme or reason: Coge^is
aliquando per vestrum scelus iracunda louem sumere sulmina. But ye the Saints
of God, his elected people, assured inheritance, endued with only faith void
of all good works, destitute of free will, and yet wilful in all your
opinions, predestined to the heavens how so ever empty of honesty, and
covered with vice, ye zealouse brethren, I say, ar above all Kings and
Princes, they at but your officers, executers of your good pleasiurs and will:
otherwise to no purpo^ in this world. To conclude this matter I will tell you
the Catholic opinion herein, which is this. As we are wholly and without any
exception obliged to God in matters of faith and conscience, so at we absolutely
and without any exception or restriction obliged and bound to our Prince with
all fidelity and obedience in temporal affairs, that is in matters nether
repugnant to God nor good reason, how soever they be to our dommage and hurt in
worldly things, or to out pains and against our repose. There is no reason,
why the foot should refuse to trauaill* when the head have a do, how hot
that ever it be: weariness can serve for no excuse: at the nodde of the head,
the rest of the members should be reddie: at sic times excuses ar but disguised
rebellions: the want of commodities makes the way more difficill but not
impossible. To the foot these things may seem very hard and iniust, because
of the great pains and many incommodities it must suffer, oftentimes not
knowing the reason why, except that it is a member subject to the head, and
therefore obliged to obey according to the office and due function of a member,
as it shall please the head to command. Would ye that men should go as Iugling
tumblers do, their feet up, and their head down? ye have some reason so ^o
desire in matters of state (although there be no reason, why it should be
granted to you) seeing by that means sundry of you might hope for the highest
place, as being in all degrees the very dregs of the people, yet being
promoted without order or extraordinairely (for all is one in your persons)
ye at found worthy of the charge ye have, ye become so perfect raillers: but
how proper ye be to gouuerne Kings and realm (which ye will to ^^pend upon
you in matters of greatest consequence) I leave the judgment to others; and
principally when it is question of your zealouse brethren, who ordinairely ar
carried away rather by passion and opinion, th^n guided by disc^eti^n and
wisdom: where upon ar founded an infnite number of rash judgments that they
have made upon other men's actions. I think it not needful that I specify any*
the ex^mples being so frequent^ and common. A n^w sort of tyranny me^kill to
be lamented* if we ^ere not oppressed with a more grieuouse, ^her by it is fre^
to no man to use his natural air and inioye* the sight of his friends and
kinnesmen, except ^e swear him*self your slave, foreswearing both God and
Prince for a reformed folly: Over high a price truly* and over great
subjection, for the small reward that any man can look for at your-hand. What
so ever banishment were more to be desired, then that dwelling at home: for
accepting that condit^on, men incu^reth the danger of double treason, divine
and human, which being done, they were unworthy not only to be esteemed
his Maiesti^s subjects, but to ^e suffered to live upon the earth, if that come
of their proper consent and desire. And what fidelity, I pray you, can his
Majesty look for of you, who requires of other men sic oaths as cut away all
assurance of fidelity toward the Prince? ye pre^erting your vain opinions
(that I say nothing more displeasant) to the whole antiquity, yea to all ages
passed and present, in matters of religion, and your judgment to all
magistrates of what so ever authority or experience in matters of state, and
your interprises to peace and quietness, ar good Christians and true subjects,
well at your case in honor and Authori^ie, although the greatest part of you
be the first honest men of your race, or rather the worst that ever was of your
race, showing the common say to be very true. Asperius nihib est humili cum
surgit in altum, ^et a beggar on horseback and he will ride ^ gallop. But
peiceable men, who have not that turbulent presomptious spirit, because they
prefer the authority of the universal ki^k, and judgment of the ancient
pastors and Ca^holik consent to their private and particula^e opinion,
respecting the magistrates as Gods officers and law^ull instruments, they at
Idolaters, papists, traitors to his Majesty enemies to the common wealth,
exco^municat inco^tine^t* put to the horn* their goods confiscated, them
selves banished out of the country: what rank or quality that ever they be
of, they are not worthy to be faluted by the worst rascal fellow of your
sessions although they be composed ordinairely of the very sink of the people.
But honest men must take patience, seeing ye gif so litill reverence to them, to
w^ome ye ar more obliged

6. where I will no^e a thing very remarcable, that neither riches, good
traict^ment, dignities, nor honors can make you quiet and peaceable men;
neither injuries, indignities, banishment, loss of goods nor friends can move
the Catholics to leave their duty toward the Prince: which I doubt not but
his Majesty some day will consider when it shall please God to have pity of
our mise^ies. Abiding which time, I pray you all good and Godly Catholics
(s^sfer me good sites to turn my speech a litill to them) to behave your
selves toward his Majesty with due obedience and modesty, se^king no pre^^xt
no^ excuse to withdraw your selves: suffering patiently persecutions if any be.
Mix no worldly respects with heavenly bl^slinges, God is highly offended when
we mak^ to our particulare passions a cloak of his name, his honor and our
affairs are not of lyk rank, they should not be mingled together* If any harm
comes to you in his service, your reward will be the greater, soing ye have
^r^uailled for his glory, and have stand stoutly to his right, under whose
banner to die, is to triomphe for ever: fear no damnage* not loss, ye have a
most sure promise of a honderdfold profit and the life eternal. we should
bestow our goods w^llingly in his service who rccompenseth so liberally. The
less of our private affections we middle here in, the better is outs, the more
ample shall be our lords goodness toward us: because his glory the more clearly
does shine, when it is allone. But when his verity is blamed for our
misbehauiour, what can we look for at his hands, but for a just punition for
abusing his authority and name? It were very hard to suffer sundry things
that occur in these spiritual wat^es, if our captain were not invincible,
and we assured how long we stand with him. We lack no good examples both of
head and members. We can not be first in this batai^l where so many thowsands
lossing the earth have conquised the heavens* there are passed before us
infinite number of champions off all dignities ages and qualities, Kings,
Quyenes, nobles and mean men, learned and ignorant, men, women, old men and
babes, poor and rich, who have borne armor under this standart, and after
the loss of all worldly goods have shead their blood with joy to their
eternal bless, because they had only Gods glory before their eyes, which
principally in this time so dangerous we should do, that our vice be not
objected to the Catholic religion, as if our faul^es came of that which we
profess, and not of ou^ selves; to which sort of calumnies and crafty
accusations, our adversaries have ost recourse, taking arguments from ou^ lives
and behavior, which they can not have from our religion. We should not mix
the religion with matters of state, they apperteine to diverse magistrates; God
will have us here obedient to both, because they a^ his lieutenants,
established in his name and authority we should not serve our selves with the
command of the one, to disobey the other in his charge. Who so ever hender any
of the two, can not serve him self with excuse of the other: we must follow
both their commands according to their place and rank: they at ordained by God
to keep one another, and not to distroy each other. If standing to the true
says, to the defense of our sovereign, we be persecuted either in life body or
goods, after the bataill, we shall be restored to ou^ own, or to meikill better.
he who receaueth a prophet in name of a prophet, shall receive the reward of
a prophet Mat. 10
yea he who gives a cup of cold water in the name of a Disciple shall not
loose his reward, what shall he receive I pray you, who willingly, when
occasion se^ueth, gifeth his life to God in Gods name to declaire his verity or
maintain his justice in defense of religion or his Prince, so highly
recommended to us by God him self? let us not infect this gift and oblation
with our private plottes and passions, he who heard Saint Paul in his weakness,
will grant us strenght to sustain all adversities: he will say to us also
sufficiat vobis gratia mea: the more we loosse here, the more we shall win in
heaven. Seeing this patience sure I am that the Kings Majesty will not be so
far offend^d, when he shall understand that thereis only conscience that do
stop you to condescend to many things, and no rebellion nor contempt of his
laws, or ordainances: for in that case ye prefer only God to him, and that
because your first obligation moves you thereto. Byding in this resolution,
the victory shall be yours, and ye shall obtain, if not man's, at lest Gods
favor, otherwise ye may look to loosse both: surther we may hope that his
Majesty being better informed of the matter, will be more gra^ious to his true
and humble subi^cts then to punish them by death, banishment or privation of
their goods in favor of the ministers who byding at the ground^s of their
doctrine can neither be good Christians nor true subjects as we have sha^^
alreddie, and shall show more euiden^ly here after if this be not thought
sufficient. Yet if our sinn^s be so great that God will have us punis^ed with
all tigour and extremity in this present life, let us receive the same not
only with patience because we have deserved meikill more, but also with
gladness and thanks giving as coming o^ his hand, who will gif us the
strenght to bear it, seeing that his quartell is mixed with our pains, let us
cry for his help* and succo^re who has the hearts of Princes in his hand,
that he may dispense their actions to his glory, to their and our salvation
and publik peace and quietness. how that shall be done, we must leave it to his
infinity wisdom and providence having always in our hearts and mouths, thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

Now to return to you again (good sites) it is not only very dangerouse,
but also far against the duty of a good Christian man to swear according
to your desire, os reither command and force, to wit that they abhor and
detest all contrario^^ religion and doctrine (to your reformation) but cheiflie
all kind of papistrie in general and particulere heads* Because the most
chief heads of the Catholic Apostolik and Roman doctrine (which ye of your
great humanity and courtesy do call papistrie at all occasions and propos)
a^ contained in the symbol of faith m^de by the Apostles, if ye have any thing
to say there to ye may. But as to us, as we belief in the symbol that there is
one God omnipotente Fat^er, Son, and holy Ghost, w^o has created, redeemed,
and sanctified us by his infinite goodness and mercy; so do we belief that there
is one holy Catholic kirk, by whose mouth we are instructed in all these
things, that we should belief, or do; because she is the spouse and mystical
body of Jesus Christ, of whom as of her head she has grace and power, and we
command to obey. These at the general heads of that which ye call papistrie
(seeing it pleased you so to term it) where upon ar biulded all particular
heads professed by the same kirk, and all hi^ children remaning in due
obedience within hi^ bosom. To detest and abhor these things, ye may easily
judge your selves (if passion command not above your ^ittes) how hard a thing
it will be to ^any Christian man, w^o has Christ's spouse in good estimation
and as it becomes him to have hi^ who is guided with so nobell a head: But ye
will say that ye condemn not that which is good, but our errors: I answer
to you in one word, so far as I can see ye have as litell judgment to
discern upon an error, as ye have power to condemn it. But this does require
a more ample discourse. Moreover to have the Catholic religion in greater
horror and detestation then te Iewdaisme, Turcisme, heresy, or at heisme I
can not think that it comes of a good and holy Friar John Crag fleeing out of
Italy from the Catholik^: being (as he said) in need he received a pourse
from ^ black dog, judge y^ of that viaticum.
spirit; but rather of him, who under the figure and shape of a black dog
gave a purse with silver to the forger of your confession. But I understand
well how the matter standed: he who has fled a way for knauerie, had rather
serve any man then return back to his own master. It is not my intent at
this present to refu^e your negations of the faith: ye will gif occasions, as
ye have given matter to answer by the grounds of your own doctrine and
maxims of your chief ministers, which I grant ye may deny, as ye have done
many better things, by reason of your Christian liberty, where by ye may
judge and condemn whom and what ye please if it agree not with the scriptures
interpreted by you, that is, with your opinion* where to ar subject all
things, by virtue of the spirit which guides you as supreme judges without
appealle, for otherwise things can not stand with your credit: ye hold as the
chief foundament of your detestations and refusals, that the Pape is the
Antichrist: which point no man of judgment can pass with, meikilles to
subscribe or swear it to be true. Sundry cunning and learned men has most
sufficiently confuted this blasphemous reuerie, so I may be excused if I enter
no further in the matter, yet for other men's contentement, who have not seen,
or could not understand these books, I will bring here some reasons why that
can not be. And Secondly we read of no Pape who has slain Si alius venertt
in nomine suo ^um recipietis. of contrary there is no man they hate so meikill
as they hate the Pape, because he is the greatest obstacle these 1600. years.
ye being yet in lumbis in^isibilis Ecclesiae. The Eua^gell should Judge
saecrific^um the perpetual sacrifice which only is accep^able and pleasant to
God: and therefore the Antichrist will labor to tak it away: where in ye
travel as ye can. The pape mainteineth the religion of his forfathers, for he
cond^mneth all thing as error that is contrary to the doctrine of the
primitive kirk and venerable an^iquitie; because Jesus Christ being the veri^ie
it self, the religion founded upon him, and published by his dear spouse at
his command, can neither be variable nor false. the Antichrist shall mispryce
the religion of his fathers wherein Seruu^ seruorum Dei, acknowledging that the
honor he receaueth of men, is because of his office that he has of God, and
that he is institute Pastor here in earth to serve the wholl flock of Jesus
Christ out lord whose servant he is and chief minister: And therefore before all
mortal men in dignity seeing he represents Christ our sovereign Lord, yet
subject to serve all men, help and assist them because of his office and
charge, certainly the lest of the realm is to be prefered to the greatest,
how long he represented the Kings Majesty's person. The Antic^rist shall
call him self God. There has been two hundred and by your preachinges, o^
rather taillinges, the Pape never has had one hours sickness for all your
crying; assure your selves that his infirmities comes of other causes. Luther
in spirit of prophicie as he thought made this most notable verse Pestis eram
viuus, moriens tu^ mors ero Papa: he knew very well the first part to be true,
and therefore might say it confidently, the last part was lyk the author,
false and untrue, he being dead and his doctrine both, it being changed
partly by him self during his life, partly by his disciples and followers after
his death, where as the Papes Authority, because it is founded upon God, does
remain, and shall remain till the only, who has credit to pray and not to
command. The Antichrist should have condemns all sort of rebellions and
novelties in religion: The Antichrist should embrace them as most proper and
convenient instruments for his auancement of perdition. filius perditioni^ the
son of perdition, chief instrument of satan, that is, so possessed and
assisted with the devil, that he shall do all things in the devils power and
for his cause, and shall be so perfect and accomplished (if I should so say) in
all vice and iniquity, that no man can equal him, meikilles to surpass him,
and principally in pride, as our master and lord Jesus Christ did excel in
all virtue, and chiefly in humility discite a me, quia mitis sum and hu^^lis
cord. Wherefor not without reason sundry learned men have repported the seven
montains to the seven deedly sins which shall be in the Antechrist in most high
degree that he may justly answer to his name, The Pape can no ways be
thought so wicked: I call to witness all sort of Protestants of what so ever
nation, saction, or opinion who have been at Rome before or since the Iubile,
and have seen the Pape who now sits Clement the eight a man worthy of that
name, if any of them may say in his conscience, that he is so wicked and
desperate a man, as the Antichrist is described to be in the scriptures. Sure I
am that there is none of them so far drounke^ in the ministerial humor, that
will say so, if he speak according to that he has seen. It is so far from
that the Pape can be the Antichrist that his most excellent Majesty a Prince
of rare judgment and learning, does acknowledge the Pape to be a temporal
Prince, to whom he is obliged and to whom in all good offices he will be
correspondent. that words may be said to your opinion who makes our King to
have obligation from, and commerce with the Antichrist? I may say with your
pardon and license sessionall, that he is a better and more honest man, then
any ministers that either is or ever was in Scotland without exception of your
chief pontifs first or last, John or Robert. I am assured that he who knows
the Pape an^ your ministers will say the same, principally if it were question
of humility and humanity: and if I be put to my proves, I hope easily to
discharge my self litill to you^ honors. If this be true as it is most
certain why should any man swear the Pape to be the Antichrist, that is the
most wicked and detestable man that ever was, is, or shall be, seeing that there
is none of your company how godly brethren that ever ye be, but i^ meikill
worse, then he? or if they swear a thing so far out of all reason and
verit^e as thinking it true, why should they follow or acknowledge you for true
and lawful pastors sent by God to reform the world, if ye be worse then the
Antichrist, who must be the most detestable and abominable instrument that ever
Satan has employed? If ye say that it is but simulation and hypocrisy in the
P^pe to deceive men, I answer you, that if we grant your foolish
affirmation, ye must also grant to us that the devil has done more good
with the Pape, and his hypocrisy, pretended, or fained holiness, then ever
the holy spi^ite, which is in you, I say, could do by ^ou and your piety and
reformed Godliness: your actions may bear witness if I lie. O Sanctas gentes
quibus ha^ ^^s^untur in ^ortis minima. Whose best works a^ so litill worth.
Certainly ye ar very greatly obliged to these, who will not swear a thing so
preiudiciable to your honor and reputation, which necessarily followed upon
your doctrine, if it were once admitted. Truly I have not so hard opinion of
you: for notwitstanding I esteem you in all degrees far inferior to the
Pape: yet think I not that ye ar so low and abject, or so wicked and abominable
as the Antichrist, meikilles to think you worse. Acknowledge the obligation ye
have to them, who doing according to their consciences toward the Pape, has
done so meikill for your honor. But ye will say that ye are not so wicked as
the Pape. I doubt not but ye will win your cause, if it be referred to your
saying or oath. If the bounds of this epistle would suffer, or if it were my
principal butte to traict that matter, I should make a comparison betwix the
Pape and you, where I should make you ashamed (if ye have any shame in your
forhead) of your selves, the merueillous difference being seen. I marvel how
a minister can look to his companions vnlaughen when he sees the people belief
a thing so ridiculous. And in conscience belief ye that the Antichrist shall be
a litill hypocrite or simple heretik? ^e shall be more furiouse then any that
ever came to trouble the kirk. Because ye cannot show that the Pape is come
with force and violence, as our Lord has advertised us he shall come, ye would
make the world believe that the Antichrist should come to continue lyk a lamb.
Jesus Christ says the contrary of him. It will be an ill reformed faith to gif
our lord the lie: how can ye think, that he who shall be instructed and fully
inspired wi^h the spirit of Satan, will in any wise, either follow or
conter^ect our master and lord Jesus Christ? ye deceive your selves and all
others, who credits you if ye belief so. The heretics, who ar only his
foreruners has entered in the kirk of God lyk Woulfes and Tigres, and ye your
selves came with so great modesty and quietness, that the earth did tremble and
shake under your feet (I know no^t if it was for gladenesse of your coming)
so mightelye that the whole policy and publik buildings thr^ugh out all
Scotland did fall down as if it had been a general earth quake. verelie
according to his nature and dignity, he must be more violent and cruel then
all the rest. Is it possible that ye think the Antichrist will use only
persuations, fair words, and li^ill hen wyles, seeing that ye use all s^rt of
violences and compulsions? he will be more cruel then ye in all respects, more
crafty and more mighty: he will bring with him all mischiefs that can be
invented, and for that cause God will shorten his time. Think ye that that
devil (if I should so say) will be lyk Cleme^^ the 8. Are ye so ignorant or so
foolish? Truly Pape Clement is so wicked, that it were better have ten
thousand lyk him, then one lyk any of you, and his death more to be sorrowed
the^ the death of a hundred thousand of you, howbeit ye have a better opinion
of your selfs. Think not also that the modesty that is in the Pape, comes of
any fear he has of you or yours. Ye slay him every year with your tounges,
but so softly, that he perceaueth it no more, then ye did the first Papes
entering. How can ye believe that the Pape or Papes, ar, or can be the
Antichrist, seeing they have condemned all the heresies that hitherto has risin
against either the divinity or humanity of Jesus Christ (as may be proved by
your owen fellows) yea they have condemned the errors risin now of late
years among your selves, as the new heresies of Gentilis, Stancharus,
Blandrata, and other good disciples of Calvin, against the holy Trinity,
whose error ye approve not although bred among you. How can it be that they
shall be the Antichrist, who so stoutly, so constantly, with so great expenses
and danger does defend the dignity of Jesus Christ? for they only whom ye
in your reformed language call the Antichrist, has holdin, approved, and yet
does defend and approve, all and wholl the general councelles where Christ's
honor, authority, and divine Majesty have been lawfully defended and
kept: yet can ye not show any sic thing done by you, who calls your selves
true Christians and lawful pastors. What shall we think of these
Antichrists, and of you zealous Christians? They keept the bible from
corruption of heresies, when ye could not be found, yea when none of your
reformed brethren could be seen, at what time your inuisibilitie excused you
from sic charitable offices. It apperteneth to him only whom ye call the
Antichrist to defend Christ's name, keep the bible, distroy heresies, confute
errors, convert infideles, send to all parts to co^^ort the faithful, to
assure them, who ar in brangle, to reduce them, who ar gone astray, and that in
Europe, Asie, and Afrik. Which is done yet in the new found Ils, where there
is more Christians now, then heretics in all Europe, yea a great deal more: O
good and dilligent Antichrist who only has watched and labored in the viniard
of our Lord as it becomes a true and faithful servant. And o ye wicked
negligent, sluggish and disloyal pastors who have sleeped like as many
Endymious these 1500. years past in some obscure cave, till the moune of false
and foolish imaginations have wakned you, to embrace again the clouds of
error in place of that heavenly Juno of verity Have we not just occasion to
wish of God to have in your place so good and godly an Antichrist? which if we
hade in every town, we should not now have been in pain to refell your
follies. We may bouldly say that this Antichrist is meikill better reformed,
then your kirk, and less to be feared, then your reformation. I doubt not but
ye would here willingly answer, that ye contribu^e with no less good will for
the diliuerance of Geneua, which ye make the people believe is besieged by the
Duk of Sauoye (where I will remark a great folly in you to believe a thing so
mani^estly false, and a malice in them, who have abused so far your
simplicity and rash crudelitie) for their reformed faith. I would also
willingly know of you, why your reformed charity extends it self only to
sic as have rebelled against their lawful Prince reither then to them, who
round about you ar in great need and distress? If ye did help your holy
city because of their necessi^ie, I would think it well done, if ye could do
well with out prejudice to your only faith. But to maintain their rebellion
against their just and lawful Prince, is but an open and evident argument of
that which is secretly hid in your breasts as we have said here before. I was
almost here deliberat to show that a great number of the qualities which should
be in the Antichrist may be easily found in you, as in his sorriders: but I
will keep that to your answer, if perchance ye persist in your Antichristian
opinion. For then we shall see God willing, whither ye can better apply the
marks to the Pape, or we to you.

8. Now to your excommunication, a thing truly meikill to be wished of many,
and to be embraced of all men: for who should not desire to be out of their
followship, who ar joined together by periuries, treason, and errors? Honest
true and faithful men should seek by all means to deliver them selves of sic
company if either willingly, rashly, or by force they have entered there in.
Yet let us see what power ye have to excommunicate any man. Only true and
lawful pastors (which ye can not be, lacking as ye do, the law^ull vocation)
have power and authority to excommunicate: where upon it follows that ye
have no power nor authority at all. we have brought manv reasons in our offer
printed, why your calling can not be good, which for the present we will not
repeat, because your owen reformation will furnish us good store of reasons to
prove the same, which we will employ here because they are your owen and that
most foundamentall. Ye will grant me if I be not deceived that the office and
dignity of a pastor is so great and excellent, that it properly conuiueth
only to Jesus Christ, and is communicated, to sic as it pleased him to call
there to, either by ordinary means, or extraordinatiely that is immediately by
him self. And for that cause no man should be so hardy or reither temerarie as
to meddle there with of him self, if he would not incur the crime of
lesmaiestie divine, in taking the office of Jesus Christ out of his hand. For
this cause Luther, seeing he could not well serve him self with the ordinary
vocation of the Catholic kirk, where he was nurished and brought up, took him
to the extraordinary, alleging he was sent immediately by God to reform the
world From this extraordinary power g^fin to Luther, ye have received your
ordinary calling, which I must show to be false with most evident reasons, to
prove that ye have no authority to excommunicate any man. Luther was sent (if
we will credit him and you) by God him self to teach the truth, the which
might serve us for a sufficient warrant of his assured true vocation, that the
true doctrine he brought with him, might force us to acknowledge his power. I
will for the present (albeit against the verity) suppose all as true and good,
because out of these principels and grounds we shall easily prove, that ye
have no lawful vocation, and consequently at no true Pastors, where upon
follows the millitie of your pretended excommunication. Luthers doctrine (say
ye) was true, ergo his vocation was good, and he a lawful Pastor. I say on
the other side (by the maxim of your owen doctrine) if his doctrine was false
his vocation was not good, nor yours received from him, and consequently
neither ^e, nor ye lawful pastors: or if your doctrine be false, your
vocation (if ye hade any of him) is lost and ye no pastors, because the true
doctrine only (as ye allege) is the sure proof of true vocation. If Luthers
doctrine was true and of the holy Spirit, doub^les yours is ^alse, seeing ye
teach doctrine not only far different from his doctrine, but also in many
heads plain contrary as may be easily shown by both your writtinges Hear,
I pray you what one The^log C. lu^nist. l^b 2. sol. 135.
o^ your Lutherian breth^en says H^nc^gitur inter omnes pie eruditos constat
Luth^rum non Vertumni aut Eceboli instar in veritate semel agnita and professa
varillasse, sed in ^a per Dei grat^am vsque ad extremum vitae halitam
permansisse: Caluinistas vero, in hoc and alijs articulis sibi nunquam constare
ex Zuinglij, Martyris, Bu^eri, Philippi, Victorin^, Hemmingy, profugorum
VVitebergentium and aliorum libris and actionibus docers and d^m^nstrari
potest. And in the inscription of the same book he speaks very plainly howye
agree together and with the verity. Theologiae Caluinistarum libri tres, in
quibus ceu in tabella quadam, quasi ad oculum plusquam ex 223* sacramenta^iorum
publicis scriptis, pagellis, verbis proprijs, and auth^orum ^onibus indicatis,
demonstratur, eos de null^ fere doctrinae Christianae articulo recte sentire:
addita simul verae sententiae ass^rtione, and contrariae opinionis refutatione:
collecti opera and studio M. Conrad^ Schluss^lburgij, dioeceseos Rareburgensis,
superintendentis and coniunctarum Megapolensium Ecclesiarum generalis
inspectoris. In his cataloge of heretics he co^pteth the Caluinists, against
whom he writteth the third book that he concludes thus. Epilog. de secta
Caluinistaru^. Cum igitur ex enumeratis nostrae doctrinae rationibus, and
falsis sacramentariorum fundamentis conscientiam anxia^ semper in dubio
relinquentibus, luce meridiana clarius apparea^ imp^os and blasphemos esse
Caluinistarum errores; Nos secundum Dei verbum (ye see how this man alleges
against you the word of God for his warrant) Augustanam confessionem veterem,
scripta viri Dei Lutheri, librum concordi^ atque apologiam eiusdem, a
sacramentarijs (he speaks of your sect) tanquam blasphemis hareticis nobis
caueamus, and ipsorum opinionem impiam tanquam prasentissimum and noxium animae
venenum toto pectore execremur. Further ye may see what Hunnius has writtin
not only against all the Caluinists in general, but also in particular against
Calvin in a book entitled Caluinus Iudai Zans. In the other part it will not
be difficill to you to know what Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza, Lauatherus and the
rest of that band have written against Luther and Lutherians, and with what
dispyte and injuries they treat one another, Scires ^ sanguine natos, which
may evidently prove the diversity of their doctrine. If the one have the
truth, necessarily the other can not have it, seeing they agree not: so if the
one have the true vocation the other can not have it, they being of repugnant
doctrine.

9. But ye will say that Luther did only begin the holy reformation which
then was so necessary in the kirk, that God was moved to send him
extraordinarily for that cause: yet hade he not the strength to perform it, as
it was needful; which work Calvin with his followers, but principally ye,
have done by your reformation: changing all things, that no thing can be
better, tourning af^irmations in to negations, fair buildings in to kellyards
or corn land, good order in to confusion, charity in to particular profit,
obed^e^ce in to rebellion, superiority in to a foli she paritie, assu^a^ce in
to mistrust etc. because he and ye have been most fully instructed with the
holy spirit. If we receive this for a good answer, we must say that this
has been do^ne by a n^w commission that God ha^h gifin to Calvin and you,
far different from the commission gifin to Luther and his ^ollowers: for the
Lutherians according to this saying, hade only charge to begin the matter,
and ye to end it; but beginning and ending should agree to gether, and not like
aegri somnia or worse. They should agree I say, if they be of one spirit,
except they come of that spirit, who never yet could agree with him self. The
holy spirit who is the sp^^ite of union and concord could not have condemned
by your mouth, which he has approved by Luthers or Lutherians mouths* I doubt
not but ye trust all that ye have the holy spirit, yet the diversity of your
opinions assure me the contrary, seeing that the spirit, who approves and
authoriseth the one and his doctrine, condemns and discharges the others and
their doctrine. If ye say that the errors hade takin so deep root that it was
not possible to take them out of men's hearts in short space, and therefore we
should not marvel if there be many ^hingis in Luthers doctrine not agreeable
with the verity. But, I pray you, hade it not been more seemly and as easy
to Luther (if he was sent by God, whose asistence he could not want in that
case) to have told the verity at the beginning as to have preached new errors
so detestable, as ye say, and so contrary to Godds word and our salvation?
what spirit moved him so to do? If he ^ad winked at some or many of these
poinctes that ye call errors, which he found in the kirk before him because of
the inueterate opinion co^fi^med by long use, there might be some apparent
excuse in your answer, but to bring in error for error, or to put out one to
take in two (the people being so docill to ^eceaue what so ever impression at
that time Luther would or cold have given them) or to confirm obstinatly an
ancient error is no work of the holy spirit, who should have guided your
extraordinat^e prophet and new sent pastor. Or was the holy spi^ite so weak
in Luthers mouth, that he could not teach him the verity? or Luther so hard
hearted, that he could not receive, nor conceive the verity mekilles teach it
to others? or hade the holy spirit since that time found Calvin a more proper
instrument to instruct the world truly and plainly in all things? Then why
was he a lying spirit in Luthers mouth, seeing it was o^ him, ye have your
extraordinary calling, which now is so ordinairie and established that no man
may preach without it?

B^ Za in epistol. th^olog. and de notis Ecc^^siae.
10. I see not what can be answered here. or shall we turn ba^ke again to the
first foundament of Luthers extraordinary vocation? where of the mark was the
true doctrine, which ye ar constrained to deny and disauow, if ye would prove
your owen good: for he condemns you and your doctrine, and ye condemn him
and his doctrine; which if ye deny obruam vos aduersarum and ves^rarum partium
voluminibus scriptisque contrarijs. what shall become here of your vocation? for
lack of true doctrine it will be null, either in him, or you, or (if ye say both
true in your mutual accusation) in you both? what shall become of your
ministry if this false thunder be shaken out of your hands? ye will have hard
escapping out of this snare, wherein ye have feltred your selves, fleing from
the Catholic kirk. For if ye say that it is enough that ye agree in the
grounds and foundaments of faith and religion which are necessary altogether
for man's salvation, and in these ye agree with Luther and Lutherians, and they
with you. I would gladly understand what ar these grounds and foundaments of
faith and religion necessary for Just. lib. 4. ^ap. 1. ^. 9.
man's salvation. Is it to believe that there is but one God? Jesus Christ to be
God and Gods Son? That our salvation co^sisted in Gods mercy and other sic
things as says Calvin? Or in the Creed, Lords prayer, and ten commands De
notis Eccl^siae.
as thinks Beza? Or shall they be in the invocation of our lord Jesus Christ as
teaches du Plessis? Or shall these foundaments be the negation and detestation
of the Catholic doctrine, or (as ye call it) papistrie according to your
me^swearing of the true faith? If ye will hold you at your owen ground, I say
only that a negative faith, is no faith properly, and so your negations will
never open the heavens to you, except that ye think that the Jews gentiles
Turks and heretics o^ all sects and at hei^ts may have place as well there as
ye, seeing they can deny heads of religion professed by the Catholics Ye ar the
first that eu^r did propos^ negatio^^ for a faith.
with noth less assurance then ye, and a great part of the same with you. If ye
will say any of the^s things which the others hade said I ask you wherefore
came Luther, seeing these things (as ye can not denie^) were believed in the
Catholic kirk before that ever Luther blew the trompette of sedition or as ye
would call it, reformation, if that honor had not been reserved to you? if the
purity of these points was requesit, why came Luther, seeing he teaches not
that purity? For that was reserved to you only as we have said often times.
It were out of purpos to say that God hade sent him to bring in new errors and
confirm old under p^etext of some few that he has taken away, where by an
other might be sent. Was it needful that your Calvin should as an other Saint
John the Baptist Parare viam Domini? In the mean time I will conclude (if
there was so many errou^s in Luthers doctrine* that it was needful to send
another in his place to teach the truth) that his extraordinary vocation was
not good, or else yours, who at come upon a false token to gif him the lie. But
Domini moderatores why shall we believe Luther in some heads of religion as
having commission of God and not in others, because ye say it? According to
your Eu^ngell ye at all equal, not one greater the^ an other: why shall we gif
you more credit, then him? or if we refuse to credit Luther, why shall we not
re^use to credit you also, that ye may remain ever Pares? or why shall we
believe your, when ye improve some things and approve others? is it not
needful here to have a new extraordinary calling to judge with discretion and
to our salvation? and if in any thing ye be gone wrong, should there not be
another extraordinary prophet to correct you as ye have corrected others? And
seeing that the true kirk (according to your reformed opinion) may err, when
shall we have lawful pastors? ye put the true doctrine the certain mark of
lawful calling, yet it can not be hade, because every man brings error with
him, and the kirk is uncertain and subject to error and so we can not trust
her. And certainly as to Luther, I credit you, when ye accuse him of false
doctrine and his followers, because he him self does acknowledge his nature to
be so corrupted and defiled, that he can do no good at all. But that ye be not
draw in from your paritie, I gif also credit to Luther and his followers when
they accuse you of so many errors, and your patriarche Calvin of so great
wickedness, because he acknowledges him self of as good nature and inclination
as Luther, and therefore can not tell the verity sincerely, as not being proper
instruments for so precious a work which would be spilt, if they touch it.
Monsieur du Plessis has no better opinion of man's nature in general, as may
be seen in the third book of the Eucharistie cap. 17. not far from the end,
where he seems to say that the grace of God can not make good, that comes of
us, because that we mix in with Gods work some of our owen particular honor,
glory, profit, and so that there is no good which we can do well, nor no ill
but we can do over well: for so he speaks. Notwithstanding we read not that
any, who has been sent extraordinariely by God to preach the verity, have
teached or proposed in Godds name to be believed any false doctrine And it is
to be supposed that God having sent Luther, has also sufficiently instructed
him in all things he should say or do in that charge and office: for otherwise
seeing the things that we should believe at above all natural reason and
human judgment, how shall we know, if he, who is sent by God, keep the
direction which he has received? if he be convict in one falsehood, he losseth
credit in all the rest, and there by disappointeth his masters intent, who
employeth him, Further it is certain that God of his in finite wisdom and
power, either choshed or maked the instrument proper, that he will employ, and
suffers not in these great matters to go otherwise then he will and our
salvation requires. For it is impossible that man can be deceived by God who
is the verity it self. But ye will say that his doctrine who is sent, should
be examined with the word of God contained in the scriptures: yea but he is
come to interpret the scriptures to you and not to ^ece^ue any interpretation
of you. His vocation gifeth him good assurance to speak. If ye would try his
vocation by the scriptures, ye should have good reason, but to try his
doctrine having admitted his calling I see no reason.

11. Moreover if it be lawful to call in doubt any man's doctrine who is
extraordinariely sent now in our days, why shall it not be lawful to call in
doubt the doctrine of all the^s, that ever were sent extraordinariely by God,
principally seeing ye acknowledge not the Authority of the kirk? For being
doubt some and incertane in the one, ye can not be assured in the others seeing
that it is that same God that sent them all, and for that same end* so shall we
have the whole bible, I say not subject to trial, but subject to be rejected
by every presumptuous brain, as has been done by sund^y in our days and
besore. Further seeing we should receive nothing of any extraordinary Pastor
but that which we have tried with the scriptures, I would be glade to know, what
trial can be made by women and children or ignorantes? For if trial should
pass before, why should any man or woman (how ignorant that ever they were)
reither then learned me^ receive any doctrine without trial? or why force ye
m^n to approve swear and subscribe your negations before they have well tried
them to be true, or reither seeing they find them false. But we will keep the
rest of this dispute to the trial of your sessions presbiteries and assembles
prouincials and generals, where in ger erall and particular we shall, God
willing, discuss this matter the best we can. Now to your calling, which I say
can not be good, whether Luthers be good or ill. For if it be good who so ever
ingyre him self to preach and teach in the kirk of God as being a lawful
Pastor, not having power of Luther, should be esteemed a private man and not a
publik officer of Gods house, a traitor and not a true man, a woolf and not a
hited, ye and yours being without his mission and calling, as we have alreddie
shewin, I see not what ye can pretend for you, to have done as ye have. Which
I prove once again in this sort: He who is sent a Pastor and Doctor in the
kirk of God, principally is sent to preach the Doctrine, as he received it of
the Doctor who sent him: if he does otherwise, his commission or procuration
containing no sic thing as he hade done, can not serve him: for who so ever
comes in the kirk with charge, comes as procurer, and not as proprieter,
wherefor he should do according to his procuration, (because he has only the
handling of other men's goods and good) and not according to his fantasy, as if
all were his owen. Now if Luther the first of this new extraordinary calling
sent you, it was to preach that same doctrine, which he preached and has
delivered to the world before he sent you. If ye keep not that doctrine, his
mission serves you to no purp^s, because ye have not done the thing, wherefor
ye were sent, it not your commission justly called back and ye declared evil
officers? As when ye gif power or commission to any new young scholar to
gouuerne a kirk, it is not without injunctions that he shall teach that same
doctrine, that ye teach and that he has heard of you, and not a another forged
at his owen fantasy or invented by an other. If he do contrary to your
command, would ye not depose him as not doing according to the power received of
you? and therefore justly to be disawowed, but so that he could not serve him
self against you with your procuration having passed the bounds prescribed to
him. Now if ye have received any power of Luther or nor, I refer the matter to
you, I say only that ye have preached and yet do preach another doctrine then
he and his followers do preach. ergo ye ar private men and not publik officers
or lawful pastors in this new reformed kirk* except perhapes by verrue of
your reformation it be lawful to rulle without reason, ye may call your selves
pastors and saints of God; ye will never persuade to men of judgment that
ye ar his saints as long as ye take upon you, the charge of Pastors without
power or charge. Think not but thi^ merits a ^u^t excommunication* and not a
conterfaited folly lyk yours, meddling our selves with things for above your
state, being but private men, yea so meikill worse then private men, that your
usurpation makes you guilty of crime of lesmaiestie divine. I^ ye will not
credit me, go to Luther your first patriarche, and he will declare, what he
thinke^h, seeing he has long since excommunicated you out of his new kirk
because in place of his heavenly doctrine (as he says) ye have teached your
doctrine which ye have brought out of hell (tak you to him if the words be some
what sharp) to prison the wordle; and for that cause in the very beginning he
did excommunicat Calvin and Zuinglius whom he called sacramentaries and that
most justly according to their owen opinion: for they acknowledging him for
that new beginning of their vocation and new reformed kirk, it behooved him to
have that power above them. So what doubt is but Luther having power to send
them, has power also to call them back if they past the bounds of his
commission? I he has called them back and broken the commission he gave them
before (as in deed he has done what he could that is in imagination as he
gave them that power) they at private men again in the mids of their
reformation, and ye also, destitute of all power and authority to excommunicat
any man. By this although Luther has never called back his power gifin to
Calvin, yet could it serve him for no Warrant, seeing that Luther denies
planely that ever he him self receaueth any charge to speak or write sundry
things, which Calvin and Zuinglius have spoken and written since that time:
and therefore he calls them heretics and sacramentaries as I have said before.
Or if he received charge to preach these things, why condemns he other men,
who preached them? There were some excuse, if he did not all, but there is no
excuse nor reason, why he should hinder other men having lawful power of him
self, to do that which he could not do, or to condemn them, who teaches the
verity that being the chief and principal end of his ^xtraordinarie vocation.
There is none of all ^he Prophetee, Evangelists, or other holy writters, who
have written althinges, which ^t has pleased God to show to the world. ^or so
he has though it good to distribute ^is gifts at sundry tyms, to sundry
person^es, for sundry reasons, as he thought it most ^xpedient for his glory
and our salvation. ^ut there is none of them all who either gain says or
condemns the others* meikilles stops them to say or write any thing that
they have in charge to declare and publish to the world* here turn you to
what side ye will either Luther shall be a false prophet or Calvin an Apostate,
and his vocation null and yours also.

12. I make no doubt but ye will reither forsak Luther, howbeit first, then
Calvin your last patron. I may object here to you the honorable titels (quo
iure non disp^to) that Calvin gifeth to Luther as to a true servant of God, and
not as to a false prophet, which were sufficient to close your mouths if they
could be closed. But I will pass this as if it were not, and speak of Calvin
and you, because ye may say that Calvin him self was sent extraordinariely to
perform that excellent work, in vain and falsely attempted by Luther, I will
well by supposition, providing that ye reformed brethren will stand there to,
and suffer me to examine the matter a litill: for we shall see, if ye can fight
better under this new captain. Calvin or any other ye will, was sent (I
suppose this now, in case ye will not stand by Luther and tak your ordinary
calling of him) extraordinariely by God him self to teach the verity, and
ministrate the sacraments according to the reformation ^e was to make: if he
did not his duty in this most excellent and necessary charge, ye should
esteem him* as he is, a false prophet, who being commanded by God and
assisted by the holy Spirit (for sure I am in your opinion he lacks not
that joined to his charge) yet would not declare the verity truly and plainly
without admixting some lies of his own by the devils suggestion, where by the
world might be of new poisoned with false doctrine under color of Gods
sovereign name. If this be true he merits more the^ to be slain 3. book the
kings cap. 13.
in the way by a Lion for tra^sgressing of the lords command, not in simple
eating and drinking, being forbidden to eat or drink, as did the ancient
prophet, but for teaching of false doctrine far by his commission, which was
to show the verity. If he did his duty ^n all things, where from comes it,
that ^undry of your brethren in France and other ^laces, yea your excellent
Apostle-Verelian ^reat Pontif of Geneua M. Theodore Beze ^is owen good
disciple, dissentes from him ^ many heads, and as I think, ye also disa^ow him
not in few points. Certainly I ^aue not to this day found one who appro^eth
him in all things. For when any of ^ours ar urged with Caluins authority, y^
answer that ye acknowledge not Calvin, but so far as he agrees with the
scriptures, where ye find that he agrees with the scriptures, ye will receive
him: what less can ye gif to Plato, Aristotle, Cicero and Seneca, or any other
profane writter? will ye reject them although ye find them agree with the word
of God? I think not. Truly Calvin is meikill obliged to you, if ye grant him
that, which ye can not refuse to an old wife. Is this the reverence ye bear to
him for his extraordinary calling? ar these the thanks ye gif him for the
vocation and power that ye have received of him? shall not the spirit that
spak in him have more credit, then any of you? was he sent with that condition
that he should have no credit, till ye found in the bible that it was true he
said. Truly if I be not far deceived, it will be very easy to make you believe
any thing ye please and otherwise impossible, if the judgment be re^erred to
you poor Calvin (so far as I understand by your answers) received not the
spirit in the best sort. He received only the spirit to tell you many
things in form of proposition to your holy assemblies, and ye received of
discretion and wisdom, to judge what was good an^ what was ill. ye have gotten
a more mighti^ inspiration then your chief prophet^. I am glade for your cause.
we can not faille to go well having gottin you for supreme judge to try all
things, but, as I think, every one in Semp^^ discente^ and nunquam ad
scie^tiam veritatis perueniente^ 2. ad Timoth. ^. 7.
his owin parish; for ever the further we go from unity, the number is the
greater, and Papes ar multiplied in your persons. I love your wits to follow
Caesar, reither first in a village, then second in Rome, yet good sires, seeing
ye ar set upon that high throne lyk to as many Salomons, that every one of you
and iuris nodos and legum aenigmata soluit, be not offended, if I ask some
things at you, seeing there rested me yet some litill doubts* I ask whether
Calvin was sent extraordinariely to teach you the verity, or be to teached and
examined by you? If he was sent to teach you, ye should admit him without any
further trial and tak the conference with the scriptures to confirm and
strengthen his sayings, and not to confute the^: for so did the first
Christians read the places of the prophets cited by the Apostles. If he was
sent to be teached and examined by you, why came he extraordinariely? to what
purpos was so great honor, and afterward to be subject to you? But this for an
other time; let us consider once again the first. If Calvin was sent
extraordinariely vz. to teach you, he may say with Saint Paul: Ego enim accepi
a Domino, quod and tradidi vobis: there is no other witness here but God and he.
If ye of your reformed modesty will give them both, or any one of them the
lie, I can not mend it, seeing, it is ye, who has gotten the charge to reform
the world, and so this may be accounted as a reformed lie, with the which no
man should be formalized: yet with license I may urge Caluins pretended right.
If he spak and writ according to the direction that he received of God how so
ever these things seems strange to you, yet should ye admit them and think,
that they are according to the scriptures: because God is never contrary to him
self, he being but one in diverse mouths, and not diverse in one mouth. how
can it be possible that ye can better know, what charge Calvin received of God,
then he him self, who was (as he and ye pretend) employed? We receive without
any contradiction or gainesaying the writtes of the Prophets and Evangelists
with all the rest of the holy bible, because these writters were sent and
assisted by God. If there seems any diversity, we accuse our weacknes, and
not the scriptures of contradiction or falsehood: for no sic thing can be in
Gods work. So if Calvin, or any other, was sent immediately by God, ye must
receive all his doctrine, except ye show either that he has been ill
instructed and that it was Spiritus mendax in ore eius: or that he has do^ne
besides his commission, of which neither can be true if God was the author. It
will serve you for nothing to say, that he was but a man and might err.
Because all the prophets and Apostles were but men and might err. yet the
assistance of the holy Spirit suffered them not to err in there commission,
and therefore we receive their sayinge^ as Gods owen fayinges, because he was
the ^uthour, and they only the instrument. Why receive ye not Calvin in this
manner? or show us that God hade sent any man to deceive us falsis vera
im^isce^s. I think ye will find no sic Sino^s sent extraordinariely by God, or
if there be any, let us hear their names. If Calvin was sent, as ye pretend,
ye should think that God has instructed him well, and has given him good and
sufficient directions (for else the fault shall be Gods and not his) and
suffered him not to go therefro: otherwise it has been a great vanity to
have sent him. Ye will perhapes reply that God in all ages had raised up Godly
fathers and learned men to oppose them solues to errors and abuses beginning
to enter in the kirk, as S. Athanase, S. Basile, S. Augustine, S. B^rnard and
othe^s in great number, whose writings notwithstanding are not altogether so
cleene but something may be tried and corrected. I answer there be great
difference betwixt them and Calvin or any other to whom the reformation ^ath
been extraordinariely committed. For although these Godly and learned fathers
were sent by God, yet were they not sent extraordinariely* but by the ordinary
way: for they received their vocation and power of the Catholic kirk in whose
bosom they were brought up and ^eached: The doctrine which they had received
of the kirk, they delivered to the members of the kirk, where in they remained
still as obedient children, submitting all their works and writtinges to her
judgment, condemning as schismatiks or heretics, all those who left her,
employing their wholl travel and writtinges to defend and maintain her
against all Satan's insultes, never making any sect a part, never alleging any
particular commission to reform others, nor yet to bring any new thing. Calvin
to the contraire left the kirk where he was conceived and teached an other
doctrine, then he has learned of his mother Christ's spouse, whom he
shamefully foresook, refusing in any wise to acknowledge her or her judgment*
(...) him self to them, whom he condem^^th in mind and writting, oppugning and
^u^sprysing her, who concea^ed him, making a band a part, because of the
pretended commission he had received to reform all these things merited a
good warrant to be believed, seeing they contain so many strange maxims above
or contrary to all good reason, which can not be found in the foresade godly
and learned fathers who were sent before. And therefore their example makes
nothing for Calvin and his doings or errors. Ye will say for your and his
defense, that they at but little things where in ye dissent from him. I know
that neither he, nor ye can do a great fault, ye ar all Gods owen mignons*
how soon that the lord hears, tha^ it is y^e, who has committed any thing,
it is incontinent excused, because of your strong faith, which changes ^nauery
in good service. But I pray you how shall I know, if his faults be great or
small* seeing that ye will receive no thing at all of his doctrine, till ye have
had it upon the touchstone of your judgment? and so for their litill things,
as ye call them, ye call all in doubt, at lest with other men* who perchance
may think meikill, that ye think litill. And here upon (good sires pardon me,
if I be so bold) I gi^ you no more credit then ye gif Calvin? for by your owen
rule, I must ^rye both his saying and your judgment, before that I receive
any thing, yea I will re^^aue, nether because he says it, nor because ye
approve it (for that were to do w^ong to the spirit and Christian liberty)
but ^^ca^se I think that I have ^ound it so in ^h^ ^ible. For if I find it not
there I will condemn and detest it as a plain heresy, (...) that where i^ ye
agree no^ with Calvin, but all the rest, and this (as I have said) according to
your owen rule and pretended C^^istian liberty, where by ^uery man is i^^g^ in
all things within the reformed kirk. Further it may seem by the forsaid
answer that ye think a man can not receive a de^dly wound; except he be (as
they say) (...) to the teeth. Certainly the largeness of the wound oft^ntymes
m^keth no^ the danger, but the place and part that is wounded. A man may be
strooken through the body, and yet live; a pri^k with a pi^n^ in the heart or
harnes might bring certain^ death, which should not be mesured by the greatness
of the wound, but by the lo^^e of the man: ye are not ignorant how litill
difference was betwix the Cat^^ol^kes and the A^rians if we will look to the
lett^rs. But to reto^^ne to your Apostle he was sent to show us the true way,
yet has he led us by the way and deceived us* how litill as ever the matter
be* his part is not good* Certainly I can not esteem your Patriarche (be it
Luther, Calvin, Z^ingli^s* Knoxe, Willox, Me^^en, He^io^e, Craig or what so
ever other ye will for all is one in these matter) a true prophet, seeing ye your
selfs esteem him a liar. For a litill leasing* principally in matters of
religion, makes no less a lier then a great leasing, only the greater it be,
he is the mo^e detestable who makes it* Ye will perchance here reply to me*
and say that God suffered him to fall in some thing ^^ where by both he and we
might knew that he was but a man. I answer first that it was not ^eed^u^l
because no (...) could have taken him for a God, although he ^ade said all
true* for we believe not that the Apostles and Prophets ar Gods* albeit we be
surely persuaded that all is true that they have said, (...) lest that they
have left us by writ. Next there was no sic superna^urall thing in him as
might bring ^s in that error, last of all it has been more prope^ ^or us
that he had said althinges (...) wit^^^^ any suspicion of falsehood* where by we
might assuredly have known that God had sent him and spoken in him: and that
for his cause, who sent him, we should receive him as an extraor^inarie pastor
come to reform the world. It was not needful to hazard our salvation to prove
him a man, but we needed many good arguments to prove, that God had sent him,
and principally an argument taken from the verity* As to him self I find him
extreme proud in all his writtinges, yet think I no^ that he esteemed him
self a God, and sure I am he died not with that opinion, I say no further. Ye
will perchance ask of me here, if I would conclude that ye ar also false
prophets and liers, if ye teach any false doctrine, as doubtless ye do? No
truly, although in some sense, I might most justly so conclude: for ^here is
great difference now betwix you, as ye profess your selves to be but ordinatie
pastors (if perchance ye content your selfs with so humble and simple a
style) and Calvin o^ any other, whom ye acknowledge to b^ sent
ext^^ordinariely by God him self: for howbeit your power (if ye have any* I
understand) be divine, as coming of God, ye^ your judgment is but human* so
that it i^ no meruaill if ye go sometimes wrong i^ high matters which should be
called re^he an e^^ou^, then a lie, because ye w^r^ dec^^ue^ in your opinion as
men. For this cause the ordinary Pastor is obliged* to follow the footstopes
of his forfathers* and make no new way to him self, nor any thing that seemed
to incline to novelty: because humano judgment should not be bold in divine
matters: for i^ ye open the door that every man may judge as he list, there
can be no assurance in religion, but daily change, as spirits of men be
diverse both from them self^s and others. But Calvin (or any other ye will)
being sent by God him self, came not here to tell us his opinion as a man, ^ut
to declare Gods mind and will as an instrument chosen extraordina^iely for that
effect. So that if he have failled, it can not b^ called human a mentis error,
but a per^iciouse lie against the holy spirit, who has given him express
charge to speak otherwise then he spak. For he lies, who in his masters name
says things which his master never had said; Omnis enim debet sine ^a^o
nucius ^sse. The Poets have fained the messengers of their fabulous Gods,
more discreit, then ye acknowledge the messengers of the true God; for ye shall
not lightly find any one word changed in M^rcuri^s Commissions, he is so
religious in doing his charge. The same may be said of Princes Ambassadors in
these days. I think it should meikill less be permitred to any man to go
from the commission gifin to him by God, either in eiking or pairing, what
shall I say to speek to contrary? Now nothwithstanding all this seeing ye find
errors in your Apostle, where by ye think not your selfs obliged to follow
him, but with this caveat, if he agree with the written word, ye gif the
world^ plainly to understand that ye approve not his extraordinary vocation*
but receaues him as another man of the common so^t, who may ^eceaue many good
and true instructions of your spit^te* which is the true square and rule of all
other spirits, where upon ^ conclude that ye have no calling of his lying
spir^te (pardon me if I say so seeing I say it after you) who could have no si^
power* and for that same reason your vocation is fallen in non entery, because
ye have been so many years in violent possession, and can not as yet show
either yours or any of your forefathers re^oures: upon these ^ands ye have
builded your house, yea erected your Kingdom of confusi on, and established
your laws of pa^rtie to have all men subject to your ministerial imaginations
tending to the ruin of all superior powers. The more high your interpri^es b^,
the (...) you^ tre^son, the ^ust cause men ^at^* not only to disobey you* but
meikill more to gainestand you as ^sur^ers of Christ's Jesus charge and office
wit^out his commission or command, and troublers of the common wealth and
seditiouse subjects, qui est is nat^ in pernicie^ Principum (...) bonorum
omnium* Brag of your excommunication as ye please it is but an vain
imagination, a bugle to fra^ babes* or a scare crow* ^ found and a show*
without ^ither danger or profit, and in a word i^ is but a false ^honder where
by no man can be made ^elp^lo nigrio^ ^^o.

13. I look here for your last refuge ye will pay (...) with your ordinary
fashion of scoffing* for some of you being asked where ye found the ki^k do^
answer, in the (...) midding of Papis^rie* Truly a most meet and proper
native so^le for so wor^^ie and noble a Lady as your ki^k is* I guess your
vocation was ^ound in the same royal palace. This an^wer as it is more near to
the purpos, so it contented (...) meikill better* for the Apost^^^ priests*
monks* and friars with other dissol^te ^^^d debouched men of our ki^k were the
first groundston^^ of your re^ormed f^^ie congregation: so if we hade never had
aposta^^^, ye should never have ^ad Apostles* Luth^r was ^ mo^k, C^l^i^ a (...)
none, Beza a Priour, Knoxe a Priest. If ye desire to be any further informed of
this matter, our country may furnish you many true histories of the great and
charitable piety of your primitive kirk when it begane 40. years since.

14. Now to the last head of our dispute, where as the matter is more clear so
shall we be more short. Gising and not granting that ye hade good Calling and
were lawful true Pastors having power to bind and loose. I ask what
jurisdiction ye can have upon them, who never were subject to you; never
acknowledged nor could acknowledge you for lawful pastors having at altymes
made profession of the Catholic religion which is so far different, yea
contrary to that which ye profess, and desires them to embrace, how can ye
urge these men to acknowledge you, or how can ye excommunicat and separate them
from you as rotten and spilt members from the rest of your reformed body,
they never being of your body. Fear ye not that men laughed at you and your
folly, to dispose so rashely upon things never yours except perchance by a
reformed imagination, or dream? Kings and Princes uses not to banish out of
their dominions other princes subjects who never were within their bounds.
True it is, that they may forbid any stranger to enter within their empires,
and that for good and just reasons, yea for their only pleasure if they will
so, because the lands ar theirs, and so may receive, or hold out any man as
they list, or punish sic as would without their license enter there in. But to
banish men that never were within their realms, were a thing very ridiculouse,
that I say not, foolish. And to constrain free men, or other Princes subjects
to gif them the oath of fidelity and du^ service were altogether against
reason, principally never being with in their jurisdiction. Lykwise I say to
you, that ye can not justly force these men now to acknowledge you who never
were yours; ye may in deed forbid them to enter in to your kirk, or to assis^
to your service, if ye have any, or to your prayers, or to take any charge
amongst you, seeing that they ^r not of you^ sto^^: but how ye can pass any
further against them truly I see not, except ye would say, that your power has
no other marches, then your will and fantasy. An ample empire truly if it be
so. Ye will have the ex^resse word of God for all thing^s that other ^en say. I
pray you bring us here some good and euid^n^^e^^ of the scripture which may
serve you for bound and charter of your bordors^ cite us some sure place, by
whose authority ye may prove that it is lawful to banish men out of your
kirk, who never were in it. Think ye not but this meriteth two or three
passages of the holy writ, before ye pass to the execution there of. The
Iew^s did esteem the Ge^tils in rank of excommunicated men; bnt never did
excommunicat them: that is did hold them as profane men destitute of the grace
and assistance of God, and out of his kirk seeing that they professed not that
same religion, which only at that t^me was the true religion. But never did
they curt them of their body as rotten members thereof, because they were not
of their body, but reither a body a part distinguished from them both in
religion and ceremonies, which only the I^wes did declare, and could do no
further, C^ptaines uses not, to discharge or b^ack out of their ^ands,
soldiers who never were under their banners. Christ Jesus never gave ^o any
sic exe^ple or command nor yet, the Apostles, y^^ none of their successors
after them* Where^ find ye the Iewe^ or gentiles excommunicated by the Apostles
or primi^iue ^irk? I find ^ruell pors^^utio^s exercised ag^^nst the Christians
and their great patience with (...) and ^eruent prayer made for their
persecutors, I find not their execrations and curse^ against them. ^e s^e the
Jews yet among^ the Christians and unconstrained to embrace the verity* o^
ye^ excommunicated, except by that general excommunication where by they are
all declared strangers in Gods house and profane persons* with whom
notwithstanding we may h^^ n^ ^peek; trafik, and communicate ^iuille although
that our kirk doors and prayer places be closed up to them. They may have
action in law against any man who has either offended them, or is owing them
any thing* Justice is not refused to them, because they, ar me^ remaining with
in the same common wealth. Now seeing the^s branches were never your^ How can ye
(...) them of your tree. K^mi su^ alteri^^ arbor^s. If ye could do that, ye
might hardely va^^t your selves to have done a miracle, which has been so
often craved at your hands for your extraordinaire vocation.

15. But ye will say tha^ they are in your Pari^hes* and therefore ye have power
upon them as upon the rest who ar within the same jurisdiction. I understand
well* ye ar ^ands lo^de^, all is yours that g^owe^ upon ^he gro^^d. But good
^^^es* ye should first show that the ground is yours, and then dispose there
upon at your pleasour* we shall never op^n our mouths to gainesay you. The
jurisdiction that ye pretend is spiritual, hitherto they have never entered
wi^h in your dominious* Why will ye now force them to land, because they are
driven by storm of wind upon your costs? They are ^orie that your limits ar
so near to them. The only sight of your realm has disgusted them
exceedingly: suffer them to stay where they are and they will enter no further.
They content them with your good will. The Turks constrain no man to embrace
their opinion, except he enter with in their temple: any man may be within the
country without any compulsion. ye require more then the most cruel tyrannes*
If ye will credit them it shall not be needful to banish them out of your
territory. They desire not to enter. They have chosen another free city,
where they like better to be burgessis, which they will lose, if they enter
with you. Ulysses was never more desirous to be delivered out of Polyphemu^
cauerne, or danger of Si^enes, or Charibdis then they to be exempt of your
communion. It is but in vain ye excommunicat them who never have, nor yet
desire to communicate with you. Ye do as they tell the ^able of the fox and
plummes, which he could not come by, nigra sun^ ^olo they are black (says he)
I will have none of them. ye ar very liberal, ye gif to others, which neither
is yours nor can ye have* what extraordinary reformed charity is this in you
to deliver over to Satan Gods creatures not being in your charge nor keeping,
meikill less at your gift? But good sires why ta^ ye not the pains to show
that ye have the true kirk, out of which there is no salu^tion; and that ye ar
lawful pastors, to whom all true Christians ar obliged to obey as to Christ's
vic^i^es and lieutenants* This were the ordinary and easy way, if ye would
follow it; for this being once sufficiently ^hewen; I doubt not but they would
show them selves very docil and very easy to receive all your instructions,
because of your undoubted authority and charge. Ye might then very well
exhort them to enter witbin your spiritual jurisdiction, seeing ye hade the
lawful power to receive them, and to enroll them among the Children of God,
and heavenly citizens. If they would not yet hear you, ye might according to
Christ's command, shake the dust of your feet* and leave their blood upon their
owen heads except perchance ye would patiently abide their conversion to God,
seeing that some ar called and do (...) in the ^ords vinia^d* in the morning,
some at midday, some in the ^uening, and at last all ar new ^tded for their
l^bours, ^o the which none ar constrained* Ye know that faith is a gift of God,
it c^n not be found e^^ry where. Spiritu^ vb^ vul^ spir^t it de pended (...)
upon our will, nor ^eurs to make men bel^^ue the veri^ie* that appe^^in^d to
God only. vol^ntas ^ogino^ p^^est^^ (...) is God only* who may change the
hardness of men's hea^^es. Why will ye force men, seeing we deny free will: If ye
say as ye think why v^ge ye men as if they had it* excuse me, if I propose sic
things, seeing I do it following your h^mour and strange opinions. I (...) some
exemple either of* ou^ master jesus Christ o^ of his Apos^los* where either
(...) or Gentill ever was constrained to acknowledge the gospel, o^
excommunicated ^f ^he would non I will grant to (...) very freely* that all men
who will not acknowledge the true kirk^ and lawful pastour^ a^ with out the
communion and pa^k^ of Jesus Christ* but not ^u^ out of the communion of (...)
park of Jesus Christ: because as I have said now often, they were never within
i^* And therefore the Apostles and ^h^ir (...) did ever ciuilie co^uerse with
the ^othe preaching and teaching the ve^iti^ (where by our for fathers were
con^erted to God) but never admitted them to be present at Gods s^r^ice till
they hade left their error and were instr^cted in the truth, and so rece^ned
in the bosom of the kirk a^ true Christians should be. If the Apostles had
de^a^red from^ their company all men, who wo^d not incontinent embrace their
doctrine, I think they ^hold not have (...) so many as they have done. In
their pa^ien^e they overcame the world, wonn^ the fa^ou^ of their enemies,
assured the faithful, b^a^^gled the infidel^es seeing them die so co^^dgeously
for the ve^i^ie that they preached, and at last left ou^ for fathers peaceable
in the kirk of God? which certainly was a heavenly work done by natural
inst^un^en^es endued with supernatural graces and virtues, infused by the
holy Spirit in the hear^^s of ^^ue and law^ull pasto^^s to confound all
worldly wi^dome and bring us wi^h simplicity and obedience to eternal bliss.
In pl^ce of which godly modesty and meeknes ye employ your reformed force and
violence showing that ye had ^e^^her make, them ^e made martyrs, where in by
many degrees ye s^^pass^ the cruel barb^^^^ of the Turks, impati^t au^
importune in all your actions, yet according to your discipline (which is
against all good discipline) impellens quidquid sibi summa petenti obsis^it,
g^udensque v^am ^ecisse ruina. -- Magnamque cade^^ magnamque reuertens
dat^stragem late, sparsosque recoll^gi^ ignes.

16. Thus fair for them who all wai^e have remamed Catholics, as to others
who have at any time yielded to you being ^ither forced or deceived by you,
good reason requires that they be set at liberty as before. Doubtless the law
will declare all sic men as free from all obligation to you, as they who never
were yours, because of the violence and deceit ye have used, principally seeing
it is so fa^re against the honor of God, the Kings Majesty's servi^e, and
publik honesty, and you to be punished as publik transgressors of divine and
human laws. If ye will have men obliged to your doctrine and discipline,
set up new play, procee^ with honest lawful and godly means without both
fraud and force error or treason take an ordinary sure calling or prove well
your extraordinary, and then, who hat^ once acknowledged you, punish him ^
your discretion and according to your laws, if he revolt from you, But now as
matters goes, although I were a zealous brother yet as faithful Christian and
true subject, I would be gladd to be excommunicated out of your company, where
treason and heresies ar confirmed with subscriptio^s and solemn oaths.

18. Now to end with you, I will yet make you an offer, as I think very
reasonable, which is this. Seeing ye will have no thing that comes of the
Catholic Apostolik and Roman Kirk, as being infected with superstition and
Idolatry* nor acknowledge the Pape, because ye esteem him the Antichrist, and
therefore will have no counceill gathered by him: do like good and vigilant
pastors, assemble your selves by whose authority ye please, hold an
universal synod among your reformed brethren of all sorts through out the
whole reformed world, without beginning and ending, that there appear no
superiorite* make a round table, speek al at once; dispute upon the
controuerted heads: agree among your selves and we shall agree with you. what
can ye ask more of us? if no accord can be hade among you, how can we agree
with you? Consenting with any one company, we shall have all the rest for
enemies, and shall not be assured if the party, that we have followed, will
stand long at his owen opinion. Or if ye think this offer of greater expenses
then esperance, we will make you another, to agree with you and subscribe your
con^ession of faith, if ye can show that ever there was any empire, Kingdom,
canton, city, town, village or cothouse, yea any single man Catholic or
heretik, young or old, learned or ignorant, professing your doctrine and
gouuerned by your discipline before this last hundred years. If ye refuse this
offers, judge your selves, what the reformed flock may think of you. Abiding
your answer I will make here an end and pray God to gif us his eternal bless,
and to you (where by ye may atteine to the same) a faith that may stand with
your duty to God and Prince, and with Christian charity.

Fare well.

