THE REFORMED POLITIC. That is, AN APOLOGY FOR THE General cause of
Reformation, written against the sclaunders of the Pope and the League. With
most profitable aduises for the appeasing of schism, by abolishing
superstition, and preserving the state of the Clergy. Whereto is adjoined a
discourse upon the death of the Duke of Guise, prosecuting the argument of the
book. Dedicated to the King by John Fregeuille of Gaut.

ANCHORA SPEI

Imprinted at London by Richard Field, dwelling in the Black Friars. 1589.

TO THE KING.
Diverse men finding them selves in like danger, may better judge each of
others case, then any one that has not experimented the like, as for example,
no man can better judge of the charges and expenses that a man has been at in
the pursuit of some process, then he that has been at the like.

This do I say, Sir, since there is nothing more dangerous then sclaunder, and
that no man can better judge of the perverseness thereof, then such as have
both tasted and tried it. So it is that the Reformed Princes have been
sclandered by the Pope, who has noted them of heresy: and in my opinion your
Majesty ca^ best judge of the injury done unto them, as having in your self
tried the sharpness of the darts of sclander, for your Majesty have with
the like darts been atteinted, no less pernitiously and maliciously then the
Reformed Princes, considering that the sclander raised upon your Majesty, was
both indirect and secret, but the same vvherevvith the Reformed Princes are
charged, is open. Now is it a plain case, that a secret enemy is more
dangerous then an open, and so consequently they that have touched your
Majesty with such a sclander, bearing you inward malice, are most dangerous
enemies. The sclander vvherevvith the Pope has charged the Reformed Princes is
well enough known, and the aunsvvere thereto, together with their just
defense, shall in my opinion, be peremptorily enough entreated of in this
present Treatise. But the sclaunder vvherevvith the Pope does charge your
Majesty deserves the laying open, because that being both secret and
indirect, it has nevertheless a more venomous tail then the tail of a
Scorpion, and of the same nature: for the vvound can hardly be cured, but by
the death of the byter. If the Pope could have burdened your Majesty with
heresy, it is evident that he would not have spared you: but your Majesty,
have alvvayes been so good a Catholic, that he could not accuse you of
heresy, but he must first have condemned him self, and therefore seeing that
way would not serve, he has sought out an other: for under hand he has
spread abroad sundry brutes and nevves, importing that your Majesty do favor
heretics, and have about you those that take part with heretics, and these
rumors has he dispersed, not only in France, but through all Italy,
Germany, and other places. Now therefore let your Majesty judge what an
impressio^ this may leave in the hearts of the people, and what a consequence
this action draws after it, your Majesty may thereby read in the hearts of
the Pope and the League, and turning the leaf never so little, may know their
driftes, together with the consequence of the matter: That is, that the Pope
seeks first to weaken the part of the Reformation, that it may stand as an 0
in algorisme, and next to bring in the Council of Trent and the Inquisition,
so to authorize the League even above your Majesty, so as no man may speak
amiss of the Pope or the League, but he shall suddenly be cast into prison: and
that once brought to pass, the next must be to lay hands upon your self, and
bury you in some Monastery: I say bury, because so you shall dye double in
this world: and by and by raise speeches according to the impressions before
mentioned, that your Majesty having favored the heretics, are by his
holiness deposed from the crown, and the Cardinal of Bourbon declared next,
but unmeet for succession, and therefore that he will set up such a one of the
League as shall be at his devotion: this I say will he do, if your Majesty
take not the better heed, and provide not in time for it. Neither shall he do
any thing that has not already been done to your predecessors, whose estates
the Popes have troubled, when there was no speech of Reformation, but only
upon malice that they bare to the privileges of the French Church. And also
albeit your Majesty should shake of the Popes yoke, yet should you do nothing
but what your predecessors have sought to do, witness the Pragmaticall
Sanction, neither shall it be any novelty in France. The hatred also that the
Pope bears to your Majesty, is the same that he has continued against your
predecessors, even for their privileges, therefore he would willingly have
in France such a king as might be his creature, so that his driftes are as
prejudicial to the Clergy, as pernicious to your person, and whether they be
hurtful to the people, let the present troubles declare. For the people had
been at rest, had not the League troubled all France, and therefore it is a
matter that concerns all, neither is there any other means to remedy it,
but by shaking of the Popes yoke, your predecessors have done it for a smaller
matter, not in respect of Reformation, neither did king Henry the viij. in
England shake it for Reformation, but for his state: And this I will aduovv
that the liberty and purity of the Council of Nice, which we do crave, is
better for France and the state thereof, then the yoke of the Tridentine
Council that the League requires. I call it liberty, because in the time of
the Nicene Council there was no Popish yoke and purity, for that the^ there
was no superstitions. But albeit your Majesty will not come near to that
point, yet can you not escape the Popes superstitious practices, but by
renouncing the Papacy, after the example of your predecessors desires, and as
king Henry the eight of England put in effect, not for Reformation, but for the
state. For it is most certain that the Pope has no power to hurt any, but
his own faction, or such as have any dealing with him: but to those that
have forsaken him, his poison is spit, his power to hurt is ended, and his
endeavors are quayled and made of no effect. Had king Henry of England still
follovved him, he would either by guile, excommunications, or croisades, have
thundered against him, but having cast him of, the Pope might like a Cerberus
with his three heads crowned with three crowns, have barked at him, but
byte he could not. The like will it be with all that forsake him, well he
may bark, but not byte, your Majesty may know what difference there is
betvveene the fidelity of the Reformed, and the conspiracies of the League:
The Reformed will dye in your service: but the Pope by the League, seeks to
make your Majesty odious to your subjects, and to other Princes and people
about you, by ministering unto them such wicked impressions by their secret
sclaunders. It is a goodly matter to know whom to trust, and whom to take
heed of, neither vvonder I but at one thing, which is, that the Sorbonistes
having before time denounced a Pope an heretic, that the Clergy have not as
yet declared this a schismaticke, for raising so great a schism in Europe, but
especially for stirring up the subjects against their king in France. I will
not any further dilate upon these matters, which are sufficiently known to
your Majesty, and Kings love brevity. I have no more to say, but to pray
unto the Lord to bless and prosper your Crown, and to make your scepter to
sprout, florishe and bring forth fruict as he did those of Ezechias and Josias.
From London this 12. of December. 1588.

Your Majesty's most humble, obedient and faithful subject. John Fregeuille of
Gaut.

AN APOLOGY FOR THE GENERAL CAUSE OF REFORMATION, AGAINST THE SCLANDERS OF THE
POPE AND THE LEAGVE.
THE I. TREATISE.
Poor is that garden wherein there grows but one herb, 1
and wretched is that orchard that yeldeth but one kind of fruict. But the
excellency of that orchard which God him self planted in the beginning of the
world, has he declared in causing it to bring forth all kind of fruicts, Genesis
2 9.
even the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and the tree of life: albeit our
selves now have, God be praised, a more excellent orchard then that, which
yeldeth such fruict as is more precious, rich* pleasant, and in excellency
without comparison. This our orchard is planted in the garden plot of new
Jerusalem, Apoc. 21. 2.
and yet we need not to clime the heavens to dress it, or to eat the fruicts
thereof. For this Jerusalem is descended out of heaven, so that we may upon
earth be conversant therein, but with a spiritual and heavenly conversation.
This our orchard is the orchard of Gods word, wherein among all other fruicts
which with infinite diversity do grow therein, we may also find the tree of
good and evil, which is the law, and the tree of life: For the law is a tree
of knowledge of good and evil, because thereby we may discern the good from
the bad, as S. Paul shows, Romans 7. 7.
where he says, that by the law we have the knowledge of sin: And as for the
the Gospel, who can deny it to be the tree of life even of life everlasting?
and our selves do know that in sundry parts of this new City is planted that
tree of life, Apoc. 22. 2.
which bears twelve fruicts, according to the twelve seasons of the year,
whose leaves do serve for the health of the Gentiles. Now when a gardener or
any other that enjoys the fruicts of a garden, purposes to feast his
friends, he presents them not with one only sort of fruict, albeit he judge
it to be the best, but offers them sundry kinds, so to pleasure them with
the choice, knowing that there is as great diversity in the tastes, as in the
kinds, and that it is recreation to judge of variety of tastes, because
variety delights. But they which purpose to entertain the guestes at the
marriage of the lamb, Apoc. 19. 7.
must likewise out of the Lords gardens chose sundry fruicts, wherewith to
content the bridegromes friends, and to satisfy the diversity of their
tastes or judgments, according to which rule have we out of this heavenly
orchard gathered fruicts admonitorie, instructiue, Divine and Politic, which
are sundry reasons of diverse sorts, whereof some be admonitorie, others
instructiue some Divine, and others Politic as having respect to the diverse
judgments of men, of whom some may be led and kept in awe with simple
admonition, where others require somewhat of greater force for their better
instructions, and unto such must be exhibited reasons instructiue: Others there
are likewise of Mary Magdalenes disposition, Luc. 10. 42.
such as chose the better part, to whom we must propound reasons Theological:
others again do resemble Martha, whose hearts are set upon the affairs of
this world, and to those must we deliver reasons of Policy, Heb. 5.
and after the example of S. Paul, give milk to such as can not brook any
other food, and stronger meat to those that have stronger stomach Neither are
Politic reasons utterly to be disdained since God him self vouchsafed to
establish a Politic government in Israel, as well as to instruct the
consciences. And if any person be incapable of higher matters, and
nevertheless may be brought by Politic reasons to do his duty, why shall
we forbear to instruct him by such reasons as he is most capable of? And
therefore have we forborne nothing that we have thought might seem to induce
men to the knowledge of the truth, and the performance of their duties* yea we
are persuaded that we have brought a fruict of no small consequence to all
Europe, in that we show by reasons as well Divine as Politic, that the truth
whereof we here entreat, is both fit for the conscience, and commodious to the
state: which neuerthesse is a matter contrary to the opinions of many, who have
accoumpted the truth to be in deed convenient to the conscience, but hurtful
to the state and the reason that led them so to judge, was because they judged
but slenderly of matters depending upon the truth, which notwithstanding do no
less maintain Policy in the general estate of a people, then conscience in
the person of every Christian: and therefore we will divide this present
Treatise into two parts, whereof the one shall be discussed by reasons
Theological, the other by reasons Political, which Treatise we do name The
Reformed Politic, because that in the same we do maintain Reformation for
the most part by Politic reasons, albeit we hope shortly to second it with
Divine, concerning Church government, to the end to strengthen that part which
seems the weaker, albeit of it self it be strong enough.

Nothing in the old serpent is more ancient then lying, 2
whereof he is the father, Apoc. 12 9.
neither is there any thing more familiar to Satan then sclander, John. 8. 44.
whereupon he is called the Devil, that is, a sclanderer. The object also of
his sclander is no other the^ God and his Church, Mat. 12. 26
for upon what reason should he sclander his own? so should he oppose him
self against him self, and work his own destruction, so as his kingdom
could not stand. But he is not ashamed to sclander God, and to gainesay his
word: Genesis 2* 27.
for when God said to Adam, Thou shall dye the death, Genesis 3.
he feared not to contrary him, saying, No* you shall not dye the death, so
that albeit this speech of Satan was not in every respect contradictorie to
Gods, yet was it his intent to gainsay God. For the meaning of Gods words
stretched to the eternal death, whereof man made him self guilty the self
same day that he transgressed Gods commandment: but Satan aimed only at the
bodily death: neither imagined he that God had spoken of any other death, and
therefore meant by contrarying that point to make God a liar, and not that
only, but also to bring of God into suspicion of envy, as under hand taxing
him to envy man's felicity, as if God had forbidden man the eating of the tree
of good and evil, for fear least he should become like unto God, by the
knowledge of good and evil. As for our Lord Jesus Christ, it is not to be
doubted but the devil has sclandered him. For what greater sclander would any
man have the^ sclanderously to put him to death? So that if Satan entered into
Judas together with the soppe, John. 13. 27
to the end to cause him to bring his treason to effect, who doubts but he
had likewise quoifed the Scribes and Phariseis, to make them enterprise the
death of the son of God? which being so, who can doubt but those goodly
titles that the Phariseis gave to our Lord Jesus Christ, were forged in the
same shop and by the same workma^? Mat. 12.
who charged our Lord that by Beelzebub the Prince of devils he cast out
devils? If the^ he durst so shamelesly set him self against God and his only
son, is it any marvel that he dare set upon men the servants of God, bruting
abroad in all places, that the faithful which serve God under the purity of
Reformation are heretics? We are therefore to know that as to Satan there is
nothing more familier then to sclander God, Christ Jesus, and his faithful
members: so is there nothing more familiar to the faithful, then to see them
selves sclandered by the old serpent and his angels, which are his members and
supposts. And this is so familiar and ordinary to the^ that there need no
example. For we know what sclanders and persecutions Gods people have endured
by strangers, and the Prophets by their brethren, in so much that it is
written, that no Prophet has been put to death but in Jerusalem. And this
teaches us that even such as in outward profession seem to be Gods people, do
for the most part persecute Gods elect, and those who^ he will sanctify, and
separate from the broad way that leads to destruction. For as they that among
the Israelites sacrificed unto Baal, did persecute them which bowed not unto
him, eue^ so in the Church which is termed Christian, they that follow like
superstitions, do persecute those that will not cleave to the same. For this
cause in the Apocalypse the Church which is compared to a woman environed with
the sun, Apoc. 18.
crowned with 12. stars, standing upon the moon, is notably said to be sent
into the wilderness by the two wings of the great eagle. Which great eagle
has relation to the Roman Empire and the dependances thereof, as is the
Papacy, which has brought this woman into the wilderness, where being, she
is compared to a mighty harlot holding a cup full of the abomination of her
whoredoms, which are the superstitions that separate us from the desolate
woman, and replenished with the blood of the Martyrs, which has been shed
because they would not cleave to these superstitions. Even as the Idolatrous
Church of Israel persecuted the true faithful which served God in pureness,
so also the desolate and superstitious Church among the Christians, does
persecute the faithful, that seek to serve God purely and without
superstition. But withal the examples of the patience of the faithful in old
time should be unto us a miror of patience: and the promises of our deliverance
which God has made us, ought to be as it were oil to refresh the lamp of our
hope, as also these fatherly corrections should be a testimony unto us, that
God accompteth us his children, to the end that we walk worthily, as children
of such a father, separating our selves from the vanity and frowardness of
the world, to follow the truth in abandoning vanity: and seeking to overcome
the world by that faith, which is the victory, arming our faith with charity,
zeal, sincerity, truth and the fear of God. Now the cause why we see that
the faithful are ordinarily persecuted, not only by strangers, but also by
those that aduow them selves to be the people of God, and of his Church, is,
because that in the Church there be both of the children of Agar and of the
children of Sara, and the children of Agar do usually despise and persecute the
children of Sara: albeit to their own harms. And Jacob also was an exile 20.
years in a forem land, for fear of his brother Esau: so do we ordinarily see
in the Church of God, that they that are borne after the flesh do persecute
those that are borne after the promise, appertaining to Gods election. The
adversaries of the Reformation do say that the Reformed are heretics, whereto
I answer, that reason makes the man, and truth the Christian. To speak
without reason is not the part of a man, but to babble: and to speak against
the truth, by charging any one in that which concerns the conscience, is to
sclander, and it is the devils rhetoric. Christian Religion is not built upon
authority but upon truth, not upon the authority of men but upon the truth
that is of God: If the adversaries of Reformation should be driven to prove
their accusation by reason and truth, they would be shreudly troubled, and we
may plainly say that they could not do it: because that either they are
ignorant wherein Reformation does consist, or if they know they can not tax it
of heresy without speaking against their own consciences, and therefore we
will entreat upon this point, to the end that in few words it may manifestly
appear, that there is no heresy in Reformation, and also that all that the
Reformed are charged withal is but sclander.

It is the part of a good archer to find the white at the first view, and to
hit it with the first shaft, and he shall be deemed a good and expert master,
so that it come not by chance. S. Paul has showed the excellency of his
art, in that with one only arrow he reached the end of the law, and with an
other the mark that was set up as the end of the Gospel. The arrow wherewith
he has hit the end of the law, was but one only word, under the which he
has comprehended the whole doctrine of the law, Romans 13. 11
and that is, Charity, and the shaft wherewith he pierced the mark of the
Gospel, Gal 5. 14.
is also this only word, Faith, where under he has also comprehended the
whole doctrine of the Gospel. Gal. 5. 5.
Now then if any man would know wherein consists the difference between
Reformation and the doctrine termed Catholic: it is in the superstition. For
take the superstition out of that Religion, which in name is termed Catholic,
and there will remain no difference between the Catholic, and the Reformed,
and therefore I appeal to the judgment of any discret person in this case,
videl* whether it be heresy not to cleave to superstition: for if it be
heresy, Reformation may be taxed of heresy: but if it be no heresy, they
which term them selves Catholics, can not tax Reformation with heresy,
unless it be with sclander. For Reformation differreth not from the Catholic
Religion but in one point, which is superstition.

Many there be that have formed them The name of a monster that casts fire
out of his mouth, having the head of a lion, the belly of a goat, and the tail
of a dragon.
Chimeres concerning Reformation as imagining it to consist in those things
wherein it does not consist, 3.
and whereof some have spoken lightly, and others have judged rashly, each
condemning it for want of understanding, some have persuaded them selves that
they understood it very well, and yet never took pains to seek into the
depth of it. There are that have thought Reformation to consist in overthrowing
the estat of the Clergy, and this foreiudgement has been a greater hinderance
to Reformation then the weapons of the Leaguers. For it is certain that had
the Clergy supposed, that they might under Reformation have enjoyed their
estate, they would have craved it, to the end to have shaken of the yoke of
superstition, which is burdensome to the greatest part of them, and therefore
they never retained superstition, but for their estates sake: and if the
Clergy had admitted Reformation, the people would also have embrased it, and
so had the Popes partakers been unarmed, and have had no means to enterprise
the League: and we fortified with those that do now strengthen our adversaries
faction. Luke. 14. 17.
True it is that when the bridegroom calls the guestes to the marriage, there
is no excuse of buying of land or vines that may serve, Luke. 14. 33.
or withhold us. Yea we must even renounce all goods and come to Christ when he
calls, and yet it does not follow that we must bind men to buy Reformation
with the loss of their goods. Among the adversaries to Reformation, this
presuppose has through the Popes subtlety had course: But what? Jesus Christ
protested that he came not to abolish the law, but to fulfill it, and reproving
the faults of the Pharisees, exepted their estate, saying, These things ought
to have been done, and yet the other not left undone, which notwithstanding
they have still imagined that it should overthrow their estate, and thereupon
have obstinately set them selves there against, which has bred the destruction
that they stood in fear of. This presuppose has also wasted the demaynes of
the Clergy, which under the Reformation might have been preserved, but the
fault was in that it was never propounded, procured or so much as demanded:
nothing will be obtained without request: but that that is done is done, and
therefore let us provide for that that is to come. And the documentes of the
Lord are given us to instruct our selves therewith, but not to enter to far
into judgment of others matters. Many also have been planted in Reformation,
and therein having taken root, have made no difficulty to dye for the same,
who if they should have been forced at the first blush to purchase it with the
price of all their goods, it is unknown what they would have done. Many also
there be that have abandoned their goods, yet not the use of them, but the
care and disquiet, as the Apostles did their nets, and yet they still used
them, even after the Lords resurrection: yet must we not take the Lords
instruction to the end thereby to cast a stumbling block in our brethrens way,
neither to enter to far into judgment of others, but every one to judge him
self, according to those instructions, and to refer the rest to God: as also
I say not this to the end to mitigate things past, but to wish men to be more
circumspect in time to come. For when we have thoroughly wayed all things, we
shall find Reformation to import nothing contrary to the state of the
Clergy. To the end therefore that none may hereafter call this article into
question, I will set down the reasons whereupon I build my speech.

First England has under the state of Reformation preserved the state of the
Clergy, as also in some parts of Germany it is kept sound, and yet may be
better preserved in France.

Secondly the state of the Clergy depends upon the Mosaicall Policy. The
Gentiles then being grafted into Israel as the wild olive is into the
natural, Romans 11. 17
the Episcopal branche is grafted into the Leuiticall, and therefore succeeding
in their functio^s, they ought also to succeed in their privileges and rights.

Thirdly the end of Reformation tends not to corrupt the order and policy
that Moses has established, but to reform that which the Popes have corrupted
with their superstitions.

Fourthly Reformation tends not to set the new Testament against the old, or
to arm Jesus Christ against Moses, neither to show that Jesus Christ with one
hand destroyed that which he built with the other: for he is the auctor as well
of the law as of the Gospel: but rather to seek out that harmony and
agreement, which is between the law and the Gospel, which is taught by the
harmony of the Canticle of Moses and of the lamb, set down in the
Apocalypse. 15. 3. whereby we be taught, that throughout all the holy Scripture
there is not any repugnance, abrogation, or contradiction. And in deed we
should do God great injury, if we should imagine that he used any repugnancie
in his laws, abrogation in his decrees, or contradiction in his rightes: well
there may be some derogations, but a derogation does but expound an edict, by
taking away some weak part and of no value or importance, to the end to
corroborate the more important part, as we see that the Gospel derogateth from
the law, Ierem. 9.
by taking away the letter, as the manual Circumcision, Romans 2. 29.
thereby to show the excellency and importance of the Circumcision of the
heart, Colloss. 2. 11
wrought without hands, and taught by the Prophets under the law and by the
Apostles in the Gospel.

Fifthly, as in the law we may consider the policy and ceremony, the law
has waxen old as concerning the literal ceremony, not concerning the
spirit: but the policy remains, as appears, first, in that S. Paul
teaches us, that the Gentiles (as in the days of David) were aforetime
estranged from the policy of Israel, (...).
for so does the Greek text import: neither do I alter the terms, as
coveting rather to draw at the well head then out of the channels: and I find
no reason to translate common wealth in stead of policy. I know we are all
made fellow burgeses of heaven, but besides, we are all made partakers of the
policy, that is to say, of the privileges: howbeit by the same we are bound
and made subject to the same rightes, which we ought not to give over to obey
traditions. I know there may be great objections made, but I have likewise
greater solutions, which I reserve for the Treatise of the policy of the
Church, and it suffiseth me here to set down the fondamentall reasons. Some
may say unto me, that S. Paul speaks of the spiritual policy, not of the
external: whereto I answer, that the Mosaicall government is spiritual,
first because the spirit of God penned it, secondly because S. Paul says
that the law is spiritual: but the part is of one kind in his course, and
there is as great difference between this government, and a government
simply external, as there is between Gods law and man's traditions. For the
law is spiritual, and man's traditions are carnal, and purge no more but the
outside of the cup, whereas Gods word is penetratiue, eue^ to the partition of
the soul and the spirit, of the sinews and marow, and this government is
Gods word, which cleanses the whole cup as well within as without, and
therefore can not be called simply external, but internal, whose principal
end te^deth to rule the inward man.

Again S. Paul says that the law is good, if it be lawfully used. Then must
we without question seek out the lawful use thereof, that is, we must take it
after the spirit and newness thereof, and not after the old letter. Now the
spirit of the law is the equity thereof, but the letter is the rigor of the
words. And therefore we must not after the rigor of the words, take eye for
eye, Exodus 21. 24.
or tooth for tooth, neither do I think, that the judges that lived under the
law, did in such points follow the letter. Thus we may see wherefore S. Paul in
his Epistle to the Ephesians inuiteth us to the government of Israel, Romans
when he laid open the vanity of the righteousness of the law against the
merits of works, Gal.
and the abolishment of the law, Heb.
against such as constituted righteousness in outward ceremonies, whom he
teaches that the new Testament abolisheth the old, howbeit that is to be
understood concerning the old letter, whereto is opposed the newness of
spirit.

A third reason will I also add, for that S. Paul says, that the law was
given for the transgressions: for by that we know that we are to use it to
correct transgressions, and that self place serves for a farther explication
of the lawful use of the law, whereof we spoke in the former article. For the
law consists in Commandments, commanding natural equity: and thereof does
S. Paul call it the law of Commandementes: but the Gospel requires a
supernatural perfection, whereof the creature man who is natural is incapable,
which perfection is expounded by instructions, admonitions, counsels and
examples. Now he that fulfilleth not the law, is by the law punishable, as
having sinned, for sin is the transgression of the law, as S. John teaches,
saying (...). But there be things concerning the profession of the Gospel,
which who soever fulfilleth not is reproueable, and yet not punishable, and
therefore the law remains to bridle and punish transgressions. The things
belonging to perfection, are, not to look upon a woman, to covet her: Mat. 5.
after a blow on the one cheek, to turn the other: to him that requires but
thy coat, to give both coat and cloak: to do good to our enemies: and to be
perfect, as our father that is in heaven is perfect: who so does not these
things, is nevertheless not subject to punishment: but he that contrary to
the law defloureth a maiden, must according to the punishment of the law, give
her a dowry or mary her: he that has stolen four sheep, must according to
the punishment of the law, be taught by his pastor to restore five. I omit that
which concerns the Civil Magistrate, and speak only of that that touches
the government of the Church, and this satisfaction which the pastor is to
impose, takes place, when the man comes of him self to confess his sin.
Here may some man object unto me, that the law was a schoolemaister to bring us
to Christ: to who^ I answer, in this place S. Paul speaks of the
ceremonial law, which sets a distinction between clean and unclean
things, grounded upon the elements of this world, and were neither tasted of,
nor eaten, but were shadows of things to come under Christ.

In the law was to be considered, government and ceremony, also that there
was two kinds of government, the Civil and the Ecclesiastical, where Moses
had the Civil and Aaron the Ecclesiastical: likewise in the Priesthood of
Aaron there were two things, the Ecclesiastical government and the ceremony:
some Priests there were that meddled rather with the ceremony then with the
government: but there were likewise Levites that were not Priests, but dealt
only in Ecclesiastical judgments, being Doctors of the law, of whom some
remained in the sanctuary towns, there to judge of murders by chance
medley: howbeit they could not judge by tradition, but by law. Deuteronomy. 17. Upon
the estate of the Clergy depended these five things: 1. ceremony, and the
right of the sacrifices. 2. The revenues. 3. possessions. 4. dignities, and
fifthly the laws whereby they should judge the people. For the ceremony, they
had sacrifices: For their revenues, they had the tenthes: for their
possessions, they had 48. towns, their cattle and the houses that they
purchased, also the vows: and in stead of this the French Clergy have their
demaines and tenthes: for their dignities they had the order of Iethro. Number.
35. 11.
Exodus 18. Deuteronomy. 17. And the laws that they were to observe were the laws
contained in the law. Leuit. 25. 32.
Deuteronomy. 17. Act. 23.

Now it is to be noted, Leuit. 27.
that the law gave the Priests authority to judge, and that in such sort,
that who soever did not obey them, was denounced worthy of death: howbeit
hereto were added two bonds. The one that the Priest could not condemn, but in
specifying the law of God, whereby he did condemn: the other, that the person
condemned dyed not but by the Civil Magistrates hands, who had authority to
look, whether the man were justly condemned, according to the law cited in his
condemnation. Deuteronomy. 17.

I say therefore that the Christian Clergy, living holily may possess their
revenues: neither will I be a more severe censurer of their estate, the^ Jesus
Christ was of the state of the Pharisees. But alas, if Jesus Christ bewailed
the wretchedness of the Pharisees, because they tithed the mint, and had left
justice or mercy, how much more lamentable is the wretchedness of that Clergy,
which terms it self Catholic: which possesses these holy revenues to the
end to maintain Gods laws, and yet have not only forsaken them, and cleaued
to traditions, but also do mainteyne superstition contrary to Gods laws, yea
and persecute such as will not cleave to the like? How much better were it for
them to possess them holily in living according to God? whereby they might
live honestly with lawful wives; where as now they wast them unworthily upon
harlots. Hitherto have men thought, that the part of the God of this world was
favorable to the Clergy, and that Gods part was contrary to them: but in
deed Gods part is more favorable to the Clergy then the contrary part: and not
to the Clergy only, but to all the people, in respect of the wars which the
superstitions have brought in, which cannot be ended but with agreeing with
God: for Gods wrath which has stirred up these scourges, must be appeased, and
then God will appease these troubles which breed our miseries. There is then no
hinderance but that the the Clergy may enjoy their rightes and privileges.
True it is that in S. Paul there be some admonitions and examples: but they
neither make law, neither abrogate any law: had S. Paul been in the days of
Eleazar the son of Aaron, he would have taken the tenthes: but being in such
a time as the Churches were poor, he labored with his own hands to spare
them: For he was a principal man, who knew how to abound and how to want, and
so spared them, but not upon duty, as him self testifies. 1. Cor. 9.
Likewise had Aaron or Eleazar been in the days of S. Paul, when the Churches
were poor, they would have labored with their own hands, or been content
with food and raiment: but had they been in the time of great Constantin, when
it was lawful to possess the tenthes, they would have used them. Out of all
which we do gather, that he which has little must be content with a little:
and he that has much must endeavor to use it lawfully. And herein consists
the knowledge how to abound, Phil. 4.
or to want, when a man can be content with his want, and not forget him self
in his plenty. As for Ecclesiastical dignities, we grant them even to the
highest, according to the order of Iethro, which order was never constituted in
the new Testament, but was practiced, and in deed the new is not to ordeine
matters already ordained in the old, but to put them in practice. Now after the
order of Iethro, the chief Bishops do succeed in the high Priests room, and
the Apostles are to be considered as sovereign Bishops, because that next to
Jesus Christ there were none in greater authority the^ they, but there were in
less. And for their parts they were in equal authority each with other: for
since our Lord would not appoint any one to be the greatest among his Apostles,
he has left them all in equal power, neither could any man give them any
greater: besides, he appointed them in like degree, to the end they should be
chief in those provinces whither Gods spirit sent them, and so should not
need one to depend upon the other. Now that they were chief it appears,
first in that Saint Paul likeneth him self unto a master builder, not a
simple masson, and others to massons that build above, when he says, that him
self laid the foundation, and that the rest builded thereupon. Secondly, in
that both from Corinthe and other places they did write unto S. Paul, to
decide the most difficult matters among them: for it is the office of the
chiefest to decide the most difficult causes Exodus 18. Deuteronomy. 17. S. Paul
likewise charged Titus as a Bishop to ordeine Priests throughout the
co^gregations Tit. 1. And Titus received that charge from S. Paul, as from a
greater then himself: For S. Paul uses commandment. S. Paul also. 1. Cor.
11. 34. says, when I come I will determine of the rest, thereby reserving to
him the ordering of such things, as could not be performed but in the presence
of the chiefest: He also says, that he that gives the blessing, is greater
then he that receaueth it: Heb. 7.
Even so may we also say, that he that commands is greater then he that
obeys: and he that sends, then he that is sent. 1. Tim. 6.
Now S. Paul commands Timothy, saying, I command thee in the name of God.
etc. He required also obedience in Philemon, saying, trusting in thine
obedience. True it is that he also used entreatie, whereof grows the
Proverb, a great Lords request is as good as a commandment. S. Paul
likewise wills Timothy not to admit any accusation against the Priest or
Elder, without two or three witnesses: so that Timothy might admit or reject
accusations against Priests, wherefore it follows that he had jurisdiction
even over the Priests.

Saint Paul also sent Timothy to the Corinthians: 1. Cor. 4.
He commanded Titus to come unto him, Tit. 3.
also to send Zene a Doctor of the law, 2. Tim. 4.
and Apollo: and he commanded Timothy to come before winter, and to bring
Mark with him. True it is that Paul sent Timothy to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 8.
but Titus went not as one sent, but offered himself, and Saint Paul sent a
famous brother to the congregations, and therefore in the 12. chap. of the same
Epistle, he says that he desired Titus, and sent a brother. He also says that
he requested Apollo who would not go, adding withal, that he shall go so
soon as his leisure serves him, and so shows, that he did not refuse, but
delay. In all which it appears, that every thing was done in good order: yet
will I say, that the Apostles usurped no dominion over, Gods elect, or Lordship
over their faith, or over the Lords inheritance: but in deed there is
difference between dominion and jurisdiction: They exercised no dominion, but
exercised their offices, as having jurisdiction. True it is that they exercised
this jurisdiction with charity rather the^ authority, as also it is the
duty of every Bishop. Here might one object that since the Apostles were
equal in authority, the Bishops also ought to be of equal authority: But I
deny the consequence, and will prove it to be no consequence by the saying of
S. Paul, where he co^pareth him self to a wise master builder laying the
foundation, and the rest to the workmen that build thereupon: For admit all
architectes and master massons were equal, yet follows it not that all
simple massons or workmen shall be so* In deed it follows that all chief
Bishops in every kingdom or sovereign principality should have like
authority. Moreover the Apostles were equal among them selves, but other
Bishops were not equal with them, as we have already showed. I know that
Paul's building may be referred to the preaching, but the interpretation
hinders not the application. Likewise we might bring an other example, and
that is, that albeit the Counselors in a Parliament be equal in authority,
yet does it not follow that the Counselors of Presidiall seas, be of equal
authority with them. Here may they also object, that S. Paul calls Titus
his companion, 2. Cor. 8.
and says to Philemon, if thou accomptest me thy fellow: whereto I answer,
that Eneas called his soldiers his fellows, and yet it follows not that
they were equal with their Captain. And a Captain may say to his soldier, I
am thy fellow, and it becomes him, but the soldier to say the same, it were
unseemly. It may also be objected, that S. Paul calls the other Bishops his
helpers and fellow laborers: whereto I answer, that all workmen are fellow
laborers and helpers of the master masson, yet not equal with him. And God
sometime makes men his fellow laborers, yet not equal with him self.

I say then that the Ecclesiastical dignities have place even to the highest,
but not universal, which usurps dominion even over kings, yea so far
forth as to dispose of their scepters and crowns: and I will prove my saying
thus. The high Priesthood of Aaron was subject to the judgment seat of Moses
and the kingdom of Judah. Also in the law which God set down, there was no
Priesthood above the kings, and that by reason of the law, since that under the
principality of Moses, there was a high Priesthood: therefore it follows that
under every Christian sovereign principality, there should be a chief Bishop,
yet not so as to acknowledge any universal Bishop. Since also that Jesus Christ
would not ordeine any to be greatest among the Apostles, it follows that
there ought not to be the greatest among the chief. And Jesus Christ forbids
his Apostles to usurp dominion: the universal Bishopric is therefore no
lawful order, but a confusion engendered by Babell. If any man will allege the
pretended donation of Constantine the great, I answer, that many impugn it
as false, besides that a covenant ca^ not be of any force to abuse or to use it
contrary to good manners, as the Pope strives to uphold superstition, repugnant
to all good manners and true godliness, yea the ingratitude of the receauer of
the donation, makes the donation void: but the Popes have practiced all
ingratitude against the Emperors, procuring their subjects many times to
rebel, prescribing their Empires, working their deaths, betraying of them, as
Frederick Barbarossa was betrayed to the Turk, and treading upon their
throats, with such other ungrateful insolences. Again the Emperor has no
authority in France, he can not then give the Pope any there. In France
Constantines authority is unknown, neither does any man give that which he
has not, nor can transfer any further right then his own. But if he bear
him self upon the authority of Doctors, I will allege one Doctor, even S.
Gregory, who says that the first that shall take upon him to be universal
Bishop, shall be the forerunner of Antichrist. If they allege the Councils, I
answer, that some of them have improued the Popes authority, albeit some
others assembled by the Popes driftes and practices have approved it. And admit
the Councels had without contradiction approved it, yet let us look whether
their Decrees be grounded upon Gods word: for in that case we must obey them,
as also if they be not contrary to Gods word: But Jesus Christ expressly
forbids such dominion, then may no Council authorize it. For S. Paul
says, that he may do nothing contrary to the truth, how then shall the
Councels be of force against Christ's express prohibition? Again, in France
the king has the Civil dominion, and the Parliamentes have no dominion, but
the jurisdiction: likewise in England the Queen has the dominion, and the
Bishops the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: But the authority which the Pope
usurps, is a dominion, which exalts it self above kings, and therefore by
Gods word expressly forbidden. Thus has the Pope no right, neither any color
in Gods word, neither is there any king or prince by Gods word subject unto
him, no not so much as any chief Bishop that is bound to acknowledge him. But
all kings and sovereign princes, may in their kingdoms and principalities
establish chief Bishops, after the manner and example of England.

I have before showed that the state of the Clergy is no cause of our
separation from those whom in France we call Catholics, 4
and therefore the abuse may be thought to be the cause, but it is not: for
there is no government wherein there may not be abuse, but the abuse simply it
not sufficient cause of schism. We know that there was never any more
excellent government then the same which God established, yet did the children
of Hely the high Priest commit great abuses, 1. Sam. 2. 12.
defiling the women appointed to watch the tabernacle, and against the peoples
wills, 1. Sam. 13.
and contrary to the custom established in the law, choosing such meats as
they liked in the Priests kettles. The people complained hereof, yet made they
no schism, as in deed they ought not: and now if we were to complain of the
Catholics but for their simple abuses, we should have no cause to make any
schism: well might we have occasion to complain, yet not therefore to
separate our selves.

It may be thought also that ceremonies are the cause of our separation from
the Catholics, 5
yet are they not so, howbeit I make great difference between ceremonies and
superstitions: for superstition is forbidden by Gods word, so are not
ceremonies, for there be three kinds of simple ceremonies, one Legal, an
other Evangelical, and the third indifferent, yet not contrary to the word of
God. The Legal are abolished as concerning the letter, but do remain, as
concerning the spirit, considering that their truth is eternal, and abides
for ever as the word of God. The Evangelical, as the Sacraments, are
necessary. And others there are which be indifferent, as not forbidden by the
word of God, for the which one should not condemn an other. The same are such
as are used in sundry Reformed places, as in England, Switzerland and else
where. In which ceremonies the Reformed faithful ought to have respect to
modesty: one to bear with an other, according to the rule of S. Paul, who
says: Let not him that eats not, despise him that eats, and he that
eats, let him not reprove him that eats not, that is to say, let not one
condemn an other. True it is that there be foolish and trifling ceremonies, as
in Baptism to put the spatle of the Priest into the childs mouth, when as
sometimes the Priest shall be half a lazare, half rotten, and have rotten
teeth, or a stinking or corrupt breath, which can not but be dangerous for
the child, and therefore upon so villainous a custom, the father may sometimes
take occasion not to cleave thereto: as also there be garments, which being
worn upon any signification, and for distinction in callinges, are ceremonies,
but if we attribute any virtue unto them, they be superstition.

The cause the^ of our separation consists not in the state of the Clergy, 6
neither in the abuses, nor in the ceremonies, but in the superstition.
Superstition do I call all worshipping of false Gods: false worshipping of the
true God, or every worship contrary to the word of God.

As for the word superstition, it is a Latin word, and may be taken diuerslly.
It may be taken for that which in Latin is called Superstitum parentatio, that
is to say, the suruiuours funerals, there hence transferring it to any other
false worship, or rather super statutu^ cultum, extranea and prophana adiectio,
taking super in stead of praeter or contra, which signifies all worship that
is added, besides the same which God has established. The Greeks do call it
(...), which signifies the worshipping of the devils: but vary it how they
will, I force not, so the definition remain.

Superstition then being the cause of our separation, it is also to be thought
that we can not allow any superstitious doctrine: But discretion is needful
to be had, in clearing the cause of superstition from that that concerns the
state, and not to condemn any thing rashly.

The superstitions that cause us to abandon the Popes party, are the
worshipping of Images and Relics, the invocation of Saints, Purgatory,
Transubstantiation, Artolatrie, Traditions, the Popes orders established by
superstitious traditions, false and faleable Pardons, false merits derogatorie
to Christ's merits, and such like.

As for Images, it is a matter sufficiently beaten by other, and therefore I
shall not need to enter into particularities, for it is manifest enough, that
the worshipping of them is idolatry. I know that every Image is not an Idol,
also that an Image simply makes not an Idol, but the worship thereof, which
is superstition: For it is written, Thou shall not honor it. But we do honor
it, when we celebrate it with any worship. I also grant, that an Image set up
for a history is no Idol, as we see in the temples of those that are called
Lutherans in Germany, but if we attribute any virtue thereto, it is
superstition: for the virtue that we attribute, is the cause of the worship and
honor thereto, yet is it good utterly to purge Gods Church from these Images,
which have been causes of the peoples Idolatry, howbeit it were to be wished
that it might be done by the kings authority. And it is to be meruailed, that
in the Churches there are the Images of God the father, Deuteronomy. 4.
since God him self has so expressly forbidden it. For if they might take
place, the heathen ought not to be reproved for their Image of Jupiter. For it
is certain that by Jupiter they understood Jove pater, and it is an ancient
character of Noah's Religion, who called God Iehoua And the Poet saying, Iouis
omnia plena, speaks of the great God creator of all things. I will omit all
Poetical fictions, neither does my Argument lead me to speak of them.

As for the Images of Jesus Christ and his Saints, if that of Jesus ought not
to be worshipped, much less ought those of the Saints: but that of Jesus
Christ must not be worshipped, it is then in vain to worship those of Saints.
Some man may say that they worship them not, hereto I answer, that when we
exhibit so great reverence to any thing, as we can not exhibit more to God
him self, we worship that thing. But such is the worship that is done to
Images, before the which we uncover our heads, bend our knees, hold up our
hands, make our prayer, present our offering and such like: Tell me then I pray
you, what more can we do to God him self? But the subtiler sort do say: ween
you that when I kneel before a Crucifixe of wood or stone, I pray to the wood
or stone? No I do it to the thing represented by that woodde^ Crucifixe, and
looking thereupon, do direct my prayer to Christ. Think you, say they, that I
am so senseless as to stay upon this visible Image? mine eye is in deed upon
the visible Image, but my heart is with Jesus Christ that is in heaven. 2. Kin.
18.
But let me ask thee, Think thou that they which sacrificed to the brazen
serpent had not the like starting hole? They had more reason to sacrifice
thereto, then thou to a Crucifixe. For it figured Jesus Christ hanging on the
wood: and whereas thy Crucifixes be erected by superstitious men, without any
commandment from God, that was erected by Gods express commandment: and
whereas some of thy Crucifixes are authorized by false miracles, that was
famous by the miracles wrought in the desert, by healing such as the serpents
had bitten. All which notwithstanding, when the people began to sacrifice
thereto, Ezechias brake it, saying, that it was but brass. Wherefore if these
starting holes should take place, who doubts but the Israelites would have
had the like? Thou worshipest, say thou, Jesus Christ, and art not so
senseless as to worship the Crucifixe: weenest thou the Israelites were so
senseless as to worship the brazen serpent, and not rather him that was
thereupon figured, hanging upon the wood? or think thou that they were so
ignorant, that they knew it not to be the figure of the Messiah, since they
lived in a time so illuminated with Prophets, as was the time of Ezechias? Had
such shifts taken place, Ezechias would never have destroyed the brazen
serpent, which notwithstanding these shifts, being broken, thy excuses also
take no place. Thou will say, that they sacrificed to the brazen serpent, but
that thou do not sacrifice to the Crucifixe. I answer, that there were two
sorts of sacrifices, the one burnt offerings the other meat offerings. The
burnt offerings were made of beasts: The meat offerings of fruicts, as of
corn, wine, bread, oil and such like, wherefore when thou offerest the like
things to the Crucifixe, thou sacrificest again to the brazen serpent: And
when thou make those offerings before the Images of Saints, thou do yet
worse. To be brief, all these excuses are but starting holes, and it is no
heresy to abandon such superstition: yea this superstitious worship is the
cause that justly we may well call them Idols. 1. Cor. 10.
And S. Paul teaches us, what soever is sacrificed to Idols, is offered to
Idols, wherein we do learn that the Idols which in old time answered by
oracles, were devils. Yea there be some deuines, which note the worship of the
Images of Saints, and there be Images under the Catholic Religion that
abuse the world, which thinks, that the Saints do work miracles: albeit
they be such miracles as the old oracles wrought long ago. Wherein it is
evident, that they are the same devils, which abuse the people, having only
changed their names. In old time they would be called God, and now they will be
termed Saints. The Gods of old time had their Priests and Sibilles* and now
the Saints have their Southsayers: they frame the^ selves to the time, but in
the mean time the people is abused thinking because the name is altered, the
matter is changed. As for the distinction of Honor, Latrie, Doulie and
Hiperdoulie, it is an other kind of shift, which has neither reason nor
ground in the word of God. Now therefore do I appeal to every man's judgment
in this matter: viz. that since they worship Images, whether this worship may
not be taken for superstition and Idolatry, also whether this worship makes
not their Images Idols. And S. Paul testifies, that Idols be devils:
Therefore these Images whereto they erect worship are devils, that is to say,
devils are worshipped in them: and so being devils, we are not to have any
acquaintance with them. For Saint Paul tells us that we can not
participate, both in the cup of the Lord and in the cup of devils, and so he
shows us that to be partakers of both together, be two incompatible
extremities. To the end therefore to participate in the Lords cup, we are
forced to separate our selves from the Pope, who mainteineth the cup of devils,
that is, Idolatry. This then is the cause of our separation, which who soever
will judge without passion, I am assured will find to be lawful. This is in
deed the matter of our separation, and not the simple abuses, neither the
ceremonies simply, and much less the state of the Clergy: for the which
things there ought not to be any breach made in the Church: well may we in
modesty require the correction of the abuses, when there be any, yet not
therefore make a schism.

Concerning invocation of Saints, 7
that is yet an other kind of superstition, for this we know, that all worship
of God and divine service, is contained under these two kinds, invocation and
thanksgiving. And this adoration or worship is so proper to God, that it can
not be transferred to any other, as he says, Thou shall worship one God only,
and him only shall thou serve: which is that kind of adoration and worship
that ought to be reserved to God only, and not transferred to others. But in
the religion termed Catholic, they do no less transfer thanksgiving to
the Saints then invocation: for they make their vows to Saints, and to pay
vows and oblations, is to celebrate thanksgiving, and therefore it may be
said, that they transfer the whole worship unto them, and so do no longer
worship one God only, neither serve him alone: but as concerning worship and
adoration, do give him as many companions as there be Saints, whom they
invoke. Besides that, sometimes such a one is upon earth inuoceted for a
Saint, as in deed is broyled in hell fire, and so may they find in hell some
one, whom they make a companion of God, in respect of worship and adoration:
neither will I say that idols, being by S. Paul's testimony, 1. Cor. 10.
devils: the devils do cause them selves to be worshipped as Saints in their
steades. Again, albeit it were not forbidden, yet since there is no
commandment for it in the word, that worship can not be according to the
faith which comes of the hearing of the word: and whatsoever is not of faith
is sin, Coloss. 2. 18.
as S. Paul witnesses. And there can be no hearing, where there is neither
commandment, instruction, example, nor admonition. 4* Esd 1. 40
But besides the commandment to worship and serve one God only, S. Paul
reproves the worshipping of Angels, which is as much as to reprove the
worshipping of Saints: for they being the messengers of the will of God, are
comprised under the name of Angels, Mala. 3. 1.
as we see in Malachy, Mat. 11. 10
who is called the Angel of the Lord. Apoc. 1.
It is also written of John Baptist, Isay. 33. 7.
I will send my Angel before thy face, who shall prepare thy ways. Mala. 2. 7.
And the seven Bishops of the seven Churches of Asia, are called the seven
Angels of the seven congregations, with many such other examples, infinitely to
be found in the holy Scripture. So that the Saints being named Angels: under
the prohibition of the worship of Angels, is contained the prohibition of the
worship of Saints. 2. Pet. 2. 11.
The Angels also as S. Peter teaches, are greater then the Saints, and
therefore if the worship of Angels, who are greater then the Saints, be by S.
Paul reproved, how can the worshipping of images stand? All such therefore is
but vanity and superstition, and the forsaking of such matters is good, so
far is the abandoning of them from being heresy. True it is that some do
bring in distinctions, as thus: That they call not upon the Saints for
remission, but for intercession: whereto I answer, that howsoever they call
upon them, or with whatsoever title it be, yet is invocation still invocation,
adoration and worship, and so still forbidden by the commandment, Thou shall
worship one God, and him only shall thou serve, neither can these distinctions
take place, unless the holy Scripture did expressly propound them, no more then
the distinctio^s of honor, latrie, doulie, or hyperdeulie. And they be
sufficiently confuted by denying only, because there is no such matter
contained throughout the holy Scripture authentical. To be brief, we must
call upon God only, and not upon Saints, and to God only must we address our
vows, and not to Saints. Some may object, that the Saints in heaven do know
what is done upon earth, yea and that they pray to God for us. Whereto I answer,
that the Prophets being in the world, knew the general estate of the Church,
and do better know it in heaven: but they are no searchers of the hearts, for
that is proper to God only. And S. Paul says, that no man knows what is in
man, but the spirit of man, which is in man himself: wherefore the spirits of
men which are in heaven, do not know what is in the spirit or heart of man that
is upon earth. But he that is a Mediator, must know his heart and intent for
whom he entreats. I will not deny but charity may move them to pray for us,
yet do hit not follow thereof, that we should call upon them, since we have no
such commandment.

As for prayer for the dead, 8
and the doctrine of Purgatory, it has foundation but upon the second book
of Machabees, the sixth book of Virgils Aeneides, and Homer. Which be very
weak props to hold up so heavy a building. They give us other pretenses,
Eccl. 12. 7.
but in vain, since that as Solomon testifies, when the dust returns to the
dust, the spirit returns to God that gave it, which shows that when man
dies, his spirit returns to God, of him to receive his judgment, which
being pronounced there is no appeal: neither are there but two ways, the
broad and the narrow, two gates, the wide and the straight, and two issues,
life and death. So as there is no void place between to build Purgatory upon.

One point there is, which is, that the rentes that are given to pray for the
dead, might be converted to the instruction of the people, and to pray for the
salvation of the suruiuors their successors: for so might that which has been
given to a superstitious use be converted to a lawful and godly use, following
the example of censers of Chore his partakers, Number. 16.
which having been offered for a conspiracy, were afterward converted into
golden plates upon the altar of the Lord.

Neither can the doctrine of transubstantiation be admitted, 9
because it stands not with any divine reason, that an earthly thing should
be transubstantiated into a heavenly, that is, earthly bread into heavenly
bread. For if the bread be transubstantiated into Christ's body, then should
Christ's body be likewise transubstantiated into a dead and earthly bread
dispoiled of his qualities and powers. Now there is nothing that lets us,
but that we may eat Christ's body clothed with all his qualities and powers,
without subiecting it to earthly bread: for we must eat it as living bread,
John. 6. 51.
since Jesus Christ says, that he is the living bread, and the bread of life.
But there is great difference between eating it as living bread, and eating it
as a dead, senseless, earthly and immovable bread. And transubstantiation
gain says the eating of it as living bread, when it represents it under the
earthly kinds of a dead and immovable bread: which is a speech most unworthy
the body of Jesus Christ: besides that we do subject the heavenly thing
signified unto the earthly sign, which is yet more unworthy the doctrine of
the Eucharist, and therefore the abandoning of such doctrine is no heresy.

Thereby also it appears that it is superstition to worship the Sacramental
bread, because the thing signified ought not to be subjected to the thing
signifying: and his body which co^teineth all things can not be comprised in a
dead and earthly thing. This is still to worship the brazen serpent, which was
but brass, and yet was no less a Sacrament of Jesus Christ hanging upon tree,
then is the Sacramental bread. And therefore these matters are but
superstitions, whereto we are not bound to cleave. And such as persecute us
because we will not bend our necks to the yoke of superstitions, do lend to a
good merchant, who is able to pay them well again. They have a marvelous
account to make: but we, thanks be to God, may give a good account of our
conversation, not before men only, but even before God, who will not be
deceived: and therefore let these men look what account they be able to give
before God: for men may sometimes be deceived: but God will not be dalyed with
all: The corrosiue of conscience may for a while suffer them to sleep, but the
fire once kindled therein will never be quenched, Heb. 10. 31
and S. Paul says, It is an horrible thing to fall into the hands of the
living God.

As touching the Mass, 10
Reformation is not an enemy simply to it, but also to the superstitions
wherewith it is stuffed. Some Catholics there be, that say that we do evil
in that we cleave not to the Mass, because there be some good things therein,
as the Epistle and the Gospel. True it is, there be good things, but there be
also bad: namely all that is superstitious: and therefore take away the bad,
and so shall we soon compound for the rest, and grow to agreement.

Traditions have also in part been the cause of our separation from the Pope, 11
but who will for that accuse us of heresy? have not both Esaias and Jesus
Christ taught the same? yea there be such traditions as S. Paul terms
doctrine of devils, as is that of vowed chastity, for S. Paul testifies that
Gods spirit expressly does say, that in the latter days some shall revolt
from the faith, 1. Tim. 4.
cleaving to spirits of error and the doctrine of devils, speaking lies in
hypocrisy, having their consciences seared with a hoate iron, forbidding
marriage, and commanding abstinence from meats, created by God for us to use
with thanksgiving. These be S. Paul's own words. Now let us see who they are
of whom he speaks? They are those that prohibit marriage: he speaks then of
the Pope, for he forbids marriage in commanding chastity. For what is
chastity but a prohition from marriage?

But what does he say of them? First he says that they be revolted from the
faith: they be then gone from the grounds thereof. Tell me then, be not they
that err from the grounds of faith heretics? Then is the Pope an heretic,
even by the evident testimony of Gods spirit, and yet does he accuse us of
heresy. He says well: but who is he that condemns us of heresy? It is the
Pope: Then is it a man, and we may well appeal unto God. But he that
pronounces that the Pope is revolted from the faith, and so consequently an
heretic, is the spirit of God: I pray you the^, to whom shall he appeal?
what, will he think that Gods spirit has spoken unwisely, and therefore is
ready to recant his sentence, which he has so solemnly pronounced?

Secondly he says, that they depend upon the spirits of error. Then are not
we to hang upon them.

Thirdly he says, that they cleave to the doctrine of devils: Is not that I
pray you, to communicate in the cup of devils? then can they not communicate in
the cup of the Lord: for S. Paul witnesses, that we can can not be partakers
of the cup of the Lord, 1. Cor. 10.
and of the cup of devils: we can not then communicate with them, but we must
also communicate in the cup of devils, which we can not do, but by renouncing
the cup of Christ. Are we to be blamed then for departing from them?

Fourthly he says, that they speak lies in hypocrisy: which appears
manifestly in the sclaunder that they charge us with, when they tax us with
heresy. For would you have a greater lie then that? what greater hypocrisy
do you require then the same, which contrary to his own conscience
sclaundereth his neighbor?

Fifthly he says, their consciences are seared, whereby we see that it is not
without cause that they resist the truth. For a man would greatly marvel, to
see these resist so evident a light, for the upholding of those superstitions,
wherein the darkness is as palpable as was that of Egypt in times past: But
now that we know their consciences to be seared, we think it no more strange
that they resist the truth, considering that the searing of their consciences
does take from them all feeling thereof.

Here might some object, that S. Paul speaks of other heretics that may
come after us, and not of the Pope. I grant he may also speak of others,
nevertheless it follows not thereby, that he speaks not of the Pope, and
for proof thereof I will for example bring Gods saying to Noah. He that
sheddeth a man's blood, let his blood be shed by man: How if a murderer should
say, that this were not spoken by him, but by his neighbor, who might
peradventure have killed a man: would not the Judge answer, that it had
relation to both, yea and to all other shedders of man's blood, who thereby do
make them selves guilty of the same offense? In like manner if there were a
hundred sects, which prohibited marriage and the use of meats, the spirit of
God in the place before alleged, does note all the whole hundred: and all
other conseque^ces would be as forcible against every of the hundred, as they
be against the Pope,

My meaning is, that all such Doctors which propound the traditions of vowed
chastity for a doctrine, that is, to make a conscience thereof, are reproved by
S. Paul. Nevertheless I say, that the reason is not a like, when we keep
Lent upon policy, without binding the conscience: because that in that case,
it is no snare to the conscience. Here might some man say, that S. Paul there
speaks of the latter days, and therefore means not that Lent and abstinence
from marriage which were instituted long ago. Hereto I answer, 1. John. 2. 18.
that S. John even in his time, said that there were many Antichrists, and
that thereby he knew the latter days then to be come, so as if the time of the
Apostles were by the holy Scriptures termed the latter days, much better may
the spirit of God in this place call those the latter days, wherein both Lent
and abstinence from marriage were brought in.

Infinite particularities which might be alleged, 12
will I omit, as being content to have touched some part of the grossest
abuses, and now will proceed to speak generally of our Doctors doctrine,
which I say can not be taxed of heresy. Some things do they hold common with
the Catholics, and in some others do they differ. As well the one as the
other have some good things, wherein they do agree, and in either of them may
there be found some things disputable: for all men are men. Herein do they
differ, that the Doctors which call them selves Catholics, I speak of those
of our days, have their faces turned to superstition, where as the Reformed
Doctors, have as concerning that point, satisfied them selves by departing from
Popish superstitions. Superstitious doctrine vpholdeth the worship of Images,
which is Idolatry: and it vpholdeth the prohibition from marriage, and from the
use of meats, which Gods spirit terms the doctrine of devils: It is
therefore found to be erroneous, since the spirit of God does say, that such men
cleave to the spirits of error, yea that they be even revolted from the faith,
showing that they have estranged them selves from the true grounds thereof,
wherein it convicted them of heresy. In this then do they differ, videl that
in the superstitious Doctors there is heresy, but in the Reformed there is
none. Some matters there may be disputable in the authors of Reformation, but
no heresy, that is, no doctrine utterly repugnant to the principles of faith.
I know there be Catholic Doctors, that some times do skirmish against the
Reformed, and to persuade men that there is error in their writings do often
times propound such things as the others never spoke of, or if they have
spoken of any such, do wrest their words into an other sense. But admit that
in some point there be some fault, as all men are men, and we will not make our
Doctors Apostles, there is difference between a simple oversight and an
heresy, but for that cause we may not tax the Reformation of heresy, seeing
that we account not our Doctors opinions as oracles, or goundes of doctrine.

Moreover we confess that we draw near to the Lords day, and the day is so
formed, that the break of the day goes before the sun rising, and the sun
rising before noone. The break of day is never so clear as the sun rising,
neither is the sun rising so light as high noone, whereof we conclude, that
in the Reformation, there is nothing so clear, but may be better lightened.
Again, a tree bears fruicts, that come not all unto ripeness, but some part
become untimely fruictes, which the tree lets fall, and those are ordinarily
sour, bitter, wormeaten, etc. and yet the rest of the fruict which grows
until it be ripe proves very good. Even so this age has brought forth many
writers, and infinite vain writings, neither have we as yet seen for the most
part, other then untimely fruicts of Reformation, but when the ripe fruict
appears, then shall we know the excellency thereof. Hereupon is it said in
the Revelation, let him that is holy, sanctify him self better, which
teaches us to labor for perfection, by correcting the imperfections that be
within us. Moreover I say that often times the Catholic Doctors do in their
Pulpites strive against our Doctors and obtain all the victory, where as if
they had to deal with a party, they might be forced to divide it: for he that
makes his own hands to play each against other, is still sure to win all,
but if he should set them to wrestle with an other, is in danger to lose. But
no man can say we have done amiss, in giving over the Catholic Doctors,
mainteiners of superstitious doctrines, to the end to cleave to others which
maintain no superstitions.

Superstitions then have separated us from the Pope, not the state of the
Clergy. For we do allow of the state of the Clergy, as being ordained by
God, so long as it cleaves to Gods laws, which do allow the estate thereof,
upon condition, that they renounce all superstitions repugnant to Gods word,
and exercise equity, charity and mercy.

The Pope and his suppostes do say, 13
that Reformation is a new matter, and must therefore be authorized by
miracles, holding as a principle, that every new doctrine must be authorized by
miracle. Which if it be so, I say their superstitions ought rather to be
authorized by miracles, as being more new then the religion of the Reformed.
For the Popes most ancient superstition is the same of the Cross and of
Relics, which holy Cross Helene the mother of Constantine the great found
after the Council of Nice: and the rest have crept in since in process of
time, as Images, abstinence from marriage, Purgatory, and such like: and those
which were brought in by Helene the mother of great Co^stantin, and grand
mother of superstition, have already continued 1260. years, which is the term
to the^ prefixed in the Revelation, so as thereby we may know, that they are
come to their full periode. I say therefore, that the pure doctrine continued
from the Apostles unto the Council of Nice: and that superstitions crept in
since. This doctrine then which was before the superstitions which were brought
in by Helene, and by the Popes augmented, was pure, and yet more ancient then
superstition: and is the doctrine which the Reformed do shoot at. The Religion
therefore of the Reformed, is more ancient then the Popes superstitions, and
therefore need not to be authorized by miracles: having already been
authorized, by the same miracles, which our Lord and the Apostles did work:
and Popish superstition being the newer, stands in greater need of
authorizing by miracles: yea and thus much will I maintain, that albeit it had
miracles, yet might they not suffice to make it of authority: For no miracles
can authorize that doctrine, which the holy Scripture declares to be the
doctrine of devils. 1. Cor. 10.
Yea and Moses says, that albeit a Prophet, or a dreamer, 1. Tim. 4.
should prophecy or dream any such dream, Deuteronomy. 13.
as should peradventure came to pass (which were miracles sufficient to
authorize any good doctrine) yet if the same should preach false Gods, he were
not to be believed, but presently to be stoned to death. Howbeit I say, that in
Popery they preach no false Gods, but they do things equivalent thereto. For
every thing whereto man does erect any worship, is by that worship made a God,
so that as many Saints as they call upon and serve, by erecting any worship
unto them, so many do they make Gods, and therefore albeit they could work
miracles to authorize the doctrine, yet ought such miracles to be accounted
among the miracles wrought by the Heathen oracles aforetime. But in as much as
the Popes favorers do say, that Reformation is a new doctrine, and must be
authorized by signs and miracles, I will give them one, howbeit I will give it
after the same manner as the Lord gave it to the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 12.
39
even the sign of the Prophet Jonas, taking it out of the holy Scripture, and
referring it to a matter which was yet to do. Likewise may I say that the
perverse and adulterous nation requires signs, but shall have no other signs
given it, then the same that God gave in the Revelation, that is, that if we
see and that shortly, the same to be fulfilled upon the Papacy, which is
foreshewed of the beast, and upon Rome that which is foretold of Babylon: also
that we see the faithful that live under the Reformation, triumph over the
beast, over his Image and character, and the number of his name, and restore to
Babylon double according to her works, and to fill double unto her in the cup
that she has filled to us: Then shall the same be to them a certain sign,
that the Reformation is of God, and that it is the seal of our approbation.

But what greater miracle do you crave, the^ to see in France a handful of
the Reformed, committing many ouersightes in the state, and many times
suffering them selves to be snared through overmuch simplicity, still hold
out, notwithstanding all the subtelties and endeavors of so many mighty and
wise men of this world? I wonder that never a Catholic Doctor will reason
according to the discourse of Gamaliell and say, Act. 5.
If this Reformation be of men, 1 Timothy 4.
the Clergy need not to sell their demaines, and consume their revenues for
the authorizing of it, for it will come to naught of it self, but if it be of
God, the Clergy have less reason to wast their goods to make war against God.

S. Paul testifies, 1. Tim. 4. 3.
that abstinence from marriage is a doctrine of devils: I know there may be
sundry cauilles alleged to blemish this matter, howbeit it can not be so well
scoured but there will remain some filth. It may be demanded why he calls it
a doctrine of devils. I answer, because it is a doctrine repugnant to God. For
God said, It is not good that man be alone, speaking generally of all, as well
of the Clergy as of the laity, and the Pope thinks it good that man should
be alone, Genesis 2. 18.
namely a Clergy man, wherein he contrarieth God, and so did Satan contrary
God when he said, You shall dye the death. Again, marriage was ordained for
three causes, whereof two were expressed in man's creation, Genesis 2. 18.
videl. that woman might be a helper to man, Genesis 1. 28.
and for the generation of children. The third cause does S. Paul express
saying, 1. Cor. 7. 9.
that it is better to mary then to burn, so showing it to be a remedy against
temptations. I may therefore demand, since God gave this law generally to all
men, why should the Clergy be deprived of a common law? For since temptations
are common, they do as much assault the Clergy as others, and they being thus
deprived of the common remedy, must of necessity fall, and so is this a snare
which the devil has set up to cause them to stumble, and a yoke that he has
laid upon them under the pretense of holiness. Now if any will object the
saying of S. Paul. That he which marieth his daughter does well, but he that
marieth her not, does better, I answer, that S. Paul in the same place
says, 1. Cor. 7. 36.
Faciat quod vult, non peccat si nubat, which is, let her do as she shall
think good, she sins not, though she mary. And proceeding in his purpose he
says, That the father may keep her a virgin, it is to be meant, If she will,
according to the former saying, That she do as she will. This my version I
authorize by S. Paul who says, that he speaks not this to set a snare: for
to force the maidens will, were as much as to set a share in her way: and
therefore I conclude thereupon, that they which of voluntary abstinence from
marriage have made a law, binding the people to one of these extremities videl.
either to forbear marriage, or Ecclesiastical functions, have set a snare and
undertaken more then S. Paul. In sum, we may see that the devils erected
this snare to cause the Clergy to fall thereat: and thereof it comes that S.
Paul terms abstinence from marriage, a doctrine of devils, I speak of the
Priests vowed chastity, which is subject to a law. Even at the Council of
Nice did the devils endeavor to bring this their doctrine into the Church, but
Paphnutius withstood it, and the Council would not admit it: whereof we
gather, that the Church until the Nicene Council, was free from those
superstitions, for the which we have forsaken the Papacy: And so I now say,
that if they mean to allow the Catholic Religion, they must procure it to be
received in like form as it was at the Council of Nice. The League labors
to bring the yoke of the Tridentine Council into France, but we crave the
liberty of the Nicene Counsel, that is, the state of the Church may be such
as it was from the time of the Apostles until the time of the Council of
Nice, while there was neither Pope nor superstition.

S. 14
Paul teaches us to pray in an intelligible language, to the end the people
may be edified: whereof it follows, that Gods word and matters depending
thereupon, ought to edify the people in that language which they understand I
do omit many other particular points, easy to be decided by such as can frame
them selves to a desire of well doing.

AN APOLOGY FOR THE GENENERAL CAUSE OF REFORMATION, against the sclanders of
the Pope and the League.
THE II. TREATISE.
WE have promised to feast our readers with diverse fruictes, 1
and in part of performance thereof, have hitherto set before them, only
Instructiue and Theological fruictes, It rests now that we present them with
fruicts Politic and admonitorie: therein addressing our discourse to the King
and the Clergy: and after speaking of the Pope: and turning again to the
Catholic people, we will also entreat of the Reformed Princes, against whom
especially the Pope has addressed his sclaunders: and then of the Ministers
and Reformed people.

The king has promised, yea sworn to drive all heretics out of France. It
is a good vow that his Majesty has made, only the question is to see who
those be. Now is it so that they be heretics, which err in the principles of
faith, and so consequently they which have revolted from the faith are the
heretics: The Pope mainteineth a doctrine contrary to the Gospel, which in
express words by the mouth of S. Peter, yea and of Jesus Christ him self does
forbid the usurping of dominion over the Lords inheritance, and the making of
marchaundise of men, or men's souls, as the Revelation calls it: and
therefore he is an heretic, and in performance of the kings vow, ought to
be driven out of France: I say, driven out of France, that is to say, his
dominion driven out of France.

It is alleged, that no heretic ought to succeed to the crown: To this
article may the king of Navarre well subscribe, for in him is not to be found
any one spot of heresy, but it is a sclaunder of the Pope, who lends him
this charity, to the end to weaken the party of the Reformation and so to
strengthen the League so strongly, that it may ouerrule both king and commons,
and shut up the king in some Covent of Charterhouse Monks, for to make one of
the League, a creature of the Popes, and one of the king of Spaines Pe^sioners,
king: and through him to trouble the whole state of France, and abolish, the
privileges of the French Church: For long has the Pope longed to set in foot,
and many a day has he begun to molest the French kings: now he shieldeth him
self under pretense of Reformation: but where was Reformation at the wars of
Millan, when the Popes did nothing but lay snares for the kings of France, in
the behalf of the Emperor and king of Spain? who so will peruse the
remembraunces of Bellay, shall therein find examples enough: yea now albeit
the cause of the Reformation were not, yet would he find occasions to trouble
the kings of France, and therefore it is an easy matter for him to find that
pretense, thereby the more cunningly to compass his driftes. And had he even
set his foot upon the kings throat, yet were it no news, for he has done
as much to the Emperor: or had he thrust our king into some Monastery, yet
should he not be the first, either Emperor or King of France that the Popes
have couled.

Many times did I marvel why the Popes should accuse the Reformed Princes of
heresy, yea and all Reformation, but having read the 12. Chapter of the
Revelation, where it is said that the Dragon and old Serpent, which is the
devil, do accuse our brethren before God both day and night, I was resolved:
for it is not unnatural for the child to imitate his fathers actions.

The king has been counseled to permit but one Religion in France: the
counsel is good, if it may be compassed by reason. There be two ways to
atchieue it, or at the least to try it, for man purposes, but God disposes.
The first is the same, which the Turk uses in mainteining of Mahometes law,
and that is the sword: but this means is bloody, cruel and doubtful, for the
blows are to be divided, and he is assured of winning nothing but stripes: yea
and it is tyrannous, whereof we conclude that the king will never take that
course, unless he be forced by the League, and work tyranny against him
self. For this we know, that by nature he is no tyra^t: and so that if it come
to that pass, all Frenchmen in reason are to take arms to free the king from
the tyranny of the League. Also to take away a schism is to put out a fire
with fire or with oil: But fire is never quenched with fire, but with water:
that is, the fire of schism must be quenched with the water of reason, which
is stronger, and stands with more equity then war it self. The other
means is sure and may be performed without bloodshed, yea it is a Christian
mean, grounded upon reason, truth and godliness. It consists in rejecting
the yoke of the Spanish Inquisition and Council of Trent, propounded by the
League, and restoring the Catholic Religion to the liberty of the Nicene
Council, free from the Pope and burden of his superstitions. This course if
the king would undertake, we should never need to fear the League: for albeit
the League and Clergy would cut of all the faction of Reformation, yet should
not Reformation quayle, for God vpholdeth it, and for proof hereof, the
experience of 30. years might suffice: But if the king and Clergy would favor
the cause of Reformation, the League would make no greater have then to hide it
self. The Clergy may imagine, that this can not be done without their hurt
and loss, in respect of diverse donations, made upon some abuse, or
superstitions and unlawful use: hereto I answer, that it is not necessary,
that, that which has been given to an unlawful intent, should therefore be
taken away, but rather converted to a better use, as were the 250. golden
censers offered for a conspiracy by Cores confederates, Number. 16.
which were converted to a good use, vid^l. to be turned into golden plates, to
be laid upon the Lords altar. Even so that has been given to pray for
predecessors souls departed, may be converted to instructions for successors
suruiuers, or to pray to God for them: and so should the Clergy encurre no
loss. But if the Clergy will not be content with so manifest reason, but
obstinately bending against the truth, seek our subuertion, we will leave them
to try in vain, how to root out Reformation and wast their revenues: for we
know that in the end they shall be forced to come to it: God can well enough
reclaim them, either of their own accordes or by great punishments, and
therefore let us suffer them to run their race: for when they have run well,
they must stay, and yield thereto.

When a man has a suit, it helps much to do his whole endeavor, and to
offer his adversary all just and reasonable offers: for by that means he may
bring his adversary to reason and agreement, he also cutteth of all suits, or
else conuinceth his enemy of frowardness, and so justifying his cause,
enclineth the Judge to favor him. Even so we knowing that we are to deal with
the great Judge which is God, also that we owe a duetic to our king do seek
to find out all means how to satisfy him with reason, and to turn away his
wrath, which the Leaguers do wrongfully kindle against us, and therefore we
offer to the Catholics so much as in right, reason, and equity we may, so as
it is not our fault, and we do wash our hands of it before God: and thus they
are to see that in contemning the just motions that we make and propound, they
disdain not us, but the truth which is of God. For if they have any harm, it
is their own fault, and God will not punish them but upon evident and just
reason, for their contumacie, in that they would not obey his truth.

If a man inuiteth his friend to his table, and at dinner offers him an apple
to eat, and it chances a worm to be therein, as sometimes it happens, he
will not urge his friend to eat the worm with the apple, but will give him
leave to take away the worm before he eat the apple, even so now the
Catholics do inuit us to eat of the fruict of their Catholic Religion,
wherein lies a worm, which is the Popish superstition, yea even the Papacy
it self, let them then take out the worm, or suffer us to take it out, and
then we will not refuse to eat of that fruict that is offered.

Moreover the Reformed Religion is no other but the ancient Catholic, such
as it was from the time of the Apostles unto the Nicene Council, and differs
not from the Catholic at this day, but in things contrary to Gods word,
brought in since the said Council, as is the Popes domination, repugnant to
the doctrine of the Gospel, taught by the mouth of Jesus Christ and S. Peter,
which forbid the usurping of dominatio^ over the Lords inheritance, and of
other the consequences of the Papacy, as are the superstitions, which have
borne sway since the said Council, and were brought in immediately after the
same, and since have been augmented and vpholden under the Papacy. I say, that
if his Majesty would so greatly benefit his Realm, equity would require
that it might be done by the consent of the Reformed plaintifs, being called
and freely heard.

This one question will I propound: why our Lord among his Apostles would not
have one greater then an other? also wherefore he has expressly forbidden
them to usurp dominion, Luke 22. 25.
whereto I answer, Mat. 20. 25
that his intent was, they should be subject to Civil dominion, as the
Priesthood of Aaron was subject to the Judicial seat of Moses. And wherefore?
We know that sometime there fall out superstitions, which are to be Reformed in
the Church, 4. King. 18. 4.
as was that of the brazen serpent in the time of Ezechias, and Idolatries in
the days of Josias, and such if the kings do suffer, 4. King. 23.
the Lord will call them to account for them, and making them accomptable, it
is also reason he should give them power to correct, and that this power should
not be in subjection to the Bishops. So did Ezechias and Josias bring into the
Church of Israel, such a Reformation as we crave in France, neither therein
depended they upon the high Priests, but as having dominion, commands the
high Priests to break the Idols, and to purge the Temple, neither needed they
to call any Council for the determining of those matters, but did with all
speed set hand to that business, to the end to take away the evil, so soon
as they knew of it. But at this day the Kings and Princes of Europe, in stead
of mainteining their authority which God has given them, do refer them
selves to the Pope, and the Pope to the Council of Trent, which has rather
empaired then amended their affairs. Thus do they as it were seek Physic
after a man is dead. And the contempt of the Privileges which God has given
them, has brought their Realms and dominions into trouble, namely France,
where as had the king maintained the authority which Jesus Christ attributes
to kings, and following the example of Ezechias, had Reformed the superstitions
of the Church, his kingdom had been in peace: yea had he employed the forces,
which the League has employed against him self, in the recovery of those
countries, which his predecessors have lost, he might have recovered them, or
obtained a new crown. Thus much more will I also say, that in case his
Majesty would undertake the co^passing of that which we propound, he should
not need to fear the threats of the League, which how loud so ever it
speak, should soon be glad to say little, yea and those that now dare face his
Majesty, should scarce find de^nes enough wherein to hide the^ selves. There
is nothing to hinder the king, following the course of this advise, from
atchieuing by reason, that, which if he labor to co^quere by the sword, he
will with great difficulty bring to pass: And surely he has but bad
counsel, that will put him self into bondage when he may go free. Jesus
Christ freeth our kings from the Popes yoke, and submits the^ to him self
only: they will not be tributaries to the Emperor, and yet stoop to his
creature. Such as are in bondage seek to purchase liberty, but our kings buy
bondage, yea and that very dearly: some with great treasures, that are
transported to Rome: other with much bloodshed of their subjects, destruction
of their countries, and trouble of their estates: for the Popes have troubled
many Kings and Emperors, against whom they have bent themselves, even to the
treading upon their throats, and uttering contumelious speeches, comparing
them to Dragons, Aspics and Basillickes: others they molest by stirring up
their neighbors against them: and others have bought their bondage with the
price of their scepters and crowns, whom the Popes have shut up into Cloisters
and deposed from their thrones: neither have the kings only, but also all
France bought this bondage very dear, and with much bloodshed. O France thou
art named France of thy freedom: but thou shall never befree until thou
freest thy self from the yoke of the sclaue of sclaues, who keeps thee bound
in the bondage of conscience and perpetual trouble of thine estate.

Pope Gregory sought to make his Papacy famous by the correction of the
Kale^der, wherein he forgot that which should be the principal in a Calendar,
which is to make it begin with an Equinoctial or a Solstice: but admit he did
very well, yet was this correction a matter of small importance in respect of
the correction of such superstitions, as trouble the whole state of
Christendom at this day: whereupon I say, that the king might make a far
more famous and necessary correction, videl. by correcting the superstitions
that are repugnant both to the conscience and estate and so celebrate the
memory of his kingdom, with a far more excellent Character then Pope Gregory
has done yea and that after the imitation of those, that have been better
qualified in Gods word, then ever was Pope Gregory, namely Ezechias and
Josias, who were the Reformers of the Church, Manasses also though first a
deformer, yet after also Reformer likewise. S. Paul in the beginning a
persecuter and destroyer of the Church yet after a builder of the same and
still it lies in Gods power to raise up such. The League weeneth to have
brought the king to that stay, as to set foot upon his throat, by laying of
snares for him at Paris, and driving his faithfullest servant from about him.
They think to make their account to do all that they may, say all that they
dare, and imagine all that they lust: but all are not out of heart, that do
dissemble. The League purposed to muffle up the French, with the Spanish
Inquisition: but the Frenchmens necks are not fit for such a yoke. The French
naturally and for the most part has his heart at his tongues and, that is to
say, is open, free and without color, not being a double hearted person,
neither hipocrite nor dissembler, as be they that suffer the Inquisition to
bridle them. Wherefore it is a fit means to lead the League to a downfall,
and to convert the Papacy into a Popedom abolished.

The Popes purpose in devising the League, was no other but to make a
metamorphose of our king, eue^ a more real metamorphose then the
transubstantiation, in co^uerting him from a Hieronimite King, into a
Charterhouse Monk sometime king. I know the king is a great Catholic, yet
think I not that he so loves the Pope and his superstitions, that therefore
he would change his Crown for a Charterhouse Monks coule.

As for the Clergy, 2
it is no marvel though they would maintain their estate, for it is a thing
natural, neither would the Nobility upon necessity do less for theirs: I
will not be a sharper censurer of their estate, the^ Christ was of the
Pharisees: But alas how lamentable is the wretchedness of those that uphold
superstition, and persecute such as will not obey the same? Let them think
upon their business, it is no small matter to become Gods enemy: for who
soever oppresses the consciences, submitting them to a yoke repugnant to Gods
word, makes him self an enemy to God. And truly they might maintain their
estate, albeit they abandoned superstition, yea and obtain the privilege of
marriage, which at this day is no small matter in France, in respect of the
numbers of men slain in the wars, and the quantity of rich enheritrixes
left: as well widows as maidens. I marvel also what reason they have to
withstand Reformation, which contains nothing repugnant to their estate,
neither any thing that is not commodious for them, and chose rather to cleave
to the Popes, the ancient secret enemies to the kings of France and the
French Clergy, who upon hatred to the French Clergy, have made a Decree at
Rome, that there shall never be created Pope of the French Nation, and that
hatred have they always showed against the French kings so often as opportunity
would serve, not in words only but also in deeds. But most of all I marvel
why the Clergy have entered the League, to make war at their own charge
against Reformation: herein has the Pope played the Clergy as brave a trick
of a Pharisie as ever man did: for he has laden them with agreat burden,
whereto him self would not set his finger: and so far is he from entering
into any charges thereof, that he has even washed his hands of all. In like
manner has he also brought the king of Spain into great charges, about the
building up of this sea monster his nauall army: promising him a million of
gold, so soon as his power should set foot in England, and this million of
gold could he well enough wrest from the poor by his Bulls and Pardons: but
when the king of Spaines Ambassador came to demand this sum, his answer
was, that he would not deliver it before the army had set foot on land, so that
notwithstanding what soever the Ambassadors earnestnes, he could obtain
nothing, for he told him, that this money which had been given for the poor,
ought not so lightly to be parted withal: albeit since he could employ part of
the same, namely 150000. crowns upon the purchase of a Marquisate for his
nephew. This is a cunning player at the Bohemia^s game, yet looks he not
whether he be within or without, al is one to him so that he may get, but in
getting he forgets nothing. Now in your opinion, if he thus mocketh the king
of Spain his eldest son, and the chief pillar of his house, what will he do
to these, whom he hates of old? will he spare them, or hurt him self to do
them good? And the League is it any better for the Clergy, then for him, since
the Clergy must rather bear the charges then he? No, it is more for the Pope:
for it works for the state of the Pope, not for the state of the Clergy,
considering that Reformation co^trarieth the Popes estate and not the Clergies,
but the Pope is not content with making the Clergy spend their revenues, but
withal he forces them to sell their demaines, a matter never accustomed
before. The ancient kings of Judah in time past, did rather sell the vessel of
the Lords house, 2. King. 16. 8. and 18. 16.
then meddle with the Clergy, but the Pope had rather make them not only to
consume their revenues, but also to sell temporalties, then to employ the
Images and superstitious Relics erected contrary to the word of God: so dear
unto him is that that God hates, and so much does he contemn that which God
has ordained. Besides the Clergy may see, how being once burdened with these
charges, the king having begun to leauie the tenthes, has since continued the
exacting of them: In the beginning they thought they should be levied but for
one year, and so to cease, but since they have been brought into a custom,
and thereof it is come, that the Clergy conceived an imagination that this
exaction would never cease, without the rooting out of all seekers of
Reformation: and thereupon they consented to the League, so to get out at once:
and in the mean time have sold their demaines, and yet must nevertheless pay
their tenthes: all which notwithstanding Reformation is never the more rooted
out: besides that, albeit it were rooted out, this subsidy would neuerthesse
be levied, under color of preserving the Church from like inconveniences.
Neither is there any remedy whereby to eschew this consequence; but by taking
part against the League, which does exact these revenues: that is, by declaring
them selves servants to the king, and enemies to the League, and taking to
the support of their estate, such persons as regard not the Pope, who has laid
this burden upon them. Moreover I doubt not but the Clergy are faithful to
the King, but nevertheless the League is a co^spiracie of the Pope against the
crown of France: but all that are of the League, are not of the co^spiracie,
neither do they understand the purpose thereof: and the Pope made it not to
Reform the time of Philip the Fair, when he caused the kings own children
to conspire against their father: but it is an old practice of the Popes, to
shuffle the French kings cards, and to seek revenge of the Pragmaticall
Sanction, as well against the king as against the Clergy, but he is glad to
take the cause of Reformation for a cloak, to the end under pretense thereof,
to do that which otherwise would be very hard for him to do.

But I pray yon, what cause have they to obey a foreign Franciscan Friar,
rather then some one of the French Clergy? For the Pope has been a poor
Mo^kish devil, that has cast his coat to catch the Papacy, and would now
gladly vncrowne the king to make him a Monk. There be among the French Clergy
many Princes, Lords and men of account, whom we might better obey then a
Franciscane at Rome: howbeit if we must needs obey a Franciscan, are there not
enough in France, that do better deserve it then he, who was never created
Pope but upon favor, rather then the worthiness in him? But in case a Romish
Franciscan were fitter to govern the French Clergy, yet were it requisite he
were brought into France, so to spare both labor and cost, and to be nearer
his flock, for it is never the property of a good shepherd, to lie far
from his fold: but now a days we make such shepheardes, as do never visit
their flocks, yea that never see the flocks, that they entitle them selves
shepheardes of.

To the end to ship the Clergy in the League, they were persuaded, that within
six months the Reformation should be utterly extinguished, and now there have
passed above four times 12. and they yet never the nearer, saving in
multiplying of expenses, they have but set forward their own destruction, and,
yet are they to take new deliberations. I wonder they know not that it is in
vain to strive against God. There is no counsel against God that can
prevail, well may they make many meetinges, either of Synodes or Estates: but
if they enter any counsel against God, he will scatter them, yea albeit they
hide them selves, yet are they not hidden from him. Let the Clergy account all
the charges they have been at, and the purchases by the League returned to the
profit of the Clergy: and then let them come to substraction, so I am assured
they shall find that the Clergy has scattered, rather then multiplied, so as
the remainders being put to interest, will never bring them any profit,
neither yet augment their revenues: let them reckon what goods they have sold,
and what rentes they have consumed, and they shall find that they do amount
to more then that that has been sold from the Reformed, yet shall the Reformed
in the end recover theirs again, but so shall not the Clergy.

As for the Cardinal of Bourbon, it were better for him to shoot at the
sovereign Bishopric in France, the^ at the crown, and to practice the
succession of the Crown for his nephew the king of Navarre, yet not by a
League or conspiracy against the king. So might he erect two good pillars to
bear up his house: and this might he do without stirring up such Tragedies,
as are now seen in France: as also the estate of a sovereign Bishopric
might more easily be given him, in respect that already he is one of the chief
Princes of the blood, and both Primate and Peer of France, besides that he
should aspire to that, which stands with the vocation of his Priesthood,
which also he might enjoy during the kings life: for it may be the king shall
outliue him, neither will it become him to renounce his Priesthood, wherein he
has kept him self unto his old age: as also he may think, that such as
promise him the crown, using his pretense to the overthrow of his family, do
well know that charity begins of it self, also that there is no man,
having means to dispose of the crown, but will set it upon his own head
rather then on a Priests. Besides in as much as there are some whose promises,
gifts and succors may be suspected, he can not but speed well in following
the Apostles counsel, which is, that every man walk in his vocation whereto
he is called: 1. Cor. 7. 20
he is called to the Priesthood, let him then so continue, and let him that can
not be Moses be content to be Aaron.

I have before noted for a fault in the Reformed, that they have not made
sufficient offer to the Clergy, of the enjoying of their rightes under the
Reformation, which is true: but it has been a greater fault in the Clergy, to
imagine that Reformation would take from them all that it offers not. It is
most certain that this foreiudgement has more hindered the cause of
Reformation, the^ the arms of the Leaguers. For the League began to work her
effects but in these last troubles, where this foreiudgeme^t has been an
ancient stombling block of old in the way of Reformation, neither had the
Clergy ever bent them selves so sore against it as they have done, had not
that been: howbeit it is not foreiudgement given, but taken, yea and by the
Clergy taken out of season, without sufficient cause given by the Reformation,
on whose side there was no other fault, but a trespass committed for want of
aduisement, by vncircumspectio^ and mistaking, neither was there any offense at
all, but by taking the matter over sharply and indirectly, considering that
the Reformation never attempted any thing against the Clergy, but the Clergy
against the Reformation in all the wars, namely in the last: wherein
contrariwise the king of Navarre has evidently showed, that he had no quarrel
to the Clergy, in that he has hitherto forborne the Clergy, albeit they
entered into the League against him. In deed I say, that they of the
Reformation might have offered the Clergy those things that I set down, yea
and have procured and craved them, when they labored to have the chambers
divided for the decision of process. But this is no sufficient cause to kindle
such a schism as the Pope has raised. For I account him the cause of this
mischief and foreiudgement, because he always mingled the Clergies cause with
his own, persuading the Clergy men that it generally concerned all their
estates, and herein have the Clergy been to blame, that they never sought out
the ground of this controversy: for had they sought never so little, they had
found that their estate was not in question, but the superstitions, which had
they taken away, they had ended all schism. Whereupon we perceauing the Popes
subteltie, who seeks to make the Reformation odious to the Clergy, by
persuading them that Reformation will overthrow their estate, do raise up a
shield against that shaft, that is, by dividing the Clergies cause from the
Popes, and proving that Reformation does not contrary the estate of the
Clergy: besides, taking the same shaft, we return it into the flanckes of the
beast, by proving that the Reformation shoots at the Papacy, as being enemy
to the Popes estate, because he is the beast mentioned in the Revelation, which
has made war against the Saints, and being wounded to the death, shall also
be healed again, as he has been already wounded to the death by the doctrine
of the Martirs, and healed again for a time: but being now broken out again,
he can never be cured, and it can not be but deadly and past cure.

For I say of the Pope, 3
that his estate is pernicious as well to the conscience as to the state: It
was brought in by guile, it is increased by bribery, and it is vpholden by
tyranny and turmoiles, as tyrannising the consciences, and troubling the whole
state of Europe. He has maintained the superstitions, of Relics, Images,
Invocation of Saints, Purgatory, vowed chastity and such like, and the same
will breed his destruction. I confess that Gods word admits Ecclesiastical
dignities, eue^ to the soueraignetie after the order of Iethro, but it
admits not any domination of an universal Bishop: nevertheless if there
were no controversy but the degree, yea and albeit there were some abuses, yet
might it be borne: but seeing it mainteineth such superstitions, as are directly
repugnant to Gods word, and for the same tyra^niseth the faithful, it can not
be borne: neither can we do better, then to abandon it as the enemy to Christ
and his truth, yet do I say, that albeit he will renounce all superstitions,
yet ought not the faithful to be bound to obey him: for no man can lay upon
the faithful the yoke which the Lord has not laid upon them: but I say that
this degree were more tolerable, then the superstitions which are the doctrines
of devils.

But to omit all matter of Religion and conscience, and to come to the state:
wherefore serves the Papacy but to trouble the state of Kings and Princes? It
has put the King of Spain to great charges, and made him buy a reproach very
dear: It has made him to arm him self to take a fall, and to stoop under a
woman's arm. It makes him to maintain an Inquisition, which is but a Popish
tyranny, and can not but breed his destruction. But what good has he done in
France, in causing the subjects to enter League against their king, yea and
arming the king against him self? for by destroying his Reformed subjects,
what does he destroy but him self? And had the king employed those forces
against others, that he has employed against him self, he might with honor
have purchased an other kingdom as great as his own, and now have been at
peace, where he is still in trouble. I say that the king has seemed to fight
against him self: but not properly the king him self, but the League. For the
king is a good Prince, but the League has against his will wrought matters to
his hinderance. Again for what serves the Papacy in France, but to suck up
her treasures? France would not be tributarie to the Emperor, yet does she
pay tribute to the Empire in the Popes person, who is but a creature of the
Empire. Upon what reason are men to go to Rome to decide Ecclesiastical
causes, as if in France there were no man capable of such decisions? If those
of Rome be better, why cause we them not to come into France, but must still
be at new charges to go to Rome?

Nay why be not our Parliaments also translated from France to Rome?
peradventure the Romans may be more capable to decide Civil causes then the
Frenchmen: or since the Pope has the honor to decide the Ecclesiastical causes,
we might give the Emperor the deciding of the Civil: but if the French be
skillful enough to decide Civil matters, they ca^ well enough shift with
Ecclesiastical, if need require. But what does the Papacy for the French
Clergy, but overthrow them: by making them sell their temporalties and wast
their revenues to enrich the League, staruing them selves in vain about
rooting out the Reformation? The Clergy warreth upon me as a professor of
Reformation, but I pity them, seeing how the Pope entangleth them, and the
League deuoureth them to the very bones. How long is it since Christ's Vicar
became a Turk, to seek to maintain his Religion by the sword? And of all
these foolish driftes the people smarteth most, by encurring infinite losses
and overthrows, upon a foolish fancy that the Pope has taken to overthrow
Reformation with the sword. I pray you if Reformation should have been
overthrown with the sword, could one handful of people have stood these 28.
years in France? could they yet have borne out, if God had not holden them
up, considering how often they have been assaulted, and as often circumuented? But
who ever went about to root out Reformation once planted in his country, and
has not labored in vain? Only the Prince of Parma, who thinks to have
flourished ^olily in the Low Countries, but every blossom becomes not fruict,
neither will his stalk make any sheffe wherewith to enrich the garner. Two
things will overthrow him. The one for that he has banished Reformation: the
other because he has hardly entreated the Catholics, by destroying their
country and boores, as propounding this mark and principle, that better is a
wast country the^ a lost, yet shall we see him leave that which he has gotten,
yea, and glad if he escape with his skin. This is a punishment that God has
inflicted upon Spain, for persecuting the faithful with the Inquisition: that
she might have been rich with the spoils of the India^s, had she not wasted
them upon the molesting of the Low Countries.

If the kings Parliaments were entangled in the Emperors hands, he would
employ all his power to recover them, and his Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
being snared in the Popes hand, he labors not to recover it, the cause
whereof seems to be only because the setting them free may cost him nothing:
for he need do no more but forsake the Pope as the English and Dutch have
done, neither shall he be able to open his mouth and ask, why do you so?

True it is that the Popes estate is hurtful and ruinous, but it is not
hurtful to any but to those that be his partakers. It is hurtful to the king
of Spain, in putting him to great charges and foolish expenses for nothing:
and to France in setting the whole state in trouble. But what harm has it
done to England, to the Reformed parts of Germany, or to Suitzerland? it has
spit his venom bnt upon his own faction: forsake him, and he can hurt you no
more.

True it is, that at this time it seems hard to forsake the Pope, because of
the power of the League: but give over the League, and let the King and Clergy
abandon it, and you shall soon see both League and Papacy come to naught. And
I know though it stay a while, that this will be the end of the game: when all
is done, the League must vnleague it self, and it will never vnleague it self
but with the Popes destruction.

The Popes combat against the light of the Gospel, witnessed by the Martirs
and Reformed, has resembled the battle between the moth and the candle,
which burns first her wings, and then her feet, so as she can not leave the
game before she be wholly burnt. So has the Pope singed his wings in England,
Germany and Suitzerland, and can not but continue the game by the League,
until the whole body of the Papacy be burned: you would say that the Pope and
the moth are both sprung out of one double yolked egg, they do so resemble in
their fight. Thus much I will say, that when the Martirs complained of the
superstitions, if the Pope had had any care to satisfy their complaints, his
kingdom might have continued: But he persecuted them, and so lost his credit
in the places aforenamed: yea now had the remnant of his kingdom been
peaceable had he not stirred up the League: he thought by the League to
confound Reformation, and undoubtedly it will be his destruction. For the
Christian kings shall thereby perceive, that he is a fisher for Eeles, who
seeks to fish only in pudle water, and can not forbear troubling the whole
estate of Europe. France shall know by experience that which the Reformed could
never with all the eloquence of Demosthenes and Cicero have persuaded, that is,
that the Popes estate is ruinous to the people in making them in vain to wast
the money, goods, and persons both of the Clergy and people, not caring for
others dangers, so as he may bring his purpose to pass: and this
foreiudgeme^t can not but at length procure the Popes overthrow, which he has
found in thinking to overthrow Reformation, neither is there Pope, Emperor or
King that seeks the destruction of the truth, but destroys him self. If
kings could well consider this point, they would never make such have with
their own harms to bend themselves against the truth: which if ever it took
place, it is now in this periode wherein Jesus Christ will reign, and destroy
every kingdom that shall withstand him, which is a song quite repugnant to the
League. Hitherto it has seemed that to get dominion they need no more but
turn their backs to Christ: but now the case does alter.

But is not this wonderful, that so soon as Jesus Christ showed him self to
be the Lamb that should take away the sins of the world, the Wolves with
their gluttonous nature have come to devour him, and at their approach have
found him to have the paws of a Lion as being the Lion of Judah? What may this
mean, if he be a Lamb, how comes it to pass, that he has the paws of a
Lion, or if he be a Lion, why bears he the shape of a Lamb? O my friend, he
is a Lamb, yet armed with the Lions paws, to rent in pieces the wolves that
would devour him.

Well, let us a little more nearely consider the Popes goodly effects: he has
armed him self with the Council of Trent, as with a Trident or 3. tyned forke
to play Neptune and to command the waters. He has shipped his Trident in the
Spanish Galiasses: the South wind would not acknowledge this new Neptune, but
scattered his Galiasses and brake his Trident, so as he has but the handle
left: that would he now make a scepter, wherewith to play Jupiter upon earth in
France, seeing he could not compass to be a Neptune upon the sea. But his
Tridents handle is no longer fit for ought but to make a hatchet steal,
wherewith to hew out a chariot to march in more magnificently, but this chariot
will prove Phactons chariot, and shortly utterly overthrow his holiness.

The League likewise will be I say, the destruction of both Pope and Papacy,
which I will prove by two reasons: one because thereby the Kings, Clergy and
Commons may to their costs learn the hurt that they take by the Popes yoke:
and experience teaches those things, which Rhetoric was never able to
persuade. An other, because the effects of the League have hitherto been very
vain and unprofitable, and will be hereafter, so as finally the League must
break without working any effect, and it can not break but with the Popes
ruin.

But who will hereafter give ear to the Popes Councels, knowing them to be so
pernicious, as by this League they do appear? In it has he deceived him
self, by employing his coin upon the purchase of his own destruction: for it
is most certain, that the breaking up of the League is the Popes overthrow,
and it will not be long before he shall stand in need of the pieces thereof. He
has also deceived the Leaguers by procuring them to make great leuies,
wherewith to purchase mighty disgraces for nothing. He has deceived the
Cardinal of Bourbo^, by feeding him with a vain hope of the crown of France,
albeit he purposed to bestow the Crown upon a more factious person then he, he
deceived the king, in laboring him to root out the Reformation, to the end
afterward with more ease and without controllme^t to lay hands upon him self,
and send him into some Monastery, and so to substitute an other at his
devotion. And he has deceived the Clergy, by causing them to wast both
demaines and revenues in vain, and finally he has beguiled the people, in
bringing them into great calamities of war, promising them peace, and
performing nothing but war. But the Reformed could he not deceived, for they
trusted him not. To be brief he has deceived but him self, and those that are
his. But who ca^ imagine that God will bless the Popes cause, who terms him
self Christ's Vicare, and yet fights with fraud and perfidie, with treason
and poison, to uphold superstitions against piety, falsehood against truth, and
the doctrine which S. Paul terms the doctrine of devils, against the pure
and sound doctrine of Jesus Christ?

Most certain it is, that the League is a conspiracy of the Pope against the
crown and state of France: also that the Popes have still even of old,
practiced to be revenged, as well of the French Kings, as of the Clergy for
the Pragmaticall Sanction, and of long time have cast with them selves, how to
subdue the Clergy to their domination, as being very sorry that they can not
atchieue their purpose, and now are glad to make Reformation an argument or
pretense, whereby to bring their driftes to some issue: and therefore the Pope
exercises the king, in procuring him to labor the rooting out of Reformation,
which is a double weakening of the king. For those who^ the Reformed in their
defenses have slain, has the king lost, and the forces of the Reformed, which
might greatly stre^gthe^ him, are thereby also made unprofitable, yea eue^
hurtful unto him. After all this does the Pope cause the League to give the
king a spurn with the footein Salluce, to the end that way also to exercise
him, and there to employ the rest of his forces: that the kings side being thus
weakened and the strength of the League coming on on the other side, they may
be assured to do with him what they list. Let the King the Clergy and all
France hardly think upon this point: it is of no small consequence: it
imports but eue^ the whole state of France. For my part I will tell you what
I think: all shall be as others list: yet am I assured, that the success of
things will show the right of mine advise, and wise men will allow thereof.
Under correction I say, the king may herein imitate Neptune when he commands
the winds in Virgill. Quos ego, sed motos praestat componere fluctus. That is,
he may first appease all Civil wars among his own, and then use his own
against strangers. A great rope is ordinarily strong, but divide it into three
or four small cords, and you may easily break it, even so is it with the
Pope: he knows the whole power of France to be strong, and therefore seeks
to disunite and sever them, and to disperse them into four or five factions.
One of the Reformed, an other of their co^traries, an other the adversaries to
Salluces, the fourth the League, and the fifth the King, which do withstand
the^: but the King may reunite to him self all his subjects, in his own
defense against strangers: and withal soon recover all that the League has
usurped, and so have his revenge for the game. Thus may the king, if he please,
see whether it is better for him to favor the Reformed, who are his faithful
servant, or the the Pope that is his secret enemy.

Moreover, I say that the League is a Popish conspiracy against the Crown and
state of France, yet will I not say, that all those of the League be
conspirators: for I am well assured there be many good men under the League,
who if they wist that the Pope had conspired against the King, would renounce
both Pope and League, and be the first oppugners of the Papacy. Others there
are also, which will wax cold, when they see the League of so small effect, or
the case alter, as undoubtedly it will, or else if they see the king determine
to be master: so as it seems that no man may well be adjudged a co^spirator
against the king, in favor of the League, before his Majesty has likewise
declared, that he takes the League to be a conspiracy against him self, and
withal do prescribe a time for them to depart it, within the which who so
shall not renounce it, but continue therein, shall be holden co^spirators
against the crown and state of France: and withal pardon all such as shall
depart therefrom.

It were also requisite (under correction) that the Clergy should denounce the
Pope a schismatike, for setting division in the state, and therefore that his
Majesty, prosecuting the steps of his auncesters and predecessors Kings of
France, should make declaration of his intent, to uphold and maintain the
French Church in her ancient privileges, together with the Pragmaticall
Sanction, amplifying the same, and proclaiming the same French Church, free
from the Popes yoke and all consequences of Popery. To the performing whereof,
that his Majesty should also create one sovereign Bishop in France. Withal
his Majesty might maintain the Catholic religion, howbeit under the
liberty of the French Church, not under the Popes yoke, who contrariwise
should be denounced in respect of his secret malice, an enemy to France:
besides his Majesty should declare him self the maintainer of Catholic
religion, under the liberty of Gods law, and of the primitive Church, and
Council of Nice. This, if it might please the King to do, the state of France
would be appeased and strengthened, and the Pope astomed, and the League set
beside the sadle, so as malgre all her endeavors, she should be glad to quail,
and so be driven to vomit up again, all that she has devoured: yea how loud
so ever she be, it would not be long but she would sing a lower note. Neither
will I fear to auow (let others think and persuade the^ selves the contrary if
they list) that the King and Clergy must now of the two ways, choose one,
that is, either to put them selves in the Popes mercy, or to renounce the
Papacy. Now if he put him self in the Popes mercy, their humanity may be
well enough known, by the courtesy that the Pope showed to Frederick
Barbarossa, who referring him self to his mercy, kneeled to him, while
Alexander IIII. then Pope, with opprobrious speeches, set his foot upon his
throat: and now if the King should do the like, the Pope would not put his
foot upon his throat, but a Monks coule over his head, wherewith he has been
long desirous to hood him: or perhaps he might escape somewhat better cheap,
if he escaped as Frances Dandalus Duke of Venice, did escape the
excommunications of Clement V. which was by creeping through the hall upon all
four with a halter about his neck. Suppl. Chron.
For the Emperor Jews IIII. cried Pope John XXII. mercy, and asked him
forgiveness, which notwithstanding, the Pope kept him prisoner in a chamber
three years, where in the end he dyed miserably.

But now let us see what the Popes excommunications are: they are but
conspiracies against princes, as appears by the excommunication of Pope
Cregorie VII. who excommunicated the Emperor Henry IIII. and gave the
Imperial Crown to Rodolph Duke of Sueuia, who died in the performance of the
Popes conspiracy. And as for the Popes wickedness, it appears, in that by a
Council holden at Worms, and another at Basil, an. 1085. he was deposed from
his Papacy, as a sacrilegious person, and disturber of the Empire. It is also
to be noted, that this Gregory procured the Saxons to revolt against the
Emperor, and alienated his subjects from him, yea even his own mother. Pascal
II. made Henry V. to rebel against his father, whom he kept prisoner in his
town of Liege, where he caused him to be so hardly entreated, that he died,
neither would the said Pascal suffer him to be buried. Yet is it to be thought,
that he had no better ground then his predecessor, who for the like doings was
deposed from his Papacy. What greater impiety can any man desire then this of
the Popes, who set the mother at debate with the Emperor her son, and armed
the children against the Emperors their fathers? Likewise Pope Gregory the
fourth caused the children of Jews the Meek so to conspire against their
father that they detained him three years in a Cloister, eue^ until that the
French Nobility and Clergy withstanding them, restored him and caused the
children to ask their father forgiveness. As much would the Pope now do to
our King, but I hope our Nobility and Clergy withstanding will not permit it.

The vanity of these excommunications and co^demnations also appears in that
one Pope or Council releaseth them whom an other has excommunicated, and not
only so, but also that some one Pope excommunicateth, releaseth and again
reexco^municateth some one Emperor, as appears by Frederick the second, who
was excommunicated, released and reexco^municated thrice: And, which is most of
all to be noted, Pope Adrian the fourth being corrupted with money given by
William king of Sicill, and the Milaners and other estates of Italy,
excommunicated the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa: John of Cremone.
Thus are the Popes excommunications against Princes as saleable in the Popes
shop, as the pardons. But what greater treachery can we wish, then was that
of Pope Alexander, who excommunicated the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, to
the end to arm him against the Turks, and the whilst sent his lively picture
and letters to the Turk, to procure him to be taken? Afterward the Emperor
seeking to be revenged of this deed, was by the same Pope forced, as is
aforesaid, upon his knees to ask him forgiveness, who besides in spite with
bitter words set his feet upon his throat.

As for the Emperor Frederick the II. him did Pope Honorius the III.
excommunicate, and again in favor of John king of Jerusalem release* but he
was again by Gregory the IX. excommunicated, and then might not be released
but for money. Thus are the releases of kings from excommunications, as
saleable also as the excommunications and Bulls: This release cost him 120000.
marks of gold, yet did the same Pope Gregory the IX. again excommunicate the
said Emperor Frederick the third time, terming him the forerunning of
Antechrist, wherefore the Emperor might have appealed as from a sclaunder,
howbeit if you take it that the Emperors were the forerunners of the Popes,
the Emperor might have urged a Minima. This Pope also called the Emperor
heretic, whereby it appears, that the Reformed Princes are not the first
Princes, who^ the Popes have wrongfully excommunicated as heretics: for
thereof grew the faction of Guelphes and Gibellines, which is an evident token
that the Popes have been no other but perpetual perturbers of the Empire and
whole estate of Europe. He that lust to reckon up all the Emperors, Kings and
Princes that the Popes have brought to their ends, as the Emperor Jews IIII.
whom John XXII. procured to dye, Supplem. Chronic.
as also Conradin king of Sicill, and Frederick Duke of Austrich, who by the
conspiracy of Clement IIII. were beheaded. Merdes Histoires.
Also how oftentimes the Popes have procured the subjects to reuolte against
the Emperors, or other their Princes, might find matter sufficient for a whole
book. But what stand I upon these things, which are so plentiful in books?
Read the lives of the Popes, the histories of Emperors, and the Chronicles of
the French kings, and you shall find histories enough, that evidently do
show, that the Popes never served but to trouble the state of Europe, even
since the time of Jews the meek, against who^ the Pope Gregory IIII. procured
his own children to conspire, as is aforesaid. But what greater rashness and
vanity, John Mayor.
yea eue^ folly and phrenesie would a man desire, then that of Pope Innocent
III. who put the whole Realm of France into interdictio^: and of Boniface
VIII. who denounced the Realm of France to be fallen into the Popes hands?
But this wound the king applied the remedy of the Scorpion, for it cost the
Pope his life* Besides that, king Philip the Fair forbad the tra^sport of any
coin to Rome. And it is to be noted, that the Popes quarrel was not as then
upon any hatred to Reformation, for that was not yet in question, but upon a
desire the Pope had to trouble the state of the Realm. Neither did king Philip
the Fair forbid the trasport of any money to Rome as being a Reformed, but as
a king desiring to maintain the state of France.

True it is, that the Reformed Princes are not the first Princes that have been
excommunicated, because they would not cleave to the Popes superstitions: for
Pope Gregory III. excommunicated the Emperor Leo III. for the same cause,
namely, for that he would not suffer Images in the Churches: Eusebius. Chronic.
wherein it appears, that the cause of the Reformed is not so new as it
seems, beside that, it appears how ruinous this cup of devils which is
Idolatry is, not only to the conscience, but also to the state, considering
that it is the overthrow both of the Empire and Papacy. It is the ruin of the
Empire, because that for Images this Pope Gregory IIII. procured all Italy to
revolt from the Empire: Eusebius. Chron.
and it is the ruin of the Papacy, because that for these superstitions
Boemia, England, and most part of Germany have abandoned the Pope, as France
also with the rest of Europe will shortly do.

Morouer there is great difference between being an heretic and being by the
Pope denounced and heretic: for we know that the Pope has sometimes
excommunicated the Florentins, and the Lawyers have affirmed the
excommunication to be void, as proceeding of hatred, and his hatred against
Reformation is well known to be the hatred of Cain, who hated his brother Abel,
because Abels works were better then his. Besides it is a principle of the
Canon law, that one excommunicate person can not excommunicate an other, one
heretic can not denounce another an heretic, neither one Apostate declare
another an heretic or excommunicate person: the Pope being such a one we have
just occasion to appeal from his sentence: but we can prove that he is an
heretic, an Apostate from the faith, and excommunicate by such Judges, from
whose sentence he can not appeal.

He is assuredly an heretic which leans to a doctrine repugnant to the
Gospel: But the Pope leans to a doctrine repugnant to the doctrine of the
Gospel taught by Jesus Christ: therefore it follows that the Pope is an
heretic. My Minor I prove thus. Jesus Christ in the Gospel forbids his
Disciples, whose successor the Pope terms him self, to usurp such dominion
over the Nations as Kings and Princes do: But this doctrine does the Pope
diametrally contrary, usurping dominion over the Nations, yea even over
Emperors and Kings: the Pope therefore is an heretic. And S. Peter, whose
successor the Pope terms him self, does forbid the usurping of dominion
over the Lords inheritance, which the Pope does usurp.

Moreuer S. Peter says: There shall be false teachers that shall make traficke
of men, that is to say, make traficke of men's souls, as the Revelation does
expound it: but the Pope makes such traficke by his Bulls: He is therefore a
false teacher, and consequently an heretic. 1. Tim. 4.
S. Paul also, whose sword the Pope says that he bears, does say, that such
as forbid marriage and meats, be Apostotaes from the faith, also that they be
cleauers to spirits of errors and the doctrines of devils: he speaks the^ of
the Popes, who in their vowed chastity do forbid marriage, and in their Lent,
meats. Thus the Pope bearing S. Paul's sword, bears the sword that cutteth
his own throat. And this we must also note; that there be some Doctors which
uphold superstitions, others which forced by the Popes do endure them, as loath
to part from them without their Princes commandment: Now those do we account
mere superstitious and guilty of these crimes, which uphold and maintain
them: but as for such as of force do suffer them, it were to be wished that
they were come from among the others, according to the saying of the Scripture.
Come forth of her my people, whereby we open them such a passage as shall not
be vncommodious for them. Out of S. Paul's words also where he says,
whosoever participateth in the cup of devils is justly excommunicate, that is
to say, is excommunicable from the cup of Christ, we may infer, that since the
Pope through his superstitions participateth in the cup of devils, he is
excommunicate out of the cup of Christ. Also it is a principle in the Clergy
law, that one excommunicated person, ca^ not excommunicate an other, whereby
the Pope can not excommunicate the Reformed Princes, because him self by the
law of God and testimony of holy Scripture stands excommunicate, he that is
rightly excommunicated, is more excommunicated then he that is so but by act.

Moreover, the Pope is a schismaticke, in that he has made a division in the
state of France: a conspirator, because he has procured the League to
conspire against the King, that is, the subjects against their Lord and
Sovereign. And a Church robber, for he has caused the sale of the demaines of
the Clergy. Here we see what a Judge he is that has pronounced the sentence
of heresy against the Reformed Princes: an heretic, a false teacher, an
Apostata, one that is exco^municable, one that cleaves to the doctrines of
devils, 1. Tim. 4.
a schismaticke, a conspirator, and a Church robber, who hypocritically
speaks leasings. Surely the Popes staff of excommunication, which he never
uses but in his conspiracies against Princes, is a dangerous staff: howbeit
he ought to know, that he has no power, but what is subject to the obedience
of kings: well may the Pastors propound unto Kings Gods commandementes, and
admonish them to obey the same, giving the^ warning of Gods threats and
judgments, in case they do not obey him: yea and upon their transgressions
thereof, to reprove them, albeit no further then Gods word does warrant: yea
and all this must they do with great modesty, moderation, discretion and
circumspection, watching time convenient, not to handle them rigorously, but
seeking to use them with reason and modesty, following the example of Nathan
when he reproved David. True it is that Elias spoke boldly unto David, but his
example is rather to be admired then imitated: for all kings are not Achabs,
neither all men Eliasses. The Popes excommunications are Ostracismes, which he
vouchsafes to none but Kings and Princes. In old time the Apostles counted it
an honor to be scourged by the Scribes and Pharisees, but now it is an honor to
be whipped with the Popes excommunications.

As concerning the French nation albeit one part of them do 4
know what the truth is, yet dare they not say what they think, nevertheless
I know, that if occasion should serve to atchieue liberty, the more they have
been constrained, the more desirous will they be to shake off the yoke of those
that have oppressed them. Some again do refer them selves to their Curats
care, who many times do take but small care. In deed I grant a man should
honor his Curate: but when it concerns his salvation, that is a matter to be
better looked unto then by a debitie. If a Merchant be in law about a Civil
cause, he will be glad to have the opinions of sundry Atturneys, because him
self is no lawyer: but his own judgment must be it that shall teach him of
two Atturneyes of contrary opinions, which he must follow: yea sometime it may
so fall out, that having the advice of many, he shall resolve him self upon
one gathered out of all the others, by the help of his own judgment, which
shall be better then the advice of any one severally taken. Even so when in
matters of conscience they shall bring a good judgment, not before entangled,
they may find out those things that are fit and healthful for them,
peradventure better then their Doctors could have taught them. Who taught the
Canaanite to answer our Lord so wisely in a matter that she had never before
heard of, was it her Doctors? no, but the spirit of God. The same is he also
which is able to teach you the same things which your Doctors understand not.
We know that Jesus Christ is the light of the world, as the Gospel
witnesses, and that this light illuminateth the blind, and blinds or
dazeleth the eyes of the wise, as the Gospel teaches. For a man must not say:
I will not go to the light because I am blind: for albeit thou art blind, yet
may thou be fit to be illuminated by the light of the Gospel: that is to
say, he that is ignorant, may notwithstanding be fit to learn Gods
mysteries, in case he be not maliciously ignorant. A man at controversy with
his neighbor, will instruct his Attorney in his right, albeit his Attorney be
a lawyer, and him self but a paisant or a clown: even so may you show your
preachers, what you have seen and known concerning the truth, thereby to
induce them with mildness to seek your salvation: yea, ye may require it even
of your King, since it concerns the salvation of your souls, then which there
is nothing of greater importance. Besides you can not enjoy any assured peace,
but by making atonement with God, of whom do depend both peace and war: and
the mean to grow to atonement with him, is to take away that which offends
him that is, superstitions, as images with the worship thereupon depending. Is
it not better to renounce them, then to languish in perpetual misery, to be
entangled in a perpetual war, or to have such a peace as is but a renewing of
war, either to enjoy a demie peace, as it were a sun between two clouds,
in lieu of an assured peace, that may be established by the means propounded,
which if you follow not, you shall languish in war without enjoying your
commodities, which for the most part shall remain subject to the soldier and
thief, as your cattle to be driven out of your pastures, and your tillage to
cease: some of you to be taken and ransomed, others to die of the enemies
sword, and so to leave their widows and orphans desolate, yet does not the
end of all these calamities depend upon the sword: for how long have we hoped
for it, and yet can not get it? For it is most certain, that when all the men
in the world shall have undertaken what they list, after they shall have
labored in vain, France shall be forced in the end to shut up all her
calamities by sharing the controversy with the Reformed, wherein each must part
with somewhat of his: as the Reformed to grant the Clergy all their
privileges, and the Clergy to yield to their just complaints, by abolishing
their idolatries and superstitions repugnant to Gods word: and such of the
people as have any knowledge, authority, wealth or zeal, to employ all in the
setting forward of so great a benefit to the common wealth. Is not such an
assured counsel which may be given to the benefit both of King and Clergy,
and the peace of the people, better than a bloody advice, tending to root out
of France one of the factions, which has taken so sure anchor hold, that it
can not be destroyed without the overthrow of the other? Some have persuaded
the French nation, that Reformation has bred all the calamities now seen in
the world: but in troth it is not Reformation that has bred them, but
superstition, and the Pope for maintaining his superstitions, has troubled the
whole state of Europe, and God being offended therewith, does punish us. Has
not God in his law promised, that if his people do observe his law, Deuteronomy. 28.
he will pour upon them plenty of blessings, as a land flowing with milk and
honey, with peace and quietness in the land: that he would be unto them a wall
of brass, and would overthrow their adversaries, so as he would put a thousand
to flight, and make a thousand to pursue ten thousand? Likewise, that if they
forsook his laws, he would send them a heaven of brass and infinite other
calamities, such as this day we see in France. Being thus scourged, we ought
to acknowledge the hand of God: the horse knows the riders hand that tameth
him, eue^ so should we know that it is God that chastises us, and knowing it,
we ought to seek if there be any evil in us, that we might amend it, namely,
whether there be any thing repugnant to his laws, that may provoke his wrath.
Then shall we find that superstition is repugnant to him, and therefore that
his wrath can not be appeased, but by abolishing this evil, and cleaving to
his ordinances: so shall we have experience of the value of Gods favor. I know
that some do think those promises are become old: but they can not waxed old,
it is our old Adam that is grown old, not Gods promises.

True it is that the literal ceremonies are growe^ out of date, but Gods
promises depend not thereupon: but contrariwise God him self faith: I need
not your sacrifices, your Sabaoths, or your new Moons. Isay. 1.
But his promises are made to those that shall obey the laws of the Lord,
whereby the worship of God is kept pure, and all contrary superstition taken
away. It is the fulfilling of his laws, which brings his blessing and peace
upon a people, and the transgression thereof that brings destruction upon
Nations: Ierem. 7. 22.
It is also to be noted that God in Jeremy does say, When I brought your
fathers out of Egypt. I spoke of no sacrifices, but commanded them to obey my
voice. As also we see that England, who has maintained the purity of Gods
laws these 30. years, has enjoyed an assured peace under the hands of a
woman, and yet such Realms as be governed by men have been troubled: for that
kingdom has God preserved from both secret and open enemies, and to that
nation has been a wall of brass. Even when the League covered the Ocean with
Galiasses and ships of both rock and Canon proof, Heb. 1.
God sent the winds (his angels, as S. Paul terms them) to scatter his
adversaries. In sum, Ezech. 20.
wheresoever a people is that observes Gods laws, the same shall every where
find a land of Chanaan, that flows with milk and honey, and Gods protection
to serve for a wall thereto. As also when soever a people shall turn from Gods
laws, and follow superstition repugnant thereto, the same shall find a brazen
heaven, and Gods wrath against it. So as I doubt not openly to avouch to the
French Nation, that they have no more to do, but to chose whether they had
rather languish in perpetual trouble, provoking the Lord with their
superstitions, or to attain to peace of conscience and state, by obeying Gods
laws, and shaking of the yoke of the Pope and his superstitions? Then if they
think good to abandone superstition, their supplications may greatly move the
Kings heart, and induce him to minister that justice to his people.

Now will I come to the Queen of England: 5
she I say is a wise and a virtuous Princess, and her virtue and wisdom has
appeared in these three things. First, that she has maintained her people in
peace, when all Europe was in trouble: Secondly, that she has gotten the
victory of her enemies, both open and secret, domestical and traiterous: and
thirdly that her self has been a party and fauorer of the Clergy, which may
be a most beautiful miror and example to France, and other Nations, when
soever God shall vouchsafe to call them to Reformation: yet in all this are we
to confess Gods favor, who has endued her with such wisdom and virtue, and
accompanied the same with his blessing, which has bred her peace, given her
the victory over her enemies, and maintained the estate of her Clergy: she is
a second Debora triumphing over Sisara, Judge. 4.
and judging Israel under a Palm tree. The Palm tree does in deed belong
unto her: I say the victorious Palm tree, since she triu^pheth over her
enemies, which are enemies to God and his people: and under this Palm tree
does our Debora judge Gods people, having maintained the government and state
of the Clergy, which God has ordained by his law, and confirmed in the
Gospel.

The Pope has presumed to command both in heaven and earth: he has endeavored
to open heaven with S. Peter's kayes, and to make himself feared with S. Paul's
sword. And the king of Spain has thought to become Monarke of the world, to
command alone upon earth, and to possess the seas alone, as well East as
West. And these two are come into the North to be overcome by a woman. Thus
does God chastise his enemies, and thus does he crown his chosen. The Giant
Goliath was overthrown by a shepherd, yet was that shepherd a man: and behold
here two Goliahs, the Pope and the King of Spain, armed from top to toe, to
cause them selves to be beaten by a woman. I will therefore celebrate the
praise of the Christianly Reformed Debora, who with her Atlanticke shoulder,
leaning upon the Divine favor, has vpholden the Reformed Ecclesiastical
heaven, I say the heaven of the Clericall estate under the Reformation. Neither
call I her the English Debora, but the Christian Debora, because the good that
she has done to the Church in upholding the state of the Clergy, redoundeth
not to England only, but to all Christendom, since we are to look that
France should grow to the same Reformation, whereto it can not come, but by
taking example of this Princess, to preserve the state of the Clergy, and the
like will al other places do that shall convert to Reformation. And this was
wisely considered of her Majesty, for the state of the Clergy, is the honor
of her Realm, and one pillar thereof. She has no enemy but the Pope, who,
had the state of the Clergy been overthrown, had had more favorers and fewer
resistants able to withstand him. Thus has God made the portion of Leuy equal
with his brethren, as well for that he would not that they who^ he has chosen
for his inheritance, should be in worse state the^ others, as also because it
was requisite that Leuy should in part, be the vpholder of his brethren. Thus
also the Clergy ought to be in part a pillar of the estate. Two notes of the
government of this discreet English Elizabeth and Christian Debora be these:
first, that under her first had Reformation free and full course throughout
England: next, that by her also the state of the Clergy has been preserved.
In France God has purposed to maintain the privileges of the Clergy, which
are the honor of France, wherein France is bound to Queen Elizabeth, for
showing the way how to come to Reformation without endomaging the Clergy,
albeit the privileges of the Clergy might be better kept in France then they
have been in England. To blemish the virtue of this Queen, some may allege
the Realms that have kept their people in peace with the yoke of the Spanish
Inquisition, whereto I answer, that the same is a tyrannous yoke of the Pope,
which can not be but ruinous to those that maintain it. When a man boweth a
tree to the earth contrary to nature, if it chance to escape, it shoots as
far to the contrary side, and shakes a long time from side to side before
it can find any rest, beside that, if in rising it light upon him that bent it
contrary to nature, it gives him such a blow, that it casts him down: and
even so will it happen to those, that preserve their peace with the tyrannous
yoke of the Inquisition. For if a man shall in their countries, proclaim
liberty according to Gods laws, against the tyrannous yoke of the
Inquisition, all the world will come running. And this Inquisitio^ will breed
the overthrow of their estate that have maintained it, for no tyranny is
durable: And God especially will reuerse such tyranny over the consciences.
But the peace which this Princess has maintained, is grounded upon the firm
rock of Gods laws, whereby it is vpholden, and I would to God the Queen
mother had in her time so sought the peace of France. I would to God our king
who loves the peace of his people, could so have maintained it in his Realm,
as the League had never come to shuffling of the cards: yea I would to God his
Majesty, who loves quietness, would harken to such right means as should be
given him to maintain quietness in his land. He has been made to believe,
that by war he should attain rest. Behold a goodly means to come to
quietness. It is an easy matter to mark the time when war begins, but
it is not so easy to know when it will end. Even this war has already
continued too long, and it is likely to accompany him to the grave, to shorten
his days, or to impose upon him some Monkish life wherein there is more
superstition then liberty.

As for the king of Navarre, 6
since the Sea League has encurred shipwreck, he is the sooner, but not the
more to fear: for God has given him both courage and valor to defend and
maintain him self, neither is he the weakest of the Reformed Princes, as also
his enemies know that at his hands there is nothing to be gotten but stripes,
the gain is small and doubtful, but the hazard great and evident. It is no
great wisdom to begin to flay an Eele at the tail, yet must the League
either in duty or in honor proceed, since it has begun, and either by force
or fury, valor or treachery, prowess or rage, try what it can do against
him, be it but to show the trick of a master, as it lately did in England, or
to iumpe fair to the ground, so to break the neck thereof. But God who has
set him on work, and in whom he has reposed his confidence shall support him,
as he is able enough to do. Howbeit in this action my greatest pleasure is,
that the king of Navarre has no enemies but Gods enemies, that hate him
because he does maintain the cause of Gods children, yet have they offered him
great offers to give over the cause of Reformation, neither can it be but they
must needs fall, because God whose purposes are clean contrary to theirs,
will overthrow their purposes, and uphold the king of Navarre, who means no
other but to do well.

There are under the Reformation some Magistrates, that have still enjoyed not
only their goods, but also their offices and the kings pay, which so fell out,
by reason of some Courtiers living under the Reformation, being careful for
their estate, and looking for a peace to be concluded were mindful of them
selves: and as reason would, provided for their own affairs: even so, had it
been thought upon, might there have been such provision, as the Clergy, even
under the Reformation, should have enjoyed their benefits: whereby if it had
been so done, we should have had a great part of the Clergy, which now do
strengthen the League, to have taken our parts: For certainly there were many
which detested superstition, and would have banished it, had not their state or
livings withholde^ them. It is a matter hereafter to be looked unto: for had it
been well seen to, the Churches would have increased, where now for these 28.
years space they have still diminished: howbeit with Gods help, it is never
to late, and therefore it suffiseth us we provide better hereafter.

The king of Navarre has showed him self wiser, more discret, wary and
circumspect then his adversaries, in that he never would during the kings
life, bring into question the right of succession to the Crown, but still bare
and contained him self within the bands of just obedience and due respect to
the king: neither ever employed his weapons to offend, but justly, and upon
just cause and co^straint had recourse to thedefensiue arms, granted by the
law of nature. And besides returned as friends, such as came against him as
enemies, and sought to overcome him with strong hand, refusing to take any
ransom of them, albeit they were able to pay largely, wherein he shows that
he makes but a pastime of his enemies endeavors: like as me^ do use to laugh at
the vain endeavors of little children, who having given a blow (as they think
very great) with their hand yet wet with the nurses milk, to a man that does
but smile at their vain choler, do imagine they have done some great act, so
as if a man start from them, and seem to weep, it bredeth infinite
contentme^t, as weening to have obtained a great victory: Thus may we play
with the mighty, when they loyter in exercise of childrens pastime. Neither
ought any man to covet to command, but to know how to command: and to know
well how to command, it is requisite he know how to obey: As well in the one
as in the other is wisdom and dexterity necessary. S. Paul teaches that a
Bishop that governs not his family well, can never well govern the Church.
By an argument taken of an opposite reason, I say that he that can well and
discretly govern a small government, can also well discharge a greater
office. I sec many that affect great offices, but never labor to be worthy the
same. Nevertheless the King of Navarre makes him self so much more worthier
the Crown, as he does less affect it, by leaving the success thereof in Gods
hand.

Concerning the Ministers of the Reformation, 7
some there are of great zeal and learning, such as have suffered much for the
purity which they have taught, and have been content with little, whereby they
deserve great commendation. Neither desire I any more, but that still they may
be more and more careful for the peace of the Church: for such contentions
there have been, eue^ among the Reformed, as have not greatly auailed to
edification: and herein I greatly commend Bucer, yea and honor his ashes: for
he would never lean to any the partialities among the Reformed, but bare him
self quietly between both parts, and never innouated any thing in the state
of the Clergy. Neither should we endeavor to triumph over our brethren, but
over our enemies. For my part I would not seek to triumph over the Clergy,
but over the Papacy, which is the Beast, over whom we are promised to triumph
in the Revelation. And as for the Clergy, I wish, by reasonable offers and
just admonitions, to induce them to participate with us in the triumph over the
Beast, by renouncing her superstitions.

As for the English government, I say that it is grounded upon Gods word, so
far forth as it concerns the state of the Clergy, instituted in the old
Testament, and confirmed in the New.

And concerning the government of the French Church, so much as concerns the
equality of Ministers, it has the like foundation in Gods word, namely in the
example of the Apostles, which may suffice to authorize both these forms of
estate, albeit in several times and places. None can deny but the Apostles
among them selves were equal as concerning authority, albeit there were an
order for their presedence. When the Apostles first planted the Church, the
same being small and in affliction, there were not as yet any other Bishops,
Priests, or Deacons but them selves: they were the Bishops and Deacons, and
together served the tables. Those men therefore whom God raises up to plant a
Church, can do no better then after the example of the Apostles, to bear them
selves in equal authority: for this cause have the French Ministers, planters
of the reformed Church in France usurped it, howbeit prouisionally: for it is
a matter auowed, that they hold their discipline but by provision, reserving
liberty to alter it according to the accurrences. But the equality that
rested among the Bishops in the primitive Church, did increase as the Churches
increased: and thereof proceeded the creation of Deacons, and afterward of
other Bishops and Priests: yet ceased not the Apostles equality in authority,
but they that were created had not like authority with the Apostles. But the
Apostles remained as sovereign Bishops, neither was there any greater then
they. Hereof do I infer, that in the state of a mighty and peaceable church,
as is the Church of England, or as the Church of France or such like might be,
if God should call them to reformation, the state of the Clergy ought to be
preserved: for equality would be hurtful to the state, and in time breed
confusion. But as the Apostles continued in this perfect equality, so long as
their new planted Church was small, so should equality be applied in the
planting of a Church, or so long as the Church continues small or under
persecution: yet may it also be admitted, as not repugnant to God word (since it
has taken place in the Church) in those places where already it is received,
rather then to innouate any thing. I say therefore, that even in the Apostles
time, the state of the Clergy increased as the Church increased. Neither was
the government under the bondage of Egypt, and during the peace of the land of
Canaan alike: for the Israelites had first Judges, and as their state
increased, they had Kings. God him self likewise first dwelt as a shepherd in
a Tabernacle built by Moses, but afterward as a king, in a house built by
Solomon. And the tree of life bears twelve fruicts, according to the twelve
seasons of the year, whereby we are taught, that such as have charge of the
Lords garden, must use the fruictes thereof according to their seasons. It is
also to be thought, that the Ministers of the Reformation, which planted
Reformation in France, had respect to their business, and to the work they
took in hand, when they brought in this equality, which was, to plant a
Church, and to begin after the manner of the Apostles, when they planted the
Church at Jerusalem: as also they meant not to reuerse the state of the
Clergy, either to submit it to their orders, whenever the Clergy or whole
state of France should happen to admit Reformation. But their purpose has
tended to overthrow superstition, and in the mean time to bear them selves
according to their simple equality, which in deed was the true mean to
Reform the Church, whereas had they meant both to abolish superstition, and to
reuerse the state of the Clergy, they should with one hand have reformed the
Church, and with the other have deformed the state. And they that presumed that
Reformation must needs subvert the state of the Clergy, conceived that
foreiudgement out of season, and without any sufficient cause, and their
foreiudgement has bred great calamities in France. Whereupon I infer* that
he which would take occasion, of the equality brought in into France, to
reuerse the estate of the Episcopal Clergy among the Reformed, shall greatly
wrong the cause of those, who therevnder have reformed France, and had never
that intent: as also they should resemble the dogs that would go into the
vineyard, but carry a yoke at their necks that keeps them out: for they
should carry with them the let, that should hinder them from compassing their
intents: for there is nothing that hinders from achiuing to perfection, but
it may be accomplished without prejudice to the state. Jesus Christ taught
perfection, yet spoke he never against the state, but always excepted it,
saying, that these things we must do, yet not leave the others undone, neither
can there be any good thing done with the overthrow of the state, but may more
commodiously be done without prejudice to the state. And Christ when they came
to tempt him, excepted the state, not only in Ecclesiastical causes, but also
in Civil, saying, Give unto Caesar that belongs to Caesar, and to God that
belongs to God: as also he would take no notice of Civil judgment, when he
was required to agree a man with his brother, teaching us by his example,
discretly to use circumspection in time and place. As also it were but a bad
consequent to say, there be abuses in the state, and therefore we must subvert
the state, but it were a good consequent to say, there be abuses in the state,
they must then be corrected, albeit without prejudice to the state. I say the
reason is not altogether like when there be superstitions contrary to
conscience: for then must we forsake them, and separate our selves therefro,
according to that which is spoken of the whore of Babylon: Come forth of her my
people, least you be made partakers of her wounds and plagues.

Our Ministers have usurped their equality prouisionally, after the example of
the first state of the Apostolic Church, not to intrude them selves to
establish a government in a kingdom: for it was not Aaron that built the
Tabernacle, but Moses, neither was it the high Priest that built the Temple,
but Solomon: no it was not Aaron that ordained the Ecclesiastical government
even in Israel, but Moses, neither belongs it to the pastors, to ordeine
Ecclesiastical government, but to Princes. The pastors duty is to cause it
to be observed and instruct the consciences: and also the Princes might do well
to cause that which God has established to be observed.

No man can reprove the Recabites for their austere life, in that they would
not use either wine or houses, but were content to drink water and to dwell in
tents or tabernacles: but had they condemned all that use wine or houses, then
had them selves been condemnable. Even so man can condemn the French Ministers
for being content with their equality and with little. But if they should
condemn all that use Ecclesiastical dignities and Church goods, them selves
should therein be condemnable, neither do they condemn them. S. Paul spared
the Church and labored with his hands, yet did he not condemn those that used
the Church goods which he spared, but showed that that which he did was upon
favor, not of duty, as acknowledging the Churches to be poor, eue^ so
likewise may a man forsake a benefice offered him, yea and admonish others to
do the like, but he may not compel any.

Other matter do I not require, but that we may be more and more circumspect,
as joining discretion with zeal. Zeal is a goodly matter, and it is good to
vow the heart unto God: but all sacrifice must be seasoned with salt, and this
sacrifice of our hearty zeal and voluntary oblation must be seasoned with the
salt of wisdom and circumspection.

Hitherto have I spoken only of simple ceremonies, to show that they are no
cause of our separation from the Pope, because they be of them selves
indifferent, or at the least tolerable, as not being forbidden by Gods word,
so long as we attribute no virtue of holiness unto them. For the reasons that
moved the Apostles so sore to beat down the ceremonies of the law, was
because the people did ground their righteousness and merit of works
thereupon, yet can not we condemn the Reformed that use any ceremonies,
neither the French Ministers, because they use none. The French Ministers do
reject them, because they will not retain any token of the ancient Popish
superstitions, whereas others have still kept some, because they will not seem
to innouate too much: either part have their diverse considerations, yet neither
contrary nor wicked. But this I may say, that in these things the greatest
simplicity is best, but this simplicity may be moderated having respect to
such as we are to deal with, neither does circumspection any whit hurt at all.
And I commend our French Ministers, for that albeit they use none, yet they
teach them to be things tolerable. For in deed they are such, as no man
should be bound unto, except upon the Princes pleasure, who is not to be
disobeyed or striuen withal, for matters of them selves tolerable: for the
which we ought not to condemn one an other, as we prove by the Apostles
words, where he speaks of things sacrificed to Idols, for the which he will
not that we should condemn, but bear one with an other: and with all have a
respect to the consciences of the weak: For if for the food that enters into
the body, having been sacrificed to heathen Idols, we may move no strife, much
more should we make none for apparel, which concerns only a gown or such
like, which have been usurped by such, as imagined by such superstitious habit
to serve God and Christ.

Now to the Reformed against whom the whole fury of the League is bent. 8
They are to suffer, yet need they not greatly to fear, for their
deliverance is at hand. And what should they fear? the world? it is a
vanquished monster that is overcome, says not Jesus Christ, Rejoice my little
flock, for I have overcome the world? Shall they then fear least the sclaue
of sclaues should overcome the Lord of Lords, and triumph over the king of
kings? Judge. 14.
If the Philistines assail us, we have in heaven a mighty and valiant Sampson
that will deliver his people, yea such a one as is not subject to the deceit of
a wench. Shall we then fear a wench, whom we see busy about spinning of
lines, whereof to make a League, to bind our Sa^psons hands and feet with a
thread of towe? League well thy League thou Romish Dalila, and press down thy
knots while our Sampson sleeps, heap League upon League, and cord upon
cord, that he escape not, for thou must not hope to pull of the hair of our
Nazarite, whom thou can not reach. Make all safe while he sleeps, for if he
begin to wake and so break thy bonds, and vnleague thy League, thou shall see
thy Philistines take their carrier after a strange manner. But let us look upon
the state of the Church heretofore, thereby to be taught hereafter. The
Israeliticall Church began by shepherds, that were captives in Egypt, and came
thence triumphantly having Princes for their Judges, and afterward Kings that
subdued their neighbors. The Christian Church began by the imagined son of a
Carpenter, and grew forward by the poor Apostles, of whom the best qualified
were fishers, who with one hand fished for fish, and with the other for men.
The Romain Emperors their enemies persecuted them, so did also the Apostates,
yet was the Galilean at the last feign to overcome. And the Reformed Church
began by poor men, whom a merchant of Lions fed, administering unto them both
bodily and spiritual food. They have been persecuted, yet have they still
increased, so as at this day there be Kings and Princes, that account them
selves honored by this profession, and we see Pharao the persecuter of Gods
people perished in their deliverance. The kingdom also of Babylon, which had
been the mightiest Empire of the world, and of largest continuance, having
persecuted the Church, is come to an end under the delivery of Gods people by
Cirus. And even so also the Popes kingdom, who has afflicted the faithful,
shall shortly cease by the delivery of the Reformed. True it is that the Pope
is not so persuaded, but imagines the contrary, because that Daniell teaches
that Antechristes kingdom must continue until the day of judgment, and the
Pope takes this judgment to be the end of the world. But Daniell speaks of
the judgment of Babylon, which also is the judgment of Antichrist, and to
that are we come, which began by the blood of the Martirs, and shall end by the
ruin of the Papacy, and of all the kingdoms that shall oppose them selves
against Christ, which shall be broken as a glass under an iron scepter.
Hitherto it has seemed, that to reign, it needed but to turn the back to
Christ: But all things have their time and their course, and now is the periode
come, and the case altered, and every kingdom must perish that shall oppose it
self against Christ's kingdom. Hitherto the daughter of Babell has made the
daughter of Sion to drink of the cup of affliction, but hereafter her self
shall drink the dregs thereof. For the Lord shall take the cup of his wrath out
of the hands of the daughter of Sion, and make Babylon dronken therewith.

Moreover I say, tht since God has given us a King, we must love and honor him:
and speak of him wisely and modestly, because he is our superior, and our
sovereign, we owe him all honor and duty. We know how Manasses afflicted the
people that defended the purity of Gods word, 2. Paralip. 33.
him self maintaining Idolatry, yet did God so teach his heart, that through
a goodly conversion he glorified God: neither is Gods power or mercy less now
then it was then. The hearts of kings are in his hands, and he is able to turn
the heart of our King, yea God can make of a heart of Manasses persecuting the
Church, 2. King. 18. 4.
the heart of an Ezechias or a Josias, Reforming the Church: and he can do us
more good in one day, 2. King. 23.
then hitherto he has done us harm. Also we must not only have a respect to
our King, in yielding honor to whom honor belongs, Romans 13. 7.
fear to whom fear, and tribute to who^ tribute, but we must also bear our
selves modestly toward all others, yea albeit they be our adversaries, as
knowing that they have as it were some pretense to think evil of us, by
reason of such false reports, as have been made them. For the devil never
wants sclaunders, neither publishers of the same: but we following our Lords
instructions, must do good to our enemies, Mat. 12. 44
and not return one reproach in exchange for an other: Romans 12. 17
yea we must overcome their evil with our goodness; and their curses with our
good speeches, 1. Cor. 4. 12.
by speaking well of them and evil of none, 1. Pet. 3. 9.
rather covering their vices and imperfectio^s, Romans 12. 21.
if we know of any, Galat. 6. 3.
then casting the^ in the teeth with the same, for God requires not a vain,
light, harebrainde and rash people, but such as be wise, as by Moses he
teaches: which wisdom he lays us down in his word, the beginning whereof
is the fear of God, the end is charity, and the foundation is Gods word, the
building is faith, and the crown of the work is glory everlasting. But each
glory has his triumph proceeding of some victory, and the victory of faith is
the victory over the world: howbeit our faith must be armed with discretion,
modesty, and patience: for by such weapons shall we obtain more victories
then by the sword: neither is the victory over the heart gotten by the sword,
well may it be won by modesty. By modesty may the hearts of the mighty be
won to do us good, or at the least to do us less harm then they would.
Besides if ye behave your selves according to that wisdom, which God requires
of his people, you shall no more but open your hands, and you shall find them
replenished with Gods blessings. Open your mouth says the Psalmist, Psalm. 81.
and it shall be filled with meat: God will stir you up such friends, as you
have not sought: He will make you to eat the fruictes, which you have neither
planted nor sown: and he will give you the victory, when you do but look on.
I would not wish you to defend Religion with the sword, which should be
defended with spiritual weapons: but in deed it is one thing to defend
Religion, and an other to defend the people that maintain Religion. For
Religion must be defended with the sword of the word, but as for Religious
people, God has always in store a David to defend the^ with the sword, Apoc.
12.
when soever need shall require: you know that Michaell and his angels, do
fight for us against the Dragon and his angels: what shall we then fear? Let
us fear God, and we shall be freed from the fear of the world: let us be wise
and circumspect in our deliberations, modest in our actions, and sober in our
discourses: let us repose our confidence in God, and endeavor to do well, so
will God be upon our side and so take our parts, as nothing shall be able to
hurt us.

The difference between the Catholics and the Reformed has seemed greater
then it is, 9
because the world has imagined that some part of the controversy consisted
in the state, yea there are some that have supposed, that simple abuses and
ceremonies only were in part cause of the schism: but now may we easily
perceive by the reasons hitherto deducted, that there remains no farther
difference but the superstition, that is to say, 1. Cor. 10.
for the Idols which S. Paul terms devils, and for the superstitious
traditions, 1. Tim. 4.
which he calls the doctrine of devils, so that such as hereafter shall fight
against us, can not fight but for devils, which are the Dragon and his Angels,
whereas we do fight for the contrary part, which is the part of Michael and his
Angels, Apoc. 12.
neither fight we in doubtful hope: for we know that our Michaell who is the
King of Kings, Apoc. 17. 14.
shall overcome the ten horns of the Beast, which are the confederates in the
League. Now therefore let the Catholques look to their business, to wit,
whether they will defend the devils cause: for whatsoever shift they find, yet
can they not escape, but S. Paul will convince them, in proof that
superstitions are the cup of devils. To new occurrences, we must have new
deliberations. They are therefore now to deliberate upon the argument which we
propound. I do here summon them to the throne of God the creator of all things,
and of Jesus Christ the redeemer of his people, to look well to their doings,
for it is no small matter that they have in hand: I wash my hands before God,
that if any evil happen them, it shall from henceforth be through their own
fault: let them consider whether they will fight for the doctrine of devils:
for there is if they mark it, no question but of that point, and so much the
better both for them and us: but if they obstinately will support the cause of
devils, so much the worse for them, and they shall find a punisher, and yet
shall we nevertheless be relieved. If they will not see or hear the just
exhortation made unto them, their contumacie also will condemn them. For
contumacie is imputed to the wrongfulnesse of the cause, and makes the
contumaxe guilty of the crime whereof he is accused. I sum, howsoever it be,
our cause can not but be helped, because it refers it self to trial, and
that God has remitted it to such a pass, that every way it is just, and the
equity thereof is clear and evident: and our adversaries cause is manifestly
convicted. Moreover it may be the Catholics at the first blush, will think
these to be but vain shapes, and so perhaps will not comprehend how profitable
our advise may be to the King, to the Clergy, and to the Commons, and yet shall
not our advise be altogether unprofitable. If a man that were to pass over a
river, which he had heard to be wadeable, and yet upon the shore should find
one that knew it better, who should warn him of the contrary, if yet
notwithstanding such advertisement, he would needs try, would you therefore
take the advertisement to have been utterly unprofitable? No, for had not the
advertisement been given, he might have adventured, and waded so far, that he
could not recover: for the advertisement will procure him to swim between
hope and fear, and to look better to the danger, the which as he shall find
too great, he will turn back before he go too deep: and so experience shall
make them know the commodity of this advise, which otherwise were ignorant,
and by discourse could not have known it. But let them proceed, the success
of matters shall instruct them, when they shall see their purposes have none
other issue then this river that is vnwadeable, yea a bottomless gulphe: and
when they shall have sought in vain for the issue of these things and shall not
find it, they will reclaim them selves, and come to that reason which we show
them. If there be a blind man in the midst of a great hall, and some one will
direct him out at the door, it may be he will not follow him, that offreth him
self to guide him, but leaving him, will feel along the wall, which also may
conduct him, and so go groping till he come to the door. But experience is a
marvelous matter, which teaches the harebrained by effect, that which they
could never comprehend by discourse. It is said, that none are more deaf, then
they that will not hear, and I say that none are worse blind, then they that
will not see reason, and yet is experience their guide and wall, all along the
which, as it were groping, they may sometimes get forth of those places, where
they find them selves enclosed: and thus does experience serve for a sound, to
sound the depth of the affairs of this world, for a wall, to conduct such as
can not go but by groping. Let us therefore let our enemies pass on, and let
us suffer them to make trial of their wisdoms: for in the end they shall find
by experience, that there is no other issue, but the same which we do show
them. But as for us, let us repose our confidence in God, and enforce our
selves to do well, and well will come to us.

I say therefore, that we are greatly to rejoice, 10
seeing our deliverance at hand, according to the saying of our Lord Jesus
Christ, When you shall see these things come to pass, rejoice, for your
deliverance is at hand: For all the signs and tokens that should go before the
fall of Babylon, are already come to pass. First, the 1260. years of the
woman environed with the Sun, are accomplished, for it is 1260. years since
the superstitions of the holy Cross of Jerusalem, and the Relics of Saints
began, and are the most ancient, which have retained the woman in the
wilderness 1260. years, so as there wants no more but her delivery through
the battle of Michaell against the Dragon. Apoc. 12.
As also we see the accomplishment of that which is said, Woe be to you, ye
inhabitants of the earth, for Satan is come down among you in great fury,
because he has but a short time. Now does Satan lay open all his fury, for he
knows his time to be short, much like as when the unclean spirits were to
depart the bodies of the possessed, they rent them, as Satan at this day
renteth the world through the League. Likewise we see the saying that the
Beasts mortal wound was healed, Apoc. 13. 3.
fulfilled, in that the Papacy having been shaken and ready to fall, has
since been reestablished. Moreover we see that come to pass, that is written
of the ten horns of the Beast, Apoc. 17.
that should make war against the Lamb, for it is said, that these ten
horns are ten kings, which at once shall take counsel with the Beast to war
upon the Lamb, and we see the like according to this description, come to
pass in the League, in case we understand that in the holy scripture under the
name of king, is meant every sovereign prince. And it is most certain, that
there are ten sovereign Princes that at once took counsel with the Beast,
which is the Papacy, to war against Christ, that is, against his Reformed
members: namely those Princes that did unite them selves together under the
League, only it rests that we see them overcome, as shortly they shall be,
that is to say, part of them, as it is said, that the Lamb shall overcome
them, and that in the rest shall be accomplished that that is said, that they
shall hate the Beast, and yield him naked and desolate, that is, that the
League or some part thereof, shall bend them selves against the Pope, and the
Pope shall have no greater enemies the^ the Leaguers, who shall depart from the
Pope, and bind the^ selves to the Lamb the Lord of Lords, to overthrow the
slave of slaves, and it is supposed that the French Clergy may grow to that
pass, yea and even the Gentlemen Leaguers, if once they begin to smell out the
Popes intent, to be prejudicial to the Crown and state of France: neither is
that altogether to be contemned which sundry have foretold concerning the year
1588. that it should be a year of marueiles. For yet remain some Reuolutions
depending thereof, neither is every Revolution accomplished one self year:
and this marvelous year has not yet laid open all her merchandise, but will
shortly: much less is it to any purpose to say, that there is no likelihood of
these matters, for we know that the great whore of Rome shall say: I sit a
Queen and am no widow, neither shall I see any mourning, then shall come upon
her nakedness and widowhood, with weeping, mourning and sorrow. Howbeit if any
shall object, that the faction of the Reformed is to weak to bring this to
pass, I answer with the Revelation, that God her Judge is mighty. To be
brief, let men say and think what they please, but I do well know that we are
in a marvelous periode and great Catastrophe, at the point to see a strange
alteration. For it is most certain that Babylon shall fall, and that shortly
and with a sodein fall, and it can not fall but with great murmr. It shall be a
wonderful doom, when by the effects, we shall hear the voice of the master
of the house and king at his return, as it were from a long journey, saying,
Bring unto me these my enemies, that would not that I should reign over them,
and slay them before my face.

I promised to make the readers a banquet, and they may complain that it is a
sclender banquet, where there is nothing but fruict and no flesh, but they must
remember that I promised them nothing but fruictes, as also it is but a taste
for them, until the banquet of the Lamb, wherein there shall be such and so
great ple^tie of flesh, that the very fowls of the air shall have enough, yea
so much as even to tread upon the flesh of kings, and of great and mighty men,
for the very fowls are also invited to the banquet of the Lamb there to be
satisfied with the flesh of Kings, Apoc. 19. 17.
Princes and mighty persons. Thus do Gods enemies enter great Leagues, to the
end to make the crows a feast of their carkases. Where our Lord says, Rejoice
for your deliverance is at hand, by that deliverance, I mean the
deliverance whereby we be delivered from the tyranny of Babylon through her
sodein fall, wherein it shall be said, restore unto her double according to her
works: for this restitution is not yet made, but I look for it very shortly.
And when this old Babell shall fall, new Jerusalem shall be built, even the
same Babell that says, I sit a Queen, and am no widow, neither shall I see
any mourning: yet shall she find her self a widow, naked, and in heaviness:
but the new Jerusalem shall be decked up and adorned as a Nymph to her spouse.
Therein shall we no longer be subject to the Babylonian yoke of Canons and
traditions full of confusion, but to the government of new Jerusalem, which is
as S. Paul calls it, the government of Israel. Let therefore the
Paranimphes adorn the spouse, and deck her up in her goodliest ornaments,
that she may be worthily presented to her bridgrome: let the Stewards labor to
become such, as may yield a good account of their administration: and let the
Virgins prepare their lamps, as knowing the bridegromes coming to be at
hand, and blessed shall those wise Virgins be, that may enter with the
bridegroom to be partakers of the fruictes and food, brought forth at the
banquet of the Lamb.

AN ADDITION CONTAINING A Discourse upon the changing of the affairs by the
death of the Duke of Guise.
IT is full twelve years and more since that discoursing upon the state of
matters, and the bringing in of superstition by Helene the mother of
Constantine the Great, I knew we should shortly see the end thereof through
the destruction of Babylon, accompanied with a triumphant delivery of the
Church, triumphing at full over the Beast mentioned in the Revelation. This
knowledge was pricked forward, with a desire to stand in some stead, whereupon
I suddenly purposed to make a search throughout Gods word, for matter
convenient thereto. And for as much as the knowledge of humane sciences was not
utterly unprofitable, I determined to seize upon an Encyclopedie. This purpose
have I continued these twelve years, with great labor and small help,
neither could I be drawn therefro by mine own particular affairs, as
preferring the study of Divinity, before all other things: as also Gods word
is my heart, life, joy, pleasure, peace and contentation, my delight, and unto
me all in all. Then began I to peruse Gods laws more exactly then as yet I had
done, and to distinguish them into a law simple figurative, and figurative
Ceremonial: then into a law of Ecclesiastical Policy, and Civil Policy:
thirdly into a Moral law, and an Euangelicke Moral, which teaches that
perfection whereat we ought to shoot, and whereof the natural man is
incapable. These be six kinds of law, after all which, there is particularly a
seventh, whereby the spirit of God gives to some, albeit to few the things
that he will bring to pass in sundry ages, as he did the coming of the
Messiah unto Simeon. Neither would I confound the simple figures with the
ceremonies, albeit the ceremonies be figures, and most of the simple figures be
histories, having relation to some end out of the history, yet following the
same, as also do the ceremonies. As also I would not confound Ecclesiastical
government with the ceremony, no more then with Civil government.

Conferring therefore the Ecclesiastical Mosaical government with the
Euangelical, laying sundry pieces into one self work, I found that the
government of the New Testament did no whit abrogate the Old. By the same
means also I came to understand, that we did not so far differ from the
Catholics; as before I supposed, as thinking that we had been in strife both
for the estate and superstitions, and that the troublesomnesse of these two
points, which served for a bad surmise, to retain the world in superstition,
might be taken away.

Herupon I conferred with some ministers of the Reformation, who liked of this
purpose, also with some of the Catholic Clergy, who likewise thought it to
be good, so as I was greatly confirmed, in hope to see some good atonement
come thereof. Then having laid my matters in steep, I went to Bourges in
Berry, where the wars soon after surprised me: so as I found my retraite
into Germany; to be more safe then into the Low Countries. There composed I a
treatise, which I communicated with sundry notable persons, both Divines,
Lawyers, and men of estate, who all liked of my purpose: nevertheless I could
not find opportunity there to publish it: afterward coming into England I
joined this my first purpose with the argument of an Apology, so of one stone
to make two castes: and composed this former Treatise, which was in good time
finished aabout the spring and ascension of the sun, which was about the time
of the Duke of Guises death.

My intent was to frustrate Achitophels counsel, that is, to scatter and
break the purposes both of the Pope and the League. Also my book was no
sooner done, but at the same instant, God began to effect my propounded
purpose: whereupon I had a more fair path and free course for my book. Which
favor of Almighty God, can not be but a good foreiudgement for the rest of
the success thereof. For it as a goodly matter, when a man finds himself a
fellow labourer with God, and that God secondeth his purposes with the effects
and success of matters. Moreover, I will boldly say, that we may now assuredly
affirm, that Babylon is fallen that is to say, that the Papacy is
overthrown, and that there is no greater certainty of the Duke G^ises death,
then of the destruction of the Papacy: for the dissipation of the League, is
the subversion of the Pope, and the League is now overthrown both by sea and
by land. In the pursuit of the League the Duke of Guises greatest oversight was
in that he dalied with the king, after him self had offended him at Paris. And
now has the king as much offended the Pope: The king can therefore no longer
trust him, for he will with one eye laugh upon him, and with the other betray
him. God preserve us from Judas Iscariotes kiss. The Serpent that lurketh in
the grass is dangerous, for we feel her before we see her, neither do we
perceive her, but by the wound that she has made in us. Thus may the Pope be
dismembered: Spain lies too far from the rest of the dependances of the
Papacy, to be able to join or succor them: besides that it is weak of
blood: The king of Spain shall find enough of the Defensive, albeit he enter
not into the offensive: The Prince of Parma can not do much for the League, he
acquits him self well if he keep his own, which he has gotten by force, and
roughness, and by money, neither is he beloved of the inhabitants of the
country, who will easily revolt, as reaping but small contentment at his
hands, and being but badly affected toward him. Many Italian Princes and
Lordships also do hold of the Pope in Fee, that had rather be their own men
then an other man's, and therefore will not fail to take occasion if it be
offered, and would soon condescend to a Counterleague, so as if any man would
but renew the path which Charles of Bourbon first traced out, these would soon
enlarge it, and upon a necessity find me^ enough to share in the booty, by
reason of the great wealth that Rome has long gathered together, so did Darius
riches draw his enemies to his destruction.

Of the King we may with the old Poet say.

Vnus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem,
Non ponebat enim rumores ante salutem.
For he has suffered them to speak that account his wisdom timorousness,
and suffering those to speak, has done better then to have spoken. He has
been wise enough to bring his purposes to their point and period, with great
dexterity, and has wisely helped him self with the Proverb, He that can not
dissemble can not reign. To be brief, he has been able enough to overcome the
League, for the death of the Duke of Guise is the victory over the League, to
which victory we may also add an other, that is that he has overcome many a
man's hope. It is nothing for Hanniball to know how to overcome, if he know not
how to use his victory: But I hope the king will crown this his good beginning
with a better prosecution: for in these purposes it is requisite to use great
circumspection, discretion and moderation, and that the king have honest and
faithful men about him. For more are the Popes secret driftes to be feared,
then the open forces of the League. And since the king is shipped in this action,
he can not but sail on while the wind blows. These three things were
necessary, to abandone the Papacy: to strengthen him self with the Clergy:
and by reunion of his subjects to reunite his forces. There is nothing more
weak then the Papacy, yet is it strong, if it be strengthened with the
Clergy: but if the Clergy be separated from the Pope, he is utterly
overthrown: if we abandon him, he can not resist. He can do no hurt to those
that forsake him, but to those that take part with him. Also albeit the Clergy
were of the League, yet does it not follow that the king should impute unto
them the conspiracy of the League: for the principal heads thereof, did
still persuade the rest, that the king had intelligence with them, neither did
it fully appear to the contrary, but by the Duke of Guises death. Also it is
not good for a master to see all that his servant do, but he must see some
part and pass over the rest. And clemency is very requisite in a king.

I would wish the king not only to maintain the state of the Clergy, but also
to relieve them from the exactions of the League: and I would wish the Clergy
to provide for the schism by abolishing all superstition, and surely the
sooner the better, for ending of the calamities of this war: for they may see
that a great part of the burden lights upon their backs, which to remedy,
the first point were to quench the schism, to the end the king might reunite
his forces to withstand the League: and that were the surest way for their
estate, which still tottereth until there be such a Reformation as may no whit
prejudice the state, neither shall they ever find fitter occasion then now,
while the king stands in need of their amity, that the Clergy may be his
shield against the Pope and the League. Besides that, our king is a wise and
discret Prince, who will make no innovation in his state: besides that in all
events, if once there were a Reformation of superstitions made, they might more
easily maintain their estate only, then both their estate and the
superstitions together: considering that their estate is from God, and
instituted by Gods laws, whereas the superstitions are of devils, as Saint
Paul teaches, to whom God is an enemy, and it can not be but God will destroy
them, and that can no worldly man prevent: yet may we provide for the estate.
Let us look that we resist not God, lest he continue his chastisements by
wars: but let us appease his wrath by framing our selves after our duty, so
will God convert our calamities into felicity, and doubtful war into an
assured peace. I pray you are not an infinite number of living Images of Gods
making, who by these wars are oppressed, of more importance then a few dead
Idols, hewn out by caruers of Images, which by the Catholic Romish Religion,
are maintained in temples and Churches? Let us take care for Gods Images.

The last year at the Easter fair at Francfort, I caused to be printed a
Latin Treatise of the day of judgment, or of the seaue^ general judgments,
wherein I proved seven general judgments of God, whereof five are already
past, and the sixth or last saving one, is the judgment of Babylon, whose
principal period was in the year 1588. which many have noted as a year of
maruels: and the last is to come in the end of the world. I said, that in that
judgment the Papacy should come to ruin: neither was it any appearance that
caused me so to say, every thing seemed to premize the contrary. The League
swelled up in France, but especially in Spain: every man looked after great
effects: there was no speech but of great preparations and provisions for
wars, made both in Spain and in the Low countries. There was no discourse,
but of the wonderful effects of the Spanish Navy, joined with the Prince of
Parmaes power. There was great preparation in Flanders of sadles and bridles
for the English geldings. I said also, when the whore of Rome shall say, I sit a
Queen, and am no widow, neither shall I see any sorrow, then shall there fall
upon her widowhood, weeping and nakedness. For we know, that the Beast must be
wounded to death, and then recovered again, which I saw accomplished: as also
the same that is spoken of the ten horns of the beast, that took counsel
together, is fulfilled in the counsel of the League. Besides that, seeing Satan
work his last endeavor to overthrow the party of the Lamb, I doubted not but
Jesus Christ would likewise work his, for our delivery. I wist not that the
League should be overcome by sea, or that the King should withstand it, as he
has done: yet now do I see the effects succeed according to my discourse and
saying in my Treatise. In the Apologeticall Treatise going before, I also said,
that the League would undoubtedly break, yet knew I not that the Duke of
Guise should be slain: howbeit thereby I see my saying come to pass, before
it be brought to light. And now do I not fear to say, that the Papacy shall
fall, yea even with a marvelous and sudden fall. The death thereof will be
known in a manner as soon as the sickness. I was not daunted at the great
preparations of the League, neither ceased I in my Treatise to publish the same
to be the revolution of the Papal fall. For I discoursed thus. Cirus wrought
great matters with small power, but that came to pass because the same was the
revolution of the Babylonian Empire, and the accomplishment of the 70. years
of the captivity of Judah. Alexander the Great vanquished the power of Darius,
which was far greater then his: but it was in the time of the period of the
Persian Empire. Julius Caesar wrought wonderful exploits: but in the same
season wherein God was preparing the world, that the Messiah might be borne
under the Roman Monarchy. Since therefore the Pope and king of Spain, made
all these warlicke provisions to the end to establish the Papacy, in the same
season wherein it should be rooted up, I concluded, that their endeavors should
be in vain: and that now the time of superstitions, which have detained the
woman in the wilderness, being at an end, Babylon can no longer continue. And
God who has the hearts of kings in his hand, will stir up some one that shall
destroy it: yea that albeit no king would take that in hand, yet that it is in
Gods power, to make some under bra^ch to spring up in one night at the root of
the tree, that may be able to prescribe law to the tree, from out of whose
root it may be sprung. Howbeit if it be lawful to speak by conjecture, I
will say, that the name of Henry seems fatal to the Papacy: for Henry the
8. in England gave the Pope a marvelous check, and now in France we see an
other Henry give him an other check, after this let him beware the Mate.

The order of the League at Paris is a good order, where porters and day
laborers are in greater credit then the Presidents. It seems that Spain
means by her proctors to attempt somewhat against France: but she were not
best. Spain has more need to fear then to hope, and to keep her self,
then to enterprise against others. She is but weak of walls and blood, and
has no strength but in pense and Miluedies, and those are also well shronke
and wasted, through the continual wars in Flanders, Hannibal supposed that
for the pinching of Rome, he needed not go to seek her out of Italy. I think
if the Spaniard were well tickled in his own country, it would trouble him
shrewdly, and that were the surest succor that might be ministered to the Low
countries. But especially it were requisite to carry thither some store of New
Testaments, and Bibles in Spanish, with other small Treatises against
superstition. For Gods word is a good seed, which can not but fructify when
once it is planted and has taken root in a place, neither will it easily be
plucked up again. But in matters of estate I would wish circumspection, and
with moderation and modesty to win men's hearts, rather then to stir them up
with vanity, idle speech, rashness and insolency: for such things do rather
destroy then edify.

The League has sharpened it self to cut of the Huguenots, but the edge is well
broken by the Duke of Guises death. These be two bad prognosticatio^s for the
good success of the League, that is, the scattering of the Navy, and the
death of Guise: as also they be good examples to teach subjects to attempt
nothing against the state of their King: for the Majesty of a king is a sacred
matter, and it is dangerous attempting any thing there against. When a man has
committed a fault, the best way is to reclame himself by making amends, rather
then obstinatly to cast away him self therein. And therefore the Duke of Neuers,
and the Lord of Antragues dealt well and wisely in taking the kings part as also
the King did well and wisely in taking all that they had done under the League
which return to him, as not done at all.

If a man will be wicked, he must execute his business cunningly, or not
meddle at all, otherwise he does injury to his occupation. Even so if they
would needs enterprise the League, they should have begun by seazing upon the
Kings person, and seeing they could not compass that, they should have
attempted nothing. But what? every one has his time: and he that must make a
bad end, must labor to do evil, for evil never comes of well doing: for
it is an excellent thing, to do well to have well: to live well, to die well:
and to begin well, to end well, since virtue only is to be rewarded with honor.

It is not impossible for a conspiracy against a King to take effect: but
linger it never so little it is hard to bring it to pass. And the League has
lingered too long in France to be able to attain any good success. It is said
that the Portingall mares do conceive of the wind: even so was the League
conceived, but that which is bred of wind, shall return into wind and smoke,
Every thing shall return to his first original, and so the beast that came out
of the bottomless pit shall return to perdition: yet will she make some
defense, set a good face on a bad game, and with her only countenance seek to
terrify the King and his subjects: but what? such a dog barketh, that
makes her soul to quake in her belly. She will wast of her self, she will breed
brauls, quarrels and discontentme^ts. Where there is no lawful head every man
will be Master, and when by reason of co^petitors they may not, they grow to
coffeehouse: also not seeing any sufficient recompense presently, or any
future hope, will know that without any net they have snared themselves in too
great a Labyrinth, and therefore will retire before they be deeper in, and the
wiser sort will be the first that will do so. If I would hazard my self for
the purchase of a hope, truly it should be both an honorable and a certain
hope: but it is not great wisdom to hazard both life and goods upon a
doubtful hope, full of dishonor and infamy. If therefore in this action there
were no more in effect, but the Kings demo^stration by the death of the Duke of
Guise, that he holds the League for a conspiracy, yet cannot the end be
honorable, and it is too great a hazard to meddle against a King.

There is without comparison, more honor and safety on the Kings side, then
in taking part with the League: for albeit the League should overcome, yet can
she reproach nothing to those that served their Prince: whereas they that stand
with the League against the king, can no way shun great reproach, besides the
danger. Yet will I excuse such as following the Duke of Neuers example, shall
return to the king, for peradventure they knew not the drifts of the League,
when they embraced it, and when a man is once in, he can not so soon resolve
how to get out again. Every nouelty delights the French, but after some
taste, they are soon glutted, and the French man remembers him self. Even so
was the League embraced as a novelty, but at length men will grow weary and
give it over. I will not forget one pretty part that the League played with the
Lord of Boneide Governor of Thoul. For he upon great goodwill to the Duke of
Guise yielded him the town, but he was so dispossessed of his government, and
in recompense the Duke of Guise gave him the government of a paltry Castle. It
was pity the Lord of Moncassin did not the like, for so might he likewise have
had the custody of some baggage cabin, in stead of the Citadel of Mets: but he
was wiser and trustier then so.

Surely the League will yet make some a do, but we shall perceive the vain
endeavors thereof. Being armed with the Kings favor, it could do nothing
against the Reformed only, how then can it now continue having both parts
against it? After some gorgeous entry, it will return us some lean and
pitiful issue, and the good shall have the vpperhand: for God is the protector
of the righteous man's cause. Confidering the Duke of Guises death, it can not
be but there will be perpetual enimitie between the houses of France and of
Guise: and how good a face soever the Pope set on the matter, yet is he no
less offended, as being chief of the League, and therefore I dare auowe, that
the King and France can not be both friends to the Pope and enemies to the
League. All these do seek by secret means to attempt against the Kings
person, and to annoy the state of France. Neither can the King better provide
here against, then by aduauncing the house of Bourbon, especially the king of
Navarre, a Prince well borne, who will never abandon his fidelity and due
obedience to the King, as also he is a valiant Prince, and one to whom the
house of Guise bears no less malice, then to the King him self. Besides, if
the said King of Navarre were dead, they would the more boldly attempt against
the kings person, whereas while he is in credit, they shall have the less
opportunity so to do. And had the League prevailed in France, it might through
the Popes favor, have shut up the king into some Monastery, which the king of
Navarre neither will nor can do: neither is there like fidelity as in the
Huguenots. For rather will they take then do harm.

FINIS.

