THE Countess of Pembrokes Emanuel.

Containing the Nativity, Passion, Burial, and Resurrection of Christ:
together with certain Psalms of David. All in English Hexameters.

By ABRAHAM FRANCE.

Imprinted at London, for William Ponsonby, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at
the sign of the Bishops head.

1591.



To the right excellent and most Honorable Lady, the Lady Mary, Countess of
Pembroke.
MAry the best Mother sends her best Babe to a Mary:
Lord to a Ladies sight, and Christ to a Christian hearing.
Your Honors most affectionate. Abraham France.

The Countess of Pembrokes Emanuel.
The Nativity of Christ, in ryming Hexameters.
Christ euer-lyuing, once dying, only triumpher
Over death by death; Christ Jesus mighty redeemer
Of forelorne mankind, which led captyuyty captive,
And made thraldom thrall; whose grace and mercy defensive
Mercyles and graceles men saved; Christ lively reuiuer
Of sowles oppressed with sin; Christ lovely reporter
Of good-spell Gospel, Mayds son, celestial offspring,
Emanuel, Man-god, Messyas, ever abounding
With pity perpetual, with pure love, charity lively,
This Christ shall be my song, and my meditation only,
O everlasting aeternall, euer-abyding,
Euer-lyuing Lord: O life, and stil-pity-taking,
Stil-quicknyng Spyrite, which causedst God to be manly,
That true-God true-man might so cause man to be godly;
Grant me a sounding voice to recount these funeral horrors,
Which made us t'enioy those sweet celestial harbors.
And thou Babe stil-borne, borne always from the beginning,
Whose sweet birth in skies causd Angels for to be singing;
Look, sweet Babe, from above, lend gracius ears to my prayers,
So shall these my lips, this mouth, this tongue, be thy praysers.
When noe Sun gave light, noe Moon distinctly apeared,
And noe twinkling stars this lightsom Olympus adorned,
When noe world was made; then that most mighty Iehoua,
That king omnipotent, that Lord and only Monarcha
Himself did meditate, enjoyed his glorius essence,
Glorius, aeternall, unspeakable, infynit essence:
Lived and loved himself, himself, felicity matchles,
All through all, chief good, chief bliss, perfection endless.
But the most good God, this simple Trinity blessed,
This most loving Lord, this three-fould Unity sacred,
Would have this goodness manifest, this bounty declared,
This love expressed this wondrous mercy revealed.
In time convenient therefore this world he created,
And it, a large Theater to behold his glory, appointed.
Which when he had with store of treasures richly replenisht,
And with abundant grace causd every part to be furnished;
Man was made at length; Adam was lastly created,
Last woork, not least woork; Adam was dayntily framed,
Most perfect creature, and like to the mighty Creator,
Good, wise, immortal, of mankind only beginner.
But proud ambition, but Serpent craftily cloaking
With cursed bitter-sweete his cankred poison abounding,
Adam dispossessed of pleasant beautiful harbors,
Adams heart possessed with most unspeakable horrors:
Man was mard at length, Adam was fowly defaced,
Last woork, and lost woork, Adam was filthily fowled,
Most cursed creature, unlike to the mighty creator,
Bad, foolish, mortal, of mankind only the murdrer.
Yet that greatest God, pitying this fall of a sinner,
His manyfold mercies did again most freely remember:
Gave new grace to the world, and caused his only begotten,
Only beloved son to be sent us down fro the heaven:
Here to receive our flesh, and here with thorns to be crowned,
Here to be mocked, to be whipped, and here at last to be murdered:
Murdered for mankind, to appease Gods infinite anger,
Guyltles for guylefull, man synles, for man a sinner.
And now that good time; that joyful day was aproaching,
Which by the living Lord was appointed from the beginning:
There was a man which came from Dauyds progeny noble,
Called just Joseph, but dwelt in a place very simple,
Nazzareth it was nam'de: himself had lately betroathed
That most spotles spowse, that Maiden Mary renowned:
Who to be Christ's mother was a chosen vessel appointed,
And by an Angels voice from God thus friendly saluted;
Hayle, o sacred Nymph, of woemens company greatest,
Blessed with abundant grace, to the blessed Trynity dearest.
At these wondrous words this may de was somewhat abashed,
And did marvel much, by an Angel strangely saluted.
Which when Gabriel once perceived, he myldly replied,
Fear not blessed Mary, believe and stand not amassed:
Blessed Mary, believe, thou shall be a maid, be a mother,
Jesus thy son shall be a King, be a Lord, be a ruler:
Ruler, Lord, and King, almighty, without any ending,
His faithful subjects with grace and mercy protecting.
Mary began thus again: Good God, this seems a wonder,
How can a maid conceive? can a may'd vntutcht be a mother?
Gabryel added again, this thy conception holy
Is not a woork of man, but Gods operation only.
Gods dyuine power shall woork this wonder upon thee,
And therefore this child so borne is son to the mighty,
Mighty triumphant Lord: this Lords dyuynyty dreadful
Thy cosyn Elisabeth made also for to be fruytfull,
Which was barren before: therefore give ear to the Lords heast,
For there is noething impossible unto the highest.
Mary resolved in mind this message firmly believed,
And submytts herself, by the Angels words to be guyded.
Then soon after that, to the hylls of Jury she hastened,
And there, Elisabeth great with Child, sweetly saluted.
At which cheerful words from blessed Mary proceeding
Elisabeths young babe this sound very strangely receiving,
Sprang in womb for joy, causd Maryes voice to be sounding,
Elisabeth to rejoice, dumb Zachary for to be speaking.
Mary, with her kinsfolk, three moonth's in Jury remained,
And then blessed Nymph to her husband home she returned,
Husband just Joseph, good man, who thought it a wonder,
That new wife, unknown, vntutcht, should now be a mother.
Unwilling therefore in publyke place to reprove her,
Good-natured Joseph meant pryuyly for to renounce her.
This man thus meaning, in sleep Gods Angel apeared,
And with cheerful words this message fryendly delyured.
Fear not, just Joseph, thy wife is a maid, is a mother,
Pure, chaste, unspotted, fear not therefore to receive her.
This babe is Gods Child, this son celestial offspring,
Lamb of God, Gods heir, ordained from the beginning
For to redeem lost Sheep, to be mankynds sole mediator,
For to relieve poor sowles, to be mankynds mighty protector.
Joseph awak's from sleep, Gods Angel he gladly obeys,
And his matchles mate, maid, Mother, Mary receaueth.
In those days all wars and vproares fully repressed,
Augustus Caesar causd every man to be taxed,
Taxed in each man's town: then Joseph quyckly removed
Unto the blessed Beathleme, and brought home Mary beloved;
Mary beloved he brought; who there, when time was appointed,
Was maid, was Mother, was most dyuynely delyured,
Bare her first borne Child, and laid him down in a manger,
Wrapped in swaddling clothes, poor bed, for want of a better.
Seelly Shepherds by the night their flocks were waryly watching,
And fro the skies they saw strange brightness mightyly shynyng:
Down to the ground they fall: but an Angel cheareful apeared,
And with joyful news their trembling hearts he reuyued.
Fear not fryendly shepherds, for I bring good news from Olympus,
This day borne is a babe, his name is called Jesus,
Only Reconcyler, Mediator, mighty Redeemer,
Only the salve to the sick, and pardon free to the sinner.
And take this for a sign: this babe is a sleep in a manger,
Wrapped in swadlyng clothes, sweet soul, and cast in a corner.
Even as he spoke these words, many thousands sweetly resounding
Immortal spyrites, celestial harmony making,
Sang and praised God, lifting their voice to the heaven,
For this joyful birth, this blessed babe of a maiden,
Glory to God most high, good will to man, and to his offspring,
Peace to the earth itself, and all that on earth is abiding.
Seelly Shepherds ran down to behold their only redeemer,
And found all to betrue, and saw Christ laid in a manger.
Then they praised God, most chereful company keeping,
And gave lawd to the Lord, that gracius harmony making,
Glory to God most high, good will to man, and to his offspring,
Peace to the earth itself, and all that on earth is abiding.
So that on every side, this glorius echo resounded,
Glory to God most high, which man-kynde freely redeemed,
Freely redeemed man-kynde, yet man-kynde dearly redeemed,
In that his own dear son for man was freely delyu'red.
O blessed birth day, o starts most luckyly shynyng,
O first day of joy, and last of anoy to the offspring
Of sinful man-kynde, o great compassion endless,
O love still fayntles pyty peareles, Charyty matchles.
God that rules above in royal throane of Olympus,
Sent his blessed Babe, and only begotten among us:
And fro the bower of bliss did abase him down to the manger,
For to reconcile us lost sheep, that wandered in error.
Noemans tongue can tell, nor noemans heart can imagine,
That th'aeternall God, should thus take flesh of a Virgin.
Christ that in heaven sat with God most mighty coaequall,
From the beginning crowned with grace and glory supernall,
This God's made to be man, this King is come from the scepter,
This Christ is swadled, this Lord is laid in a manger:
Christ who fills each place, (o Christ how are we beholding?)
Christ whom noe-place holds, in so small place is abiding;
Christ noe-way-conteind, Christ first, last, Christ the Creator,
Infinite every way, is now conteynd of a creture;
Christ noe-where-enclosd, Christ ender, Christ the beginner.
Euery-where, noe-where, is now enclosd in a corner.
And all this for man: so that, where sin was abounding,
Grace did abound much more; as man was cause of a falling,
Man was a raiser again; as man made deadly beginning,
So true God, true man did make most gracius ending.
Adam sinned first, and brought in death to reward it:
Christ by death killed death, and gave his life to remove it.
Adam lost Paradise, where pleasures earthly abyded;
Christ purchased heaven, where treasures greater abounded.
Serpent wyly beguyld Adam, by the means of a woeman;
Serpents head was bruisd by Christ, by the means of a woeman.
Aspyring Adam was quite cast down to the darcknes,
Humble-minded Christ has lifted us up to the brightness
Of still lasting light, to the joyful face, to the presence
Of God, there to behold his sacred ineffable essence.
Sing then, friendly Shepherds, and lift your voice to the heaven,
Glory to God most high, for blessed Babe of a Maiden.
Whom neither Satan could daunt, nor company hellish,
Nor raging Pharisees, nor deaths unspeakable anguish:
Who by the cross, by the nails, by the spear, by the thorns, by the whipping,
Passed alost to the skies, and there in joy is abiding:
Who by the whipps, by the thorns, by the spear, by the nails, by the
crossing;
Lifted us up to the skies, with his Angels still to be dwelling.
Who to be blessed, was cursed; who gave himself for a ransom,
Who by the Cross crossed death, by death obteynd us a Kingdom.
Whose incessant pangs, whose grief and agony restles,
Whose bloody sweat did cause our sinful souls to be spotles.
Sing then, friendly Shepherds, and Angels all be a singing:
Come fro the Fast, you Kings, and make acceptable offering:
Come fro the East by the light of a blessed star that apeareth,
And to the King of Jews your footesteps rightly directs.
Lo, here lies your Lord, bow down, make peaceable offering,
Gold to the golden Babe, of golden time the beginning;
Franckencense and Myrrh, to be sweet perfumes to the sweetest
Child, that sweet sacrifice, acceptable unto the highest,
Sweete-smelling sacrifice, once offered only for ever
For to appease Gods wrath and his most infynit anger.
Home to the East, you Kings, and bring this news to the godly.
God suffers for man, guyltles condemnd for a guylty:
Home to the East, you Kings, and tell this abroad for a wonder,
We have seen that Babe of a Virgin, laid in a manger:
Home to the East you Kings, and show that mighty resounding
Of those sweet Angels celestial harmony making:
Tell this abroad for a truth, and think, that from the beginning,
Noe such sight to an eye, noe such sound came to a hearing.
Back to the East, you Kings but back by a contrary passage,
Least ye be partakers of a most unmerciful outrage.
And get away Joseph, get away, and haste thee to Egypt,
Herod seeks thy son to be murdered, not to be worshipped:
Merciles Herodes to be sole and only triumphant,
Seeking one infant, will murder a number of infants.
Beathlem's red with blood, sweets sucklings blood that abounded,
Beathlem's white with bones, babes bones all woefuly scattred.
Childles mothers mourn, and howl with watery countnance,
All cry out for grief, and all cry out for a vengeance:
Vengeance light on a woolf, vengeance and plagues on a tiger,
Vengeance on this beast, vengeance on this bloody butcher.
And, when he thought his throane with firm foelicity grounded,
And his senseles soul with most security flattred,
Vengeance lights on a woolf, vengeance and plagues on a tiger,
Vengeance on that beast; vengeance on that bloody butcher.
Lyce did suck his blood, which first was cause of a bloodshed,
Vermyne tore his flesh, which babes flesh made to be mangled.
So let such men fare, that take a delight to be murdring,
Christ's curse light on his head, that Christ's flock loves to be spoiling
Now come back Joseph: but come not nere bloody Jury,
Fly fro the butchers brood, let Nazzareth only receive thee,
There shall thy dear Child in years and wit be a growing,
And with gifts of grace, with supreme glory abounding.
Thence shall thy dear Child to the Church of God be repairing,
And doting Doctors and Priests divinely reproving:
Thinck not much therefore, if three days there he abyded,
Father on earth must yield, whylst Father in heu'n is obeyed.
And now John that sprang in mothers womb, was a preaching.
Teaching, baptizing, and Christ's ways duly preparing.
When this John Christ's head with water duly besprinckled.
And Christ from Jordan was now but newly removed,
Sacred Ghost fro the skies flew down all lovely to Christ's head.
And in form of a Dove itself there sweetly reposed:
Then fro the heu'ns these words with chereful glory resounded,
Thou art my dear child, in whom I do mean to be pleased.
And forerunning John, John Baptist daily reports,
Christ to be Lamb of God, that sins with mercy remoueth.
At these wondrous news the old Serpent deadly repyned,
And the renowned fame of Christ extremely maligned,
Fearing this to be that great sovereign lordly Monarcha,
Sin-par'dning Jesus, foretold long since by Sybilla:
And he remembered well, what plagues were duly denounced,
When great grand-dame Eve with a bitter sweet he beguyled.
Therefore now he begins and takes occasion offered,
When fouretimes ten days from meat and drinck he refrained,
And in desert kept: he begins him thus to be tempting,
With colored friendship concealed treachery cloaking.
Shall the coaeternall and consubstantial offspring
Of God, soemany days, and soemany nights be a fasting?
Shall those purpled cheeks, which erst so cheareful apeared,
Look thus pale and wan, with too much penury pinched?
Make these stones to be bread; for I know, if Son to the Thundrer
Speak but a word, its done: let cretures serve the Creator.
But when he heard of Christ, that grace from mighty Iehoua
Strengthened more than bread, and fed man more than a Manna,
Then with a new stratageme to the Templs tower he repaired,
And Christ (so Christ would) on a pynacle high he reposed,
Saying; Leap to the ground, if thou be the Son to the Mighty,
Thy Fathers Angels are pressed at an inch to receive thee.
Yet when he heard Christ say, that God was not to be tempted,
And that he always had fool hardy presumption hated,
Since both thse proou'd naught, last cast he began to be proving,
And with spiteful rage, his latest part to be playing:
For when he had brought Christ, by Christ's permission only,
Unto a huge mountain, which gave full view to the glory
Of world and worlds wealth: World and worlds wealth will I give thee.
Said this damned fiend, if thou will learn to obey me.
Here Christ with just zeal and indignation urged,
That malapert rashness with these words boldly rebuked;
Get thee away Satan to the burning lake of Auernus,
Woorship alone is due to the sovereign Lord of Olympus.
Then with dead despair Christ toowell known he relinquisht
Since that he saw himself and all his villainy vanquished.
Lying Serpent thus confounded; an Angel apeared,
And long-fasting Christ with cheerful food he refreshed.
Thenceforth Christ his life was noething else but a teaching,
Preaching, and woorking of woonders worthy the woondring.
Sick are whole, lame go, dumb speak, blind see the Redeemer,
Hearing's given to the deaf, and cleansed skin to the leaper.
Netts even burst with fish, and full boats gin to be sincking,
Water made to be wine makes brydegroome greatly rejoicing,
Wyndes are whist with a word, and blustering storms be repressed,
And foaming seaes waves to a firm walk mightily changed.
Diu'ls roar out for fear, and haste their heavy departure
Which tormented men with tootoo woeful a torture.
Five loaves, twooe fishes, five thousand fully refreshed,
Yet twelve baskets full with broaken meat be reserved.
Seven loaves, feaw fishes, four thousand fully refreshed,
Yet seven baskets fyld with broaken meat be reserved.
Elias came down to behold life-giuer Jesus,
And Moses rose up, to behold soule-sauer Jesus,
His face shyn'de as sun: himself transformed in a moment;
Surpassing brightness did stand in steed of a garment,
Mount Tabor glistred: sweet voice came down from Olympus,
Hear my beloved son, my dearly beloved Jesus.
Yea, dead men lived: yet Jews causd him to be dying,
Who raisd Lazarus up, who dead Gyrle made to be living.
The Passion, Buryall, and Resurrection of Christ.
Christ, whose blessed birth causd Angels for to be singing:
Christ, whose loving life forced diu'ls themselus to be wondryng,
Christ, whose bitter death made templs veil to he rentyng,
Grau's to be op'nyng, earth to be quaking, heu'ns to be lowering,
Give me the grace, sweet Christ, since every thing is a mournyng,
For to recount these pangs, this cross, this death by my mournyng.
When that appointed fight, that fearful combat aproached,
Fight with pangs of death, and hells vnsuffrable horrors,
Combat with man's syns, and Gods unspeakable anger,
Then cursed capten Caiphas with his hellish adhaerents
Contryued platforms, conspyred jointly together
For to beetray that man which was man's only redeemer.
If that he hold on thus such wonders still to be working,
Then farewell Pharisees, with Scribes, and only renowned
High Priests; and therefore its more than time to prevent him.
Yet forbear for a while, till solemn feasts be determynd,
Least this strange murder may chance to be cause of an vproare*
O dyuine doctors, devout Priests, worthy protectors
Of Salomons temple, good graybeards; that for a feast day
Can vouchsaufe to delay this murder, this bloody outrage,
Not for love of God, but for this fear of an vproare.
But Christ foreknowing their treachery, came to the leper
Leper- Symons house in Bethany: where when he supped,
Mary, (remembering how herself was lately released
From seven tormenters) kneeld down to her only redeemer,
Washte his blessed feet with trickling tears that abounded,
Wypte liys blessed feet with her hair that sweetly beseemed.
Kyst his blessed feet; and head, and feet then anointed
With precious sweet balm, with most odoriferus ointment.
But that most cursed caytiue, that greedy devouring
Murdrer, cutthroate, thief, with his hellish treason abounding
Judas Iscariot, still bent to the bag, to the budgett,
Began to repyne and grudge, that this so costly anoyntment
Was thus wasted away, which might have been by the purser
Sold and geu'n to the poor: but alas this traiterus abject
Meant to enrich himself, and not to be good to the needy,
As by his accursed stratagems it plainly apeared.
For, when he lost this pray, his master he deadly maligned,
And balm box broaken brake Judas hartful of envy.
Damnable, infernal, outragius, horrible envy:
So that noe myschief, noe part of a thief, or a murdrer
Was by the vile reprobate, by the damned villen omytted,
Until he had this loss as he took it, fully recou'red,
Until he had for gain his master falsely betrayed.
Christ fro the mount Olyuet with an ass coms seellyly ryding,
Poorly, without any pomp, to the pompous cytty repayring,
Some with flowring bows his ways had freshly adorned,
Some with fragrant flowers his passage sweetly prepared,
Some causd they garments by the high way side to be scattred,
Every man cry de out with cheerful voice to the heavens,
Hosanna sweet vmpe of David's gracius offspring,
Hosanna to the King almighty of Israel holy,
Hosanna to the Lord of Lords, to the prince of Olympus,
So that on every side, Hosanna sweetly resounded.
And sweet Hosanna from rocks with an echo rebounded.
Yt was a plague to the Priests, to the fatbely Priests to behold this.
Yt was a death to the Scribes, to the scraping Scribes to abide this,
Yt was a hell to the proud Pharisees for a truth to believe this;
Yet, it was a joy to the young and old, for a truth to report this.
And for a truth, both young and old went straight to the temple,
Straight to the temple went with Jesus seellyly ryding,
And yet on his poor ass with a princelyke glory triumphing.
Into the Church when he came more like to a fair or a market,
Than Salomons temple such chapmen he quyekly removed,
Ouerturnd their seats, and tables justly defaced,
His fathers orders, and service rightly reuyued:
But to the proud Pharisees, to the scraping Scribes, to the fatt Priests
It was more then a plague, then a death, then a hell to behold this.
Therefore once yet again themselus they gyn to be styrring
For t'entrappe Jesus: but lo, whilst this was a woorking,
In comes that cutthroate, that thiese, yet freshly remembering
How th'Alablaster box of balm his greedy deuowring
Claws escaped before: and then to the company hellish,
And Satan's synagogue, his murdring mind he revealed.
Hayle sacred Cayphas, chief Priest, and mighty Protector
Of Jewish customs, and Hebriews laudable orders:
Hayle Scribes and Pharisees, that teach and preach the renowned
Doctrine of Moses: give ear and mark what I tell you:
This wandryng vpstart vpocrite, this Christus, Jesus,
Man, God, I know not what, does abuse and daily deceive us.
Us fools his folowers; and me unworthily hating.
Chiefly of all others with slaundrous taunts he reuyleth.
And yet I could forget this abuse and injury private,
But that by these means he begins t'aspyre to the scepter.
For, what a sedition, what a styrr does he make, what an vproare?
And what a sort be before, what a train coms daily behind him?
His woonders woondring, his doctrine vaynly believing,
His ways with fresh flowers and branches dayntyly dressing,
His delicate fine feet with balmes most costly anointing,
His royal person with tytles princely saluting,
His foamyng palfray with rich roabes gayly bedecking,
Hosanna singing, and each where freely triumphing?
If that I bring him bound, and so cause all to be ended,
And people quyeted, say on, what shall be my guerdon?
What shall I have? for I serve but a snudg, and am but a beggar.
Hereat Caiphas smylde, and Jews all greatly rejoiced;
And of their silver, they pieces thyrty appointed
For this vile butcher, which causd that Lamb to be slaughtred.
These things dispatched, those fathers ghostly departed,
Counsell's dissolved: Judas back slyly returned.
Christ with a curse by the way (most fearful sign to the saythles)
That fruyteles figgtree causd evermore to be fruytles.
Christ rose from table (most perfect sign of a meek heart)
And wash this fryends feet, teaching them for to be lowely.
Christ foretold his death (most doubtless sign of a true God)
And did note to the rest, that shameless desperate outcast.
But woe woe to the wretch, but alas woe woe to the traitor,
Better he were not borne, then borne to a damnable horror.
Christ took bread and wine (most sacred signs to the faithful)
And gave thancks to the Lord, and brake and gave it among them,
Most cherefull sacrament, most louly and lyuly remembrance
Of Christ his body crossed, and blood shed freely for all men.
And now that Renegate that damned Apostata Judas
Coms to the Priest Caiphas, and there his brybe he receaueth,
Brybe for blood, Lambs blood, Gods Lamb: and brings a great rowte
Of swearing cutters and soldiers duly prepared,
With lynckes and lanterns, with swerds and staves for an onsett,
Marching all in array in due and martial order,
As though some fyeld were to be fought, or king to be conquered:
Whereas alas noeman was there with force to resist them,
But some feawe fishers, and their poor master Jesus.
O valyant Judas, of a warlike company capten:
These be the sinners plagues, these these be rewards to the wicked,
That not a mouse can creep, not a leaf can shake, not a wind blow*
But their sowls with syn, their mynds with murder aboundyng,
Still be a trembling still be a quiu'ring, still be a quaking,
Quaking still for dreede and fear of an hasty revenging
Afterclapp to be given by the thundering Prince of Olympus.
Christ after supper, gave thancks, rose up fro the table,
Came to the mount Olyuete; then these words gracius vttred;
My saythfull folowers and fryends, my dearly beloved
And best companyons; this night you shall be molested,
And fore offended, to behold some villainies offered:
For so it was written long since, and truly revealed,
That your fryendly shepherd must needs at last be removed,
And his Sheep scattred, wandering for want of a sheepsman.
But faithful folowers and fryends, but dearly beloved
And best companyons, your master shall be reuyued,
And by death kill death, and over death be triumphing,
His faithful folowers visyting, his dearly beloved
And best companyons and fryends in Galyly seeing.
Scarce had he said thusmuch: but Peeter stowtly replied;
Not so, sweet Master, though every man be amassed,
livery man fly back, yet Peeter's fully resolved.
For noe love of life, noe fear of death to be startyng:
Great words, small woonders: But Jesus gave him a watch-woord,
His weakness knowing, his rashness meekly rebuking,
And said: Poor Peeter, pray, and leave off thy protesting,
This night quickly, for all thy stowt and manly presuming,
Ere that a Cock crow twice, thou shall thrice flatly deny me.
And now when that night, that dreadful night was aproaching
Christ did watch himself, and wyld his friends to be watching,
Christ prayed thrice himself, and wyld his friends to be praying,
Christ with fearful pangs, and dropps of blood was abounding,
Christ fell flat to the ground, and wished that cup to be passing,
(Yet not his own conceit, but Fathers will still obeying)
Christ at length came back, and found his friends to be sleeping:
Come, let us go (quoth he) now, its more than time to be styrring,
Lo here com's Judas, with a cursed kiss to betray me.
Even as he spoke these words, that martial army apeared,
Lynkes gave light to the night, and causd their swoords to be glistring,
And foreman Judas for a guide went iollyly marching,
That vile vipers kiss, for a sign and token apoynting.
Then with a brazen face, past grace, Christ Jesus he kissed,
And said, Hayle Master; to the which Christ mildly replied,
Friend, Wherefore comst thou? But Peeter rashly revenging
Christ's disgrace, as he thought, who first came, first he requited,
And Malchus right ear from his head with a sword he divided.
Whosoever strikes with a sword, with a sword must look to be stricken,
And blood seeks for blood: Stay Peeter, learn to be lowly,
If that I meant to revenge, said Christ, and make a resistance,
Could not I ten thousand Angels have quickly procured,
Whose strength these forces might have most easily daunted?
But then my Fathers edict should not be obeyed,
And scriptures verifyde: This spoken, he strangely refixed
Malchus his ear to his head: O meeknes, charity, mildnes,
Of true God, true man, long suffering, infinite, endless:
This was enough to have causd brute beasts themselves to be tamed,
Ragged rocks to relent, and hearts of flynt to be yielding.
This done: Whom do ye seek, quoth Christ? To the which the renowned
Craking swashbuklers, like meek and humble obeyssants
Their mouth's scarce opening, said thus: We seek for Jesus.
Then, quoth Christ, He is here: which words divinely proceeding
From that sacred mouth, causd Judas soul to be trembling,
Their captens quaking, and every man to be reeling,
And falling backward to the grownd, extremely amassed,
Like to a tower thrown down by the roaring crash of a thunder,
Or to a man that is scorcht by the fearful flash of a lightnyng.
Christ for a while conceales that great dyuynity dreadful,
Stays that breath which makes heu'n, earth, and hell to be quaking,
Geu's them leave to arise, and then more myldly demands,
Whom do ye seek? Jesus, say they, of Nazareth only.
Have not I said, he was here, quoth Christ? What need's any further
Search? What need ye to bring swerds, staves, and armor about you?
As though some famous thief, or notorius owtlaw
Were to be suppressed? did I not walk daily among you?
Did not I day by day teach, preach, and woork many woonders?
Then might your Ealders and Scribes have sought to repress me.
But the prefixed time, the predestinat hour was appointed,
And this is it: Therefore my Fathers Will be obeyed,
Noeman shall withstand, noeman shall make any stryuing:
Lo here take Jesus: But these, must not be arested,
Let them alone for a while, till greater things be revealed.
Christ then caught and bound; his fryends with terror amassed,
Every man sled back, as Sheep that wanted a sheepesman,
Or vanquished souldyers dispersed for want of a Capten.
Who can alas that night, that cursedst night of a thousand,
Those woorks of darcknes, that mockery, villainy, treason,
Those byndings, beatings, spyttings, and fylthy reuylings
Counteruayly with words, or thoughts, or streams of abounding
And still trickling tears? They brought him bound to the high Priest,
Late high Priest Annas, sage Father, who for a pastyme,
Disdainefull pastime, not for devotion, asked
Christ many idle toys and fond, not worthy the hearing,
Of fishmen folowers, and poor contemptible abiects,
Of newfound doctrine on brainesick fantasy grownded.
All that I spoke, said Christ, was spoken abroad to the whole world,
All that I taught was taught in temple, among many thowsands,
In corners not a word, in secreat place not a wonder,
They can tell what I taught, what I wrought, let them be reporters,
Ask them. What Jack sauce, quoth a blewcoate knave, be ye thus taught
With noe more reverence and humble duty to awnswere
This reverend Father? learn, and take this for a lesson:
So from a word to a blow, with a sinful fyste he defiled
That synles sweet mouth, which these words peaceably vttred;
Fryend, if I have said ill, bear witness, let me be punished,
Yt but well, why then do thou unworthily stryke me?
Here any man might thinck, that Christ thus fowly abused,
Should have been pytyed, should have been fryendly relieved
Of this sage Father: but alas, it is an Ass, not an Annas,
And sends Christ to the chief of their good company Caiphas.
Scarce was he come to the house, but anon they fall to reuylings,
Here Is that princely Prophet, that towld us soemany tidings,
Here is Gods own Son, that wrought us soemany wonders,
Famous carpet knight, and pardoner only renowned,
Sorcerer, inchaunter, taleteller, noble abuser
Of fools and matrones, that casts out diu'ls by the diu'ls help,
Plucks down Gods temple with a trice, and buyldeth a better
Only within three days: as twooe rogues falsely suborned,
Hyr'de by the owld hyrelings, had most untruly deposed.
Then good Sir Caiphas, with great integryty asked,
What say thou feallow, to the crimes objected against thee?
Christ said just noething, his damned iniquyty loathing.
Caiphas began to be hoate, and took on like to a Prellate,
And coniuring Christ, charged him by the mystery sacred
Of Gods dreedfull name, to declare it plainly among them,
Wheather he were that Christ, Gods Son, borne from the beginning;
Thou have said, quoth Christ, yet marck what further I tell you:
You shall see this Christ sitting on a mighty tribunali,
On Gods own right hand, in clouds with glory apearing.
Then that puft-vp Priest from a badman, turned to a madman,
Rent his roabes in a rage, and, Blasphemy, blasphemy, roared,
What do we seek for proofs hereof, what need any wytnes?
Our selus have heard all, himself has plainly reueald all.
What Is to be herein done? or what, do ye thinck, he deserves?
Death, said every man, Death, death with an echo rebounded.
Then those lewd rakehells with poysned rankor abounding,
His sweet face, o grief, with spyttle fylthy defiled,
His bloody cheeks, o hell, with buffetts all to be bruysed,
Some stroke him blindfyeld, and then thus scornefuly taunted,
Now, good Christ arread, and guess who gave thee the buffet?
Peeter saw all this, Peeter that manly protester,
Peeter styr'd not a foot; Peeter that mighty protector,
Peeter, stowt Peeter, by a gyrle, by a paltery damsel
Is dashed, is vanquished, forsakes his Master Jesus,
Thrice forsakes, and twice fore-sweares his Master Jesus.
And now Cock began crow, and giu's him a friendly Memento,
That man's flesh is frail, that man's but a smoke, but a vapor,
His pride naught but dust, and all his glory, but ashes.
Peeter in his cursing heard this Cock chearefuly chaunting,
And saw Christ then all arp soule-searching sight to be turning.
Yet with a lovely regard, with a merciful eye to be looking.
Every eye was a bow, and every look was an arrow,
Eye and eye-arrow pierst Peeters heart in a moment,
Peeters heart and soul: and there inflicted a deep wound,
So deep wound, that it had been no way possibly cured,
Were not his own soules-wound with his own tears all to bewashed.
Now he remembers alas, his first foole-hardy presuming,
Now he detesteth alas, his last unfriendly reuolting:
Now that wan countnance, which fear of death had apaled,
All on a fire is set for shame of duty neglected,
Since that blood, fro the face to the heart which lately retired,
Back fro the heart to the face with speed is freshly repaired,
Now his masters eyes in his eyes are ever apearing,
And therein does he seem his whole offense to be reading.
Now Cock crows in his ears, and calls forth day to be wytnes,
Wytnes of every word that Peeter spoke to the darcknes.
Cock with an open mouth, and loud voice bowldly proclaymeth,
That bragging servant his master cowldly renounceth.
Every sight, each sound, just accusation offreth,
And self-wounding soul, self-condemnation urges.
Noe rest, noe harts-ease: now loathed life he detested
More, yea much more now, than death at first he abhorred.
Life, let Peeter dye; life, leave to be daily prolonging
These my doleful days, least life soon draw'n to an ending
Cause me to loose that life, which never leaves to be lasting.
This frail life, small broils and shortest iarres to be shunning,
Made me the greatest joys and endless peace to be leaving,
Made me deny my Lord, of lasting life the beginning,
Made me renounce sweet life, for a follish fear to be dying.
Life let Peeter dye: many days heap on many mischifs.
Blessed were those babes that died, when merciles Herod
Seeking one chyldes death, many Mothers made to be chyldeles:
Blessed, most blessed children, whose tymely departure
Parted their sweet sowles from such, and soemany thousand
Woes, who dyed before they knew what it was to be synnyng,
And fro the damnable earth to the highest heavens be removed,
Like to a Lilly, before it chance by the frost to be nypped.
They, in stead of mouths, their throats then sweetly did open,
And, for want of words, powered forth their blood to the heaven.
O strange thing, these babes are now with glory triumphing,
Which yet never before did taste any part of a fighting;
Their young heads with crowns of Martyrdom be adorned,
Ere any tender locks had their heads sweetly bedecked;
Yea, their feet, that on earth were never seen to be treading,
Walk in Olympus now, and there in joy be abiding,
But Peeters gray hears, draw graceles face to the graues-dore,
Peeters long living, makes Peeters soul to be doting,
Peeter lyu's, yea lyu's to deny his master Jesus,
Lyu's, yea lyu's to renounce his lord and master Jesus,
Lyu's, and yet forsakes, forsweares lyfe-geauer Jesus.
Christ, who might command that glorius hoaste of Olympus,
Those spotles spirits, those euer-dutiful angels,
Sought, found, and took us from soemany, soemany thowsands,
Us ragged fishers, from soemany, soemany thowsands,
Us poor, poorest sowles of soemany, soemany thowsands.
Yet we alas his love have most unlovely rewarded,
And this most kind Christ have most unkindly requited,
We, most cursed crewe, of soemany, soemany thowsands,
We, woorst vipers brood, of soemany, soemany thowsands,
We, the detestedst twelve, of soemany, soemany thowsands.
One with a cursed kiss his dear Lord falsely betrayed,
Ten fled back for fear, when death and danger aproached,
And I, the woorst of twelve, yea after soemany great words,
Leaft, forsook, forsware, Lord, Sovereign, Master Jesus.
Whyl'st poor Peeter thus with mind extremely molested.
With deep fobbs and sighs, with streams of tears that abounded,
Washed away those spotts, and most syncearely repented;
Morning came at last, and then those damnable owtcasts
That condemned Christ, did bring him bound to be slaughtred,
Bound, bruysd, and beaten to the Romayne Deputy Pilate,
Pilate, who for a Judge of life and death was appointed.
In mean time, Judas possessed with desperate horrors,
Clogged with a sinful soul, with a dogged deadly repentance,
Coms with his afterclapps, when he see's his master Jesus
Thus condemnd to the death, and runs in a rage to the high Priests,
Saying, Sinned I have, that guyltles blood to betray thus.
If thou have sinned, say they, look thou to be plagued,
What care we for that? w'haue kept tutch, given thee thy wages.
That woeful wages drew my destruction onward,
That graceles guerdon my death untimely procured,
That brybe bred my bane: Take there your Mammon among you,
Take back your bloody brybe: so threw their silver among them:
And flinging headlong, enrag'de with an hellish Erynnis,
Hanged himself on a tree: fit death for treachery faythles:
His loathed carkas was an ougly detestable object,
Spectacle infamous, most fearful sight to the people,
With gutts gushing forth, with bowels broken asunder.
Lo here, you Traitors, your treasons justly rewarded,
Your Master Judas himself has rightly requyted:
Your Master Judas dealt so, that now to the worlds end
Of that name Judas, each traytor's named a Judas,
Every faythles fryend from that tyme's called a Judas.
Marck Peeters weakness, marck Judas villainy, fly from
Both dead despayring, and too much hasty presumyng.
Peeter started aside for fear of death, with a faint heart,
Judas slyded back for love of a bribe, with a false heart:
Peeter by and by wept sore and truly repented,
Judas never again came home, but deadly repyned.
Judas thus bursting, high Priests and Scribes be amassed,
And consulting long, at last they fully resolved,
With that cursed coin some peace of ground to be buying,
For strangers* buryall, with a feigned sanctyty cloaking
That cursed bloodshed, that most unnatural owtrage.
So this price of blood was paid for a fyeld of a potter,
Called a fyeld of blood, for a sign of this bloody murder.
Christ is brought to the bar: sir Pilate sits as a bencher,
Priests be his accusers: many captall crimes, many treasons,
And many seditions were there objected against him.
So much said, naught proved; Christ standing seellyly sylent,
By smoothing Pilates command was sent to the Tetrarche,
Herodes Tetrarche of Galyly, there to be judged,
Since Christ seemed to belong to his Jurisdiction only.
Herod greatly reioyst, and looked for many woonders
When Christ came: But Christ with silence wisely rebuked
This Tetrarchs tatling, and Priests unruly reuylings.
Herod contemned Christ, when he saw noe hope of a wonder.
Sent him back for a fool, to the first judge deputy Pilate,
All in a long white coat, for a scornful mockery clothed.
Thus poor Christ, meek lamb was tossed fro the poast to the pillar,
Wandering here and there, hence thence fro the Woolf to the slaughter.
Pilate seeing Christ fro the Tetrarch saufly returned,
Spoke to the Priests and Scribes: This man seems still to be guyltles,
Herod sends him back: its best he be whipped for a frantike,
And so loost at large: for I know you look for a prisner
At this feast, of course: say then, who shall be released?
Barrabas, or Jesus? What need thou to be asking
O pytyfull Pilate? thou know, their only desyring
Is to have Christ murdered; thou giust this lamb to the woolus jaws.
Kill, kill Christ, say they, and give us Barrabas only.
(Barrabas, in theeuing and murdring, barbarus owtlaw.)
Then people pleasing Pilate, cauld Christ to be scourged,
And in a scornful sort to the Jews to be newly produced,
But kill, kill, they cry, and crucify, crucify Jesus.
Pilate seeing Christ by the sowldyers all to be scourged,
Causd him then for a mock with a crown of thorns to be crowned,
With royal garments and roabes of purple adorned,
And in a throane placed, with a reed in his hand for a scepter.
Some mocked, some spytted, some kneeld and fynely saluted,
Hayle o King of Jews, for same and glory renowned.
Some with his own scepter that sweet face all to be bruysed,
Every one took pains, that noe pains might be omytted,
Noeman spared any cost, least Christ might chance to be spared:
Yet this was not enough, to appease their villainy monstrous,
But kill, kill, they cry, and crucify, crucify Jesus.
Pilates wife in a dream with Christ then greatly molested,
Persuades her good man for fear, that he might be released:
Yet noe dreams would serve to appease their villainy monstrous,
But kill, kill, they cry, and crucify, crucify Jesus.
Then just judge Pilate in an open show to the people,
His pure hands forsooth, with great solempnyty washed,
Thincking so fro the guylt of guyltles blood to be quytted.
Noe wind, noe water, could stay their villanv monstrous,
But, kill, kill, they cry, and crucify, crucify Jesus.
Crucify coosnyng Christ, his death and blood be requyted
On Jews that now live, and Jewish progeny after.
Caesar's saythfull fryend can abide noe King but a Caesar,
Therefore look Pilate, that this King soon be removed.
Christ in his own coat now to the Jews was lastly presented,
And by Pilates doom (deaths doom) given up to be crossed:
Whose Cross, in Latyne, Greek, Hebriew, had for a title
These words, Here Is Jesus, Jews King, of Nazareth, added.
Chief Jews took Jesus pricked, whip't fro the crown to the anckles,
Faint, weak, and feeble, scarceable for to be creeping:
Yet they laid on a Cross, his shoulders heauyly loading,
Dryuing him foreward, til he fell down under a burden,
Burden with deaths pangs, plagues, griefs, and horror abounding.
Christ and Cross fallen down, by chance one Simon aproached,
Who to be Crossecaryer, by the proud Priests then was appointed,
Crossecaryer to a place, that in Hebriew's Golgatha called,
Place of deadmens sculls: where Christ they speedyly Crossed,
Feet and hauds with nails, with great nayls all to be mangled:
And, for a greater spyte, two thieves they causd to be hanged,
Hanged on either side, and Christ almighty between them.
Christ once nayld to the Cross, now every knave is a craking,
Proud hearted Pharisees, sell Scribes, hypocritical Ealders,
Captens, and Souldyers, great, small, from the Priest to the Pyper,
Wagging their wise heads, laughing, and scornefuly tauntying,
Thou that sau'st others, now save thy self from a mischif,
Thou that buyldst temples with a tryce, come down fro the gallows,
Come Gods dear dearling, come King of Jews fro the gybbett,
Leap from a Cross to a Crown, from a cursed tree to a Kingdom.
Christ, (o loving Christ, long suffering Christ) thus abused,
Gave not a check for a taunt, but alas very hartyly prayed,
Father forgive them, forget this villainy Father.
Hark and mark that thief, (that thief even brought to the last gasp)
How he reuyles his Lord: Peace thief, give care to thy fellow,
We for a sinful life with death are justly rewarded,
But Christ's synles life has noe death duly deserved:
Thou Christ, thou Jesus, thou Lord vouchsaufe to remember
Me, me, sinful wretch, me, when thou comst to thy kingdom.
Christ heard and said thus, Thy prayers shall be regarded.
This day in Paradise with me thou shall be received.
O blessed thief, cursed thief, Sheep, Goat: Therefore let a sinner
Not despair, one thief is saved in an hour in a moment:
But let a sinner fear, let a sinner not be presuming,
One thief only repents, and scapes in an hour, in a moment.
Christ's coat was seameles, for a sign of an absolut, endless,
And perfect kingdom: this coat so fitly cohaerent
And all-wrought over, was nothing touched by the souldyers,
Nor torn in pieces, nor cut, nor parted among them,
But lotts cast, that some one man might wholly receive it,
That, what was foretold, might have effectual ending.
Christ now hangs on a tree, suffering vnsuffrable horrors,
Torments for man's sins, and Gods unspeakable anger:
Whylst Christ is suffering, whylst fearful pangs be aproaching,
Sun for Gods Sons grief does grieve, and gyns to be lowering:
Hydes his darckned face, lets golden rays be eclipsed,
Seeing Light of light with pricking thorns to be crowned:
Hea'n and earth is darck fro the sixth hour unto the nynth hour,
Heu'n and earth laments, and every thing is a mourning:
Heu'n and earth laments, whylst Jesus Christ is a dying,
Heu'n and earths comfort, heu'n and earths only reuyuing.
But now Christ began faint, with an infinite agony troubled,
And Ely Ely, and Lamasabacthany cried,
Father, dear Father, why should thy Son be refused?
Then bitter vinegar they raught, when he said, that he thirsted,
Which Christ once tasting, said, Father, now it is ended,
Thy will's fulfilled thy laws and heast be obeyed,
Take my soul to thy hands; Then his head he began to be bowing,
With those words his life and endless passion ending.
Scarce did he yield his breath, but straight fro the top to the bottom.
Templs veil was rent, and torn, and broken asunder,
Earth did quake, stones brake, graves opened, dead-men apeared.
Then captens, souldyers, men, matrones, all the beholders
Smote their breasts, and said, this man was son to the mighty,
Whose strange death even makes live dead, and dead to be lively.
Christ is dead indeed, his bones need not to be bruysed:
Yet for a further proof, his side was speedily pierced,
Pearc't with a spear, and thence pure blood, pure water abounded.
Then noble Joseph, with faithful friend Nicodemus
Did beg of Pilate, that blessed corpse of Jesus,
Took it down fro the cross, fine lynnen duly prepared,
With Myrrh and Aloes themselves it carefuly wynded,
And in a late-made tomb, wherein was nobody chested,
That sweet corpse (sweet corpse of Christ almighty) reposed,
Rolled a stone to the grave, and so all heavy departed.
Yet these Priests left not, til they had watchmen appointed,
And graves stone sealed, least Christ might chance to be stolen
By his wel-willers, as they then vainly pretended;
Sots, fools, and madmen, still against this prick to be kicking,
And still against this stream, this sacred stream to be striving.
For when third day came, there came with a terrible earthquake
Gods Angel fro the skies, and rold that stone fro the graues-dore,
And there sat for a while: his face was like to a lightning,
His roabes white as snow, which made those watchmen amazed,
And half dead for fear: but the Angel spoke to the women,
(Two Mary's, coming of purpose, for to anoint Christ
With precious spices, with sweet odoriferus ointments)
You seek here for Christ, here Christ is not to be sought for,
Christ is quickened again, and risn', as he truly reported,
And foretold his friends; in Galyly there will he meet them,
Lo, where lately he lay: fear not, but boldly report it.
As they ran to report, Christ Jesus plainly apeared,
And met them by the way, and bade them not be amazed,
But bring news to the rest, that he would in Galyly see them.
This done, and they gone; poor watchmen ran to the City;
And told all to the Priests; who then with an obstinat error,
And wilful blyndenes, these watchmen largely rewarded,
Willing them to report, and tell this abroad to the people,
That Christ's disciples stole him by night fro the watchmen,
Whylst they lay sleeping. Which haeresy stoutly, to this day
Stifneckt Jews maintain: o cursed and damnable error,
O hard-harted Jews, that give more care to a hyreling
And brybed soldier, by the proud Priests falsely suborned,
Than to the truth it self with so great glory revealed,
Than to the eyes which saw, to the ears which heard, to the fingers
And to the hands which felt that which was truly reported,
Hands which felt Chrysts hands and feet and sides to be wounded,
Fares which heard his words and blessings sweetly delyu'red,
Eyes which saw and knew, that Christ in Galyly walked,
And four times ten days in diverse places apeared:
Eyes which saw Christ eat, and then fro the earth to be lifted
Up to the highest heu'ns, and there with glory received
On Gods own right hand with jurisdiction endless:
Until he come to be Judge of quick and dead, by the thundering
Sound of a fearful trumpe: and bring his sheep to the sheepefold
Immortal sheepefold, and goats throw down to the darcknes
Aeternall darcknes, fro the sacred face, fro the presence
Of God, there to abide with Lucifer and his adhaerents,
Plagud with a dying life, with a living death, with a roaring,
Weeping, and gnashing of teeth, and horrible howling:
Where Is naught but woe, woe; but a worm still greedily gryping,
Naught but a loathsome lake with fire and Sulphur abounding.
FINIS.
The first Psalm.
O Thrice happy the man, that lends noe care to the counsel
Of soule-sick sinners; nor frames his feet to the footestepps
Of backsliding guvdes: nor sets him down with a scorner
In the maligning chair, that makes but a mock of Olympus.
But to the living Lords edicts himself he refers,
And therein pleasures and treasures only reposeth:
Night and day by the same his footesteps duly directing,
Day and night by the same, heart, mind, soul, purely preparing.
This man's like to a tree, to a tree most happily planted
Hard by a brook, by a brook whose streams of silver abounding
Make this tree her fruit, her pleasant fruit to be yielding,
Yielding fruit in time to the planters daily rejoicing.
This tree's rooted deep, her bows are cherefuly springing,
Her fruit never fades, her leaves look lively for ever:
This man's settled sure, his thoughts, words, daily proceedings
Happy beginnings have; and have as fortunat endings.
Sinners are not foe; they and theyrs all in a moment,
All in a moment pass past hope, grace, mercy, recou'ry,
As weight-wanting chafe that scattreth in every corner,
Whyrled away fro the earth, hence, thence, by a blast, by a wyndepuffe.
Woe to the scorner then, whose soul will quake to be judged,
Quake, when it hears that doom by the Judge almighty pronounced.
Woe to the sinner then, noe settled sinner aproacheth
Near to the sinles Saints, where joy and glory abounds.
For, the triumphant God does still look down to the godly,
Their ways well knowing, and them with mercy protecting:
But the revenging Lord has threatened a plague to the godles,
And their ways shall away, and they themselves be a wayling.
The sixth Psalm.
LOrd forbear to rebuke, forbear, and stay thy revenging
Hand, in thy great wrath and indignation endless.
Heal my wounds, my God, take some compassion on me;
My bones are bruysed, my strength is wholly decayed,
My soul is troubled, my mind extremely molested,
How long shall thy wrath, and these my plagues be prolonged?
Turn yet again, good God, thy woonted mercy remember,
And this soul, poor soul, for thy great mercy deliver.
Save my life from death, in death noe worthy remembrance
Of thy name is found: and keep my soul fro the dungeon,
Infernal dungeon, where noe tongue yields any praises.
My heart with groanyng, my soul is weary with anguish,
Every night do I wash my careful couch with abounding
Streams of trickling tears: my flesh is myghtyly troubled,
My color all faded, my former bewty decayed,
For fear, all for fear of such as seek to devour me.
But get away, get away all you that woork any myschief;
My sighs ascend up, my prayers pierce to the heavens:
And such as my soul with grief unworthily vexed,
With shame and sorrow shall worthyly soon be requyted.
The eyghth Psalm.
O Prince all-puysant, o King al-mightyly ruling,
How wo^drous be thy works, and how strange are thy proceedings?
Thou have thy great name with most great glory reposed
Over, above those Lamps, bright-burning Lamps of Olympus,
Even very babes, young babes, young sucking babes thy triumphant
Might set forth; to the shame of them which injury offer,
Even to the shame of them which damned blasphemy utter.
When that I look to the skies, and lift mine eyes to the heavens,
Skies thine own hand-work, and heavens framed by thy fingers;
When that I see this Sun, that makes my sight to be seeing,
And that Moon, her light, light half-darck, daily renewing,
Sun dayes-eye shynyng, Moon nights-light chereful apearing,
When that I see sweet Stars through Crystal skies to be sprinkled,
Some to the first sphere fixed, some here and there to be wandryng,
And yet a constant course with due revolution endyng.
Then do I thinck, o Lord, what a thing is man, what a wonder?
O what a thing is man, whom thou so greatly regardest?
Or what a thing's mankind, which thou so charyly tendrest?
Thou have man, this man, this blessed man mightly framed,
And with abundant grace, with abundant dignyty crowned,
Not much inferior to thy sweet caelestial Angels.
Thou have given him right and jurisdiction over
All thy wondrous works, thou have made him to be master,
Him chief master on earth, right Lord, and absolut owner
Of beast, foul, and fish on the earth, air, water abiding.
O prince all-puysant, o King al-mightyly ruling,
How wondrous be thy woorks, and how strange are thy proceedings?
The nine and twentieth Psalm.
YOu Kings and rulers, you Lords and mighty Monarchaes,
Whose hands with scepters, and heads with crowns be adorned.
Kneel to the King of Kings, and bring your dutiful offerings;
Lowt to the living Lord; ascribe all might to the mighty
Alwayes-mighty Monarch: and learn to be ruled by the ruler.
Which heu'n, earth, and hell, rul's, ouerrules in a moment.
For this is only that one, whose thundering voice fro the clustred
Clouds breaks forth and roares, and horror brings to the whole world*
For this is only that one, whose fearful voice fro the heavens
Cedars, tall Cedars, tears, rents, and ryues fro the rooting,
Cedars of Libanus constrayns like calves to be leaping:
And Cedar-bearing Libanus, with frightened Hermon
Like to a young Unicorn makes here and there to be skipping.
For this is only that one, whose threatnyng voice, the devouring
Lightnyngs flakes throws down, and terror brings to the deserts,
Tears down trees and woods, makes hyndes for fear to be caluyng,
And that forelorne waste of Cadesh for to be tremblyng.
Every voice his voice, his praise, and glory pronounces,
His sacred temple with his honor daily resoundeth.
Over gulfs and deepes his royal throane he reposeth,
Ouerwhelmyng gulfes, and drownyng deepes he represseth,
And still a living Lord, still a King almighty remains,
And yet a father still: for he leaves not, still to be sendyng
Strength to his own elect, and inward peace for a blessing.
The eight and thirtith Psalm.
SCourge me not, my God, whylst thy wrath's kyndled against me,
Put me not to rebuke, in thine unspeakable anger.
For, thy darts, o God, dead darts, and dangerus arrows
Stick fast, fast to my heart, o Lord, stick fast to my hartroote,
And thy hands, sore hands press and oppress me with anguish.
In my flesh noe health; in bones noe rest is abiding,
Thy wrath plagues my flesh, my syns to my bones be a poison.
My syns, woeful wretch, my syns now grown to a fullnes
Ouergrow my head, cursed head, and keep me still under,
Like to a burden alas, my back too heauyly loading.
My careful carkas with sores lies all to be wounded
Festring sores with gross corruption ever abounding,
Festring sores and wounds fro my sinful folly proceeding.
My pain's so grievous, my grief so great, that it urges
Me with a pale, dead face, and crooked lyms to be creeping.
Mine inslamed loins are filld withfilthy diseases,
And noe part vntutcht, noe piece unwounded apeareth.
Faint and feeble I am; sore bruysed, so that I can not
But roar out for grief of soul, and horrible anguish.
Lord, thou know my desire, thou see my daily bewaylings,
Heart hartles does pant, and strengthles strength is abated,
Sightles sight is gone, and fryends vnfryendly departed,
And unkind kynsmen my wounded carkas abhorring
Look; but a great way of; but come not near to my comfort,
Thus forsaken I am, forlorn, contemptible abject.
They that sought my life, laid secret snares to betray me,
And, to devour my blood, conspyred daily together.
And I, for all this, alas, poor fool, stood feellyly sylent,
Like to a man that is deaf, and seems not a word to be hearing,
Like to a man that is dumb, and fear's his mouth to be op'nyng:
For, my faith and trust in thee, my Lord, I reposed,
Thou must plead my cause, and by thee I must be defended.
Lord, I desire that these my foes may not be triumphing
Over a contryte soul: for when my foot was a slipping,
Then they laughed and scornd, and seemed to be greatly rejoicing.
And in truth, my God, my plagues are daily renewed,
And my bleeding wounds lie always open before me.
Always in my sight; for I must and will my detested.
Fylthy detested life confess, with an heavy remembryng
Hearty repentyng soul. But, alas, my deadly malignyng
Foes are much increaste, in might and number abounding*
These men alas, for that my soul their fylthynes hated,
Life with death, o Lord, and good with bad be requyting.
Help, o Lord my God, make haste, draw near to the needy,
Help, o God my Lord, and my salvation only.
The fiftith Psalm.
GOd, the triumphant God, th'aeternall great God of all Gods
Has sent forth Summons with a thu^dring voice fro the heavens,
World-warnyng Summons, commanding all in a moment,
All from the east to the weast, to be pressed, and make an aparance,
And perform their suyte to the court, to the great, to the high court,
Great high Syons court, sweet Syon: where he apeareth
With surpassing grace, exceeding bewty abounding.
God shall come, shall come with a voice al-mightyly sounding;
Greedy devouring fire shall go with glory before him,
And blustering tempests shall roar with terror about him.
Heu'n from above shall he call, and quaking earth to bewytnes,
Of this just edict and sentence rightly pronounced.
Bring my Saints, says God, go bring my Saints to my presence,
Which have vowed their hearts, and sworn their sowles to my service:
And of this judgment from judge almighty proceeding,
Those bright-burnyng gloabes of Christal-mantled Olympus,
Shall Be reporters true, and always shall be recorders.
Hear me, my dear flock, and thou, o Israel, hear me,
Hear me thy God, thy Lord; and know, that I am not agreeued,
Nor displeased a whytt, for want of customed offerings
Burnt offerings, sacrifice, and Honnors due to my altars.
What do I care for a Goat? or what do I care for a Bullock?
Since Goats and Bullocks, and beasts that range by the deserts,
Since cattle feeding on a thousand hills be my own goods?
Mine own proper goods be the fowls that fly to the mountains,
Mine be the beasts that run by the fyelds, and watery fountayns.
If that I hunger, alas what need I to tell thee, I hunger?
Since that the earth is mine, and all that on earth is abiding.
Thinck not, thinck not, alas, that I take any joy to be eating
Bulls flesh: thinck not, alas, that I take a delight to be dryncking
Goats blood, guyltles blood: but make acceptable offering
Of thanks-geuyng heart, and pay thy vows to the highest.
Call me to help, when so thou findst thyself to be helples,
Cry for grace, when so thou thinckst thy soul to be past grace:
And I will hear, and help, give grace, and strongly protect thee,
And thou lawde, and love, sing, serve, and woorthyly praise me.
But with a frownyng look, this God spoke thus to the godles;
With what face dare thou my sacred name be prophanyng
With those lying lips, and mouth with murder abounding?
With what face dare thou with a fyled tongue be professing,
And by defiled life, and fowled soul be denying?
With what face dare thou for an ostentation only
Seek to reform others, thyself so fowly deformed?
When thou meet'st with a thief, thou seek'st by theft to bethryuyng,
And walkst side by side as a copsemate sit for adulters.
Thy moutli's made to beguyle; and monstrous villainy vttreth,
Thy lips let forth lies: thy tongue untruly defameth
Thine own mothers son: these, these be thy holy proceedings,
These be thy works; and since that I seemed for a while to be syle^t.
Thou thoughtst (wicked thought) my thoughts were like to thy own thoughts,
And so runnst headlong. But I come; but plagues be aproaching,
And when I come, then I stryke; when I stryke, the^ I beat thee to powder.
Thy bloody thoughts, Iewde words, vile deeds will I open in order,
And show all to thy face: which thou shall see to thy sorrow,
Know and acknowledge to thy own confusion endless.
You that forget God, thinck on thus; least he remember
And forget not you; but root you out in his anger.
Then shall noeman come, your damned sowles to deliver.
Praise and thancks-giuing is a most acceptable offering;
And, if a man by my laws his conversation order,
Unto the same I myself will my salvation offer.
The threescore and thirteenth Psalm.
GOD, the aeternall God, noe doubt, is good to the godly,
Giving grace to the pure, and mercy to Israel holy;
And yet, alas, my seete, my, saint feet began to be slyding,
And I was almost gone, and fallen to a dangerous error.
For, my soul did grudg, my heart consumed in anger,
And mine eyes disdayng'd, when I saw, that such men abounded
With wealth, health, and joy, whose minds with myschif abounded.
Their body stowt and strong, their lyms still lively apearing
Neither fear any panges of death, nor feel any sickness:
Some still mourn, they laughe; some live unfortunate ever,
They for joy do triumph, and taste aduersyty never,
Which makes them with pride, with scorneful pride to be chayned.
And with blood-thirsting disdaigne as a roabe to becou'red.
Their fare is delicate, their flesh is dayntyly pampred,
Their eyes with fatnes start out, their greedy devouring
Gutts, swell with swylling; and, what fond fancy desires,
Or lewd lust lyketh, that fortune fryendly afordeth.
Themselus most sinful cause others for to be sinners
With their poysn'd breath, and vile contagius humors;
They check, scorn, controlle, look, over look, with a lordlyke
Imperious countnance; their mouth foul blasphemy vttreth,
And fro the forlorn earth, to the heu'ns disdaingfuly mounteth.
This surpassing pomp and pride allureth a number
Even of Gods own flock, (flock weak and weary with anguish)
Unto the self same trade, which makes their glory the greater.
Tush, say they, can God, fro the highest heu'ns to the lowest
Earth, vouchsaulf, thinck you, those Prince like eyes to be bowing?
It Is but a vain conceit of fools, to be fondly referring
Every jesting trick, and trifling toy to the Thundrer.
For lo, these be the men, whose souls are seared with an iron,
And yet these be the men, who rule and reign with abundance;
These, and who but these? Why then, what mean I to lift up
Clean hands, and pure heart to the heu'ns? What mean I to offer
Praise and thanksgeuing to the Lord? What mean I to suffer
Such plagues with patience? Yea, and almost had I spoken
Even as they did speak, which thought noe God to be guyding.
But so should I alas, have iudgd thyfolk to be luckles,
Thy sons forsaken, thy saints unworthily haples.
Then did I thick, and muse, and search what might be the matter.
But yet I could not, alas, conceive so hidden a wonder:
Until I left myself, and all my thoughts did abandon,
And to thy sacred place, to thy Sanct'uary lastly repaired.
Then did I see, o Lord, these men's unfortunate endings
Endings meet and fit for their ungodly beginnings.
Then did I see how they did stand in slippery places,
Lifted aloft, that their downefalling might be the greater.
Living Lord, how soon is this their glory triumphant
Dashed, confounded, gone, drowned in destruction endless?
Their fame's soon outworne, their name's extinct in a moment,
Like to a dream, that lines by a sleep, and dies with a slumber.
Thus my soul did grieve, my heart did languish in anguish,
So blind were mine eyes, my mind so plunged in error,
That noe more than a beast did I know this mystery sacred.
Yet thou heldst my hand, and keptst my soul fro the dungeon,
Thou did guide my feet, and me with glory receauedst.
For what in heu'n or in earth shall I love or woorthyly wonder
But my most good God, my Lord and mighty Iehoua?
Though my flesh often faint, my hart's often drowned in horror,
God never fails, but will be my mighty protector.
Such as God forsake, and take to a slippery comfort,
Trust to a broken staff, and taste of worthy reuengement.
In my God therefore my trust is wholly reposed,
And his name will I praise, and sing his glory renowned. ()
The hundred and fourth Psalm.
Living Lord my soul shall praise thy glory triumphant,
Sing thy matchles might, and show thine infinite honor.
Everlasting light thou putst on like as a garment,
And purple-mantled welkyn thou spreadst as a courtayne:
Thy parlor pillars on waters strangely be pitched,
Clouds are thy charyots, and blustering wyndes be thy coursers,
Immortal Spyrits be thy euer-dutiful Harrolds,
And consuming fires, as servants daily be waiting.
All-maintaining earths foundation ever abides
Laid by the Lords right hand, with seas and deeps as a garment
Cou'red; seaes and deepes with threatening waves to the huge hills
Clyming; but, with a beck their billows speedily backward
All do recoyle; with a check their course is changd on a soddaine;
At thy thundering voice they quake: And so do the mountains
Mount upward with a word; and so also do the valleys.
Down with a word descend, and keep their places appointed:
Their meares are fixed, their bancks are mightily barred,
Their bounds known, least that, man-feeding earth by the rage of
Earth-ouerwhelming waters might chance to be drowned.
Stil-springing fountains distill fro the rocks to the ryuers,
And crystal rivers flow over along by the mountains:
There will wild asses their scorched mouths be refreshing,
And field-feeding beasts their thirst with water abating
There by the wel-welling waters, by the syluer-abounding
Brooks, fayre-flying fowls on flowring bancks be abiding,
There shall sweete-beckt byrds their bowres in bows be a building,
And to the waters fall their warbling voice be a running.
Yea those sunburned hills, and mountains all to be scorched,
Cooling clouds do refresh and watery dew fro the heavens.
Earth sets forth thy woorks, earth-dwellers all be thy wonders:
Earth earth-dwelling beasts with flowing grass is a feeding;
Earth earth-dwelling men with pleasant herbs is a serving.
Earth brings harts-ioy wine, earth-dwelling men to be hartning,
Earth breeds chearing oils, earth-dwelling man to be smoothing,
Earth bears lifes-foode bread, earth-dwelling men to be strengthening*
Tall trees, vp-mounting Cedars are chearefuly springing.
Cedars of Libanus, where fowls their neasts be preparing;
And Storkes in Firr-trees make their accustomed harbors.
Wild goats, doaes, and roaes do roue and range by the mountains.
And poor seelly conyes to the ragged rocks be repayring.
Night-enlightning Moon for certain times is appointed,
And all-seeing Sun knows his due time to be sitting.
Sun once so sitting, darck night wraps all in a mantle
All in a black mantle: then beasts creep out fro the dungeons,
Roaring hungry Lions their pray with greedy devouring
Claws and sawes attend, but by Gods only apoyntment:
When Sun rises again, their dens they quickly recover,
And there couch all day: that man may safely the day time
His days work apply, til day give way to the darkness.
O good God, wise Lord, good Lord, and only the wise God,
Earth sets forth thy woorks, earth-dwellers all be thy wonders.
So be seaes also, great seaes, full fraught with abundant
Swarms of creeping things, great, small: there, ships be a sailing,
And there lies tumbling, that monsterus huge Leuiathan.
All these beg their food, and all these on thee be waiting;
If that thou stretch out thine hand, they feed with abundance,
If thou turn thy face, they all are mightily troubled;
If that thou withdraw their breath, they dye in a moment,
And turn quickly to dust, whence they were lately derived,
If thy spirit breathe, their breath is newly created,
And the decayed face of the earth is quickly revived,
O then, glory to God, to the Lord then, glory for ever,
Who in his own great woorks may worthily glory for ever.
This Lord looks to the earth, and steedfast earth is a trembling,
This God toutcheth mounts, and mountains huge be a smoking.
All my life will I lawd this Lord; whylst breath is abiding
In my breast, this breath his praise shall still be a breathing.
Hear my words, my Lord, accept this dutiful offering,
That my soul in thee may evermore be rejoicing;
Root the malignant race, race out their damnable offspring:
But my soul, o Lord shall praise thy glory triumphant,
Sing thy matchles might, and show thine infinite honor.
FINIS.

