A DIRECTION or Preparatiue to the study of the Law: Wherein is showed, what
things ought to be observed and used of them that are addicted to the study of
the Law, and what on the contrary part ought to be eschued and avoided.

AT LONDON Printed by Thomas Wight. Anno Domini. 1600.

The contents of the several Chapters.
CHapter 1. Of the worthiness and excellency of the Law. Chapter 2. Of the
good qualities wherewith the student of the Law ought to be furnished. Chapter
3. Of the choice which the student of the Law ought to make in his study.
Chapter 4. Certain rules to be observed of the student in the reading of his
books. Chapter 5. Of the exercise and conference which the student ought to
use. Chapter 6. That the understanding of the student ought to be
proportionable to the intendement of the Law. Chapter 7. That the student
ought well to conceive the reason and justice of the Law in distinguishing and
establishing the property and community of things. Chapter 8. That the words
or terms used in books of Law ought to be understood and applied as the
Law does expound and conceive them. Whereunto is annexed a table of certain
words, in the interpretation whereof, the Common law of this Realm and the
Civil law do seem to agree. Chapter 9. What method is to be used in
handling and disposing matters of law.
Lectissimis et generosissimis iuuenibus in hospitijs curialibus connutritijs,
and Juris Anglicani studio operam nauantibus assiduam. S.
SI Theophrastum, vt ipsum nomen indicat, oratione diuinum, circumscripta
quaedam spatia, and angusti vmbraculorum circuli a frequenti auditorum corona,
and publico iudicum consessu detinuere: Si Socrates, quem sapientissimum virum,
Apollo sapientissimus Ethnicorum Demon iudicauit, nihilo plura volumina
edidit, quam condidit, id est, nulla: mihi quidem generosissimi iuuenes, non
solum in scribendi initijs, sed in vmbilico etiam and crure valde metuendum
est, ne prima medijs, media vltimis, omnia omnibus, non apposite respondeant:
Quae enim parce nimis traduntur desiderium, quae prolixe fastidium pariunt, et
medium quaesitum inuenire difficile, inuentum tenere difficillimum: Cum hanc
arduam sane prouinciam primo ingressus fueram, istud me recreauit and
sustentauit solatium. Qui curas suscipiunt grauiores si mansuetis ingenijs vti
volunt iudicibus, eorum audere, est agere, velle est posse, velitari est
vincere. Fateor in aliquibus tenus, vltra, plus vltra peruentum esse: Sed vel
metam ipsam attingere, imo vero ad eam contendere, sudoris est et virtutis:
Quanqua^ hoc A Euo, in hoc praesertim Britanniae Elysio, nihil in delitijs
habetur praeter meras orationis illecebras: mira certe quae placeant,
vermiculata verba, nectareas phrases, eloquentiam Atticam exposcunt, omnia
limata, arguta, sententiosa esse volunt, plane Aristippei sunt singuli praue
sectum stomachantur ob vnguem. Quare seria and submissa prece, mihi vehementer
obsecrandi estis insignissimi iuuenes, vt hic potius otij mei foetus quam
laboris fructus (vacatio enim haec proxima quam sub aequinoctium autumnale
Londini non admodum inuitus egi, cum ad priuata studia et negotia multum
superesset temporis, hanc vobis prolem peperit) sub candoris vestri radijs
calorem et vires recipiat: cuius si compos fuerit, debebit ille quidem vigorem
suum vobis, lucis vsuram mihi, fortunam mundo. Valete: Ex hospitio Graiano:
pridie Nonas September. An. salutis humanae. 1599.

Vobis addictissimus Guilielmus Fulbeckus.

Faults escaped in the printing of the Table of words annexed to the eight
Chapter, may be thus amended.

Fol. 74. b for Index read Iudex fol. 75. a for Debito read Debtor ibidem. for
mixed read mixtae fol. 76. a for Doto read Dolo ibide^. b for Fidenistor read
Fideiussor fol. 77. a for fato read salo fol. 78. b for Maritinum read
Maritimum fol. 80. b for contumately read continuately fol. 81. a for vacillaus
read vacillans.


The other faults escaped in the printing of the other Chapters, a courteous
eye and understanding may easily reform.

OF THE Worthiness and excellency of the Law.
The first Chapter.
AS nothing more encourages the soldior to fight, and to give forth apparan^
signs of valor, then the glory and renown which is gained by exploits of
war: so nothing is a greater spur to the student of any Art or Science,
then the just reward of fame and commendation, which belongs to those, who by
labor attain to perfection in any praiseworthie science. For as nature
rewards the Be with honey, so Art recompenseth the painful student with
riches, praise or honor. And howbeit some men make small account of praise or
good report, as being in their own conceit but an empty sound, yet wise men
have thought and written, that a good name is better then Gold, Proverb. 2^
Aim. cons. 145 viso proces^^ in fi.
and that a man's credit is the fairest flower of his garden. Now if praise be
due to Arts and sciences, as being the best treasure and endowment of the mind,
religion only excepted, then surely the knowledge of the law may in the first
place challenge prerogative of dignity, by whose righteous doom and decree it
is provided, ruled, and ordered, that al other sciences should have their
maintenance and support, in such plentiful and condign manner, as by merit or
equity does to them of right aptaine. But every art receives his commendation
by the end and scope which it proposes to it self. And the chief end or last
mark of ye law as well as other sciences is God his glory. But ye next and
immediate end, which is allotted to it, is to administer Justice to al, and in
that sense it may be called the rule of Justice: For religion, Justice, and law
do stand together, and are together trodde under foot by such as neither care
for God, nor goodness: such as are rehearsed by one of notable judgment. Cyprian
de 12. abusio.
A wise man without works, an old man without devotion, a young man without
obedience, a rich man without alms; a woman without chastity, a gentleman
without virtue, a contentious christian, a proud beggar, an unjust king, a
negligent Bishop, a congregation without discipline, a nation without law. But
Justice is then rightly administered, when it is not sold, Can. venden. q. 3.
Canon pauper 11. q. 3.
When there is no respect of persons. Deuteron. 1
When hatred is away and conscience is present. Can. sex. 23. q. 3.
When rigor is te^pered with mercy. Can. omnis and sequ. can. discipli. 45.
did.
And Justice must be regarded of the law as the load-star is minded of the
Seaman, for without it can be no government. An other end of ye law is the good
estate of the people. For it is an Aphorism amongst the laws of the 12.
tables: Salus populi suprema lex esto: Let the safety of the people be
accounted the chief law. l. 12. tabula^. c. 6.
And ye deserves not the name of a law which has no relation to publik
profit. Cicer. 2. de legi.
For Hermogenes said well yt every law was made for the good and profit of men.
lib. 2. de sta^ homiu^.
And Plato says, that a Lawmakers ought to have regard of 3. things
especially: namely, that the convenient liberty of the common weal may not be
impeached by the laws, that they may preserve amity amongst the people, and
that they may furnish the^ with wisdom. lib. 2. de legi.
Wherefore they that despise laws, have no care of common profit, Cicae. pro
Caecin.
because they were made for common use, lib. 2. de legi.
and without law, which I interpret to be an order established by authority,
neither house, nor city, nor nation, nor mankind, nor nature, nor world can be.
Cicer. lib. 3. de legi.
And therefore Cicero says, yt our ancestors were of such virtue and wisdom,
that in making of their laws they had no regard, but of public good: Cicer.
lib. (...) de invent.
For they would not write any thing to hurt, and if they had written any such
things, it would have bin rejected as soon as it had bin understood. It is
manifest therefore that the end at which the Law does aim is the general
advantage of common society in a just manner distributed and dealt to every
one. For, non sufficit bonum fieri nisi been fiat, It is not sufficient to do
that which is good unless it be done in good sort, and therefore let not any
man, which undertakes this profession lay conscience aside: for though the
charge and calling be seculer, yet it must be religiously handled. For God is
the author of the Law, and the revenger of the abuse thereof, The weight and
measure, Pro. 16.
says Solomon, are God his judgments, and therefore if any man maintain any
wrong by color or pretense of Law let him know, that though man be hurt, yet
God is offended, ye do not execute the judgment of Man, Chroni. 2. c. 19
but of God, says Iosaphat. God is the beholder and vmpier of Counsels and
Judgments, and surely if a man do well discharge this weighty and excellent
function, there is no man of any religious habit or vocation in higher place or
greater reckoning with God. So much the more are they to be reproved, who
exercise sychophancie, fraud and caueling in the handling of causes, being
wresters of Laws, and wringers of money, whose conquest in bad causes makes
them triumph as much as Romulus did when he had killed his brother: nay as
Atreus did when he had co^past the death of his brother Thyestes, boasting and
glorying. Senec in Thy.
nunc parta vera est palma, nunc meas laudo manus, Now have I gotten an
honorable victory, now I praise my handie work, but they in whom conscience
bears stroke are far otherwise addicted, and shall be hereafter otherwise
rewarded. Nay even in their life time do they possess ye ensigns of authority
and dignity, and by good right may they challenge many special favors,
immunities and indulgences. Constantine the Emperor gave to the professors of
the imperial Laws, full and perfect freedom from all collateral charges,
taxes, and other burdens of the common weal, L. medic. 1. 6 de profes. and
medi.
and he decreed also that certain yearly pensions should be paid unto them out
of the Treasury, D. L. medicos.
and the Emperor Valent. would have the^ which by the space of xx. years were
professors of the law, to be illustrated by the name of Comites, a name of
excellent dignity. l. vnica and rubri. de profes. qui in vrbe Constantinopol.
docent ex lege merueru^t. Commit. li. 12. c. tit. 15.
Many other privileges and benefits are mentioned in the Civil law, which
belong as well to Studients as to professors, and hereupon had that saying his
original.

Dat Galenus opes, dat sanctio Iustiniana:
Ex alijs paleas, ex istis collige grana. Angel. Aretin in. proaem. institut.

Neither has England bin unkind or strait handed to men of that coat and
calling: for in old time as I find in M. Plowden, who was credibly infourmed
thereof, there were four Reporters of the cases of Law, which were chosen men,
and had a yearly stipend for their pains and travail therein, paid by the
king, Plowd. in Epi. a les estudents de le common ley.
But some will say that God forbids us to contend. Who denies that? but he
does not forbid to Judge and determine controversies: and there is great
difference between judging and contending: for though God do forbid thee to
beat a poor traueling man: yet he does not forbid thee to bind up his wound,
when he is hurt and maimed of others. So though he do greatly abhor the
hatred, rancor, malice, and disagreement of men, yet he is well pleased and
contented yt such pernicious and contagious diseases should be cured. Let him
that conde^neth the fault, approve the remedy. One man rages with a burning
desire of revenge: an other co^ueieth to himself an others man's goods by
craft, whom when charity and duty cannot bring into the right way, his disloial
dealing must be repressed by the severity of Judges. Moses, David Solomon,
committed no sin, when they caused wicked men to be rigorously punished: and
though Christ do condemn a quarrelous and reuengeful person, yet he leaves to
the Judges their authority, whether they rule and order causes by the Laws and
customs of nations, or by the law of Moses. Joseph, Daniel, Naaman, the
Centurion, did govern commonweals by the laws of the heathen. Surely the
politic laws of Kings and Magistrates are greatly to be heeded and regarded,
which Christ himself allowed, when he paid tribute to Caesar. And the
profession and practice of the knowledge of law is warra^ted by the example of
great men, who would not have borne the names of professors, if the science had
not contained in it singular wit, excellent wisdom, and profitable directions
for the whole course of man's life. It is well known that the Camilli, the
Curij, the Fabritij, the Fabij, the Claudij, the Scipioes, the Crassi, the
Iulij the Ciceroes, and the Scaeuolaes were singular men and singulerly skilled
in law. And to give the^ their proper appellation were lawyers. These men
governed their common weals not in the shadow, in darkness or corners, as the
Grecians did, but in the clear light of the Sun, and in the face of the world,
using experience as a Pilot against the boisterous and turbulent affections of
the people. And therefore Virgil when he distributeth Vir. Aeneid. 6.
several sciences to several Countries, appropriateth the science of governing
commonweals to the Romans.

Tu regere imperiopopulos Roman memento,
Parcere subject is and debellare superbos.
Mind thou O Roman men by law to guide,
To spare the meek, and ouer-master pride.
But some account it a matter of too great curiosity, yt the laws which should
be plain and manifest to al should be reduced to an art obscured with difficult
cases, shadowed with conceited terms, and as it were, covered with clouds,
and wrapped in darkness: to whom I answer that it is very expedient, that there
should be a certain art and science of the Law, general rules and precepts,
and convenient discourses. For the particular things which do fall under the
observation of law ar infinite, and the weakness of man's memory cannot
tolerate the multitude of particular laws: and therefore it is convenient
that that which we call aequum bonum, which in plain terms is nothing else
but perfect reason, should be comprehended and delivered in certain general
precepts, and Plato alleges this for a reason Plat. in polit.
because it is necessary, that there should be Regia disciplina a princely
science, for he suteth it with that name, which may by a general censure,
order and dispose of all things without regard of every particular
circumstance. For the certain knowledge of matters, it is good that the law
should be bounded by certain rules and limits: For a man could not certainly
know what were his own, and what an other man's, unless the Law should as it
were by finger point, and show unto him, what, when, and how it were his, and
therefore true is that saying of Cicero, Cicer. lib. 9. Epist. famil.
Omnia incerta sunt cum a iure discessum est. If you depart from Law there is
no certain state of any thing. And his opinion is in an other place, Cicer. in
ora. pro Caecin.
that our inheritance rather comes to us by the law, then by our ancestors:
for though they do give is, or leave it unto us, yet it is the law which does
settle it in us, and does preserve the possession thereof free and inviolate
unto us. Wherefore it is to good purpose, that the Law should be definite in it
self, and should consist of certain conclusions which should be as the listes
and periodes of the science, by the contemplation of which, a man may be
instructed and sufficiently furnished for particular causes and events: For the
particular case lies as it were embowelled, and is implicatiuely contained in
the general learning, and there is nothing in the Law which may not be reduced
unto some universal theoreme, which may easily be conceived and remembered,
because it is general. Marcell. 2. ff. de iur. et fact. ignor.
And though the professors of the Law do make-particuler arguments of special
causes, and do admire examples or cases to the illustrating of that which they
do principally handle, yet the Law it self is comprised within certain rules.
Neither ought it to trouble us, that the Law books are so huge, and large, and
that there is such an ocean of reports, and such a perplexed confusion of
opinions, because the science it self is short and easy to one that is
diligent, according to that saying: Industriae omnia serua fiunt, All things
are servants to diligence, or come at her command, and arts are not to be
esteemed by the greatness or smalnes of the books, but by the goodness of their
rules. And though ye laws which do vind men's lives and manners ought to be
understood of all, that their prescript being known, men may decline from that
which is for bidde^, and follow that which is commanded: yet that may be done
either by their own means, or by ye means of others: and if a man's brain be
no fit mould for the Law, let an other man's mouth be his teacher. Hence comes
the name of Counsailor, because in doubtful causes he may resolve and give
counsel: Whereby appears as well the necessity, as the excellent use of the
calling: for what can be more convenient or of better opportunity, then that a
man of experience should show the way to one that is ignorant. It is therefore
expedient that there should be laws written, and that such laws should not be
altered without urgent occasion: for it is a fond part to strive against the
course and stream of laws, and customs received. A great question it has bin
heretofore, whether commonweals were better governed by written Laws, or by
the present and voluntary conceit of ye Magistrate: This matter, because
religion it self has committed civil duties to the wisdom and ordering of
man, ought to be measured by the examples of wise governors and by popular
sense. What good common weal has there ever bin without written Laws, which
have bin used by the Egyptians, Cretensians, Athenians, Romans, and Jews. The
writing or the engrauing of laws in Tables is a principal cause of ye
certainty of the same, and without certainty, it should be of small credit: for
what authority or force should it have, if it did always change like the
Moon, or like Vertumnus: but when causes ar decided by the opinion and will of
the Magistrate, the power of gouerme^t may be in the hands of such as be
unskillful, or wicked, and so either for want of skill, or conscience, Justice
may fail of her course. How often might the pretense and show of justice
beguile us? how often might justice be perverted by favor or malice? But if
Laws were not general, and should not sometimes restrain Magistrates and
governors, great inconuenie^ce would ensue: even as great as happened in Athens
by the violent domination of the 30. tirants, who when they had cancelled and
disadnulled the Laws, did exercise a common butchery and slaughter of good
men: Wherefore, as in dangerous tempests the ship is not rashly committed to
the winds: but there is need of a skilful Pylot by cunning and carefulnes to
govern: so the wavering and passionate mind of the Magistrate, must be
ballassed and weighed down by Law, least his own private affections do drive
him from doing Justice as from the haven. Aristotle affirms, that God rules
that common weal which is governed by a written Law, because the Laws are the
champions and defenders of convenient liberty, then which there is nothing
more pleasant in this life: for what thing can be more happy, then to be free
from the fear of injury, and safely to enjoy the society of men, and
therefore he would not have the government of the common weal to be committed
to any one man, though very virtuous, without the regiment and direction of
Laws. Neither let any man say, that I do sinisterly judge of the natures and
dispositions of men, in that I account no man of so approved and special
virtue, and fidelity, that the mannaging of common affairs may be offered unto
him to order them at his will and pleasure without the appointment and warrant
of laws: surely I could wish that every governor were a Numa: But yet I would
have the law to be joined with the Magistrate in the act of government. Neither
do I fancy or figure in my mind any happier common weal, then such as may
accord with the tenor and progress of human affairs. If a man should
imagine that the authority of government were in the hands of the Stoikes,
such as would neither be moved by hatre, nor favor, though they in other
respects were very unfit to govern, how shall their humors be satisfied, who
had rather be governed by written laws, then by upright Magistrates? for such
is the madness and frowardnes of some, that they will not be contented with the
equity and faithful dealing of the Judges, but will still contend by the
rigor, and dint of law, and will try all extremity, being often times more at
iarres and at odds with the Judges, then with the adverse party: here the
aucthority of Judges will be weak, unless the laws publicly received do
strengthen it: so that in the written laws there is not only a safeguard for
innocence against injury, but also for the Magistrate against the importunity
of the people: But as wayfaring men whilst they travail are not afraid of
going a stray, when Mercuries image does point out unto them the way that they
are to go: so good men when a certain law is proposed unto them, when by it
they know what every man ought to perform, what to avoid, they are secured and
do wholly repose them selves in the protection of laws. To the intent that the
Hebrews might well agree, and have good order amongst them selves, God did
enact and establish certain laws, that they might judge by prescript, and
rule, least the law being ambiguous might procure dissentions. And other people
and nations have either by the tyrannons domination of Magistrates, or the
outrageous discord of the people bin enforced to receive Laws as the square
and measure of their actions. In the City of Athens when there was continual
debate about the difficult points of ye law the^ in force, there arose three
factions of men, not of the worst sort, but yet not well agreeing in matters of
state: the City by this mean being greatly molested, and the hearts of men
being edged and exasperated by the festered sore and cankerworme of contention,
the government was committed to Solon: he surueying by depth of judgment the
weak, and impuissant estate of the City, made Laws, whereby peace and
contentment were restored: And when he saw, that these Laws were the sinews
of the good estate of the city, he determined that whosoever should hold any
judicial place, should in precise terms take oath that he would judge
according to the Laws. This was also the cause why the Romans did fly to a
written law: the Magistrates did arrogate and assume too much to them selves,
the people did exceedingly grudge and murmr that their honest liberty was
impeached by the manner of their ruling, and the best men were at variance in
matters of Law: so that it was thought meet that some equal Laws should be
in force, whereby the rashness of the people, and the violence of the
Magistrates might be moderated: For this cause the Laws called the Twelve
tables were prescribed to the City, which yoke was willingly received, because
without laws they knew their common weal could not prosper, nor continue. And
as there ought to be a certain form of Laws, so these laws ought not to be
altered or abrogated without great occasion, and the evident advantage of the
common weal. There was a Law amongst them of Locros, that whosoever would
make a motion or inuectiue against any received law, should thereof deliver his
mind, having an halter about his neck, and if it were agreed by the assembly,
that the thing which he endeavored to persuade were for the good of the common
weal, the man was safe, and received commendation: but if it were disallowed,
and rejected as an unprofitable admonition, he was straight way hanged and
received death as the guerdon of his innovation. And in Athens there were a
kind of men called (...), who in all public meetings did sit amongst the
chief Magistrates, and did put them in mind not to decree any thing against
the Laws in force. Thus it is evident that both the making and maintayning of
laws is necessary. And it is rightly said of Cicero, that the Law is as
necessary for the gouerme^t of a state, as the soul and mind is for the
preservation of the body, in orat. pro Cluentio.
this (says he) is the bond of all dignities, and degrees, which are in the
common weal, this is the foundation of liberty, the fountain of equity. The
will, counsel, and decree of the City is contained in the laws, as the body
can do nothing without the soul: so a city without Law cannot use her
actions, power, or authority. The Magistrates are the ministers of Laws, the
Judges are interpreters, the people are the Servants, that they may have true
liberty. The Law is thus defined by Cicero, 3. lib. 1. de legi.
Summa ratio insita a natura, quae iubeat ea quae facienda sunt, prohibeatque
contraria, A principal reason ingrafted in us by nature, which commands the
things that are to be done, and forbids the contrary, and all the
particular and several laws of diverse nations, are but the branches of this
law: for the laws be certain and clear intelligences, and rules, whereby the
mind is addressed to pursue that which is good, and to eschew the contrary:
and they offer to the mind the forms and Ideaes of virtue and dishonestie. So
that in the sacred precepts of law, as in a crystal glass, a man may
perceive what he may do with praise, what he cannot do without infamy: for
the common places, which be handled by diverse, of common duties, of that which
is truly good, of that which is perfect happiness, of the best estate of a
common weal, do not so sufficiently qualify and instruct the understanding,
as the law it self. But here I shall be crossed by an other objection, that
great and tedious are the labors which are to be sustained in the study of the
law. Surely there is nothing of weight or worth, which may be compassed
without pain and travail, and yet if the pain be compared and balanced with
the profit, it is but as a few drops of hail to a whole shower of Manna. What
would not a towardly man do? what would he not undertake by his wisdom and
warines, to keep all danger from the bodies, heads, and life's of the innocent:
to preserve his memory from oblivion, and silence: to be of great account
amongst the greatest: to attain to that knowledge, which is the highest of all
humane arts and sciences? and though it were as hard a matter for a young
gentleman to gain the knowledge of the law, as it was for Phaeton to ascend
unto the Chariot of the Sun, who ere he could accomplish that, was to pass
through uncouth ways, and by the ghastly forms of deformed creatures, by the
terrible Signs of the Bull, the Lion, and the Scorpion Quid. Metamorph.
, though (I say) a Studient ought to have all the law perfect, and to pass
through a multitude of cases, judgments, Statutes, arguments, treatises,
comments, questions, diversities, expositions, customs of courts, pleadings,
mootes, readings, and such like: yet since there is no art nor science, by
which the common weal receives so great benefit: since there is no course of
life, no time of age, no estate of men, which can either flourish or be without
the safeguard of laws, and since the difficulty of the science is rewarded by
the dignity, credit, and ample fortune which belongs unto it: the hope of
them which employ themselves in this study ought not to wax faint, nor their
minds to be daunted with the labor and pain, which all arts require: but
they ought to be incited and allured to proceed in their studies by the
excellent and honorable rewards of the same.

Of the good qualities wherewith the Student of the law ought to be furnished.
The second Chapter.
BEcause many apply themselves to the study of the law, without deliberate
consideration of their qualities and sufficiency, so that many times they
find not that contentment, which otherwise they might enjoy. It is very
convenient that they should know what qualities are requisite in him, who is to
employ his time in the study of the law: for as Aristotle says, Aristot.
lib. 10. Ethico^, ad Nicomach.
Rules and precepts have not force in all, but the mind is to be decked with
good gifts, that it may take joy in things that be truly good, and abhor the
contrary. The first and chief thing that I do require in him, is, to have
the true knowledge, and fear of God, without which his other knowledge is but
as a sword in the hand of a frantike person: and where the light of truth is
not, there is a dark and tenne-folde may about the mind. But where God is
not, there is no truth, there is no light, there is no law. The soul and
senses, are but the instruments of his will, which he binds and loses at
his pleasure. And if they turn from beholding him to the contemplation of any
art and science whatsoever, surely they effect nothing but their own
destruction. I know this is no pleasant sound to some dainty ears, who
cannot tolerate any naming or mentioning of religion, which the Paganes, whom
they make as presidents of their profane manners did not only regard, but in
the very front and beginning of their laws (such was their reverence) they
prefixed a precept and caveat for the observation and keeping of holy rites in
a regardfull manner: Ad diuos adeunto cast, pietatem adhibento: qui secus
faxit, deus ipse vindex erit: Let them go to the worship of God with a chaste
mind: let them use reverence: God will be the revenger of him that does
otherwise. Leg. 12. tabular. c. 1.
. Some perhaps had rather hear a curious discourse handled by some Astrologer,
whereby they might have certain notice and understanding what complexion and
constellation is most fit to enter into the study of the law: with such dregs
they would have their mind satisfied. They perhaps, will believe (for what is
more credulous then fancy) that they which are borne under Jupiter, are not
fit for the study of the law, as Cocles teaches them, Cocles in Physiognom.
that they which are borne under Mercury, are of quick conceit, but quickly
vnconceited, soon ripe and soon rotten, especially if Mars be joined with
Mercury in the constellation, as it happened according to the suggestion of some
in Hermogenes the Sophist, who writ of Sophistry in his youth like a grave old
man, and was in his old age as a trifling boy. But they which are borne under
Saturn, are said to be more dull in the beginning, but in process of time of
more sound and deep knowledge then others: surely I am not of opinion, that
the soul and the powers thereof are subject to the sway and motion of the
planets. If I should think, that it were a substance flowing from the body,
or so mingled with it, that it might be accounted a kind of blood, as some
Philosophers grossly conceived, this might seem unto me probable. Cicer. in
Tusc. quest.
. But I am fully and immoueably persuaded, that the soul comes from above
into this strange matter, whereof the body is compacted, and is of an
incorporeall nature, which is not subject to the impression of the senses. For
when sickness affects the body, the soul is sound: and when the body is
racked, the mind is free. Neither is it to be maruailed at, that it conformeth
not it self to the change of the body, because some material parts of the
body are not always partakers of the change. Let a man go abroad in the most
cold and freezing weather, yet his eyes will never be frozen, let him stand by
a most scorching fire, yet they will never feel heat. The strange and
different substance of them from the other parts of the body, I take to be the
cause. Now the Planets do work only upon corporal things, for their influence
is of the same sort as the attractiue force of the Adamant, or the Geate, which
cannot work but upon material things: and therefore I may well conclude, that
the Stars do not qualify the mind, but the body only, which being a cotage
of clay, must needs bear the wind and weather, the alteration and impression
of the Planets. Wherefore let not any man who aymeth at the knowledge of the
law as the mark of his desire, make any estimation of these Physognomicall
fictions: let him not go to the house of Mars nor to the sphere of Mercury
for knowledge. Si quis indiget sapientia, postulet a domino: If any lack
wisdom, let him request it at the hands of God Jacob. c. 1.


He must likewise observe, that the way to the hight of knowledge is by
humilities gate. Let not the increase of his skill make his mind to increase,
and swell, after the manner of lofty spirited men, who when they know nothing,
yet would seem not to be ignorant of any thing. Every auditor must be willing
to hear Oportet discentem credere, says Aristotle, In Analytic. posterior.
, who though he were a man of singular knowledge, yet gave example of great
modesty, by this censure, Maxima pars eorum quae scimus est minima eorum quae
ignoramus, The greatest part of the things which we know, will counteruaile
but the least part of the things which we know not: as if a man should
compare one hundred to one. But none do more boast of knowledge, then the
ignorant, as nothing sounds more then empty vessels: and they nourishing in
their minds a haughty and ample opinion of their supposed ability, are so
bewitched with self-love, that they think they sucked eloquence with their
nurses milk, that the bees which are feined to sit upon Platoes lips, did fly
to their lips whilst that they were dreaming in the cradle: that they were
able to teach old men before they had teeth: and triumphing in this conceit,
they admire themselves, and disdain others, advancing their own doings, and
discommending the fruitful labors of other men, like apes, loving their
deformed children, and like fantastic Pygmaleons wo^ing their own devises.
If any thing be spoken of the^ sometimes clarkly, and acutely as they think,
they make an inward applause unto themselves, and cherish their hearts with this
acclamation, facete! lante! lepide! nihil supra! but if any thing be spoken of
others aptly and sensibly, they straightway infer, Quanto tu melius hoc
inuenisses Thraso! But a discreet and advised man, will judge none to be so
mean, but that he may learn something of him: for though he know more then
others, yet he must think, that others know somewhat which he knows not.
The best and the most grave man says Cicero, will confess, that he is
ignorant of many things. Cicer. Tuscula. 3.
. And Solon was not ashamed to say, that in his old age he was a learner.
Cicer. in Catone mayor.
And Iulianus the Lawyer said, that though he had one foot in the grave, yet
he would have an other in the school. Lapud Iulianum de fide commissis
liberal. in p.
. The next thing I require in a Student is temperance, which I do not take so
strictly as Aristotle does, who defines it to be a restreint from corporal
pleasures, which are objected to the sense of feeling Aristoteles lib. Nicoma
chior. 2. and 3. and in lib. magnor. morali.
, but would have it so largely understood as Plato Plat. in Conuiui.
, Cicero Cicer. lib. 1. officior.
, and now of late time Scalig. lib. 3. poetic. Alberic. Gentil. lib. de leg. 3.
c. 13.
Scaliger, and D. Gentilis have taken it to be, a restreint of the mind from
all voluptuousnes and lust, as namely from couetuosnes, excess of diet,
wantonness, and all other unlawful delights. A Student must in his diet be
temperat, and abstinent, for as Musonius says, Continency in diet is the step
to wisdom. Stobaeus de temperantia.
A fat and full belly yields nothing to a man but gross spirits, by which
the sharp edge of the mind is dulled and refracted, and too much meat cast
into the stomach does engender nothing but cruditie and diseases. This measure
must be used in our diet, that no more be taken then will suffice. Seneca
prescribes a good rule, Senec. epistol. 111.
Famem fames finiat, Let hunger end hunger, which is nothing else in plain
terms, but that a man should rise with an appetite, being rather satisfied
then filled. Yet he that feeds more plenteously, is not to be reproved, if
his body do stand in need of more copious nourishment, and a man must not so
abstain, that the functions and duties of the mind and body be hindered.
Good and moderate nourishment does quicken the spirits, and they do give
strength to the brain, but that which is unwholesome and immoderate does stop,
thicken, confound, and destroy them. As in diet, so in other things, it is good
for a Student to have the rule and mastery of his mind and appetite, neither so
to let slip the reigns to his desire, that he will for any commodious respect,
bring himself to shame and obloquie, and for a present advantage, incur a
perpetual discredit. Plato has a sentence worthy of observation Plato in
Timae.
, Et dicere and facere ea quae decent ad sobrium and prudentem hominem tantum
pertinet, To say and to do the things that are comely, belongs only to a
sober and wise man. That example of rudenes used by certain Florentine
Ambassadors, is to be avoided. Iouius reports it Ioui. lib. 28.
They were sent as Ambassadors to Charles the fifth, and Pope Clement the
seventh staying at Bonomia, and being Macthants, carried with them (such was
their extreme covetousness) certain wares to make gain of, thinking they
should be free from custom, as going under the name of Ambassadors
necessaries. But this being perceived to the two great Estates, moved the
Emperor to laughter, and the Pope to anger, who was a citizen of Florence. The
Legates departed with infamy, which they well deserved for abusing so honorable
a calling by such base indignity, which may be a warning to all to prefer
their credit before their greedy desires.

Diligence in the pursuing of any study is of great weight and moment, and in
the study of the Law it has principal force and effect, for the cases are
many in number, which must be read, remembered, and applied, which cannot be
compassed but by extreme diligence. And whereas some pretending a lumpish
idleness, would have the Law measured with narrow limits, and would have the
multitude of volumes, cases, rules, and diversities abridged and made less,
surely they give large testimony of their great desire of ease. But ease is a
very badde medicine for difficulty, and their pretense is wholly repugnant to
reason, yea to possibility. They that would have few laws, must procure that
there be few causes, and little business, which it is not possible for any to
bring to pass. If it were possible for these faint students to take away the
infinite and the innumerable affairs and actions of men, then that which they
require might sort to good effect. But that lies not in their power, and
therefore they should surceasse their sluggish surmise. For this cause
Ludouicus Viues is justly reprehended of Albericus Gentilis, in that he held,
that all things might be finished by few laws, whom Gentilis Albericus
Gentilis dialogo primo de iuris interpretibus.
affirms, to fight against common experience. For if many contentions or
controversies should happen, which none can bridle or prevent, if the law
should not handle, discuss, and determine them all, the law should do
injury, and it should not be the handmayd of Justice, it should not Suum
cuique tribuere. So that in the Students mind this resolution must be fixed,
not to sink under the burden, but with all convenient industry to follow his
Study, never to be weary of pains, nor to slacken his endeavor, since nothing
of price and account is purchased without great labor, by which he may
attain to the knowledge of many excellent things more worthy of admiration,
then praise. Neither is it seemly to pretend weakness of body, and
tenderness of complexion, when health and strength do well serve, and may
well be employed in Study. Ciceroes body was neither of iron, nor of oak,
yet he was not broken, nor in manner altered by continual night-watchings,
noone-sittings, and morning-risings, by many labors, contemplations, and
studyes, by the great charge of his houshoulde, by the weighty care of the
commonweal, by writing many books, and epistles without number, as Cardanus
well observes. Lib. 4. de sanitate tuend. c. 16.
. and why should any man despair to do that which another has done,
especially having the like disposition of mind, the like faculties and means
to attain to knowledge, and the like desire. This diligence does chiefly show
it self in reading and hearing. It is not fit for him that hears or reads,
to have a mind wavering from the purpose, and as it were going on pilgrimage. A
man is then said to floate in fancy, and to wander in thought, when he does
not bend his mind to that which is handled, and when he is amongst his books
in body, but not in mind, or when he is present at some reading, and does not
show himself attentive, but does number the tiles of the house, or builds in
the air, or does nothing less then that which he should do: but the force of
the mind must bend it self to that thing only which is to be conceived. For
the power of our mind and understanding is more strong when it is united, then
when it is dispersed, and distracted into many parts.

Pluribus intentus minor est ad singula sensus. But as these things forenamed
are of great consequence and value to the Student, so wisdom that rare and
excellent virtue of the mind is of great importance, which I do rather exact,
then require in a Student, for without it nothing can be done decently or
perfectly: and surely to a Student of the law it does specially appertain, for
it does consist in the cunning discerning of the truth of every thing. Cicer.
Offic. lib. 1.
And a Student ought not only well to deliver things conceived, but well to
judge of them, and in this part stands the best part of a Lawyer. It is the
property of a wise man most sharply to perceive what is true, what is false in
every cause and controversy, not to be deceived nor inueigled, not to be
unconstant in opinion, nor ignorant in the circumstances of things. The
ordinary mean to attain to wisdom, is to use time and diligence sufficient
for the consideration of things, to hear reasons on both sides contending in
his mind as it were armed and professed enemies, not to judge of any thing
rashly or hastily, nor to give a slight censure of weighty matters. For as
Fabius says in Lyuye Liuius lib. 22.
Omnia non properanti clara certaque fiunt, festinatio improuida ac caeca est,
All things are plain and certain to him that is not rash nor headie. Haste is
improuident, and blind, which is therefore rightly termed of Plato Nouerca
Scientiae, The stepdame of knowledge. Plato in politic.
. And the Aetolian Magistrate said well, Liuius lib. 31.
That there is nothing so great an enemy to good advise, as haste, which
brings penance swiiftly, but warning too late, and without profit, because
counsel hastily given cannot be revoked, neither can the thing which is
disordered by badde advise, be entirely restored or brought into order again.
But where a man takes time sufficient, he cannot be said to do any thing
rashly. Wherefore not unfitly has it been defined by some to be the
knowledge of the oportunitte of doing things aright, and the cause that all
things be well done, Diogen. Laer. in vit. Platonis. Cicer. lib. 1. officior.
, and it has not only a stroke in worldly affairs, but even in matters of
religion: for by it a man may be so directed, that he may neither decline to
superstition, nor to that which is contrary unto it, namely, impiety or
atheism. And it is the leauill or compass of all other virtues in the
accidents and affaiers of this life. It will show the times and measure of
boldness and audacitie, least it turn to rashness and impudency. It will so
order Temperance the mother of order, that it may not be accounted rudeness or
inciuilitie. It will guide Justice which governs all things, least it turn
to cruelty: nay it will moderate it self, least it be termed craft or deceit.
By these effects the Student may easily perceive, how necessary it will be unto
him.

The qualities above mentioned, do so directly respect a Student, that they may
be numbered in the rank either of adiuments, or ornaments. One thing yet
remains, which is, to be placed and raunged amongst the ornaments only, being
a mere ornament, yet it does as much adorn, as the other do help: and that
is courtesy or mildnes, which does as much deck and illustrate any gentleman,
as the dyamond does the gold to which it is fastened, or as the chain of the
neck does give a luster to the bravery of the other parts, it sets in
order, garnisheth and graceth the other gifts of the mind, without which they
should be unsavory, and want applause. I distinguish it from Ciuilitye called
Vrbanitas, and (...), for that is only to be seen in public meetings and
assemblyes, but this may show it self within a man's private walls, or
chamber, and may be used betwixt man and man. Most loathsome and deformed are
the manners of the Stoikes, who whilst in sowernes of mind they seek to
overcome man's nature, do exceed it, and of men they become beasts. And such
manners have disgraced men of excellent ability. Coriolanus was by nature a
Stoike, and his roughnes of manners is justly and worthily reproved of Dionys.
Halicarnastaus Dionys. Halicarnast. lib. 8.
Cato was both by nature and profession, whom for his bitter austeritie Erasmus
condemns Erasmus in Encom. mo^ae.
. And surely I think that such rugged behavior does relish harshly, and is
sometimes unpleasant to them who by natural inclination do favor it. Hear
therefore a Stoike dispraysing a Stoike. Cu. Piso (says Seneca) fuit a multis
vitijs integer, sed prauus, and cui placebat pro constantia rigor Senec. lib.
1. de ira.
Cu. Piso was free from many faults, but yet a froward man, and was delighted
with stifnes of mind in stead of constancy. Florus has noted the currishnes
of Romulus with a perpetual blot of infamy, Romulus ob asperitatem morum a
Senatu discerptus est Flor. lib. 1. histor.
. Romulus for the roughness of his manners was torn in pieces of the Senate.
But mildness is of that sweet and delectable nature, that it pearceth the
stony hearts of barbarous people, it affects their eyes and ears, it bends
the most stubborn and insolent spirits, it finds an easy way amongst
swords, it overcomes wrath, and alayeth hatred. Valeri. Maxi. lib. 5. c. 1.
. This I commend to the student as a principal mean to gain favor, love,
and good entreatie.

Of the choice which a student of the Law ought to make in his study.
The third Chapter.
Now that we have showed what qualities are convenient for him, who purposes
to gain knowledge and credit by the study of the Law, it remains to give
him some taste of that course which in pursuing his study he may not
unprofitably observe. For though the way were plain, yet to them that know it
not, it is hard and difficulte. And as the first yoke is to the young Steer
heavy, not because he is not able to bear it, but because he is unacquainted
with the carrying of it, so young Students though they be in age and capacity
mature and perfect, yet because they adventure upon a new enterprise whereof
they never had trial, they are somewhat troubled at the first: yet in
continuance of time, by labor and some direction of Veteranes in the Art, they
pearce through the thornie fence or bar of these great difficulties: but
here let the Student take courage unto him, and when the door is opened, let
him not doubt to enter. As he must not neglect time, which is a consuming
treasure, so he must make distinct choice of it, least omitting better
opportunities, he do cast him self into the straites of time and necessities,
whereby he shall find much incombrance, and his proceedinges shall be crossed
by many interruptions. And surely as in all matters of moment, the place where
a thing ought to be done is greatly to be regarded: so likewise the time
wherein it is to be done. For the turning of all temporal affairs does
depend upon these two hynges, and these circumstances do either make or mar
the substance of our actions. It has bin questioned of diverse whether the
morning or the night be more convenient time for the study of the Law, which
because it is no modern doubt, but either part has had favorers and patrons
in all ages, and to the end that by some clerenes of reason the truth of this
matter may appear, I will bestow some pains in the opening of this point.

Marsilius Ficinus a man of excellent learning and judgment does by five
reasons prove that a man should rather rise in the morning to study, then
watch in the night. Marsilius Ficinus lib. de vita sana. c. 7.
His first reason is borrowed of the Astrologers, which he does not greatly
urge, because he had small regard of their vain speculations: but admitting
that they say to be true, he thus reasons: there be three planets which be
very favorable to Students in the course of their studies. Sol, Venus, and
Mercury, all which in the night are most remote from our Hemispheere, and go
into the twelfth house of the heavens, which is called the prison, toward the
West. His second reason is this. The spirits of our bodies do follow the
state and disposition of the air. Now in the morning, when the Sun rises,
the air is subtilized and made rhinne, pure, and free from al gross vapors.
But in the night time it is thickened, and corrupted with contagious
exhalations, which possessing the senses, do pierce into the brain. Thirdly,
the day was made at the first, for labor, and the night for rest, (and
therefore it is said in the 104. Psalm. Thou make darkness and it is night,
wherein all the beasts of the Forest creep forth, when the Sun ryseth, they
retire and couch in their dens. Then goes man forth to his labor, until
the evening.) And whilst the Sun holds and contains his race in our
Hemispheere, with his beams he does open the poares and passages of our
bodies, and from the center, to the circumference of the same, he does enlarge
the humors and the Spirits which makes us more apt to labor and study: but
when he departs from us then all these things are bound and straightened, and
then we are driven and provoked to sleep. Fourthly, it is very healthful
unto us to use labor or study in the morning, which if it should be in the
night the spirits being greatly wasted and consumed by the motion in the
daytime, the body becomes weak, and so is utterly unfit for any kind of
labor. And he that gives himself at that time to study, causes the Spirits
to fly up into the head, and they being so distracted, cannot yield
sufficient service either to the head or to the Stomache. Fiftely if a man
study soon after supper, the nourishment is resolved into gross vapors which
do fill the body and are very noisome obstupatiues to the senses. For the
meat being destitute of heat and spirit, does wax raw and does putrify in
the stomach. So that the brain is offended and our study greatly hindered
and impeached. It may be added for a sixth reason, if any thing may be added to
Ficinus. The spirits wherein all our agillitie and dexterity does consiste, by
which the brain does work, are together with the other parts of the body
refreshed and strengthened. So that in the morning they must needs be more
serviceable then at night. Seuently, the fantasy or imaginatiue part of the
Soul which helps greatly in study, and principally in the study of the
Law, is in the night time confounded and obscured. Lastly the body in the
night time waxes more dulle, so that the mind cannot use it as a convenient
instrument. For when the stomach is full and stuffed with meat, the thick
air being round about us, stopping the poores, the great store and abundance
of humors is carried, as Aristotle says Lib. de somno and vigil. c. 3.
to the head, where it sticks for a time, and lays as it were a lump of
lead upon the brain, which makes us drowsy and proane to sleep: then it
discendeth by steps or degrees, and coming into the other parts does
engender sleep. And it is the opinion of a learned Physician, Lemnius lib. 1.
de complexion. c. 9
that the nightlie study is unseasonable, and that it wearieth and weakneth
Students, making them lean and exhausting their bodies. For by late watchinges
their vital spirits through too much intension are weakened, and their native
humiditie dried up. Demosthenes did study much by candle light, and therefore
his orations were said to smell of the Lamp: but he did not begin to study
till the first entrance of the morning, and herein he did endeavor to excel
every man. But whosoever will follow Demosthenes in this, had need to be well
advised of the strength and constitution of his body and to examine, Quid
valea^t humeri far, et quid far recusent. For nature must not be oppressed,
but measure and mean must be used, least the stomach being made by too much
fatigation unable to digest the meat received, the poares of the body be
clean worn out and extinguished. The whole Senate of Physicians do call the
morning hours, the golden hours, in regard that the body is then in best
temper. This may suffice to persuade, that the morning is more fit for all
kind of study in general, and by consequent for the study of the Law. I
has bin proved by probable reasons, and by authority of wise men. If this
will not serve, hear the voice of wisdom her self. I love them that love
me, and they that seek me early shall find me. Prouer. c. 8. ver. 17.
I have dwelt the longer in this question, because it is very expedient for a
Student, to know the best time of his study, which if it be used in season,
may prosper, and take good effect: otherwise his labor may be unprofitable
God (says) Solomon has made all things good in their time. Ecclesi. c. 3.
And Ecclesiasticus would have every man to observe time. Ecclesi. c. 4.
This therefore I will noe longer handle, being a matter plain, but will
satisfy the Student in other difficulties, which are more frequent and
doubtful, and are occasions, that many which do enter into this study do
break off their course, and bid the Law farewell. The books of Law, say they,
are not pleasant to read, the words or terms are harshe and obscure, the
style no whit delightful, the method none at all. It is a science void of all
proper definitions, artificial divisions, and formal reasons. To answer this
cauil, (for I cannot blainch it whiter.) I will use a two-folde manner of
confirmation, and will show that either the Law has those things which they
deny unto it, or if it do want them, it needs them not. The writings of
wise and grave common weal men learned in the Law are not to be censured by
Grammarians, and Rhetoricians, who make a gallant gloss of Clytemnestraes
mules, Alexanders horse, and such friuilous vanities. For their study was
far different being for the general good and commodious government of the
common weal. And if any man reprove them for want of sharpenes of invention,
and finenes of wit, let him be well advised, and consider the substance of
their works, and he shall find, that they carried Mercury in their brain, and
not on their tongue, and that they wanttd not wisdom, though they were
defective in Rhetoric, which not to have joined with wisdom, is so far from
fault, that if they had conioined it they had committed a fault, for who will
not dispraise and detest curled hair, and paynting of the face in an aged
Matron. And in their writings wherein their chief purpose and address was,
to search out the truth of doubtful matters and to deliver it to posterity,
there could be nothing worse, then a curious kind of style, which is used
commonly of them, that seek to flatter and to dissemble, and to bewitch with a
familiar kind of persuasion the common people, with whom such flowers are of
more account, then substanciall fruit. All kind of things is not convenient
for all sorts of men. Rethoricke I grant is a pleasant thing, and full of
delight. But in professors of gravity, neither comely nor commendable. Who
would not allow a tripping gate, nimble hands, glauncing eyes in a
Stageplaier or dauncer. But in an ancient Citizen, or grave Philosopher, who
would not dislike them, blame them, abhor them. If we see a young Damesell
pleasant and talkatiue, we do not reprove it in her, but if we find that in a
Matron, we loath and condemn it. And truly from the purpose and practice of
grave men, there should be nothing more different, then that which sauoreth
of too much daintiness or curiosity. Alcibiades his shoe is not fit for
Socrates his foot, and it is not convenient for grave men to celebrate the
feast of Bacchus in the Temple of Vesta: there is great distance betwixt the
style of the Courtier, and the professor of the Law: For if the Courtier should
neglect delicate speech, he should be no good Courtier: so if the professor of
the Law should affect it, he should not speak like a Lawier. If Pythagoras
could have lived without meat, he would not have eaten so much as herbs, and
if he could have expressed his meaning by signs or gesture, or by any other
mean then speech, he would never have spoken, so loath was he to offend in
superfluity: Therefore the writers of the Law are not to be reproved for
doing that, which if they had done they might iusty have bin reproved. Cicero
when he treats of matters of Law, speaks like a Lawyer, and a Lawyer must
speak as the Law does speak: Therefore Baro in Epist. ad Com. Just.
says well, the writers of the Law would not have left to posterity, so many
Law-bookes, if they had affected a choice phrase of speech. And surely if when
the Latin tongue did most flourish, the Caesar's and Cicero him self, did not
use any gorgeous and fyled kind of speech in matters of Law, shall we desire it
of Bartolus, Bracton, Britton, and Glanuill, when eloquence was in the Eclipse
or wayne, and exceedingly decayed. Varro says, that by the diverse mixtures of
people and nations, old words grow out of use, and are changed, and new do
take place: Varro lib. 4. de lingua latin.
How can it then be, but that the Common Law should have harsh, obscure,
difficult, and strange terms by the commixtion of the several languages of
the Saxons, Danes, and Normans, the authors of the same. Polybius reports,
that there was such alteration of the Roman language soon after the expulsion
of their king, until his time, that they which were most skillful of antiquity
could hardly understand a great part of the words Polybius lib. 3. hystor.
which doubtless was a great impeachment to learning and knowledge. If the
received words of the Law should be altered, it may well be presumed that many
ancient books of the Civil law, and the old year books would in short
time, be hardly understood: And I am fully persuaded, that if the ancient
Terms of the Law should be changed for more polite and familiar novelties,
the new terms would be nothing so emphaticall and significant as the old.
The words of the law may be compared to certain Images called Sileni
Alcibiadis, whose outward feature was deformed and ouglie, but within they were
full of jewels and precious stones: so the words of the Law, though they be
rude in sound, yet are they preignant in sense. But some perhaps will say mine
ears cannot tolerate such an unpleasant sound and so confused a style, O
delicate fellow, when you go to the Theater or dancing School repose your
self wholly in your ears, but when you come to hear matters of weight handled
and discussed, rest not upon your senses, but upon your mind and understanding.
Alcibiades was more moved by the naked speech of Socrates, then by the labored
eloquence of Pericles: But this Rhetoritian will reply: I confess the Law to
be of it self a reverend and excellent thing: but it would be no whit worse,
if it were more finely and politely delivered. Who will deny that which is
comely of it self, to be made more comely, if other things be added to adorn
it? To answer this briefly and plainly, many things there be to which if you
should add any other thing, you should take away their grace and beawtie. They
be of their own nature in so good estate, that you can not change them, but
you must needs make them worse: A Tomb or pillar of marble, if it should be
painted with any color, should lose the former grace, and be a great deal
worse: and a beawtifull face is often disgraced, by a needles ointment, and so
it is of other things which of them selves are fair and comely: the thing
which is added hydeth that which it finds, and shows that which it
brings: and these things which are handled in the law are not adorned by the
varnishing of art, but are obscured by it. And it is not convenient in such a
serious matter to dally with tropes and figures, nor to riot with
superabunda^ce of words, nor to flourish with eloquence and diaperd phrases: But
yet he will further object, Though it do not belong to the professors of the
Law to speak and write figuratively; yet surely it behooves them to speak and
write in good congruitie, which notwithstanding they do not. I would gladly
know what congruitie it is which Curiosity does require: The fine Rhetorician
will say, absurda consuetudo disrumpenda est: The Lawyer, he will say, vsus
contra rationem annullandus est, he will say that this is not Roman latin,
it is most true: therefore (will he conclude) it is not well spoken, nor
congrue, the argument halteth. The Moscouite will speak of a thing after one
sort: the Fleming after an other sort will utter the same thing: neither of
them speak in Latin, but in their own language: do they not therefore speak
right? yes, they speak right and congrue in their own language, and so do the
Lawyers in their own dialect and language proper to their Art. Does any man
think that these words, Bellum, Exul, Sylua, Proscriptio, manus iniectio,
were unknown to the ancient writers of the Law? Yet sometime they do not use
these, but in stead of them they say, Guerra, Bannitus, Boscus, Attinctura,
Arrestu^. But it is convenient that they should use these latter words, being
proper to their Art or science. Neither is it meet that they should change
them for the words of a strange language. Wherefore Scaliger does upon good
cause dispraise the Graetians, because they do express things merely
foreign and external by words of their own Idiome: and commends the
Romans, because they did apply foreign words to foreign matters. Iuli.
Scaliger in exercitation.
And the common law being derived from the Normans, and other nations, does
conveniently retain the words of the first Inuentors. And because amongst
Lawyers Latin words be used many times in an other sense then they are
vulgarly and commonly taken, it is not good to have the interpretation of such
words from any other then the Lawyers themselves. And though the Grammarians
and Antiquaries do in the Etymologicall interpretation of words excel: yet
the writers of the Law in the Analogical interpretation of such Latin words
as do belong to their art do far surpass them. I do not think any exquisite
skill of the Latin tongue to be necessary in (...) Lawyer: but hold it
sufficient if he know so much thereof, and in such manner, as the common sort of
men, which are conversant in the reading of Latin books. And Plato has a
good saying to this purpose, that these things ought of necessity to be
known, whereof if a man should be ignorant, he should be said to be shallow
Plato lib. 7. de Legi.
and superficial. So much therefore of the Latin tongue ought to be known,
as will keep a man free from such reproachful terms. The ancient Reporters
and handlers of the Law whilst they writ of Fines, Vouchers, Remitters,
Restitution, Releases, and such intricate matters, had no leisure to note the
properties and rules of the Latin tongue in Cicero, Pliny, Plautus, and
Varro: they inquired not which was good Latin, but what was good Law: But they
were wise in their Judgments, circumspect in their advise, sharp witted in
their arguments, grave in their speech, subtle in their questions, cunning in
their resolutions: they were excellently instructed to distinguish of ambiguous
things by most witty diversities, to open and to argue hard and enigmaticall
cases by sound and invincible reasons, to confute that which was false, and
confirm that which was true. And whereas they are impeached for the want of
good and proper definitions, let me ask of these strict Logicians, what a
definition is? I think they will say that it is a brief and plain
declaration of the substance of a thing: and be there none such in the Law?
surely many: but they will have ti to consist of the proper genus and the
proper difference, as they term it, without adding any thing else: But it is
sufficient if it express the nature of the thing, whereunto it is applied. May
May not these be admitted for good definitions, A Fair is a great Market: a
Market is a little Fair: a village is a multitude of houses: a County is a
multitude of villages, Do not these sufficiently express the nature of a
Fair, Market, Village, and County: yet if they should be tried by the
touchstone of the Logicians, they wruld be utterly rejected as not current.
Some do spend a whole decade of hours in doing nothing else, then seeking out
the proper genus and difference of one only thing, and when they have done,
they are scarsely so wise as they were before, they may say of them selves as
Gentilis speaks of them very fitly: Confidentia astra petimus, ruimus in
praecipitia. Abberie. Gentilis li. 4. de Iur. inter^p.
Their divisions like wise are reproved, because they do not flow from the
essence of the thing divided: Yet it is sufficient if they do briefly divide
a thing into his particulers. Who can disallow of this division used in the
Law, whereby all causes are said to be either criminal, or pecuniarie: none
but such as will find a knot in a bulrushe. Again, they say their reasons are
not artificially concluded: Surely, it is not for any man, unless he be in
the Schools to tie himself to a precise kind of syllogysmall logike: But if
it go to the end of the controversy, it is sufficient, and that is the opinion
of Alciat. Alciat. lib. vlt. parerg. c. vltim.
Their Method is amongst other things reproved, or rather their want of
Method, which exception wants truth. All books written of the Law may be
reduced to these four heads: either they are Historical, as the year Books
of the Common Law: and Zasius his counsels in the Civil law, in which no
Method is requisite, but it is sufficient to report the things done, and how
they were done: or explanatory, as Mast. Stamford his Treatise of the
Prerogative, and the discourses of diverse Glossographers, and Commentors in the
Civil Law, wherein no strict Method can be observed: For the Commentor must
needs follow his author every way that he goes: And if there be no Method
in the one, there can not justly be any demand of the other. For he that
undertakes to comment, or to confute, must apply himself wholly to the course
of his author, or the adverse party: And therefore Scaliger said very aptly
to ^ardanus, Sequor te non quo ducis, sed quo trahis: Iul. Scalig. in
exercitati.
Or else they be Miscellaneall, and in such there needs no Method, because
things of diverse sort, and not depending the one upon the other are laid
together: And such are the Abridgements of the Common Law, and the Pandectes of
the Civil Law: Or else they be Monological, being of one certain subject, as M.
Stamford his book entitled the Pleas of the Crown, Ma. Lambards Justice of
peace, whom if any reprove for lack of method, surely his judgment is out of
order, and that excellent Book of Albericus Gentilis, a Ciuilian De
legationibus, then which I have not seen any thing done with more plausible,
artificial, and exact method which as it is very hard for any to imitate, so
it were to be wished, that he would in some other like treatife equal himself.

But yet an other objection having more favorers then the former must be
auuswered, which is that the Law is uncertain, and that Lawyers in their
opinions and arguments do greatly differ, and dissent. But here the matter is
greatly mistaken. For the Law it self, which does consist of agreeable
co^clusions, and of the judgments, awardes and opinions, to which reason and
truth have subscribed, is not uncertain, how-be-it they which do argue of new
questions, and causes never heard off before, or such as for their great
difficultye have not yet bin decided, do in argument contend amongst
themselves: but that which moves disputation is not the obscurity or
doubtful understanding of the Law, but the qualities and circumstances of the
persons, of the actions, and accidents, of the time, the place, the
antecedents, and consequents. And though reason be opposed to reason, and
circumstance to circumstance, yet the Law is never opposed to it self. And if
a man will condemn an art, because the professors and practisers are diverse in
opinion, surely there is no art, nor science, which will be free from
condempnation. Go to the Historiographers, who should report the truth of
every thing, you shall find them at great odds: Lyuie against Polybius,
Plutarche against Liuie, Sigonius against Plutarche, and Xiphilinus the
interpreter and abridger of Dio against his author. Dio reports a prodigious
miracle, which Xiphilinus alters, setting a new face upon it, and
discrediting his author. Xiphili. in vita M. Anto. Philoso.
Go to the Grammarians, you shall find seven great Masters at variance about
this one word Anticomarita. Eras. li. Colloquior. in Synod. Gramma.
Go to the Philosophers, there is great dissension and a diametrical
repugnance of opinions amongst them: there you shall see the Parepatetikes
against the Academikes, the Epicures against the Stoikes, the Cyrenaikes
against the Cynikes, the Nominalles against the Reals, the Carpentarians
against the Ramistes. Go to the School of the Physicians: you shall have the
like disagreement: Galen against Hipocrates, Auenroes against Galen, Auicenna
against Auenroes, Paracelsus against them all, and Erastus against him. Will
any man now condemn History, Grammar, Philosophy, and Physic? If not,
then it is evident, that an Art or Science is not to be reproved, because the
writers thereof do in opinion or argument disagree. No more is the Law to be
dispraised, but rather to be liked for the variety of opinions in it. For as
by the collision or beating together of Flint and Iron fire does appear, So
the truth is disclosed and made manifest by the conflict of reasons. A man
shall more easily and discreetely judge of things (says Aristotle.) If he
have heard the reasons on both sides contending like adversaries. Aristot.
metaphy Sicor. 2. c. 1.
But if some men be more contentious in points of Law, then others, that is the
fault of the men, but not of the art. The knowledge of the Law (says Cicero)
is not Litigious, but the ignorance thereof. Cicer. lib. ^. de Fi^.
And if a man should defer his study of any art, or science, until the
writers thereof did fully, and vnitedly consent, It would be as vain a
thing, as if a man should purpose his journey from London to York, but
should make a vow not to begin his journey, until all the clockes in London
should strike together.

Now that I have removed out of the way all such objections, as might be
occasion of impediment, and interruption to the student, I think it not beside
the purpose, to prescribe and commend unto him some special writers of the
Law, in the reading of which, he may with advantage and overplus bestow his
pains.

He that frames himself to the study of the Civil law, may very profitably
employ his pains in reading of the Code, Nouellaes, and Pandectes, which are
necessary for the profession. Of the ancient writers I think these are most
convenient to be read, Bartolus, Baldus, Paulus de castro, Philippus Decius,
Alciatus, Zasius. Of the latter writers, Budaeus, Duarenus, Cuiacius,
Hotomannus, Donellus, and among these, yea above these, him whom I lately
named Albericus Gentilis, who by his great industry has quickened the dead
body the Civil Law written by the ancient Ciuilians, and has in his learned
labors expressed the judgment of a great state-man: the soundnes of a deep
Philosopher, and the skill of a cunning Ciuilian: Learning in him has showed
all her force, and he is therefore admirable, because he is absolute.

The common Law is for the most part contained in the books called the Annals
of the Law, or year Books, all which are to be read, if the student will
attain to any depthe in the Law. In them he shall see notable arguments well
worthy of pains and consideration. The two late reporters are Ma. Plowden, and
Sir James Dyer, who by a several and distinct kind of discourse, have both
labored to profit posterity. Some humors do more fancy Plowden for his
fulness of argument, and plain kind of proof: others do more like Dyer, for
his strictnes and breuity. Plowden may be compared to Demosthenes, and Dyer to
Phocion, both excellent men, of whom Plutarche reports, that such things as
were learnedly, wittily, copiouslie, and with admiration dilated, and delivered
at large by Demosthenes, were shut up in few words, compendiouslie recited,
and with admiration handled of Phocion.

There be certain ancient writers of the Law, namely Bracton, Britton, and
Glanuille, whom as it is not unprofitable to read, so to rely upon them is
dangerous: for most of that which they do give forth for Law, is now
antiquated, and abolished: their books are monumenta adorandae rubiginis,
which be of more reverence then authority.

Ma. Fortescue in his writing shows a sharp judgment, and in this is
exquisite, and artificial, that where he endeuoreth to be plain, he spares
not to be profound. For he writ to a King, who desired to have intricate things
plainly opened.

Ma. Littleton laid a sure foundation of the Law, and by his own book has
deserved more praise, the^ many writers of note and name by their ample
volumes: out of the great books of the Law he gathered the most special
cases, which were either generally agreed upon, or by the Court awarded to be
Law, or else in all ages received for positive rules. For very few there be
throughout his whole treatise, which may not be signed with one of these three
marks: his book doubtless is of such singularity, that Littleton is not now
the name of a Lawyer, but of the Law it self.

M. Fitzherbert must needs be commended for great pains, and for well
contriuing that which was confusedly mingled together in many year Books: but
he was more beholden to nature, then to art, and whilst he lab^red to be
judicial, he had no precise care of methodicall points: but as he was in
conceit slow, so he was in conclusion sure: and in the treatises which be of
his own penning, he shows great judgment, sound reason, much reading,
perfect experience, and in the whole conueyance of his discourses gives
sufficient proof, that he sought rather to decide then to devise doubtful
questions.

Mast. Brook is more polite, and by popular and familiar reasons has gained
singular credit, and in the facility and compendious form of abridginge
Cases he carries away the garland. But where Ma. Fitzherbert is better
understood, he profits more, and his Abridgement has more sinews, though
the other has more veins, but I am ^oath to make them countermates, and
therefore leave the judgment thereof to others.

In Ma, Parkins his book be many commendable things, delivered by a ready
conceit, and pleasant method: many excellent cases which savor of great
reading, and good experience, his Treatise is to young Students, acceptable and
preciouse, to wh^m his very faults and errors be delightful, but it might
be wished, that he had written with less sharpness of wit, so he had
discoursed with more depth of Judgment. For he breaks the force of weighty
points with the shiuers of nice diversities, yet many things are to be
allowed (...) him, many to be praised, so that the reade^ be careful in his
choice, wherein he was too careless.

In Mast. Stamforde there is force and weight, and no common kind of style: in
matter none has gone beyond him, in method, none has overtaken him: in the
order of his writing he is smoothe, but yet sharp, pleasant, but yet grave:
famous both for Judgment in matters of his profession, and for his great skill
in foreign learning. And surely his method may be a Law to the writers of
the Law which shall succeed him.

Ma. Rastall for his long and laborious travail in collecting matters of
weight, and moment, which lay dispersed, and reducing them to a convenient
form has deserved never to be forgotten. And I know not whether I may more
justly commend him for his greatness of knowledge, or for the largenes of his
books and labors, or for his special care of doing things exactly.

In Ma, Theloall his Digest of writs, diligence and desire to profit is
eminent. He endeavored to be like M. Stamford: but he is so far distant from
the delightful progress of his style, and method, that he may seem to have
lived in some other age a long time before Ma. Stamford. But as his strength
was less, so his labor was equal. For in handling one title of the Law, he
has dealt so painefully, that no point can be named concerning that Title,
which he has not discussed, nay to give him right, has not fully discussed.

Ma. Lambards pains, learning, and Law, appear by his books, which are
conducted by so curious method, and beawtified by such flowers of learning,
that he may well be forted amongst them to whom the Law is most beholden. His
style runs like a te^perate stream, his excellent knowledge and use of
antiquities argues no small reading, and a singular conceit: He has bin so
universally beneficial to the whole Realm, that whosoever despises his
works, bewraieth himself.

M. Crompton has taken great pains in this study, and his books are in
every man's hands, which proves their general allowance, his cases are very
profitable, and apt for the title to which they are applied, and so
compendiously collected, that a man may by them in few hours gain great
knowledge.

Certain Rules to be observed of the Student in the reading of his books.
The fourth Chapter.
NO actions have good success, which be rashly and ex abrupto undertaken
without direction: for where advise fails, there fortune is blind, and not in
other cases, and it is far greater travail to atchiue any matter of
difficulty by self labor, then by the prescription and instruction of
others: Wherefore it shall not be inconvenient to propose certain rules, by
which the Student may hold an even course in the study of the Law.

In the understanding of the Law the Student must not vary or depart from the
proper sense and signification of the words, unless thereby some absurdity,
inconuenie^ce, or injustice may appear: for otherwise the property of words
is strictly to be maintained, and retained. Therefore let him be diligent to
search out the proper sense of words: for as Celsus says, Scire leges non est
verba earum tenere, sed vim et proprietatem, Celsus li. 9. digestor. Plowd.
Comment. 82. per Saunders.
To know the Law is not to know the words of the law, but the force and
property of the words: for words are as it were servants to things, because
they were first invented for the plain and perfect description of things: for
though nature do make soundes, yet industry does coin words, without which
our understanding might be contemplative, but not practical: for without them
the understanding is in manner bound, or maimed, because without freenes of
speech, and plenty of words it can not display it self, nor extend his force
to the opening and discovery of any mean matter. And as art makes the mind to
speak, so the mind or understanding makes art to write. Certain it is, that
without words a man's meaning may not be certainly known: Of words some be
artificial, and some inartificiall: Inartificiall are those which the common
or vulgar sort of men do use for the delivery and declaration of their
intentions and meanings, serving not for the illustrating of arts and
sciences, but only for mutual conference betwixt man and man: Artificial, are
these which the inuentors of arts have devised for acquainting the mind with
the rules and mysteries of their arts, because words fitly and accomodatly used
are the very images and representations of things, which do lead the
understanding as it were by the hand, to the apprehension and perfect knowledge
of the things them selves: wherefore in this respect diligence must be used of
the Student.

2 Where the Law is obscure, that sense must be taken which is least*
prejudicial: for every perfect speech of man consists of two things, of
words, and of meaning, and when both the words and meaning are plain and
manifest, he that doubts of any thing is rather foolish, then curious: But
when the words be directly repugnant to the meaning, the whole proposition or
assertion is merely void. Obscurity in writing or speaking, is when the
sense can not be gathered, 1. by that which of the most part of men is usually
done, 2. nor by that which was usually done by him that uttered the words, 3.
nor by the custom of the country, 4. nor by the common use of speech, 5. nor
by the pr^misses nor by the ^^quel: And therefore if a man will hyre workmen,
and will covenant with them that he will give them as much as other men of the
same village or parish, if some give by day iii. pence, some vi. pence, some
ii. pence, the couenantor in this case shall give but ii. pence: Guido
question. 252.
because in obscuris quod minimum est sequimur: Otherwise it had bin if it had
bin plainly and expressly said (as much as any other man of the said village
or parish.) So if a man promise upon good consideration to give to every of the
Canons of a Cathedral church a quarter of Wheat every year, and the number of
the Canons be augmented: yet the grant is restrained to that number, which was
at the time of the grant. Imo c. literas de resscript. 38. H. 6. 10. 39. H. 6.
6. Temp. E. 1. Common 28. and 21. E. 3. 2. per Wilby.
Yet the Law does sometime construe devises by mediocritie: Philip. Dec.
Comment. ad regul. iur.
As if a man devise to one two cups for his table, without expressing the
metal whereof they shall be made, they shall neither be of gold as the best
metal, nor pewter as the baser metal, but of Silver as a metal betwixt
both: But that is, because every devise ought to be interpreted for the benefit
of the deuisee, and yet as near the meaning, and as far from the prejudice
of the deuisor as may be: Therefore in devises not words but meaning is
followed, and a transposing of the words may be used if the meaning require:
confused things must be distinguished, generality restrained, severed things
must be conjoined, implied things must be explicated. But in bargains and
contractes we must not respect so much that which was meant, as that which is
spoken, because bargains do properly consist in facto, and therefore in
matters of contract a man's will is rather gathered by his words, then by his
meaning: for, propositum in mente retentum nihil operatur, and as the words do
sound, so his will is to be construed: and the words of the contract be the
substance of the contract.

3 When the opinions of the learned in the Law are repugnant the one to the
other, it is the safest and best way to follow that opinion which is most
agreeable to reason: for if contrary reasons be probable, the better of them
is to be chosen, and that which is more consonant to Equity: and where the
reason of the Law does fail, there the disposal of the law does fail: li.
adiger. quamuis. de iur. patron. li. 7. P. tit. 14. c. cum cessante de appell.
As of the contrary part where, the reason of the law takes place, her the law
takes effect. l. non possunt et li. nam et ait Pedius de ll. in p.
But if contrary reasons do seem to be of great force, whereof the one
tends to a public good, the other aymeth at a private advantage, that which
is for the common good is more to be embraced, favored, and followed: for that
which is good to many must needs be good to every particular person: and these
things which are generally expedient, ar with good reason preferred before such
things as do peculiarly profit. Julian in l. ita vulnerat. quod si quis absurd
ad leg. Aquilei.
But that reason which is for the profit of a private man, and does not
prejudice common right, may well be admitted. Public profit may be considered
after four manners, 1. When profit does accrue both generally and particularly,
as by the government of Magistrates, l. i. huius. ff. de insti. et iur.
2, when the profit is general, but not particular: as locupletatio aerarij,
the enriching of the Treasury in Cities and Towns corporate, l. pen. c. de
princip. li. 12.
3. when the profit is private, but yet a public good comes of it: as the
dowry of women, and the infranchising of Citizens, 4. when it does so profit
particulerly, as that it does not disprofit generally: g. as when we say that
it is not expedient, that men should mispend their goods, or throw them into
the Sea: That reason therefore is of more force in law, which is more generally
commodious.

Atque ipsa vtilitas iusti prope matter et aequi. Horati.
It is good therefore for the Student to fifth out the reason of the Law, and
that by very diligent and earnest search: for the reason of the law is the life
and soul of the Law: Wherefore not without good cause is Bartolus reproved of
the Ciuilians, Alciat. li. 1. de verb. sign.
for that he denied reason to be of the essence of the Law: And surely I think
there is no Law wholly without reason, I mean which was not grounded upon reason
at the fifth making of it. Yet I will confess that the reason of many Laws is
so obscure, and uncertain, that it can hardly be found out, conceived, or
delivered. The Law is the invention of wise men, who would not make any thing
public without reason, though the reason of the Law may be hid from him, from
me, and from a number of men: Neither are we to think that any Law is therefore
without reason, because a reason thereof can not be rendered: for as Cicero said
well, Iniquum est quod accidit non agnoscere, si, cur id accidat, reperire
nequeamus, Cicer. in ora. ad Brut.
It is an unjust thing not to acknowledge the thing which has happened, because
we cannot find out the reason, wherefore it happened. It is not good to affirm
that the Laws made by wise men do want reason, because we can not discover ye
reason. But as I do not like Plato his conceit, when he forbids young men not
to inquire of the reason of the laws: Plat. lib. 1. de leg.
So to be too curious in the inquisition of it, will be rather matter of trouble
then of praise to the Students: Therefore it is a point of humility and modesty
to think those things, which by grave and sage men have bin established for
law, not to be without reason, though ye reason thereof can not be discerned.
And that which Gentilis wittily speaks of the Civil law, may be affirmed of
the common law of this realm, Rationem vbique habet, sed non vbique conspicuam.
Alber. Gentilis lib. 2. Epistol. c. 2.
Castrensis is so peremptory for ye reason of the law yt he boldly avouches,
yt he never saw any law, whereof he did not see the reason. Castr. in eo item si
reip.
Theodosius did ascribe such authority to the deceassed professors of the
law, that he would have their answers in doubtful matters to have the force
and strength of a Law. And the same thing was done by Augustus, as Pomponius
reports. li. 2. de orig. iur.
But yet I could wish, as Gentilis Abberic. Gentil. lib. 3. Epistol. c. 17.
and Alcitat Alciat. lib. 4. perarerg. c. 17.
do require, that the aucthorities and cases of the learned writers of the Law
should rather be weighed, then numbered: that is, should rather be examined how
they accord with reason, then how many they be in number: but if it so fall
out, that two men of great judgment do dissent, his argument is to be held for
Law, which reason does inform and enforce to be agreeable to the truth: For no
man will intend the meaning of the Law to be, that the opinion of any man,
though singular in knowledge, should be preferred before the truth: For both
the Lawyer and Judge are the ministers and dispensers of Justice, and of the
gifts of God, and are servants to God him self: but the servant must not do
that which the Master will not permit: but neither Justice nor God will do any
thing against the truth: Therefore, neither the Lawyer nor Judge ought to do any
thing against ye truth. If Justice should judge according to opinion, and not
according to verity, it should the^ do injury, which thing is against her
nature. And though many arguments be made for the preserving and maintayning of
the rigor of Law, yet none of them ought so to be admitted against justice and
truth, as that occasion of injury may seem thence to arise, whence right and
equity should proceed: l. meminerint. c. un. vi. li^. 42. coll. 9.
because no reason of the law, no course of equity will tolerate, that those
things which have been conveniently introduced for the profit of men, should be
against their profit with a more hard and rigorous interpretation restreined.
For these things which be established for a certain end, ought not to work
the contrary. l. quod favor* c. de legi*
But some perhaps will object, that a Judge ought to determine and a Lawyer
ought to argue, according to the knowledge which he has by the written law,
and that is the reason and conscience of a Lawyer, as he is a Lawyer. But
surely such arguments are not proofs, and such judgments if they be not
according to the truth of the thing it self, in reason are not sound nor
maintenable. For every proof should be a true assertion, and every judgment
the rule of truth. And how can that seem just according to the law, which
appears to a man's conscience to be unjust. Surely the light of the truth in
an honest mind dimmeth and obscureth all cauils and quillets: And it is a
frivolous dream to think, that a Lawyer has one conscience as a Lawyer, and
an other conscience as a Christian. For he has but one soul, and knowledge of
the truth, and therefore but one conscience: for conscientia is cordis
scientia, and no reason will require that a lie, by any distinction should be
preferred before the truth. The principal mean to enquire after the truth of
every thing, is to examine of two or more contrary reasons whether is more
probable. That which is plausible to common understanding is termed probable,
and when the words of a covenant or devise be clear and manifest, we follow
the literal sense of the^ without farther inuestigation, because in things
that be certain, and apparent, there is no place for conjecture: but when the
words be obscure, or when some thing is omitted, least the grant, covenant,
or devise do fail, we have always recourse to that which is more probable,
and we imagine that more was spoken then written, and more intended, then
uttered. And it is not convenient, that in the affairs of men, the
interpretation which depends upon probable conjecture should be excluded. l.
non aliter. ff. de legate. 3.
A thing may be probable many ways, first, decis. Neapol. 44. Numb. 26.
by the common use of speech, Marius Salmonius ad. l. omnes populi ff. de
iustitia and iure.
secondly, by comparing the consequent with the antecedent, thirdly, by the
circumstances of a man's actions, fourthly, by the concordance or agreement with
the law, because every one is intended to conform his will according to law,
unless the contrary be proved: quaero.. inter locatorem. ff. locat.
but it may be said, that where the words of the law do fail, the law it
self does fail. L. 4.. totie^ ff. de damn. infer.
And words were invented, that they might show the meaning of the parties,
therefore we must not regard that which is probable, but that which the words
do sound. l. si repetendi c. de condi^. ob causam.
To this I answer, that there ought to be no departing from the words, and
from the true property, unless there be apparent proof of an other meaning:
l. non alit^^ ff. de leg. 3.
but where an other meaning does appear, there the tongue yields to the
heart, and the words do give place to the meaning. Bal. in c. mandat. de
rescript.
The words only in such case are not to be regarded, but we must consider
what was meant by the person, quantity, quality, place, time, precedents,
consequents, and other circumstances. l. penult. ff. ad exhib. Alciat. in l. 1.
ff. de verb. sign.
And where it is said that if the words fail the law does fail, it is true,
unless there be some secret intent of the law to the contrary, Tiraquell.
in l. si vnquam ad verb. lib. Number. 35. C. de reuoc. donat.
the ground whereof is probability. And though a man's sense and meaning be
declared by his words, Quintilian. lib. 7. c. 7.
yet because there be more things which we think, then which we speak or
write, the speech of a man is not always the touchstone of the mind, but the
concurrence of circumstances: and though a man's words ought to be taken most
strongly against him, ad. d. l. si inguam in princi. number. 54.
yet they are well to be sifted and examined l. semper in stipulationibu^ ff.
eod.
least the interpretation be too burdenous in some case, Loriotus de reg.
axiom. 105.
and so unjust against the party. A man's speech does consist of words and
meaning, even as a man himself does cons^st of body and soul, or to make the
matter more plai^e, the words are but the superficies, and the intent or
meaning is the substance. l. tutor petitus. 1. ff. de excus. tut.
And the law traceth the meaning of a man by the circumstances, even as the
hunter traceth the hare by the print of his foot. Bartol. in l. si quis serio
coll. vltim c. de fur* and Cons. 275. lib 2. number. 2.
Yet I would not that a man's deed or act in the country should be made
frustrate by some Jewish or mystical interpretation: but such an intendment
must be taken, as the words being compare^ with circumstances will yield. For
words are not by violence to be racked, but by circumstance to be ruled. And
we must always so interpret, that a man's right may be vpholden. But it may be
further objected, that in graunts and contracts, and in other private affairs
Casus omissus habetur pro omisso l. si commodissim. ff. de liber. and posthu.
l. post dotem. ff. solut. mat^im.
and the inte^^ion or meaning of a man, which is not apparent and manifest, is
as a child unborn, which is of no account till he be brought to light. l. Vlt.
c. de posth. haered. instit. Bald. ad l. 1. C. qui admit. ad bonor. post. and
col. 9.
For a man's speech is an external act, which is ordained for the declaration
of his inward meaning, l. Labeo ff. de supell. legate.
and therefore words are said to be the limits of our meaning. Socyn consi. 4.
lib. 41. Jason. Cons. 140. lib. 2.
To answer directly, these words ( Casus omissus etc.) are to be understood
only in such cases where a thing is omitted, both in respect of the not
expressing of it, and in respect of the not implying it. But where the law
will uphold the meaning of the party, there is no need of words: and though
words were invented, that they might express our thoughts, yet by them only
our meaning is not signified. But there be other signs l. 3. ff. de testi. l.
de minore. ff. de quaest.
namely, the circumstances before the act, in the act, and after the act.
Thus it is evident, that the best and most probable reason in the conflict of
opposite arguments, is to be sought for by the Student, and how it may be found.

4 The best interpreter of the law is common reason and intendement. l. si de
interpret. ff. de ll.
Wherefore if any one man's opinion do differ from common reason, let the
Student avoid it. Neither are such things without cause to be altered, which
have always heretofore received a certain interpretation. l. minime ff. de
legi.
Neither is the common law any other thing, then a determinate order
established and ratified by common consent. Wherefore Bodinus says not well,
who puts this difference betwixt a law and a custom, in that a custom is
accepted by the plausible agreement of the multitude, but a law springs up
in a moment, Bodin. lib. 1. de repub. c. 10.
and is commanded by the authority of the Rular, many times against the
liking of them that are bound by it. For common law is that which is made and
approved by common allowance, and therefore it is law, because it is commonly
used for law. Wherefore Athenaeus Athenaeus lib. 12. c. 22.
and Polibyus histor. lib. 6.
Polibius do upon good ground and reason reprove the laws of Plato, because no
nation of Greece could be persuaded to use them: but as Plato feigned laws, so
he might likewise faigne men to use them: therefore Horace said rightly, Quid
leges sine moribus vanae proficiunt? Laws without use are vain and profit
not. Horat. lib. 4. ^arm* ode. 24.
But here it is good for the Student to be assured of what nature and quality
the thing is which I call common reason or intendement, for that may seem to
offer doubt, whether we ought to ascribe common reason and opinion to the
number of authors, or to the worthiness of them, or to the persuasion of reason
which does concludenter demonstrare to the sense and understanding of ye most
part of men of indifferent capacity. I would have common opinion taken
according to this last bra^ch.

5 The things which be odious in law must be restrained, and the things which
be favorable must be enlarged. Private customs are odious in the eye of law,
and whatsoever swarueth from common right: c. cum delect. de consuetud. l. cum
quidam. ff. de lib. and posth.
for the common law was framed in favor of public tranquillity, and therefore
the departure from it must needs be accounted odious. Aymo consil. 170. nu. 3.
Baldus in l. non possunt ff. de legib.
The law is more proane to acquit, then to condemn: l. Arrianus. ff. de
oblig. and act.
and because it is better with the restraint of an odious constitution, to
absolve one that is guilty, then with the enlarging and amplifying of it to
condemn one that is innocent, l. absentem. ff. de paenis.
therefore there is nothing that requires more diligence and consideration,
then to deal warily where there is great danger to any party, that a man may
not rashly determine of a man's credit, blood, or life: since these things be of
that quality, that being once lost, they ca^ never be repaired. cap. vbi maius
sup. de elect. lib. 6.
But to know whether things be favorable or odious, the things are not to be
considered in themselves, but theffects which proceed of the^ Alciat. ad l. 2.
in number. 44. de verb. oblig.
as dower is favored in respect of the widowhood, and desolatenes of the woman
whose husband is deceassed. L. 1. ff. solut. matrim.


6 It must likewise be observed, that when a thing is forbidden, all things
that follow thereof are likewise forbidden: as on the contrary part when a thing
is granted, all things are implicatiuely granted with it, whereby we may
attain to the thing granted: l. ad rem mobil. ff. de procur. l. 2. ff. de
iurisd. om. iud. Temps E. 1. Grauntes. 41.
and if the beginning of things be forbidden, the end also is forbidden
according to the rule, Qui meditatur principiu^ meditatur etia^ finem, bald. ad
L. quamuis. c. de fide comm.
and things are principally forbidden for the end to which they are directed.
But here a distinction is to be used, for where the conseque^t is of it self
available, and does not necessarily depend upon the power and virtue of the
antecedent, it may be of force, though the antecedent be forbidden, Baldus ad
d. l. non dubi. in 13. oppositione
for then it is without the cause of the prohibition: but if it depend
essentially upon the antecedent, it is otherwise. For the better understanding
of this rule, it is good to be seen what may properly be said a principal
thing, and what an accessorie. That is principal which is of greatest moment:
an accessorie thing is that, which by consequence goes with the principal. If
the Queen grant unto one Cognitionem causae, her highness grants unto him
the hearing of the parties, and the examination of witnesses. So the margarites
or precious stones that be in gold or silver, do yield unto it, and do pass
with it, because they are but the ornaments thereof, and were applied to the
decking and beawtifying of it. An accessorie briefly may be taken to be that,
which is adjoined to a thing, and is less then the thing to which it is
annexed, either in substance or in value, or in respect both of substance and
value.

7 The validity of an act must be especially favored, unless there be a
manifest nullitie in the proceeding. l. quoties ff. de verb. oblig.
Therefore whenever the nullitie of an act shall appear by the proceeding of
the parties, which is said to be evident, and notorious and excluding all
cavil, Bart. in l. 3. parag. condemnat. ff. de re iud.
it is to be held as void, but if the nullitie proposed do not so appear, but
requires a deeper search, because many times error is objected that the Suit
may be protracted, there consideration must be used. But in doubtful causes
interpretation must be so made, that the act may rather stand then fall. But
the objection of error is always to be favored, when the error assigned does
concern the figure and solemnity of judgment. 9. E. 4. 3. gloss. in verb.
defensiones in de saepe de verb. figu.
And therefore he that will dispute of the validity of an award or judgment,
ought to be wary and careful, that he put the axe to the root, and that he
first examine the jurisdiction and power of the Judge, because that being the
basis and foundation of the judgment, if that fall, the rest cannot stand. It
is therefore to be considered whether he were a compete^t Judge by reason of
the cause, of the parties, of the time, and the place. For by reason of the
suit or cause, a Judge may be incompetent, as if the cause belong to a mere
jurisdiction, and the Judge be only a Magistrate in a certain corporation: or
if the cause be civil, and the Judge who takes connusans of it be Judge of
Jail delivery, or if the Judge be secular, and the cause Ecclesiastical, or
if the Judge have some other limited jurisdiction, and he takes connusans of a
cause not comprehended within the lists and bounds of his commission, he may be
incompetent also by reason of the place, as if he judge of causes without his
territory, or circuit, or else within his territory, but yet in a place
exempted, he may be incompetent by reason of the time, as if he did judge
before he had his commission, or after his commission expired, or if his
jurisdiction were suspended, as at festival times, which we call dies non
iuridicos, or at such a time, when a greater Judge was present: or if the Judge
were called to a higher place, or if he were forbidden to exercise his power.
And also the person and quality of the party is to be considered, because
some by reason of a legal impediment are incapable of the aduantidge of law,
as these that are outlawed, excommunicate, and out of the Queens protection.
And there can be no fast root or sure ground of their proceedings, for such
are to be denied audience, because their offense and default ought not to find
patronage. Likewise there may be a default in ye party making an Attorney, as
if he could not make an Attorney in that cause, or else by reason of the
Attorney himself, as if he be incapable of such an office as being not
lawfulby aucthorised. But if a jurisdiction be given and granted to one, it is
to be intended to be given him accumulatiue, and non privative, rather to
enlarge, then to diminish his power. And though a Judge of the Jail delivery
being appointed and ordained by commission to the hearing of causes criminal,
may not principally inquire of causes civil and pecuniarie, because it is a
Jurisdiction limited, yet incidently and as it were by the way, for the better
examining of capital crimes, he may take notice of such things. But if the
process and judgment be framed against one, who is not only not subject to
his jurisdiction, but is also free from the jurisdiction of every man living,
as if the party be dead, concerning whom, no act can be conceived or vpheld,
the Judgment is void.

Thus have I showed to the Student in so general manner as the order of this
treatise does require, and likewise so particularly, as to his understanding
may be plain and manifest, what course he ought to take in examining the
cases, reasons, opinions, arguments, proceedings, and judgments, whereof he
shall find great store and abundance in his books. Now I will by favor
descend to describe and delineate unto him briefly (for it is a matter which
may be handled plainly and in few words) what course he ought to observe in
the exercise of his study.

Of the exercise and conference which the Student of the law ought to use.
The fifth Chapter.
EVery art and knowledge produces effects, and like a good weapon is
unsheathed and used in time convenient, otherwise it would be quickly ouercast
and eaten with rust. But there is nothing that with so much brightness and glory
illustrateth our knowledge, as the orderly and judicial applying and
accommodating of that which we have read. For as a man knows by his books,
so he is known by his practice, and by that which he is able to perform in the
faculty which he professes, and he which knows to himself is not known of
other men. Wherefore I suppose it a thing of exceeding moment for the Student,
to demean himself well in his conference and exercise, least the multitude of
hours which he has spent, do slip from him without use, as the sand falls
out of the howre-glasse, when no man sees or minds it.

1 The student of the law ought to have great regard of his speech, and that
he deliver his opinion or argument in convenient and orderly sort, not after a
rude confused and impolite manner, and he who is not only wise but eloquent,
is without comparison the best in all professions which consist in practice and
in the form of speech. Therefore parents and tutors in the Uniuersity should
have principal regard, that he who is to address himself to the study of the
law, may be fit with a plausible grace to discourse and dispute, and even in
the prime of our years this care must be had. For by nature we hold that fast
which in our tender years we conceive, and the worse sort of things do
steadfastly abide in us, the better is soon turned to worse, but in this matter
it is good to follow the precepts of such as be neither too curious nor too
ignorant: for there is nothing more like a may game then these vaineglorious
persons, who have decked themselves with a false persuasion of knowledge. To
the Student of the law I do therefore think this course necessary, because
he must live in great celebritie in the assembly of the people, and in the
midst of the common weal. Let him therefore enure himself from his youth,
to frequent assemblyes: let him not be afraid of men, nor appalled or tymerous
through a shadowed kind of life, least when he should make use of his
study, his eyes das^e at midday, and all things be new unto him, who
seeks that in himself, which is to be done and performed in a multitude:
Yet I would not have him too curious and deynty in his speech, for we must
use words as we use coin, those which be common and current. And it is a
great error for a man to estrange himself from the common use of speech, and
to exceeding preciseness in words, and style, does quench the heat of our
invention, and brideleth the course of our wits. Yet it is commendable to
have in our discourses both good words, and good matter. For Cicero did not
fight with armor of proof only, but with bright-shining harness, when he
did not only gain the admiration of the Romans, but their acclamation also
and applause. But let good words conteyne in them good matter, that the
Argument or discourse may not shine as it were by oil and ointment but by
blood and complexion. It is a feauer-like pain to endure a man's speech,
loadned with superfluous words. In all things decorum must be observed, least
that which we say, do turn to laughter, or loathing, and purchase the name
of folly, a mean must be kept, least our speech be dry and faint, or else
too copious, and full of circumstaunces: yet it is better for the invention to
be abundaunt and copious, then to be lean and poor. Words if they be not
vested with the substance of things, are of no force: Rhetoric which is the
Artificer of persuasion, if it be severed from circumstaunces, and raunge
without learning by a facile kind of sway. It is called Atechina. If it be
applied to the destruction of good men, it is termed Cacotechina, but if it
be bestowed in vain and superfluous matters, it may be termed
Mataeotechina, a frivolous labor, and a tryflyng art. There is nothing which
more beawtifieth a man's speech, then an apt division or partition of the
things which be handled, which does ease the mind of the hearer, prepares
the mind of the understander, and refreshes the memory, and (as Justinian
says) the obscurytie which does rise of a confused text, is by separation and
division dispersed and removed. Justin. in. alio. insti. quib. modis tes.
infirm. and in. sed ne in primis de leg.
And as the division of fields does make the tillage more plentiful and
sightly, so does partition in the handling of causes, adorn and garnish them.
These things may be aptly divided which have a separate reason, and are sorted
to diverse ends.

2 Students shall not do amiss, if at certain times they meet amongst
themselves, and do propose such things as they have read or ^eard by that mean
to be assured of the opinion of others in such matters. By this course it may
be brought to pass, that every one may both better understand, and more
firmly retain in memory the things which he has read or heard, and these
things which be to good purpose uttered of others, he may enjoy as his own.
For private conference there is no time amiss; Adrianus the Emperor (as Dio
reports) did handle and discuss points of law at dynner time. M. Cat^ even
in the Court whiles the Senate was assembling, did busy himself in reading:
and surely, he that has a mind to learn, may learn at every place, and at
every time.

3 Gentlemen students of the Law ought by domestical Moots to exercise and
conform themselves to greater and waightier attempts, for it is a point of
warlike policy, as appears by Vegetius to train young Soldiers by sleight
and small skirmishes for more valerous and haughty proceedinges, Veget. lib. 1.
de re militari.
for such a shadowed kind of contention does open the way, and give courage
unto them to argue matters in public place and Courts of Record, and it will
not be amiss, sometimes to reason together, before men of more reading and
greater judgment which may friendly admonish them, and if they err reduce
them into the right way, It is good to bring such matters into question as be
disputable, and may deserve argument, for it were a vain thing to make a doubt
of that which is plain and manifest, as whether a rent or annui^ie ought to be
paid to a dead man, or whether a man may commit an offense against the Law
without punishment and such like, wherein if a man should a^ke any man's
opinion, he might perhaps receive such answer as Labio did of Iubentius
Celsus: Aut non intellig^ quid sit de quo me consulis, aut valde stulta est
consultatio tua. l. Domitins Labio de testa^.
It is evident that one Law may with good probability hear several
interpretations, but that sense is most to be embraced which does take away the
occasion of doubting, the way to remove doubt, is to examine well the reasons
of the contrary part, wherefore Baldus says well.

Ferro aperire viam qui per contraria transit. In l. precib. c. de impub.
And to loose doubts is to find out the truth as Aristotle says, Arist.
Metaphys. 3.
but often conference and private debating of points of Law, is the fountain
and original of exceeding profit, for by it the wit, the memory and the
tongue, are greatly furthered and helped, and a man is made more ready and bold
for public matters, and the truth which is the mark of our study, does more
easily appear. Wherefore it is not unfitly said of Marcellus the lawier, that
every art by continual exercise does receive increase. In l. legatis. ornatri.
de leg. 3.
The wit if it be somewhat dull is by conference more sharpened, if it be ripe
and ready it is a great deal more furthered, and to the memory nothing can be
more profitable, which of it self is so brittle and tender, that unless it be
renewed with continual exercise, it will easily perish. And in vain shall a
man pass away the night without s^epe, or the day without recreation, in vain
shall he run over the volumes of the Law, in vain shall he inquire after the
opinions of the learned, unless his memory do represent and readily offer unto
him these things being with great labor followed and atchiued when time and
occasion shall require, I need not show how much it does benefit and polish
the tongue: for conference is the proper exercise of the tongue. I said that
boldness is procured by the frequent meeting and communication of students, and
I will auow that which I have auerred, for as by degrees a man does converse and
talk with his companions and such as be better then himself, so by degrees he
grows bolder, which may be gathered by that Fable of Esope: The Fox did by
chance mete the Lion whom he never saw before, and was so affrighted that his
senses were almost lost, when he saw him the second time, he feared likewise,
but nothing so much as before, but when he saw him the third time, he was so
little afraid, that he went unto him and talked with him. I said further that
it was the high way to discern the truth of every thing, and therefore
Archadius says of Herennius Modestinus that by much disputation he atteined
to excellent judgment, In. l. mune^.. mista. de muneri. and honori.
wherefore let the student often resort unto his fellow students, and amongst
them let him be well advised of his choice.

4 After private and home exercise, public exercise must ensue, which must not
be rashly done, but there must be both maturitie of years and advise, least the
unripe brain do make the forehead to blush, and in stead of praise we reap
contempt. Surely it is the beginning and foundation of impudency, for a man to
because the opening of the door, and the holding of the Candle was not parcel
of the consu^mation of the act, and so was the Law taken 3. of Queen
Elizabeth. 3. Eliz. 186. Dyer.
An adulterer did counsel the woman to murder the child when it should be
borne, the child was borne and murdered by the Midwife in presence of the
Mother, and by her commandment, The Mother and the Midwife be principal, and
the Adulterer but accessory, because his counsel was before the birth, and he
was not cooperant in the act, but because the force of his persuasion and
counsel did continue until the murder it being not countermanded by him,
therefore he was held and adjudged an accessarie, but whether in the same case
if the woman be admitted to be accessory, whether she should be a traitresse
or no, because the principal is no traitor, is a question which may well
bear argument on the one side upon the letter of the Law, and on the other
side upon the meaning of the Law, but of this matter I have given the Student a
sufficient taste, and my meaning was in this treatise rather to draw the
lineaments of things, then to discuss them to the full. These may serve to
prepare the mind of the Student to handle such things as may seem to be
contradictory in the body of the Law.

6 That the Student may with more ease compass and accomplish the things
precedent, it is good for him to have great care of preserving and continuing
his memory, and therefore it is a profitable course under titles to digest the
cases of the Law, into which they may transfer such things as they have either
heard or read, neither is it safe to trust to other men's Abridgements which are
little available to such as have read little, but that which we by our own
sweat and labor do gain, we do firmly retain, and in it we do principally
delight, and I am persuaded there has never bin any learned in the Law, and
judicial, who has not made a collection of his own, though he has not
neglected the Abridgements of others, The memory is specially to be helped and
increased of the Student, for though it be the gift of nature, yet by industry
it becomes more excellent. For the integrity of the memory it is good to have
sound health and convenient digestion of the meat, and a mind free from all
other thoughts, It helps it much to make good divisions, for he that
deuideth things aright, can never err in the order of things. There is nothing
surely which does either more grow by diligence or by negligence more decay
then memory, It is not good trusting to a suddeine memory, but a nights rest
will add great strength unto it. Of what force memory is by nature and labor
Themistocles may witness, who in one years space did speak the Persian
language very perfectly and Mithridates who did well understand the two and
twenty languages of the nations whom he did govern. M. Crassus whiles he was
President of Asia attained to the five differences of the Greek tongue. Cyrus
did remember the names of all his Soldiors who were in his Camp. And if memory
be necessary for any science, surely to the profession of the Law, it is of
weighty importance, which because it does pursue accidentia, and infinita
requires no help of nature so much as memory, for the understanding
conueyeth the cases to that treasury; out of which it draws them as often as
use and opportunity does demand. But if the understanding be good, and the
memory naught, a man shall be a Lawyer to day and none to morrow. Wherefore in
this part the Student must excel, and that he may excel, he must labor, and
that he may labor, he must have health, which I wish unto him.

That the understanding of the Student ought to be proportionable to the
intendement of the Law.
The sixth Chapter.
THe Law considers things according to public respect, that is, as much as
concerns the common weal, not according to their contingencie in facto,
which is every man's object, and familiar to common sense, and therefore needs
not any artificall handling: And the Students understanding must be so
sequestered and re^^ued from vulgar opinion: being the mother of error, and
measuring things only by the skin, and color, that he must comprehend and
conclude many things, which are very remote from the reach of the the senses,
and from ordinary apprehension: in which contemplation the common Law of this
Realm of England above all other does show wonderful sharpnes, and a most
exquisite conceit, subtilizing things whereof common sense has but a confuse
knowledge, being guyded by the principal reason and inseparable truth of every
thing, which the understanding straineth out of the secret and hidden causes of
things: for as in herbs, if we touch them outwardly, we do not find nor
feel any moisture in them, but rather take them to be vrie, until by pressing
or distilling of them, we wring out a juice proper to their nature: So the Law
does conceive and conclude many things of ordinary contingents, which common
sense can not perceive, but rather imagines them to be clean contrary to the
truth, whereas they may to a good understanding easily appear to be true by
the certainty and necessary coordination of their causes and reasons. That
this may be made evident I mean to annexe some particulars for the explaning
thereof.

1 It is clear by Law, that a term and a freehold of the self same thing may
be both in one man at one time, yet if this be delivered to a superficial
understanding, it will seem a paradoxe. Tenant for term of years makes his
executors and dies, the executors purchases the reuersion, in this case both
the term and fee-simple are in the executor to several purposes: for the term
shall be assets to the use of the testator, and the fee simple free inheritance
for the use of the executor and his heirs, 43. E. 3. 27. et. Br. cases.
And if a man be seized of land of an estate for life, the remainder to his
executors for years, he may devise this term or assign it. 16. E. 2. per
Herle, Covenants 25.
And if lessee for years grant his term to the wife of him in ye reuersion,
and to a stranger, the inheritance of the husband can not extinguish the moitie
of ye term: because he has the inheritance in his own right, and the term
in right of his wife. 14. Eliz. 416. Com. Bracebridges case.
A man seized of land in right of his wife is attainted of felony, and the king
seiseth the land pro vita viri, the king has but a chattel and the wife the
freehold: for if a stranger enter, and the husband dye, the wife shall have an
Assise. 4. E. 3. 47.


2 Likewise it will seem strange, though in Law and reason it be true, that a
man should be remitted to his land to some intent, and yet not to an other: As
if a recovery be had upon a false title against tenant in tail, the tenant in
tail dies, the issue enters, he is in of his first right against all but
only the recoueror. 12. E. 4. 21. per Choke.
So if tenant in tail discontinue, and his son and heir apparent disseiseth
the discontinuee to the use of the father, the tenant in tail dies, the son
by M. Chookes opinion is in his remitter against all, but only the
discontinuee. 12. E. 4. 21. per Choke. et vide 7. R. 2. tit Enter en le Per, en
le collect. de Bellew.
the issue in tail which has good cause of a Formedon in the discender, is of
couin that A. should disseise the discontinuee against whom he recouereth: he
shall not be remitted in respect of him, but shall be accounted a disseisor: 18.
H. 8. 5. 15. E. 4. 4.
but against all others it seems that he is remitted. Tenant in tail makes
a feoffement to the use of his wife and his son being heir apparent to the
intaile and dies, the issue is remitted against all persons but only the
woman. 4. E. 6. 68. Dyer.


A title may be executed to some intent, and yet not executed to an other: And
therefore if there be tenant for term of life, the remainder in fee to a
stranger, against whom a recovery is had pro loco and tempore in a Warrantia
chartae, brought by a stranger of other land, he in the remainder dies, the
recouerer is impleaded and voucheth the heir of him in the remainder, and
recouereth, tenant for life dies, execution shall be ^ued against the heir of
the land whereof his auncestor had a remainder, because there was a remainder
executed in the father to this intent at the time of the Warrantia chartae
brought: 15. E. 4. 13. per Littleton.
but to all other intents it was executory, for it was not executed that the
wife might be endowed, nor for him in the remainder to bring a writ of right,
40. E. 3. 43.
But the remainder in such cases is to some intents executed: for if he in the
remainder had aliened his remainder in Mortmaine, the lord might have entered,
15. E. 4. 13.
and upon such a remainder the lord may have a Cessauit, 27. E. 3. 87.
but the heir shall not have an Assise of Mortdauncester. 39. E. 3. 3.
Mortdauncester 50. Fitzh. Na. bre. 196. k.


4 A thing may be extinct or in suspense in one respect, and in Esse in an
other respect: the father being tenant in tail alieneth the land with
warrantie, and has a rent charge in fee issuing out of the land of his son
and heir apparent, which rent discendeth to the son, this rent is a good
assets for the value in respect of the discontinuee: and yet it is extinct in
respect of the issue. 31. E. 3. Garrantie 39.
A man seized of a rent service is bound in statute staple, and after
purchases the land, out of which the rent is issuing after execution, the rent
is extinct, as to the conusor, but in Esse as to the conusee. 4. Eliz. 205.
Dyer.
A corrodie is granted to I. S. for life, who grants it back to the
grauntor for term of years rendering rent, the corrodie is in Esse as to the
payment of the rent, but in suspense as to the taking of the corrodie. 20. E.
4. 12. 22. E. 4. 17. 18.
And it was lately ruled in one Caires case in the Court of wards, that if a
man held land of the Queen by a certain rent, and the Queen grants the
rent to a stranger, who grants it to the tenant, the rent is extinct as to
the payment, but in Esse as to the tenure. The King seized of a forest
granted the office of the forrester to one rendering rent, and he grants the
forest to an other, the forrester forfayteth his office, yet the grauntor
shall have the rent: 26. Ass. p. 60.
So that it must needs be that the office to the intendment of law is to that
intent in Esse. And if a man grant to an other a rent out of his land in fee
upon condition, that if the grauntee or any of his heirs dye, their heir
being within age, the rent shall cease during the minority, if the grauntee
dye his heir within age, his wife shall have dower, but cessabit executio
during the nonage: 10. H. 7. 13. per Keble.
But in this case it seems that if the heir dye during his nonage, the wife
of the heir shall not have dower of the rent: because it was never leuiable by
the son, as it was by the father. A man seysed of two acres of land has
issue two daughters and dies, now the rent is in suspense, as to one moitie,
and in Esse as to an other moitie. 9. E. 3. Charge 4. 9. Ass. p. 22.


5 The intendement of the Law is as strong in a matter of law, as the truth
it self in a matter in facto: And therefore if A. be disseised, and his brother
makes a release with warrantie to the disseisee, and afterward enters into
religion, this warrantie shall be a bar to A. although that he be living:
34. E. 3. Garrantie 72.
for A. may have his land by descent, and therefore it seems to be reason,
that the warrantie should discende upon him as his heir. Note here of what
validity the intendement of Law is touching a civil death. The Wardein of the
Fleet who has the office in fee dies seized, and the office discendeth to
his son and heir, being then in prison, the Law does presently discharge him
of imprisonment, because he is to be at large the better to look to others,
that be in prison. Plow. Com^ Plats c. 37.
A man makes a lease to one for term of life, rendering the first seven
years a rose, and if he will hold the land any longer then seven years, that
then he shall pay four Marks yearly: liuerie is made, the lessee surrendreth
at the end of the first seven years, his estate was adjudged to be but a
term ab initio, and no freehold, and the writ of covenant brought against him
for not repayring was qui tenuit ad terminum annorum. 50. E. 3. 27.
If a man make a lease of land excepting the trees which grow upon the land,
the trees are severed in law: for he has no reuersion of them, and if he sell
them, and after the sale make a feoffement, the feoffee shall not have them,
because they were severed by the vendition or sale of them, 20. H. ^. 22.
for by the exception they were severed from the term, but not from the
inheritance, but by the vendition they were severed from the inheritance. If
the Baylife of the land do demand a rent service, and the tenant denies it,
and the Baylife says that he will distraine for it* and the tenant says that
he shall not distrayne, wherefore the Baylife dare not proceed further to
take a distress, for doubt of death, this is a disseystn of the rent in the
eye of the Law. 49. E. 3. 14. Assise 66.
And if a rent service be warranted to one, and the land does escheat, the Law
as M. Finchden thinks transferreth the warrantie to the land. 45. E. 3.
Voucher 72. per Finchden.


6. One thing in the understanding of Law may be of several natures in several
respects, and so one writ may be two several writs to two several intents: In
an action of debt the declaration was of x. li. upon a sale, and v. li. which
he had delivered to the defendaut to redeliuer, and it was held good, because
the action was in the debet and detinet, and the warrantie of attorney and the
essoine in this case shall be in placito debiti. 32. E. 3. Brief 288.
Quaere, If a man lease land to one for term of years rendering rent, and the
lessor grants his rent to a stranger, and the lessee surrendreth; this does
not extinguish the rent, for now it is a rent seck which does not depend upon
the reuersion, ^0. E. 4. 12.
And so one man to the understanding of Law may have several capacities or
respects: For if a man disseise a feme sole, being an inheritrix of certain
land, and after he takes her to wife, and they have issue, and the husband is
disseised, and the disseisor leuieth a fine with proclamations, the husband
dies four years after the proclamations, and before the fifth year be passed,
the issue being of full age, and after the wife dies, and the fifth year
passes, now the issue is bound as heir to his father, yet he may have other
five years, as heir to his mother, to be accounted from the death of his
Father. Plow. Com. Stowels c. 367
So if I. S. be tenant of land, for term of an other man's life, the remainder
to an other for life, the remainder to the said I. S. for term of his life, or
in fee: and he is disseised, and the disseisor leuieth a fine with
Proclamations, and the five years incur, now is I. S. bound for the present
estate, but if he in the mesne remainder for life die, he shall have other
five years for the other estate. Ibid.
So if a man have an estate in land for the life of A. the reuersion to
himself for the life of B. the remainder to himself for the life of C. and is
disseised, and the disseisour leuieth a fine with Proclamations, he shall have
five years severally after every several estate determined. Plow. Com. 368.
Stow. cas.
I. S. gives land to A. his daughter in tail, and has issue B. another
daughter, and dies, A. dies having issue C. a Precipe is brought against C.
who voucheth to warrantie her self and B. as heirs to the donour of the
reuersion to have the warrantie paramount, in this case is C. both the vouchor
and the vouchee. 2. H. 6. 16.
A term is devised to one who is made executor, he enters, this is an
administration and an execution of the term unto him, and he is both deuisee
and executor. 20. Eli. Com^ Weldens cas
A. couenanteth by Indenture with B. that the son of A. shall marry the
daughter of B. and that therefore B. shall give unto A. an 100. li. and if the
marriage did not take effect before such a day that then A. and his heirs
should stand seized to the use of B. and his heirs until the hundred pound be
paid by A. his heirs or executours B. dies, and after the marriage takes
not effect, the use and possession of the land vesteth in the heir of B. but
Quaere says Brook whether he shall be in ward or no, for he is an heir and
yet he is a purchasor. 3. Mar. Br. Feff. al uses 59. and vide 3. Mar. 128. Die.
Wilf. cas and 13. E. 3. Br^ Exting. 45.
If I. S. be Deane of P. I may give him land to him and his successors, and to
him and to his heirs, there he takes both as Deane and as a private man, and
is tenant in common with him self: so if a rent charge be granted in such
manner, he shall join with himself in an Auowry. 24. H. 8. 30. per Pollard
Likewise the Law may deny one a benefit as he is I. S. and yet allow it unto
him as he is executor to I. N. and therefore if an executour be Outlawed, or
Excommunicated, which be disabilities in Law: yet as an executour he may
maintain an action, because he sueth and is to recover to the use of an other
person. 14. H. 6. 14. 21. H. 6. 3
and so an executour may have an action of trespass in his own name, without
nameing his companion in the executorshippe, if goods be taken out of his
possession. 42. E. 3. Execut^s 67.
For he is possessed of them as a private man, but he is possessed of them to
the use of an other as executour. 11. H. 6. 35
And he need not in the case aforesaid name, himself executour. 12. R. 2.
Executors 75.
For if he do, it may tend to the abatement of the writ according to M. Kebles
opinion. 16. H. 7. 4. per Keble 19. H. 6. 65. per New^.
who says that the possession of one of the executors (his meaning is as he is
executor) is the possession of both, and herewith agrees the opinion of
Newton, but by their favors though the property of the executors in the goods
of the testator be one and the same, yet the possession may be several, for he
that has the custody of goods may only be said to be in real and actual
possession of the same, which kind of possession is only hear meant, for
which cause a writ of Detinue that concerns the possession of goods, shall
be brought only against that executor who is possessed of the goods.

7 21. H. 6. 1. 39 E. 3. 59. H. 5. 14 11. H. 4. 46
The Law may work several things in one instant as if a disseisor make a
lease for years, and after he and the disseisee release, by one deed to the
tenant for years, the Law adiudgeth the release of the disseisor first to take
effect, and after the release of the disseisee, for there is no priuity nor
estate in the lessee, upon which the release of the disseisee may inure, if the
Law do not make such construction. 21. Eli. Com^ 539. Para. cas.
If the tenant for thirty years make a lease for ten years, and they both
surrender to him in the reuersion, the surrender is good for both estates, and
yet the lessee for ten years, could not surrender by himself for defaulte
of priuitie, but when the other ioineth with him, his surrender shall he taken
to go before and the other to follow it. 14. H. 7. 1. and 4.
Likewise if the tenant for term of life surrender to the grauntee of the
reuersion, this is both an Attournement and also a Surrender. 19. Eliz. 258.
Dyer.
So if a man have land by descent by the Mother side, and leaseth it for
years, the lessee couenanteth and grants to pay yearly to the lessour and
his heirs xx. s. the lessor dies, the Law in a moment will convey the
reuersion, to the heir of the part of the Mother, and the twenty shillings to
the heir of the Fathers side, because it is a su^me in gross. Plow. Com^ 132.
Brow. cas


8 By intendement and admittance of Law a thing suspended may be revived, for
if the donour disseise the donee in tail, and after makes a feoffement, and
the tenant in tail reentreth, now the feoffee shall have the reuersion. 9. H.
7. 25. per Fineux
So if the heir in tail enters upon the discontinuee, and makes a
feoffement upon condition, and for the condition broken reentreth, and after a
recovery is had by the discontinuee, the issue in tail is now restored to his
first action, and the entaile is revived, for by the breach of the condition
the feoffement is disanulled. 23. H. 8 Br. Restore al primer acc' 5.
Tenant for life, the remainder in tail, the remainder in fee to the heirs of
the tenant for term of life, grants a rent charge in fee, this shall charge
the land during his life, but it shall be suspended during the entaile, and
after the entaile determined it shall be revived, and shall charge the heir of
the tenant for life. 5. E. 4. 2.


9 The Law alters the nature or substance of a thing by matter, ex post
facto, A man seized of land in right of his wife, enters into religion, the
wife alieneth, the husband is deraigned, the husband may reenter into the
land. 33. E. 3. Ent^ congeable 52.
So if a man be indebted to a villain, who recouereth in an action of debt,
and after the debtour purchases the manor to which the villain is regardant,
and after alieneth it, the villain may now have execution. 12. H. 4. Execuc'
28.
If a man make a lease for term of an other man's life rendering rent, and the
arrerages incur, the lessor shall not have an action of debt, because he has
a franktenement in the rent, but if Cesty que vie die, now is the freehold as
to the rent converted into a chattell, and now he shall have an action of
debt. 39. H. 6. 26. per Paston
Likewise a deuorce alters the estate of frankemariage into a bare freehoold.
7. H. 4. 16.
If a man add a condition to a single Obligation after the delivery, this
makes the Obligation void, for now it is not his deed, and the same Law is of
the rasing or enterlining of a condition after the delivery of the Obligation.
36. H. 6. 5 per Ash. Just.
If land be given to one in tail, and the donee gives the land to the
donour, and to a stranger for term of their lives, this is a discontinuance
conditional, namely if the stranger survive. 28. H. 8. 7 Die. per Fitzh.
If the Sheriff attache one by force of a Capias that is iustistable, but if
he return a Non est inuentus upon the writ, he is a trespassour ab initio. 3.
H. 7. 11
If I. disseise I. S. and levy a fine to I. N. and after I. S. enters upon I.
N. and enfeoffeth me, and I. N. enters upon me, and I bring my Assise, and I.
N. pleads the fine in bar, I may avoid the fine by showing the matter
aforesaid. 15. E. 4. 5 per Litt^.
If a fine be leuyed of land in ancient demesne, and the Lord disanulleth the
fine levied at the Common Law, he has restored the right to him that levied
the fine. 16. E. 2. cont^ claim 10
If he which abateth after the death of the tenant in fee simple make a
Feoffement upon condition to be performed within nine years ensuing, and after
the feoffee leuieth a fine with Proclamations, and the five years incur the
condition is broken, and the abator reentreth, now the heir of him that dyed
seysed may have an Assise of Mordauncestor against the abator, whereas before
he was bound by the fine. Plow. Com^ 358. b Sto. cas.
Tenant in tail makes a Feoffement and takes back an estate in fee, and
binds him self in statute Merchant, and then makes a Feoffement upon
condition, and after the recognisance is put in execution, and the tenant in
tail dies, and the heir in tail being within age enters for the condition
broken, he is remitted, and the recognisans avoided, but otherwise it had bin
if he had bin of full age: for then he coming in under the Estoppell should
not have avoided the Estoppel, nor by consequence the recognisans. 8. H. 7. 7.
If my very tenant be seized of a Manor held of the King in Capite, and of an
other Manor held of me by knights service, and he is disseised of the Manor
held of the King, and afterward dies seized of the Manor held of me,
whereupon I seize the body of the heir, and after the heir within age
recouereth the Manor held of the King, now the King may have my land also in
Ward, because the heir shall now be adjudged to be in by descent, and the
King shall have the Wardeshippe of the body. 15. E. 4. 14 per Littleton
Skreenes cas
If my Horse strike one, and after I sell the Horse, and afterward the party
that was stricken, dies of the stroke, now shall the Horse be forfayted as a
Deodand. Com^ 290. per Car. dame Hales. cas
If a villain inflicte upon himself a mortal wound, and the Lord seyseth
his goods, and then the Villain dies, now shall the Queen have his goods
because he is Felo de se. Ibid.
A man administreth of his own wrong, and after takes letters of
Administration of the Ordinary, this shall relate to the death of the
intestate. 9. E. 4. 33.
the heir charge land which is after recovered in a writ of Dower, the woman
shall hold it discharged. 10. H. 7. Charge 3.
Thus it is evident that the understanding of the Law works especially upon
relations on the first causes of things reducing through many straites of
colorable pretenses and objections the right of a thing to him to whom it
appertains, according to the quality and exigence of the said right and
title, so that the understanding of the Student when it enters into the survey
of these intricate and hidden points, must be of this ability to compound
things, and to resolve them by imagination, to build and destroy, and to
turn sail by circumstances and occurrences: for there is no case which
accidents may not alter, but that one thing may counteruaile an other, or that
a defect may be supplied by enforcement of reason, or that a wrong may be
purged and transfourmed into right, and black as it were changed into white,
contrary to nature is the work of intelligence reflecting upon it self, some
perhaps carry such spiced and scrupulus consciences, that they cannot abide any
fiction or representation of a thing that is not in facto, but surely the
supposall admittance and intendement of the Law is necessary, without which
neither the science of the Law, nor any other which consist in contemplation
and abstraction of the essences of things from the confusion and mixture of
circumstances can be of any worth or force. And though I must confess that
every thing, which is imagined to be done, and is not actually done is a
fantasy, or an untruth, yet this must be granted, that, that which is not
really done, and yet for avoiding inconvenience must be supposed to be done in
facto is not a fault, though it be false. Many things of this kind and quality
have I before immediately proposed which will be void of all effect, if you
take imagination from the Law: Let it therefore be considered what this
imagination is whereof we speak, that by the description thereof it may be
better known. It may thus appear unto us, Fictio a supposall or admittance of
a thing to be is, legis aduersus veritatem in re possibili ex iusta causa
dispositio, the disposing of the Law against a matter of truth in a thing that
is possible, grounded upon just cause: and there is great difference betwixt
imagination and presumption, because fictio iuris the imagination of law tantum
operatur quantum veritas ipsa, in the conclusions and decisions of law, and the
Law makes sometime ens ex non ente in intelligence, though not in existence:
but praesumptio stat in dubio it is doubted of, and yet it is accounted
veritatis comes, the companion of truth, qu^tenus in contrarium nulla est
probatio: And the use of supposall or fiction in the Law is only to supply
that quod desideratur in facto, which is wanting in fact, vt ex ipsa
produc^ntur very i^ris effectus, that true effects and conclusions of law may
proceed from it. The Logicians say that the universals are not in rerum
natura, for if they were they should be monstra: for an universal man, or an
universal tree comprehending in it all trees, is r^^her by understanding to be
comprehended then by sense to be compassed, yet I would not have any
imagination to be used: but where Equity and the orderly coherence of things
does require it.

That the Student ought well to conceive the reason and Justice of the Law in
distinguishing and establishing the property and community of things.
The seventh Chapter.
THe end and effect of the Law is to settle the property and right of things
in them to whom they belong: And to judge those things common which continuance
of time and the intercourse of parties has distributed and warranted to many,
for if all things should be common, there should be nothing in order, and if
nothing should be common, men would hardly be kept in duitie, for then should
friendship, society, and conversation, the comforts of mankind fail, which
would turn the whole common weal into a wilderness: therefore the most prudent
and politic Lawmakers have thought it most convenient, that betwixt these two
extremities a middle and even course should be taken, whereby property might
be reteigned, and yet community preserved. Plato, because once he was of
opinion that all things ought to be common, has therefore many blows of his
scholar Aristotle writing against him in his Politikes, in which book he has
a learned difference, that all that be common (...) in use but not (...) in
possession and title, which notwithstanding is not generally and indefinitely
to be admitted, because then it tends to the overthrow and utter subversion
of all commonweals: But Plato being after better advised did retractate his
former opinion, and labors to confute it: for in his book of Laws he
writes in one place, Let every man have the free use and possession of his
goods by law, whether he be citizen or stranger, Plat. lib. 8. de legib.
and in an other place: The distinction of demeanes, inheritances, and titles,
is the foundation of all private contractes, which must be severely established
by Law: therefore meum and tuum ought to be in every common weal. Plat. lib.
11. de legib.
And again, Let the inheritances and properties of things be definite and
certain in every common weal, and let a certain manner of purchasing them be
prescribed by Law. Plat. lib. 12. de ligib.
Thus it is evident that a distinct property of things is commodious and
convenient for the good administration of a common weal: It is of two sorts,
either an absolute and indefeasible property, or else a qualified property and
sub modo. An absolute property is such which is not in any sort subject to the
claim of any other: but a qualified property is that, which one man may
claim after one sort, and with a certain limitation, and an other may claim
after an other manner, and without limitation: As if a man do hyre beasts of
an other to manure his land for a certain term, he that hyreth them has a
property in the beasts pro tempore, and therefore if the beasts during the
term be taken away, he may have a general Repleuine: 42. E. 3. 18. 11. H. 4.
17. 17. E. 4. 2.
So he may have of beasts which be in his custody and were committed to his
keeping: 47. E. 3. 12.
And so he may have a general writ of Trespass for the taking or dryueing
away of beasts in his custody, though the absolute property be in an other
man: But if he which has the very property does take them, an action of the
case will only lie 48. E. 3. 20. 11. H. 4. 23.
And the Bailie of corn or money, being out of sack or bag, has so far
forth a property in the thing delivered, that if the Bailie be afterward
attainted of felony, he shall forfait the corn and the money: for it cannot
be known whether they be mine or no. 3. E. 3. Corone 317. 323. 334.
And the Lord may have a Repleuine of the beasts of his villain, or bondsman,
if he have bin seized of his villain. 42. E. 3. 18. Na. br. Fitz. 69. 9. H.
6. 25. per Bab. 19. E. 3. Repleuin 32. 33. E. 3. Rep. 43
And it appears by diverse books, that in an action of trespass, it is no
plea to say that the property, that is the very property, is in an other.
12. H. 6. 19. 27. H. 8. 21.
And it is said likewise, that he out of whose possession goods are stolen,
may have an Appeal: and he likewise may have an Appeal who is the very
proprietarie. 19. E. 3. Repleuin 32.
And therefore it is a firm conclusion in law, that if sheep be delivered, or
leased to one for a certain time to marle his ground, the delivery or demise
is a good plea in bar of an action of Trespass, or Repleuine, because he
has a property modo et forma against the baylor himself, or lessour, and may
have an action against him for taking them away within the time. 21. H. 7. 14.


2 And as the property of things may be particular or general, so likewise
it may be joint or several: A joint property is where two or more are jointly
interessed in a thing: A several property when they have several interestes
in several things: and therefore where the property or right in goods and
chattels is joint, there the action which is brought to try the property must
not be several: And therefore in a writ of Rauishment of a ward the
defendant said that the plaintiff had nothing in the seygniorie but only in
common with such a one, and this was held a good plea, without saying that he
had nothing in the ward in seueraltie, or without showing how he held in
common in parcenarie, or by iointenauncie. 6. H. 4. 6. 12. H. 6. 4. 22. H. 6.
14. and 1. E. 4. 7.
And so if the property be several, the action must not be joint but
several: And therefore if in a writ of Repleuine brought by two for certain
beasts, if the property of some of the beasts belong to one of them only,
and the property of some of the beasts to the other, the writ shall abate.
28. E. 3. 92. 3. H. 4. 12. 34. H. 6. 37. 2. E. 4. 23. 10. E. 4. 2. 8. E. 3. 15.
Thus it is evident that the Law does maintain and uphold the joint and
several property of things, without which the common weal could not
consist. Now let us consider how the community of things is likewise
respected by Law.

3 A man may observe and deduce his account from former times, that it has bin
thought very necessary and convenient that mutual commerce and trafique
betwixt Nation and Nation should be entertained and continued: Plat. lib. 12.
de legib.
And therefore Plato wisely admonishes, peregrinorum commercia respub. ne
auersetur: And Amasis the Egyptian king was so glad of the commerce and resort
of strangers, that he granted to the Grecian merchants being mere aliens,
the use and exercise of their rites and religion in their own language: And to
the end that strangers might more commodiously practice their negotiation in
that Realm, there was a certain place appointed in that kingdom, namely
Naucrate for the receipt of foreign wares, Herodot. lib. 2.
which course is greatly approved by Aristotle, whose opinion is, that a
principal City must be erected in some convenient place whereto things which
be necessary to this life may be abundantly conveyed, and to which there may
be easy passing for them that be in league with us, and hard for others:
Arist. 5. polit. cap. 7. 6. polit. ca. 7. et lib. 7. ca. 4. et 5.
and therefore says he it ought to be situate near to the sea. 7. polit.
cap. 5.
And doubtless just was the quarrel and complaint of the people of Megara
against the Athenians, who had utterly barred and secluded them from their
havens, and from all marting with them: Plutarch. in Peric.
for he which breaks and dissolueth the reciprocal intercourse of nations,
is an enemy to the society of mankind. And Strabo in his last book notes it
as the property of the Barbarians, to repulse and keep out of their
territories all strangers, which custom is against the Law of Nations, what
a great point of inhumanitie is it to deny them the sea which by nature is open
to all: Vlpian. lib. 8. Digestor. tit. 4. c. 14.
yea, it ought to be as common as the use of the air: Celsus li. 43. Digestor.
tit. 8. c. 3.
and all creatures may claim the free use of that, as may appear by that
^aying of Daedalus:

Omnia possideat, non possidet era Minos. Ovid. in Metamorph.

Though Minos all things do possess, the air is not his own.
And the shore of the sea is by nature common to all, as Neralius says, c. 14.
tit. Digestor. de acquirend. rerum domini.
and though Empires and kingdoms be divided, yet the use of such things
remains still in common, and therefore the saying of Maro in the person of
one of his traueilers was uttered with good reason: Quod genus hoc hominu^,
quaeue hunc tam barbara more^ permittit patria? hospitio prohibemur arenae. but
yet to enemies, because in them the league of friendship does fail, the right
of fellowship should not be granted. For grossly are they deceived, who would
without restraint have all things common, of which error the Anabaptists are
patrons, and do endeavor to ground their error upon scripture, but falsely, for
Abraham and the Patriarchs were men of great riches: Joshua did publicly and
privately distribnte his goods to the people of Israel. There be in Solomon
precepts of the propriety of things. And God would not have said, Thou shall
not steal, if he would have had all things common: for to steal, is to take
away goods wherein others have a property, and therefore theft is said to be
contrectatio rei alienae animo furandi, inuito illo cuius illa res est.
Stamford. fol. 24.


3 But yet the rule of charity and society requires that some things should
be in regard of use and benefit common to other, and therefore by customs of
Countries, and by law, the offspring of these customs, the earth is in part
appropriated unto some, and in part participated and made common to others.
Therefore the Common law does well allow and maintain the common use of
certain things, as namely, the use of Fishing in another man's Pond, 18. H. 6.
29. and 92. 17. E. 4. 7. 7. H. 7. 13. 18. E. 4. 4.
of pasture for his beasts in an other man's soil, 9. H. 6. 36. 27. H. 6. 10.
15. E. 3. Common. 12. 22. Assis. pl. 36. 36. Assis. pl. 3. 4. H. 6. 13. 37. H.
6. 34. 4. E. 4. 29. 10. E. 3. 15. 10. E. 3. 56. 4. E. 3. 4. 15. Assis. pl. 5.
14. E. 3. Bar. 277. 17. E. 2. Common. 23. 22. H. 6. 51.
of taking of an estouer or maintenance of wood in another man's grove, N. B.
Quod permit. 11. Elizab. 281. Die.
of having a franchise and liberty in an other man's Manor or Seignorie, 13.
E. 45. 10. H. 7. 13. 7. E. 4. 10. 48. E. 3. 17. 30. E. 3. 20. 3. H. 6. 12. 34.
H. 6. 43.
and lastly, of having a way through an other man's ground. 33. H. 6. 26. 8. E.
4. 9. 6. E. 3. 23. 2. E. 4. 9. 20. E. 3. Admeas. 8. 21. E. 3. 2. 11. H. 4. 82.
2. H. 4. 11.


4 Some things there are, the property whereof the law can not vest in any,
and therefore it leaves them to the occupant, that is in plain terms to him
that can seize them, as things which are by nature ferae naturae, as beasts,
birds, or fishes, being in their own liberty. And as to the property it is
not material whether they be taken in a man's own ground, or in an other
man's, and such things be his no longer then they be in his possession or
custodye: for when they have escaped and recovered their natural and
pristinate liberty, then they cease to be his, but then the law understands
such things to have recovered their natural liberty, when they are either
past the view, or else being in view they be hard to be followed, and recovered.
The nature of Bees is wild, and therefore when a swarm of them lights upon
thy tree, they are no more thine before they be covered with thy hiue,
Iustinia. lib. Institut. 2.
then hawks, which have made their neasts in some of thy trees, or doves in
thy doue-house for though the young birds be thine, whereof thou may bring an
action of trespass, quare vi and armis pullos esperueriorum suorum in bosco
indificantium, or columbas columbaris sui caepit, which writ is not only
maintenable, when the doue-house is broken or the door open, and the young
doves be taken out of their neastes, but an action of trespass will also lie for
ye troubling or hurting of the old doves within the doue-house, though they be
ferae naturae, as well as for chasing and killing conies in a man's warren, 16.
E. 4. 7. 22. H. 6. 6. 67. 18. E. 4. 8.
yet he shall not use this word suos, 43. E. 3. 24. 12. H. 8. per Newdig. 14.
Eliz. 307. Die.
in his writ, yet because he has them by reason of his Warren or Doue-house
wherein he has a property, he shall have an action for the chasing or the
taking of them. 8. E. 4. 5. 22. H. 6. 55. N. B. Fitzh. en le brief de
trespass.
The nature of Cranes and Doves is wild: neither is it material that by
custom they are wont anolare and reuolare, to fly from home, and return
home. And in such things which are came, and by custom are wont to depart and
yet to return, this rule is allowed, that so long they may be said to be
thine, as they have animum reuertendi. And felony cannot be committed in the
taking of beasts that be savage, if they be savage and untamed at the time of
the taking, nor for taking of Doves being out of a Douecoate, nor for taking of
Fishes being at large in the river, for such taking is not contrectatio rei
alienae sed quae est nullius in bonis. 18. H. 8. 2. 22. Assis. pl. 95.
And the stealing of a Do which is tame and domestical is fellonie, but then
says M. Stamford, it seems that he that steals it should have certain
knowledge that it is tame Stamf. lib. 1. c. 16.
but if the Do be killed and then stolen, this is felony. 10. E. 4. 15.
And though a man may have for the taking of his Ferret an action of trespass,
because he is profitable to take Connies for the use of his master. Yet
because a Ferret is ferae naturae, a man cannot have an appeal of fellonie for
him, no more then he may have for the stealing of his Hawk and Popiniay, or
such like, for such things are ferae naturae, and a man can have no property
in them, neither can he say in his writ feras suas, for that implies a
contradiction, and because they are savage, therefore they are not tithable.
But when such things are made came by my labor and cost, the property of them
is changed, and the nature altered, and then if a man take them out of my
possession, I may have an action. For a man may have an action quare molossum
suum cepit, because he is necessary for the keeping of his house, or the
keeping of his fold or a fish pond. 12. H. 8. 3. Fillowes C. per Brook.
Pollarde. Brudnell. Newport and Newdigate.
But the nature of hens and geese is not savage, and therefore if they shall
fly away, though they be past thine eyesight, notwithstanding in what place
so ever they be, they cease not to be thine: and who so ever deteyneth them, is
punishable by way of action. Iustini. lib. Institution. 2.


4 In the Civil law there is this case, certain Sheep were carried away from
the Shepherd of A. by Wolfes, an husbandman of the next village having pursued
them with great and strong dogs which he kept for the safety of his beasts,
recovered them from the Wolfes, for the dogs did enforce the Wolfes to leave
them, and when A. did demand the Sheep, the question was whether the sheep
became his that did so recover them, or remained still the sheep of A, for the
dogs did get them by a kind of hunting: yet Pomponius thought in this case,
that as those things which are taken either on sea, or on land, do cease to be
theirs that took them, when they are come to their natural liberty, so by
the same reason our goods taken away with beasts living either in the sea, or
on the land, do cease to be ours when the beasts that took them have escaped
our pursuit. And who will affirm that that continues to be ours which a bird
flying hither and thither, carries out of our barn, or out of our field, or by
any means carries it away from us, if therefore it cease to be ours when it
comes to the mouths of beasts, in common apperance, irrecuperably, it must
needs become his who first recouereth it, and so be made proper to the
occupant, even as a fish, or bird, which has escaped our power, if it be taken
of an other, is streightway his, but he thinks it more reasonable that it
should continue ours, so long as it may be recovered. Vlpianus lib. 19. ad
edictum.


5 Likewise a thing pro derelicto habita, waiued and forsaken, is nullius in
bonis, as when a man for fear of a tempest casts his things into the sea, or
some danger being imminent, leaves them upon the land, or else of his own free
will leaves that which is his own sine spe rehabendi. 29. E. 3. 29. 12. E. 4.
5.
If a thing be fallen out of a chariot or wagon, it may be said to be lost or
waiued. Vlpia. lib. 56. ad edictum.
And if a man have a liberty to take wayfes and strayes in his manor by
prescription, and certain beasts be wayued or do stray within the precincts of
his manor, and a stranger takes them, he that has the manor shall not have
an action of trespass general for the taking of them before he has seized
them, 16. Elizab. 138. Die.
though the law be taken to be otherwise by some. ibid. and Fitzh. N. B. 19.
But 13. E. 3. a writ was maintained by an Abbot by reason of his franchise in
the like case, but that was an action upon the case, which proves that the
property was not in him before seizure. 13. E. 3. Brief 678.
But it has been held for clear law, that felony is not committed in the
taking of treasury found, wreck of the sea, wayfe and stray, and such like,
unless they have been before seized, and the reason is, quia dominus rerum non
apparet, ideo cuius sunt incertum est, and therefore the punishment in such
cases is by fine, and not by the taking away of life and member. 22. Assis. pl.
99.
Such lands, the property whereof has been executed by possession, cannot be
wayued but by matter of record. 7. E. 4. 7. and 20.
And it is a certain rule and sound reason, that such things as cannot pass
but by matter of record, cannot be wayued or relinquished, but by matter of
record. 8. H. 4. 13.


6 Such things are said to be nullius in bonis, which have not from time out of
mind bin known to belong to any man, as treasures hid in the earth, as when
any money, gold, silver, plate bullion is found in any place, and no man
knows in whom the property is. The law bestows it upon the King, and it
becomes res fiscalis, parcel of the treasury royal, and therefore it is
called in the common law treasure troue, that is to say, treasure found,
whereby it appears, that the King is not proprietarie of it, till it be
found, but it is before nullius in bonis. But if any mine of metal be found
in any ground, that always pertains to the Lord of the soil, except it be a
mine of gold or silver, or a mine which has veins of gold and silver, which
shall always be the Kings in whose ground soever they be found: Exposit. des
terms de ley, Plowd. in le case de informat. pur mines.
and in ancient time, as M. Bracton says, it belonged by the law of nature
to him that found it: but now by the law of nations it is res fisci, and
belongs to the King: but heretofore it has been ruled quod thesaurus non
competit regi, nisi quando nemo scit quis abscondit th^saurum: Fitzh. corone
446.
for then (as M. Stamford collecteth) it shall belong to him in whom the
property was before, and if he dye before such finding, his executors shall
have it. Stamf. lib. 1. cap. 42.
And because there might befall some square or variance betwixt the Lord of the
soil, and the King about the property of such treasure, it is therefore
decided quod thesaurus competit domino regi and non domino libertatis si non
sit per verba specialia aut per praescriptionem. Fitzh. corone. 281. 436.


7 And things are said to be nullius in bonis by common consent, as things
consecrate and religious: for though the goods belonging to a Church, as
belles, seruicebookes, surplices, chalices, and other things, must be supposed
in a writ of trespass brought by the Churchwardens to be bona parochianorum in
custodia nostra existentium. 8. E. 4. 6. 37. H. 6. 30. 12. H. 7. 27. 8. H. 5.
4. 11. H. 4. 12. 19. H. 6. 66.
Yet in that the law gives the action to the Churchwardens, and to their
successors, for the recovery of such goods unjustly taken, and does give the
property to the parishioners, this properly must be intended to be to the use
of the church, that is, to the use of the parochians, as they are the Church:
for though it be true that Rolfe says, 8. H. 5. that a church parochial can
not otherwise be intended, but a house made of stones, and walls, and roof,
and such material things which can not take by gift or feofment no more then a
church conuentuall which lacks a sovereign: 8. H. 5. 4.
yet it cannot be denied that the parishioners are incorporate for the
purchasing of personal things, and that in regard of such capacity, they
may be said to be the Church it self, as well as the Parson and his
successors in ancient time were said to be the Church in the purchase of land
and realties, which may appear by this case: Land was devised to one for life,
the remainder to an other for term of life, the remainder to the Church of S.
Andrew in Holburne, this is adjudged to be a good devise, 21. R. 2. Deuis. 27.
and this must needs go to the Parson and his successors, because the
Churchwardens and parishioners were never admitted by law to purchase land to
the use of the Church. And Belknappe said, that the clothes of a dead man
being found dead in the field, did belong to his executors if he had made a
will, otherwise that they should be delivered to the Church for celebration of
divine service for the soul of the dead: for his meaning is (as I take it)
that the Ordinary should intermeddle with them for the disposing of them. 48.
E. 3. Enditement. 27.
And if a man take a coate-armor which hangs over a dead man's tomb in a
Church, the enditement must be bona executorum, of the dead man: but if a
graue-stone be taken away, the enditement must be bona ecclesiae. Lambard
Eirenarc. 494. 495.


That the words or terms used in books of law ought to be understood and
applied as the law does expound and conceive them.
The eight Chapter.
IT is not possible for a man to be skillful in any Science, unless he do
perfitly know the words which do occur and are often used in that Science. I
do not mean words of Art only, which by Lexicons and explanatorie books
may easily be conceived, but such as do import and concern the objects of the
science, about which it is principally conversant. To pursue therefore briefly
an interpretation of such words as in the law are material, I take it not to
be dissonant from order to begin with the diversity of laws, and to show how
these words, the law of Nature, the law of Nations, the law Civil, the
common law, the statute law, the customarie law ius merum, and aequum et
bonum, are used in the law books, and are to be understood, that so it may be
known how and in what sort one law differs from an other, and of what
quality and condition that law is to which the Student is addicted, or upon
which he does ground his reason. The law of Nature therefore is that, which
the Nature of Natures, or the God of Natures of the Philosophers called Natura
Naturaus, has caught all creatures that have sense by the mediation of nature
created of which they consist: for this law is grounded in the root and
inward parts of Nature, and therefore one says well, Habemus non scriptam
sed natam legem, quam non didicimus sed hausimus: This is according to
Justinian his definition, in his Institutes, to whom D. Hotoman may seem at
the first to do injury by obiecting that by this definition, to eat, to
sleep, to move, and to rest, are parcel of the law of nature: and though
this be answered by some, Gou. lib. 1. lect. ^ur. c. 19.
that these things are excluded from the definition, by this word ius, yet
what absurdity would follow if such things should be granted to be
parcel of the law of Nature, why not as well as the repulsing of force, which
apparently proceeds from the law of Nature. For in truth there is no
difference in the effect betwixt external force, and the force which a living
creature having sense should do to it self, if it should not perform these
aforesaid actions of Nature, as to eat, to sleep, to move, and to rest,
whereby Nature is preserved and kept in time. This is plain in men, who by the
Civil law are said to kill, in denying nourishment to themselves, or others,
whereby life and nature may be mayntayned. And Josephus writes well, that it
is against the nature of living creatures for any of them to kill it self.
Joseph. de bell. Iud. lib. 3.
But D. Hotom. does further cavil, following his forefather Valla, that law
cannot be applied to beasts, no more then injury may be done unto them. To
this may be replied, that injury in some sense may be done unto them, if
injury be taken for that quod inre non fit, which is not done according to
that law, that is prescribed unto them by nature. But if it be done according
to the rule of nature, though it differ from the nature of all other things,
yet it is not injurious or unnatural, for example. All birds except the
Cuckoe, do foster and bring up their young, these do it by the law of
Nature, this does it not by the law of Nature, and yet does no injury to her
young, because she does it by the instinct and privilege of Nature. This law
is of all most ancient, being connaturall unto us, and following immediately
and indissolubly, the very principles of Nature created, being an even leuill,
and most just law in it self, though wrested and corrupted by the corruption
of things: but in what kind so ever it is uniformly executed, it is without
all blemish of injustice, as in mankind it is uniformly apparent, that every
man is inclined by nature to provide for posterity. But when some provide too
much, some too little, some with pinching from themselves, some in seeking to
make their children far greater then themselves, this is not uniform, this
therefore is unjust: neither do I dissent from the opinion of them that think
the laws of Moses do imitate and resemble the simplicity, integrity, and
uniformity of the law of Nature.

The law of Nations is that which natural reason has propounded and
appointed in common to all men: I do not say that nature has appointed, but
nature with reason, or natural reason. And it is also severed from the law of
nature, because it is appropriated only to men, yet communicated to all
nations, for there is no nation which uses it not. The distinguishing of
Demesues, the diversity of Realms and Kingdoms is parcel of the law of
Nations. Likewise wars, contracts, and such like, are branches of that law,
the definition of it may be shortly this, a law in which all Nations do
consent. But this pleases not Bodinus, for says he, all nations have
consented to Idolatry, yet who will account that a law? Bodin. lib. de Repub.
But this definition is meant of human things, not of divine, for who will so
understand it? For all the Nations of the world may not prescribe a law to
God, nor capitulate any thing touching these things that concern him, he is
a lawmakers for himself, and therefore has said Quod praecipio tibi hoc
tantum facito, non addas, nec minuas. Deuter. 12. v. 32
But in humane things that which all Nations do allow for a law that is for
government and public respect (for which intent the word law is used in the
definition) that is to be received and acknowledged for the law of Nations.

The law Civil I do not take so largely as some do interpret it, to be a
law which every city or people has appropriated to it self: for though the
original denomination of it came from this word City, yet by that was meant
only one City where that law was practiced and observed, and that was the
ancient city of Rome, for which cause the Civil law is at this day called by
some ius Romanum. Alber. Gentil. lib. lecti. and epistolar. 2. c. 14.
And though many Cities and Commonweales be now governed by that law, yet
therefore it can not be said to be ius Civil, since it had the name before.

The Common law is that which by common use or common reason is made, not by
common assembly, as Statutes or Acts of Parliament are established: And it
differs likewise from statute laws in this, that in such laws there are
many times prouisoes and exceptions of certain persons. But the Common law
binds all alike, and is not applied and used as a plaster to one part, but
as a strong purgation to all the parts of the body politic, and it may
challenge a third difference, for that the Common law arises from the people
and multitude, but the Statute originally from the King, because before every
Parliament, writs of summons issue from the King for preparation to that
solemn meeting of the States. Again, the King may dispense with penal
Statutes, 34. H. 8. 52. Die.
by clause of non obstante, but he may not alter the course of the Common
law, 11. H. 4. 73.
though the word of Common law extend by the generallitie of it, to any law
that is commonly used in any place, yet use has restreigned it to the Law of
this realm of England, to the dominions of which it is confined, and beyond
this neast streatcheth not her feathers.

The customary Law is nothing else but a custom long time continued, which may
be thus more fully defined, Custom is a law not written, by the manners and
usage of a certain people or the greater part of them upon good reason and
judgment, begun, and continued, and having the force of a Law. I said (a Law
not written) because the bare memory of man is the register of customs. I said
by the manners and usage etc.) because no custom does grow without the consent
of certains people or the mayor part of them* I said (begun upon good reason
and judgment) because such things as are introduced by error, are not to be
observed. I said (continued) because without diuturnitie of time, custom can
have no force or strength. I said (having the force of Law) because it must be
of equal power in the place where it is used with the Law. Acustome against
the Law of nature is of no force, because naturalia sunt immutabilia; A custom
against the Law of nations is of no validity, because that is grounded upon
the Law of nature. A custom against the Law positive is either against publi^^
v^ilitie or private profit, if it be derogatorie to public utility, it is
void: if it be only against private profit it is good and effectual, and a
custom once disallowed and defeated by Law, cannot be recontinued or revived
by any means. It has bin questioned how many Acts or deeds of men be
required to bring in a custom, and the opinion of the most learned has bin,
that so many acts and so notorious, that the thing which is done may be
intimated into the notice of the people, so that it may seem to be allowed by
the secret consent or likeing of the people. But one notorious act cannot
induce a custom, for that is against the name of a custo^e: for consuetudo is
nothing else but communis assuetudo. It has bin also doubted whether an act
contrary to a custom do interrupt the custom, to which it may be thus
answered, either the custom was not yet perfitte, and then it does interrupt
the custom, for the consent of the people did not yet evidently appear, or
else it was complete and perfect, and then it cannot be defeated by one act, but
by so much time and in such manner as it was induced.

Ius merum is that Law which has no mixture nor regard of circumstances, but
groundeth a rigorous conclusion upon things done without further examination
how or why they were done, as if a man sell a lease of land for years, and
certain cloth for ten pound, the contract is entier, and if the title of the
vendor be not good as to the lease, yet he shall have the entire sum though
the vendee be dispossessed of the lease at the time of the action brought for
the money, 24. H. 8. Br. Contract 35. 7. H. 7. 4
because in strict reason the contract was entire, so if a man sell his own
horse, and the horse of I. S. to A. for ten pound, and I. S. takes away his
horse, yet an action of debt will lie for the whole sum, because the contract
was in it self entire. 30. H. 8. Br. Apportion 7
But if a man reteigne one in service for a year, for ten pound to be
paid at two feasts of the year, and the Master dies after the first feast,
and before the latter, the Servant shall have his wages but for the first
Feast, because the contracte was at the first time apportioned. 27. E. 3. Br.
Apportion 6.


The Law which is termed aequum and bonum, is that which does mildely
interpret, amend, and mollify the hard and rigorus speeches, and censures of
the other Laws: and is sometime sharp and severe, where the other Laws are
remiss and conniuent: as may appear by that saying of Salust, sentencing the
proceeding of the Romans in a matter of estate fit reus magis aequo bonoque
quam iure gentium Bomilcar comes eius qui Romam ^ide publica venerat, and this
is not so much comprehended in writing, as in the true understanding of that
which is written. It is necessary by the judgment of an other Law, which says
Etsi nihil facile mutandum est ex solennibus, tamen vbi aequitas euidens poscit
subueniendum est. l. 183. de Reg. iur.
and again iustus iudex aequitatem solutius sequitur. l. 14. de reg. iur. de
relig.
This though it have place sometimes in the precepts, rules, and cases, of the
civil and common Laws: yet it has more affinity with the Law of nature, and
the Law of nations, which are ignorant of the knots, and intricate points of
these aforesaid Laws.

Now that we have discoursed of these several Laws, it remains that we
should show what things are the principal objects of the Law, which may be
reduced to two heads, for either they are real or personal. That which is
real, is either land, or that which issues out of land: land is either firm
and fixed earth, or that which is immediately and coherently annexed to the
earth, as houses. By the differences of this division a pischarie or fishing is
excluded, whether it be libera piscaria, that is a liberty of fishing in an
other man's pondes, or waters, which he has in common with others. For xx.
persons may have a fishing after that sort in one river, and it is therefore
called libera because none may disturb them to whom the fishing belongs: 17.
E. 4. 7.
Or seperalis piscaria, which in our books has several significations, for
either it may signify a several fishing, which one man alone has in an other
man's soil. 18. H. 6. 29.
Or else where a man has a several fishing to himself in his own ground, and
so it is a thing compounded of water and of earth, and therefore it is said,
that where a grant is made of a stagne or piscarie, the land passes. 4. E. 3.
3. Feoffem^r 79
And in a Formedon brought of a gorse, which in Latin is called gurges, a gulf
or d^epe* Yarmouth, wherein fishes are commonly taken, the demaundant shall
recover the land and soil it self. 14. E. 3. Formedon 34.
And it has bin adjudged that a fishing so taken lies in Tenure. 40. E. 3. 44
And a writ of Aiell was brought of a fishing as a thing lying in demes^e. 20.
E. 3. Bre 685
And also of a stagne or poole: Temps E. 1. Brief 861
But it cannot be termed land, because the water is not coherently fired to the
soil, but otherwise it is of an acre of land which is covered with water: for
though that be ouerflowed with water, yet it is not naturally ouerflowed, as a
ponde or fishe-poole is. 18. E. 4. 4
And therefore it is said 12. H. 7. that a man may have a Praecipe de vna acra
terrae cum aqua cooperta, or de vna acraterrae generally at his election. 12.
H. 7. 4
But a tenement cannot be said to be freehold, except it touch the earth, and
therefore a chamber built upon a hallor parlor, cannot be said to be freehold,
because it cannot be perpetual, for the foundation may perish, and for that
cause it cannot be demanded by plaint or Writ. 3. H. 6. 1. Plaint 1^.
Yet 9. E. 4. an exchange was made of land for a chamber, 9. E. 4. 40.
but that proves it not to be freehold, for an exchange may be of things of
diverse natures, as of land for rent. 3. E. 4. 10.
And so of a rent for a common. 9. E. 4. 21.
A Castle whether it be a thing either of it self, or parcel of a seigniory
or Manor may well be called land or freehold. 7. H. 6. 36.
For though land may not be parcel of land no more then one Leete or Hundred
may be parcel of an other. 3. Mar. 1. Com^ 168. Hills cas. 7. E. 6 Com^ 80.
Pa^^idg. cas. 23. H. 8. Br. (...). 53.
Yet land may be parcel of a Manor. 4. E. 4. 16. 42. E. 3. 22. 44 E. 3. 40.
Feoff. 53. lib. ^unda^. leg. fo. 70.
And a park may be parcel of a Manor. 3. E. 3. Br. Iurisd. 39.
And land may be parcel of an Honor. 26. Ass. pl. 60.
And of a Castle. 4. E. 4. 17.


It is now showed what may properly be called Land, and it is not impertment
to declare how many sorts of land, which we have before called firm ground,
may be demanded by Law, of which the Law has a several contemplation. Land
therefore as it is subject to the consideration of Law is sixefold, Arua,
Florida, consita, compascua mineralis, in frugifera. Arua is the arable ground
which is tilled with the Plough. Florida, the garden ground, which procreateth
flowers, Herbs, and all such things as the Be does feed upon. Consita, is
the wooddie ground which is thoroughly replenished, with trees, plants,
shrubbes, and such like. Compascua is that which brings forth grass and
fodder. Mineralis is that, wherein mines are conteigned whether they be regal
mines, as mines of Gold or Silver, or baser mines, as brass, lead, copper,
tin, coals, or the like. Infrugifera is that which is barren, and cannot be
helped by manurance as the soil where rushes, weeds, fern, and such things
do grow, and it is good to know the diversity of these several sorts of
ground, that when such things are to be demanded by writ, they may be
demanded by their proper names and kinds, and therefore if a feoffement be
made of two roodes of land, and after a house is built there upon, and part of
it is become medowe, parcel pasture ground, and parcel wood, the demand must
be by the name of a house, medowe, pasture, and wood, 3. H. 6. 8.
and there is a writ in the Register, de minera plumbi and cuiuscunque generis
metalli cum pertinentijs. Regist. 165
and ruscaria the soil where rushes do grow must be demanded by number of
acres. 16. Ass. pl. 9.
And where a stagne has bin, or land covered with water, if the water be
turned out of the course or dried, the land may be demanded by the name of
meadow. 33. E. 3. Enter 80.


That which issues out of land, or the profits of land are of three sorts,
Natural, Industriall, and Artificial. The Natural profits of land are such as
do rise by the force and benefit of Nature principally, and not by the
diligence and labor of man, as apples, herbs, trees, and such like.
Industriall profits are such as do principally require the diligence and
culture of man, which unless it be continually applied, natura nihil operatur,
as corn, hoppes, woad, saffron, and such like. Artificial profits are these,
which are reserved, granted or issuing out of land by the Act of man, and the
approbation of Law, as a common of pasture, a warren, a rent, and things of
like sort. Common of pasture is of four sorts appendant which is belonging
only to arable ground, or to land that consists as well of arable ground,
as of other things, as a Manor or measuage, but the appendancy does
principally grow by reason of the arable, and therefore it belongs to such
beasts only as do manure or marle the ground, as horses, oxen, kine, and
sheep. 37. H. 6. 34
And if a man have common to certain arable lands in one Village, he cannot
use the Common with beasts that manure his arrable in an other Village. 10. E.
3. 56
And this ought to be intended of ancient arrable ground, not of land newely
improued. 10. E. 2. Common 22. 5. Ass. pl' 2.
For continuance of time immemoriall makes the appendancy, wherefore if the
arrable land to which common is appendant, do by purchase come into the
possession of the owner of the soil, in which the common is to be taken, the
common is extinguished in his person: But if after the tenements be severed by
alienation as they were before, the common is revived by some authority, 4.
E. 3. 45. 17. E. 2. Common 23.
because the same ancient arable land to which before it belonged still
continues: But by some it is otherwise, because being once extinguished it
cannot be de nouo and in an instant made appendant. 14. H. 4. 2.


Common appurtenant is where a man prescribes to have common of pasture
belonging to his land with all manner of beasts, it differs from a common
appendant in this, that a common appendant is only to be taken by such beasts
as manure or marle the ground, and by such number of beasts as will serve to
manure or marle the ground, to which the common may be claimed, and belongs
only to them as long as they are demurrant upon the land: But a common
appurtenant may be taken by all manner of beasts. 37. H. 6. 34. 9. E. 4. 3.
Likewise a common appendant must be only claimed by reason of land which may
be marled or manured: but a common appurtenant may be claimed by reason of a
mesuage or house. 22. H. 6. 43. 4. E. 4. 29.
Furthermore a common appendant grows only by continuance of tune, and the
essence of it is prescription joined with appendancie, 26. H. 8. 4. 5. H. 7. 7.
4. H. 6. 13.
But a common appurtenant may be granted at this day, and springs up in an
instant. 26. H. 8. 4. 15. Assis. pl. 5. Common 13.
And a common appendant can not be severed from the land to which it belongs:
5. H. 7. 7.
But a common appurtenant may be severed: 26. H. 8. 4.
And they differ in this, that a common appendant must be used and taken,
according to the rate and quantity of ground, in regard of which it is
granted or claimed. 15. Assis. pl. 5.
But a common appurtenant may be claimed for beasts sans number: for by the
opinion of Monbray none shall have a writ of Admeasureme^t of pasture, but he
that has a common appendant: 18. E. 3. 30.
So that it may be probably collected, that a common appurtenant because it
cannot be admeasured, may be well enough sans number: And it may be likewise to
a certain number of beasts, for if a man at this day will grant one a mesuage
with a common appurtenant for ten beasts, I doubt not, but this is a good
common appurtenant to the mesuage.

Common by vicinage is where two townships or more do entercommon, and have
entercommoned from time out of mind, which is not to be used, by putting the
beasts of the inhabitants of one town, into the lands of the inhabitants of
an other town, for so they may be distrayned damage feasant: But they must put
them in their own fields, and if they stray into the fields of the other
village, they must suffer them to be there, and they must put in their beasts,
having regard to the freehold of the inhabitants of that village where the
common is to be used. 13. H. 7. 13. 15. Elizab. 316. Dyer. 16. E. 3. Common 9.
22. H 6. 51. 6. E. 6. 70. Dier.
This kind of common Mast. Littleton makes appendant, 7. E. 4. 26.
but by other authority it is a feueral and distince kind of common.

Common in gross is where a man claymeth to have common for all manner of
beasts, whether the number be certain or uncertain by special grant in
writing, or by prescription in him that claymeth or his ancestors, or they
whose estate he has not by reason of any particular land: and this common may
be used by the beasts of a stranger, which the proprietarie of the common may
giest, as we term it. 11. H. 6. per Babing. Mart. and Paston. 45. E. 3. 25.
Assise 61. 36. Ass. pl. 3. 15. Ass. pl. 5. Perkins tit. Graunts.


A Warren is a profit likewise which may be taken out of other men's ground by
prescription, 30. H. 6. 28. Dyer.
and if the owner of the soil (...) any one by his commandment; or as his
servant do come upon the soil, and do ^hase the Conies, he cannot justify
the chasing, 34. H. 6. 43.
though he may justify his entry into the ground. 3. H. 6. 12.
And a rent is also a profit issuing out of the soil of a stranger, and
sauoureth of the nature of the land; out of which it issues and therefore if
rent issue out of land in ancient demesne, it is ancient demeshe, and so it
is of rent granted out of land in Gauelkind, it shall be divided as the la^d it
self: 4. E. 3. 53. 14. H. 8. 5.
And so it is of rent granted out of land deuisable by custom, though the
rent be granted but of late time. 22. Ass. pl. 78.
And so if rent be receiueable out of customarie land, as borough English, or
where dower is to be had of the half part, and such like, the rent shall be of
the custom and nature of the land, and therefore in the demand of such rent
by Praecipe, or in a Repl^^in, the tenure by ancient demesne of the land is a
good plea. 14. H. 8. 5.
And so if land in tail be divided amongst parceners, the (...) reserved to
one of the (...) parceners shall be in (...), and of the same condition as the
land was. 2. H. 7. 5. 15. H. 7. 14.


Parsonall things (...) things either in possession, or in action: Things in
possession are either goods or chattels: the name of goods is natural and
civil, by the natural signification all such things are comprehended under
the name of goods, which may profit. 1. 49. de verb. signific.
But as the name of goods is taken ciuilly, it stretches to the whole he ape
and body of a man's wealth, together with the charge and deductions: the reason
of this differenceis because nature conside^^^ things as (...) they are: but a
common weal or city after such sort as is most expedient Alber. Gentil. lib.
4. Epist. c. 7.
And though the charge which follows goods do de^race somewhat from the
value and estimation of the same, yet because it is to be discharged and
satisfied out of the goods, it is therefore jointly reckoned and considered
with the goods themselves.

Chattels which in the common Law are termed Catalla, are diversely taken, for
the profits of land if they be given generally unto the King by act of law,
they may be called Chattels, and therefore the profits and issues of the lands
and (...) of them which fly for felony are forfaited unto the King, until
such time as they be acquitted, and that by the Statute of Praetog. cap. 10.
which says that the King shall have omnia Catalla talium fugitiuorum, and
under the word Catalla is comprehended the corn which was growing upon the
land, at the time when the forfeyture of the goods did begin to take place, 3.
E. 3. Corone 3. 4.
And if a man be outlawed in an action of debt, and the outlawrie be returned,
so that the writ issues to the Escheator to seize the goods, chattels, and
land of the party outlawed, the issues of the land shall be taken to the
kings use until he have sued his Charter of pardon: 8. R. 2. Supersedeas 19.
for an outlawed person shall not forfait any land, but the profits only, as
rent and corn, if he be outlawed in a personal action: Otherwise it is if he
be outlawed of felony, for then the King shall have the escheat of the land,
or the Annum, diem, and vastum. 9. H. 6. 20.
But if the profits of land be generally granted by the act of the party,
then they are the substance of the land and do not pass without liuerie: And
if a man grant the profits of land, the land it self passes. 14. H. 8. 5.
45. E. 3. 90. 4. Elizab. 210. Dyer.
And therefore it has bin held by Fortescue and Danby Justices, that tenant in
fee simple may grant vesturam terrae, and the grauntee shall have it after his
death: But the tenant in tail, for life, tenant in dower, and tenant by the
courtesy cannot make any such grant, but if they dye the grant is determined.
37. H. 6. 30.
And if a feoffement be made of land upon condition that neither the feoffee
nor his heirs shall take the profits, the condition is void, and the
feoffement simple and absolute, 21. H. 7. 24.
and in such cases the profits of land may not be termed Catalla, no more
then the lands themselves: But under the word Chattels, a lease for term of
years is comprised. 39. H. 6. 35.
And likewise a right of action for goods: as if goods be taken wrongfully
from a felon: 6. H. 7. 9.
Or when one is indebted to a felon by bond: 19. H. 6. 47.
Or when he is accomptable to a felon by reason of any receipt, or otherwise.
28. E. 3. 92. et 50.


Things in action are such in which a man has neither property nor
possession: as if a man do owe to an other xx. pound upon a writing
obligatorie, though he have a property and possession in the 1. H. 7. 15.
writing or charter, yet the sum contained is a thing in action, in which he
has neither property nor possession: and so it is of an Aduowson when the
church is void of an incumbent: for the patron can not grant it to any other,
because then he should grant but fructum aduocationis, which is a thing rather
imagined by law, then subsistent by nature: and therefore the patron can not
truly be said to have property or possession in it. But though such things
be to some intent merely in action, yet in some cases they are taken as things
vested: and therefore if a man be seized of an Aduowson, and the church become
void and he dies, his executors shall present, and not the heir, Fitz. Na.
br. 34.
for the aduowson in regard of the executors was a chattel vested in the
testator. The King may grant things in action, 2. H. 7. 8.
and so may a common person in some cases: As if a man bring an action of debt
against I. N. and the plaintiff is indebted to me, and promises me that if I
will aid him against I. N. that I shall be paid out of the sum in demand:
there it is lawful for me to aid and maintain the plaintifie against I. N,
because by the promise I have interest in the sum demanded. 15. H. 7. 2.
And where a man is indebted to me in xx. pound, and an other owes him xx.
pound by obligation, he may assign this obligation and debt to me in
satisfaction: And I may maintain suit for it in the name of the other.

A Table of certain words in the Interpretation whereof the Common Law of this
Realm and the Civil Law do seem to agree.
A.
ACcusatio A bill of presentment, is a regular form of complaint, whereby
offenses, are opened and punished.

Acquisitum purchased, that is said to be whereof the property is translated
from one to an other.

Affines are the kinsmen of the husband and the wife by marriage, so called,
because two Kindreds which are diverse one from the other, are coupled by
marryage, and one of them comes to the borders or marches of the other
kindred.

Ad nos pertinere is said that which does belong unto us, either by way of
property, or by way of possession, or by charge, or by administration.

Aedes, plural: a house consisting of diverse rowmes, (for domus may consist
only of foundation, wall, cover) as the integrall parts, or as some briefly
say, which consists of soil and superficies,

Aestas summer, a part of the year, which begins at the equinoctial of the
spring, and ends at the equinoctial of Autum, and so summer and winter are
divided by vi. months.

Annona vittaile, is not referred only to corn, but to the meat of the
shambles, as well to fish as flesh.

Aperta vis, open force, which is manifest and evident, and does not receive
any excuse of simplicity.

Arborvento deiecta, has not now the name of a tree, but the name of wood.
Arbor dum crescit, lignum cum crescere nescit.

Area, a floare is a vacant place, therefore called Area quasi exaruerit, and
were not able to bring forth any thing, it has bin taken to be such an empty
place as does lie discovered, locus ab aedificio purus, and has no
superficies: it is called a plot of ground, court or yard.

Argen^um silver, it is of three sorts, infectu^, factum, signatum. Infectum is
that which is unpolished and not adorned with any particular form being in
the ore, or bullion, newly severed and singled from the ore. Factum, is that
which is beutified with some particular form, of which kind is a silver cup,
a silver goblet, a silver bowl, or a silver mazard. Signatum is that which
bears some special Image or impression, and such is the silver that is
coined and accounted current, Argentum factu^ must be described by the kind or
shape, Infectum by the weight, Signatu^ by ye number.

Arrestare, is by the authority or warrant of the law, to hinder that either
a man or his goods be at his own liberty, until the law be satisfied.

Artifices, artificers, are they which sell things labored by them, and by
their labor reduced into a particular form, as Shomakers, Smithes, Glouers,
Tailors and Weauers, but artificium if it be largely taken, extends to ye
knowledge of every art: artifex and opifex differ, for in the one there is
labor and judgment, in the other labor only.

Assultus, an assault is a violence done to a man's person, by the person of an
other man.

B.
Bona fides a sincere conscience, excusing one of ill meaning.

C.
Carcer is taken two ways, for it is either locus custodiae, or locus paenae.

Cauillatio when a man turns his speech ab euidenter veris, ad euidenter
falsa.

Cella because there we do celare, we do hide that which we would keep secret
or close.

Ciuitas, a city: it is taken materially, and formally: being understood
materially, it does signify a multitude of houses made of stone and timber,
being formally taken it is ciuilis societas quasi societas simul viuens, and
not viuens simply, but viuens been, for as Cicero says, ciuitas sine legibus
is corpus sine anima, and therefore Aristotle says, non concedimus vt homo
imperet sed ratio.

Cliens, is he that is in suite, so called quasi colens, and he who deals
for him in the cause is called patronus, quasi pater.

Codicillus, the declaration of a ma^s last will, which without the just
solemnity of a testament a man ob impedimenti necessitatem is enforced to
write, but now the use of codicills or testaments are without any necessity
confounded, which is contrary to law, for a ^odicill ought to serve
necessity, and not a rash onset.

Cognatio kindred, it is divided into three parts; 1. into parents, 2. into
children, 3. into cosins. Parents are they of whom we are begotten, as father,
mother, grandfather, grandmother, and these which are in degree above them.
Children are they which are begotten of our bodies, as son, daughter,
grandchild, and such as he underneath them, Et nati natorum et qui nascentur ab
illis. Cosins are they which have neither begotten us, nor bin begotten of us,
but have a common root and original with us, as brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
and such as do descend from them.

Colludere, is in fraudem tertij conuenire.

Commenda, the custody of a Church committed and commended to some.

Commodare is to grant the use of some thing for a certain time, there is
difference betwixt commodare and mutuo dare, because co^modare is to lend, to
have the same again, as books, apparel, and such like, but mutuo dare is to
trust, hoping to have the like again, as money, corn, salt, spices, and such
like.

Compromissum, is the power that is given to the arbitrator, so called because
both the parties do promise to obey the opinion of the Judge, and therefore he
is called compromissarius index to whom the matter is referred.

Communitas, a comminalty, is societas hominum communi lege viuentium.

Conditio, when a thing depends super casum incertum which may tend either
ad esse or ad non esse.

Confessio, is double: either judicial, or extraiudicial, judicial is that
which is done before the Judge, extraiudicial which is done in presence of good
and honest men.

Consentire, is to meet in one opinion.

Constitutiones, Judgments, rules and awardes concerning several matters
whereupon this verse has bin made.

Quatuor ex verbis virtutem collige legis,
Permittit, punit, imperat, atque vetat.
Controuersum ius, is that which is on both sides doubtful: certum ius is that
which is certainly determined and is called positive Law.

Copulatiua the conjunction copulative is taken after two sorts, either in a
divided sense, or in a compounded sense, in a divided sense as when I say, Sir
Robert Book, and Sir James Dyer were Lord chief, Justices of the Common
pleas, for they were not chief Justices together, but at diverse times: in a
compounded sense, as when I say two and three do make five.

D.
Debito is he of whom we may against his will exact money.

Decimae are of three sorts praediales, personales, and mixed praediales are
they which arise of farms or lands, as corn, hay, and the fruits of trees:
personal which are due by personal labor, as by some trade, trafick, or
mystery, mixed of which it may be doubted whether they be predial or personal as
wool, lamb, milk etc.

Defensio, is the avoiding of a surmised and pretended offense.

Delegatus a delegate, to whom a cause is committed to be determined and
ordered.

De plano, vel sine figura iudicij, vel summarie.

Deprehendere, is to take a man in ipso facto, so that he can never fly, nor
deny the fact.

Discendere to discende or to spring of ones body, hereupon they which are
borne of us are called by the name of discendents, which with them that ascend
make the right line, and the ascendents and discendents cannot marry together,
wherefore if Adam were now living he could not marry a wife.

Dicecesis, the government of a certain province by the Bishop, for as a
territory is so called, quatenus iudex ius terrendi habet, so a diocese as
far as a Bishop has ius administrandi sacra.

Dispensatio, a release of common right, either ex causa vtilitatis,
necessitatis, or ingentis praerogatiuae meritorum.

Diuersa, such things whose subject is not alike, or whose definition is not
alike.

Dominium is a right to dispose perfitly de re corporali.

Domus instructa, a house furnished, if a man devise such a house the household
stuff passes, but not the wine that is within the house, because by common
intendement a house is not furnished by wine.

Dubia causa, is that which is but semiplene probata.

E.
Error, an opinion, whereby that is approved and allowed to be true which is
false, and that to be false which is true, and error may be two ways, either
in iure constituto, or else in iure quod quis in suo habet negotio, the one is
an error in law, the other in facto.

Euanescit actio, the action does fail, or abate, euanescit actio, by the
power of the law, or of the Judges, remittitur actio, by the will of the
plaintiff.

Executor, an executor, which is after three sorts, executor testamentarius,
executor legalis, that is to say the ordinary, executor datiuus, the
administrator.

Election, is the certainetie of our will, it may be of persons, or of things,
places, or times: Of things, as if a man should pay a sum of money, or else a
horse or a hawke: Or of persons, as if he should pay it to I. S. or to I. N. Or
of places, as if he should pay it at London, or at Lincoln. Or of the time, as
the first day of April, or the second day of May.

F.
Falsitas, falsehood is immutatio veritatis cum doto and damno alterius, the
change of truth with falsehoode to the deceiving and endamaging of an other
man.

Fama, is a common report proceeding from suspicion, and published by the
voices of men, and it differs from rumor, because that is a diverse
whispering of men, which is not so effectual as Fame. Fama constans is that
which is dispersed abroad neither by men unknown, nor of light credit, nec
ignotis nec improbis.

Fide^^^^^ is he which binds himself for another, quasi inssu alterius
ponens fidem suam.

Fortuitus casus, a meare chance which by man's counsel, care, and diligence
can neither praeuideri or praecaueri, be foreseen or foreclosed.

G.
Generalis lex, a general law which comprehends all cases, except such as be
unlawful, and unjust. For there is nothing more absurd then to draw a just
Law to an unjust interpretation.

Germani fratres are they which are of the same Father and Mother, Consanguinei
which have the same Father, but not the same Mother, Vterini which have the
same Mother, but not the same Father.

Gestores negotionu^, factors or procurators be of three sorts, voluntarij
which gratis and of their own accord do regard the business of their friend:
Necessarij which by obligation of their office do follow matters: Quasi
necessarij, which have some color to deal in matters.

Graeca mercari fide. i. pecunia numerata with money paid in hand.

I.
Illegitimi bastardes, whereof there be three sorts, Incestuosi which be
begotten of kinsmen and kinswomen within the degrees prohibited: Nefarij, which
are begotten of descendents, the children of the same parent: Spurij, or
Adulterini, which are borne in adultery.

Iniuria whatsoever is done against law and right, whether by words, as by
slander: or by deed, as by violence of hand.

Inops sine open without help, which has no wealth nor maintenance, whereby he
may help himself.

Instaurare, is to bring a thing into his fourmer estate.

Insula, a plot of ground compassed on all sides with the sea, quasi in fato
posita, it is of two sorts: Perpetua, and Natiua. Perpetua, which has bin
from time out of mind part of a Province: Natiua, which has bin lately
discovered by the ebb and drought of waters.

Interlocutoria sententia, which does not define or determine the controversy,
for that is called sententia definitiua: an Awarde.

Iudex limitaneus, which has a limited inrisdiction, as the Lord in Court
Baron who only holds plea of a sum under xl. shillinges, and within the
precinct of his Manor.

Iuramentum an oath, it is the affirming or denying of a thing with religious
assertion, or attestation, and it is double: Extraiudicial or Judicial.
Extraiudicial, as Iuramentum conuentionale, when upon a bargain one does
swear to an other. Judicial is of two sorts, Necessarium, and Suppletiu^m:
Necessarium, which is ad litem aestimandam, when witnesses are produced by the
parties. Suppletiuum, when the Judge does enforce the party himself to swear
for want of other proofs.

Inseperabile, that is said to be which is so inherent in the subject, that it
cannot be removed, but they do either stand together or fall together. A thing
may be said to be indiuidual or inseparable in many respects, 1. according to
the form required in the act: And therefore if three be bound jointly, they
must be sued jointly, 2. by reason of necessary depending, and therefore the
principal being defeated, the accessorie is also destroyed, because it cleaves
inseperably unto the principal: and therefore if the marriage be not lawful,
the endowment cannot be lawful, 3. by the meaning of the parties: as when a
submission is made to two arbitrators, it is not to be imagined that the
parties had an intent of seuerance, 4. by the nature of the thing: as when a
thing will not suffer a particion: as a seignorie in gross, a common, a
condition, and so a jurisdiction is an entier thing: and therefore if a man will
bring an action in a base Court of a debt of 4. li. it is not good for thirty
shillinges, or a less sum: for a Judge or officer has a precise power of
the Law, and if he pass his jurisdiction, his sentence or act is void.

Integrum is that which is compounded of diverse parts, for parts compacted
and joined together do make the whole, but an entier thing may be diversely:
for it may be either totum numerale consisting of many numbers lincked
together, 2. totum universal, as the general nature whereof the particulers ar
comprehended: as homo of animal, auis of brutum, 3. totum integrale which is
made whole and entier by many parts, and it is of two sorts, Heterogeneu^, and
Homogeneum: Heterogeneum the parts whereof are not of the nature of the whole
thing, as a house which does consist of soil, stone, wood, mortar, and cover.
Homogeneum which is of the same nature with ye whole, as water, fire, earth,
whereof every part has the name of the whole.

L.
Lacus is that which has perpetua^ aquam. Stagnum that which has water at
sometime, and is sometime dry. Fossa a receptacle for water made by man's hand.

Lana, wolle, which may be cloth, but yet is not wrought in cloth. And if a
man by his will do devise his wolle to any, be it wrought or not wrought, dyed
or not dyed* or be it spunne, it is comprised under the name of wolle, and it
is called by the name of Volle until it be made cloth.

Littus, that place to which the greatest floude of the sea does come.

M.
Maiestas, a sovereign honor: Majesty is said to be the daughter of honor
and reverence.

Marinum et Maritinum do thus differ, Marinum is that quod Mare incolit, which
lives in the Sea, or which is bredde in the sea, Maritinum quod Mare accolit,
which is adjoining, or adjacent unto the sea.

Mercator, a Merchant, is not as some think termed a Merce, but of the word
Mercor, which signifies to buy, and they are properly termed Mercatores, qui
res emunt quas in eadem specie carius vendant.

Moneta, a monendo, Money, so termed, because by the impression of the stamp
it does give us notice, either of the prince whose it is, or the price which it
bears: It takes Legem valoris, the rule of the value of the superior, and
therefore it cannot be abased or refused, but by the commandment of the
superior.

Mortua res, that is said to be by which a man is not richer.

Motu proprio, ex certa^scientia, de plenitudine potestatis, are praegnantes
clausulae, clauses of importance, against which none may be heard.

Mutuum, quasi ex meo ^^uum.

N.
Narratio, a declaration of a matter either ore tenus* or in form of law: If
it be ore tenus, it is called a motion, and thereof it is said, qui been
narrat, been impetrat: If it be in form of law, it is a declaration grounded
upon a writ, containing the whole state of the matter, as the plaintiff
supposes it.

Naturaliter possidere he is said, which possesses a thing corporally, and
takes the profits of the thing possessed, and this of the common Lawyers is
called possessio in facto: But if a man's father die seized, and the son does
not enter, nor actually take the profits, neither does any other disturb him
to take possession, this is called a possession in law, or eiuilis possessio.

Negotium meum, that is said to be, cuius ^^erum and damnum ad me pertinet.

O.
Obuentio is a kind of re^enew: it differs from Reditus, being strictly
taken, in this, that obue^tiones are conting entiu^* reditus certoru^.

Oculis res subijci dicitur when it is plain and manifest, it is well said of
Erasmus, ad cognitionem magis faciuntaures, ad fidem faciendam certiores sunt
oculi.

Officialis, an Official, who in a certain part of the diocese is the
Bishops deputy.

Opera labor, it is double, Officialis, and Artificialis: Officialis, is that
which is spent and bestowed upon the diligent attendance done by the servant to
the Master. Artificialis, is the labor of the trade, as Printing, paueing,
feeling, graueing, embrodering, and such like.

P.
Pactum is the consent of two or more in a matter which pleases both parties,
Pollicitatio is when there is not the consent of two, but only one agrees.
Pactio nuptialis is a Matrimonial contract. Pactum retrouende^di is when the
vendee couenanteth, that if the vendor or his heirs or executors will within a
certain time pay so much money, as the vendee does pay, that then he shall have
the land again, and be in his former estate.

Palam fa^tu^ is that which is done openly. Public factu^ is that which is
done cora^ populo.

Paries, a wall* thereof there be diverse kinds: Lateritius which is made of
clay, Testaceus which is made of brick, Coementar^us which is made of lime,
stone, and water mingled together, Cratitius which is made of wood, boardes, or
boughs, platted together.

Paraecos, a parishioner, an inhabitant in a certain place, who has brought
his household to a certain place, to reside there.

Praetor mayor, he Mayor of a city, as Rhodiginus says: for others ar called
Praetores minores.

Priuilegium is ins ^singulare, whereby a private man, or a particular
Corporation is exempted from the rigor of common Law, for that which is now
called proprium, has bin called of old writers priuum.

Proprium that which does so belong to one that it is not common to an other,
and though that wherein we have a joint property with others may be called
nostrum: yet it cannot be called propriu^, for propriu^ does not admit any
communion, but proprium and suum be equipollent, and of the same sense.

Puer has three significations, either it signifies the estate of a man: as
when we call servants pueros: Secondly the sex, as when we call a male child
puerum: Or else the age, as when we call one that is young puerum.

Pars is that whereby the whole is supported, it is either pars diuisa, or pars
indiuisa, this division will hold both in nature and Law: In nature that id a
divided part, which consists of diverse parcels: as the wing of a bird, or
the cloven hoof of a beast, or the finne of a fish are said to be parts
divided: In law there is also a divided part, as the third part whereof a woman
is endowed after the death of her husband, and after the assignment made, and
the third part of the land of the tenant in Capite, which the king has after
his death: Likewise the parts of a manor divided by parceners: A part
undivided is manifest to the understanding and to the eye: to the
understanding, as the moitie or third part of iointenants, parceners, tena^ts
in common, before particion: to the eye, as the vnclouen hoof of a beast, or
the parts of the earth cleaving contumately together.

R.
Ripa, a bank, it is proper to a floude, as the shore is to the sea. Ripa is
that which does flumen continere, stay the natural force of his course, and
that is said to be a bank, quae plenissimum flumen continet, which stays the
water, when it is at the highest.

S.
Sequestratio is either a separation, by way of compounding, or by interdiction
of possession: It is voluntaria, or necessaria, Voluntaria, when it is done by
the consent of the parties, Necessaria, when it is done by one that has a
competent authority to sequester.

Sylua caedua, which being cut may grow again.

T.
Tugurium, quasi ^egurium, it is taken of some for every country house, but
not rightly, for the house which does consist of walls and tiles or brick is
no cotage, but a cotage is that which does principally consist of reeds or
thatch or soddes, earth and twigs laid together, and compacted by clay or
slime, or which has in it a very small deal of timber.

Tumultus is taken for every perilous commotion, if it be publicly and
hastily done.

Turba, a multitude, consisting at the least of the number of ten.

V.
Vacillaus testis, which does give an inconstant and diverse testimony.

Vagabundus, which has neither certain house, nor steadfast habitation, a man,
as one terms him, sine re, sine spe, sine fide, sine sede.

Vel, a particle, it does not always disioyne, but sometimes explane.

Vis force or violence: it is of diverse sorts, vis detractiua, when a man
takes a thing from one against his will: vis compulsiua, when I compel a man
to assent to a certain act, vis diuina, commonly called vis mayor, whereof
there is no resistance: vis expulsiua, which is done with weapon, and it is
called of some vis armata, vis inquietatiua, when I am disseised by force, vis
imminens the striking or assault of a man. Vis is not verbis, but facto, for he
is not said vim pati, which is only touched by words.

Universal quod ad vniuersos pertinet.

What method is to be used in handling and disposing matters of Law.
The ninth Chapter.
OF method it were better to write nothing then little, for so many diverse
methodes are proposed by many diverse authors, that plenty breeds scarsity,
and a man can hardelye tell which to choose. Curiosity as in all other things
it is vain, so in method it is necessary. For to proceed without equality
of tenor is negligence, and to observe method vnartificially is ignorance.
They that give a reason of the beginning, continuance, and ending of their
tractats and discourses, are without doubt the most judicial and most
plausible methodistes: or they which so temper and moderate the course of
matters, that though they render not a precise reason of their doeings: yet it
is apparent to the reason and understanding of others. A twofolde method is
very much talked of, and that is by proceeding either a singularibus ad
vniuersalia or ab vniuersalibus ad singularia, the one of these I account no
method at all, howsoever it has usurped the name, being but a natural
discerning of things done in facto by the ordinary direction of the senses,
and making thereof a general conclusion, which is easy and familiar to every
man's capacity, so that the praise of that action is diligence and not art, for
is it any difficult thing to reason and conclude, wood is heavy, stone is
heavy, iron is heavy, and sic in caeteris: therefore all things made of
earth are heavy? how pro^e and ready is the perceauing of these particulars
to every man's sense? and how easily may the conclusion be framed by his
understanding? but in deed the discoursing from vniuersalles to particulars is
more hard, more artificial, more compendious, for it is done in less compass
and fewer words, which is a great argument of a good method, and therefore I
do not agree to Aristotle that Athenian Doctor, when he says, Ars tum
existit, cum ex multis experientiae notionibus vna^ quae ad vniuersum genus
accommodetur nascitur praeceptio. Me^aphys. 1* c. 1.
Unless he mean it of vulgar and mechanical trades and occupations, whereof
only I admit it to be true, but I rather approve that which he says, and
does likewise: progrediendum est ab vniuersalibus ad singularia. Physicor. 1.
c. 1.
But there be some which will not allow any discourse but that which is
furnished with mathematical and demonstratiue reasons. Some would have every
thing handled by examples, as Ramus, a man happier in writing, then in
reproouing one that writ better then he: who in handling Logical places, does
illustrate them with many examples, but with never a rule. What manner of
teaching is this, to show unto thee that others did thus: but not to show why
they did so: which default is for want of rules, in which the reason and
knowledge of doing things aright is contained. A man cannot make a shoe by a
number of lastes, but he must have instruction of one that is skillful in the
trade. Some again will have every thing confirmed by the authorities and
testimonies of them that be learned, thinking that only to be the fit way of
teaching. But the certain and necessary reasons of the Mathematikes, are not
in all arts to be required. Arist. Metaphys. 1. part. poster. c. 3.
Neither is there an (...) or accurate kind of handling things in all sciences
alike to be used and observed: but in every science things are so to be ordered
and digested, as the subject or matter does require where about it is employed,
and so far forth as may be agreeable to the profession of the science. For a
Geometrician and a Carpenter do diversely handle and use a right line, the one,
as it may be profitable to his work which he carueth, the other searches what
kind of thing it is, and of what nature and so other sciences must be ruled by
the subject which they contemplate, least there be more (...) then (...) in
them: neither is a cause or reason to be exacted in all things, for of many it
is sufficient to have this knowledge quod ita sunt, though we cannot know
propter quod ita sunt, as of principles which are the first and highest rules
in arts and sciences, and therefore no reason can be yielded, because they are
prima, the very first in the discourse of reason, and therefore (...) for
themselves to be believed* Surely Method is so convenient a thing in the
study of the law, that without it neither can the understanding be well
taught, nor the memory well directed. It is not enough to have a great heap
of things that are to be read, unless the use or order and manner of reading
them ^e well understood: and as in things that ^e fit for banquets, though
there be great variety of sweet meats, yet there is nothing more unpleasant
or unwholesome if they be mingled together, so the Student must have a care least
the order of his reading be confounded, least the last things be handled in the
first place, and these things which should be in the midst be put in the
last place, which whosoever do, they cannot only not comprehend the things
which they study, but utterly debilitate and weaken the strength of the
memory: therefore it is good for Students to use an artificial Analysis, or
resolution of things, into their principles, which may teach to divide the
whole into his parts, and to subdeuide parts into parcells, and in the end to
make a consent and coherence of the entire thing and his parts: for though the
skillful partition of things be profitable and pleasant for the memory, yet
the Synthesis, that is the apt composition, coordination, and mutual
dependence of them does more satisfy the understanding. Polyb. lib. 1. histor.
Therefore Polybius a judicious aucthor says well, that they which think by
the knowledge of particulars dispersed to attain to the full and perfect
knowledge of the entire thing, do no less err, then he who viewing the
parts of a handsome and comely body severally and apart, does therefore imagine
that he knows the whole feature and portraicture of the same man, who if he
had beheld these parts joined together, and compacted, and moved by the spirit
of life, would have judged far otherwise. For though a man may have a
confused notion, or conceit of the whole, by viewing the separate and
disioyned parts, yet it is not possible that he should have certain
knowledge of the same, no more then a man by seeing particular Mappes of
Cities, may certainly perceive the figure, situation, and order of the whole
world. But he that can easily resolve things, may easily compound: for when he
knows the particular sense and use of the things resolved, he may easily
gather a general knowledge of the whole thing, that is, a general knowledge
of many particulars, which make one entire thing. The form of this Analysis
following, which is of Master Littleton his two Chapiters of fee simple, and
fee tail, I do offer to the Student, as a thing to be considered of, because
it is incident to this purpose, which though it gain not his good liking, yet
if it minister but occasion unto him to adventure upon the conueyance of some
other Analysis, that may receive the general approbation, and just applause of
the learned, I shall think my labor herein well bestowed, and would gladlye
reap profit by other men's presidents.

The Analysis of Littletons Chapter of Fee simple.
Tenure in fee simple may be considered By the definition Invented. Fee simple
is as much to say, as a lawful and pure inheritance.
Expounded. He that will purchase lands in fee simple must have these words in
his purchase, (To have and to hold to him and to his heirs, for these words
his heirs make the estate of inheritance, and he that lacks this word
(heirs) and has to have and to hold to him and to his assigns for ever, has
estate but for term of life.

By the tenant in fee simple who is after two sorts to be considered.
Generally. Tenant in fee simple, is he which has lands or teneme^^s to hold
to him and to his heirs for ever.
Particularly. By purchase as when a man both lands and t^^ements by his deed,
or by his agreement, to the possession of which he comes not, by title of
descent from none of his ancestors, or his ^osins, but by his own act. By
descent who may be thus described. He that is tenant in fee simple must be of
the whole blood w^^ may be proved by two examples. 1 If a man have issue two
Sons by two venters, and the elder purchases lands in fee simple, and dies
without issue, the younger brother shall not have the land, but the uncle of the
elder brother, or some other his ^ye cosins shall have it, for yt the younger is
but of the half blood to the elder brother. 2. If a man have a Son and
daughter by one venture, and a Son by an other venture, and the son by the
first venture* purchases lands in fee simple, and dies without issue, the
sister shall have the land by descent as heir unto her brother, for that the
sister is of the whole blood to the elder brother.



By the properties of fee simple. 1 Inheritance in fee simple may lineallie
descend but not lineally ascend which may be illustrated by six prerogatives.
1 By the uncles prerogative If the fathers son purchase land in fee simple,
the uncle shall have the land as heir unto the son, and not the father,
because it cannot lineally ascend.
2 By the fathers prerogative which is threefold. 1 If the foresaid uncle dye
without issue, the Father living, the Father shall have the land as heir unto
the uncle, and not unto the son, for that he comes to the land by
collateral descent, and not by lineal ascension. 2 If lands descend by the
Fathers side, the Fathers side shall inherit, and none of the Mothers side. 3
If the son die without issue, and have purchased lands in fee simple they of
the blood of the fathers side shall be heir unto him before any of the mothers
side.
3. By the mothers prerogative which is twofold. 1 If the son having
purchased lands in fee simple have no heirs on the fathers side, then shall
the land descend unto the heir on the mothers side. 2 If a man take a wife
inheritrix in fee simple, which has issue a son and then dies, and the
son enters into the tenements as son and heir to his mother, and after
dies without issue, the heirs of the mothers side ought to inherit the
tenementes, and not the heirs of the fathers side.
4 By the brothers prerogative which is after two sorts. 1 If there be three
brethren, and the middle or younger brother purchase land and dye without issue,
the elder brother shall have the land by descent, for that he is more worthy
of blood. 2 If there be two brethren by diverse venters, and the elder is seized
in fee simple and dies without issue and his uncle enters as heir unto him
which also dies without issue the younger son shall inherit the tenementes
as heir to the uncle, because he is of the whole blood to his uncle.
5 By the Sisters prerogative. If a man be seized of land in fee simple, which
has issue a son and a daughter by one venture, and a son by an other
venture, and dies: and the elder son enters, and dies without issue, the
daughter shall have the land, and not the younger son, but if the elder
brother die before entrye be made, then the younger brother shall have the land.
Qui a possessio fratris defe^do simplici facit sororem esse heredem.
6 By the prerogative of the whole kindred. If a man purchase land in fee
simple and dye without issue, every one that is his next cousin collateral for
default of issue may inherit.

2 Of such things whereof a man may have a manual occupation, possession or
receite as of lands, teneme^ts, rents, or such other, a man shall say in his
pleading and in way of bar, that one such was seized in his demesne as of
fee, but of such things that lie not in manual occupation, as of an aduowson of
a church, or such manner of things, there he shall say, that he was seized as of
fee and not in his demesne as of fee. 3 Fee simple is the largest and greatest
inheritance that a man can have. 4 For default of lawful heirs the lord shall
have the land held in fee simple by eschete.


Observations upon the Analysis.
A.
THis definition, which Master Littleton uses, sounds like a good Logical
definition, as consisting of the true genus, and the proper difference: for
this word (inheritance) is the genus, which extends as well to fee simple, as
to fee tail, and this word (pure) is a difference, whereby it is distinguished
from fee tail: for fee simple is a pure inheritance, that is without
limitation or restreint, but fee tail is a limited or a restreigned
inheritance. This word (lawful) in the definition is not idle: but the meaning
of it is, that it is an inheritance according to the meaning of common law,
for if by (lawful) should be meant rightful, then a fee simple by diseisin
should be excluded, which I think was not Master Littletons intent. And
again, if this word (lawful) should extend to all laws, inheritance should
be here taken according to the interpretation of other laws also, which
cannot be. Master Littleton well begins with the definition, for there are
but four things to be doubted of, first, whether a thing be in rerum natura,
secondly, what it is, and of what nature, thirdly, whether it be such and so
qualified or no, fourthly, why it is such, and so qualified: and he that well
opens these four points* shall in all learned discourses show himself
excellent and absolute.

B.
The nature of fee simple may be somewhat understood by applying it to the
subject to which it apperteineth, for tenant in fee simple, and tenure in fee
simple, being coniugata, he that well knows the one, must of necessity
well understand the other.

C.
Master Littleton lastly describes estate in fee simple by certain adjuncts
or properties which do greatly serve to illustrate, and explain the things
whereof we entreat: they are of two sorts, external and internal.
Internal are they which flow from the nature of the thing it self: of such
sort are the first and third properties mentioned in the Analysis, for in that
fee simple may lineally discende, and not lineally ascend, the nature of the
tenure is the only cause, for it being to a man and so his heirs, the more
worthy heir is he that is of the body, the less worthy he that is of the
blood and not of the body, but the father in regard of the son can be
neither of these but in regard and by mediation of the uncle he may be heir to
the son, because he is of the uncles blood, so that in the direct line it is
evident, that the fee simple cannot ascend: and it is a very essential
property to fee simple to be the largest and greatest inheritance, because it
is to a man and his heirs without limitation. External properties are these;
which do so go before a thing, or so follow it; or so cleave to it, that
notwithstanding there is no necessity of any of these: as for example, before
the killing of a man, commonly there is some brawling and contention of words*
With the act does concur the sighing or groaning of him that is slain, and
the flight, fear, lurking, trembling, and unconstant answer of him that did
kill him do follow the act, howbeit some be slain, without the concurrence of
these circumstances. There be two sorts of adiunctes, some belonging to the
person, some to the thing it self, to the person as the kindred, country,
se^e, age, education, the habit of the body, the fortune, the estate, the
qualities of his mind, the manner of his life. The adjuncts of the thing are
the causes, the place, the time, the manner of doing a thing, and such like. Of
these, some be common, and some be proper: common, as if one should commend
Achilles, because he was of good birth, because he was a great captain,
because he was in fight against the Trojans, for every of which, Diomedes is
as much to be commended as Achilles. Proper adjuncts be, as if thou should
commend Achilles for his great valor in killing Hector the stoutest of the
Trojans, and for his good fortune in killing Cygnus, who being inuulnerable,
did bar all the Gretians from coming down the wall, and because being
young, and not bound by any oath or leageance, he fought so valiantly for the
Gretians. These two later of the proper adjuncts, I call external, as not
flowing from the essence of a thing, but befalling externally to it when it is
in esse. Of this kind there are two in the Analysis, the second and fourth.

The Analysis of Littletons Chapter of Fee tail.
Fee tail may be diverse ways considered By the first original. Tenant in fee
tail is by force of the statute W. 2. cap. 1. for at the common Law before the
said statute, all inheritances were fee simple.
A By the definition. Invented. Feodum taliatum est haereditas in quadam
certitudine limitata.
Expounded after ij. sorts. 1 If tenant in tail die without issue, the donor
or his heirs shall inherit as in their reuersion, for in every gift in the
tail the reuersion of the fee simple is in the donor. 2 If a man give lands or
tenements to an other to have and to hold to him and to his heirs males or
females, he to whom such gift is made has fee simple, for that it is not
limited by the gift of what body the issue male or female shall be.

By the diverse kinds thereof In respect of the nature of the entaile. Tail
general which is to be considered by the Definition. Invented. Tail general is
where lands be given to one and to the heirs of his body begotten.
Expounded. Therefore it is called general tail, because whatsouer woman the
tenant takes to wife, if he have many wives, and by each of the^ have issue,
yet any of these issues by possibility may inherit the tenements by force of
the said gift, because that every such issue is of his body engendered. So if
lands be given to a woman, and to the heirs of her body, howbeit that she have
many husbands, yet the issue that she has by each husband may inherit.

By an example or special kind thereof If tenements be given to a man and to
his wife, and to the heirs of the body of the man engendered, in this case the
husband has estate in the general tail, and the wife estate but for term of
life.

Tail special which is to be examined according to the Definition. Invented.
Tenant in tail special is where lands and tenements be given to a man and his
wife (jointly or severally) and to the heirs of their two bodies begotten.
Expounded after two sorts. 1 In such case none may enherite by force of such
gift, but those which be engendered between them two, and it is called special
tail: for that if the wife die and he take an other wife, and has issu, the
issue of the second wife shall never inherit by force of such gift, nor also
the issue of the second husband if the first die. 2 In the same manner it is
where lands and tenements be given by a man unto another with a wife, which is
the daughter or cousin to the giver in frankmariage, which gift has
inheritance by this word (Frankma^) unto it annexed, howbeit they be not
expressly said nor rehearsed in the gift, that is to say, that these donees
shall have these lands or tenements to them and to their (...) between them
two ingengred, and this is called special tail, because the issue of the second
wife may not inherit, and the woman donee in frankma^ must be of kin to the
donor, and they shall do no service but feal it, till the 4. degree to be
accounted from the donor be past.

Diverse kinds thereof. 1 If lands be given to the husband and to the wife,
and to the heirs of the husband which he begets of the body of ye wife, in
this case the husband has estate in special tail, and the wife but for term
of life. 2 If the gift be made to the husband and to the wife, and to the
heirs of the wife of her body by the husband engendered, the wife has estate
in special tail, and the husband but for term of life. 3 If lands be given to
the husband and the wife, and to the heirs which the husband has by his wife
in this case, both have estate in tail special, for that this word (heirs) is
not limited more to the one then to the other. 4 If lands begiuen to a mau and
his heirs with he enge^dreth on the body of his wife in this case ye husband has
estate in the tail special, and ye wife nothing at al.


In respect of the persons to whom the tail belongs. Tail to the heir male
which is two fold. 1. If lands be given to a man and his heirs males of his
body engendered, in such case his heir male shall inherit, but his issue
female shall never inherit. 2 If lands be given to a man and to his heirs
males of his body engendered, and he has issu ij. sons and deceaseth, and the
elder son enters as heir male, and has issue a daughter and deceaseth, his
brother shall have the land and not the daughter, for that the brother is heir
male.
Tail to the heir female with is to be considered by ye definition. Tail to
the heir female, is where lands be given to a man and to his heirs females of
his body engendered, in this case his issue female shall inherit by force and
form of the said gift, and not the issue male, for that in such cases where
the gift is, who ought to inherit, and who not, the will of the donor shall be
observed.


By the properties. 1 Whosoever shall inherit by force of a gift in the tail
made unto ye heirs males it behooves him to co^uey his descent by ye males with
may be illustrated by 2. examples. 1 If lands be given to a man and to his
heirs males of his body engendered, and he has issue a daughter, who has
issue a son, and deceaseth, in this case the son of the daughter shall not
inherit by force of the tail, but in such case the donor shall enter. 2 If
lands be given to a man and his wife, and to the heirs males of their two
bodies begotten, and they have issue after the like sort, the like shall happen.
2 The death of a man takes not away the estate of those that be in the tail,
as if a man have issue a son and deceaseth, and land is given to the son,
and to the heirs of the body of his father engendered, this is a good tail, and
yet the father was dead at the time of the gift. 3 The donees and their issue
shall hold of the donor and his heirs as he holds of the Lord Paramount.


Observations upon the Analysis.
THis definition, which Master Littleton makes of estate tail, consists
likewise of genus, and of a difference. The genus is haereditas, which is
common both to it and to fee simple: the difference in quadam certitudine
limitata, by which it is distinguished from fee simple, for that is non
limitata and sine certitudine, and by this definition a man may know what a fee
simple is, and by the definition of fee simple what fee tail is, so that the
rules of art are well observed, which are that Rectum est iudex sui obliqui,
and opposita iuxta se posita magis illucescunt.

Though the division or tenure of estate tail does in the Table precedent
consist of two members, or two differences, yet the especial tail is divided
into more parts: and that manner of dividing is not contrary to the rules of
method, for it is too much curiosity to exact in every division two only
opposed essential differences, and two distinct kinds. There be three causes
wherefore a division cannot be made by two differences. First because of noe
kind of thing, both the essential differences cannot certainly be known, but
the one of them we do express by a negative. Secondly, because that
difference which we set down in the affirmative is not always the true
difference. Thirdly, because the diverse nature of diverse immediate kinds of
one thing will not always permit a twofold division, for though the division of
Animal in hominem and brutum be bimembris and according to rigorous exaction,
yet sith there be many kinds of brutish creatures, some that swim, some
that fly, some that go, some that creep, and the particulars of these kinds
do differ in the quintessence of their nature, surely to comprehend all these
distinct things under two differences is not to be required, because it is
either impossible, or a thing of exceeding difficulty. But when things are to
be handled by way of disputation, as the arguing of cases which is of great use
in the law, another method and course must be used then has been taken in
the framing of this Analysis, for there the principal case must be fully set
down, the points of ^awe orderly distinguished, the reasons on the one part
must be first set down, with answers annexed unto them, then the reasons on
the other part, with answers likewise in their due places: and lastly, the
conclusion of the whole controversy debated, whether it were by judgment,
adiournement, or by the concord of the parties, or by other special mean, and
for better direction herein (I am desirous to profit others if I could) I have
set down an homely pattern according to the plains of my conceit, in the
disposing and ordering of a case, famous in our year books, and of great
weight and use, being the Prior of Mertons case, being very often at large
argued, namely, in the eightenth, ninetenth, twentieth, and twenty one years
of the reign of King Edward the fourth at several times, and was likewise
touched the second year of Richard the third, and all the contents of the
arguments upon this case delivered, as many as did concern the principal
points then in question (for by matters are to be reposed in a several place
by themselves) I have brought into the compass of a few lines, if you respect
the large leafes wherein they are handled.

Le case enter le Prior de Merton plaintiff, and le Prior de Bingham defendant.
EN le. 3. an de H. le. 3. Scir. faci. 18. E. 4. 22. 19. E. 4. 2. 47. 20. E. 4.
16. 21. E. 4. 60. 2. R. 3. 5.
un fine fuit levy parenter le Prior de Merton pl. et le Prior de Bingham
deforceant sur un brief de covent, que fuit en ceux parolls: cest le final
concord pare^ter le Prior de Merton querentem et le Prior de Bingham
deforceantem de 5. Marks, et v. s^. rent cu^ pertinentiis en S. et R. sur que
un brief de covenant fuit sum^on enter eux que fuit que lauantdit Prior de
Bingham acknowledge et grante pur luy et ses successors que touts iours, apres
ils payer chescun an al esglise de Merton pur les teneme^ts queux il tient del
dit prior et pur les teneme^ts queux W. de W. ascun foits tient del dit Prior
en les villages auantdits cinque marks, et v. s^. a deux terms dans, pur
touts suites et services, et que il ferroit a le chief seign^or del fee pur
lauantdit Prior de M. et ses successors touts services queux apperteignont a
les dits teneme^ts: et pur cest grant le dit Prior de M. grant pur luy, et ses
successors, que ils violent garrant^ al auantdit Prior de Bingham et ses
successors touts lauantdits tenements pur les auantdits services contra omnes
gentes: sur que vient en le court un I. Prior de Merton et prya scire faci.
enuers W. Prior de Bingham dauer execution darrerages del dit rent, que fuero^t
due en les ans darrein pass, et il auoit: et fuit return etc. a quel iour le
Prior de Bingham vient eins, et dit que le fine prove le rent grant a le
predecessors del pl. destre un rent service on a^^une auter rent issuant horse
de terre et nemy un annuitie, per que entant que il auoit acknowledge, que cest
rent fuit execute, il doit aver un Assise ou Distres, et nemy un brief que est
en nature de brief dannuitie* et sur cest ils demurront.

Les quaestions de ley.
1. Si le fine fuit bien levy. 2. Si le rent soit un annuitie.
1. Negat. Que le fine ne fuit bien levy.
Littleton.
Fines he sont bon e^^eant leuies de chooses queux ne sont in rerum natura al
temps del fine levy, A.
et le rent de que cest fine fuit ^eu^e ne fuit in esse al temps pe^ que etc.
Ratio prima.


Brian.
Ceo ne besoigne. B.
Car si ieo auoy in Islington 20. li. rent issuant de terres de twenty homes
per several grauntes, Responsum.
si ieo grant per fine a vous 20. li. rent horse de lour terres ou tenements in
Islington vous naueres 20. li. rent queur ieo auoy in Islington mes vous aueres
un novel rent: mes est diversity ou le chose de que le fine est destre levy
gist en demesne, et ou nemy. Car lou gist en demesne, la doit estre in esse al
temps del fine levy, come si ies levy fine de mon terre en dale lou ieo
nauera ascun terre en dale, cest fine est void, mes de chose que poit issuer
horse de terre un fine poit estre levy, coment que ne soit in rerum natura,
come de rent ou common in dale, ou en fait il nauoit ascun common ou rent in
dale al temps etc. mes sil auoit common in gross en (...) le ville, et grant
a moy un common, et ne monstra quel common, ceo serra construe le common que il
auoit en (...) le ville.

Neale.
Cest fine est levy de un mere annuitie, C.
et pur ceo est male, Ratio. 2.
cont^ si de chose naturallment surdant horse de terre come si ieo conust tout
mon dr^t en un acre de terre auous et vous per (...) le fine grant a moy un
annual re^t de 20. s^. horse de (...) le terre, cest bon grant, vn^ ne fuit
ascun original de ceo: per que etc.

Brian.
En ancient temps home puissoit aver conus un fine sans original, Respons.
et sil soit levy a cest iour il poit aver scire facias et si aduowso^ descend
al coparceners et ils per indenture enrolle voilent agree de presenter per
turn, chescun de eux quant son temps vient auera scire facias: per que etc.

Piggot.
En ancient temps fines fue^ levy deo et ecclesie, Replicat ad hoc respons.
mes le ley estore alter: mes come ieo pensa chescun fine doit aver original
et de accorder a ^. Car le note est placitum conuentionis, et en nostre case
nest ascun couen^ dun annuitie, mes dun rent solement, et si le original seit
de 20. acres et le fine soit levy de 40. acres quant al 20. le party ser^
discharge: car ne fuit ascun original de eux, et en praecipe quod reddat le
fine poit estre levy del chose en demand, car le original conteigne et
concern c^. Issint si brief de couen^ soit de 20 acres en dale et le fine est
levy, de 20 acres en sale le fine nest bon, ou si le original soit de terre
arable, et le counusans de pasture.

1. Affirmat'. Que le fine fuit bien levy. D. Ratio 1.

Sulyarde.
Si en un brief de couen^ port dun manor, le plaintiff grant le manor al le
deforceant, et grant oustre a discharger le dit manor enuers le seignior del
fee, cest bon fine, et vnc^ le clause de discharging ne fuit en le brief de
couen^, donques en cest case etc.

Sulyarde.
E. Ratio 2.
Si en un brief de droit de customs et services le seignior poit releaser per
fine tout son droit, que il ad en le terre, et le ten^ poit grant per (...) le
fine 20. ^. annualment, donques etc.

Catesby. R. 3.

Quant un home acknowledge le droit de terre a un et un re^t est reserve sur le
grant et ren^, ou un common, ou tot carectae ligni destre prise del ter^, cest
bon, car ils sont conteigne implicatiue, en le original, mes si le fine est
levy dun chose nient express ne implide en le original cest void, donques
en cest case, pur c^ que le fine est dun rent service, car le fine est pro
omnibus alijs seruitijs per cest peroll ( alijs) est implide, que le rent est
aliquod* seruitium.

2. Negat. Que le rent en cest ^ase nest un annuitie.
Piggot.
Le fine est que le Prior de Merton pur les services auant dits acquit le
Prior de Bingham de touts services enuers le seignour del fee, F.
et pur ceo cest rent service et nemie rent secke. Ratio. 1.


Collowe.
Le rent est change per le fine, Respons.
Car ambideur les parties serront estoppe de denyer lestate prise per le fine,
come si home soit seize de terre en fee, et un fine soit levy perenter est^ et
luy, per que lestraunge acknowledge m^ le terre a luy et a les heirs de son
corpse ingendres, ore son estate est change, issint si home tient per service de
chiualer, et le signior per fine acknowledge que il tient en soccage ore le
tenure est alter, et il tiendra en socage, et en cest case le rent ne poit
estre rent service, car donques le party poit distr sur le terre et ceo ne
poit estre. Car touts suits quant al terre sont discharge per le fine: et ne
poit estre rent charge. Car null terre est charge oue distr: et rent secke ne
poit estre: car donques il serra demand sur le terre: et annuitie ne poit
estre: Car le Priour ne poit charge lemeas^^.

Pigot.
Si le Prior ne B. ^e poit extinguisher les services per ses parolles, G.
on per^son act, Rat. 2.
le ^ent service continue, per q^ etc.

Si home tient de moy per xx. s^, H.
et ies confirm son estate de tener per un denier pur touts manners de
services, Rat. 3.
il ferra fealty, and cest rent est parcel del ancient rent, per que etc.

2. Affirmat'. Que le rent est un annuitie.
Starkey.
Si un home ne poit grant al auter ceo g^ il auoit deuant, I.
donques le rent g^ le Prior de Bingham grant a le Prior de Merton ne poit
estre launcient rent, Rat. 1.
mes un nouel rent ou un annuitie, per que etc.

Si ieo teigne de vous per homage, Con^ir. ratio.
fealty, et ^. s^. rent, et ieo voile graunter a vous per fine xii. d. rent
pur les tenements queux ieo teigne de vous, cest un nouel rent, and nemy
launcient rent, per que etc.

Vauisor.
Si per fine sur conusans de droit come ceo, un nouel rent poit este grant,
car cesty a que le conusans est fait poit grant un rent a le conusor, R.
et le cause est pur ceo que il serra intend que cesty a que le coNusans est
fait est seisie vel terre: Rat. 2.
Mes auterment est de fine sur grant and render, car le ley ne i^tende que le
grauntee est seisie del terre, donques en cest ^ase le rent est un nouel rent.

Choke.
Si ceux parolx, que le Prior de Bingham ferra touts les services pur le Prior
de Merton, Rat. 3.
ne prouant ceo destre rent service: Car si soient seignior et tenant, et le
seignior release a le tenant per fait indent tout son droit que il auoit,
reddendo vnum denarium, and faciendo capitali domino seruitia etc. en le
behalf del seignior ^eux parolx sont voides, Car per le release son seigniorie
est extinct, donques en cest case etc.

Judgment.
Trois des Justices agarderont g^ le pl poit suer execution per Scire facias,
et issint judgment fuit enter* e^maintenant sedente curia, un brief Derror
fuit mise eins. Et fuit touch en le bank del Roy 2. R. 3. mes nest la decids,
ne argue.

Observations upon the precedent form of arguing.
A. The first reason made by Mast. Littleton is drawn from the cause of the
thing generally, and specially from the material cause: For if the only
material causes of fines be things which are in esse, it is a probable
conclusion to say that of this rent being not in esse, a fine could not be
levied. And as the rule of Logic is, Quae eadem sunt eorum generationes et
corruptiones, causae constituentes et corrumpentes eaedem sunt: Arist. Top. 7.
c. 1.
So of such things which be the same in kind, the causes material are the
same: and therefore the material causes of fines, that is the thing whereof they
are levied, ought to be the same.

B. The answer of Brian to Mast. Littletons reason is by way of
distinguishing, for every answer must be either by direct granting, or direct
denying, or else by distinguishing which is partly a granting partly a denying.

C. Mast. Neale his reason is drawn from the same place of Logic, from which
Mast. Littletons was derived: for he supposes that an Ammitie is no fit
material cause whereof a fine may be levied.

D. Sulyards reason is drawn a comparatis patibus from things alike probable:
For if a man in a writ of Covenant brought of a manor, may grant and covenant
to discharge the said manor against the Lord of the fee, though in the writ of
covenant there were no mentioning of any such discharge: by the like reason a
man may levy a fine of a thing which is not mentioned in the writ of covenant,
and which was no^ in Esse before. And this manner of reasoning is grounded upon
that rule in Logike, Si duo duobus aeque conueniant, and hoc huic conueniat,
etiam illud illi conueniet. Arist. Top. 2 c. 4.


E. Sulyards second reason is drawn a simili: For like as in a fine levied
upon a writ of Right brought of customs and services, the tenant may grant a
rent which was not in Esse before: so likewise in this case the fine might be
levied of a rent, which had no being before. And this consequens is warranted
by this rule, Si in vno eorum quae similia sunt aliquo modo se res habeat,
eodem etiam modo in alijs se habebit. Arist. Top. 2 c. 4.


F. The first reason whereby Pigot goes about to prove that the rent is not
an Annuitie is deduced a genere: For if it be truly named by the general name
of service in the fine, it must be intended to be a special kind of rent
service, and not a rent secke, according to the rule, Si aliquid sit genus,
species ab e^ comprehensa participabit natura eius, sed non natura eius quod
est contrarium generi. h.

G. Pigot his second reason is drawn a comparatis paribus.

H. His third reason is drawn a simili.

I. Starkey his first reason is drawn a comparatis paribus.

K. The reasons used by Vauisour and Choke to prove the rent to be an Annuitie
are drawn a simili.

FINIS.

