A DECLARATION of the Practices and Treasons attempted and committed by Robert
late Earl of Essex and his Accomplices, against her Majesty and her Kingdoms,
and of the proceedings as well at the Arraignments and Conuictions of the said
late Earl, and his adherents, as after:

Together with the very Confessions and other parts of the Evidences
themselves, word for word taken out of the Originals.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Queens most excellent
Majesty.

ANNO 1601.



A DECLARATION touching the Treasons of the late Earl of Essex, and his
Accomplices.
THough public justice passed upon capital offenders, according to the laws,
and in course of an honorable and ordinary trial (where the case would have
borne and required the severity of Marshall law to have been speedily used)
do in it self carry a sufficient satisfaction toward all men, specially in a
merciful government, such as her Majesty's is approved to be: yet because
there do pass abroad in the hands of many men diverse false and corrupt
Collections and Relations of the proceedings at the arreignment of the late
Earls of Essex and Southampton: and again, because it is requisite that the
world do understand as well the praecedent practices and inducements to the
Treasons, as the open and actual Treasons themselves (though in a case of life
it was not thought convenient to insist at the trial upon matter of inference
or presumption, but chiefly upon matter of plain and direct proofs) therefore
it has been thought fit to publish to the world a brief Declaration of the
practices and treasons attempted and committed by Robert late Earl of Essex
and his accomplices against her Majesty and her Kingdoms, and of the
proceedings at the conuictions of the said late Earl and his adhaerents upon
the same treasons: and not so only, but therewithal, for the better
warranting and verifying of the narration, to set down in the end, the very
Confessions and testimonies themselves, word for word taken out of the
Originals, whereby it will be most manifest, that nothing is obscured or
disguised, though it do appear by diverse most wicked and seditious Libels
thrown abroad, that the dregs of these treasons, which the late Earl of Essex
himself a little before his death, did term a Leprosy, that had infected
far and near, do yet remain in the hearts and tongues of some misaffected
persons.

THE most partial will not deny, but that Robert late Earl of Essex was by
her Majesty's manifold benefits and graces, besides oath and allegiance, as
much tied to her Majesty, as the subject could be to the sovereign, her
Majesty having heaped upon him both dignities, offices, and gifts in such
measure, as within the circle of twelve years or more, there was scarcely a
year of rest, in which he did not obtain at her Majesty's hands some notable
addition either of honor or profit.

But he on the other side, making these her Majesty's favors nothing else but
wings for his ambition, and looking upon them, not as her benefits, but as his
aduauntages, supposing that to be his own metal which was but her mark and
impression, was so given over by God (who often punishes ingratitude by
ambition, and ambition by treason, and treason by final ruin) as he had long
ago plotted it in his heart to become a dangerous supplanter of that seat,
whereof he ought to have been a principal supporter: In such sort as now
every man of common sense may discern not only his last actual and open
treasons, but also his former more secret practices and preparations toward
those his treasons, and that without any gloss or interpreter, but himself
and his own doings.

For first of all, the world can now expound, why it was that he did aspire,
and had almost atteined unto a greatness, like unto the ancient greatness of
the Praefectus Praetorio under the Emperors of Rome, to have all men of war
to make their sole and particular dependence upon him: That with such jealousy
and watchfulness he sought to discountenance any one that might be a
Competitor to him in any part of that greatness: That with great violence and
bitterness he sought to suppress and keep down all the worthiest Marshall
men, which did not appropriate their respects and acknowledgements only
toward himself. All which did manifestly detect and distinguish, That it was
not the reputation of a famous Leader in the wars which he sought (as it was
construed a great while) but only power and greatness to serve his own ends,
considering he never loved virtue nor valor in another, but where he thought he
should be Proprietarie and Commander of it, as referred to himself.

So likewise those points of popularitie which every man took notice and note
of, as his affable gestures, open doors, making his table and his bed so
popularly places of audience to futers, denying nothing when he did nothing,
feeding many men in their discontentments against the Queen and the State, and
the like, as they were ever since Absalons time, the forerunners of treasons
following, so in him were they either the qualities of a nature disposed to
disloyalty, or the beginnings and conceptions of that which afterward grew
to shape and form.

But as it were a vain thing to think to search the roots and first motions
of treasons, which are known to none but God that discernes the heart, and the
Devil that gives the instigation: so it is more then to be presumed (being
made apparent by the evidence of all the events following) that he carried into
Ireland a heart corrupted in his allegiance, and pregnant of those or the like
treasons which afterward came to light.

For being a man by nature of an high imagination, and a great promiser to
himself as well as to others, he was confident that if he were once the first
person in a kingdom, and a sea between the Queens seat and his, and Wales
the nearest land from Ireland, and that he had got the flower of the English
forces into his hands (which he thought so to intermixe with his own
followers, as the whole body should move by his spirit) and if he might have
also absolutely into his hands potestatem vitae and necis, and arbitrium belli
and pacis, over the Rebels of Ireland, whereby he might entise, and make them
his own, first by pardons and conditions, and after by hopes to bring them in
place where they should serve for hope of better booties then Cowes, he should
be able to make that place of Lieutenancie of Ireland, as a rise or step to
ascend to his desired greatness in England.

And although many of these conceits were windy, yet neither were they the
less like to his, neither are they now only probable conjectures or comments
upon these his last treasons, but the very preludes of actions almost
immediately subsequent, as shall be touched in due place.

But first it was strange with what appetite and thirst he did affect and
compass the government of Ireland, which he did obtain. For although he made
some formal shows to put it from him: yet in this, as in most things else,
his desires being too strong for his dissimulations, he did so far pass the
bounds of Decorum, as he did in effect name himself to the Queen by such
description and such particularities as could not be applied to any other but
himself: neither did he so only, but further he was still at hand to offer
and urge vehemently and peremptorily exceptions to any other that was named.

Then after he once found that there was no man but himself (who had other
matters in his head) so far in love with that charge, as to make any
competition or opposition to his pursuit, whereby he saw it would fall upon
him, and especially after himself was resolved upon, he began to make
propositions to her Majesty by way of taxation of the former course held in
mannaging the actions of Ireland, especially upon three points: The first, that
the proportions of forces which had been there maintained and continued by
supplies, were not sufficient to bring the prosecutions there to period. The
second, that the axe had not been put to the root of the tree, in regard there
had not bin made a maine prosecution upon the Archtraitour Tyrone, in his own
strength, within the Province of Vlster. The third, that the prosecutions
before time had been intermixed and interrupted with too many temporising
treaties, whereby the Rebel did ever gather strength and reputation to renew
the war with advantage. All which goodly and well sounding discourses,
together with the great vaunts that he would make the earth tremble before him,
tended but to this, that the Queen should increase the list of her Army and
all proportions of treasure and other furniture, to the end his commandment
might be the greater. For that he never intended any such prosecution, may
appear by this, that even at the time before his going into Ireland he did
open himself so far in speech to Blunt, The confession of Blunt. 3.
his inwardest counselor, That he did assure himself that many of the Rebels
in Ireland would be advised by him: so far was he from intending any
prosecution toward those in whom he took himself to have interest. But his
ends were two: The one, to get great forces into his hands: the other, to
oblige the heads of the rebellion unto him, and to make them of his party.
These two ends had in themselves a repugnancie: for the one imported
prosecution, and the other treaty: But he that meant to be too strong to be
called to account for any thing, and meant besides, when he was once in
Ireland, to engage himself in other iourneys that should hinder the
prosecution in the North, took things in order as they made for him. And so
first did nothing as was said, but trumpet a final and utter prosecution
against Tyrone in the North, to the end to have his forces augmented.

But yet he forgot not his other purpose of making himself strong by a party
amongst the Rebels, when it came to the scanning of the clauses of his
commission. For then he did insist, and that with a kind of contestation, that
the pardoning, no not of Tyrone himself, the capital Rebel, should be
excepted and reserved to her Majesty's immediate grace, being infinitely
desirous that Tyrone should not look beyond him for his life or pardon, but
should hold his fortune as of him, and account for it to him only.

So again, whereas in the commission of the Earl of Sussex, and of all other
Lieutenants or deputies, there was ever in that clause which gives unto the
Lieutenant or deputy, that high or regal point of authority to pardon
Treasons and I raitors, an exception contained of such cases of treason as are
committed against the person of the King: It was strange, and suspiciously
strange, even at that time, with what importunity and instance he did labor,
and in the end prevailed to have that exception also omitted, glosing then,
that because he had heard, that by strict exposition of law (a point in law
that he would needs forget at his arraignment, but could take knowledge of it
before, when it was to serve his own ambition) all treasons of rebellion did
tend to the destruction of the Kings person, it might breed a buzze in the
Rebels heads, and so discourage them from coming in, whereas he knew well that
in all experience passed, there was never Rebel made any doubt or scruple upon
that point to accept of pardon from all former governors, who had their
Commissions penned with that limitation (their Commissions being things not
kept secretly in a box, but published and recorded) so as it appeared
manifestly that it was a mere devise of his own out of the secret reaches of
his heart then not revealed: but it may be shrewdly expounded since, what his
drift was by those pardons which he granted to Blunt the Marshall, and Thomas
Lee, and others, that his care was no less to secure his own instruments then
the Rebels of Ireland.

Yet was there another point for which he did contend and contest, which was,
that he might not be tied to any opinion of the Counsel of Ireland, as all
others in certain points (as pardoning traitors, concluding war and peace,
and some other principal articles) had been before him, to the end he might be
absolute of himself, and be fully Master of opportunities and occasions for
the performing and executing of his own treasonable ends.

But after he had once by her Majesty's singular trust and favor toward him
obtained his Patent of Commission as large, and his List of forces as full as
he desired, there was an end in his course of the prosecution in the North.
For being arrived into Ireland, the whole carriage of his actions there, was
nothing else but a cunning defeating of that journey, with an intent (as
appeared) in the end of the year to pleasure and gratify the Rebel with a
dishonorable peace, and to contract with him for his own greatness.

Therefore not long after he had received the sword, he did voluntarily engage
himself in an unseasonable and fruitless journey into Munster, a journey
never propounded in the Counsel there, never aduertized over hither while it
was past: By which journey her Majesty's forces which were to be preserved
entire both in vigor and number for the great prosecution, were harased and
tired with long marches together, and the Northern prosecution was indeed
quite dashed and made impossible.

But yet still doubting he might receive from her Majesty some quick and
express commandment to proceed: to be sure, he pursued his former devise of
wrapping himself in other actions, and so set himself on work anewe in the
County of Ophaley, being resolved, as is manifest, to dally out the season,
and never to have gone that journey at all: That setting forward which he made
in the very end of August being but a mere play and a mockery, and for the
purposes which now shall be declared.

After he perceived that four months of the Summer, and three parts of the
army were wasted, he thought now was a time to set on foot such a peace as
might be for the Rebels advantage, and so to work a mutual obligation
between Tyrone and himself, for which purpose he did but seek a commodity.
He had there with him in his army one Thomas Lee, a man of a seditious and
working spirit, and one that had been privately familiar and entirely beloved
of Tyrone, and one that afterward immediately upon Essex open rebellion, was
apprehended for a desperate attempt of violence against her Majesty's person;
which he plainly confessed, and for which he suffered. Wherefore judging him
to be a fit instrument, he made some signification to Lee of such an
imploiment, which was no sooner signified then apprehended by Lee. He gave
order also to sir Christopher Blunt Marshall of his army, to license Lee to go
to Tyrone when he should require it. But Lee thought good to let slip first
unto Tyrone (which was nevertheless by the Marshals warrant) one James Knowd,
a person of wit and sufficiency, to sound in what terms and humors Tyrone
then was. This Knowd returned a message from Tyrone to Lee, The confession of
Th. Lee.
which was, That if the Earl of Essex would follow Tyrones plot, he would
make the Earl of Essex the greatest man that ever was in England: and further,
that if the Earl would have conference with him, Tyrone would deliver his
eldest son in pledge for his assurance. This message was delivered by Knowd
to Lee, and by Lee was imparted to the Earl of Essex, who after this message,
employed Lee himself to Tyrone, and by his negociating (whatsoever passed else)
prepared and disposed Tyrone to the parley.

And this imploiment of Lee was a matter of that guiltiness in my Lord, as
being charged with it at my Lord Keepers only in this nature (for the message
of Knowd was not then known) that when he pretended to assail Tyrone, he had
before under hand agreed upon a pariey, In the confession of Blunt at the
bar, he did there declare that he had Essex his particular warrant to send
Lee, and afterward was desired by Essex to take it upon himself, and that
they both had pardons.
my Lord utterly denied it that he ever employed Lee to Tyrone at all, and
turned it upon Blunt whom he afterward required to take it upon him, having
before sufficiently provided for the security of all parts, for he had granted
both to Blunt and Lee pardons of al treasons under the great seal of Ireland,
and so himself disclaiming it, and they being pardoned, all was safe.

But when that Tyrone was by these means (besides what others God knows)
prepared to demand a parley, now was the time for Essex to acquit himself of
all the Queens commandments and his own promises and undertakings for the
Northern journey, and not so alone, but to have the glory at the disadvantage
of the year, being but 2500. strong of foot, and 300. of horse, after the
fresh disaster of sir Coniers Clifford, in the height of the Rebels pride, to
set forth to assail, and then that the very terror and reputation of my Lord
of Essex person was such as did daunt him and make him stoop to seek a
parley, and this was the end he shot at in that September journey, being a mere
abuse and br^^^ry, and but inducements only to the Treaty, which was the only
matter he intended. For Essex drawing now toward the Catastrophe, or last part
of that Tragedy, for which he came upon the Stage in Ireland, his Treasons grew
to a further ripeness. For knowing how unfit it was for him to communicate
with any English, even of those whom he trusted most, and meant to use in
other Treasons: That he had an intention to grow to an agreement with Tyrone
to have succors from him for the usurping upon the State here, (not because it
was more dangerous then the rest of his treasons, but because it was more
odious, and in a kind monstrous, that he should conspire with such a Rebel,
against whom he was sent: and therefore might adventure to alienate men's
affections from him) he drove it to this, that there might be, and so there
was, under color of treaty, an interuiew and private conference between
Tyrone and himself only, no third person admitted. A strange course,
considering with whom he dealt, and especially considering what message Knowde
had brought, which should have made him rather call witnesses to him, then
avoid witnesses. But he being only true to his own ends, easily dispensed with
all such considerations. Nay, there was such careful order taken, that no
person should ouerheare one word that passed between them two: as because the
place appointed and used for the parley was such, as there was the depth of a
brook between them, which made them speak some lowdnesse: therewere certain
horsemen appointed by order from Essex, to keep all men off, a great distance
from the place.

It is true, that the secrecy of that parley, as it gave to him the more
liberty of Treason, so it may give any man the more liberty of surmize, what
was then handled between them, inasmuch as nothing can be known, but by
report from one of them two, either Essex or Tyrone.

But, although there were no proceeding against Essex upon these treasons, and
that it were a needless thing to load more treasons upon him then, whose
burden was so great after: yet for trueths sake, it is fit the world know,
what is testified touching the speeches, letters and reports of Tyrone,
immediately following this conference, and observe also what ensued likewise in
the desseignes of Essex himself.

On Tyrones part it fell out, that the very day after that Essex came to the
court of England, Tyrone having conference with Sir William Warren at Armagh,
by way of discourse told him, and bound it with an oath, and iterated it two or
three several times: The relation of sir Wi. Warren certified under his hand
from the Council of Ireland to the Lords of the Council here.
That within two or three months, he should see the greatest alterations and
strangest that ever he saw in his life, or could imagine: and that be the
said Tyrone hoped ere long to have a good share in England. With this concurred
fully the report of Richard Bremingham a gentleman of the Pale, having made his
repair about the same time to Tyrone, to right him in a cause of land: saving
that Bremingham delivers the like speech of Tyrone to himself: The report of
Ri. Bremingham to the Council of Estate in Ireland.
but, not what Tyrone hoped, but what Tyrone had promised in these words, That
he had promised (it may be thought to whom) ere long to show his face in
England, little to the good of England.

These generalities coming immediately from the report of Tyrone himself, are
drawn to more particularitie in a conference had between the Lord Fitz
Morris Baron of Liksnawe in Munster, and one Thomas Wood a person well reputed
of, immediately after Essex coming into England. The confession of Tho. Wood.
In which conference Fitz Morris: declared unto Wood, that Tyrone had written
to the traitorous titularie Earl of Desmond, to inform him, that the
Condition of that Contract between Tyrone and Essex was, That Essex should be
king of England: And that Tyrone should hold of him the honor and state of
Viceroy of Ireland: And that the proportion of soldiers, which Tyrone should
bring or send to Essex, were 8000 Irish. With which concurreth fully the
testimony of the said James Knowde, The confession of James Knowde.
who being in credit with O^^^^ Mac Roory chief of the Omoores in Lemster, was
used as a Secretary for him, in the writing of a letter to Tyrone, immediately
after Essex coming into England. The effect of which letter was: To understand
some light of the secret agreement between the Earl of Essex and Tyrone, that
he the said Owny might frame his course accordingly. Which letter, with further
instructions to the same effect, was in the presence of Knowde delivered to
Turlagh Macdauy, a man of trust with Owny, who brought an answer from Tyrone.
The co^tents whereof were: That the Earl of Essex had agreed to take his part,
and that they should aid him toward the conquest of England.

Besides, very certain it is, and testified by diverse credible persons, that
immediately upon this parley, there did fly abroad as sparckles of this fire,
(which it did not concern Tyrone so much to keep secret, as it did Essex) a
general and received opinion, that went up and down in the mouths both of the
better and meaner sort of Rebels: The declarations of Da. Hethrington, James
Knowd and others.
That the Earl of Essex was theirs, and they his: and that he would never
leave the one sword, meaning that of Ireland, till he had gotten the other in
England: and that he would bring them to serve, where they should have other
manner of booties then cowes: and the like speeches. And Thomas Lee himself,
The confession of Th. Lee.
(who had been, as was before declared, with Tyrone two or three days, upon my
Lords sending, and had sounded him) has left it confessed under his hand: That
he knew the Earl of Essex and Tyrone to be one, and to run the same courses.

And certain it is also, that immediately upon that parley, Tyrone grew into a
strange and unwonted pride, and appointed his progresses and visitations to
receive congratulations and homages from his confederates, and behaved himself
in all things as one that had some new spirit of hope and courage put into him.

But on the Earl of Essex his part insued immediately after this parley a
strange motion and project, which though no doubt he had harbored in his breast
before: yet for any thing yet appears, he did not utter and break with any
in it, before he had been confirmed and fortified in his purpose, by the
combination and correspondence, which he found in Tyrone upon their
conference. Neither is this a matter gathered out of reports, The Earl of
Southampton and sir Christopher Blunt.
but confessed directly by two of his principal friends and associats, being
witnesses upon their own knowledge, and of that which was spoken to
themselves: The substance of that which is confessed by Southampton and Blunt
touching Essex purpose to have transported into England the army of Ireland,
and the changing of that dessein into the other dessein of surprising the
Queen and the Court.
The substance of which confessions is this: That a little before my Lords
coming over into England, at the castle of Dublin where Sir Christopher Blunt
lay hurt, having been lately removed thither from Reban, a castle of Thomas
Lees, and placed in a lodging that had been my Lord of Southamptons: the Earl
of Essex took the Earl of Southampton with him, to visit Blunt, and there
being none present but they three, my Lord of Essex told them, he found it now
necessary for him to go into England, and would advise with them of the manner
of his going, since to go he was resolved. And thereupon propounded unto them,
that he thought it fit a carry with him of the army in Ireland, as much as he
could conveniently transport, at least the choice of it, to the number of two
or three thousand, to secure and make good his first deseent on shore,
purposing to land them at Milford haven in Wales, or thereabouts: not doubting,
but that his army would so increase within a small time, by such as would come
in to him as he should be able to march with his power to London, and make his
own conditions as he thought good. But, both Southampton and Blunt dissuaded
him from this enterprise: Blunt alleging the hazard of it, and that it would
make him odious, and Southampt on utterly disliking of that course upon the
same and many other reasons. Howbe it thereupon Blunt advised him rather to
another course, which was to draw forth of the Army some 200. resolute
gentlemen, and with those to come over, and so to make sure of the Court, and
so to make his own conditions. Which Confessions it is not amiss to deliver,
by what a good providence of God they came to light: for, they could not be
used at Essex arraignement to charge him, because they were uttered after his
death.

But Sir Christopher Blunt at his arraignment being charged that the Earl of
Essex had set it down under his hand, The speech of Sir Christopher Blunt at
his arraignement, and the occasion of the falling into the aforesaid
confessions.
that he had been a principal Instigator of him, to his treasons, in passion
brake forth into these speeches: That then he must be forced to disclose what
further matters he had held my Lord from, and desired for that purpose (because
the present proceeding should not be interrupted) to speak with the Lord
Admiral and M. Secretary, after his arraignment, and so fell most naturally
and most voluntarily into this his confession, which if it had been thought
fit to have required of him at that time publicly, he had delivered before his
conviction. And the same confession he did after (at the time of his execution)
constantly and fully confirm, discourse particularly, and take upon his
death, where never any man showed less fear, nor a greater resolution to die.

And the same mattter so by him confessed, was likewise confessed with the same
circumstances of time and place by Southampton, being severally examined
thereupon.

So as now the world may see how long since my Lord put off his vizard, and
disclosed the secrets of his heart to two of his most confident friends,
falling upon that unnatural and detestable treason, whereunto all his former
Actions in his government in Ireland, (and God knows how long before) were
but Introductions.

But, finding that these two persons, which of all the rest he thought to have
found forwardest, The place of General of the horse in the army of Ireland
was conferred by Essex upon Southampton contrary to her Majesty's express
commandment.
Southampton, whose displacing he had made his own coffeehouse (having
placed him, no question to that end, to find cause of coffeehouse) and
Blunt, a man so enterprizing and prodigal of his own life, (as himself termed
himself at the Bar) did not applaud to this his purpose, and thereby
doubting how coldly he should find others minded, that were not so near to
him. And therefore condescending to Blunts advise to surprise the Court, he
did pursue that plot accordingly, and came over with a selected company of
Captains and voluntaries, and such as he thought were most affectionate unto
himself, and most resolute, though not knowing of his purpose. So as even at
that time, every man noted and wondered, what the matter should be, that my Lord
took his most particular friends and followers from their companies, which
were countenance and means unto them, to bring them over. But his purpose (as
in part was touched before) was this: that if he held his greatness in Court,
and were not committed (which in regard of the miserable and deplored estate he
left Ireland in, whereby he thought the opinion here would be that his service
could not be spared, he made full account he should not be) then, at the first
opportunity, he would execute the surprise of her Majesty's person. And if he
were committed to the Tower, or to prison for his contempts, (for besides his
other contempts, he came over expressly against the Queens prohibition under
her Signet) it might be the care of some of his principal friends, by the
help of that choice and resolute company which he brought over, to rescue him.

But the pretext of his coming over was, by the efficacy of his own presence
and persuasion, to have moved and drawn her Majesty to accept of such
conditions of peace, as he had treated of with Tyrone, in his private
conference: which was indeed somewhat needful, the principal Article of them
being, That there should be a general restitution of Rebels in Ireland to all
their lands and possessions, that they could pretend any right to, before their
going out into Rebellion: without reservation of such lands as were by Act of
Parliament passed to the Crown, and so planted with English both in the time
of Q. Mary, and since: and without difference either of time of their going
forth, or nature of their offense, or other circumstance, tending in effect to
this: That all the Queens good subjects, in most of the Provinces, should have
been displanted, and the Country abandoned to the Rebels.

When this man was come over, his heart thus fraughted with Treasons, and
presented himself to her Majesty: it pleased God, in his singular providence
over her Majesty, to guide and hem in her proceeding toward him, in a narrow
way of safety between two perils. For neither did her Majesty leave him at
liberty, whereby he might have commodity to execute his purpose: nor restrain
him in any such nature, as might signify or betoken matter of despair of his
return to Court and favor. And so the means of present mischief being taken
away, and the humors not stirred, this matter fell asleep, and the thread of
his purposes was cut off. For, coming over about the end of September, and not
denied access and conference with her Majesty, and then being commanded to his
chamber at Court for some days, and from thence to the Lord Keepers house; it
was conceived, that these were no ill signs. At my Lord Keepers house he
remained, till some few days before Easter, and then was removed to his own
house, under the custody of Sir Richard Barkley, and in that sort continued
till the end of Trinity Term following.

For, her Majesty all this while looking into his faults, with the eye of her
princely favor, and loath to take advantage of his great offenses, in other
nature then as contempts, resolved so to proceed against him, as might (to use
her Majesty's own words) tend, ad correctionem, and non ad ruinam.

Nevertheless afterward, about the end of Trinity Term following, for the
better satisfaction of the world, and to repress seditious bruits and libels,
which were dispersed in his justification, and to observe a form of justice,
before he should be set at full liberty: her Majesty was pleased to direct,
that there should be associate unto her Privy Council, some chosen persons of
her Nobility, and of her Judges of the law: and before them his cause,
(concerning the breaking of his instructions for the Northern prosecution, and
the manner of his treating with Tyrone, and his coming over, and leaving the
kingdom of Ireland, contrary to her Majesty's commandment, expressed as well
by signification thereof made under her Royal hand and Signet, as by a most
binding and effectual letter, written privately to himself) to receive a
hearing: with limitation nevertheless, that he should not be charged with any
point of disloialty; and with like favor directed, that he should not be
called in question in the open and ordinary place of offenders in the Star
Chamber, from which he had likewise by a most penitent and humble letter
desired to be spared, as that which would have wounded him for ever, as he
affirmed, but in a more private manner at my Lord Keepers house. Neither was
the effect of the sentence, that there passed against him, any more then a
suspension of the exercise of some of his places: At which time also, Essex
that could vary himself into all shapes for a time, infinitely desirous (as
by the sequel now appears) to be at liberty to practice and revive his
former purposes, and hoping to set into them with better strength then ever,
because he conceived the peoples hearts were kindled to him by his troubles,
and that they had made great demo^strations of as much: he did transform
himself into such a strange and dejected humility, as if he had been no man of
this world, with passionate protestations, that he called God to witness, that
he had made an utter divorce with the world: and he desired her Majesty's
favor, not for any worldly respect, but for a preparatiue for a Nunc dimittis:
And that the tears of his heart had quenched in him all humors of ambition.
All this to make her Majesty secure, and to lull the world asleep, that he
was not a man to be held any ways dangerous.

Not many days after, Sir Richard Barkley his keeper was removed from him, and
he set at liberty, with this admonition only: That he should not take
himself to be altogether discharged, though he were left to the guard of none,
but his own discretion. But he felt himself no sooner upon the wings of his
liberty, but (notwithstanding his former shows of a mortified estate of
mind) he began to practice afresh, as busily as ever reviving his former
resolution: which was the surprising and possessing the Queens person, and the
Court. And that it may appear how early after his liberty he set his engines
on work, having long before entertained into his service, and during his
government in Ireland, drawn near unto him in the place of his chief
Secretary, one Henry Cuffe, a base fellow by birth, but a great scholar, and
indeed a notable Traitor by the book, being otherwise of a turbulent and
mutinous spirit against all superiors:

This fellow, in the beginning of August, which was not a month after Essex
liberty granted, fell of practicing with Sir Henry Neuill, that served her
Majesty as Ligier Ambassador with the French King, The declaration of sir He.
Neuell.
and then newly come over into England from Bulleyn, abusing him with a false
lie, and mere invention, that his service was blamed and misliked, and that
the imputation of the breach of the treaty of Peace held at Bulleyn, was like
to light upon him, (when there was no color of any such matter) only to
distaste him of others, and fasten him to my Lord, though he did not acquaint
him with any particulars of my Lords deseignes, till a good while after.

But my Lord having spent the end of the Summer (being a private time, when
every body was out of town and dispersed) in digesting his own thoughts, with
the help and conference of Master Cuffe, they had soon set down between
them the ancient principle of Traitors and Conspirators, which was: To prepare
many, and to acquaint few; and after the manner of Mines, to make ready their
powder, and place it, and then give fire but in the instant. Therefore, the
first consideration was of such persons as my Lord thought fit to draw to be of
his party; singling out both of Nobility and Martial men, and others, such as
were discontented or turbulent, and such as were weak of judgment, and easy
to be abused, or such as were wholly dependants and followers (for means or
countenance) of himself, Southampton or some other of his greatest associates.

And knowing there were no such strong and drawing cords of popularitie, as
religion: he had not neglected, both at this time, and long before, in a
profane policy to serve his turn (for his own greatness,) of both sorts and
factions, both of Catholics and Puritanes, as they term them, turning his out
side to the one, and his inside to the other, and making himself pleasing and
gracious to the one sort by professing zeal, and frequenting sermons, and
making much of Preachers, and secretly under hand giving assurance to Blunt,
Dauies, The confession of Blunt and Dauis.
and diverse others, that (if he might prevail in his desired greatness,) he
would bring in a toleration of the Catholic religion.

Then having passed the whole Michaelmas Term in making himself plausible,
and in drawing concourse about him, and in affecting and alluring men by kind
prouocations and usage, wherein (because his liberty was qualified) he
neither forgot exercise of mind nor body, neither Sermon nor Tenis Court, to
give the occasion and freedom of access and concourse unto him) and much
other practice and devise: About the end of that term, toward Christmas, he
grew to a more framed resolution of the time and manner, when and how he would
put his purpose in execution. And first about the end of Michaelmas Term, it
passed as a kind of cipher and watchword amongst his friends and followers, The
declaration of Sir Henry Neuil, and Confession of Sir Ferdinando Gorge.
That'my Lord would stand upon his guard: which might receive construction, in
a good sense, as well guard of circumspection, as guard of force: but to the
more private and trusty persons he was content it should be expounded that he
would be couped up no more, nor hazard any more restraints or commandments.

But the next care was, how to bring such persons, as he thought fit for his
purpose, into Town together, without vent of suspicion, to be ready at the
time, when he should put his deseigne in execution: which he had concluded
should be some time in Hillarie Term: wherein he found many devices to draw
them up, The confession of Blunt.
some for suits in Law, and some for suits in Court, and some for assurance of
land: and one friend to draw up another, it not being perceived, that all
moved from one head. And it may be truly noted, that in the Catalogue of
those persons, that were the eight of February in the action of open Rebellion,
a man may find almost out of every County of England some, which could not be
by chance or constellation: and in the particularity of Examinations (too long
to be rehearsed) it was easy to trace in what sort many of them were brought
up to Town, and held in Town upon several pretenses. But in Candlemas Term,
when the time drew near, then was he content consultation should be had by
certain choice persons, upon the whole matter and course which he should hold.
And because he thought himself and his own house more observed, it was
thought fit, that the meeting and conference should be at Drury house, where
S. Charles Dauers lodged. There met at this Council, the Earl of
Southampton, with whom in former times he had been at some emulations and
differences in Court. But after, Southampton having married his kinswoman, and
plunged himself wholly into his fortune, and being his continual Associat in
Ireland, he accounted of him as most assured unto him, and had long ago in
Ireland acquainted him with his purpose, as was declared before. Sir Charles
Dauers, one exceedingly devoted to the Earl of Southampton, upon affection
begun first upon the deserving of the same Earl toward him, when he was in
trouble about the murder of one Long. Sir Ferdinando Gorge, one that the Earl
of Essex had of purpose sent for up from his government at Plymmouth by his
letter, with particular assignation to be here before the 2. of February. Sir
John Dauies, one that had been his servant, and raised by him, and that bare
Office in the Tower, being Surueyour of the Ordinance, and one that he greatly
trusted: and John Littleton, one they respected for his wit and valor.

The consultation and conference rested upon three parts: The co^fessions of
sir Charles Dauers. 1. 2. Sir Io. Dauis 2. Sir Ferdin. Gorge 2. Sir Christopher
Blunt 2. Southampton at the bar.
The perusal of a list of those persons, whom they took to be of their party:
The consideration of the Action it self, which they should set a foot, and how
they should proceed in it: And the distribution of the persons, according to
the Action concluded on, to their several imploiments.

The list contained the number of six score persons, Noblemen and Knights, and
principal Gentlemen, and was (for the more credits sake) of the Earl of Essex
own hand writing.

For the Action it self, there was proposition made of two principal
Articles: The one, of possessing the Tower of London: the other of surprising
her Majesty's person and the Court, in which also deliberation was had, what
course to hold with the City, either toward the effecting of the surprise, or
after it was effected.

For the Tower was alleged, the giving a reputation to the Action, by getting
into their hand the principal Fort of the Realm, with the stores and
provisions thereunto appertaining, the bridling of the City by that piece, and
commodity of entrance in and possessing it, by the means of Sir John Dauis.
But this was by opinion of all rejected, as that which would distract their
attempt from the more principal, which was the Court, and as that which they
made a judgment would follow incidently, if the Court were once possessed.

But the later, which was the ancient plot, (as was well known to Southampton)
was in the end, by the general opinion of them all, insisted and rested upon.

And the manner how it should be ordered and disposed was this: That certain
selected persons of their number, such as were well known in Court, and might
have access without check or suspicion, into the several roumes in Court,
according to the several qualities of the persons, and the differences of the
roumes, should distribute themselves into the Presence, the Guardchamber, the
Hall, and the utter Court and gate, and some one principal man undertaking
every several room with the strength of some few to be joined with him,
every man to make good his charge, according to the occasion. In which
distribution, sir Charles Dauers was then named to the Presence, and to the
great chamber, where he was appointed, when time should be, to seize upon the
Halberds of the Guard: sir John Dauies to the Hall: and sir Christopher Blunt to
the utter Gate: these seeming to them, the three principal wards of
consideration. And that things being within the Court in a readiness, a
signal should be given and sent to Essex, to set forward from Essex house,
being no great distance off. Whereupon Essex, accompanied with the noble men of
his party, and such as should be prepared and assembled at his house for that
purpose, should march toward the Court: And that the former conspirators
already entered should give correspondence to them without, as well by making
themselves Masters of the gates to give them entrance, as by attempting to get
into their hand upon the sudden the Halberds of the Guard, thereby hoping to
prevent any great resistance within, and by filling all full of tumult and
confusion.

This being the platform of their enterprise, the second act of this Tragedy
was also resolved, which was, that my Lord should present himself to her
Majesty as prostrating himself at her feet, and desire the remove of such
persons, as he called his enemies, from about her. And after that my Lord had
obtained possession of the Queen, and the State: he should call his pretended
enemies to a trial upon their lives, and summon a Parliament, and alter the
government, and obtain to himself, and his associates, such conditions as
seemed to him and them good.

There passed speech also in this conspiracy, of possessing the City of
London, which Essex himself, in his own particular and secret in clination,
had ever a special mind unto: not as a departure or going from his purpose of
possessing the Court, but as an inducement and preparatiue to perform it upon
a surer ground. An opinion bred in him, (as may be imagined) partly by the
great ouerweening he had of the love of the Citizens: but chiefly, in all
likelihood, by a fear, that although he should have prevailed in getting her
Majesty's person into his hands for a time, with his two or three hundred
Gentlemen, yet, the very beams and graces of her Majesty's magnanimity and
prudent carriage in such disaster working, with the natural instinct of
loyalty, which of course (when fury is over) does ever revive in the hearts of
subjects of any good blood or mind (such as his troop for the more part was
compounded of, though by him seduced and bewitched) would quickly break the
knot, and cause some disunion and separation amongst them, whereby he might
have been left destitute, except he should build upon some more popular
number, according to the nature of all usurping Rebels, which do ever trust
more in the common people, then in persons of sort or quality. And this may
well appear by his own plot in Ireland, which was to have come with the
choice of the Army, from which he was diuerted, as before is showed. So as
his own courses inclined ever to rest upon the maine strength of the
multitude, and not upon surprises, or the combinations of a few.

But to return: These were the resolutions taken at that consultation, held by
these five at Drury house, some five or six days before the Rebellion, to be
reported to Essex, who ever kept in himself the binding and directing voice:
which he did to prevent all differences that might grow by dissent or
contradiction. And besides he had other persons, (which were Cuffe and Blunt)
of more inwardnesse and confidence with him then these, ( Southampton only
excepted) which managed that Consultation. And, for the day of the Enterprise,
which is that must rise out of the knowledge of all the opportunities and
difficulties, it was referred to Essex his own choice and appointment: it
being nevertheless resolved, that it should be sometime before the end of
Candlemas Term.

But this Council and the resolutions thereof, were in some points refined by
Essex, and Cuffe, and Blunt: for, Sir Henry Neuels declaration,
first it was thought good, for the better making sure of the utter gate of the
Court, and the greater celeritie and suddenness, to have a troop at receipt
to a competent number, to have come from the Mewes, where they should have been
assembled without suspicion in several companies, and from thence cast
themselves in a moment upon the Court gate, and join with them which were
within, while Essex with the maine of his company were making forward.

It was also thought fit, that because they would be Common wealths-men, and
foresee, that the business and service of the public State should not stand
still: they should have ready at Court, and at hand, certain other persons to
be offered, to supply the offices and places of such her Majesty's Counselors
and servants, as they should demand to be removed and displaced.

But chiefly it was thought good, that the assembling of their companies
together, should be upon some plausible pretext; both to make diverse of their
company, that understood not the depth of the practices, the more willing to
follow them: and to engage themselves, and to gather them together the better
without peril of detecting or interrupting: and again, to take the Court the
more unprovided, without any Alarm given. So as now there wanted nothing, but
the Assignation of the day: which nevertheless was resolved indefinitely to be
before the end of the Term, as was said before, The confession of Blunt. 3.
for the putting in execution of this most dangerous and execrable Treason. But
God who had in his divine providence long ago cursed this action, with the
Curse that the Psalm speaks of, That it should be like the untimely fruit of
a woman, brought forth before it came to perfection, so disposed above, that
her Majesty understanding by a general charm and muttering of the great and
universal resort to Essex house, contrary to her Princely admonition, and
somewhat differing from his former manner (as there could not be so great fire
without some smoke) upon the seventh of February, the afternoon before this
Rebellion, sent to Essex house M. Secretary Harbert, to require him to come
before the Lords of her Majesty's Council, then sitting in Counsel at
Salisbury Court, being the Lord Treasurers house: where it was only intended,
that he should have received some reprehension, for exceeding the limitations
of his liberty, granted to him in a qualified manner, without any intention
toward him of restraint, which he, under color of not being well, excused
to do: but his own guilty conscience applying it, that his Traynes were
discovered, doubting peril in any further delay, determined to hasten his
enterprise, and to set it on foot the next day.

But then again, having some advertisement in the evening, that the guards
were doubled at Court, and laying that to the message he had received
ouernight: and so concluding that Alarm was taken at Court, he thought it to
be in vain, to think of the enterprise of the Court, by way of surprise: but
that now his only way was, to come thither in strength, and to that end
first to attempt the City. Wherein he did but fall back to his own former
opinion, which he had in no sort neglected, but had formerly made some
ouertures to prepare the City to take his part: relying himself, (besides his
general conceit, that himself was the darling and mynion of the people, and
specially of the City) more particularly upon assurance given of Thomas Smith,
then Shiriffe of London, a man well beloved amongst the Citizens, and one that
had some particular command of some of the trained forces of the City, to
join with him. Having therefore concluded upon this determination, now was the
time to execute in fact, all that he had before in purpose digested.

First therefore he concluded of a pretext which was ever part of the plot,
and which he had meditated upon, and studied long before. For finding himself
(thanks be to God) to seek, in her Majesty's government, of any just
pretext in matter of state, either of innovation, oppression, or any
unworthiness: As in all his former discontentments, he had gone the beaten
path of Traitors, turning their imputation upon Counselors, and persons of
credit with their Sovereign: so now he was forced to descend to the pretext
of a private quarrel, giving out this speech, how that evening, when he
should have been called before the Lords of the Council, there was an
Ambuscado of Musketers placed upon the water, by the devise of my Lord Cobham,
and Sir Walter Raleigh, to have murdered him by the way as he passed. A matter
of no probability, those persons having no such desperate estates or minds, as
to ruin themselves and their posterity, by committing so odious a crime.

But contrariwise, certain it is, Sir Ferdinando Gorge accused Blunt, to have
persuaded him to kill, Confession of sir Ferdinando Gorge.
or at least apprehend Sir Walter Raleigh, the latter whereof Blunt denies
not, and asked Sir Walter Raleigh forgiveness at the time of his death.

But this pretext being the best he had, was taken, and then did messages and
warnings fly thick up and down to every particular Nobleman, and gentleman,
both that evening and the next morning, to draw them together in the forenoone
to Essex house, dispersing the foresaid fable, That he should have been
murdered, save that it was sometime on the water, sometime in his bed, varying
according to the nature of a lie. He sent likewise the same night, certain of
his instruments, as namely, one William Temple his Secretary into the City, to
disperse the same tale, having increased it some few days before by an
addition, That he should have been likewise murdered by some Jesuits to the
number of four: and to fortify this pretext, and to make the more buzze of
the danger he stood in, he caused that night a watch to be kept all night
long toward the street, in his house: the next morning, which was Sunday, they
came unto him of all hands, according to his messages and warnings. Of the
Nobility, the Earls of Rutland, Southampton, and the Lord Sands, and Sir
Henry Parker, commonly called the Lord Mountegle, besides diverse Knights and
principal Gentlemen and their followers, to the number of some three hundredth.
And also it being Sunday, and the hour when he had used to have a Sermon at
his house, it gave cause to some, and color to others to come upon that
occasion. As they came, my Lord saluted and embraced, and to the generality of
them gave to understand, in as plausible terms as he could, That his life had
been sought, and that he meant to go to the Court, and declare his griefs to
the Queen, because his enemies were mighty, and used her Majesty's name and
commandment, and desired their help to take his part: The confession of the
Earl of Rutland.
But unto the more special persons he spoke high and in other terms, telling
them That he was sure of the City, and would put himself into that strength,
that her Majesty should not be able to stand against him, and that he would
take revenge of his enemies.

All the while after eight of the clock in the morning, the gates to the
Street and water were strongly guarded, and men taken in and let forth by
discretion of those that held the charge, but with special caution of
receiving in such as came from Court, but not suffering them to go back
without my Lords special direction, to the end no particularitie of that which
passed there might be known to her Majesty.

About 10. of the clock, her Majesty having understanding of this strange and
tumultuous assembly at Essex house, yet in her Princely wisdom and moderation
thought to cast water upon this fire before it brake forth to further
inconvenience: and therefore using authority before she would use force, sent
unto him four persons of great Honor and place, and such as he ever
pretended to reverence and love, to offer him justice for any griefs of his,
but yet to lay her Royal commandment upon him to disperse his company, and
upon them to withdraw themselves.

These four Honorable persons, being the Lord Keeper of the great Seal of
England, the Earl of Worcester, The declaration of the L. Keeper, the Earl of
Worcester, the L. chief Justice under their hands.
the Controller of her Majesty's household, and the Lord chief Justice of
England, came to the house, and found the gates shut upon them. But after a
little stay, they were let in at the wicket, and as soon as they were within,
the wicket was shut, The oath of the L. chief Justice Viua voce.
and all their servants kept out, except the Bearer of the Seal. In the court
they found the Earls with the rest of the company, the court in a manner full,
The declaration of the Earl of Worcester Viua voce.
and upon their coming toward Essex, they all flocked and thronged about
them: whereupon the Lord Keeper in an audible voice delivered to the Earl the
Queens message, That they were sent by her Majesty to understand the cause of
this their assembly, and to let them know that if they had any particular
cause of griefs against any persons whatsoever, they should have hearing and
justice.

Whereupon the Earl of Essex in a very loud and furious voice declared, That
his life was sought, And that he should have been murdered in his bed, And
that he had been perfidiously dealt withal, and other speeches to the like
effect. To which the Lord Chief Justice said, If any such matter were
attempted or intended against him, it was fit for him to declare it, assuring
him both a faithful relation on their part, and that they could not fail of
a princely indifferency and justice on her Majesty's part.

To which the Earl of Southampton took occasion to object the assault made
upon him by the Lord Gray: which my Lord Chief Justice returned upon him, and
said, That in that case justice had been done, and the party was in prison
for it.

Then the Lord Keeper required the Earl of Essex, that if he would not declare
his griefs openly, yet that then he would impart them privately, and then
they doubted not to give him or procure him satisfaction.

Upon this there arose a great clamor among the multitude, Away my Lord: they
abuse you, they betray you: they undo you: you lose time. Whereupon my L.
Keeper put on his hat, and said with a louder voice then before: My Lord, let
us speak with you privately, and understand your griefs: and, I do command
you all upon your allegiance, to lay down your weapons, and to depart. Upon
which words the Earl of Essex and all the rest, as disdaining commandment,
put on their hats: and Essex somewhat abruptly went from him into the house,
and the Counselors followed him, thinking he would have private conference
with them, as was required.

And as they passed through the several rooms, they might hear many of the
disordered company cry, Kill them, kill them: and others crying, Nay, but
shop them up, keep them as pledges, cast the great Seal out at the window,
and other such audacious and traitorous speeches. But Essex took hold of the
occasion and advantage, to keep in deed such pledges if he were distressed,
and to have the countenance to lead them with him to the Court, especially the
two great Magistrates of Justice, and the great Seal of England if he
prevailed, and to deprive her Majesty of the use of their counsel in such a
strait, and to engage his followers in the very beginning by such a capital
act, as the imprisonment of Counselors carrying her Majesty's royal
commandment for the suppressing of a rebellious force.

And after that they were come up into his book chamber, he gave order they
should be kept fast, giving the charge of their custody principally to Sir
John Dauis, but adjoined unto him a warder, one Owen Salisburie, one of the
most sedicious and wicked persons of the number, having been a notorious
robber, and one that served the enemy under Sir William Stanley, and that bare
a special spleen unto my Lord Chief Justice, who guarded these honorable
persons with Muskets charged, and Matches ready fiered at the chamber door.

This done, the Earl (notwithstanding my Lord Keeper still required to speak
with him) left the charge of his house with Sir Gilly Mericke, and using these
words to my Lord Keeper, Have patience for a while, I will go take order with
the Mayor and Sherifes for the City, and be with you again within half an
hour, issued with his troop into London, to the number of two hundredth,
besides those that remained in the house, choice men for hardiness and valor,
unto whom some Gentlemen, and one Noble man did after join themselves.

But from the time he went forth, it seems God did strike him with the spirit
of Amazement, and brought him round again to the place whence he first moved.

For after he had once by Ludgate entered into the City, he never had as much
as the heart or assurance to speak any set or confident speech to the people
(but repeated only over and over his tale as he passed by, That he should have
been murdered) nor to do any act of foresight or courage: but he that had
vowed he would never be cooped up more, cooped himself first within the walls
of the City, and after within the walls of an house, as arrested by Gods
Justice as an example of disloyalty. For passing through Cheapeside, and so
toward Smiths house, and finding, though some came about him, yet none joined
or armed with him, he provoked them by speeches as he passed, The confession of
the Earl of Rutland. The L. Sandis.
to arm, telling them, They did him hurt and no good, to come about him with
no weapons.

But there was not in so populous a City, where he thought himself held so
dear, one man, from the chiefest Citizen, to the meanest Artificer or
Prentise, that armed with him: so as being extremely appalled, as diverse that
happened to see him then, might visibly perceive in his face and countenance,
and almost moulten with sweat, though without any cause of bodily labor but
only by the perplexity and horror of his mind, he came to Smiths house the
Sheriff, where he refreshed himself a little, and shifted him.

But the mean while it pleased God, that her Majesty's directions at Court,
though in a case so strange and sudden, were judicial and sound. For first
there was commandment in the morning given unto the City, that every man
should be in a readiness both in person and armor, but yet to keep within his
own door, and to expect commandment: upon a reasonable and politic
consideration, that had they armed suddenly in the streets, if there were any
ill disposed persons, they might arm on the one side and turn on the other, or
at least if armed men had been seen to and fro, it would have bred a greater
tumult, and more bloodshed: and the nakedness of Essex troop would not have
so well appeared.

And soon after direction was given, that the Lord Burghley, taking with him
the King of Heralds, should proclaim him Traitor in the principal parts of
the City: which was performed with good expedition and resolution, and the
loss and hurt of some of his Company. Besides that, the Earl of Cumberland,
and Sir Thomas Gerrard Knight Marshall, rode into the City, and declared and
notified to the people that he was a Traitor: from which time diverse of his
troop withdrawing from him, and none other coming in to him, there was
nothing but despair. For having stayed a while, as is said, at Shirife Smiths
house, and there changing his pretext of a private quarrel, and publishing,
That the Realm should have been sold to the Infanta, The confession of the
Earl of Rutl.
the better to spur on the people to rise, Essex confession at the Bar.
and called, and given commandment to have brought arms and weapons of all
sorts, and being soon after advertised of the Proclamation, he came forth in a
hurry.

So having made some stay in Gracious street, and being dismayed upon knowledge
given to him that forces were coming forwards against him under the conduct of
the L. Admiral the Lieutenant of her Majesty's forces, and not knowing what
course to take, he determined in the end to go back toward his own house,
as well in hope to have found the Counselors there, and by them to have served
someturne, as upon trust that toward night his friends in the City would
gather their spirits together, and rescue him, as himself declared after to M.
Lieutenant of the Tower.

But for the Counselors, it had pleased God to make one of the principal
offenders his instrument for their delivery: who seeing my Lords case
desperate, and contriuing how to redeem his fault, and save himself, came to
sir John Dauis and sir Gillie Mericke, as sent from my Lord: and so procured
them to be released.

But the Earl of Essex, with his company that was left, thinking to recover
his house, made on by land toward Ludgate, where being resisted by a company
of Pikemen and other forces, gathered together by the wise and diligent care of
the Bishop of London, and commanded by sir John Luson, and yet attempting to
clear the passage, he was with no great difficulty repulsed. At which
encounter sir Christopher Blunt was fore wounded, and young Tracie slain on his
part: and one Waits on the Queens part, and some other. Upon which repulse he
went back and fled toward the Waterside, and took boat at Queen hiue, and
so was received into Essex house at the Watergate, which he fortified and
baricado'd: but instantly the Lord Lieutenant so disposed his Companies, as all
passage and issue forth was cut off from him both by land and by water, and
all succors that he might hope for, were discouraged: and leaving the Earl
of Cumberland, the Earl of Lincoln, the Lord Thomas Howard, the Lord Gray,
the Lord Burghley, and the Lord Compton, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir Thomas
Gerrard, with diverse others, before the house to landward, my Lord Lieutenant
himself thought good, taking with him the Lord of Effingham, Lord Cobham, Sir
John Stanhope, Sir Robert Sidney, M. Foulk Greuill, with diverse others, to
assail the Garden and Banketting house on the Water side, and presently forced
the Garden, and won to the walls of the house, and was ready to have assailed
the house: but out of a Christian and honorable consideration, understanding
that there were in the house the Countess of Essex, and the Lady Rich, with
their Gentlewomen, let the Earl of Essex know by Sir Robert Sidney, that he
was content to suffer the Ladies and gentlewomen to come forth. Whereupon Essex
returning the Lord Lieutenant thanks for the compassion and care he had of the
Ladies, desired only to have an hours respit to make way for their going out,
and an hour after to barricado the place again. Which because it could make
no alteration to the hinderance of the service, the L. Lieutenant thought good
to grant. But Essex having had some talk within of a sallie, and despairing of
the success, and thinking better to yield himself, sent word, that upon some
conditions he would yield.

But the L. Lieutenant utterly refusing to hear of capitulations, Essex
desired to speak with my Lord; who thereupon went up close to the house: and
the late Earls of Essex and Southampton, with diverse other Lords and Gentlemen
their partakers, presented themselves upon the leads: and Essex said, he
would not capitulate, but entreat, and made three petitions. The first, That
they might be ciuilly used: Whereof the Lord Lieutenant assured them. The
second, That they might have an honorable trial: Whereof the Lord Lieutenant
answered, they needed not to doubt. The third, That he might have Ashton a
Preacher with him in prison for the comfort of his soul: Which the Lord
Lieutenant said he would move to her Majesty, not doubting of the matter of
his request, though he could not absolutely promise him that person. Whereupon
they all with the ceremony amongst marshall men accustomed, came down and
submitted themselves and yielded up their swords, which was about ten of the
clock at night, there having been slain in holding of the house, by musket
shot, Owen Salisburie, and some few more on the part of my Lord, and some few
likewise slain and hurt on the Queens part, and presently, as well the Lords
as the rest of their confederates of quality were severally taken into the
charge of diverse particular Lords and Gentlemen, and by them conveyed to the
Tower and other prisons.

So as this action, so dangerous in respect of the person of the Leader, the
manner of the combination, and the intent of the plot, brake forth and ended
within the compass of twelve hours, and with the loss of little blood, and
in such sort as the next day all Courts of Justice were open, and did sit in
their accustomed manner, giving good Subjects, and all reasonable men just cause
to think, not the less of the offenders treason, but the more of her
Majesty's princely magnanimity and prudent foresight in so great a peril, and
chiefly of Gods goodness, that has blessed her Majesty in this, as in many
things else, with so rare and divine felicity.



THE EFFECT OF the Evidence given, at the several Arraignments of the late
Earls of Essex and Southampton, before the L. STEWARD; And of Sir Christopher
Blunt and Sir Charles Dauers, and others, before great and Honorable
Commissioners of Dyer and Determiner. And of the Answers and Defenses, which
the said Offenders made for themselves; And the Replies made upon such their
Defenses: With some other Circumstances of the proceedings, as well at the same
Arraignments as after.
THE two late Earls of Essex and Southampton, Some question was made by the
earl of Essex, whether he might challenge any of the Peers. But answer was
made by the Judges, that the law had that reputation of the Peers, that it
trusted them both without oath and challenge.
were brought to their trial, the nineteenth of February, eleven days after
the Rebellion. At which trial there passed upon them 25. Peers, a greater
number then has been called in any former president. Amongst whom her Majesty
did not forbear to use many that were of near alliance and blood to the Earl
of Essex, and some others, that had their sons and heirs apparent that were
of his Company, and followed him in the open Action of Rebellion. The Lord
Steward then in Commission, (according to the solemnity in such Trials
received) was the Lord Buckhurst, L. high Treasurer, who with gravity and
temperance directed the Evidence, and moderated, and gave the Judgment. There
was also an Assistance of eight Judges, the three chief, and five others. The
hearing was with great patience and liberty: the ordinary course not being
held, to silence the Prisoners, till the whole state of the Evidence was given
in: but they being suffered to answer articulatly, to every branch of the
Evidence, and sometimes to every particular deposition, whenever they offered
to speak. And not so only, but they were often spared to be interrupte'd,
even in their digressions, and speeches not much pertinent to their cause. And
always when any doubt in Law was moved, or when it was required either by the
Prisoners or the Peers, the Lord Steward required the Judges to deliver the
Law; who gave their opinions severally, not barely, yea or no, but at large
with their reasons.

In the Endictment were not laid or charged the treasons of Ireland, because
the greatest matter, which was the desseigne to bring over the Army of Ireland,
being then not confessed nor known, it was not thought convenient to stuff
the Enditement with matters, which might have been conceived to be chiefly
gathered by curious inquisition, and grounded upon report, or presumption, when
there was other matter so notorious. And besides, it was not unlikely, that in
his case, to whom many were so partial, some (who would not consider how
things came to light by degrees) might have reported, that he was twife called
in Question about one offense. And therefore the late Treasons of his Rebellion
and conspiracy, were only comprehended in the Enditement, with the usual
clauses and consequents in Law, of compassing the Queens death, destruction,
and deprivation, and leuying war, and the like.

The Evidence consisted of two parts: The plot of surprising her MAJESTY'S
Person in Court, and, The open Rebellion in the City.

The plot was opened according to the former narration, and proved by the
several confessions of four witnesses, fully and directly concurring in the
point: Sir Christopher Blunt, Sir Charles Dauers, Sir John Dauies, and Sir
Ferdinando Gorge. Of which number, though Sir Christopher Blunt were not at the
Council held at Drury house, no more then Essex himself was: yet, he was
privy to that which passed. Sir Ferdinando Gorge being prisoner in the
Gatehouse, near the place of trial, was (at the request of the Earl of
Essex) brought thither, and avouched Viua voce his confession in all things.

And these four proved all particularities of surprising the Court, and the
manner of putting the same in execution, and the distributing and naming of the
principal persons and actors, to their several charges: and the calling of my
Lords pretended enemies to trial for their lives, and the fummoning of a
Parliament, and the altering of the government. And Sir Christopher Blunt, and
Sir John Dauies, from Sir Christopher Blunt, did speak to the point of
bringing in a toleration of the Catholic religion.

For the ouert Rebellion in the City it self, it was likewise opened,
according to the former narration, and divided it self naturally into 3. parts.

First, the imprisonment of the Counselors, bringing her Majesty's Royal
commandment to them, upon their allegiance, to disperse their Forces.
Secondly, the entering the City, and the stirring of the people to rise, as
well by provoking them to arm, as by giving forth the slanders, that the
Realm was sold to the Spaniard, and the assailing of the QVEENES Forces at
Ludgate. And thirdly, the resistance and keeping of the house against her
MAJESTY'S Forces, under the charge and conduct of the Lord Lieutenant.

And albeit these parts were matters notorious, and within almost every man's
view and knowledge: yet, for the better satisfaction of the Peers, they were
fully proved by the oath of the Lord Chief Justice of England, being there
present, Viua voce, and the Declaration of the Earl of Worcester, being one of
the Peers likewise, Viua voce, touching so much as passed about the
imprisonment of themselves and the rest: and by the confessions of the Earl of
Rutland, the Lord Sands, the Lord Cromwell, and others.

The defense of the late Earl of Essex, touching the plot and consultation at
Drury house, was: That it was not proved, that he was at it: And that they
could show nothing proving his consent or priuity, under his hand.

Touching the action in the City, he justified the pretext of the danger of
his life to be a truth. He said, that his speech that the Realm should have
been sold to the Infanta of Spain, was grounded upon a report he had heard,
that Sir Robert Cecill should say privately, That the Infantaes title to the
Crown (after her Majesty) was as good as any other. He excused the
imprisonment of the Counselors, to have been against his mind, forced upon him
by his unruly company. He protested he never intended in his heart, any hurt to
her Majesty's person: That he did desire to secure his access to her, for
which purpose he thought to pray the help of the City, and that he did not
arm his men in warlike sort, nor struck up no Drum, nor the like.

The defense of the late Earl of Southampton to his part in the plot, and
consultation at Drury house, was: That it was a matter debated, but not
resolved nor concluded; and that the action which was executed, was not the
action which was consulted upon. And for the open action in the city, he
concurred with Essex, with protestation of the cleerenesse of his mind for any
hurt to the Queens person: And that it was but his affection to my Lord of
Essex, that had drawn him into the cause. This was the substance and best of
both their defenses. Unto which the Reply was.

DEFENSE.

To the point that the late Earl of Essex was not at the consultation at
Drury-house.

REPLY.

It was replied, that it was proved by all the witnesses, that that
consultation was held by his special appointment and direction, and that both
the list of the names, and the principal Articles, were of his own hand
writing. And whereas he said, they could not be showed extant under his hand:
it was proved by the confession of my Lord of Rutland, and the Lord Sands,
that he had provided for that himself. For, after he returned out of the City
to his own house, he burned diverse papers which he had in a Cabanet, because
(as himself said) they should tell no tales.

DEFENSE.

To the point which Southampton alleged, That the Consultation at Drury house,
upon the list and articles in writing, was not executed.

REPLY.

It was replied, that both that Consultation in that manner held, if none other
act had followed, was treason: And that the Rebellion following in the city,
was not a desisting from the other plot, but an inducement and pursuance of it:
their meaning being plain on all parts, that, after they had gotten the aid
of the city, they would have gone and possessed the Court.

DEFENSE.

To the point, that it was a truth, that Essex should have been assailed by his
private enemies.

REPLY.

First, he was required to deliver, who it was that gave him the advertisement
of it, because otherwise it must light upon himself, and be thought his own
invention: whereunto he said, that he would name no man that day.

Then it was showed how improbable it was, considering that my Lord Cobham, and
Sir Walter Raleigh were men, whose estates were better settled and established,
then to overthrow their fortunes by such a crime.

Besides, it was showed how the tale did not hang together, but varied in it
self, as the tale of the two Judges did, when one said, Under the
Mulbery-tree, and another said, Under the Fig Tree. So, sometimes it was,
That he should have been murdered in his bed, and sometimes upon the water,
and sometimes it should have been performed by Jesuits, some days before.

Thirdly, it was asked what reference the going into the city for succor
against any his private enemies, had to the imprisoning of the L. Keeper, and
the L. Chief Justice, persons that he pretended to love and respect; and the
Earl of Worcester his kinsman, and Master Controller his Uncle, and the
publishing to the people, that the Realm should have been sold to the
Spaniard.

And lastly, it was said, that these were the ancient footsteps of former
Traitors, to make their quarrel as against their private enemies: because,
God unto lawful kings did ever impart such beams of his own glory, as
Traitors could not look straight upon them, but ever turned their pretenses
against some about them. And that this Action of his, resembled the Action of
Pisistratus of Athens, that proceeded so far in this kind of fiction and
dissimulation, as he launced his own body, and came hurt and wounded before
the people, as having been assailed by his private enemies, and by color
thereof obtained a guard about his person, by help of whom, he after usurped
upon the State.

DEFENSE.

To the point that he heard it reported, M. Secretary should say: That the
Infantaes title to the Crown (after her Majesty) was as good as any other.

REPLY.

Upon this his allegation, M. Secretary standing out of sight in a private
place, only to hear, (being much moved with so false and foul an accusation)
came suddenly forth, and made humble request to the Lord Steward, that he
might have the favor to answer for himself. Which being granted him, in
respect of the place he carries, (after a bitter contestation on his part with
the Earl, and a serious protestation of his alienation of heart from the
Spanish nation, in any such condition) he still urged the Earl to name the
reporter, that all the circumstances might be known. But the Earl still
warily avoiding it, M. Secretary replied, that seeing he would allege no
Author, it ought to be reputed his own fiction. Whereupon the Earl of Essex
said, though his own conscience was a sufficient testimony to himself, that
he had not invented any untruth, yet he would affirm thus much for the worlds
farther satisfaction in that behalf: that the Earl of Southampton also, had
heard so much reported of M. Secretary: but said still, that he (for his part)
would name no body. Whereupon M. Secretary adjured the Earl of Southampton, by
all former friendship, (which had been in deed very great between them) that
he would declare the person: which he did presently, and said it was M.
Comptroller. At which speech M. Secretary straight took hold, and said, That
he was glad to hear him named of all others: for howsoever some malicious
person, might peradventure have been content, to give credit to so injurious a
conceit of him, (especially such as were against the peace wherein he was
employed, and for which the Earl of Essex had ever hated him, being ever
desirous to keep an army on his own dependency) yet he did think no man of
any understanding would believe that he could be so senseless, as to pick out
the Earl of Essex his uncle, to lay open to him his affection to that nation,
in a matter of so odious and pernicious consequence: And so did very humbly
crave it at the hands of the Lord Steward, and all the Peers, that M.
Comptroller might be sent for, to make good his accusation.

Thereupon the Lord Steward sent a Seriant at Arms for M. Comptroller, who
presently came thither, and did freely and sincerely deliver, that he had only
said (though he knew not well to whom) that M. Secretary and he, walking in the
garden at Court one morning about two years since, and talking casually of
foreign things, M. Secretary told him, that one Doleman had maintained in a
book (not long since printed) that the Infanta of Spain had a good title to
the Crown of England, which was all, as M. Comptroller said, that ever he
heard M. Secretary speak of that matter. And so the weak foundation of that
scandal being quickly discerned, that matter ended: all that could be proved,
being no other, then that M. Comptroller had told an other, who had after told
the Earl of Essex, that M. Secretary said to him, that such a book said so,
which every man could say, that has read it, and no man better knew then the
Earl himself, to whom it was dedicated.

DEFENSE.

To the point of both their protestations, That they intended no hurt to her
Majesty's person.

REPLY.

First, the Judges delivered their opinions for matter in Law upon two points:
The one, That in case where a subject attempteth to put himself into such
strength as the King shall not be able to resist him, and to force and compel
the King to govern otherwise then according to his own Royal authority and
direction, it is manifest Rebellion: The other, That in every Rebellion the
law intends as a consequent, the compassing the death and deprivation of the
King, as foreseeing that the Rebel will never suffer that King to live or
reign, which might punish or take revenge of his Treason and Rebellion. And it
was enforced by the Queens Council, that this is not only the wisdom of
the laws of the Realm which so defines of it, but it is also the censure of
foreign laws, the conclusion of common reason which is the ground of all laws,
and the demonstratiue assertion of experience, which is the warranty of all
reason. For first the Civil law makes this judgment, That Treason is nothing
else but Crimen laesae maiestatis, or Diminutae maiestatis, making every offense
which abridgeth or hurts the power and authority of the Prince, as an insult
or inuading of the Crown, and extorting the imperial Scepter. And for common
reason, it is not possible that a subject should once come to that height as to
give law to his Sovereign, but what with insolency of the change, and what
with terror of his own guiltiness, he will never permit the King, if he can
choose, to recover authority, nor for doubt of that, to continue alive. And
lastly for experience, it is confirmed by all stories and examples, That the
subject never obtained a superiority and command over the King, but there
followed soon after, the deposing and putting of the King to death, as
appears in our own Chronicles in two notable particulars of two unfortunate
Kings: the one of Edward the second, who when he kept himself close for
danger, was summoned by Proclamation to come and take upon him the government
of the Realm: but as soon as he presented himself, was made prisoner, and
soon after forced to resign, and in the end tragically murdered in Barkley
Castle. And the other of King Richard the second, who though the Duke of
Hertford, after, King Henry the fourth, presented himself before him with
three humble reuerences, yet in the end was deposed and put to death.

DEFENSE.

To the point of not arming his men otherwise, then with Pistols, Rapiers and
Daggers, it was replied.

REPLY.

That that course was held upon cunning, the better to insinuate himself into
the favor of the city, as coming like a friend with an All hail, or kiss,
and not as an enemy, making full reckoning that the City would arm him, and
arm with him, and that he took the pattern of his Action, from the day of the
Barricadoes at Paris, where the Duke of Gwyse entering the city but with eight
Gentlemen, prevailing with the city of Paris to take his part, as my Lord of
Essex (thanks be to God) failed of the City of London, made the King (whom he
thought likewise to have surprised) to forsake the town, and withdraw himself
into other places, for his further safety. And it was also urged against him
out of the confession of the Earl of Rutland and others, that he cried out to
the citizens, That they did him hurt and no good, to come without weapons, and
provoked them to arm: and finding they would not be moved to arm with him,
sought to arm his own troops.

This, point by point, was the effect of the Reply. Upon all which Evidence
both the Earls were found guilty of Treason by all the several voices of
every one of the Peers, and so received judgment.

The names of the Peers that passed upon the trial of the two Earls.
EARLS. BARONS. The Earl of Oxford. Shrewesburie. Durbie. Cumberland.
Worcester. Sussex. Hartford. Lincoln. Notingham.
The Lord De la VVare. Morley. Cobham. Stafford. Gray. Lumley. Windsor. Rich.
Darcy de Chichey. Chandoys. Hunsdon. S. John de Bletso. Compton. Burghley.
Howard of VValder.
Vicount Bindon.


The names of the Judges that assisted the Court.
The Lord chief Justice. The L. chief Justice of the Common Plees. The Lord
chief Baron. Justice Gawdie. Justice Fenner. Justice VValmesley. Baron Clerk.
Justice Kingsmill.
SOME PARTICVLARITIES of that which passed after the arreignment of the late
Earls, and at the time of the suffering of the Earl of Essex.
But the Earl of Essex finding that the consultation at Drurie house, and the
secret plots of his premeditated and prepenced treasons were come to light,
contrary to his expectation, was touched even at his parting from the Bar
with a kind of remorse: especially because he had carried the manner of his
answer, rather in a spirit of ostentation and glory, then with humility and
penitence: and brake out in the Hall, while the Lords were in conference, into
these words: That seeing things were thus carried, he would ere it be long say
more then yet was known. Which good motion of his mind being after his
coming back to the Tower, first cherished by M. D. of Norwich, but after
wrought on by the religious and effectual persuasions and exhortations of M.
Abdie Ashton his Chaplain, the man whom he made suit by name to have with him
for his souls health, as one that of late time he had been most used unto, and
found most comfort of, comparing it, when he made the request, to the case of a
Patient, that in his extremity would be desirous to have that Physician that
was best acquainted with his body: He sent word the next day to desire to
speak with some of the principal Councillors, with whom he desired also that
particularly M. Secretary might come for one. Upon which his request, first the
L. Admiral, and M. Secretary, and afterward at two several times the Lord
Keeper of the great Seal, the Lord high Treasurer, the L. high Admiral, and
Master Secretary repaired unto him: before whom, after he had asked the Lord
Keeper forgiveness for restraining him in his house, and M. Secretary, for
having wronged him at the Bar, concerning the matter of the Infanta, with
signification of his earnest desire to be reconciled to them, which was
accepted with all Christian charity and humanity, he proceeded to accuse
heavily most of his confederates for carrying malicious minds to the State, and
vehemently charged Cuffe his man to his own face, to have been a principal
instigator of him in his Treasons, and then disclosed how far sir Henry
Neuill her Majesty's late Ambassador was privy to all the Conspiracy: of whose
name till then, there had been not so much as any suspicion. And further, at
the Lords first coming to him, (not sticking to confess that he knew her
Majesty could not be safe while he lived) did very earnestly desire this
favor of the Queen, that he might die as privately as might be.

And the Morning before his execution, there being sent unto him for his better
preparation, The testimony of the 3. Divines under their hands.
Master Doctor Mountford, and Master Doctor Barlowe to join with Master Abdie
Ashton his Chapleine, he did in many words thank God that he had given him a
deeper insight into his offense, being sorry he had so stood upon his
justification at his Arraignement: since which time, he said he was become a
new man, and heartily thanked God also that his Course was by Gods providence
prevented. For, if his project had taken effect, God knows (said he) what
harm it had wrought in the Realm.

He did also humbly thank her Majesty, that he should die in so private manner
(for he suffered in the Tower yard, and not upon the Hill by his own special
suit) lest the acclamation of the people (for those were his own words) might
be a temptation to him: adding, That al popularitie and trust in man was vain,
the experience whereof himself had felt: and acknowledged further unto them,
that he was justly and worthily spewed out (for that was also his own word) of
the Realm, and that the nature of his offense was like a leprosy that had
infected far and near. And so likewise at the public place of his
suffering, he did use vehement detestation of his offense, desiring God to
forgive him his great, his bloody, his crying, and his infectious sin: and so
died very penitently, but yet with great conflict (as it should seem for his
sins. For he never mentioned nor remembered there, wife, children or friend,
nor took particular leave of any that were present, but wholly abstracted and
sequestered himself to the state of his conscience, and prayer.

THE EFFECT OF THAT which passed at the Arraignements of Sir Christopher Blunt,
Sir Charles Dauers, Sir John Dauies, Sir Gillie Mericke, and Henry Cuffe.
THE 5. of March by a very honorable Commission of Oier and Determiner,
directed to the Lord high Admiral, the Lord Chamberlain, Master Secretary, the
Lord chief Justice of England, Master Chancellor of the Exchequer, Master
Secretary Herbert, with diverse of the Judges, the Commissioners sitting in the
Court of the Queens Bench, there were arraigned and tried by a Jury both of
Aldermen of London, and other Gentlemen of good credit and sort, Sir
Christopher Blunt, Sir Charles Dauers, Sir John Dauies, Sir Gillie Mericke and
Henry Cuffe. The three first whereof, before they pleaded, asked this question
of the Judges, Whether they might not confess the Inditeme^t in part, and
plead Not guilty to it in the other part. But being resolved by the Judges,
that their pleading must be general, they pleaded Not guilty, as did likewise
the other two, without any such question asked. The reason of that question
was, as they confessed, in respect of the clause laid in the Indictment: That
they intended and compassed the death and destruction of the Queens Majesty:
unto whose person (although they confessed at the bar, as they had done in
their examinations, that their meaning was to come to her in such strength, as
they should not be resisted, and to require of her diverse conditions and
alterations of government, such as in their confessions are expressed)
nevertheless they protested, they intended no personal harm to hirselfe.
Whereupon (as at the arraignment of the two Earls) so then again the Judges
delivered the rule of the Law; that the wisdom and foresight of the Laws of
this land makes this judgment, That the Subject that rebelleth or rises in
forcible manner to ouerrule the Royal will and power of the King, intends to
deprive the King both of crown and life: and that the Law judges not of the
fact by the intent, but of the intent by the fact. And the Queens Council did
again enforce that point, setting forth that it was no mystery or quidditie of
the common Law, but it was a conclusion infallible of reason and experience:
for that the Crown was not a Ceremony or Garland, but consisted of preeminence
and power.

And therefore, when the subject will take upon him to give law to the King,
and to make the power Sovereign and commanding, to become subject and
commanded: such subject lays hold of the Crown, and takes the sword out of
the Kings hands. And that the Crown was fastened so close upon the Kings head,
that it cannot be pulled off, but that head and life, and all will follow, as
all examples, both in foreign stories and here at home do make manifest. And
therefore, when their words did protest one thing, and their deeds did
testify another; they were but like the president of the protestation used by
Manlius the Lieutenant of Catiline, that conspired against the State of Rome,
who began his letter to the Senate with these words, Deos hominesque testor,
Patres conscripti, nos nihil aliud etc.

And it was said further, that admitting their protestations were so far
true, that they had not at that time in their minds a formed and distinct
cogitation to have destroyed the Queens person: yet nothing was more variable
and mutable then the mind of man, and specially Honores mutant mores: when they
were once aloft, and had the Queen in their hands, and were Peers in my
Lord of Essex his Parliament, who could promise of what mind they would then
be? especially, when my L. of Essex at his Arraignment had made defense of his
first Action of imprisoning the privy Councillors, by pretense that he was
enforced to it by his unruly company. So that if themselves should not have
had, or would not seem to have had that extreme and devilish wickedness of
mind, as to lay violent hands upon the Queens sacred person: yet, what must
be done to satisfy the multitude, and secure their party, must be then the
question. Wherein the example was remembered of Richard the third, who (though
he were King in possession, and the rightful Inheritours but Infants) could
never sleep quiet in his bed, till they were made away. Much less would a
Catilinary knot and combination of Rebels (that did rise without so much as the
fume of a Title) ever endure, that a Queen that had been their Sovereign, and
had reigned so many years in such renown and policy, should be longer alive,
then made for their own turn. And much speech was used to the same end. So
that in the end, all those three at the bar said, That now they were
infourmed, and that they descended into a deeper consideration of the matter,
they were sorry they had not confessed the Indictment. The confession of Blunt
at his death, which is set down in the end.
And Sir Christopher Blunt, at the time of his suffering, discharged his
conscience in plain terms, and said publicly before all the people, that he
fawe plainly with himself, That if they could not have obtained all that they
had would, they must have drawn blood, even from the Queen her self.

The Evidence given in against them three, was principally their own
confessions, charging every one himself, and the other, and the rest of the
evidence used at the Arraignement of the late Earls, and mentioned before:
save that because it was perceived, that that part of the charge would take no
labor nor time, being plain matter and confessed, and because some touch had
been given in the Proclamation of the Treasons of Ireland: And chiefly because
Sir Christopher Blunt was Marshall of the Army in Ireland, and most inward with
my Lord in all his proceedings there: and not so only, but further in the
confession of Thomas Lee, it was precisely contained, That he knew the Earl
of Essex and Tyrone, and Blunt the Marshall, to be all one, and to run one
course: it was thought fit to open some part of the Treasons of Ireland, such
as were then known. Which very happily gave the occasion for Blunt, to make
that discovery of the purpose to have invaded the Realm with the Army of
Ireland: which he then offered, and afterward uttered, and in the end sealed
with his blood, as is hereafter set down.

Against Cuffe was given in Evidence, both Sir Charles Dauers confession, who
charged him when there was any debating of the several enterprises which they
should undertake, that he did ever bind firmly, and resolutely for the Court:
and the accusation under the Earls hand, avouched by him to his face, that he
was a principal instigator of him in his Treasons: but especially a full
declaration of Sir Henry Neuils, which describes and planteth forth the whole
manner of his practicing with him.

The fellow, after he had made some introduction by an artificial and
continued speech, and some time spent in sophistical arguments, descended to
these two answers: the one, For his being within Essex house that day, the day
of the Rebellion, they might as well charge a Lion within a grate with Treason,
as him: And for the consultation at Drury house, it was no more Treason then
the child in the mothers belly is a child. But it was replied, that for his
being in the house, it was not compulsarie, and that there was a distribution
in the action, of some to make good the house, and some to enter the city, and
the one part held correspondent to the other, and that in Treasons there were
no accessaries, but all principals.

And for the consultation at Drurie house, it was a perfect Treason in it
self, because the compassing of the Kings destruction, which by judgment of
Law was concluded and implied in that consultation, was Treason, in the very
thought and cogitation, so as that thought be proved by an ouert Act: And
that the same consultation and debating thereupon, was an ouert Act, though it
had not been upon a list of names, and articles in writing, much more, being
upon matter in writing.

And again, the going into the City was a pursuance and inducement of the
enterprise to possess the Court, and not a desisting, or departure from it.

And lastly, it was ruled by the Judges for law, That if many do conspire to
execute Treason against the Prince in one manner, and some of them do execute
it in another manner, yet their Act (though differing in the manner) is the Act
of all them that conspire, by reason of the general malice of the intent.

Against Sir Gilly Merrick, the Evidence that was given, charged him chiefly
with the matter of the open Rebellion, that he was as Captain or commander
over the house, and took upon him charge to keep it, and make it good as a
place of Retraict for those which issued into the City, and fortifying and
barriccadoing the same house, and making provision of Muskets, Powder, Pellets
and other munition and weapons for the holding and defending of it, and as a
busy, forward, and noted Actor in that defense and resistance, which was made
against the Queens forces brought against it, by her Majesty's Lieutenant.

And further to prove him privy to the plot, it was given in Evidence, that
some few days before the Rebellion, with great heat and violence he had
displaced certain Gentlemen lodged in an house fast by Essex house, and there
planted diverse of my Lords followers and Accomplices, all such as went forth
with him in the Action of Rebellion.

That the afternoon before the Rebellion, Merricke, with a great company of
others, that afterward were all in the Action, had procured to be played
before them, the Play of deposing King Richard the second.

Neither was it casual, but a Play bespoken by Merrick.

And not so only, but when it was told him by one of the Players, that the
Play was old, and they should have loss in playing it, because few would
come to it: there was forty shillings extraordinary given to play it, and so
thereupon played it was.

So earnest he was to satisfy his eyes with the sight of that Tragedy, which
he thought soon after his Lord should bring from the Stage to the State, but
that GOD turned it upon their own heads.

The speeches of Sir Christopher Blunt at his execution, are set down as near
as they could be remembered, after the rest of the confessions and evidences.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE. DIEV ET MON DROIT


HERE FOLLOW the voluntary Confessions themselves, such as were given in
evidence at both the several arraignments, taken forth, word for word, out of
the Originals. Whereby it may appear how God brought matters to light, at
several times, and in several parts, all concurring in substance. And with
them, other Declarations and parts of the evidence.
The Confession of Thomas Lee, taken the 14. of February 1600, before Sir Ioh.
Peyton Lieutenant of the Tower, Roger Wilbraham Master of the Requests, Sir
Anthony Saintleger Master of the Rolls in Ireland, and Thomas Fleming her
Majesty's Solicitour general.
THis examinate says that Tyrone sent a message to this Examinate by James
Knowd (whom this Examinate by the Marshals warrant in writing had sentto
Tyrone, before himself went to Tyrone) that if the Earl of Essex would follow
his plot, he would make him the greatest man that ever was in England, and that
when Essex and Tyrone should have conference together, for his assurance unto
the Earl of Essex, Tyrone would deliver his eldest son in pledge to the
Earl. And with this message this Examinate made the Earl of Essex acquainted,
before his coming to this Examinats house, at that time when this Examinate
was sent to Tyrone.

This Examinate says, he knew that Essex, Tyrone, and the Marshall Sir
Christopher Blunt, were all one, and held all one course.

Thomas Lee.
Exam. per Ioh. Peyton, Roger VVilbraham, Anthony Saintleger, Thomas Fleming.
The Declaration of Sir William Warren, 3. Octobris. 1599.
THe said Sir William came to Armagh the last Friday, The Earl of Essex came
the same day to the Court in England.
being the 28. of September: from thence he sent a messenger in the night to
Tyrone, to Dungannon, signifying his coming to Armagh, as aforesaid, and that
the next morning he would meet Tyrone at the Fort of Blackwater: where
accordingly the said Tyrone met with him, and after other speeches, by further
discourse the said Tyrone told the said Sir William, and delivered it with an
oath, that within these two months he should see the greatest alteration, and
the strangest, that he the said Sir William could imagine, or ever saw in his
life: and said that he hoped before it were long, that he the said Tyrone
should have a good share in England. Which speeches of the alteration, Tyrone
reiterated two or three several times.

William Warren. Certified from the Council of Ireland to the Lords of the
Council here.
The declaration of Thomas Wood 20. Ianuarij, 1599. taken before the L.
Buckhurst L. high Treasurer, the Earl of Notingham L. high Admiral, Sir To.
Cecill principal Secretary, and Sir I. Fortescue Chancellor of the Exchequer.
THe said Wood says, that happening to be with the L. Eitzmorris Baron of
Licksnaw, at his house of Licksnaw, between Michaelmas and Alhallowtide last,
the said Baron walking abroad with the said Wood, asked of him what force the
Earl of Essex was of in England He answered, he could not tell, but said he
was well beloved of the Comminaltie. Then said the Baron that the Earl was
gone for England, and had discharged many of the Companies of Ireland, and that
it was agreed that he should be King of England, and Onele to be Viceroy of
Ireland, and whenever he should have occasion, and would send for them,
Onele should send him 8000. men out of Ireland. The said Wood asked the Baron,
how he knew that? He answered, that the Earl of The titulary Earl that is in
rebellion.
Desmond had written to him so much.

Thomas Wood.
Confessed in the presence of Tho. Buckhurst, Notingham, Rob. Cecill, Io.
Fortescue.
The Confession of James Knowd, taken the 16. of February, 1600. before Sir
Anth. Saintleger Master of the Roules in Ireland, and Roger Wilbraham Master of
the Requests.
OWney mac Rory having secret intelligence of the friendship between the Earl
of Essex and Tyrone, wrote to Tyrone, desiring him to certify him thereof,
whereby he might frame his course accordingly, and not do any thing contrary
to their agreement: which letter my self did write by Owneys appointment (for
then I was in credit with him.) In which letter he also desired Tyrone to send
him some munition. The letter, with instructions to that effect, was in my
presence delivered to one Turlagh mac Dauie o Kelly, a man of secrecy,
sufficiency, and trust with Owney, and he carried it to Tyrone. Before whose
return, Owney grew suspicious of me, because I sometimes belonged to M. Bowen,
and therefore they would not trust me, so as I could not see the answer: but
yet I heard by many of their secret counsel, that the effect thereof was, That
the Earl of Essex should be king of England, and Tyrone of Ireland.

Afterward I met with Turlagh mac Dauie, the messenger aforesaid, and asked
him whether he brought an answer of the letter from Tyrone. He said he did,
and delivered it to Owney. And then I asked him what he thought of the wars.
He told me he had good hope the last year, and had none this year: his reason
was (as he said) that the Earl of Essex was to take their part, and they
should aid him toward the conquest of England: and now they were hindered
thereof by means of his apprehension.

I dwelling with the Tanist of the Country (my mothers cousin germain) heard
him speak sundry times, That now the Earl of Essex had gotten one of the
swords, he would never forgo his government, until he became King of
England: which was near at hand.

I saw a letter which the Earl of Essex writ to Owney, to this effect, That if
Owney came to him, he would speak with him about that, which if he would
follow, should be happy for him and his Country.

James Knowd.
Exam. per Anthony Saintleger, Roger VVilbraham.
The declaration of David Hethrington, an ancient Captain and seruitor in
Ireland, 6. January 1599. Taken before the L. Buckhurst L. high Treasurer, the
Earl of Notingham L. high Admiral, Sir Robert Cecil principal Secretary, and
Sir John Fortescue Chancellor of the Exchequer.
HE the said David Hethrington riding into the edge of the County of Kildare,
about the end of the first cessation, fortuned to meet with one James
Occurren, one of the horsemen of Master Bowen provost Marshall of Lemister, who
told him that the said James Occurren meeting lately with a principal follower
of Owney mac Rory, chief of the Moors, Owneys man asked him what news he
heard of the Earl of Essex. To which James Occurren answered, that he was gone
for England: whereunto he said, Nay, if you can tell me no news, I can tell
you some: The Earl of Essex is now in trouble for us, for that he would do no
service upon us, which he never meant to do, for he is ours, and we are his.

David Hethrington.
Confessed in the presence of Tho Buckhurst. Notingham. Rob. Cecil. Io.
Fortescue.
The first Confession of Sir Ferdinando Gorge Knight, the 16. of February
1600. taken before Sir Thomas Egerton Lord Keeper of the great Seal, the L.
Buckhurst L. high Treasurer, the Earl of Notingham Lord high Admiral, and Sir
Rob. Cecill principal Secretary.
HE says the Earl of Essex wrote a letter to him in lanuarie, complaining his
misfortune: that he desired his company, and desired his repair up to him, by
the second of February, That he came to Town on Saturday seuen-night before
the Earls insurrection: and that the same night late he visited the Earl. Who
after complements, told him, that he stood on his guard, and resolved not to
hazard any more commandments, or restraints: that he desired him to rest him
that night, and to repair unto him again, but in such sort as it might not be
noted.

That he had been with the Earl two or three times that week; and on
Saturday, being the seventh of February, the Earl told him, that he had been
sent for by the Lords, and refused to come: delivering further, that he
resolved to defend himself from any more restraint.

He further says, that it was in question, the same Saturday night, to have
stirred in the night, and to have attempted the Court. But being demanded
whether the Earl could have had sufficient company to have done any thing in
the night: he answered, that all the Earls company were ready at one hours
warning, and had been so before, in respect that he had meant long before to
stand upon his guard.

That it was resolved to have the Court first attempted, that the Earl had
three hundred Gentlemen to do it: but that he the said Ferdinando Gorge was a
violent disswader of him from that purpose, and the Earl most confident in the
party of London, which he meant (upon a later dispute) first to assure: and
that he was also assured of a party in Wales, but meant not to use them,
until he had been possessed of the Court.

That the Earl, and sir Christopher Blunt, understanding, that sir Walter
Raleigh had sent to speak with him in the morning, the said sir Christopher
Blunt persuaded him, either to surprise sir Walter Raleigh, or to kill him.
Which when he utterly refused, sir Christopher Blunt sent four shot after him
in a boat.

That at the going out of Essex house gate, many cried out: To the Court, to
the Court. But my Lord of Essex turned him about toward London.

That he meant after possession of the Court, to call a Parliament, and therein
to proceed as cause should require.

At that time of the Consultation on Saturday night, my Lord was demanded what
assurance he had of those he made account to be his friends in the City?
Whereunto he replied, that there was no question to be made of that: for, one
amongst the rest, that was presently in one of the greatest commands amongst
them, held himself to be interessed in the cause, (for so he phrased it) and
was Coronell of a thousand men, which were ready at all times, besides others
that he held himself as assured of, as of him, and able to make as great
numbers. Some of them had at that instant (as he reported to us) sent unto him,
taking notice of as much as he made us to know of the purpose intended to have
intrapped him, and made request to know his pleasure.

Ferd. Gorges.
Exam. per Th. Egerton C. Sr T. Buckhurst. Notingham. To. Cecill.
The second confession of Sir Ferdinando Gorge the 18. of February 1600. All
written of his own hand. And acknowledged in the presence of Sir Thomas
Egerton L. Keeper of the great Seal, the L. Buckhurst L. high Treasurer, the
Earl of Notingham L. high Admiral, and Sir To. Cecil principal Secretary.
ON Tuesday before the Insurrection (as I remember) I was sent unto by my L. of
Essex, praying me to meet my Lord of Southampton, Sir Charles Dauers, Sir John
Dauies, and other his friends at Drury house where I should see a schedule of
his friends names, and proiects to be disputed upon. Whither I came
accordingly, and found the foresaid Earl, Sir Charles Dauers, Sir John Dauies,
and one Master Litleton. The names were showed, and numbered to be six score:
Earls, Barons, Knights, and Gentlemen. The proiects were these: Whether to
attempt the Court, or the Tower, or to stir his friends in London first, or
whether both the Court and Tower at an instant? I disliked that counsel. My
reasons were, that I alleged to them: First, to attempt both with those
numbers, was not to be thought on, because that was not sufficient: and
therefore advised them to think of some thing else. Then they would needs
resolve to attempt the Court, withal desired in mine opinion. But I prayed
them first to set down the manner how it might be done. Then Sir John Dauies
took ink and paper, and assigned to diverse principal men their several
places. Some to keep the Gate, some to be in the Hall, some to be in the
Presence, some in the Lobby, some in the Guardchamber, others to come in with
my Lord himself, who should have had the passage given him to the Privy
chamber, where he was to have presented himself to her MAJESTY.

Ferd. Gorges.
Knowledged in the presence of Tho. Egerton C. S. Tho. Buckhurst. Notingham.
To. Cecill.
The confession of Sir John Dauies, taken the 18. of February 1600. before the
Earl of Notingham L. high Admiral, Sir Rob. Cecill principal Secretary, and
John Herbert second Secretary of Estate.
SIr John Dauies being demanded, how long before my Lord of Essex tumult he
knew of such his purpose?

He answers, that he knew not directly of any meaning my Lord had, until
the Sunday seuennight before, or thereabout.

Being demanded what he knew? then he answered, That my Lord consulted to
possess himself of the Court, at such convenient time when he might find
least opposition. For executing of which enterprises and of other affairs, he
appointed my Lord of Southampton, sir Charles Dauers, sir Ferdinando Gorges,
and himself, to meet at Drury house, and there to confider of the same, and
such other proiects, as his Lordship delivered them. And principally, for
surprising of the Court, and for the taking of the Tower of London. About which
business they had two meetings: which were five or six days before the
insurrection.

He further says, That Sir Christopher Blunt was not at this consultation, but
that he stayed and advised with my Lord himself about other things to him
unknown. For that my Lord trusted several men in several businesses, and not
all together.

Being demanded what was resolved in the opinions of these four before named?
He says, that sir Charles Dauers was appointed to the Presence chamber, and
himself to the Hall. And that my Lord was to determine himself, who should
have guarded the Court gate, and the Water gate. And that Sir Charles Dauers
upon a signal or a watchword, should have come out of the Presence into the
Guard chamber. And then some out of the Hall to have met him, and so have stepped
between the Guard and their halberds: of which Guard they hoped to have found
but a doozen, or some such small number.

Being asked, whether he heard that such as my Lord misliked, should have
received any violence? He says, that my Lord auowed the contrary: And that my
Lord said, He would call them to an honorable trial, and not use the sword.

Being demanded whether my Lord thought his enemies to be Spanish, bona fide,
or no? He says, that he never heard any such speech: and, if my Lord used any
such, it came into his head on the sudden.

Being demanded what party my Lord had in London? He says that the Sheriff
Smith was his hope, as he thinks.

Being demanded whether my Lord promised liberty of Catholic Religion? He
says, that Sir Christopher Blunt did give hope of it.

John Dauis.
Exam. per Notingham, To. Cecill. I. Herbert.
The confession of Sir Charles Dauers, taken the 18. of February Anno 1600.
before Sir Thomas Egerton L. Keeper of the great Seal, the L. Buckhurst L.
high Treasurer, the Earl of Notingham the Lord high Admiral, Lord Hunsdon L.
Chamberlain, and Sir Robert Cecill principal Secretary.
HE confesses that before Christmas, the Earl of Essex had bethought
himself, how he might secure his access unto the QVEENE in such sort, as
he might not be resisted: but no resolution determinately taken, until the
coming up of this Examinate, a little after Christmas.

And then he does confess, that the resolution was taken, to possess himself
of the Court: which resolution was taken agreeable to certain articles, which
the Earl of Essex did send to the Earl of Southampton, this Examinate, Sir
Ferdinando Gorge, and Sir John Dauies, written with the Earls own hand. To
which consultation (being held at Druric house, some four or five days before
Sunday, that was the eighth of February) Littleton came in toward the end.

The points which the Earl of Essex proiected under his hand were these.

First, whether it were fit to take the Tower of London. The reason whereof was
this: that after the Court was possessed, it was necessary to give reputation
to the Action, by having such a place, to bridle the City, if there should be
any mislike of their possessing the Court.

To the possessing of the Court, these circumstances were considered.

First, the Earl of Essex should have assembled all the Noblemen and Gentlemen
of quality on his party: out of which number, he should have chosen so many
as should have possessed all the places of the Court, where there might have
been any likelihood of resistance. Which being done, the Earl of Essex, with
diverse Noblemen, should have presented himself to the Queen.

The manner how it should have been executed, was in this sort. Sir Christopher
Blunt should have had charge of the utter gate, as he thinks. Sir Charles
Dauers this Examinate, with his company, should have made good the Presence,
and should have seized upon the Halberds of the Guard. Sir John Dauies should
have taken charge of the Hall. All this being set, upon a signal given, the
Earl should have come into the Court with his company.

Being asked what they would have done after? He says, they would have sent
to have satisfied the City, and have called a Parliament.

These were the resolutions set down by the Earl of Essex of his own hand,
after diverse consultations.

He says, Cuffe was ever of opinion, that the Earl of Essex should come in
this sort to the Court.

Charles Dauers.
Exam. per Th. Egerton. C. S. Th. Buckhurst. Notingham. G. Hunsdon. To. Cecill.
The second Confession of Sir Charles Dauers, taken the same day, and set down
upon further calling himself to remembrance, under his own hand, before Sir
Th. Egerton, L. Keeper of the great Seal, L. Buckhurst L. high Treasurer, the
Earl of Notingham L. high Admiral, Sir Rob. Cecill principal Secretary.
SOme points of the Articles which my Lord of Essex sent unto Drury house, (as
near as I can remember) were these: Whether both the Court, and the Tower
should be both attempted at one time? If both, what numbers should be thought
requisite for either? If the Court alone, what places should be first
possessed? by what persons?

And for those, which were not to come into the Court before hand; where, and
in what sort they might assemble themselves, with least suspicion to come in
with my Lord?

Whether it were not fit for my Lord, and some of the principal persons, to be
armed with privy coats?

Charles Dauers.
Knowledged in the presence of Tho. Egerton. C. S. T. Buckhurst. Notingham.
Rob. Cecill.
The first Confession of Sir Christopher Blunt examined the 18. of February
1600. before Io. Herbert second Secretary of Estate, and in the presence of
Nich Kempe Counselor at Law, William Wa^marke, William Martin, Robert
Andrews, Citizens: John Treuor Surueyor of the Navy, and Thomas Thorney his
Surgeon.
HE confesses that the Earl of Essex sent Wiseman, about the 20. of January,
to visit his wife, with letters of complement, and to require him to comevp
unto him to London, to settle his estate according as he had written unto him
before some few days.

Being demanded to what end they went to the City, to join with such
strength as they hoped for there: he confesses, it was to secure the Earl of
Essex his life, against such forces as should be sent against him. And being
asked, what, against the Queens forces? he answered, that must have been
judged afterward.

But being further asked, whether he did advise to come unto the Court over
night? He says no. For, Sir Ferdinando Gorge did assure, that the Alarm was
taken of it at the Court, and the Guards doubled.

Being asked whether he thought any Prince could have endured, to have any
Subject make the City his Mediator? or, to gather force to speak for him? He
says, he is not read in stories of former times: but he does not know, but
that in former times Subjects have used force for their mediation.

Being asked, what should have been done by any of the persons, that should
have been removed from the Queen? He answered, that he never found my Lord
disposed to shed blood: but that any that should have been found, should have
had indifferent trial.

Being asked upon his conscience, whether the Earl of Essex did not give him
comfort, that if he came to authority, there should be a toleration for
Religion? He confesses, he should have been to blame to have denied it.

Chr. Blunt.
This was read unto Sir Christopher Blunt, and afterward signed by him in the
presence of us, who are under written: Io. Herbert. Nicho. Kemp. VVil.
VVaimarke. VVil. Martin. Robert Andrews. John Treuor. Th. Thorney.
The second Confession of Sir Christopher Blunt the same day, viz. the 18. of
February: taken before M. John Herbert second Secretary of Estate, and
subscribed by him in the presence of Nicholas Kemp Counselor at Law, Thomas
Thorney his Surgeon, and William Martin, Robert Andrews, and Randolph Bull,
Citizens.
SIr Christopher Blunt (after the signing of this confession) being told, that
he did not deal plainly, excused himself by his former weakness, This
weakness was in respect of his hurt receiuedin charging her Majesty's forces at
Ludgate.
(putting us in mind that he said once before, that when he was able to
speak, he would tell all truth) does now confess: That four or five days
before the Earl of Essex did rise, he did set down certain Articles to be
considered on, which he saw not, until afterward he was made acquainted with
them, when they had amongst themselves disputed: which were these.

One of them was; Whether the Tower of London should be taken.

Another, Whether they should not possess the Court, and so secure my Lord,
and other men to come to the Queen.

For the first concerning the Tower, he did not like it: concluding, that he
that had the power of the Queen, should have that.

He confesses that upon Saturday night, when M. Secretary Herbert had been
with the Earl, and that he saw some suspicion was taken: he thought it in
vain to attempt the Court, and persuaded him rather to save himself by
flight, then to engage himself further, and all his company. And so the
resolution of the Earl grew to go into the City, in hope (as he said
before) to find many friends there.

He does also say, that the Earl did usually, speak of his purpose to alter
the government.

Chr. Blunt.
Exam per. Io. Herbert. Subscribed in presence of Nico. Kempe, Tho. Thorney,
Rob. Andrews, VV. Martin, Randolph Bull.
The Declaration of the Lord Keeper, the Earl of Worcester, and the L. Chief
Justice of England.
Upon Sunday, being the eight of February last past, about ten of the clock in
the forenoone, the Lord Keeper of the great Seal, the Earl of Worcester, Sir
William Knollis Comptroller of her Majesty's Householde, and the Lord Chief
Justice of England, being commanded by direction from the QVEENES MAJESTY,
did repair to the late earl of Essex his house, and finding the gate shut
against them, after a little stay they were let in at the wicket. And as soon
as they were within the gate, the wicket was shut upon them, and all their
servants kept out.

At their coming thither, they found the court full of men assembled together
in very tumultuous sort: The Earls of Essex, Rutland, and Southampton, and
the Lord Sandys, Master Parker, commonly called Lord Mountegle, Sir Christopher
Blunt, Sir Charles Dauers, and many other Knights and Gentlemen, and other
persons unknown, which flocked together about the Lord Keeper, etc. And
thereupon the Lord Keeper told the Earl of Essex, that they were sent from
her MAJESTY, to understand the cause of this their assembly, and to let them
know, That if they had any particular cause of grief against any persons
whatsoever, it should be heard, and they should have justice.

Hereupon the Earl of Essex with a very loud voice declared, That his life
was sought, and that he should have been murdered in his bed; that he had
been perfidiously dealt with; that his hand had been counterfaited, and
Letters written in his name; and that therefore they were assembled there
together to defend their lives: with much other speech to like effect. Hereupon
the Lord Chief Justice said unto the Earl, That if they had any such matter
of grief, or if any such matter were attempted or purposed against him, he
willed the Earl to declare it, assuring him that it should be truly related
to her MAJESTY, and that it should be indifferently heard, and justice should
be done, vvhomsoeuer it concerned.

To this the Earl of Southampton objected the assault made upon him by the
Lord Gray. Whereunto the Lord Chief Justice said, That in his case, justice
had been done, and the party imprisoned for it. And hereupon the Lord Keeper
did eftsoons will the Earl of Essex, that whatsoever private matter or
offense he had against any person whatsoever, if he would deliver it unto
them, they would faithfully and honestly deliver it to the QVEENES MAJESTY,
and doubted not to procure him honorable and equal justice, whomsoever it
concerned: requiring him, that if he would not declare it openly, that he
would impart it unto them privately, and doubted not but they would satisfy
him in it.

Upon this there was a great clamor raised amongst the multitude, crying, Away
my Lord, They abuse you, They betray you, They undo you, You lose time.
Whereupon the Lord Keeper put on his Hat, and said with a loud voice, My Lord,
let us speak with you privately, and understand your griefs: And I command
you all upon your allegiance, to lay down your weapons, and to depart, which
you ought all to do, being thus commanded, if you be good Subjects, and owe
that duty to the QVEENES MAJESTY which you profess. Whereupon they all brake
out into an exceeding loud shout and cry, crying, All, all, all.

And whilst the Lord Keeper was speaking, and commanding them upon their
allegiance, as is before declared, the Earl of Essex and the most part of that
Company did put on their hats, and so the Earl of Essex went into the house,
and the Lord Keeper, etc. followed him, thinking that his purpose had been to
speak with them privately, as they had required. And as they were going, some
of that disordered Company cried, Kill them. And as they were going into the
great Chamber, some cried, Cast the great Seal out of the window. Some other
cried there, Kill them: and some other said, Nay, let us shop them up.

The Lord Keeper did often call to the Earl of Essex to speak with them
privately, thinking still that his meaning had been so, until the Earl
brought them into his back Chamber, and there gave order to have the further
door of that Chamber shut fast. And at his going forth out of that Chamber,
the Lord Keeper pressing again to have spoken with the Earl of Essex, the
Earl said, My Lords, be patient a while, and stay here, and I will go into
London, and take order with the Mayor and Shiriffes for the City, and will be
here again within this half hour. And so departed from the Lord Keeper,
etc. leaving the Lord Keeper, etc and diverse of the Gentlemen Pensioners in
that Chamber, guarded by Sir John Dauis, Francis Tresham, and Owen Salisburie,
with musket shot, where they continued until Sir Ferdinando Gorges came and
delivered them about four of the clock in the afternoon.

In the mean time we did often require Sir John Dauis, and Francis Tresham,
to suffer us to depart, or at the least, to suffer some one of us to go to the
QVEENES MAJESTY, to inform her where and in what sort we were kept. But they
answered, That my Lord (meaning the Earl of Essex) had commanded that we
should not depart before his return, which (they said) would be very shortly.

Thomas Egerton C. S. Edward Worcester. John Popham.
The examination of Roger Earl of Rutland, the 12. of February 1600. taken
before Sir Thomas Egerton L. Keeper of the great Seal, the L. Buckhurst L.
high Treasurer, the Earl of Notingham L. high Admiral, Sir Robert Cecill
Principal Secretary, and Sir Io. Popham L. chief Justice of England.
HE says, that at his coming to Essex house on Sunday morning last, he found
there with the Earl of Essex, the Lord Sandys, and the L. Chandos, and diverse
Knights and gentlemen. And the Earl of Essex told this Examinate, That his
life was practiced to be taken away by the Lord Cobham, and Sir Walter
Raleigh, when he was sent for to the Counsel. And the Earl said, That now he
meant by the help of his friends, to defend himself And says, that the
deteining of the Lord Keeper and the other Lords sent to the Earl from the
Queen, was a stratageme of war. And says, That the Earl of Essex told him,
that London stood for him, and that Sheriff Smith had given him intelligence,
that he would make as many men to assist him as he could. And further the
Earl of Essex said, That he meant to possess himself of the City, the
better to enable himself to revenge him on his enemies, the Lord Cobham, Sir
Robert Cecil, and sir Walter Raleigh. And this Examinate confesses, that he
resolved to live and die with the Earl of Essex: and that the Earl of Essex
did intend to make his forces so strong, that her Majesty should not be able
to resist him in the revenge of his enemies. And says, that the Earl of Essex
was most inward with the Earl of Southampton, Sir Christopher Blunt, and
others: who have of long time showed themselves discontented, and have advised
the Earl of Essex to take other courses, and to stand upon his guard. And
says, that when the Earl of Essex was talking with the L. Keeper, and other
the Lords sent from her Majesty, diverse said, My Lord, they mean to abuse
you, and you loose time. And when the Earl came to Sheriff Smiths, he desired
him to send for the Lord Mayor, that he might speak with him. And as the
Earl went in the streets of London, this Examinate said to diverse of the
Citizens, that if they would needs come, that it was better for their safety
to come with weapons in their hands. And says, that the Earl of Essex (at the
end of the street where Sheriff Smith dwelt) cried out to the Citizens, That
they did him harm, for that they came naked: and willed them to get them
weapons. And the Earl of Essex also cried out to the Citizens, That the Crown
of England was offered to be sold to the Infanta. And says, that the Earl
burned diverse papers, that were in a little Casket, whereof one was, as the
Earl said, An history of his troubles. And says, that when they were
assaulted in Essex house, after their return, they first resolved to have made
a sallie out. And the Earl said, that he was determined to die: and yet in the
end they changed their opinion, and yielded. And says, that the Earl of
Southampton, sir Christopher Blunt, and sir John Dauies advised the Earl of
Essex, that the Lord Keeper and his company should be detained. And this
Examinate says, that he heard diverse there present cry out, Kill them, kill
them. And says, that he thinks the Earl of Essex intended, that after he
had possessed himself of the City, he would entreat the Lord Keeper and his
company, to accompany him to the Court. He says, he heard Sir Christopher
Blunt say openly in the presence of the Earl of Essex and others, how
fearful, and in what several humors they should find them at the Court,
when they came thither.

Rutland.
Exam. per Th. Egerton C. S. T. Buckhurst. Notingham. To Cecill. Io. Popham.
The Confession of William Lord Sandys, of the parish of Sherborne Cowdry, in
the County of Southampton, taken this 16. of February 1600. before Sir John
Popham L. chief Justice, Roger Wilbraham Master of the Requests, and Edw. Coke
her Majesty's Attorney General.
HE says, that he never understood, that the Earl did mean to stand upon
his strength, till Sunday in the morning, being the eight of this instant
February. And says, that in the morning of that day, this Examinat was sent
for by the Earl of Essex, about six or seven of the clock: and the Earl
sent for him by his servant Warberton, who was married to a widow in
Hampshire. And at his coming to the Earl, there were six or seven Gentlemen
with him: but remembers not what they were: and next after, of a Noble man,
came my Lord Chandos, and after him came the Earl of Southampton, and
presently after, the Earl of Rutland, and after him Master Parker, commonly
called the Lord Mountegle. And says, that at his coming to the Earl of
Essex, he complained That it was practiced by Sir Walter Raleigh to have
murdered him, as he should have gone to the Lord Treasurers house, with Master
Secretary Herbert. And says, that he was present in the Courtyard of Essex
house, when the Lord Keeper, the Earl of Worcester, Sir William Knollis, and
the Lord Chief Justice, came from the QVEENES MAJESTY to the Earl of Essex.
And the Lord Chief Justice required the Earl of Essex to have some private
conference with him: and that, if any private wrongs were offered unto him,
that they would make true report thereof to her MAJESTY, who no doubt would
reform the same. And says, that this Examinat went with the Earl, and the
rest of his company to London to Sheriff Smithes: but went not into the house
with him, but stayed in the street a while, and being sent for by the Earl of
Essex, went into the house, and from thence came with him, till he came to
Ludgate: which place being guarded, and resistance being made, and perceived by
the Earl of Essex, he said unto his company, Charge: And thereupon sir
Christopher Blunt, and others of his company, gave the Charge, and being
repulsed, and this Examinat hurt in the leg, the Earl retired with this
Examinat and others, to his house, called Essex house. And on his retire, the
Earl said to this Examinat, That if Sheriff Smith did not his part, that his
part was as far forth as the Earls own, which moved him to think, that
he trusted to the City. And when the Earl was after his retire in Essex
house, he took an iron Casket, and broke it open, and burnt diverse papers in
it. Whereof there was a book, as he takes it: and said as he was burning of
them, That they should tell no tales to hurt his friends. And says, that the
Earl said, That he had a black bag about his neck, that should tell no
tales.

William Sandys.
Exam. per Ioh. Popham. Roger VVilbraham. Edw. Coke.
The Examination of the Lord Cromwell, taken the 7. of March 1600. by Sir I.
Popham L. chief Justice, Christ. Yeluerton her Majesty's Sergeant, and Fr.
Bacon of her Majesty's learned Council.
AT the Sherifs house this Examinate pressed in with the rest, This Examination
as appears by the date, was taken after Essex arraignment, but is inserted,
to show how the speech of the Realm to be sold to the Infanta, which at his
arraignment he derived from M. Secretary, at Shr. Smiths house he said was
advertised out of Ireland And with this latter concur many other examinations.
and found the Earls shifting themselves in an inner chamber: where he heard my
L. of Essex certify the Company, that he had been advertised out of Ireland
(which he would not now hide from them) that the Realm should be delivered
over to the hands of the Infanta of Spain, and that he was wished to look to
it. Further, that he was to seek redress for injuries: and that he had left
at his house for pledges, the Lord Keeper, the Earl of Worcester, Sir William
Knollis, and the Lord chief Justice.

Edw. Cromwell.
Exam. per Io Popham. Chr. Yeluerton. Fr. Bacon.
Sir Christopher Blunt, knight, at the time of his arraignement, did openly at
the Bar desire to speak with the L. Admiral, and M. Secretary: before whom
he made this Confession following: Which the Earl of Southampton confirmed
afterward: and he himself likewise at his death.
HE confesses, that at the Castle of Dublin, in that lodging, which was once
the Earl of Southamptons, the Earl of Essex purposing his return into
England, advised with the Earl of Southampton, and himself, of his best manner
of going into England for his security, seeing to go he was resolved.

At that time he propounded his going with a competent number of soldiers, to
the number of two or three thousand, to have made good his first landing with
that Force, until he could have drawn unto himself a sufficient strength
to have proceeded further.

From this purpose, this Examinate did use all forcible persuasions: alleging
not only his own ruin, which should follow thereof, and all those which
should adhere to him in that action: but urging it to him, as a matter most
foul, because he was not only held a Patron of his Country, which by this
means he should have destroyed: but also, should have laid upon himself an
irreuocable blot, having been so deeply bound to her MAJESTY. To which
disswasion, the Earl of Southampton also inclined.

This desseigne being thus dissuaded by them, then they fell to a second
consideration. And therein this Examinate confesses, that he rather advised
him, if needs he would go, to take with him some competent number of choice
men.

He did not name unto him any particular power, that would have come to him at
his landing, but assured himself that his Army would have been quickly
increased by all sorts of discontented people.

He did confess before his going that he was assured that many of the Rebels
would be advised by him: but named none in particular.

The Examination of the Earl of Southampton after his Arraignement: taken
before the Earl of Notingham Lord high Admiral, Sir Robert Cecill principal
Secretary, and M. John Herbert second Secretary of Estate.
SIr Christopher Blunt being hurt, and lying in the Castle of Dublin, in a
chamber which had been mine, the Earl of Essex one day took me thither with
him: where being none but we three, he told us, he found it necessary for him
to go into England, and thought it fit to carry with him as much of the Army,
as he could conveniently transport, to go on shore with him to Wales, and
there to make good his landing with those, till he could send for more. Not
doubting but his Army would so increase in a small time, that he should be
able to march to London, and make his conditions, as he desired.

To which project I answered, that I held it altogether unfit, as well in
respect of his conscience to God, and his love to his country, as his duty
to his Sovereign, of which, he (of all men) ought to have greatest regard,
seeing her Majesty's favors to him had been so extraordinary. Wherefore, I
could never give any consent unto it. Sir Christopher Blunt joined with me in
this opinion.

Exam. per Notingham, To. Cecil, Io. Herbert.
The speeches of Sir Chr. Blunt, at the time of his death, as near as they
could be remembered March 18. 1600.
MY Lords, and you that be present, Although I must confess, that it were
better fitting the little time I have to breath, to bestow the same in asking
God forgiveness for my manifold and abominable sins, then to use any other
discourse, especially, having both an imperfection of speech, and God knows, a
weak memory, by reason of my late grievous wound: Yet to satisfy all those
that are present, what course has been held by me, in this late enterprise,
because I was said to be an Instigator, and setter on of the late Earl, I will
truly, and upon the peril of my soul, speak the truth.

It is true, that the first time that ever I understood of any dangerous
coffeehouse in my L. of Essex, was about three years ago, at Wansted, upon
his coming one day from Greenwich. At that time he spoke many things unto me,
but descended into no particulars, but in general terms.

After which time, he never brake with me in any matter, tending to the
alteration of the State, (I protest before God) until he came into Ireland,
other then I might conceive, that he was of an ambitious and discontented mind.
But, when I lay at the Castle of Thomas Lee, called Reban, in Ireland,
grievously hurt, and doubted of my life: he came to visit me, and then began
to acquaint me with his intent.

As he thus spoke, the Sheriff began to interrupt him, and told him the hour
was past. But my Lord Gray, and Sir Walter Raleigh Captain of the Guard,
called to the Sheriff, and required him not to interrupt him, but to suffer
him quietly to finish his prayers and confessions. Sir Christopher Blunt said,
Is Sir Walter Raleigh there? Those on the scaffold answered, Yea. To whom Sir
Christopher Blunt spoke on this manner.

Sir Walter Raleigh, I thank God that you are present. I had an infinite
desire to speak with you, to ask you forgiveness ere I died, both for the
wrong done you, and for my particular ill intent toward you: I beseech you
forgive me. Sir Walter Raleigh answered, that he most willingly forgave him,
and besought God to forgive him, and to give him his divine comfort: protesting
before the Lord, that whatsoever Sir Christopher Blunt meant toward him, for
his part, he never had any ill intent toward him: And further said to Sir
Christopher Blunt, I pray you without offense, let me put you in mind that you
have been esteemed, not only a principal prouoker and perswader of the Earl
of Essex in all his undutiful courses, but especially an aduiser in that which
has been confessed of his purpose to transport a great part of her Majesty's
Army out of Ireland into England, to land at Milford, and thence to turn it
against her sacred person. You shall do well to tell the truth, and to
satisfy the world. To which he answered thus.

Sir, if you will give me patience, I will deliver a truth, speaking now my
last, in the presence of God, in whose mercy I trust. And then he directed
himself to my Lord Gray, and my Lord Compton, and the rest that sat on
horseback near the scaffold.

When I was brought from Reban to Dublin, and lodged in the Castle, his
Lordship and the Earl of Southampton came to visit me; and to be short, he
began thus plainly with me: That he intended to transport a choice part of
the Army of Ireland into England, and land them in Wales, at Milford, or
thereabouts: and so securing his descent, thereby would gather such other
forces, as might enable him to march to London. To which, I protest before the
Lord God, I made this, or the like answer: that I would that night consider of
it, which I did.

And the next day the Earls came again: I told them, that such an enterprise,
as it was most dangerous, so would it cost much blood, as I could not like of
it: besides many hazzards, which at this time I cannot remember unto you,
neither will the time permit it. But I rather advised him to go over himself
with a good train, and make sure of the Court, and then make his own
conditions.

And although it be true, that (as we all protested in our examinations and
arraignements) we never resolved of doing hurt to her Majesty's person: (for in
none of our consultations was there set down any such purpose) yet, I know,
and must confess, if we had failed of our ends, we should (rather then have
been disapointed) even have drawn blood from her self. From henceforward, he
dealt no more with me herein, until he was discharged of his keeper, at Essex
house. And then, he again asked mine advise, and disputed the matter with me;
but resolved not. I went then into the Country, and before he sent for me
(which was some ten days before his Rebellion) I never heard more of the
matter. And then he wrote unto me, to come up, upon pretense of making some
assurances of land, and the like I will leave the rest unto my confessions,
given to that honorable Lord Admiral, and worthy M. Secretary, (to whom I
beseech you sir Walter Raleigh commend me) I can requite their favorable and
charitable dealing with me, with naught else but my prayers for them. And I
beseech God of his mercy, to save and preserve the Queen, who has given
comfort to my soul, in that I hear she has forgiven me all, but the
sentence of the Law, which I most worthily deserved, and do most willingly
embrace, and hope that GOD will have mercy and compassion on me, who have
offended him as many ways, as ever sinful wretch did. I have lead a life so
far from his precepts, as no sinner more. God forgive it me, and forgive me
my wicked thoughts, my licentious life, and this right arm of mine, which (I
fear me) has drawn blood in this last Action. And I beseech you all bear
witness, that I die a Catholic, yet so, as I hope to be saved only by the
death and passion of Christ, and by his merits, not ascribing any thing to mine
own works. And I trust you are all good people, and your prayers may profit
me. Farewell my worthy Lord Gray, and my Lord Compton, and to you all, God send
you both to live long in honor. I will desire to say a few prayers, and
embrace my death most willingly. With that he turned from the rail, toward
the Executioner: and the Minister offering to speak with him, he came again
to the rail, and besought that his conscience might not be troubled, for he
was resolved; which he desired for Gods sake. Whereupon commandment was given,
that the Minister should not interrupt him any further. After which he prepared
himself to the block, and so died very manfully and resolutely.

An abstract out of the Earl of Essex Confession under his own hand.
Upon Saturday the 21. of February, after the late Earl of Essex had desired
us to come to him, as well to deliver his knowledge of those treasons, which he
had formerly denied at the Bar, as also to recommend his humble and earnest
request, that her Majesty would be pleased (out of her grace and favor) to
suffer him to die privately in the Tower: He did marvelous earnestly desire,
that we would suffer him to speak unto Cuffe his Secretary: Against whom he
vehemently complained unto us, to have been a principal Instigator to these
violent courses, which he had undertaken. Wherein he protested, that he chiefly
desired that he might make it appear, that he was not the only perswader of
these great offenses, which they had committed: but that Blunt, Cuffe, Temple,
besides those other persons, who were at the private conspiracy at Drury house
(to which though these three were not called, yet they were privy) had most
malicious and bloody purposes, to subvert the State and Government: Which could
not have been prevented, if his project had gone forward.

This request being granted him, and Cuffe brought before him, he there
directly and vehemently charged him. And amongst other speeches used these
words: Henry Cuffe, call to God for mercy, and to the Queen, and deserve it,
by declaring truth. For I, that must now prepare for another world, have
resolved to deal clearly with God, and the world: and must needs say this to
you; You have been one of the chiefest instigators of me, to all these my
disloyal courses, into which I have fallen.

Testified by Tho. Egerton. C. S. Th. Buckhurst. Notingham. To. Cecil.
The Earl of Essex his Confession to three Ministers, whose names are under
written, the 25. of February 1600.
THe late Earl of Essex thanked God most heartily, That he had given him a
deeper insight into his offense, being sorry he had so stood upon his
justification at his arraignment, for he was since that become an other man.

He thanked God that his course was so prevented: for if his project had taken
effect, God knows (said he) what harm it had wrought in the Realm.

He humbly thanked her Majesty that he should die in so private manner, lest
the acclamation of the people might have been a temptation unto him. To which
he added, That all popularitie and trust in man was vain: the experience
whereof himself had felt.

He acknowledged with thankfulness to God, That he was thus justly spewed out
of the Realm.

He publicly in his prayer and protestation, as also privately, aggrauated the
detestation of his offense: and especially in the hearing of them that were
present at the execution, he exaggerated it with four Epithetes, desiring God
to forgive him his great, his bloody, his crying, and his infectious sin:
which word Infectious, he privately had explaned to us, that it was a leprosy
that had infected far and near.

Thomas Montford. William Barlow. Abdie Ashton his Chaplain.

