CERTAIN FRVITFVLL INstructions and necessary doctrines meet to edify in the
fear of God: Faithfully gathered together by John Frewen Minister of the word
of God.

Whereunto is added a Table, wherein the reader may easily find out the
principal matters contained in this book.

1. Pet. 4.10. Let every man as he has received the gift, minister the same
one to an other; as good disposers of the manifold grace of God.

1. Io. 4.1. etc. Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the
spirits whether they are of God, for many false Prophets are gone into the
world.

AT LONDON, Printed by John Winder for Thomas Chard. 1587.

To the right worshipful, and his approved good freindes: M. Tho. Couentry,
and M. Leonard Iefferis of Hill, and Earls Crome within the county of
Worcester: and to the virtuous Gentlewomen their wives: I.F. wishes earnest
zeal to the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, perseverance and practice thereof
unto the end and in the end, health in this life, and in the life to come,
everlasting joy and felicity, through the same our only savior the son of
God.
OUR Lord Jesus Christ (right worshipful and right dear in the Lord) having
no small experience of the malice and subtle practices of the enemy of our
salvation, (I mean the devil) and knowing that he would leave nothing
unattempted whereby his disciples might be seduced from the truth of his
doctrine: he carefully in his gospel gives them this forwarning, Mat. 7.1^
that they should take heed and bewarre of false Prophets which should come to
deceive them, and as ravening wolves to devour their souls. The which warning
was never more necessary then in these our days. For as there is nothing more
precious in this world, then the blessed and heavenly doctrine of the word of
GOD, and as there are no persons more worthy to be accomp^ed of, then such to
whom the Lord does give the spirit of wisdom to open and impart this
treasure unto us: So on the other side, there is nothing more dangerous and
infectious to the children of God, then corrupt and false doctrine, and no
persons more to be hated and speedily avoided, then wicked and lying teachers,
whom Satan thrusts into the Church to blemishe that precious pearl and
means of our salvation. Hear not (says God by Jeremy) the words of the
Prophets, Ier. 23.16.
that prophecy unto you, and teach you vanity: They speak the vision of their
own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord. Verse 26.
And again, how long do the Prophets delight to prophecy lies, even
prophesying the deceit of their own heart? Satan himself the father and
founder of al lying and false teaching used the same course in Paradise: For
when God had said unto Adam: Genesis 2.17 and 3.4.
In what hour soever thou shall eat of the fruit of this tree, thou shall die
the death. the old crafty serpent (seeking to seduce man from God) said nay
you shall not die the death, but you shall be like unto God. By which gloss and
false interpretation of gods word, he pulled them clean from the obedience of
Gods holy will and commandment, to their own utter overthrow and heavy
judgment. By such like falsehood he tempted Christ himself to make him
conceive over great confidence of the providence of God toward him, Mat. 4.6.
Ps. 91.11.12.
It is written (says he) that he will give his Aungelles charge over thee, and
with their hands they shall lift thee up, least at any time, thou should
dash thy foot against a stone By like craft of lying, and by false sense
perverting the word of God, he from time to time instructs his Messengers and
false Proph. to abuse and deceive the simple people of god, that be not well
taught by his holy spirit how to withstand them. The which false proph. (to the
end they may be discovered and taken heed of): it greatly behooves all
Christians (that look to be saved by the death of Christ) to bewar who^ they
believe, and to have recours to the rule and touchstone of the holy scriptures,
which is the perfect directory whereby all truth of doctrine is examined and
whereby we may try and prove the spirits whether they be of 1. Io. 4.1 2. Pe.
1.20
god. For why the whole scripture (as saint Paul says) is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to convince to correct and to
instruct in righteousness that the man of God may be absolute, being made
perfect to al good works. Search the scriptures (says our savior Christ) for
in them ye think to have eternal life and they are these that testify of me.
Io. 5.39.
Thy word is a lantern unto my feet (says the Prophet), Ps. 119 i05 Pro.
30.5.
and a light unto my paths. Every word of God is pure, says Salomo^, he is a
sheeld to those that trust in him. We find not any thing in this world (how
precious soever it be) that is worthy to have the word of God compared unto
it: for it surmounteth (infinitely, and beyond reason) all things which are and
may be imagined to be excellent and precious: also there is nothing in this
world (how precious soever it be) but does participat with earth, and needs
to be purged and cle^sed from his dross and superfluities, before it ca^ be
pure, but the word of God is clean of it self and neither has, nor ca^ have
any dros for it proceeds not from a furnace but from the mouth of God, which
neither ca^nor will bring forth any work, but it shall be so perfect as it
ought to be, and wherein nothing may be amended. He that is of God, (says
our savior) hears Gods word. And again, Io. 8.47. Io. 10.27
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they will follow me, a stranger
they will not follow. Now if the adversaries of the gospel (I mean the
Papists) would willingly (as becomes Christians) submit themselves to this
tryer of all truth of faith and holiness, which is the word of God. If they
would as Christ's sheep hear the voice of their shephearde: Then should they
know that nothing is to be added, or taken away from the word of God: Deu. 4.2
31 Io. 20.51.
Then would they say with S. John, so much is written, that if we believe, we
have salvation by the name of Christ. Then would they say with S. Paul, that
the scriptures can make us wise to salvation: 2. Tim. 3. Ambrose
And then would they (with Ambrose) condemn all new doctrine which Christ
has not taught, because Christ is life to all believers. But because they have
ears and hear not, eyes and see not, hearts and yet cannot understand the
truth, nor find the way of salvation: therefore they keep the scripture in an
unknown tongue from the common people: and make it little less the^ heresy to
have it in their tongue: therefore they so greatly disgrace and discredit the
Scriptures as insufficient to salvation, and not containing al necessary truth,
but that there are many articles of necessitye to be believed which are not
contained in the scriptures. For so says one of their champions. Lindan. li.
1. c. 10.
The Apostles (says he) would not commit certain principal points of our
religion to paper and ink thereby to perish, and to be forgotten: but they
committed them to the faithful hearts of christians. As though those things
remained more sure which be committed to the frail memory of feeble men in this
sinful world: then those things that by the spirit of god are put in writing.
This is the cause why they blasphemously call the sacred written word of God,
The Papists blasphemy.
a dead writing, a dumb Master, doubtful and uncertain, A black gospel,
dead ink, inkie diuinitye, A nose of wax, a leaden rule, etc.

This is the cause why they say that the scriptures take authority of the
church, Friar Soto.
and that without the authority of the Church, the scriptures have no authority.

As though the Majesty of Gods wisdom, and his truth contained in the
scriptures, depended upon the authority of man. For though the Church be
never so holy, yet it consists of men, which oftentimes have and do err,
when they lean not to the word of God. Petrus de palude. de potestate Papae.
Art. 4. Herueus de potest. Papae.
If they would hearken to Gods word, then would they not say, that the Popes
only power passes all the power of the whole Church besides: And that the
Pope by virtue and power is the whole church: and so conclude theruppon, that
there is neither holy ghost, nor interpretation or sense of the scriptures, but
only in the Pope. Indeed it is true, that as the Scriptures were written by
the spirit of GOD: 2. Pet. 1.20
So must they be expounded by the same. For without that Spirit, we have
neither eyes to see, nor ears to hear.

It is that spirit that opens and no man shuts: the same shuts, Ma.
11.15 Reu. 3 7
and no man opens.

The same spirit prepared and opened the heart of Lidia, Act. 16.14 Io. 6.45.
that she should give ear to, and consider the things that were spoken by S.
Paul.

And in respect of this spirit. the Prophet Esaias says: Esa. 53.13. Ier. 31, 33.
They shall be all taught of God.

But God has not bound himself that this spirit should evermore (of
necessity) dwell in Room: Esaias. 62.2
but upon the lowly and humble hearted, that tremble at the word of God.

Chrysostom says, they that speak of themselves: Chrisost. de sancto. and
ado. spi
falsely pretend the holy ghost. And again, if any thing be brought unto us
(says he) under the name of the holy ghost besides the gospel, let us not
believe it. For as Christ is the fulfilling of the law and the proph. so is the
holy ghost the fulfilling of the gospel. Now with what spirit the Bishops of
Rome have expounded unto us the holy scriptures) it is so manifest and
apparently known, that we need go no further but to their own writings and
canons sufficiently to prove that the Pope is Antichrist, 1. Io. 2.22.
and that his prelates and disciples are the spiritual wolves of whom Christ in
his gospel gives warning, Mat. 7.15
though they cover themselves never so closely under the clothing of Christ's
true sheep.

Christ was humble and lowly. The prophet in his own person speaks of him: I
am a worm and not a man: ashame of men and the contempt of the people. And S.
Paul says he humbled himself, Ps. 22.6 Phil. 2.8.
and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the cross.

Behold his parents, his birth, his cradle: behold his life, his disciples,
his doctrine and his death: All were witnesses to his humility. He says of
himself the son of man has not whereon to rest his head. And to his disciples
he says, Mat. 8.20.
The Kings of the Gentiles reign over them, and they that bear rule over them
are called gracious Lords: but you shall not be so. Luke 25.22 Ma. 11.29
And again Learn of me that I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find
rest unto your souls. Now on the other side, if we consider the condition of
Antichrist, behold his birth, his place, his chair, his estate, his doctrine,
his disciples and al his life. there shall nothing be seen but pomp and vain
glory: he is proud in life, The image of Antichrist
proud in doctrine, proud in word, and proud in deeds. He is like unto
Lucifer, and sets himself before his brethren, and over nations and
kingdoms. He makes kings and princes to kiss his feet, to carry his train,
to hold his stirrup. etc. He claims power over heaven and earth. He says,
he is Lord over all the world, the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings: that his
authority reaches up into heaven and down into hell: that whosoever he
blesses, is blessed, and that it is cursed whatsoever he curses. He sells
merits, the forgiveness of sins, the sacrifice for the quick and the dead.
He makes merchandise of the souls of men, He remoueth Kings and deposes the
stats and princes of the world.

He takes upon him the authority and name of the living GOD which made heaven
and earth, Extrauag Io. 22.
even the name of GOD the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. And in this pride
he exceeds all others that have been wicked. But some will peradventure
reply, that the Pope at this day is not called GOD, but that he abaceth and
writes himself by a title of humility, and is called so the servant of
servant. Thus (indeed) he is written: but mark how much the matter is
amended.

Extra. de Mayor and obedien.
This servant says, I do make holy the unholy. I do justify the wicked. I
do forgive sins. I open and no man shuts. This servant can say, that
whosoever obeys not him, shall be rooted out: and that he may dispense for
any commandment of the old or new testament. 9 Que. 3. cuncta pet. de pal de
pot. pa. Art. 4.
No man may judge this servant. For (they say) the Pope is exempted from all
law of man, and again, neither all the clergy, nor all the wholeworld, may
either judge or depose the Pope. Such a power this servant of servants claims
to himself, what greater power may be given unto God? And this power the Pope
at this day challe^geth as proper to his seat: that he has the authority which
is due unto Christ over his Church none may say he does err, or ask why he
does so.

Now the first Sheep clothing (wherewithal the false Prophets and members
of Antichrists school do use to hide and cover their deuelish hypocrisy) is
fasting, prayer, alms deeds, The first sheeps clothing wherewith the false
Prophets do hide themselves.
and outward holiness of life. The which things when they are don syncerely
by Gods true ministers and faithful children: then are they (in deed) the
right clothing of his sheep: but when such false teachers do put on the same:
then are they counterfaite clokes to deceive the simple. Whereby we may
perceive, that outward holiness of life is not the only true token of
Christianity. The second.
Secondly they do hide themselves under the sheep clothing of ordinary power
and authority, long succession and lawefull calling, to the ministry, under
the which title, (like wolves) they have crept into the Church, and from time
to time most cruelly persecuted Gods good people, and the doctrine by them
taught. The third.
Thirdly they are hid and covered under the goodly name and title of holy
Apostolical and Catholic church; to the end they might make men believe, that
all their doctrines, traditions and devises of new worship proceeded not from
themselves, but were established by the perpetual consent of the church, and
allowed by the sentence and interpretation of the holy counselles, fathers and
doctors and yet (being rightly and truly examined) it is nothing so.

They tell us that they have their private Mass, their half communion and
their trifling ceremonies from the Apostles. And all this (God knows) they
prove by full simple conjectures, because Christ said to his Apostles: Io.
16.12. 1. Co. 11.34.
I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear the^ now. And
because S. Paul said to the Corinth. Other things will I set in order when I
come. And although it were true that they have not devised these things of
themselves but have received the^ al from the Apostles and holy Fathers (which
thing their own conscience knows to be most untrue) yet notwithstanding the
same things so received, they have fowly defaced with sundry their
superstitions. They have made them necessary to salvation: they have bound the
people no less to them, then to the law of God: and so have they made the^
snares for Christian consciences. And therefore if it were so that the thing it
self came from the fathers, yet the abuse thereof came from themselves: and for
the same they have taught the people to break Gods commandment. Esaias. 1.22.
Thus have they mingled gods heavenly wine with their puddle water: Mat. 23.24
Mat. 16.6.
thus have they strained gnats and swallowed camels: this is the very leaven of
the Scribs and Phariseis which Christ calls hypocrisy. Therefore if so be the
thing it self, they have thus received (in respect of substance) be al one:
yet being thus abused (in respect of their superstitions and deformities) it is
none one.

Furthermore as a Lion is discovered by his claws (what garment so ever he
have upon him) even so these spiritual wolves (though they be covered with the
clothing of Christ's true sheep: The claws of the spiritual wolves.
yet) if you look upon their claws, you shall quickly epsy the^ what they
are. The first
One of their claws is confidence in the holiness of their life, whereby they do
not only advance themselves as just before God and the world: but also
contemn and despise al other. Such a claw had the Pharisei that Christ
speaks of, who in disdain of the poor sinful (but yet repentant) Publican,
makes his vaunt in this manner: Lu. 18.21.
I thank she (O Lord) that I am not as other men are, extorcioners, unjust,
adulterers nor as this Publican etc. Such are these religious men which in
these days make their vaunts, that they are not only able so far to fulfill
the law of God that they may be accounted righteous themselves: but also that
they have their works of supererogation and merits which may be sold and
applied to the benefit of other. This is known to be the common doctrine of
the church of Rome at this day. A second clawe.
Another clawe of these countrfeited wolves is a certain peculiar holiness,
consisting in the observation of man's traditions and devises: of which commonly
they make greater account, then of the commandementes of God. Such they were
whom Christ sharply reproves saying: Mat. 15.3.
ye transgress the commandementes of God by your tradition. Such they are
which account themselves holier then other, and (above all other) take to
themselves the goodly cloak of religious men, because they live after the rule
of Benedicke, Francis, Dominicke etc. or because they wear this or that
fashion of apparel, abstain from this or that kind of meats, observing the
choice of days, vow of single life, and diverse other like fancies of man's
brain, in comparison whereof the commandementes of God are smally or nothing
among them regarded.

The Phariseis sought to please men and to deceive the people they taught them
to walk in the ways of their forefathers, to believe as they believed, to do
as they had done. They flattered them and said, you are the church of God:
Mat. 23.14. Luke 20.47. Eze. 13.2. and. 34.2.
you are gods people: you are the sons of Abraham: you cannot err, you
cannot be deceived. The Scribes and the Phariseis deuowred up widows houses
under pretense of long prayers: They gave alms and made money of their alms
giving: They fasted and made money of their fasting. This did the Scribes and
Phariseis, the which although are dead, yet their doings continue still: their
name is taken away, but their profession abides, As they made gains of their
prayers, of their alms and fasting; so do the Papists make great gaynes and
wax rich under pretense of holiness. They have brought in a profession of
wilful chastity and forbidden marriage in some whole estate of men. They have
forbidden to eat certain meats upon certain days: whereas God has left
meats as free to the choice of man, as he left his sun to shine freely to
the use of all men, asnd they make free liberty for money to eat what every
man likes. They make money of purgatory, money of pardons, and money of their
masses. They make money of Peter, and of Paul: of the Apostles and Martirs and
of Christ himself. These are they of whom S. Peter speaks, 2. Pet. 2.3.
Through covetousness shall they with fained words make merchandise of your
souls. If they be asked from whom they had their Mass, their invocation of
saints, prayer for the dead, images, their Deifying of Saints, their
erecting of alters unto them, their torches candlelights, pilgrimages, and all the rest of their beggarly trash: they are never able to answer one jot for
the maintenance thereof out of the word of God: but we will follow (say they)
our fathers and their traditions. Behold the ground of Popish religion.
God give them grace (if it be his will) that they may see their own vanity:
that they may know that they are but miserable and mortal men, and that a time
shall come, when their hypocrisy shall be disclosed: that they may become
godly, and be (in deed) the ministers of Christ, and disposers of the secrets
of God: And that they may serve God in truth, in holiness, and righteousness all
the days of their life.

And now to return to your worships. I most humbly beseech you to accept this
my poor labor, which I offer (under your names) to the whole church of God.
The which as I know it comes unlooked for, not only in respect of your
selves, but also of diverse other that know me (as well) in that country where I
was born, as also in other places: so also it may seem very rash and needles.
For who am I, that I should take upon me to publish any thing? The unworthiest
of many hundreds, and the vnablest of many thousands. And yet seeing many
things more simple, less needful and profitable, are both permitted and
suffered to come abroad: I am not altogether discouraged, neither has any man
just cause to accuse me in this my simple enterprise. I know these be the
days of learning and knowledge and that there be great store of learned
deuines in our land (whom I beseech the Lord to bless. Mar. 12.42.43. Luke
21.2.3.
) and yet the two mites of the poor widow cast into the treasury (among the
great gifts of the welthy) are not to be refused. The causes that moved me to
dedicate this first fruit of my simple travail unto your worships (above al
other) are these. First your great goodness from time to time showed toward me
and my friends: the which called upon me contitually to show some token of
thankfulness for the same. For I must needs confess that it has uttered it
self many and sundry ways, and that not without a certain friendly or rather
fatherly care of my well doing. Secondly, that it might be a mean, (through
the assistaunce of Gods spirit) to kindle and inflame your hearts with an
earnest zeal to the glorious gospel of the son of God, by daily and
continual exercise and practice wherein you might be sufficiently furnished
with spiritual armur to endure constantly unto the end (as good soldiers of
Jesus Christ) against all the assaults of Satan and his wicked instruments
which (do or may) come in sheep clothing to deceive you and to betray your
souls from the way of salvation. For of this am I certain, that there will
not want false prophets entycing you from Christ, and that many stumbling
blocks will be cast (namely and especially in your way Master and Mistress I
efferis as once hertofore I presumed to advertise you privately by letter) to
the end you might be discouraged from the way of the Lord. But beware (I
beseech you again) of their Angelical or Seraphicall show of heavenly life.
Have not by and by their doctrine in admiration but carefully look unto the
claws of these spiritual wolves and indifferently (without affection) examine
the ground of their profession, by the rule and touchstone of the word of
God: and you shall prove that they deal deceitefully and with guile: that
they be false Apostles and deceitefull workers: that they go about to beguile
your senses and to blind your eyes: that they call you to worship an Idol in
steed of the true and living God: and that they would lead you out of light
into darkness: from truth into error: from knowledge unto ignorance.

If you shall vouchsafe to read this little book, and to examine it thoroughly
and indifferently by the word of God: and then (it being effectually confirmed
by the same) to make your profit accordingly: and (as it is committed to your
protection: so) to maintain and defend it: I shall not only be satisfied and
think my pays sufficiently recompensed: but also be greatly encouraged
heartily to pray unto the Lord to increase the gifts of his holy spirit in
you, that you may go forward more and more to perform that duty in
obedience which he requires at your hands: that you may ouerleape all the
lets that Satan can cast in your way and continue in the certainty of true
faith: and that you may be fully settled upon the death and passion of our
Lord Jesus Christ being assured that the same only is of sufficient ability
to draw you out of the dungeon of death.

And I beseech your worshippes, that as God in abundant measure, has
mercifully endued you with all things necessary for this life: (whereof many
thousands feel the want) so without ceasing you would praise and magnify him
for the same. And as you are so nearely joined together, not only by reason of
your possessions, but especially by the bond of marriage that you are brethren
and sisters: that so you would join together in the sincere profession of the
glorious gospel of the son of God, and so go forward more and more in
practice thereof: that the gospel (being rooted in your hearts) it may bring
forth sanctification, the true seal of your adoption, that you may feel his
goodness in the assurance of that everlasting and heavenly truth. Beware of
these two cankers I beseech you, that corrupt the whole world, I mean, pride
and covetousness: Let them not once be named among you as becomes saints.
Ephesians. 5.3. Col. 3.5.
A day will come, when the Lord will fill your hope with better things then all this world can give you. Stand fast in his truth in these slippery days, and
above all, let his glory, and the advancement of his word, be dear and
precious unto you. In Gods matters, let his will be the rule thereof, and not
your own wisdom and affections, Examine your selves often by it, and neglect
not the pure preaching of the same. Delight in the law of the Lord and be good
examples to others. Care not for the contempt of the world, but hold fast a
good conscience, that you may be approved of God. And our Lord Jesus Christ
give you the forgiveness of all your sins, and the peace and comfort of your
conscience. The Lord let all his blessings fall upon you, that you may see
the riches and treasures of his mercy: that you may be filled with all
fullness with the spirit: that you may behold the glory of the kingdom of god,
and those things be revealed unto you by his spirit, which he has prepared
for them that love him. Amen.

The third day of December, Anno. 1586. Yours for ever to command in the Lord,
John Frewen.

To the Christian Reader.
THE matter and substance of this book as I nothing fear to offer and
commend unto thee (gentle Reader) for thy profitte and instruction in the
ways of the Lord, being fully assured that it is the sincere truth of God,
and the perfect path way unto salvation, firmly grounded upon the rock
Christ, and sufficiently warranted, according to the writings of the holy
Prophets and Apostles: so the Method and manner of setting (some part) of it
down is not (I must needs confess) so exquisite and orderly, as I my self
desire and as thou (being learned) may easily perceive and discern. One
especial cause of this want is this: when I wrote it first, I had no purpose
nor intent, that it should at any time come so publicly unto thy hands. Other
excuses I could allege which (if thou knew) would seem (I doubt not) very
reasonable unto thee. Notwithstanding to avoid offense (as much as I can) and
to the end this might be noe hinderance to thy godly desire: I thought good
to annexe this table, whereby thou may easily find the principal matters
comprehended in this book. And so brotherly entreating thee with z^^le and
diligence to accept and profit in the one, and charitably to bear with the
other: I heartily commend thee unto the Lord.

Thine in Christ Io. Fr.

A table necessarily describing in what sentence or doctrine, the principal
matters (contained in this book) may easily be found.
A
Affliction. IF we will follow Christ, we must suffer affliction. page 6.

The Godly are joyful in affliction. page 182

Afflictions come by the providence of God. page 183. and 184.

Afflictions be the rods of God to the just. page 185

Afflictions come for diverse causes. page 187

Patience overcomes afflictions. page 188

The patience of the faithful is tried by Afflictions. page 190

Anger. Anger is to be avoided with hatred and envy. page 69

Angry words and thoughts forbidden. page 70

Of anger and the effects thereof. page 74

Apostles. Succession is nothing without the doctrine of the Apostles. page 281


B
Baptism. Of Baptism. page 325

Fruitful doctrines concerning Baptism. page 326

The grace of regeneration figured in Baptism. page 328

When Baptism was ordained. page 330

Papisticall untruths concerning Baptism. page 331

Why we are baptized and eat the supper. page 332

Bind seek Remit. Body and Blood. How the true body of Christ must be
received. page 335. and 337

The wicked do not eat the body of Christ. page 350

How the body and blood of Christ is truly received. page 337


C
Chance. Nothing comes by chance or fortune. page 203

Christ. Chist is the true shepherd. page 14

Christ the only mediator and why so called. page 17

Jesus Christ must sanctify our prayers. page 16

Faith in Christ. page 134

Christ has freed us from the law. page 145

The spirit of Christ dwells in Christians. page 155

The fruit of our communion with the death of Christ. page 159

Of Christ his person and office his priesthood and kingdom. page 227

How we ought to know and confess Christ. page 228

Christ is the lively image of the Father. page 230

Why our Savior Christ came in the flesh. page 232

Faith in Christ the mean of our salvation. page 233

We are justified by the grace of God in Christ and not by works. page 236

Prayers to Saints is repugnant to the mediatorship of Christ. page 274

Christ is the only intercessor with the Father. page 277

The Papists will have Christ to be in part a Savior. page 278

Contrariety between the religion of Christ and the Pope. page 280

The right applying of Christ's sufferinges and sacraments to our benefitte.
page 323

Of the presence of Christ in the supper. page 344

Christ feeds us with his substance. page 346

Of the second coming of Chrst. page 360

Christ is the Apostle of our profession. page 363

Christian. The liberty of a true Christian. page 151

The first point of a true Christian. page 152

A true Christian is partly under the law, and partly under grace. page 154

Christians must be constant. page 157

The duty of Christians. page 158

Three marks of a Christian soldier. page 369

A note to know a true Christian. page 153

Church. The description of the invisible Church and visible. page 285

The Church may err. page 287

The name of the Church abused by wolves. page 288

Commandment. The exposition of the 6. commandment. page 67

Of the 7. Commandment. page 76

Of the 8. Commandment. page 88

Of the 9. Commandment. page 103

Of the last Commandment. page 115

Concupiscence. Concupiscence restrained by the Papists. page 222

Concupiscence without consent is sin. page 125

Conscience. Faith and a good conscience the armor of the faithful. page 8

Covet and covetousness What is meant by the word Covet. page 116

Against Covetousness and usury. page 94


D.
Die. To be partakers of the life of Jesus Christ we must first suffer with
him. page 191

Deeds. In evil deeds left undone, and in good deeds done we may be
deceived. page 127

Devil seek Satan. Doctrine. The doctrine of freewill is an arrogant
doctrine. page 251. and 253

False doctrine concerning invocation. page 276

With what doctrine ministers must be furnished. page 303

The agreement of the Popish doctrine with the Apostles. page 351


E
Egypt. What signifies the deliverance out of Egypt. page 31

Envy look anger. Essence. The unity of Essence is not taken away by the
distinction of persons. page 219


F
Faith and faithful. Faith is a precious treasure. page 8

The means to enjoy faith alwais. page 9

Faith is not without prayer. page 10

Faith it is that justifies. page 23

Through Faith our sins are forgiven. page 215

How Faith does justify. page 237

Faith does justify 3. manner of ways. page 244

Faith is the means whereby remission of sin is promised. page 176

The meaning of being justified by Faith. page 246

Of free justification by Faith with out works. page 249

Diverse kinds of Faith. page 271

Faith is the mouth of the soul whereby Christ is eaten. page 342

We must have an assured faith and a contented mind. page 101

The faithful are surely settled in Gods providence. page 211

The Faithful are better contented with a little, then the ungodly with great
abundance. page 366

Faultiness. Three degrees of Faultiness in sin without the act. page 170

Favor. The Favor of God the fountain of consolation. page 212

Flesh. There dwells no goodness in our flesh. page 380

The Flesh lusts contrary to the spirit, page 382

Fornication. Fornication is forbidden. page 77

Freewill look Will.
G.
God. Of the true knowledge of God. page 216

God has not elected every one. page 4

The godhead and power of God are seen and how. page 217

God is the creator of all things. page 222

Gods grace is the only stay and repayrer of all things. page 221

Of the true worship of God. page 30

We must worship God alone. page 33

We must worship God according to his word. page 39

God and not Images is to be worshipped. page 37

God defends those that are his. page 7

The foundation of God abides sure. page 136

God will try and prove our hearts. page 138

The word of God abides for ever. page 139

There is no change in God page 146

We are assured of the favor of god page 149

God is not the author of sin. page 161. 163

God has his elect in all countries. page 136

The will of God is always just, although we se not the reason thereof. page
214

All must be forsaken for Gods sake. page 193

Godly and ungodly. The providence of God increases the patience of the godly.
page 200

The ungodly are not content with their abundance. page 366

Gospel. The Gospel a necessary witness of our salvation. page 18

We are called by the gospel. page 18

The dignity of the gospel. page 133

The Gospel encourages to godliness. page 134

Of the Gospel, and how it must be preached. page 306

Grace We cannot deserve grace by our works. page 239

Grace election, vocation etc. page 267

The first step to Gods grace is to confess our sin. page 165

Ground. We must not hide our talent under the ground.. page 372


I
Idolatry. Idolatry is enemy to the true service of God. page 36

Images Images are forbidden in the law of God. page 34

Iniquity. How God does visitte the iniquities of the fathers upon the
children. page 40

Justification The Papists cannot be persuaded of free justification. page 2^3


L
Law The end of the Law. page 20

The use of the Law. page 24

The law and the gospel. page 25. 26

Difference between the law and the Gospel. page 27

Of the 2 Table of the Law page 61

No man fulfilleth the law thoroughly. page 128

No man justified by the deeds of the Law. page 131

Liar Against slaunderers and liars. page 107

Love Love is a token of adoption. page 12

Love the fruit of faith, page 21

Lust seek Coucupiscence
M
Magistrates. Of Magistrates, and how we must obey them. page 65

Malice, seek Anger. Man and means Of the fall of man. page 224

The first means that man had to be delivered. page 225

The second means. page 226

Marriage and Married folk. Of Marriage and why it was instituted. page 82

The Papists opinion concerning Marriage. page 84

Of Married solkes. page 80

Merit and deserve, We cannot merit gods favor. page 15

Ministers. What Ministers ought to be in the Church. page 290

The title of the Ministry page 291

What every Minister ought to preach. page 296

The office of Ministers, and how men ought to behave themselves toward them.
page 298

The calling of the Ministry. page 302

The true duty of the Ministers of the Gospel. page 294

Diversity of gifts among Ministers. page 305

Murder seek Anger.
N
Name We must not take the name of God in vain. page 43

The name of God must be used with reverence. page 44

Nature. We are utterly blind by Nature. page 354

Neighbor. What is meant by the word Neighbor. page 118

We must apply our thoughts, delits and desires to profit our Neighbor. page
120

Negligence, Gods election must not be a cause of Negligence. page 5


O
Obey We must obey our Superiors and Magistrates. page 63

Original sin. What ought to be considered in original sin. page 168

Original sin Look Sin.
P
Papists, Pope, and Popish. The blasphemy of the Papists concerning sin.
page 171

The doctrine of the Papists repugnant to the scriptures page 374

Pastor A right image of a godly Pastor. page 254

Patience True patience what it is page 197

Patience is a great virtue page 196

The Providence of God increases the patience of the godly. page 198

Power We have no power of our selves to serve God. page 137

Prayer. Prayer is a proof of faith. page 10

How the way is opened for us to pray. page 143

Preach, and Preacher, seek Minister and Gospel. Providence The Providence of
God. page 202

The providence of God is a great secret. page 199

Gods providence is over all. page 200

Nothing comes by fortune, but by Gods providence. page 203. 208

God by his providence preserves all. page 205

The right considering of Gods providence. page 206

The Providence of God is not only general. page 209


R
Real Against the real presence in the Sacrament. page 348

Redemption The price of our redemption. page 12

The end of our redemption page 13

Remission and Remit. Four things that concur in remission of sins. page
178

No remission but in Christ. page 272

The keys of the kingdom of heaven are all one with the power of binding and
loosing of remitting and reteyning sins. page 377

Repentance. What repentance is. page 308

Repentance is necessary to make pure the conscience. page 310

Repentance is the gift of God. page 312

How we ought to repent. page 313

The qualities of Repentance. page 314

Riches. Of Riches and how they hurt. page 97

How Riches ought to be used. page 99


S
Saboth. Of the Saboth day. page 51

The spiritual Saboth. page 53

The ceremonious use of the Saboth. page 55

The end of the Saboth. page 57

How we ought to profit by the Saboth, page 59

Sacraments. Of Sacraments, and what a sacrament is. page 316

A Sacrament consists of three parts. page 318

The beginning of sacraments is from God. page 320

why sacraments were ordained page 321

How many sacraments there be. page 325

Saints. Of prayer to Saints, page 274

Salvation. The foundation of our salvation. page 1

The cause of our salvation, is the mercy of God. page 2

Salvation comes by faith. page 241

Satan Satan a continual enemy to them that fear God. page 6

How Satan has bewitched the Papists. page 373

Scripture It is not sufficient to read the Scripture. page 140

The Scripture is profitable. page 141

The Scripture is deuinly inspired. page 142

The Scriptures must be read with reverence. page 143

The drift of the scriptures. page 149

Season. It is not for us to know the times and Seasons. page 358

Sin. Sin does possess our whole nature. page 181

God is not the author of Sin. page 161. 163. 164.

The first step to the grace of God is to confess our Sins. page 166

Sin is not of Gods creation, but of the devils procurement. page 167

What ought to be considered in original Sin. page 168

The blasphemy of Papists concerning Sin page 171

Sin does bring death with it. page 173

We must confess our Sins to God. page 174

Through faith our Sins are forgiven. page 215

The means whereby remission of Sins is promised. page 176

Four things that concur in remission of Sin. page 178

Of binding and loosing, of re^eyning and remitting Sin. page 377

Slaunderer. Against Saunderers and liars. page 105

We must not uphold the Slaunderer. page 117

Sobriety. Christians must be continent, sober, chaste, and modest page 158

Soul. Faith is the mouth of the Soul, whereby Christ is eaten. page 342

Soldier. Three marks of a Christian Soldier. page 369

Spirit. The spirit of Christ dwells in Christians. page 155

The Spirit of faith is the Spirit of love. page 22

The Spirit strives contrary to the flesh. page 382

Stealing. Diverse sort of stealing. page 90

Succession. Succession is nothing without the doctrine of the Apostles. page
281

Succession proves nothing. page 283

Superior look Maiestrates. Supper. Of the Lords Supper. page 334

The right use and meaning of the Lords Supper. page 22^

Swearing. We must not swear at all. page 46

Swearing must be utterly excluded. page 49


T
Table. How we ought to be prepared to the Table of the Lord. page 341

Of the second Table of the law. page 61

Talent. We must not hide our Talent under the ground. page 372.

Tribulation. Tribulation brings forth patience. page 194

Tribulation. Seek affliction. Time look Season.
V
Unity. The Unity of essence is not taken away by the distinction of persons.
page 219

Virtue and Vice. We can neither attain virtue nor vice, by our freewill. page
254

The word of God is a great virtue. page 356

Vocation. Vocation after purpose. page 269

Usury seek covetousness.
VV.
Will. The Will of God must be our direction. page 135 and 147

Our will is utterly blind til God has changed us. page 257

Of Freewill. page 250

The doctrine of Freewill is an arrogant doctrine. page 251

The doctrine of Freewill is blasphemous. page 253

Opinion of Freewill is unthankfulness. page 255

We can neither attain virtue nor eschew vice, by our own Freewill. page 254

Man has no freewill to do good. page 258. 260

Freewill overthrown. page 179. 265

Freewill and the law, without grace can do nothing. page 262

Freewill highly extolled of the Papists. page 264

Wisdom. The perfection of wisdom. page 10

The fear of God is true wisdom. page 364

Witness. Of true and false witnesses. page 109

What it is to bear false witness. page 104

Word. The word of God abides for ever. page 131

We must worship God according to his word. page 39

Popish satisfactions are not warranted by Gods word. page 179

The word of God is a great virtue. page 356

The cause why the word of God is despised. page 357

Wrong. We must abstain from wrong and injury. page 72

Against wrong and oppression, page 92


FINIS.
FRUITFUL INstructions and necessary doctrines meet to edify in the fear of
God
1 The foundation of our salvation.
THE holy Ghost says by the mouth of the Apostle Paul in his second chap.
unto the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2.8. Col. 1.19
that we are saved by faith. For we know not that God is our father: we know
not that we are reconciled to him, but only by the preaching of Faith:
whereby we lay hold on the promises of the gospel, and wherein God shows
that he is well pleased toward us through our Lord Jesus Christ. And thus we
attain to the possession of our salvation by faith, and yet there is none that
gives us faith but God only, Phil. 1, 29.
and the reason wherefore he gives it unto us, is this: because it has pleased
him to chose us before we were made yea before the world it self wa^ made, as
the Apostle shows in the first unto the Ephesians. In which place, verse. 3.4
1. Pet. 1.2.
he sets that before us, which is, or ought to be most familiar and known
unto us, as namely, that God has made us pertakers of heavenly blessings in
Christ Jesus, and that forgeuing us our sins he shows that we are
acceptable unto him. and that he has taken us to be his children.

2 The cause of our salvation, is the mercy of God,
IN the salvation of the godly, there is nothing to be sought for, above the
goodness of God. For seeing we are all comprehended in this race of Adam,
which has nothing in it, but corruption and sinfulness, and therefore wholly
subject unto Satan what goodness is it, that God can find in us? And what
can he fores^ in us, but only sin? Ephesians. 2.3.
So that is is certain, that God does not choose men, to take them into the
number of his children, because he foresaw them to be better then those,
which he forsook and rejected: Deu. 4.37 and 7, 8 Psalm. 44.3. Io. 15.16. Act.
13.48
but it must needs be that his goodness and mercy bare the cheifest swaie
herein. without any other consideration. Of his own free mercy and grace, of
his own will in Christ his son, he has chosen and preferred unto life whom
he will have to be saved and accounted among the just. Before the children
were borne, and when theye had neither done good nor evil (that the purpose of
God might remain according to election, not by works, To, 9.11.12.
but by him that calls) it was said unto her, The elder shall serve the
younger. He has chosen us in himself, Ephesians. 1, 4.5 1. Pet. 1.2.
before the foundation of the world was laid, that we should be holy, and
without blame, before him in love etc. Seeing then that the mercy and grace of
God, do go before election as ye cheifest cause thereof: it is manifest that
all the works of the Law, and deserts whatsoever, are excluded, Iam. 3.8 Mat 3.9
whether they go before faith, or follow after. The Lord your God is God of
gods and Lord of Lords, Deu. 10 17. Act. 10.34. Job. 34.9. Ephesians. 6.9.
a great God, mighty and terrible which accepts no persons, nor takes
reward. How much less to him that accepts not the persons of Princes, and
regards not the rich more then the poor? for they be all the works of his
hands.

3 God has not elected every one.
THe Lord is debtor unto no man: It is of his free mercy, whatsoever he gives
unto man He may bestow his benefits upon whom he will. I will show mercy unto
whom I will show mercy, Ex. 33.19.
and I will have compassion, on whom I will have compassion. In the which words
he notes, the highest cause of bestowing grace, namely, his voluntary decree
and withal he insinuates, that he has appointed his mercy peculierlie for
certain, and yet God in rejecting whom he will, is not only without blame,
but also wonderful in his wisdom and justice. To. 9.17. To. 9.21
Has not the potter power of the claye, to make of the same lump one vessel
to honor, and another to dishonor? The causes of reprobation are hid in the
eternal and unsearchable counsel of God: the righteousness whereof we ought
rather to worship, the^ curiously to seek after. Whatsoever is in any
creature, it is the ministry of the power of God. The faithful being vessels
of mercy, are made instruments to set forth the mercy of the Lord: and the
reprobate being vessels of wrath: are predestinate to show forth the
judgments of God, and both the one and the other to his everlasting glory.

4 Gods election must not be a cause of negligence.
IF God has bestowed any grace upon us, and has assured us of our salvation
in Christ by means of his holy spirit: yet must we not thereby take occasion
to be secure and negligent: Ephesians. 2.10. 1. Pet. 1.13 14.15. 1. These. 4.7. Tit.
2.11 12.
but rather be stirred so much the more earnestly, to walk in holiness, and
to attain unto that, whereunto God calls us. And although it consists not
in any mortal man's power to disapoint the council which God has established
from above: yet if we be careless, we do as much as lies in us, to make of
none effect the purpose of God.

5 Satan is a continual enemy to them that fear God.
IT is a common thing not only to them that have charge to preach the
Gospel, but also to all the faithful to be continuallye assaulted of Satan,
when they would serve God, Luke 22.31 1. The 2.18 1. Pet. 5.8. To. 8.7.
And it is also certain, that we have as many enemies which do endeavor to
turn us aside from the following of God and of his word, as we have thoughts
and affections: and therefore it is required that we be well armed with the
knowledge of the Gospel to fight as well against nature, as against an infinite
number of temptations which Satan has always ready at hand.

6 If we will follow Christ; we must suffer affliction.
Seeing our Lord Jesus Christ is our head and captain, it cannot be, but that
our life must be as a continual fight, For Satan who is a deadly enemy to
the son of God, 2. Tim. 3.12.
will never leave the members of Christ in rest, but will torment and vex
them, so that we shall have nothing but disquietnesse in this life: And
therefore we must take good courage in him that has overcome the world, Io.
16.13.
and our trust in him must be such, that we do not doubt, but that the
victory which he has gotten, is gotten for us.

7 God defends those that are his.
THe fight of the faithful is a good fight, for God does reach forth his
hand unto them, Psalm. 18.2. 1. Tim. 6.12 2. Tim. 4.7.
and the victory is already prepared for them: And therefore although the
world be froward, and although it will always resist the truth and troble
them that bring it, yet in the end hypocrisy shall be confounded, and the rage
and hatred of the hipocrits shall serve to give a greater glass and light to
the virtue which God gives unto his word.

8 Faith, and a good conscience, the armor of the faithful.
THe true servant of God must be furnished with faith and a good conscience,
if they will fight under the banner of our Lord Jesus Christ: And moreover it
is chiefly required in the ministers of the gospel that they continue in pure
doctrine, 2. Tim. 1.18.19 1. Tim. 3 9. 2. Tim. 2 15.
that they find not out false imaginations, neither go astraye from true
religion, but that they have right uprightness in them: And so generallye all
the faithful must not only have a zeal to serve God, but they must be
defenced with good doctrine, and their cheifest rule must be that God may be
honored.

9 Faith is a precious treasure.
FAith is a treasure which is well worthy to be kept. For it is the stay
that holds us up, Act. 15.9 1. Pet. 1.9 1. Pet. 5.9
it is the prop of our salvation, if we be not well grounded in faith, we shall
quiklie sink into the bottomless pit of hell, Io. 5.24
and therefore as the men of this world are careful to lay up their gold and
silver (which are but corruptible metals) safe and in sure keeping so ought we
to be much more careful to lay up this treasure of faith in a good
conscience. For it is a thing far more precious, and deserves to be more
embraced and maintained.

10 The means to enjoy faith always,
IF we will enjoy faith, not only for a little time but for ever: We must
go forward with reverence. When God has once showed us the way of salvation,
there must be no hypocrisy in us, but the true humility of the mind. Io.
8.31. Iam. 1.25
We must not be lightheaded to be carried away with our violent lusts, nor
yet double hearted, to mock God and to despise his grace: and so may we be
sure, that God will give us such a constancy and steedines, as shall never be
ouerco^e: although all the temptations in the world do rise up against us, To.
^.38.
yet God will always keep us, for our salvation is in his hand, and he has
promised to be our keeper and faithefull protector.

11 Prayer is a proof of Faith.
The chiefest exercise that the children of God have, is to pray unto God. For
prayer is a good proof of our faith when we have recourse unto our God and
call upon his name, Pro. 15.29. Mat. 21 22. To. 12.12 2. Tim. 2.1 2 Iam. 5.15.
and do not only think and have care of our selves but our charity must
reach it self toward al, both small and great, whether they be of our
familiar freindes, and nighe acquaintance or whether they be strangers and such
as we do not know.

12 Faith is not without prayer.
IT is a true token that we have profited in the word of God, if so be that we
have an earnest desire and affection to pray unto God, and so that our souls
do (as it were) breathe and thirst after it from day to day: for that man,
which says that he trusts in God and believes the Gospel, and in the
mean while makes no account of prayer: he shows himself to be but a
scorner and an hipocrit. Ps. 34.13 Coll. 4.2. Luc. 18.1. 1. These. 5.17.
For if we receive the promises of God, and if we be assured of that which
he says, we must then seek him, for as he promises to be our father and
savior, so he calls us unto him, he reaches out his hand unto us, he
seeks nothing, but as we are called to the knowledge of his truth: so we
should come and pray him to accomplish those things which we have hoped for at
his hands. And theerfore al they that are negligent to pray unto God, do give
a great token that they never tasted of his promises.

13 Of Prayer.
We must not only pray for the faithful which are our brethren already,
but for them that are very far of (as the poor infidels and unbelievers)
although there seem to be a great distaunce and difference between both, yet
must we notwithstanding have pity and compassion upon their destruction, to
the end that we may pray unto God that he would draw them unto him self.

14 Love is a token of Adoption,
GOD has adopted us to be his children, if we be the members of his son
Jesus Christ. which cannot be, unless we be joined together in brotherlye
love one toward another. If we separate our selves from them whom God will have
to be his own, Io. 13.35. 1. Io. 3.15 1. Io. 4.20
we divide in sunder (as much as lies in us) the body of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and so banishe our selves from the kingdom of heaven.

15 The price of our redemption.
Whereas sin, Satan, death Hell and dampnation held us in captivity, we
are now delivered from the tirannie of all the^ by Christ Jesus crucified.
First he overcame sin, when being the son of God, in the shape of a
reprochefull man, as an innocent lamb deserving no punishment and yet
suffering most cruel punishment and bitter death, gave himself a full and
perfect sacrifice for our sins. And when sin was by his death and passion
destroyed: death also in the same victory was disarmed and maimed: 1. Cor.
15.56
For sin is the sting of death, and when death had lost his sting and was
conquered in Christ's resurrection from death: Satan also lost his strength and
power which only rested upon them which through sin were in danger to death:
To. 6.1^
for the reward of sin is death. Finally because hell only deuoureth those
which through sin and death are slaves unto satan it follows that when the
other three were by him so mightily vanquished: hell also with all the danger
thereof was subdued, and we delivered from all their tirannie.

16 The end of our redemption.
Our Lord Jesus Christ has paid the price of our redemption, and has
delivered us from the captivity of sin, satan death and hell, that we might
walk before him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. Luc.
1.75. To. 6, 3.
Moreover we are baptized into the death of Christ and as we are pertakers of
his death so should we be pertakers of his resurrection: to the end that as
Christ is risen from death: so also we should rise from the death of sin,
unto the life of righteousness. 1. Pet. 3.7. Romans 8.17
Furthermore by the benefit of Christ's passion we are made heirs of God with
him, and children of light. And therefore we should walk according to our
calling and have no fellowship with the works of darkness, neither pass our
time in vain delights, but put on the lord Jesus Christ, and not satisfy the
lusts and desires of the flesh. We are also by profession citizens of
heaven, Ephesians. 2.19.
and of the household of God: our conversation therefore should be in heaven
with a manifest declaration of the contempt of this miserable world, and the
transitory vanities in the same.

17 Christ is the true shephearde.
Our Lord Jesus Christ has promised that if we hold him for our shepherd, he
will not suffer the Devil to have any advantage of us, but he will dispense the
virtue and power of God his father which shall overcome all his enemies, Io.
10.11. Eze. 34.23. Esa. 40.11
and therefore we shall be well defended if we have Jesus Christ to be our
captain and guide. For the which cause we must learn of him to be Sheep,
and to walk in his obedience, and to commit our selves to his protection: and
that we may do so, we must consider the frailty that is in us: For when we
once know that we should quickly be overcome of Satan, if we were not vpholden
and maintained by a greater virtue: it will be as a spur unto us to move us to
have our whole recourse unto GOD, and to call upon him with alhumblenes and
carefulnes.

18 We cannot merit Gods favor.
IF we stand in talk of acquiting our selves before God it is certain that
we can find nothing in our selves worthy such a reconciliation or that may
come any thing near it. And therefore it stands us upon to search our need
and want in Christ Jesus, how by the price of his blood we are reconciled to
God his father, Io. 15.5 2, Cor. 3.5
and that we have free access given unto us, so that we may boldly and
confidently call upon him.

19 Jesus Christ must sanctify our prayers.
SO often as the faithful do settle themselves to pray unto GOD, they must
know that all their prayers must be sanctified and consecrated by the blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ. For if in prayer we do not ground our selves upon the
grace of the only Mediator, that was given us, we must needs be in doubt
and perplexity, all our prayers are polluted and unclean: There is no mean
to sanctify them and to make them stand good and steadfast before God, unless
they be watered by the blood of Christ, Iam. 1.6 Mat. 11 24
as the scripture also shows that if we pray not in Faith and certainty, we
shall never profitte any thing at all. When we come unto God we must be out of
doubt that we pray (as it were) by his mouth, and his will must be a rule that
can never deceive us, He. 11.6
so that we may not swerve from it the least iott that may be, neither to the
right hand nor to the left. For God will not be prayed unto, but after his own
will, and not according to the fantastes of men.

20 Christ the only mediator, and why so called.
Our Savior Christ is not only called a Mediator in respect hereof that he
reconciled us to God by his death at once, But because he appears now
before the Majesty of God, to the end that we might be heard by his means. 1.
Tim. 2.5
For these are two things which cannot be sundred, as namely the death and
passion of the son of God, and that he now makes intercession for us.

Moreover, Jesus Christ is called the only Mediator, not only, because he
now makes intercession for us, but also because he suffered death for us, and
therefore we cannot give this office unto the saints, but we must make them
our redemers, and so cast Christ clean away the which is an horrible
blasphemy,

21 The Gospel a necessary witness of our salvation.
IT were to small purpose that Jesus Christ had redeemed us from everlasting
death, and had shed his blood to reconcile us to God, unless we were
certified of this benefitte by means of the Gospel, for it is faith that
brings us into possession of this salvation: And although we find it not but
in the person of our Lord Jesus and we must needs come thither: yet if we have
not this keye of faith, Jesus Christ shall be (as it were) strange unto us,
and all that he suffered will nothing at all profit us, as indeed it does not
the^ belong unto us

22 We are called by the Gospel.
Whenever the Gospel is preached, we have to know and consider, that it is
to make us pertakers of Jesus Christ that being ingrafted in him, Heb. 2.11.
we might have part and portion in all his riches and whatsoever he has may
be ours. For seeing it has pleased him once to become our brother, we need
not doubt but in taking upon him our poor and wretched estate, he has made
such an exchange with us, that we might be rich in him. By the preaching of
the Gospel, God calls us unto himself and it will be neither in vain, nor
lost labor if we come accordingly.

23 The perfection of Wisdom.
GOD has given us the perfection of wisdom in the holy scriptures: and
therefore no man should give himself to fables and foolish questions, which
are not profitable to edification, but cleave fast and content himself with
the word of God, and with the truth of doctrine contained in the same. For
the which cause we are commanded to try all things, 1. Th. 5.21
and keep that which is good. For the Devil cannot so culour his lies and
deceipts, but when we come to the touchstone of the word of God, we shall
then know, what is to be received, and how we may well discern it from false
doctrines, and from the forged and counterfaite practices of men's devises.

24 The end of the Law.
THE Law of God does not only teach us how we ought to live with our
neighbors being conuersaunt with them, without deceit, malice, or violence,
and how to serve God in holiness and righteousness: 1, Tim. 1.5
but the cheifest end of the law, is to lead us to Christ, to seek our
salvation in him. For it has pleased God to receive us into his favor by the
means of his only son, because we are washed and made clean from our
filthiness, 1. Cor. 6 11
because he has paid our debtes, whereby we were in danger to everlasting
death: And finally because we cannot be justified by the deeds of the law,
or our own merits, To. 5.1 Gal. 3.10
but by the free goodness of our God. The law conteyneth nothing contrary to
the Gospel, and if we consider rightly, we shall find that the Gospel is a
simple expounding of that which Moses preached before: and although there
was a darkness in the shadows and figures of the law: And that God was not
in some respect so gracious unto the old fathers as unto us: yet
notwithstanding the substance of the Gospel is drawn from thence, 1. Tim. 1.5
Heb. 11.2.
and we have the same faith which they had that lived before the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Great cause have we therefore to profit in the Law of
God, and to take heed we lose not so great a treasure.

25 Love the fruit of Faith.
Love proceeds from faith which carries with it a good conscience and a pure
heart and so is love the fruit of Faith: whereby we know that which is
secret. Moreover we must know that faith is not a wandering opinion, it
consists not in talking well: but it is a lively knowledge rooted in the
heart, for therein God offers himself unto us and will have us for our parts
to come unto him.

26 The spirit of Faith, is the spirit of love,
THe same spirit, which is the spirit of Faith and persuades our consciences
to believe the unspeakable goodness and mercy of God toward us in Christ
Jesus, is also the spirit of love, and enflameth our hearts earnestly to love
so bountiful and so merciful a God, that vouchsafed (when we were yet his
enemies) to give his dearlye beloved son to death for us. Io. 3.16 1. Io.
4.9.10
Now, if by the motion of one spirit we do by faith assuredly know Gods
goodness toward us, and by the knowledge and true sense thereof do love him
for the same: needs must there follow obedience to his will, and perpetual
study to please him. Io. 14.13
Faith then of necessity brings forth love, and love brings forth
obedience to his will. He that loves me (says our savior Christ) keeps my
sayings. This love then should lead us to obedience this love should be the
root of all good doings, and not of a proud hope to merit Gods favor and
everlasting life by our own good works. Luc. 17.10


For when we have done all that we can do (as Christ witnesses) we have
not (yet) done so much as of duty we should do.

27 Faith it is that justifies.
HE shows himself to be a preposterous interpreter of the law, who seeks
to be justified by the works thereof: because the Law was given to this end,
that it might lead us by the hand to another righteousness, Whatsoever the
Law teaches, whatsoever it commands, whatsoever it promises, To. 5.1 To.
10.4 Gal. 3.24.
it has Christ always for his mark, and therefore all the parts thereof are
to be directed unto him, And that cannot be, unless we being spoiled of all
righteousness, confounded with the knowledge of sin, do seek for free
righteousness of him only. For although the law of righteousness does
promise a reward to his obseruers: Yet after it has brought all under
giltinesse, it substituteth a new righteousness which is not gotten by the
merit of works, To. 3, 20.
but being freely given, is received by faith.

28 The use of the Law.
THe Law is given to condemn us, to the end we should seek salvation in our
Lord Jesus Christ forasmuch as in our selves there is nothing but condemnation.
And although the children of God are exempt and set at liberty from the curse
thereof, by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, insomuch as he has put out
the hand writing of ordinances that was against us, Col. 2.14.
and fastened the same upon the cross, to the end that when we shall come
before the judgment seat of God, we might be acquitted and discharged: yet
notwithstanding because of our manifold corruptions and superfluities: God
applies his law to stir us up to goodness, and to correct our vices that our
hearts should not be hardened: ^ therefore we ought to submit our selves
unto it willingly, and not be like unto the wicked which must be
constreyned thereunto by force.

29 The Law and the Gospel.
THe Law was given after a fearful and terrible manner, and it brought
nothing but death and cursing: And the Gospel brings us life and salvation.
In the law there was (as it were) a veil and covering, Ex. 19.18. Deu. 4.11.
and God spoke (as it were) in a shadow, but in the Gospel he reuealeth
himself face to face, and not only in a natural image but to the end that
we should have our shape turned into his glory, and that we should profitte
therein from day to day. In the gospel we have the sum of righteousness as
says the Prophet Malachie, Mal. 4.2.
wherein God says not that he will make his word as a lamp as before in
the Law: but it is said that the sun of righteousness shall arise, and under
his wings shall be perfect health as the Apostle also declares, that the
doctrine which is now set forth is not dark and obscure. For God has in
such sort taken order for what soever was expedient for the perfection of our
saluatyon that we see clearlie in the doctrine of the gospel, what soever is
necessary and requisite for us we need not any more go seek the stars,
seeing we have the Sun that shines so brightlie: and therefore let us learn
to be content with the Gospel, forasmuch as God has given us such a
direction as he knows meet for our salvation.

30 The Law and the Gospel,
THe Law shows us our sin, the Gospel shows us remedy for it The Law
shows us our condemnation, To. 3.20 Io. 1, 29 To. 7.7 Col. 1.6 To. 4.15. Act.
14.3. Io. 1.29. To. 5.10
the Gospel shows us our redemption. The Law causes wrath, the gospel is
the word of grace: the law is the word of despair, the gospel is the word
of comfort, The Law says pay thy debt, the gospel says, Christ has paid
it. The Law says thou art a sinner, despair and thou shall be damned: the
gosple says thy sins are forgiven thee, be of good comfort, thou shall be
saved. The law says, make amends for thy sin? the gospel says, Christ has
made it for thee. The law says, the father of heaven is angrye with thee, the
gospel says, Christ has pacified him with his blood. The Law says where is
thy righteousness goodness and satisfaction: the Gospel says, Christ is
thy righteousness goodness, and satisfaction: The law says thou art bound
and endebted to me, The gospel says, Christ has delivered thee from them
all. He that believes not Gods word, believes not God him self, the Gospel
is Gods word, therefore he that believes not the gospel, believes not god
himself.

31 Difference between the Law and the Gospel.
THere is nothing more necessary and comfortable for troubled consciences then
to be well instructed in the diffecence between the Law and the gospel: and
therefore is the church of Rome much to blame in this behalf, because it
confounds together these two, being in nature so diverse and contrary one
from the other: as threatenings and promises, things te^porall with things
eternal: soroweful things with glade tidings, death with life, bondage with
freedom etc. teaching the people that whatsoever the Law says, the gospel
confirms and whatsoever the gospel says, the same is agreeable to the law,
and so make they no difference between Moses and Christ, save only that Moses
(say they) was the giver of the old law, and Christ is giver of the new and
more perfect law. And thus imagine they the gospel to be nothing else, but a
new Law given by Christ bynding to the promises thereof, the condition of our
doings and deseruings, no otherwise then the old law, And so deuyde they the
whole law after this distinction into three parts the Law of nature, the law
of Moses, and the Law of Christ, And as for the Gospel, they say it is
revealed for none other cause, but to show to the world more perfect
precepts and counsels, then were in the old law: to the fulfilling whereof
they attribute justification, and so leave the poor consciences of men in
perpetual doubt, and induce other manifold errors: bringing the people into a
false opinion of Christ, as though he were not a remedy against the law but
came as an other Moses to give a new law to the world. Furthermore as they
make no difference beetweene the nature of the Law, and nature of the Gospel,
confounding Moses and Christ together: So neither do they distnict or discern
the time of the law, and the time of the Gospel a sonder. Gal. 3.24.
For where S. Paul brings in the law to be a Schoolemaister and limiteth
him his time unto Christ, and says that Christ is the end of the Law, that
is, Mat. 5.34. To. 10.4.
whereas the Law cease, there Christ begins, and where Christ begins,
there the law ends. They contrariwise make the Law to have no end nor
ceasing, but give to it immortal life and kingdom equal with Christ, so that
Christ and the law together do reign over the soul and conscience of man
which is untrue. For either Christ must give place and the law stand: or else
the law, (the condemnation and curse of the law I mean) must end and Christ
reign. For both these Christ and the Law, grace and malediction, cannot reign
and govern together.

32 Of the true worship of GOD.
The Lord our God does straight lie charge us in the first commandment of
the first table that we reserve unto him only, Ex. 20.2.3. Mal. 1.6. Mat
10.28 Ier. 10.7 Ps. 135.6.
his whole honor, not giving any part thereof to any other. That we love
and fear him above all, that we acknowledge him alone to be our governor
and guider of al things, of whom we receive all our benefittes. And finally
that we make our prayers to none other but to God alone. For inasmuch as he is
God alone, and besides him there is no other: Iam. 1.17. To. 10.14.
and can and will do all things for us, which are needful as well for our
souls as bodies. We must not go unto them which are no Gods, neither any
other where to seek those things, which ca^ be performed and given us by none
but God only. The man that will truly examine himself in this commandment,
must well consider with himself, what doubting and mistrusting he has of Gods
help in adversity, what unlawful means he has used to help him by, in
his seeldome or careless resort unto him in his prosperity, advisedly
considering that the law requiring soundness in our whole nature, as well in
thought, Deu. 27.26.
as in deed, accurseth him that continues not sound in all that is
commanded. By this means we shall be brought to see what need we have, of the
obedience and bloodshed of Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.24.
and so shall the Law be come our Schoolemaister, to bring us unto Christ.

33 What signifies the deliverance out of Aegipt
Whereas the Lord makes mention in the beginning of his law, Ex. 20.2.
of the deliverance from the bondage of Egypt: we must understand, that as
concerning the body, it is peculierly to be referred to the people of Israel:
Howbeit it does indifferently belong unto us all, in that we are redeemed by
Christ, from hell the devil, sin and death. For we are the children of Adam
by nature accursed and inheritors of death, Ephesians. 2.3,
we have nothing in us but sin, and so consequently we must needs be
accursed before God, Let men please^ magnify themselves as they list, yet
behold their birth, behold their nobility, they are but bondslaues of
Satan, they have a sink and bottomless gulf of corruption in them they are
worthy that the wrath and malediction of God should fall upon their heads,
briefly, being banished from the kingdom of heaven, they are given over to all
misery, and wretchedness. Now our Lord and God, by the hand of his son, has
hence delivered us. He has not sent a Moses, as to the people of ancient
time: but not sparing his only son, he has delivered him to death for us.
Io. 3.16.
Being then ransomed with so dear and inestimable a price, as is the holy and
sacred blood of the son of God: We ought wholly to yeald our selves unto him,
So then, in stead that it was said to the ancient people, that God had
delivered them out of the land of Egypt, it is now said, that we be redeemed
from the bondage of Satan, to live unto the Lord, To. 14.8 1. Cor. 6.19.
as the Apostle speaks, that we are not our own. Wherefore it behooves the
faithful, that they presume not on the liberty to do what seems them, and
to live every one after his own lust. For our Lord Jesus Christ therefore
died, and rose again and revived, that he might be the Lord both of the quick
and the dead. To. 14.9.
And therefore it is good reason that he should have the sovereign rule, seeing
he has not spared himself for our redemption and salvation.

34 We must worship God alone.
We are straightly forbidden of the Lord, to worship any together with him,
or to admit any worship of him, Ex. 20.3.
beside his own which he has left us in his word. The Lord would have us to
seek all good things at his hands alone, and cannot abide that we should
have other Gods before his face. For inasmuch as he has taken upon him to
care for us, and to honor himself, by showing forth the treasures of his
grace upon us, 1. Pet. 5.7.
it shall not be lawful to darken the light of his goodness, by seeking to
obtain that, Ps. 55.22.
at the hands of any other, the gift of which he has reserved to himself
alone, for the glory and praise of the riches of his grace. For let us be
assured, that whenever we seek to any other then him, for any part of our
welfare, we do (as it were) hyde the brightness of his face, that he cannot
be seen in the full show of his mercy, how he is affected toward us, while
they by stepping between, conueye some praise of the gift and mercy to
themselves. Here we see, all passage to the virgin Marie, angels or saints,
(whatsoever) to be stopped up, Mat. 11.28
and the way to God opened unto all in their necessities, to run thither
with an assured hope ease, comfort and refreshing, by reason of the promise

35 Images are forbidden in the Law of God.
BEcause there is no comparison between God, which is an everlasting spirit,
incomprehensible, and a material body, mortal, Ex. 20.4. Deuteronomy. 5.8.
corruptible and visible: therefore the Lord commands us in the second
commandment of the first table, that we should not represent him in any
visible image. He forbids not the making of all kind of images, but when
they are made to some superstitious end, as either to express the Godhead: or
by that means, to bring him somewhat nearer to us, or to our use: or to stir
up or kindle in us any kind of devotion, or as we commonly say, to put us
in a good mind,

If we come, where they are, we must not bow unto them, nor worship the^,
neither for there own sakes, which is ye grosser error: nor yet for others
whom they are made to represent, which also is bad inoughe. God is more
excellent and greater, then that he may be represented by any image. For when
as heaven and earth, and all things contained within the compass of them,
cannot represent God, much less shall vile images made with men's hands do
the same, which have neither life nor moving, nor any thing at all, like unto
the most mighty God, Esaias. 44.9 Act. 15.20 and 17.6. 1. Cor. 5.11. To. 1.23.
as witnesses the holy Ghost by the mouth of the Prophets. Furthermore the
Apostles of Christ them selves with one consent and very earnestly have
forbidden Christians the worshipping of images, and before time the holy
prophets have prophesied, that the church of Christians should have no images.

36 Idolatry is enemy to the true service of God.
Great reason it is, that we should be careful first of all to serve God, and
to yield unto him only the honor and glory which beelongeth unto him And that
we may well begin to do so, we must abhor idolatry, the which the wise man
calls vanity and lies, and so likewise do all the prophets in diverse places.
In all agee and amongst all nations, Pro. 30.8. Esa. 41.29 and 44.9. Ier. 2.5.
and 10.3.14.15. and 14.
it is, and has been usual that the idolaters (even those which are the
deuoutest) do give themselves unto dishonestie, filthiness and uncleanness,
unto oppression and crueltye, even with an unbridled lust and desire. And the
prophets also do make great complaints thereof, and do reproach the
idolaters, that they have forsaken God, an that they have their hands full of
blood. So then, if we will begin earnestly to serve God, we must begin
first to hate idolatrye, following the doctrine that Jacob gave to his
household, Genesis 35.2. Ex. 20.3.4
and God in the beginning of his Law. And heerewithall let us learn to
renounce our own wits and be willing to be brought to the knowledge of the
everlasting power and diuinitye of God, that we may glorify him as God, and
not turn away our selves from him, unto superstition and idolatry, the which
if we should do, we shall deserve to have the wroth and indignation of God,
to be powered upon our heads, as upon the wicked and ungodly, and to give us up
unto a reprobate mind, for to condemn us eternally.

37 God, and not images is to be worshipped.
AS we may not take upon us to worship any besides the Lord, no more it is
lawful for us to give any worshipp to the Lord, Ex. 20 4. Esaias. 20.4
but only that which is allowed in his word. And therefore has he
forbidden us to make any graven image, imagining that way to please him, and
to do a work acceptable in his sight.

For some of those which bow unto graven images, think and say, that the
Lord is served therein, and that they do it not unto the image, but unto the
Lord represented unto them in the same. But the Lord in the commandment,
Deu. 5.8.
forbids as well the false worship of the true God, as the giving of any
part of his true woorship unto a false God, I mean unto any besides the only
true God. It comes all from one fountain, to dare be bold to give unto him
any worship besides that which he has commanded, and to worship any other
besides himself: which thing he has in many places plainly forbidden.

And so he represseth this intolerable boldness of man, that in his own
devotion will presume to please the Lord, either in the worshipping of others
or in any other manner of worshipping him, then he himself has opened in his
word.

38 We must worship God according to his word.
WE are instructed of the Lord to do nothing as seems us, especially when
there is any question of the service of God, that we attempt nothing after our
own fantasies, but that we sollowe in all simplicity, that which he
appoints by his word, without adding of any thing unto it whatsoever. For
as soon as we shall have declined never so little herein, Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32
what ever we allege to make our cause good, God will not leave us unpunished.
For it is no vain threat when God says in this second commandment, Deuteronomy.
5.9.
that he is a Ielous God, which visits the iniquity of parents upon their
children Wherefore let us note first of all, that forasmuch as we are by nature
overmuch given to idolatry, this threatening of God, comes always before our
eyes, to the end we presume not to mingle any thing with his word, or to
devise any kind of idolatry, but that we serve him purely according to his
nature, and not according to our fantasy. Secondly we must not pretend our
good meanings, to justify that we shall have invented and devised: but
contrariwise let us remember that the principal service which God requires
is obedience. 1, Sa. 15.22 Hosea. 6.6 Mat. 9.13. and 12.7.
When we know not which is the true religion, neither can discern who is the
true God, it is no marvel if all our senses wander, and we run hither and
thither without any right directing of our ways: But when GOD has once
declared himself unto us, and we know his truth, then is there great reason,
that all our dreams fall to the ground, and that we abide steadfast in that
whereof we have knowledge. Ex. 20.5.
When God names himself to be jealous, he means thereby (without doubt) to
signify, that he will not suffer his honor to be violated, or he himself to
be robbed of that which properly belongs unto him, to have it given to
creatures, for he cannot patiently endure any such treacherye.

39 How God does visit the iniquity of the fathers upon the children.
THe Lord our God does not only threaten them which by idolatry are turned
away from his Law, in saying only that he will punish them in their own
persons, but he extends his vengeance to their whole posterity. I am (says
he) a jealous God, which punishes the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children. The which sentence at the first sight, seems to be not well
agreing to the justice of God, and also contrary to natural reason. For God
says by his Prop. Ezechiel that the son shall not bear the iniquity of the
father, Deu. 5.9. Eze. 18.20
neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son, but the
righteousness of the righteous, shall be upon him, Deuteronomy. 24.16.
and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon himself. The Lord moreover
reproves the Jews for this blasphemy which ran much in their mouth, and
whereof they had made a common proverb: Our fathers have eaten sour grapes,
Eze. 18.2.
and the childrens teeth are set on edge. But yet for all this, when the matter
shall be well considered, there will no contrariety be found in these two
places. For as concerning the place of Ezechiell, God understands no other
thing, but that those which are punished of him, cannot allege their
innocence, that they cannot say that god does them any wrong or injury, if he
use them sharply: For they shall find themselves guilty every one in his
own person, and that he shall be declared just, when every one shall se, that he
exceeds neither measure nor reason. Now this also is certain, that when God
punishes the children because of the fathers, Px. 20.5.
yet cease he not to be just in his chastisements: for the children on
their part, being well examined shall be found faulty. Psa. 61.5.
They can ^^ sooner come forth of their mothers womb, but they commit many
notable and manifest sins:, and such as might be known to the world. We are
every one of us by nature under the curse of God, so that we have no occasion
to find fault with God, when he leaves us in this estate. And as he shows
his favor toward his servant, Ephesians. 2.3,
when he does bless their posterity, so does he show his vengeance toward
the wicked, when he suffers their children to continue in their cursed state.

40 We must not take the name of GOD, in vain.
IN the third commandment of the first table, the Lord does not only forbid
us to abuse and blaspheme his blessed name by perjury: Ex. 20.7. Deu. 28.58.
Ier. 10.6. Psalm. 8.1. 1. Chr. 29.13. Deu. 18.10 11.12. Esaias. 8.19. Mal. 3.15.
Gal. 5.20. Mat. 5.34.35.36.37.
but forbids as well, all vain and superfluous oaths, he charge us to use
his name with a most high reverence, whenever we either speak or think
upon him, that we blaspheme not his name, by coniuring, witchcrafte sorcerie,
neither by cursing nor any such like: that we never swear by the name of God
in our common talk, although the matter be never so true.

For as the name of God is holy, so it behooves us to take diligent heed,
that we do not in such sort name it that either we may seem to pass lightly
of it our selves, or give to other occasion to have it in small reverence.

The name of God is unhallowed first when we think not honorablye and
worthelie of him, when we murmr against his judgments, word, and doings,
and boldly set our selves against them: and as often as we do not call upon,
and praise the name of God, when we are unthankful toward him, when we deny
his name, when we swear not only by his name but forswear our selves, and
ungodly use the power and majesty of God, his passion and wounds in horrible
cursings, The name of God is also profaned, when as it is rashlye and often
used without any profitte or necessity, as when we use the name of God in all
our saings and speaking. God requires the sanctifiing of his name, whereby we
judge well and think honorablye of him and of his works, and count nothing
more excellent, better, or more precious, then the name of our God, and that we
imagine and speak nothing of the judgments works and deeds of the Lord,
but that which is holy, because that we do not acknowledge him only to be
God, but also o^^ Lord and God.

41 The name of God must be used with reverence.
THe Lord has lent us the use of his name to determine our doubts, and decide
our controversies, that be of great importance, and cannot otherwise come to
light: and that with such reverence, as unto his honor appertains. He has
not left it to wait upon our vain words. and talk of no importance, to serve
where our humor will place it. So that men are always guilty of high treason
against his glory in the use of his name, unless both the waightines of the
matter they have in hand, and their reverence in the manner of dealing therein,
shall excuse them. A man can no way be vnreuerent toward his name, but he
shall in so doing be gilty of his dishonor. For those things wherein he has
left the marks of his glory, as his name, his word, and his sacraments: by the
use or abuse of them, do truly witness of the heart how it stands affected
toward the honoring of him. There was never man found truly honoring God in
his heart, whose tongue was defiled with usual swearing, and often vnreuerent
using of his name. The excuse therefore is vain and utterly untrue, that
swearing is but a custom^ of the tongue, and that their heart stands
reverently affected toward his name and glory. For it is the wants of
reverence in the heart to God, that fometh out such filthiness at the mouth And
the long continuance of that impudency in the heart, has brought the fruit
thereof into the mouth, which witnesses sufficiently the corruption that is
settled inwardly in the heart^ Our communicatio^ must be, yea, yea, nay nay:
that which is more comes of evil. It is unlawful to swear by any creature,
because an oath has in it, an acknowledgement of superiority and of judgment
unto that whereby we do swear, even to justify truth and to revenge falsehood
and wickedness, but much more unlawful it is to swear by Mass: Mattens,
roode or any such names and significations of idolatry.

42 We must not swear at all.
WE ought to bear such a reverence to the name of God, that al oaths be laid
aside, and banished from among us, but as necessity requires when God
suffers us to borrowe his name. Otherwise we ought to follow that form of
speech which our Lord Jesus Christ has prescribed, as handling our matters
in all simplicity: for all which is besides this, is evil, and condemned by
the Law, as namely, if we take the name of God in vain. And withal let us
note, that all superfluous oaths and those in which the name of God is not
honored as it deserves, have in them a double evil. For first, when men let
them fly so at al adventures, it is a sign that they scarce make any account
what they say, Secondly, if we consider from whence this common swearing
proceeds, we shall find that from no other thing, but that men be such
liars, so full of falsehood and deceit, that when they speak the one to the
other, none can believe that it is true which is said. So then it must needs
be, that there is in us great wickedness, considering that when God has given
us a tongue, it is in part to communicate one with another: For our tongue is
the messenger of the heart, whereby we express unto others what we have
conceived in our minds. Wherefore let us learn to use in this thing such
sobriety as God commands, and let us not swear without great necessity, and
being thereunto required: and although there are some so utterly void of
conscience and religion, that they make no account of swearing by their Faith:
yet let us know that this name of Faith cease not therefore to be in price
before God: for he holds it dear, and it is an hallowed thing unto him,
which neither can, neither ought to be unhallowed, except we will be in great
fault, and incur the danger of the threat, pronounced in this third
commandment. So it is not sufficient not to have pronounced expressly by God,
but when one swears by his faith, or takes any confirmation from that,
which has any sign of the Majesty of God his name is unhallowed in this thing
If this now be true, as (indeed) it is most true: what then shall be said of
those, which use false oaths to disguise their purposes, which swear rashlye
even to sport themselves with oaths: yea to despite God by their execrable
blasphemies, insomuch that he has neither flesh nor blood, nor any thing else
which they spare? These are not only holden faulty, for abusing the name of
God: but because they use him to the greatest, and most execrable reproach they
may do,

43 Men ought to deal together in sincerity, that swearing may be utterly
excluded.
ALL kind of oaths are unlawful, which by any abuse do profane the name of
God, to the reverence whereof they ought to serve. Men therefore ought sincerely
and in good faith commonly to bargain one with an other, because that the
simplicity and true meaning of their talk, shall be no less then an oath among
the^ which regard not sincerity. And certainly it is an excellent order in
correcting faults, to note and mark the springs out of which they flow. For
whereof comes such promptnes in swearing, but because in so great vanity, in
so many deceits, in such inconstancy and wavering, nothing is credited. Mat.
5.34
Our Savior Christ therefore requires us to be circumspect in our talk and
constant in our words that we need not swear at al. He teaches us how we
should bargain as namely, that we be simple and constant in that thing which
once we affirm or deny: if we affirm any thing to do it truly, and if we
deny any thing, to deny the same also truly. The like manner of speech also
the Apostle Paul used to the Corinthians, saying, 1. Cor. 1.17.18.
When I was thus minded, did I use lightness, or mind I those things which I
mind according to the flesh, that with me should be yea, yea, and nay nay? God
is faithful yt our work toward you was not yea and nay. Esaias. 9.17 Romans 3 4
Men very seeldome do use to affirm or deny truly that which they think,
but are delighted with lies and that is the cause that we have such indenting,
such folding and binding in obligations, as though there were no credit in men
at all, which undoubtedly is very small. Now because this is the true kind of
barganing, when men speak no more with their tongues, then they think in their
hearts: our Savior Christ pronounces, that whatsoever exceeds is sin.
Neither is their judgment to be allowed which think him to be in fault of the
oath, Mat. 5.37 Ia. 5.12.
that will not believe him yt speaks: for Christ teaches that me^ are in
fault that will be constrained to swear for if there were any faithfulness
among them, if they were not wavering and double tongued, they would have
simplicity and true dealing

44 Of the Sabbath day.
The Lord ordained the Sabbath day, first that it might be a figure to
represent our spiritual rest: that we ceasing to do our own works, the Lord
might bring forth his works in us: that is, by mortifiing our flesh, and
subduing the inordinat affections of our nature, to the end that Gods spiryt
may bear rule in us. Secondly that in one place we should assemble our selves
together, with fear and reverence, to hear, Mat. 13.23 Act. 20.7. and 15.21
mark and lay up in our hearts, the word of God preached unto us, to pray
altogether with one consent that we understand: and at convenient times to use
the sacraments in faith and repentance, Luk 4.16. Mat. 18.19 1. Cor. 14 15. 1.
Cor. 11 33.
And thirdly to make the estate of servant, which are under bodily masters,
more tolerable. As touching the severe and straight commanding of bodilye
rest, it belongs to the ceremonial law, which was abolished at the coming
of Christ. The spiritual rest is of two sorts. For first our powers and
actions cease and rest, so that in the works of old Adam, we must not only
not follow our will, but that moreover all that which is good in us, we must
give unto God, because he only is holy, Ex. 31, 14.15. Ezech. 20.12.
and makes al them that are holy to be such. After this rest ensues the
perpetual rest of eternal felicity, whereof the Apostle makes mention Heb.
4. and this is a spiritual and perpetual Sabbath. Secondly we do rest from
those labors and actions which are commanded by god and of themselves are not
evil, but may be done without sin: yet on the Sabbath day we abstain from
them not that idleness is allowed of God, but to the end we may the better,
attend upon spiritual actions which God requires. This day is not holy of it
self, neither can we give any holiness to it, and also all other days are
(as well as it) the Lords days.

But the meaning of the commandment is, that on the Saboth day these holy
works are to be done, which are commanded to us all by God, as namly, that
first we confess that it is god alone that sanctifies us, and that we suffer
him to work his works and pleasure in us, and that we our selves do not our
own works and pleasure or will. Secondly, that we godly associat or join our
selves to holy asse^blies and sermons, prayer, and receuing of the sacraments.

45 The spiritual Sabbath.
BY the word Saboth is understood spiritual rest, that is to say, ceasing from
sin, or the leaving of our own works, and the execution or doing of the
works of God of such as are by him commanded unto us, and do appertain to his
worship and glory. This spiritual Saboth is begun in this life in the^ that
are converted, and is finished in the life everlasting: and is termed a saboth
or rest, both because this is indeed a true rest from labors and miseries, and
our hallowing and dedicating unto the worship of God, and also because that in
times paste it was signified by the ceremonial Sabbath. There remains (as
the holy Ghost witnesses) a rest to the people of God. Heb. 4.9.10.11.12.
Exo. 20.10. Verse. 15. Eze. 20.13 and 22.8.
For he that is entered into his rest, has also ceased from his own works,
as God did from his. Let us study therefore to enter into that rest. etc. In
Exodus 31. The lord commands him to be put to death which shall break the
Saboth. Also in the Prophet Ezechiell when he co^plaineth of the corruption of
the whole worship of God: He says, that the saboth is broken: of which
straightness in requiring the keeping of the Saboth there are evidently
apparent two causes especially. The one, for that the neglecting of the
ministry of the Church does very easily corrupt and blot out the doctrine and
worship of God: the other, for that by the straight requiring of the figurative
Sabothe. God would declare the greatness and necessity of the thing signified,
that is, of the spiritual Sabbath.

46 The Ceremonious use of the Saboth.
The Saboth day had this ceremonious use, to cause at a set time the people to
assemble together, to hear the Law, and to call on the name of the Lord, to
offer their sacrifices, and to do all that which should concern spiritual
order and policy.

But because this cannot be well and sufficiently understood, without some more
plainer and more distinct handling: therefore let us first of all note, that
the Saboth day was a shadow, under the Law until the coming of Christ, to
signify that God will have men rest themselves from their own works. And that
this is so, Heb. 10.1
S. Paul has also declared, and likewise besides him, we have sufficient
testimony in other places of the Scripture. In his Epistle to the Colossians,
Col. 2.17
he has these words in effect, that we have the substance and body of those
things which were under the law, we have them (says he) in Christ. And
therefore it was expedient that the ancient fathers should be exercised in
this hope: as well by the sabbath day, as by other ceremonies: but since the thing
is now given us, we ought not to stay our selves on these shadows. True it is,
that the Law is so abolished that yet we ought to keep the substance and
truth thereof: and as for the shadows and figures, they are done away by the
coming of Christ. If one then demand how the ancient fathers knew of this
sense and meaning: Moses has made declaration hereof as it is sufficiently
showed in the book of Exodus. For God after he had published his law in the
xx. Chap. he reuealeth unto Moses in the xxi. Verse. 13.
chapter, to what end it serves, and declares that he has ordained the
Saboth day (as a sign) that the people of Israel should be sanctified by
him. Now when the scripture speaks of our being sanctified unto God, it is
to separate us from all that which is contrary to his worship and service. But
where shall a man find such purity? We know that we are of God (says S.
John) and the whole world lies in wickedness 1. Io. 5.19
We need not go forth of our selfs to have battle with God and his justice
because ye wisdom of the flesh is enemy against him. Romans 8.7.
When men loose the bridle to their thoughts and imaginations, to their desires
and lusts: then make they open battle with God. And we are not ignorant of
ye which is declared in Genes. vi. Verse. 5.
that the wickedness of man is great in the earth, and all the imaginations and
thoughts of his heart, are only evil continually. So then we may well
understand, that we cannot be sanctified before our God: that is we cannot
serve him in holiness and pureness, if we be not separated, from that
uncleanness, and those defilements which are contrary hereunto, and not having
first abolished all that which is of our own nature.

47 The end of the Saboth.
The saboth teaching us our inward corruption stays not there, neither is
that ye end of it, but leads us to understand, that seeing our own ways be
all corrupted and defiled with sin, insomuch as the ceasing from sin is no
other thing then the ceasing from our own ways and works: it appears
evidently that justification and holiness of life, have not their beginning
from our selves, but are the free and undeserved graces and works of God
within us.

Which we are compelled to grant in that we confesseour own ways to be
corrupted, and that the ceasing from sin, is (as it was said before) the
ceasing from our own ways and works. For if (as the truth is) our own ways
be all corrupted and defiled with sin, if any good be in us it must have a
beginning and spring otherwhere then from our selves. Ex. 31.13.
The saboth did signify, our new birth in Christ, to be the work of God in
us as witnesses the Lord himself. Keep ye my saboth (says he) for it is a
sign between me and you, in your generations, Ez. 20.12.
that you may know that I the Lord do sanctify you. For the denial of their
own ways must needs witness their work of sanctification to proceed from
the Lord, and not of themselves. The same is witnessed in Ezechiell. And in
the Acts of the Apostles, the covenant made with Abraham for blessing al
nations in his seed, is said to be performed in Christ, in turning every one
of his from their iniquity. Act 3.26.
Unto you (says the holy Ghost) has God raised up his son Jesus, and him
has he sent to bless you, in turning every one of you from your iniquities.
The Jews had this special ceremony of rest, to exercise them in the doctrine
and practice of mortification: the truth of which ceremony is fulfilled in
Christ For by the power of his death it is brought to pass, Romans 6.8
that sin dies in his. It was necessary they should be acquainted with this
doctrine, for the Lord has no service of us that he will accept of, if we
learn not to renounce and deny our affections. Neither can we go truly to the
obedience of him, but in the denial of our selves.

48 How we ought to profit by the Saboth.
THe Saboth day ought to serve us (as it were) for a tower to make us mount on
high to view the works of the Lord from a far, when we are neither hindered
nor occupied with any thing, but that we may apply all our senses, and all
our whole understanding to reknowledge the gracious gifts and benefits which
he has bestowed upon us. And when we shall have well practiced this on the
Saboth day, that is to say, when we shall have deeply considered the works
of God: we shall verily all the rest of our time be given hereunto, and these
meditations shall so fashion and adorn us, that the next day, Ex. 20.8. Deu.
5.12.
and all the rest of the week, we shall be led to thank our God: when so
before hand we shall have premeditated on his works to make our profit
therein. But when the Saboth day is spent, not only in unlawful games and
pastimes full of vanity, but in things with are altogether contrary unto God,
that men think they have not celebrated the same, except God therein be by
many and sundry ways offended: when men vnhallowe in this sort, this holy
day, which God has instituted to lead us unto himself: it is no marvel if
we become brutish and beastly in our doings all the rest of the week.
Wherefore let us know, that it is not sufficient to come to church on the
Saboth day, to receive some good doctrine and to call upon the name of the
Lord: but we must digest those things which we hear and receive, and apply al
our senses to the better understanding of those benefits which God bestows
upon us, Mat. 7.24 Luke 11.28 Ia. 1.22. etc.
and that by this means we be so formed and fashioned to the same, that the
Monday and all the rest of the week following cost us nothing to come and
aspire to our God: and that we need but call to mind that which we have
learned before at good leisure: when our minds be (as it were) vnwrapped from
all those things which hinder us to receive the works of God.

49 Of the second table of the law.
AS the Lord in the four commandments of the first table does perfectly
instruct us in all the duties that appertain directly unto his worship and
service: even so in the second table, he does give us rules and precepts for
the duties that we do owe unto men. The duties unto God do admonish us, that
al our doings toward men are nothing, where Gods glory does not go before.
As it is written by S. John: In this we know that we love the children of God,
when we love God and keep his commandments. As like as our dealing with men
is nothing, when the true service of God, 1. Io. 5.2.
is either not known or not regarded: so that service that is given unto God
is not accepted when our brethren are neglected of us. And therefore our
savior Christ charge us, that when our neighbor has any thing against us,
we should not presume to offer any gift unto God. before we be reconciled.
Mat. 5.23 24.
So greatly does the Lord esteem of this loving conversation with men, that
the holy Ghost makes it the proof of our blessed estate. We know says S.
John that we are translated from death to life, 1. Io. 3.14 Ex. 20, 12. Ier
19.3 Col. 3.20.
because we love our brethren. Concerning that which we do owe unto men: the
honoring of father and mother has the first place. To honor our parents is to
yield unto them all obedience, reverence and gratefulnes. Children says S.
Paul, Ephesians. 6.1.
obey your parents in all things, for that is well pleasing unto the Lord. And
our Savior Christ Math. 15 and so likewise Mark 7. does declare out of this
commandment, how children ought to behave themselves toward their parents.
By father and mother all those are understood who are the conueiers of any
special goodness of God unto us, whom because he has vouchsafed to be his
means in conueying of the grace that we do enjoy by him, he cannot abide that
they should be without honor at our hands.

50 We must obey our Superiors.
GOd will prove our obedience and the love we bear him, when he commands us
to walk in all equity and vprightnes with our neighbors and that we live
together in such love and unity, that any one be not given unto himself, but
that we communicate together, and that every one according to his ability to
do well, employ and force himself thereunto. This way God proves us to know
whether we worship him unfeignedly and from our heart, And this is the cause
why our Lord Jesus Christ says that the weightier matters of the law is
judgment, Mat. 23.23
mercy and fidelity. Therefore when we live with men without hipocrisiy and
dissimulation, when we are not given to our subtle sleightes nor malicious
practices: when we study to minister and to serve every one in his
commodity: when we maintain right and resist wrong as much as lies in us:
we then shall accomplish the chief and principal part of the law. Not that
the service of God ought in the mean time to be forgotten, or that it is of
less importance: but because it is impossible that men acquit themselves in
their duties toward their neighbors except they be lead thereunto by the
fear of God. And although mention be here expresselye made of father and
mother, yet there is no doubt, but God meant to deliver a general doctrine,
Romans 13.1
of having al superiority in honor. For if it had not touched any thing of
the duty we owe to other superiors, as Princes, Magistrates, and those which
have the sword of Justice, if it had delivered nothing concerning Masters it
would have seemed to have been imperfect. Therefore we must conclude, that God
has commanded that all they which are in honor and authority, be honored and
obeyed. Neither ought we to account it strange that under one special kind
of obedience to be yielded to al superiors, the whole is comprised: For this
was not done because God could not speak it in other manner, but for our
profit and instruction. For when we see that God abaseth himself to our
rudenes and that he speaks according to our capacity: it takes from us all
excuse, remoueth al pretenses whatsoever, and every one is bound to order
himself aright, Genesis 6.5.
confessing that there is nothing, which hinders us from doing our duties,
but yt we be rebellious against God and will not bear his yoke.

51 Of Magistrates, and how we must obey them.
PRinces and Magistrates do not rule for their own cause, but for the common
profit, neither are they endued with an infinite or unlimited power, but such
as is tied to the health of their subjects. They are bound to God and men in
their principality, Deu. 5.16 Deuteronomy. 1.17 and 16.19. Leu. 19.15 1. Sam. 16 7.
Pro. 24.23. Ia. 2.2.
and unto God they must give an account seeing he has advanced them to so
great honor, and has placed them (as it were) in his seat, and will have them
govern (as it were) in his person. So did Moises and Joshua give the judges
(which they made) well to understand: ye shall have no respect of persons in
judgment (says Moses) but shall hear the small as well as the great, ye
shall not fear the force of man, for the judgment is Gods. And therefore it
behooves Princes and Magistrates, to take good heed to themselves, knowing
that God will have an account of them, and they must appear before the Lord
Jesus, to give an account of their office, which they have executed. They ought
to employ themselves in this that their subjects be maintained and kept in
good peace, that every man may quietly enjoy that which is his own, that no man
be oppressed and put to wrong: that they themselves stand for right and equity
without accepting of persons, Deu. 27.19. Ex. 23.3.
that there be no partiality nor favor used, no hatred nor revenge showed,
and that there be an honest and indifferent dealing betwixt man and man, that
our lives be honest and seemly, not dissolute and lawless, but especially and
above all that they maintain Gods honor, and pure and true religion according
to his word. For as much therefore, as the magistrates are appointed to
maintain the state of mankind, and to be their protectors: it is great reason
that we pray for them, and with all humblenes and reverence submit our selves
to their laws and decrees (being not repugnant to the will of God revealed in
his word) for otherwise we shall resist the ordinance of God, 1. Tim. 2.12.
To. 13.3.
and show our selves to be public enemies of mankind.

52 The exposition of the sixth commandment.
IN the second commandment of the second table, the Lord our God does not
only give us a law to restrain our outward deeds, but principally to bridle
the affections of the mind. He teaches us that unto this knitting together by
honoring each other we ought to bring with us a singular care of preservation to
be spread forth unto every one. He forbids us all hilling, fighting, and
quarelling, Deuteronomy. 5.17 Exo. 20.13 Genesis 9.6 Mat. 5.39, Col. 3.13. Leu. 19.17 19.
Mat. 5.22. 1. Joan. 3.85. Pro. 20.22 Ma. 25.35 Esaias. 58.7 Luke 6.27. Mat. 5.44.
Leu. 9.17
reproaches, mocking and such like. He forbids all killing in heart, that is,
all anger, malice and desire of revenge. He commands us to preserve life, by
exercising the works of mercy and compassion toward our brethren, and
toward our enemies, to love one an other inwardly in heart, as our selves. Our
Savior Christ makes this exposition of this commandment Mat. 5. in which
place also he teaches that we must seek to be agreed with our adversary, and
that we must not strive in the law, and therefore much less assault our
neighbors with violence. Of these matters the Apostle Paul entreats more at
large 1. Cor. 6. and Ephesians. 4. To. 12.17 18.19.20. Number. 35.16. etc.
The Lord in the law accurseth him that takes reward to shed innocent blood.
With murders the lively image of God is blotted out, and therefore this blood
asks vengeance at Gods hand: and peace is not granted unto that land that
maintains murderers, until it have drunk their blood.

53. Anger is to be avoided with hatred and envy.
SVch men as be given to anger, are also cruel, Gen 4. and 27. and Exo 14. 1.
Sam. 18. 2. Sam. 15 2. King. 12
as we have example by Cayne, Esawe, and the brethren of Joseph. A man that is
furious, is like unto a flood of water that descends with raging: as we may
see in Pharao, Absolon, and Roboam. Anger is cruel, and wrath is raging, but
who (says Solomon) can stand before envy, whereby he gives to understand
that the company of the wrathful and furious man is very hurtful and
dangerous, Pro. 27.4.
and therefore that we should not desire the same, but should rather shun
and avoid it. And for as much as we desire not that any should fly our
company, as from cruel and wrathful, furious and unmerciful men, and also that
we would not have our neighbors to be such toward us, Ephesians. 4.31.32. Col.
3.8.
let us learn with S. Paul to put from us al bitterness, anger, wrath and such
like. The angry and wrathful are very dangerous, but the envious are far
more cruel, and greater transgressors of this commandment: for besides
cruelty and raging, the which may be corrected in the angry and wrathful, the
envious is ambitious and arrogant, a dissembler, purposing malice, obstinate
and hard of heart against his conscience, so that they are altogether without
reconciliation: as we may see in the Scribes and Pharisees against our Lord
Jesus Christ. Wherefore let us take diligent head not only of the envious, 2.
Pet. 2.1
but also that we our selves envy not, that we be no murderers, backebiters
nor violent oppressors, that we eschew anger hatred and wrath: and live in
godly peace and quietness with our neighbors, according to the will of God.

Angry words and thoughts forbidden in this commandment.
THe Lord is not only careful to have obedience from our hands, but also
from our thoughts and tongues: so that both thoughts and words must come
under subjection unto him, Io. 4.24.
that neither of the^ be infected with malice, which the Lord so hates and
abhors. For we must interpret the law according to the nature of the Lord
who is the law giver. Man by reason that he only sees the deed, and cannot
discerue of the heart makes laws for the outward doings, and punishes the^
alone without proceeding further: Act. 1 24. To. 8.27. 1. Th. 2, 4. 1. Io. 3.20
1. Io. 3.15
but the Lord who searches the heart and reins, makes laws for it, and
punishes even the consent of the heart going against his law. For in as much as
the Lord hates the evil it self, he cannot but abhor it wheresoever he
shall find it whether in heart, hand or tongue. Whosoever hates his brother
(says S. John) is a mansteare. We see hereby that not only gross evils come
into reckoning before the Lord, but even hatred settled in the heart, although
the hand has never been stretched forth to execute the same. Neither comes
it before him as a trifling toye, but it appears monstrous, having no other
shape upon it, nor other account made of it then of murder. This was the cause
why the Lord forbidding hateful and malicious thoughts in this commandment,
would give it no other name then murder, teaching us that howsoever we
nourish such thoughts, and make small account of them, yet his judgment is
plain that they be no better then murder when the heart of man is settled in
them. We may see in the Gospel how our Lord Jesus Christ hates words, which
proceed from malice and anger, and pronounces that whosoever shall say fool
to his brother, shall be worthy to be punished. Mat. 5.22.
Hatred toward our brother is so grievous in his sight, that it stayneth and
defiles what soever it touches, be it thought or word, and makes it so
heavy, that the Lord can no longer bear it.

55 We must abstain from wrong and injury.
THe Lord in declaring that he is displeased when one man does injury to
another shows us thereby that this ought to withholde us from doing wrong,
except we be bereaved of all sense. And to the end we might better advise our
selves in this thing he declares further, Ex. 20.13.
that there cannot be a murder committed, but the earth therewith must needs
be polluted and defiled. And as it appears in the book of Numbers, The
effusion of man's blood in it self, imports a filth and such a blot, Number.
35.43.
as scarce can be wiped out. When mention is made of killing, even in a battle
approved and allowed, it appears 1. Chro. 22. that a man thereby is become
unclean: because we might learn therebie to have in greater horror and
detestation the effusion of blood. 1. Chro. 22 8.
If an enemy be killed in open battle, although God pardon this, because he
which kills him has just and lawful cause, and does it for ne-nessitie: yet
notwithstanding it is said that the man which has slain him is polluted and
made unclean, to the end we might know that God has created us to live
together in peace, and that we can give never so little a blow in anger to
our brother, but that we defile our selves, and become by and by unclean
before the face of God. Io 13.35.
The persons of men must be accounted dear and precious in our sight, for
until we be come unto such perfection, God will always account us for
murderers. If one strike his neighbor and kill him not, yet is he already a
murderer before God: to the end, God might declare unto us, that how ever we
esteem them as light and little faults to be the occasion of tumults and
sedition: Deu. 5.17
that he notwithstanding shall not so account of them, because they are al as
weighty as murder.

56 Of Anger, and the effects thereof.
THe sons of Adam are of such a nature, that they will be feared and doubted,
and cannot suffer to be despised, nor to receive any sign of contempt. If it
seem unto any one that any do labor to trouble him, he is straightwaye moved
with anger and wrath and suddenly does show it by contentions, debates,
strifes, and in outrageous words and violent deeds. He boyleth so vehemently
with impatiencie and fury, he has so great desire to be revenged for the
injury, that he persuades himself to be done unto him, that he loses al
boldness, and cannot dissemble his naughty stomach: and yet, it seems unto
him, that he is mighty and strong, and that he behaueth himself in good
order, and that his heart is upright because he suffers none to hurt or bite
him, neither to tread him under foot. But the holy Ghost by the mouth of
Solomon pronounces him to be a fool. Pr. 12.16. Mat. 5.25.
A fool (says he) in a day shall be known by his anger. His meaning is not,
that the fool is satisfied to have showed his anger and wrath for a little
space, and afterward returns to be reconciled, and to be freindes again
with them with whom he was angry: as every one of us must do in following the
goodness of our heavenly father. For he endures but a while in his anger: but
in his favor is life. And for to follow him, we must obey the exhortation of
S. Paul. Be angry (says he) but sin not etc. And again, let all
bitterness, anger and wrath, crying and evil speaking, be put away from you,
with all maliciousness, Ephesians. 4.29.31.
etc. We must not dwell long and abide in the company of the contentious, for
to know the wickedness of his heart: For, for every little thing done contrary
to his will, he will show by injuries, raging and violences, what he is
within. As Cain against Abell, Corach, Dathan and Abiram against Moses: Genesis 4.
Number. 16. 1. Sam. 27.
Saul against David, the enemies of the truth against the children of God: Not
only among the Papists, but also there where they boste of the reformation of
the Gospel.

57 The exposition of the seventh commandment.
IN the third commandment of the second table, the Lord our God does not
only forbid all adultery, fornication, and al other uncleanness in our
bodies: but also all impure thoughts, and lusts of the heart. He forbids us
unchaste behavior, gluttony, drunkenness, and all other things whatsoever may
entice and allure us unto uncleanness He commands us to keep our bodies and
souls chaste and pure: or if the gift of chastity be not given us, then to use
the lawful remedy appointed by God, which is marriage. for inasmuch as our
bodies and souls are the temples of the holy spirit, Deu. 5.18. Leu. 18.20
Deuteronomy. 23.17. Mat. 5.25. Esaias. 3.16. To. 13.13. Ephesians. 5.18. 1. Th. 4. Heb. 13.4.
we ought to keep them in all pureness, and not only to abstain from the
carnal act, but also to be chaste in heart, words and behavior. The Lord
does not only forbid adultery, but also all discourteous, wrongful and
intolerable living together, he will have the life of married persons to be
ruled with charity. How great a fault God judges adultery, may here be known
in that he has condemned it with death, the which may more at large be
seen in Job the thirty and one chapter, and Proverbs the fifth and six
chapters.

58 Fornication is forbidden.
Adultery is not only condemned and forbidden, in this commandment but also
fornication, when both the offenders are single persons. Fornication is
forbidden in expres words in Deuteronomy. There shall be no whore (says the L.) of the
daughters of Israel: the punishment of this sin of fornication which was so
fearful among the people of Israel, is brought in of the Apost P. to bring all
men to such fear of God, as may restrain them from it. Neither let us commit
fornication, 1. Cor. 10.
(says the Ap.) as some of them committed fornication. and fell in one day
23000 The life of man being so precious, unto our heavenly father as it is, it
cannot be a small sin that provoke ye Lord to proceed in judgment even to
the death of so great a number: and therefore is this notable punishment (not
without great reason) joined to fornication which was the cause thereof. For
commonly, this sin is little regarded, having natural infirmitye set beside
it, in the usual speech of me^ to hide it withal. But the holy Ghost does not
so match it, in his speech, he does not set before our eyes in a cloak of
natural infirmity, whereby we should the less fear it: but puts upon it ye
garment that indeed belongs unto it, even a cloak bathed with the blod of
23000. There is a great difference between these two cloakes: the one is far
unlike the other. In the eyes of the holy Ghost, this sin is fearfully stained
with much blood: in the sight of fornicators, there is nothing in it with is not
natural and kindly, so diverse are their judgments, and so great is the
disagreement of their opinions. The Apost. P. reasons against fornicators by
the worthiness of our bodies, 1. Cor. 6.16.
which are the members of Christ. Do ye not know (says he) that he which
couplth himself with an harlot, is one body. For two (says he) shall be one
flesh. Certain it is that the body of a^ harlot can be no member of Jesus C.
And the fornicator, by the testimonye of the Apost. is become one body with
her, Genesis 2.24 Mat. 19.5 Mar. 10.8 Ephesians. 5.31
having the same coniunctio^ with her in wickedness, that the husband has
with his lawful wife in holiness and by the appointment of the Lord. There is
great cause therefore. why the holy Ghost should so earnestly persuade us to
fly fornication, making that sin above all other, to offend against his own
body which does commit it.

59 Of married folks.
ADultery and fornication being forbidden, the godly, loving and chaste life
of married folks must needs be commanded: Which, that it may be performed,
almighty God requires of his children, that they do match themselves with
such as fear him, and serve him after his word. Such has he promised to
bless: As for those that marry for riches, beauty and such outward things,
when there is not the fear and true worship of God joined withal: Ps. 128.
Genesis 6, 2.3.
they have always tasted of most grievous plagues from the hand of the Lord.
Moreover we know, that if any thing must be kept holy in the whole life of
man, it is the faith which the husband plighteth unto the wife and the wife
promises unto the husband. All contractes and promises which we make must
faithfully be observed: but if we make comparison we shall find that marriage,
not without great cause is named the covenant of God, Solomon shows by this
word, Pro. 2.17.
that God bears rule over marriage, having it under his guard and protection.
And for this cause if the husband break his promise which he has made unto
his wife, he is not perjured only toward her, but toward God. Deuteronomy. 5.18
Ex. 20.24.
As Much is to be said of the wife, that she does not only wrong to her
husband, but to the living God. For unto him she is bound, inasmuch as God will
have the care of mantayning marriage whereas it is ordained by him, and he
himself the author of the same.

Therefore when we hear this word adultery, we ought to hold it as execrable
and accursed: and let us know that except we be sober, contine^t, Heb. 13 4.
chaste and modest: God has us in great hatred, and our life is infected before
him. For if our persons are counted precious, and our lives held dear in his
sight, he will also that the loyalty and mutual faith which ought to be
between the husband and the wife be in price and estimation, Mat. 5 28. Tit.
1.15.
that such an honorable and holy thing as marriage is, be not set forth unto
reproach. And this ought to teach us, that God will not have a man to cast an
vnchastey upon the wife of his neighbor, because God has already coupled her
unto her husband he will him to be her shadow: and that when we think on
evil, and set our minds on any vile lust: we ought to stand in fear of that
sentence which is pronounced by the holy Ghost, as namely that GOD will take
vengeance on al them, which violate and defile the holy conjunction which he
has set forth in his own name.

60 Of marriage, and why it was instituted.
Seeing that in lawful marriage there is Gods blessing: it is manifest yt in
whoredom there is nothing but cursednes. Wherefore we must not delight in
whoredom, but rather abhor it, Ps. 128.
seeing that therein there is nothing but wickedness and evil success
whereas in marriage there goes a blessing. They which are married, must not with
all greediness follow the lusts of the flesh and their sensuality, taking
their pleasures and desirs after their inordinate concupiscences but the joy
that the faithful married folks ought to have, is that they should confess that
it is God that has knit them together for to be united in such wise, that the
one should not desire to be separated from the other: but that in this union
man should know that it is not good for him to live alone: and therefore
should love his wife, whom God has given unto him to be with him, and to help
him: the wife also to know that she has been taken out of the side of man,
and thereof made a woman, that she might be an helper to man: and therefore
should give her self wholly to obey her husband. That they should confess
that they are in a very honorable estate, as the son of God has well
declared, and that it comes not from the invention of man's brain, but from
the most ancient institution of God. Also that God has made them pertakers of
marriage, to the end they should possess their vessels in honor and
sanctification, and not in filthiness and uncleanness. Likewise if they have
children, they should acknowledge that they are the instruments whereby God
does increase his Church, and the greater number of children they have, let
them rejoice Let them rejoice so much the more, confessing that the blessing of
God is the more upon them and that God does greatly honor them, when they are
made fathers and mothers of so great a flock. They that want this knowledge and
understanding, and which do not so rejoice, though they be married, and yt they
come not near ye gate of the whoremongers and harlots house, and that they
have a number of lawful children: nevertheless yet as touching them, there
nothing remains but a curse and malediction: for unto the unclean and
infidels nothing is clean.

61 The Papists opinion concerning marriage.
Our Lord God has showed that all they that cannot abstain from marriage ought
to use it: Yea and that which is more if any man see (although otherwise he
have no need) that he can serve God better being married, he is bound to
marie, considering yt is a kind of life, that god likes well of, and
accounts honorable. The Pope holy papists on the contrarieside, Ge. 1.27.
and 2.24.
(kicking against the holy ordinance of God:) affirm and say, the ministers
of the word of God, cannot be holy, unless they abstain from marriage. The
high Priest (say they) in the old law, when he went into the Sanctuary,
must needs be separated from his wife: and again that it is an ordinary
thing amongst them when they offer sacrifice unto god, that he that is in that
office must wholly renounce marriage, and have nothing to do with women.
Concerning the first, the papists speak blasphemy against God, in saying
that the Shepheardes of the Church of Christ, are called to sacrifice Jesus
Christ. For the mass (as we know) is a very deuillish and detestable thing.
True it is that God commands us to sacrifice the souls which we shall get to
him by means of the Gospel, (as S. Paul also speaks unto the Romans:)
But as for the high Priest of the old law, To. 12.
he was a figure of our lord Jesus Christ, which is not at this day in us, and
therefore it is a beastly and blasphemous argument, wherewith the papists have
deceived the simple people, in that they have not suffered their priests to be
married and are come to this point to call the state of marriage a defiling, and
so despise the ordinance of God. Heb. 13.4.
The holy Ghost has pronounced that marriage is honorable for all men: and yet
the papists dare affirm that it is foul and filthy: therefore the devil is
the author and finder out of their doctrine. And great occasions have we to
praise God, and to give him hearty thanks, for that he has drawn us out of
such a confusion, and has showed us the only way to serve him, so yt we may be
out of all doubt that he likes well of our life, that we cleave simply to his
word, not adding any thing to it, Deu. 4.2 and 12.32.
but follow the pure rule, that is contained in the same.

62. Christians must be sober, continent, chaste and modest.
THe will of our God is, that we should live soberlye and chastlye, that
christians should be no adulterers, no fornicators, not given to idleness,
wa^tonnes, drunkenness, gluttony, nor to any such like, but that they should
abstain from al these things, and endeavor with all godly affection to
discharge their duties according to his word, Ex. 20.14 Luke 1.75 Gal. 5.19.
1. Cor. 6.9 Tit. 2.12.
and to walk before him in holiness all the days of their life.

Whosoever are given to dissolutenes and excess, it is certain that they are
not spiritual, what countenance soever they make to the contrary, but they
follow the flesh and perform the filthye works of the same: and therefore is
this horrible sentence pronounced against them, that they shall not be
inheritours of the kingdom of God. It is the will of our heavenly father,
that christians, should live soberly and moderately, avoiding all occasions
whereby they might be entyced and provoked to wantonness and uncleanness. But
it is not sufficient only to restrain the outrageous wantonness and lust of
the flesh: but also the flesh when it is most sober, and in his best
temperance, must be subdued and repressed, least it fulfill his lusts and
desires. For the most sober and temperate are many times most assailed with
temptations.

63 The exposition of the eight commandment.
In the fourth commandment of the second table, Deu. 5.19 Ephesians. 5.3.5 Col.
3.5. Ps. 62.10, 1. The. 4.6 Ex. 22.21.22.23. Pro. 27.27 Ge 3..19. Ephesians. 4.28.
the Lord our God does not only forbid all stealing and such robberies as are
punished by common laws: But he forbids al stealing in heart, that is, all
desire of any man's goods wrongfully. He forbids al deceit and wrongful
dealing, al unlawful and deceive able occupations, whereby we pluck unto us
any part of our neighbors substance, whether it be by violence, by fraud,
or by any other means, that God has not allowed by his word. And on the
other side, he charge us, to be content with that portion which the Lord
has lent us, to apply our selves honestly in our vocation and calling, to
live of that which is our own, and also to be helpful unto others. All such
as fear God, must have regard that the possession and getting of their goods,
be without covetousness, fraud, theft, and deceit: but honest and pleasing
God, as coming by inheritance, or of honest and diligent pains taking: for
God in this commandment forbids us to take away or keep any thing that
is due to another, by what means soever it be done: wherefore false weightes
and measures are forbidden: things found by chance must not be kept, but
restored again to the true owner. That which is left with us to keep and lent
us, must be wholly given home again. The duties that are due unto every man
must be done unto them, and no man must be defrauded of the things that are
his. Debtes must be paid at the time appointed without the hurt of our
neighbors, but especially the wages due for man's work must be paid truly and
quickly. The Lord expounds this commandment ver. 19. ye shall not steal,
neither deal falsely, nor lie one to another says the Lord. For in so much as
God is a spirit, he has not only regard to robberies that be committed in
deed, Leu. 19.11 Io. 4.24.
but he considers as well our secret enterprises, our devises and purposes,
and the desires of our minds, to come by riches through our neighbors loss.

64 Diverse sorts of stealing.
THere are many kinds of theeueries: for some use privy and secret sleightes,
when they draw to themselves by subtle means and practices the substance of
another: Ex. 20.15. Deu. 5.19.
other use open force and violence: and some use more sly feats, and such
close co^ueiances, that a man shall not be able to accuse them before the
world: and yet because they walk not in all simplicity and vprightnes, they
are thieves before God. But in the mean time we have to note, that god judges
not of theftes after the manner of men: for they which live in great credit
and reputation before men, shall not cease to be condemned before god: and
therefore we must not bring our own fantasyes to judge of theftes thinking to
escape the hand of God, when we shall not be condemned by men, nor punished by
earthly judgment: for god proceeds in this, much further and higher. And
indeed, when God threatens a woe by the prophet Esaias, Esaias. 33.1
that he which has pilled and spoiled others, shall be rewarded with the like:
he speaks not of pettye thieves, which are led to execution but he
speaks of great Princes and Monarchies which bear then the swaye throughout
the world. And again in his first chapter, when he addresseth his talk
against the holy people which was the church of God. Thy Princes (says he)
are rebellious and companions of thieves. verse. 23.
Certain it is, that none charged these of theft: but they sat as Judges and
condemners of other petty thieves, and yet failed they not to be condemned
before God. And thus the thieves here below on earth, are notwithstanding
accursed by the law of God, and he has pronounced on them his determinate
sentence in this commandment. We must therefore humble our selves under the
judgment of god, and know, that we shall gain little, although our theeueries
be excusable before men, and although we cover and color them never so
cunningly. For in the mean time, the law of God shall have his course, and
the execution thereof shall be ready at hand to co^demn us, god has forbidden
nothing which he will not call into an account.

95 Against wrong and oppression.
FOr as much as we are the children of God, who is just and righteous, gentle
and merciful: we should wish to do wrong unto no man, neither use our
neighbors with crueltye or deceit. We do wrong unto a man, when we give him
not that which we owe him, Ex. 34.6. Ex. 20.15.
or when we take from him that which he possesses iustlye, and without the
which he nor his familye can be maintained in this life.

And this wrong is done most commonly to them that are poor and have no
abundance of wealth: Deu. 15.7 Pro. 28.27 Mat. 25.40
for as much as they have no power to defend the^ selves, and that no service
nor pleasure is looked for, at their hands. This comes also because of their
weakness, why God abhors those which do them wrong, and counts it dishonor
done by them: not that it is lawful to do wrong unto ye richer sort nor to pull
away from the^ that which they possess, though they be wicked, and have
nothing sanctified to their use. Now although we ought to do no wrong to
such kind of people, yet have they no need to be commended, for they will not
willingly suffer to be wrounged: Prou. 14.31.
and as they well think, they are strong enough to defend themselves, and do
rather pull away the goods of others, then to suffer any loss or hinderance at
all. Likewise God has no care to commend them, but he commends unto us the
needy pronouncing that the wroung that is done unto them, turns to his
dishonor, and that the evil and injury that is done to the poor, is done
unto himself: so that when a poor man is wronged, we do not injury to him
only that has no power, but we stand up against almighty God who knows
well how to revenge the wrong that is done to him. Though a man be never so
poor and needy, yet he cease not to be the work and creation of God,
as well, or better, then the richest: and forasmuch as he is his work, God will
surely take care of him, and not forsake him: Josh. 1.5. Psalm. 118.6 Heb.
13.6.7.
the which may be a great comfort to the afflicted, and a perfect assurance of
the fatherly care of God toward them. On the other side it ought to fear and
terrify the unmerciful and cruel: for in doing wrong to the needy, they do
not despise the work of a man, but so much as lies in them, they destroy
what God has made, wherein they take a work in hand, which they cannot bring
to an end, and the wrong yt they invent for their neighbor, shall fall upon
themselves. The world is full of such as do wrong unto the needy, whereupon it
follows that God is greatly dishonored, Psalm. 7.16.
although all the world would be esteemed, that they reverence and fear God,
as they ought to do.

66 Against covetousness and usury.
ACcording to the judgment of the world, and sense of the flesh, the manner
to abound in worldly wealth, is for a man, to get and lay up for himself,
and to keep and hold it, and not to disperce the fruits which come thereof,
but to make a treasure of them and to spend warily for his own use. For we see
by experience, that they which do so use them, become soon rich, or at
leastwise are esteemed such: for we see them possess much goods.
Contrariwise, they which make great cost, though they greatly abound do
consume them by little and little: and especially they which dispende
riotously and prodigally where there is no need, but in pomp, in delicacie,
pleasure, and ostentation. On the other side, there be which are liberal, and
distribute their goods plentifully, and yet cease not but still to abound, and
do greatly increase: contrarily, there are which be so sparing yt they will not
use nor show mercy when need requires: and yet they waste and come to
poverty. Although the first is of the gretest show, and that it is commonly
seen with the eye: yet is it not, so certain as the contrary: A small thing yt
the righteous has, Ps. 37.16. Ps. 112.1.3.
is better the^ great riches of the ungodly. Blessed is the man ye fears the
Lord etc. Riches and plenteousnes shall be in his houses and his righteousness
endures for ever. Ps. 62.10.
To gather riches together it is lawful, but we must take heed we set not
our hearts upon them, otherwise we shall gather but with vanity: for it is a
great vanity for a man to occupye himself with greediness and covetousness.
As David says doubtless man walks in shadow, Psalm. 39.6. Eccl. 4.7.
and disquieteth himself in vain, he heapeth up riches and cannot tell who
shall gather them. Again, I turned and saw vanity under the sun. There is
not only vanity in such laboring, but also great cruelty: for they which
gather couetouslye, care least to do wrong unto their neighbors: For the
which cause they are called in the Scripture thieves, robbers, Esaias. 1.59.
Amos. 8.
and murderers: and it is laid to their charge that their hands are full of
blood. The usurers and covetous, have no pity upon the poor, they are cruel
and unmerciful, and therefore their greedy desire, shall increase to their
confusion, and as their money increases, so shall they increase the heaps of
their sins. He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver, Eccl.
5.9.
and he that loves riches shall be without fruit thereof. But that which is the
greatest misery of all, and which surely ought to fear, Mat. 25.4. Ia. 5.3.
the oppressors, the covetous, and cruel usurers, is the deprivation and
loosing of the true and heavenly riches, which are much more precious then all
the transitorye treasures of this life.

67 Of riches and how they hurt.
Our Lord Jesus Christ very aptly in his Gospel, compares riches and worldly
pleasures to thorns, for as thorns have fair green leaves, and beautiful
blossoms, and flowers, that may allure a man to reach at them, so if he take
hold of them hastily, he shall be sure to be pricked with them. Mat. 13.22.
So there seems to be a certain beauty, and sweetness in riches, thereby
to purchase worldly pomp and pleasures: but if a man with greedy desire reach
at the^, 1. Tim. 6.9
they will wound him and pearce him to the heart. For riches and worldly
pleasures, prick in getting, they prick in keeping, and they prick in
departing: and commonly they wound a man so grievously, that without repentance
they kill him for ever. Rightly therefore are they resembled to pricking and
dangerous thorns, and there is nothing that does so fully possess the mind
of man, nor so mightily pull it from God, and the care of salvation: as the
study of riches and worldly pleasures. Wherefore our Savior Christ says,
that it was as easy for a Camel to pass thorough the eye of a needle, Mat.
19.14
as for one, whose heart was possessed with desire of riches to enter into the
kingdom of God. The same thing in effect, he also teaches in the parable of
the rich man, that made a feast for the marriage of his son, and sent his
messengers to bid the guestes, and they refused to come, pretending sundry
excuses: Math. 22.1. etc.
One said I have bought five yoke of Oxen, and must needs go prove them, I
pray thee have me excused: Another said, I have bought a farm, and must go see
it, I pray thee have me excused. The third said, Luke 14.16
I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come. By this feast is meant ye
communion of the gospel and benefit of our salvation purchased by Christ. To
this feast me^ are called by Gods messengers, that is by the faithful
ministers of Gods word, the excuses made show what causes commonly they are,
that with hold men's minds from obeying ye word of God, and coming to the
gospel: yt is, the cares of the world, the study of riches, and the pleasure
and pomp of this life noted by these 3 kind of things, whereof our savior
Christ speaks in the same place. And would to God these impedimentes had
choked the word of God, and hindered ye hearing of the gospel in Christ's time
only, and were not of greater force in the hearts of men at this day in
England. Mat. 6.24.27. etc.
And the cause thereof, is the care of the world and love of riches, which
makes the^ to have no regard of the word of God, nor of their own salvation.

68 How riches ought to be used.
IF a man be rich, he must use the goods he has in his hands, and that in
doing homage unto God: which he cannot do, unless he be content therwithal to
resign the^ up, and to forgo them: and then use them as it is meet. There
are two things requisite, if they yt have, and possess riches, Mat. 5.3. Ps.
62.10.
will use them aright. First of al, they must be poor in spirit, that is to
say, they must not be tied to their riches, but when it shall please God to
make them poor, they render up the whole into his hands, and desire nothing,
but to have their co^tentation in him. Secondly, while it pleases God they
shall enjoy their riches which they possess, that they know how to use the^
moderately that it be not to glut themselves with them, and to hurt their
neighbors to make themselves gorgeous and brave above their estate, but
always use them so, as God has commanded. 1. Pet. 5.7.
And if we be poor, God will prove our patience by this means, and have us
to depend wholely upon him. Ps. 40.17.
He that has much must not trust in his wealth, he that is poor and low,
must know that he has his Father in heaven, and that the blessing of God is
better then all the kingdoms and treasures of this world. When we have
scraped together, all that we can possibly desire, if God blow upon it, it
will all go to wind: but if God bless us, Esa. 40.24
be it never so little, that he has given us, it will suffice us, it will be
enough for us, to live from hand to mouth, for Gods hand shall continually be
stretched out upon us to content us. So then seeing God, has set down this
rule that men content themselves with that he gives to every one: it is
certain, 1. Tim. 6 9
that whosoever coueteth to be rich, he clean casts off the yooke, and
submits not himself to Gods order. Wherefore let us take heed to our
selves, and be content to be nourished in this world, knowing that God has
reserved this office to himself, as yt we ask and crave at his hands our
daily bread. Let us work, Mat. 6.11.
and do our duties in our vocations. Luke 11.3.
And if it please god to encrese us moreover and beyond our hope, and cause our
riches to grow: let us yield him praise and thanks for the same.

69 We must have an assured faith, and a contented mind.
THere are two things without the which we shall never be able to perform any
acceptable obedience unto God, in this eight commandment. The first is an
assured faith in the promises of God, that he will provide for us things
necessary, as well for the body, as the soul: and that he has charged
himself, as well with the care and provision for the one, 1. Pet. 5.7
as for the other. This faith (if it were true) would consume many fears, and
cares of our mind for worldly matters: Mat. 6.33.
so yt we might apply our selves upon the care of better things. This did the
holy ghost know very well, and therefore mening to cure covetousness, he makes
the plaster of faith saying Let your conversation be without covetousness, Heb.
13.5.6. Josh. 1.5. Ps. 118.6.
for he has said, I will not fail thee nor forsake thee. When our hearts
shall be fully persuaded that the Lord will not leave us, nor forsake us, we
cannot be so greatly tormented, with the care to live and to obtain necessary
things for us: having so strong assurance for it, as is his promise, who has
made al things of nothing with his word. The second thing is, Ps. 33.6.
to find a contented mind with yt which we have already. And therefore to stay
in it, as in a poreportion. with great thankfulness of heart to our God for it,
bearing our port and countenance in all our doings accordingly, without any
exceeding whatsoever. For if once our affections shall ouerflow the banks of
our condition, so that in mind we burn with the desire of a better, our
dooinges can never be persuaded, that they must so nearly be looked at, but yt
they may borrowe a little of conscience and equity, to make the provision
according as the desire directs. This does the Apostle confirm in plain
speech to Timothy, where after persuasion to be content with yt we have
(because the gain of godliness is great) he tells us plainly, yt they who
will be rich, 1. Tim. 6.9.
fall into many temptations, snares, and many noisome lusts. This is the danger
of them that are fallen so fa^ into friendship of a better estate that they
will be rich. This being once set down and determined, not only conscience is
constrained to depart, but also thankfulness to God for our present estate does
in like manner forsake us.

70 The exposition of the ninth commandment.
IN the fifth commandment of the second Table, the Lord our God under one
kind, Ephesians. 4.25. Ps. 15.2.
does give us a general doctrine, meaning, that we may not speak any thing
to the reproach of our neighbor falsely, Pro. 21.1.
that we should neither lie, flatter, nor dissemble, that we should never tell
false tales behind our neighbors back, that we should not in private
offenses speak any thing, 1. Co. 13.7 1. Pet. 4.8. Pro. 11.12 Mat. 18.15
16.17.18.
although it be true, to the hurting of our brothers good name, if by private
admonitions he may be woone. He hears false witness, that of hatred, envy,
friendship, or affections, either concealeth, or utters not the truth, or
by his witness ouerturneth the same. Truth in all matters, by this law is
commanded, and lies dissimulation, flattery, and whatsoever is false and
fained is forbidden.

71 What it is to bear false witness.
IF we will obey God, we must maintain the honor and credit of our
neighbors, as much as lies in us. For when he has forbidden us to hurt his
good name, he wills also on the contrary side, yt we maintain ye honor and
estimation of al. Deu. 5.20.
Now it is not sufficiently maintained in his estate, when we harm it not,
except we withal procure the good thereof. Ex. 20. i6
Therefore when we shall come into judgment, we must take heed of hurting
those by any false report, any lying, or any forswearing, Leu. 19.16
whose honor and good we are bound to procure. For he which shall bear false
witness against his neighbor, he kills and robs him, as much as he can,
and he does all the evil which proceeds from perjury. And this is the cause
why God commanded in his Law, that the witnesses should be the first which
should lay hands to the execution of him that was punished for any evil deed,
Deuteronomy. 17, 7
to the end it might be known, that by their voices and by their tongues,
they had put him to death, and that the witnesses should be put in greater
fear of speaking otherwise then the truth, when every one should think he
has to render an account to God, if he shall have been a witness against
any man.

So then when question is of being a witness, every one must deeply consider
of the matter, and take diligent heed, he enlarge not his conscience, but that
he speak in pure simplicity, that which he knows to be true before God. And
here we are to think not only of false witnessinges, which shall be against the
life of a man but of such also which concern their goods and estimation. And
thus are we warned in all respects, to procure the honor and profit of our
neighbors, Pro. 10, 12
when we are to bear witness. And yet not so, that under this shadow of
covering the injury of him that has offended, or of preseruinge his goods, we
lie before God. For if the honor of men be dear unto us, what ought the honor
of God to be, if we will make comparison?

If God have a regard and care of us which are but poor creatures: let us not
think that in the mean time he will forget himself. But if by false
witness, we seek to bear out and bolster him that has offended: if we
cover the fault and dissemble it: It is certain, that we blaspheme the name
of God and deface his glory as much as lies in us.

72 Against slaundederes and liars.
THere is no man, but desires to have a privy freinde which is no talker, and
babbler, to the end that if he have any thing in his heart, which does trouble
and grieve him, that he may safely open the same unto his friend, and yt he may
be somewhat eased and relieved: he hops also, that that which he has
declared, shall be kept secret, or at leastwise that the thing, shall not be
expounded otherwise, then it was spoken: and that he will not labor to hurt
him, nor to bring him into hatred with his neighbor, Ex. 20.16 Deu. 5.20 Leu.
19. i6
according to this commandment: Thou shall not bear false witness against
thy neighbor. There are some which think and believe, that it is not evil
done, to reveal secrets to condemn their neighbors, and to publish their
imperfections: but the holy Ghost here condemns all such persons,
calling them slaunderers, by the mouth of Solomon. Pro. 12.13
And it is notwithout good cause that such people are condemned. For first of
all they are hipocrits, secondly they are transgressors of the Law: Mat. 7.5.


Thirdlye, they set themselves before the Law, in condemning it. Speak not
evil one of another brethren, He that speaks evil of his brother speaks
evil of the Law, Iam. 4.11.
and condemns the Law, and if thou condemnest the Law, thou art not an
obseruer of the Law, but a judge. Infideiitye and unfaithfulness has taken
root in their hearts, whereby they are ledd to betray their neighbors, in
discovering that which they ought to keep secret. Moreover, if we be not led
by love, we cannot be faithful unto our neighbors: for to dissemble their
imperfections, 1. Cor. 13.
there is no strength in us that is worth any thing, except it be exercised by
love. And if by love we must exercise faithfulness, the which is set against
false witness bearing: it follows that the slaunderer, is led with hatred
to discover the secret, and consequently that he is a murderer. 1. Io. 3.15.
1. Io. 3.14.25.
For whosoever hates his brother is a manslear. He that loves not his
brother, abides in death. Yet nevertheless let us not fear to be accused of
slander, though we accuse them which lead a slanderous life, though we
rebuke them, reprove them, and threaten them either privately or publicly: and
though we labor to get them punished and chastened, to the end that slanders
may be taken away from the people of God, Ma. 18.17 1. Tim. 5.20. 2. Tim. 4.2
and the offenders brought again unto God by true repentance so much as we can.

Otherwise we should be unfaithful unto GOD, and to his Church, we should be
like them which suffer the sheep to be devoured, in sparing the Wolves.

73 Of true and false witnesses.
WHEN we witness or speak truth against the wicked, for to send him to
death: though we save not his life: Yet do we not cease to be true witnesses,
and to save lives. For in purchasing the punishment of the wicked, we are
cause that diverse do live in peace and rest: and thus do we preserve and
save lives, the which is a very acceptable thing before GOD who will have the
Magistrates to punish the malefactor, Deu. 17.9 To. 13.3 i. Tim. 2.2
upon the oath of two or three witnesses, that the evil being purged, we
might live in peace.

Now if the Lord be careful of such temporal and corporal saving and
preserving: Let us understand that by a far stronger reason he takes care
for the spiritual and eternal saving of lives: as he has always showed,
when he raised up true men, which have given themselves to show the way of
truth unto his people: as were Noah, Abraham, Lot, Moses, Joshua, the judges,
the holy kings and Prophets.

And not content heerewith, He has sent his own son, who not only was a
true and faithful witness for to preach deliverance as a minister and servant,
but by himself has made the purgation of our sins, sheading his most
precious blood for the eternal redemption of our souls.

And if the deliverance of our souls be so precious before God, Heb. 1.3. and
9.12. To. 8.32.
that he has not spared his own son: It folloeth therefore, that we must be
careful thereof, before all other things: Otherwise we are great contemners of
God, and renounce to be saved and redeemed by Jesus Christ: the which is to do
him great injury, and consequently to put our souls in bondage with the Devil.

Now for to be careful of our deliverance, we must as Jesus Christ has sent
us his Apostles and disciples for to be true witnesses unto us, and asmuth as
lay in their ministerye have delivered us from death and damnation: even so
still now we should demand of him such Pastors and Ministers, which will be
true witnesses, and declare nothing unto us, but the pure word of God, to the
which if we cleave by faith and repentance, 2. Tim. 4.3. Io. 8.44.
they shall deliver our souls. But as they are the most profitable witness,
which preach unto us Jesus C. even so the most exquisit deceivers ar they which
under ye shadow of religion, do set forth men's traditions, and doctrines of
devils vain speculatio^s and subtle questions. For such, so much as they can
do shut up the kingdom of heaven from men and do deliver them unto the Devil.

74 We must not uphold the slaunderer, but bear with our brethrens
infirmity.
IN the word of God, not only those are charged with this sin of false
witness, that first set on foot, and erect a false tale to the discredit of
their neighbor, but those also that by their approving of it, and ears
willingly opened unto it, do uphold the same. For notwithstanding it were set
up, yet must it of necessity fall down again, if it should find none that
would by ye receiving and approving thereof, vnderpropp it, and (as it were)
lend their shoulders unto it. Therefore it is said by the holy Ghost in
Exodus: Thou shall not receive a false tale, Ex. 23.1.
neither shall thou put thy hand with the wicked, to be a false witness.

It shall not excuse us, that we were not the first authors of it, neither yet
that many as well as we, did believe it, but we are taught to take heed, how we
give credit to report, even strengthened with the approbation of many (whereof
notwithstanding we our selves have no certain knowledge) that we be not so
hasty to give sentence in our heart, and much less in place of justice use our
testimonye against any, upon no sufficient ground, moved only by the speech
and reports that run abroad. We are taught, neither to go, nor join with
the mighty to witness a false matter for favor or fear: neither yet upon a
kind of foolish pity, to honor the poor, and to join with them in their
unjust cause: so precious would the Lord that the regard of his truth
should be. It is not lawful for us to agree with any against God. And as for
the easy ear that so soon receives the slaunderers report, the holy Ghost
gives the medicine for it in the proverbs: Pro. 25.23
As the North wind (says he) drives away the rain, so does an angry
countenance the slaundering tongue. It is the over good entertainment, that
the slanderous tongue finds that cherishes it: for the heavy countenance
drives such guestes clean away. It is forbidden as a sin against this ix.
commandment, to blaze abroad the infirmities of our brethren: and therefore
we must admonish one another, and so to hide sin and iniquity: we desire
you brethren (says S. Paul) admonish them that are unruly: 1 The. 5.14.
comfort the feeble minded: bear with the weak: be patient toward all men.
It is forbidden to expound things that might be well taken, into the worse
part: and for some little blemish to deface the whole. It is commanded us to
show forth our zeal against sins that be already ripe in our selves, Mat.
7.3.4.
and to turn it that way to be revenged upon them, when it would be so gladly
occupied in suspecting and surmising evil in others, which either is not so at
all, or at the least, not so clear as in our selves.

So that always this be our rule, from the sight of our own sins, to
proceed to the reproving of others.

75 The exposition of the last commandment.
IN the former commandments, To. 7.7. Ge. 6.5. and 8.12.
God would suppress our will and affections, but in this tenth commandment in
plain words he forbids all inward desire, whatsoever is unlawful to be
done, as the rebellion of the flesh, all corruption of the old man, all blot
of original sin: he utterly inhibiteth al evil thoughts, light motions,
sudden affections, yea though we never fully purpose them, neither consent
willingly to do them. Pro. 20.9 To. 7.23. Ep. 4.22. Col. 3.9. To. 6.6.
Concupiscence wherewith we love our selves, and seek our own commodity
only, not caring for others, and are wholly in our nature corrupted, is the very
self same vice or original sin, whereunto we are borne or subject. God
requires of us holiness and cleannes, and not only outward righteousness of
works, but the mind, spirit, and the powers of the mind, and perfection and
holiness, such as he him self is endued withal. And because yt al me^ are
corrupted, and therefore imperfect by nature, in mind and thought, and also in
it self: by this commandment we are all convicted and found guilty of sin
before God, as is more at large taught in the seventh and eight chapters of S.
Paul's Epistles unto the Romans.

76 What is meant by the word covet.
TO covet, sometimes imports the will which is in a man, as when one shall
cast his eye upon the goods of his neighbor, if he shall be tempted to
covetousness, and that he norish such a temptation in him, and give himself the
bridle: sin then has won so much, Ex. 20.17. Deu. 5.21
that he has a resolute will in him, that he could wish well, that the same
were his. This is one kind of desire which imports withal a will, when a man
shall consent unto sin, and if he had the mean, he would put in practice his
wicked will and purpose which he has conceived. Now such wicked desires have
been already forbidden, Deu. 5.18 19. Ex. 20.14 15.
when it has been said, Thou shall not steal: thou shall not commit adultery.
For God has not only forbidden the act of fornication, and stealing, but to
desire and lust after either the wife of another, or his goods and substance.
But there are other desires and lusts, to the which we cleave not at all, to
consent unto them, which oftentimes tickle and stir us up, and we perceive
some motion in us which is against God, and is rebellious to the integrytye and
vprightnes which is contained in the law, and such desires are forbidden in
this place. For God not without cause, having condemned all evil desires, and
affections, annexeth that this is not yet such a perfection as he requires:
but we must know, that every affection which stirs us up unto evil,
(although we conclude not any thing within our selves, neither rest our
selves upon it, that if only a concupiscence forceably break forth in us and
we strive therewith:) that this is a sin committed: and we are culpable
before God. And thus we see what integrytye the Lord requires of us in this
commandment, Deu. 6.5. Mat. 22 37. Mat. 12.29.30.
when having forbidden wicked desires, he adioyneth that both our senses and
minds must be locked up in such sort under his fear and inflamed with such a
love and desire, to walk in all holiness, that we be not moved or driven either
on one side or other, by any wicked passion, to desire either the goods or the
wife of another.

77 What is meant by the word neighbor.
BY the word neighbor, God means not only our kindred and friends, at whose
hands we hope for some profit and advantage, or which have deserved some
recompense at our hands: but he will have us to have an eye, to the common
alia^ce, which he has set among us: for therefore are we all formed after his
Image, and bear his mark. Deu. 5.21. Ex. 20.17 Luke 10.29.37. Pro. 27.10
Besides this, we be al of one nature, the which ought to hold us in true
unity and brotherlye love: but many make themselves unworthy of it: for some be
full of wilines and malice: some are full of pride* and othersome are full of
harmefulnes: so that (as much as lies in the^) they do cut off themselves, from
the array and company of neighbors: and yet notwithstanding, although men
deserve not ^o be counted and taken for neighbors: yet in bearing them love,
we show it is good reason, that God should ouerweigh our own naughtines.
Such as are our enemies and labor to devour us, do notwithstanding, not cease
to be our neighbors, in respect of ye order that God has set. And for the
same cause also our Lord Jesus Christ tells us, that it is no charity to
recompense him, that has done us a good turn or service, nor to love those
who^ we like of, Mat. 5.46. Luke 6.27. Act. 7.60. 1. Cor. 4.13.
or at whose hands we look for some profit. For the heathen do as much as that
comes too, but they do it not to obey god and his law, and when we have
regard of our own profit, it is rather a loving of our selves, then any point
of charity. For the marks that charity shoots at, are god, and the
communion or fellowship that ought to be among us: and then it is a true proof
yt we are desirous to love God, when we endeavor to do good, even to them yt
are unworthy of it. But because we are very far from the perfection of ye law:
it behooves us to fight against our own nature, that we may obey God. For the
true exercise of christianity is, to acknowledge and bewail our own sinfulnes
and infirmity in discharging our duty toward God, and thereupon to labor and
endeavor to win of our selves from day to day, so as our lusts may not
ouermaister us, but rather that God may have such superioritye, that in stead
of louinge our selves, we may labor to employ our selves in doing good
wheresoever he calls us.

78 We must apply our thoughts delight, and desires to profit our neighbor.
THe lord our god commands us, to bring our desires, thoughts, and
delights, unto the good and benefit of our brethren: and that we bring not
only hands to do well to our neighbors, but also hearts, thoughts,
desires, lusting, longing and delighting therein: according as the Apostle
testifies of himself, that he was delighted with the law of God according
to the inner man: whereunto accords the holy Ghost by the mouth of Solomon
saying: Pro. 21.15
It is joy to the just to do judgment. Many have been brought to do
outward things in themselves good, which never had any ioyefull desire in them
to glorify God with them: but the holy ghost works in his, not only a change
of works, Ps. 51.10.
but also an alteration of thoughts, desires, and delights, yt their desires
may be holden within yt which is good, wherein it behooves a Christian to be
careful, Deu. 29.4.
eue^ thus to transform his delights: not taking it sufficient, if he shall
have brought the^ at any time, from yt which was evil, until he have joined
them to yt which is good. Wherefore, let our care be increased this way, and let
us be far from thinking yt the grace of god only reaches unto the deed and
full consent, letting desires and thoughts take their liberty in their
corruption: but we must confess (as the truth is) that his grace not only
brideleth thoughts from rushinge into that which is evil: but also gives
them a sweet taste in that which is good and holds them greatly thereunto.
Wherefore let us seek after the grace of God, not only to season our deeds, but
also our thoughts and delights therewith, that our study and thoughts may be
occupied in that which is acceptable unto him.

79 Concupiscence restrained by the Papists.
THe Papists do restrain this word of concupiscence, to those evil
affections and desires which import a resolute will, and full consent, the
which is against the natural sense of Moses, and yet is it a doctrine fully
concluded among them. And although they cannot deny that to be pricked and
provoked with an evil and wicked desire is a damnable vice, Ex. 20.17.
and which proceeds from original sin, and from this corruption which we
draw from Adam: yet they imagine that after Baptism this is no more a sin.
Deu. 5.21.
As if such a fantasy come into the mind of man, to doubt of the promises of
GOD, to murmr against him, to be angrye with him: when a man shall be
afflicted, if it come into his fantasy to accuse God of injustice and
crueltye, this is not a sin, say the Papists. Neither are these of the
rudest and ignorantest sort among them which speak thus, but this is a
general resolution, and doctrine universally concluded on, in all their
devilish Sinagogues. There is not a Synagogue among them, where this has not
been received as an article of faith: namely that a man being provoked and
stirred up by some wicked desire sins not, To. 7.7.
that if he be tempted in himself to commit murder, to commit fornication:
and briefly to be guilty of all the crimes in the world: if so be, that he
consent and assent not thereunto, that is to say, if he resolve not himself
herein, to say that he will put in practice his wicked conceit, and that he
stay not himself heereon to please himself in this wicked affection: all
this (say the Papists) is no sin. This is (say they) but to exercise us in
combat and fight against sin, and we then declare that we are valiant
champions, and that sin bears not rule over us, or reighneth in us. Now
(in deed) it is true, that the faithful show well that the spirit of God
reighneth in them, when they repel and beat back such temptations, knowing
that they are contrary unto God, and that he condemns them. It is certain
that hereby it is showed, that God has given us victory over sin, and that
the virtue and power of his spirit abides in us, and yt we are stout and
valiant champions to bid battle against Satan. But this is not to say, that
we are exempted and freed from all fault, Io. 3.6. To. 7.14.
and that we may so pluck out of us all sin, and ransom our selves so
fully, as if it might not stayne and spotte us any longer. We are far wide
from this. To. 3.9.23 Gal. 3.22.
For on the one side it is true, that we have great cause to praise GOD, that
he bestows this grace upon us by his holy spirit, to surmount and overcome
all wicked affections: but in the mean time, we ought to bewail our selves
knowing that we are on our part over weak, and that if he take not pity
upon us, forasmuch as we have within us an evil conscience, which is to
provoke his vengeance against us: we should well deserve to be throne down
of him into the bottomless pit of death.

80 Concupiscence without consent is sin.
IN the former commandments, the Lord condemned whatsoever wicked
affections our hearts conceive: but there is great difference between a set
will, and affections whereby we are tickled. Therefore by this last
commandment, God requires such integrity of us, that no corrupt lust
should move us unto evil, howesoeuer it be that we consent not unto it. And
herein God would open and discover the shame and reprooch of the Papists,
and how that the greatest Clerks among them are more rude and ignorant then
the poor unbelievers, which never heard one word of the holy scripture.
Deuteronomy. 6.5. Mat. 22 37 Luke 10.27. Mar. 12.30 To. 13.9.
It is said that the sum of the Law is, that we love God withal our heart,
withal our soul, and with all our mind. Let us now consider, if a man
conceive any thing against GOD, if he conceive any evil lust or desire of
fornication or stealing, although he cleave not at all unto it, yet one part
of his soul and understanding is already corrupted, and he loves not GOD
with all his heart. There is no question of the heart, but of this apprehension
and conceiving of the mind, which is in the soul of man. Now he shows that
there is great vanity in this, that the fear of God, withholdeth him not, as
it ought. It follows then, that he is culpable and condemned, because he
discharges not himself, in loving GOD, as he has commanded him. And thus, we
see, that evil and wicked thoughts are condemned, and that we cannot so
excus^ them, but that God shall woorthilye punish us for them. And let us know
that although men never consent unto evil, to have their will resolutely bent
thereunto: yet cease they not to be accursed before God, if he would use his
severity against them.

81 In evil deeds left undone, and in good deeds done, we may be deceived.
THe understanding that Christians have of their estate how it fares between
GOD and them, is better taken and has surer proof and more certain
testimony from their desires and inward affections unto the law of God, then
from their outward doing of things commanded by the law. Evil things may be
left undone for fear of punishment, Mat. 6.16.
for desire of commendation, or avoiding of evil speech, or for that we are
not tempted with the^, when notwithstanding the heart shall not in any respect
mislike of them. Esaias. 29.13.
Good things also may be done for praise of man, for hope of merits with
God, Mar. 7.6.
when yet the affection shall nothing be moved that way. And this is nothing
before GOD, to avoid evil from our hand, but to imprint it nevertheless in
our heart, or to do good with our hand without any desire of the heart.

So that both in evil deeds left undone, and also in good deeds done, we may
be deceived. But if the inward affection of the heart stand desirouslye
affected, after that which God has commanded us to do unto men, and
hatefully affected toward that which God has forbidden, this change cannot be
wrought there, but by the spirit of God alone. As for the praise, and
dispraise of the people, it reaches nothing so far. Wherefore let us embrace
this desire unto the duties commanded us, not giving any rest unto the Lord
in our prayers, before we shall obtain this inward testimony which is above
al exception to be taken against it: and without the which outward doings are
of no account before the Lord, Ps. 42.21. To. 12.8. 2. Co. 9.7.
who looks into ye affections of man, and embraces a cheerful and
delightful giver.

82 No man fulfilleth the law thoroughly.
MEn by their good wills can never find in their hearts to give over the
opinion which they have of their own righteousness, except they be compelled
and forced thereunto. For although we be overwhelmed with so many vices as is
pity to behold: yet the worst and deepest rooted vice in our nature is pride,
or presumptuousnesse, Genesis 6.5.
which is a selfewilled persuading that there is somewhat in us: inso much that
although God tell us, that there is in us but evil, lewdnes filthiness, and
uncleanness, and that all the virtue which we dream upon is but vanity and
leasing: yet can he not compass to humble us, until we our selves perceive
our own need, and have proved it to our faces. The holy Ghost by Saint Paul
does pronounce that all they which are of the Law are accursed. Gal. 3.10.
Whereby he means that so long as men rest and muse upon their own works,
and think to obtain grace by that mean before God, they be accursed.

For like as he that forsakes himself, and renounceth all that he has of his
own, and groundeth himself upon the only mercy of God, is of faith: so
contrariwise he that thinks to bring any service wherewith to bind God unto
him, or imagines to recompense him with his merits, is of the Law. Deu. 27.26.
And now, seeing that the law curses all them, that performs it not to the
full, it is certain that all men from the greatest to the least are guilty.
For the sum of the Law is, that we love God with all our heart, with all our
soul, and with all our mind, Deu. 6.5. Ma 22.37. Luke 10.27 Mar. 12.30 To.
13.9.
and our neighbor as our self. That is to say, We should love we should hate,
we should fear, we should hope for nothing, but in GOD and to his glory. We
should think or muse upon nothing in our mind and understanding, but that
may make to the honor and glory of God. We should do nothing to any other,
which we would not willingly be contented should be done unto us.

If we examine our selves by this rule, we shall need no other judge then our
selves to condemn us. For certain it is, that no man can keep the Law, that
is to say, no man can discharge himself throughlye of all things that the
Law commands. For it is not in vain that it is called an intolerable
burden. Act. i5.10
Also we see our own infirmity, and there God shows us an Angelical
holiness. And how then is it possible for us to attain unto it? Nevertheless
the faithful being guided and governed by Gods spirit, do keep the Law that
is to say, they walk according to the rule that is given them in the same.

83 No man shall be justified by the deeds of the Law.
ALthough we endeavor to keep a clear conscience toward GOD, and to lead a
blameless life through charity toward men, according to the prescript rule
of Gods Law: yet our so doing, must not be with intent to purchase grace
favor, or righteousness thereby at Gods hand (for that belongs only unto
Christ, and no man living shall be justified by the deeds of the Law) nor to
glorify our selves to the worldward: For whosoever seeks the glory of men
is destitute of the glory of GOD, Ma. 5.16. etc. 1. Pet. 2.12,
and has received his reward already) but only to glorify GOD by showing
forth the mighty working of his spirit in us, to the benefit of our neighbors
to the stablishing of our own consciences in the faith, and to the confusion
and shame of the adversaries which do slanderously misreport ye doctrine of
salvation which we profes.

If we deal after this manner, then does Gods word put us out of all doubt,
that sin shall not get the upper hand of us, because we be not under the Law,
but under grace. And this continual renewing and maintayning of the battle,
against Satan, the world, To. 6.14.
and our own flesh, assures us, that although we be never so full of
infirmities, yet are we grafted into Christ, and grown into him by resembling
his death, in that we are crucified, and daily labor to crucify ye old man
with him: by means whereof we grow up again into ye liknes of his resurrection,
through newnes of life to the glory of God for ever. Finallye it warranteth us
that we be firmlye settled and grounded in Gods election so as we cannot in
any wise perish, for satan is not divided against him self, To. 6.4, 5.6. Ma.
12.2 6
the wor^^lings hate not the world nor the things therein: flesh and blood
mislike not the corruption of old Ada^: neither can any man come unto Christ
except the father draw him. Job. 6.44.


84 The dignity of the Gospel.
THe Gospel is not a common doctrine, nor a doctrine lightlye to be regarded:
And although it has pleased God that it should be preached by the means of
men, which are but frail creatures, and oftentimes of small account: 1. Tim.
1.11.
yet is it not therefore to be said that the doctrine which they pronounce
through the spirit of God, is therefore the worse or to be esteemed of less
value: for the gospel is a gospel of glory, that is to say, a glorious
doctrine, wherein the Majesty of God appears. To. 1.16.
If the power of God ought to be in estimation with us: that power shines in
the gospel. If the goodness of GOD be worthy to be sought for and loved of
us: The gospel is an instrument of that goodness: Worthy therefore it is, to
be reverenced and embraced if the goodness of God be to be reverenced, and as
it is an instrument of our salvation, so is it to be looued of us.

85 The Gospel encourages to godliness.
AS there is nothing ca^ keep good children so much in obedience then to know
their fathers good will toward them: so nothing can more pithyly move good
Christians to the service of God, and keeping of his Law, then in his gospel to
learn his unspeakable goodness and mercy toward them.

Moreover the same Gospel that teaches us by Christ's blood only to attain
remission of our sins, Ephesians. 2.10. Luke 1.73. Tit. 2.11.
does teach us also that the end of our redemption is to live in the fear of
God, and no more to be subject unto sin. God the Father by his son Jesus
Christ has delivered us from sin and satan, and therefore must we now
forsake them, and live in the obedience of him that has so mercifully and so
freely redeemed us. For this cause do we profess to forsake the Devil and
all his works, To. 6.4.
and as the Apostle says, bind our selves to rise with Christ in newness of
life, To. 13.12.
that seeing we be now made by him the children of light, we should have no
more to do with the works of darkness.

86 The will of God must be our direction.
IF we will pray rightly unto God, We must know what his will is, and to
understand the same we must know what he shows us in his word, we must
compass all our requests according to his holy will, and rest our selves
upon his promises.

And whereas the scripture speaks of the will of GOD after two sorts: 1.
Tim. 2.4 Genesis 6.6.
it is not as though he had a double will, but it is because of our grosnes
and rudeness. And whereas it is also said, that GOD is sometimes angrye,
sometimes sorrye, 1. Sam. 13 11.
and that he repents himself, it is not as though GOD had any such
passions and affections of man: But the holy Ghost applies himself to our
weakness, because we cannot comprehend God in his incomprehensible Majesty.

87 God has his elect in all countries.
Whereas it is said, that God will have all men to be saved: the meaning is
not that God will save every particular man, 1. Tim. 2.4. Ttt, 2.11.
but it is to be understood of all countries, and of all nations, so that
whereas in times past he chose but one certain people to himself: now he has
his elect in all places, and his mercy is showed to all the world: The promises
which were given to the Jews only are now stretched unto the Gentiles which
were separated from God, Ephesians. 2.12.
and cut of and banished from all hope of salvation.

88 The foundation of God abides sure.
WHen we see such turnings that they which seemed to be forwards in religion
do give back and withdraw themselves from the kingdom of heaven: 2. Tim. 2.19.
yet for all that we must not think that the Church is deminished. And
although the number of them who^ we thought to be faithful is by this means
smaller: yet let us be assured that how soever the world go, there is a sure
foundation, God will always keep his church, and there shall always be some
to call upon him, and to worship him: Ps. 72.5.
and this may be sufficient for us for as much as our salvation is so surely
settled upon the grace of our God in that it has pleased him to choose us
before the world was made and so to account us among the number of his
children. Ep. 1.4.


89 We have no power in our selves to serve God.
EXperience teaches us very evidently that we have such imbecillitie and
weakness in our selves, Ps. 46.1.2.
that we are not able to continue in the service of God unless we have a
greater strength then is to be found in our mortal nature: For such is our
frailty that we are ready to fall at every step, and moreover the devil cease
not to assault us daily, which imports that we could not be able to resist
him unless we had an higher virtue. But God who sees our imperfection, does
not at any time bring us out to combats but therwithall he gives us sufficient
strength to withstand them, 1. Cor. 10.13.
and also our Lord Jesus Christ has received al virtue and power to fortify
those yt are his that they be not forsaken: and yet notwithstanding we must
prepare our selves to an invincible courage if so be that we will go on with
our vocation and calling: Mat. 28.18
but they especially that must lead the way to other, (I mean the ministers of
the word of God) they have need of this heavenly help, for Satan will more
fiercely and more da^gerously bend his assault toward them, then toward any
other.

90 God will try and prove our hearts.
WE must not think to serve God at our ease and rest, for he will try and
prove what hearts we have to employ our selves to his will. And this is the
cause why he lets loose the bridle to the wicked and grants peace and rest
to the naughtye persons: Ps 44.21.
and on the other side suffers his children to be molested by them, and this
is the matter that we are so often exercised and tried: but we have the remedy
at hand, for the scripture shows us that the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
shall be common unto us if so be, 2. Tim. 2.1
we embrace it and cast it not away through our negligence.

91 The word of God abides for ever.
IF we will prove our faith and obedience toward god, the truth of his word
must the^ reign over us, 1. Pet. 1.23.
we must frame our lives thereafter, we must know yt it is an abiding and
immortal truth not flitting nor changeable, it is not a temporal doctrine to
serve for a season, but the mind of God was that it should be of force in
these days, and unto the end of the world, and that the world should sooner
perish and heaven and earth decay then the authority of the law or of the
prophets should be diminished: Mat. 5.18. Luke 16.17. 2. Tim. 3.15.
and therefore we must suffer our selves to be governed by the holy
scripture, referring our selves thither without seeking wisdom in any other
place.

92 It is not sufficient only to read the scripture.
THe scriptures are given unto us from above, not to the end we might have
them only in books and so lay them up as our treasure as many men do:
neither yet are they given that we might simply and slightly read them, Mat.
7.21. To. 2.13. Ia. 1 22.
as though it were sufficient to read: either that by a superstitions opinion,
the reading of them might be in stead of worship and divine service, as the
papists do, and as the Jews continuallye do on the Sabbath days: but they
are given to this end that they might be read with diligence, and with a mind
desirous to find out those things which belong to true knowledge and true
godliness.

93 The Scripture is profitable.
THere is nothing in the scriptures which may not serve to our learning and
institution of our life: there is no vain or unprofitable thing contained in
the oracles of god and therefore we must profit in the reading of the scripture
unto piety and holiness of life. 2. Tim. 3.16.17.
What soever is set down therein we must labor to learn it, for it were a
reproach against the spirit of truth, Io. 16.13.
if we should think he has taught any thing which were not material for
us to know: secondly whatsoever is taught in the scriptures, let us know that
it tends to the increase of godliness: For hereunto specially do they serve,
To. 15.4.
as namelye to erect the minds of men (being prepared unto patience and
strengthened by consolations) unto the hope of eternal life, and to keep them
in the meditation thereof.

94 The scripture is divinely inspired.
THe scripture calls no man, but as is well agreeing either to his nature,
his affections or his manners. It flattereth no man (although it give very
honorable names and titles to the faithful) neither blames it any body but
upon just cause. For the scripture is divinely inspired and endited by the holy
Ghost which is a teacher of all truth and a hater of lies.

With fear and reverence therefore, with care and diligence we should read
the holy scriptures and hear the preaching of the Gospel: for therein does God
open his mouth to give us wisdom. Io. 4.24.
And we must not imagine any carnal thing of God seeing he is a spirit: we
must not resort to the preaching of his word and to the public prayers
slacklye or for customs sake, or to avoid the danger of the law, as do the
hypocrites, the superstitious and Idolaters: but to the end we may receive and
learn wisdom of God through his grace and goodness, whereby we knowing him,
may walk in his fear.

95 The scripture must be read with reverence.
THe readers of the scriptures must be searchers and not corrupters, wresters,
dreamers, or superstitious murmurers. For the Scriptures do not require any
searching, but that which is godly, humble and desirous to know and embrace
one truth only: otherwise a man may find some which read the Scriptures
but not to search out Gods truth, but rather to hinder the same. Even so,
Herod inquired out the truth out of the scriptures concerning the place
where Christ should be borne, Mat. 2.4
not to the end he might worship him, but rather to destroy him. Also the
Pharesies said not to Nicodemus behold what is written in the scripture
concerning christ: but they said search and look, for out of Gallilye rises
no Prophet. So in like manner wicked and ungodly Io. 7.52.
men do search the scriptures to corrupt the same to their own destruction.

96 Faith in Christ.
IT is very necessary for christians to know, first whereof faith in christ
does come: what we must believe concerning Christ, and in what, faith in
Christ is to be continued and confirmed. To. 10.17
Faith (the Apostle says) comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God:
Secondly, if so be faith comes by hearing of the word of the Lord, and if it
be our part to abide in the same, and that we ought not to believe any other
thing then the very same which is set before us by the word, whereby we
conceive faith and believing in the which we abide: very foolish are they
which at this day say they know not what to believe and what not, for if so be
they were abiding in the word of the Lord they should know what to believe:
but because they have already applied their ears and mind to human
doctrine, it comes to pass that they being ignorant of Gods truth, are
carried about with every wind of doctrine the which is forbidden by the holy
ghost. Ephesians. 4.14.
Thirdly this also is manifest, in what christian faith ought to be maintained
and confirmed, Io. 8.31.
when our savior Christ says yt they which continue in his word are his true
disciples. So that we must abide in that from which we have conceived our
faith. We are begotten by the word of truth thorough faith, Iam. 1.18.
and by the same we are strengthened and confirmed.

97 Christ has freed us from the law.
Our Lord Jesus Christ was sent to redeem them that were under the law, that
we might receive the adoption of sons. He was moreover our peace when he
shed his blood to wype out all our sins, Gal. 4.5.
to deliver us from all our debtes, when he became a curse for us and was
become subject to all reproach to cover all the faults which we had committed.
And whereas God was our enemy (as also we on our parts were enemies to him)
in Christ may we behold our agreement, Ephesians. 2.14.15.16.
and so likewise the atonement which was made and accomplished.

98 There is no change in God.
WHereas it pleased God to hide the witness of his Gospel for a season from
the Gentilles, and afterward to have it preached throughout all the world,
and choose such a fit time for it, as he had determined in his secret
Coun^^^: we must not say that he is chaungeable therefore: Iam. 1.17.
but we must learn to worship and reverence him in his providence with all
humbleness, confessing that nothing proceeds from him but most justly and
most wisely, 1. Tim. 1.17.
and that whatsoever he has once determined, and whatsoever he does, cannot
be controlled.

99 The will of God must be our rule.
WE must not give our selves too much to our lusts, as by nature we are
provoked thereunto, but always wait upon God, to see what his good will and
pleasure is and with patience and quietness wait for the same, and although
many things fall not out as we would have them, but we think to our
foolish reason that God should have done other wise: yet must we bridle our
selves, and show that obedience unto God, that his counsel may be a
sufficient rule for us, 1. Ti. 2.7.
remembering also that God has his due time, and it is not for us to appoint
him a time when he shall do what he has to do, this authority and office
of commanding is not in our hands, Act. 1.7.
neither is it in us to know the times and seasons which the father has put
in his power.

100 How the way is opened for us to pray.
AS often as the goodness of God is witnessed unto us, and be promises us his
grace although we be wretched sinners. As often also as we hear that our sins
were forgiven us by the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that
then payement was made for all our debtes, Col. 2.14.
and the obligation that was against us dispatched and rent in pieces, and God
made at one with us. We have the way opened unto us to pray unto God, as also
the Lord says I will say unto them which were not my people, Hos. 2.23.
thou art my people and they shall say thou art my God: therefore so soon as
our Lord GOD makes us to taste his goodness, and promises us that even as
he sent once, his only son unto us, so now he will accept us in his name:
we need not doubt to come unto him, for it is as much as if he commanded us
to pray, and the one hangs upon the other.

101 The drift of the Scripture.
THe whole course of the scripture teaches us, especially and above all
things, that we should not doubt, but assure our selves and undoubtedly
believe that God is merciful, loving and patient, Iam. 1.6.
that he is neither dissembler nor deceauer, but that he is faithful and true
and keeps his promise: yea and has performed that he promised in delivering
his only begotten son to death for our sins, Luke 1.69.
that every one that believes in him might not perish, but have everlasting
life. Io. 3.16.
Here we cannot doubt, but GOD is pleased with us, that he loves us in deed,
that the hatred and wrath is taken away, To. 4.25.
seeing he suffered his son to die for us wretched sinners.

102 We are assured of the favor of God.
GReat cause have we to yield most heartye thanks unto our good God,
forasmuch as it has pleased him to deliver us from this monstrous doctrine of
doubting, wherein we were noussed in the time of ignorance: so that we can
now assure our selves that the holy ghost cries and brings forth in our
hearts groninges that cannot be expressed. To. 8.26.
We are commanded in the gospel to behold, not our own good works, or our
own perfection: To. 3 22.
but God the promiser and Christ the Mediator. Contrariwise, the Pope
commands us to look, Ephesians. 2.8.9
not only unto GOD the promiser, nor unto Christ our high priest: but unto our
works and merits. Here on ye one side doubting and desperation must needs
follow: but on the other side assurance of gods favor and joy of the spirit,
if we cleave unto God who cannot lie. For as he promised so has he delivered
his son to death ye through his blood he might redeem us from our sins and
from eternal death. Tit. 1.2.
In this case we cannot doubt unless we will utterly deny God.

103 The liberty of a true Christian.
A True Christian is the child of grace and remission of sins, because he is
under no law, but is above the law, sin, death, and hell. And even as
Christ is free from the grave, and Peter from the prison, Mat. 28.6.
so is a Christian free from the law. And such a respect there is between the
justified conscience and the law, as is between Christ raised up from the
grave, and the grave it self, and as is between Peter delivered from the
prison, Act. 12.9.
and the prison it self. And, like as Christ by his death and resurrection is
dead to the grave, so that it has now no power over him, nor is able any
longer to hold him, but the stone being rolled away, the seals broaken, and
the keepers astonished, he ryseth again, and goes away without any let:
and as Peter by his deliverance is freed from the prison, and goes whyther
he will: even so the conscience by grace is delivered from the law, Heb. 13.9
and so is every one that is borne of the spirit.

104 The first point of a true Christian.
THE kingdom of Christ is not earthly, but a spiritual kingdom, by the power
of the holy ghost reigning and flourishing in the hearts of men, and setting it
self against the works of the Devil and of the world, and therefore looks
for no other thing in the world, Io. 18.36.
but misery and trouble. Wherefore the first point of a true Christian is, so
far as man's frailty can suffer, 1. Io. 2.15.
to renounce the world and the affections and pleasures thereof and with the
comfort of Gods mercy in Christ Jesus to arm himself with patience against
all the mischiefs yt the Devil or the world can raise against him. A true
professor of Christ and his gospel makes this account before hand and looks
for no other, and because he knows yt life of a Christian is a warfare upon
the earth, he understands also that Christ's soldiers which will profess to
fight under his banner may not in this life look for wealth, Io. 15.18.
prosperitye and quietness, especially when he sees the Devil, the world and
the flesh ready prepared to overthrow him and to bring him to confusion.
Whosoever therefore dallieth with the world, shows himself more then half a
traitor against Christ, much more they that for the world, revolte from
Christ.

105 A note to know a true Christian.
THere is a most certain note, whereby the true children of God are known and
discerned from the children of the world: if by the spirit of God they be
regenerate unto innocence and holiness. To, 8.9
For as GOD by his spirit consecrateth us for temples to himself, so by the
same spirit he dwells in us: Io. 14.17. 1. Cor. 3.16.17
and so the sons of God are counted spiritual not in respect of a full and
absolute perfection: but only for the newness of life begun in them, and
because they have the spirit of God abiding in them, howesoeuer they feel
some relics of the flesh remaining. To. 8.10.
The kingdom of the spirit is the abolishing of the flesh, and in who^ the
spirit of Christ reigns not, they do not appertain unto Christ. They are
not Christians that serve the flesh for by plucking him away from his spirit,
they make him like to a dead image or carcass.

106 A true Christian is partly under the Law, and partlye under grace.
A True christian is divided into two times. In that he is flesh he is under
the Law, in that he is spirit, he is under grace. Concupiscence, Gal. 5.19
covetousness, ambition, pride and such like vices do always cleave to the
flesh. Also ignorance, contempt of God, impaciency, murmuring and grudging
against God, because he hinders and breaks of our counsels, our devises
and enterprises, and because he spedilye punishes not such as are wicked
rebellious and contemptuous persons. etc.

Such manner of sins are rooted in the flesh of the faithful, wherefore if
we behold nothing but the flesh: we shall abide always under the time of
the Law, but these days must be shortened or no flesh shall be saved. The
Law must have his time appointed wherein it must have his end the time
thereof is not perpetual but has his end, Ma. 24.22 To. 12.4 To. 6.9
which end is Christ but the time of grace is eternal. For Christ being dead,
dies no more. He is eternal, therefore the time of grace is also eternal.

107 The spirit of Christ, dwells in Christians.
WE must always remember, that free remission of sins, cannot be separated
from the spirit of regeneration: for yt were as much as for to rent Christ in
pieces. Which thing if it be true, as indeed it is most true, then are the
adversaries of the gospel void of the true sense of the holy Ghost, 2. Cor. 5.5
when they charge us with arrogance in that we dare acknowledge the spirit of
Christ, dwelling in us.

For either we must deny Christ, or confess, that we are Christians by his
spirit.

It is pitiful to consider their horrible falling from the word of God,
forasmuch as they do not only boaste themselves to be Christians without the
spirit of God: but also scorn and scoff at the faith of others bring surely
grounded upon the rock, but such is the philosophy of the Papists, the spirit
is indifferently sometimes called the spirit of God the father, sometime of
Christ, not only because all the fullness thereof is shedd upon Christ, Col.
2.9.
as he is our mediator and head, that from thence might redou^d to every one
of us his portion: but also because the same spirit is common to the father
and the son, who have one essence, and the same eternal Deity

108 Christians must be constant,
BY constancy and perseverance in faith, how many cruel persecutions soever
are exercised against us, what grievous offenses soever are objected against us
by them that fall: although the deceitful error of false Prophets do resist
our faith, 1. Pet. 1.9.
yet notwithstanding at the length we shall receive the salvation of our
souls, which is the end of our Faith.

Christ therefore acquireth this fortitude of those that are his. Ma. 24.13
that they persist and abide stoutly in sight, against all the impedimentes of
their Faith.

Thus also Paul commands us to do, 2. The. 3 13.
that we be not weary of well doing.

And in an other place he says, 2. Tim, 2.5
that no man is crowned except he strive lawfully. We must therefore bear
all things with a bold mind and stout courage which the Lord shall lay upon
us.

109 The duty of Christians.
IT is the part of Christians so to live, so to behave themselves, and so to
suffer all things, that Christ only may be the cause of the hatred and
persecution which they suffer: and then this, is, and ought to be a comfort
unto us, that if we suffer for Christ, then are we his, then shall we say
with the Apostle Paul, We labor and are rebuked because we trust in the
living God, 1. Tim. 4.10.
which is the savior of all men, especially of those that believe. This is a
great consolation and comfort, that how great soever the dangers be, if faith
be present it is able to lift up a discouraged heart.

For he that only continues to the end, committing himself under the
tuition and protection of the Lord He (I say) at length shall be safe, although
he be delivered to the death and hated of all men. Ma. 10.22
This safetye and health is promised not by resisting but by suffering as the
Lord does plainly declare. Luke 21.19
By your patience (says he) possess your souls. The which contains a
wonderful consolation.

They whith fight under princes, are doubtful of the victory, but Christ
promises victory without all doubt, to them that fight to the end. Let us
not therefore fear or doubt to fight for the glory of the Lord, Mar. 13.13
although the whole world rise against us, because an happy and prosperous
end is promised unto us of Jesus Christ the son of God, which is a faithful
keeper of our salvation, if we continue.

110 The Fruit of our communion with the death of Christ.
IF We be Christians, then must appear in us the sign of our Communion
with the death of Christ, whose fruit is that the flesh be crucified with
all our concupiscences.

To. 6.8.
Howbeit we may not therefore count this communion as none, because (as yet) we
do feel some relics of the flesh to live in us: But we are continually to
study for the increase thereof, until we are come unto the mark. For it is well
if our flesh be continually mortified, and we have well profited, when the
flesh being subdued, has yielded to the holy Spirit.

And there is an other communion of the death of Christ, whereof the Apostle
Paul speaks in diverse places, 2. Cor. 4 10
and namely to the Corinthians as touching the bearing of the Cross, after
which follows the participation of eternal life.

Newness of life must be followed after of Christians the whole course of
their whole life: for if they ought to represent in themselves, by the
mortification of the flesh, the Image of Christ, and life of the spirit: That
must be done once for all, but this must continue still.

Not as though the flesh were mortified in us in a moment: but because we
must not reuolte, or go back in mortifying the flesh. For if we turn back
unto our filthiness, we deny Christ, To. 8.10.
of whom we cannot be partakers, but by newnes of life.

111 God is not the author of sin.
ALthough God gives the first moving, power and strength in all manner of
actions, which we must confess to be good as proceeding from him: and
orders and disposes all evil, To. 9.14.
which is a perverting of the good that comes from God, and proceeds from
Satan and the corruption of man's nature, so that he co^uerteth the same
always in the end to his glory, and the benefit of his elect, as we see in the
persecution of the wicked and the infirmities of the godly: Ps. 19.9.
yet is he by no means to be charged as the author and cause of sin and
evil. When it pleased the almighty to show forth his infinite power,
wisdom and goodness in the creation of things visible and invisible, bodily
and spiritually, it pleased him for the illustration and setting forth of the
glory of his goodness, to ordeyne that evil should proceed out of the freewill
of his reasonable creatures: And this his ordinance is good. For although evil
be naught, and cursed be he that says evil is good, Esaias 5.20
yet that there should be evil (which is Gods ordinance) it is excellent
good. The excellency of goodness cannot so well appear and be known, as by
the comparison of the contrary which is evil. Therefore it is perfect good
that evil should be the manifestation of that which is good: we see that in
all the creatures and works of the world, God has ordained that his glory
should shine in contraries: As to the intent that the beauty and glory of
light should be seen and known to be such as it is, he has ordained
darkness. For if he had created light to be perpetual without any change of
darkness, how had it been possible for men, although living in the light to
have known the excellencye of light, and so should God have been defrauded of
the glory of so beautiful, profitable and comfortable a creature. Therefore even
as by darkness, we learn how to esteem light, and by bitter that which is
sweet, and every other thing by his contrary: even so by the deformity of evil
we are taught, how great is the excellent comelines of yt which is good, and so
the ordinance of God yt there should be evil is perfect good.

112 God cannot be accounted the cause of sin.
THat ye glory of gods mercy might appear in the salvation of his elect, and
his justice in the condemnation of the reprobate, To. 9.22.23.
it was necessary that there should be evil, and so necessary that otherwise
there should have been no matter for the mercy and justice of God to work
upon: for if there should have been no sin nor evil, Ps. 19.9.
wherein then should the mercy of God have been seen in pardoning and
forgiving sins, if there should have been no transgression, how should the
glory of Gods justice have shined in punishment? And thus it is evident yt god
by no means may be counted ye author of evil, which he has not created, made,
or wrought, but ordained yt it should proceed from the freewill of his
reasonable creatures for the illustration of his glory. Let us therefore
tremble at his righteous judgments who does al things according to the good
pleasure of his will: and has made the wicked man for the day of his wrath,
and yet by no means is the cause of his wickedness. If any man be not satisfied
with this answer, To. 11.33.34.
he may enter further, unto the unmeasurable depth of Gods judgment, into the
which he may rather find an entrance, then a way out, except it be to his
everlasting destruction for his horrible presumption.

113. Sin is not of God.
IN the beginning of all things god made man, not in such sort as he now is
in, miserable, a bond slave of sin and death, but excellent, holy, just, and
good: but through his own fault and transgression of gods laws, he fell into
sin punishment, death, hell, and into the very power of the devil. And
hereby it is manifest, that sin was neither created nor commanded by God,
but forbidden, because god gave unto man a good and holy commandment,
wherewith he forbadde him that fruit, which being eaten would bring sin,
death and damnation, We must not now busily dispute, and curiously search why
god gave this commandment of not eating unto man, when notwithstanding he was
not ignorant of the event, or of that which would come to pass? or for what
cause he gave the devil power to tempt and deceive man? Or wherefore God did
not mightily keep man from falling? etc. For the holy Ghost by the mouth of
Paul rejects such kind of questions and finds great fault with them, 1.
Tim. 4.7. and 6.20. 2. Tim. 2.16. Tit. 3.9.
and sharply reproves and condemns them. Wherefore the best and wisest way
is to believe that God is just, and to confess that he wills not that which
is evil, much less does evil.

114 The first step to the grace of God is to confess our sins.
THey are incurable who having n^ feeling of their sins despise the grace of
God. Therefore it is horrible blindness to be ignorant of our blindness, even as
not to know our sickness, is almost a disease incurable. And as the first
step to recover health is to acknowledge our infirmitye, even so the first
step to the grace of God is, to know our ungodliness and ignorance. To this
effect appertains that which S. John says: 1. Io. 1.8.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and the blood of Jesus Christ his son shall cleanse us from all iniquity.
In the very chosen and dear children of God, there surely is much sin: But
it is taken away, it is not imputed, neither does it remain: in the wicked
only there remains sin and damnation: There is therefore a passing sin,
and a remaining sin. To this effect pertains this saying, he that believes
in the son has everlasting life, and he that obeys not the son shall not
see life, Io. 3.36.
but the wrath of God abides on him. Let us therefore believe in the son of
God, let us confess unto him our sins, that we being illuminated by him and
absolved from our sins, may come at the last to that light which no man can
attain unto.

115 Sin is not of Gods creation in man, but of the devils procurement.
WHereas sin is in man's nature: it is not of Gods putting in by creation, but
by reason that Satan did spread his naughtiness further abroad at such time,
as man was beguiled by his wilines, to disapoint the benefyte of God. And thus
it appears that the Devils became accursed of them selves, and that their
being cruel, full of rebellion, full of lying and full of wickedness, came
altogether of their turning away from their creator as the scripture teaches
us. 2. Pet. 2.4.
Yet for all that they cease not to be always under ye hand of God. And
therefore what a thing were this if we had not the knowledge thereof? For when
it is said yt ye devil is ye prince of this world it were inought to make us
afraid, if so be we knew not that there is a bridle alofte which reineth him
back, and hinders him of doing that which he would. For if Satan's power
were not limited, he would out of hand have his full fling at us: We know he
desires nothing but our destruction according also as he is our deadly enemy:
so that he goes about like a roaring lion seeking to devour us. 1. Pet 5.8.
So then one of the necessariest articles that we have, is to know that the
devil is held short, and that howsoever he play the cruel enemy against our
salvation, yet can he do nothing further then is permitted him from above.

116 What ought to be considered, in original sin.
IN the consideration of original sin, the corruption of sin it self is
first to be considered, the strength whereof is so great, that through the
corruption thereof the image of God is destroyed in us, and in stead of
righteousness and holiness there is placed unrighteousness and uncleanness:
secondly the guilt is to be considered, whereby God (if he would) might have
counted them for sins unto death: but God was reconciled unto Adam, yet not
in such wise notwithstanding that he took from him all sin and corruption,
that afterward he should not be sinful, corrupt and mortal: for he left
him in the same case of nature, wherein he was then set, but he was so
reconciled unto God, that he does not follow his accusation, nor pursue his
right, but rather does not impute unto him his vices and corruption to
condemnation. There remains then in Adam corruption, and flows into us his
children by corruption gotten by inheritance. Genesis 8.21.
The Lord says Genesis 8. that the imagination of man's heart is evil, even
from his youth. Who can make that clean (says Job) which is conceived of
unclean seed? Job. 14.4.
Behold I was borne in iniquity (says the Prophet) and in sin has my
mother conceived me. Ps. 51.5.
Everlasting death, Genesis 3.15
whereunto all men through sin remain subject, remains in the unfaithful:
Heb. 2.15.
but from the believers it is taken away by the blessed seed.

117 Three degrees of faultiness in sin without the act.
THere are three degrees of faultiness in sin, although it come Genesis 8.21.
as it carries him hither and thither and makes many fancies to run into
his head: And without doubt the same is it: yet notwithstanding there is some
inward pricking to provoke us unto it. Now this is a wicked sin, and as it
were already conceived: afterward follows consent when we settle our will
upon it, so as there is no let in us, for the performaunce of the evil, but
the want of occasion and opportunity: and this is the third degree, For then
is the sin fully shaped in us, although

118 The blasphemy of the Papists concerning sin.
THE Papists can say well enough, that if a man consent unto evil (that is to
say if be lust after it in such wise as he would feign do it if occasion
served) they grant that such a consent is a damnable sin. But if a man have
any evil liking, so he consent not thoroughly to it, the Papists say, it is
no sin at all, which is false: It is said, thou shall love the Lord thy
GOD, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Mat. 21.37 Mar 12.30 Luke 10.27
with all thy heart and with all thy strength. What is meant by mind and
strength? God has not limited the love that we owe unto him, that it should
be only in our hearts and minds: but he says, that our wit, reason, and
understanding and all our strength, (that is to say, all our powers and
abilities that we have in our nature,) must be also thoroughly applied
thereunto. Now then, if a man conceive any evil, although he consent not to
it, nor yield his affection fully thereunto: can he be said to love God with
all his mind? No: if a man have never so little a piece of himself inclyning
to corruption, although with all the rest he endeavor himself to accomplish
the law: yet does he love GOD as he ought to do? No undoubtedly: for sin
is nothing else but a transgressing of Gods law: Therefore we may conclude,
that all the vain thoughts which provoke us unto evil, are sin: and that
we are guilty of them to God ward: unless he bear with us of his infinite
goodness. But he forgiueth them to those that are his. Nevertheless it be
hooueth them to acknowledge it for sin: and whosoever does flatter himself,
he does but provoke Gods wrath and cover the mischief to his own damnation:
For in the end his hypocrisy must be discovered and made manifest to be
punished with all the rest.

119 Sin does bring death with it.
WHere sin reigns: we shall find nothing but the wrath of God which
brings with it death. Therefore it is only mercy which reconcileth us unto
God, that therewithal we might be restored to life. God so loves the world
that he gave his only begotten son, Io. 3.16.
that all that believe in him should not perish but have everlasting life. To.
5.10.
If any demand in whom this love is founded: the Apostle Paul answers, that
it is founded in the purpose of his will. Notwtstanding this manner of speech
seems to be contrary to many places of the scriptures, Ephesians. 1.5.
which place the first and principal foundation of Gods love toward us in
Christ, and do show that without him, we are displeasing and hateful unto
God. But we must remember that the hidden and secret love, with which God has
loved us, because it springs from his eternal purpose, is above all other
causes: but that his grace which he would have to be made manifest unto us,
and by which we have assurance of salvation, begins at the reconciliation
made by Christ. For seeing we must needs grant that he hates all sin and
wickedness, how can we assure our selves to be in his love and favor, until
our sins are clean put away for the which he is justly angry with us? Thus
ye blood of Christ must be the mean to make God favorable unto us, before we
can have any manner of feeling of his fatherly love and clemency.

120 We must confess our sins unto God.
GOd it is alone whom we have and do offend, who knows our hearts, deeds
and determinations, remitteth or punishes sins, and has given his son
unto us, an high priest, and one eternal sacrifice. Therefore must we come to
God the Father, through Christ, and that with the same words which he has
given us, teaching us to confess our sins, saying: Mat. 6.12. Luke 11.4.
Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
after this sort may all the faithful in all their trobles, and at all times,
and in every place confess themselves to God both secretly and openly.
Secretly when each man prays alone and confesses his sins to God. Openly,
when any man in the Church, together with the whole congregation prays and
confesses the same. And there are many examples in the holy Scriptures of
those who confessed themselves unto God and not only craved, but also obtained
of him forgiveness of their sins. But on ye contrary part, there are no
examples of any which confessed themselves to Lay men or Priests: for this
honor belongs to GOD alone, which has given us his son to be our high
Priest, who hears sufficiently the confession of all the faithful, so that
there is no need to substitute any in his room to hear them. For who so ever
with a true faith from the bottom of his heart, confesses his sins in this
manner, to God the Father, and to his son our only chief Priest Christ
Jesus, craving his grace and mercy: they undoubtedly receive full remission of
all their sins. If we confess our sins, 1. Io. 1.9.
says S. John, he is merciful to forgive us our sins. Wherefore seeing it
is thus, as by the truth it is confirmed, they then which confess their sins
to God and to his son our Lord, have obtained full remission of the same,
and so there is no need to use the Popish confession of the romish Synagogue.

121 Faith is the means whereby remission of sin is promised.
FOrasmuch as God has promised remission of sins, to the repentant sinner,
by no other means nor condition but only faith in christ: therefore excluding
al other means and conditions of man's working, we say that what repenting
sinner soever believes in Christ, has already to himself (and needs not to
seek to any priest) perpetual assurance of remission not for this time or
that time only, but for ever. To, 8.1
For the promise says not he that believes in Christ, shall be pardoned this
time, so he sin no more: neither does say that the law is stayed or ye sentence
repriued, but says plainly that the law with the condemnation thereof and
sentence is condemned and shall never rise again to them that be in C. Jesus:
Act. i0.43
and promises indeterminatly, without limitation forgiveness of sins to all
that believe in his name And likewise in an other place, the scripture speaking
absolutelye says, sin shall not have dominion over you. and adds the reason
why, saying, To. 6.14.
for ye are not under the law, but under grace. Adding this lesson withal (as
it follows in the same place) not that sinners should sin more therefore
because they are under grace, but only that weak infirmity might be
relieved, broken censciences conforted, and repenting sinners helped from
desperation, to the praise of Gods glory: for as God forgeueth not sinners
because they should sin: so neither does infirmity of falling diminish the
grace of Christ, but rather illustrate the same as it is written, 2. Co. 12.9
My power is made perfect through weakness, and again where sin abounded,
the grace of God abounded much more.

122 Four things that concur in remission of sins
IN remission of sins these four things must concur and go together: the
cause that works (which is the sacrifice of Christ's body) 2. the promise
that offers. 3. Faith that apprehends, and 4. the repenting sinner that
receaueth. And although sins daily do grow, which daily provoke us to
crave remission: yet as touching the cause that works remission of our daily
sins, and the means which apprehends and applies the said cause unto us,
they remain always one and perpetual: besides which no other cause nor means
is to be sought for of man.

So that to them that be repenting sinners and be in Christ Jesus, there is no
law to condemn them, though they have deserved condemnation: but they are
under a perpetual kingdom and a heaven full of grace and remission to cover
their sins, and not to impute their iniquities through the promise of God in
Christ Jesus our Lord. And therefore wicked and impious is the doctrine of
them first with seek any other cause of remission the^ only the blood of our
savior Jesus Christ. Secondly which assign any other means to apply the
bloudshedding of Christ unto us, besides only faith. Thirdly and especially
which so limit and restrain the eternal privilege of the passion of Christ,
as though it served but only for sins done without and before Faith, and
that the rest after Baptism committed, must be done away by confession,
pardons and satisfactory deeds.

123 Popish satisfactions are not warranted by Gods word.
THe faithful are not bound by the word of God to do that pe^naunce which
the Papists call satisfaction. For there is one eternal satisfaction, viz. a
price reco^ciliation, and redemption from our sins, namelye the death of
Christ, whereby our offenses and punishmenes deserved for the same are clearly
forgiven and wiped a way. And this is confirmed both by ye Prophets, by the
writings of the Evangelists and Apostles, Esa. 53.5 To. 3.24. 1. Co. 1.30 To.
5.17.18.19.
and chiefly by the Apostle Paul in diverse of his epistles. If therefore by
our works and penance which we suffer, that is to say, if we attribute to
our satisfaction, which consists in the correction of our body, as fasting
prayer, alms and other like works, the remission of our sins, and the
punishment due therefore, or if we suppose that by this satisfaction we
satisfy and requit al those things for which we were guilty before God, then
truly this satisfaction is directly contrary, and strives against the
satisfaction of C. Or else must they say that P. in ye like case resoned not
aright, when he said that if righteousness be by the Law, Gal. 1.21.
then C. died in vain. For even also after the same sort do we also reason
saying: If we our selus can make satisfaction for our sins, what need then had
Christ to die? wherefore the true church of God, keeps still that one eternal
satisfaction, even the death of Christ, and herewith do all the faithful
content them selves, judging their works, not to be so perfect or worthy, that
by the^ their sins should be forgeuen, and that God by them should be satisfied
and eternal life be purchased.

124 Sin does possess our whole nature.
THe infection of sin is universally dispersed over our nature, and has
infected even the thoughts themselves so greatly that when the Apostle Paul
will set forth his damnable estate, he does set it forth no otherwise, but
that he did then follow the will and counsel of his thoughts We must therefore
learned suspect our thoughts, Ephesians. 2.3 Col. 3.2.
if we will be advised by the Apostle, and not to imagine with the doctors of
Room, that our estate is good, so long as the will, (when it shall have
wrestled) at length gets out, not having wholly yielded nor flatlye fallen
down. Thoughts therefore running this way, after any thing of our neighbors
in so doing, make manifest declaration of their poison and corruption: which
if they have no resistaunce, do carye us headlong through the broad way into
destruction. Romans 7.7,
If by grace they shall be stopped and resisted, in that grace, God is to be
magnified: yet we in that our corruption, notwithstanding, are iustlye to be
blamed and admonished, thereby to seek for more aid, in that part of our
thoughts: least if that temptation should lie sore upon us, Satan should
that way get entrance into our hearts.

125 The Godly are joyful in affliction.
THe children of God do rejoice in the midst of trouble, knowing that it
will bring upon them experience and trial of Gods goodness in the end.
Christ is made unto them redemption from sin: whereas the ungodly (howsoever
in prosperity they fleshly brag of their hope in GOD) yet when affliction
comes, 1. Cor. 1.30
they are without all heart, comfort, or courage. For they know not (in deed)
that Christ is made unto them redemption to deliver them from all that danger
that comes for sin, as well as from sin it self. This persuasion causes
the godly in all their afflictions and necessities whatsoever, Iam. 1.3.
to stay themselves in godly conversation, both toward GOD and man, with
patience and assured hope of an happy end: Whenas the ungodly either murmr
against GOD, or else fall into some one evil dealing or other, thereby to
purchase their deliverance, which is an assured testimony, that they do not
look to have it from the Lord.

126 Afflictions come by the providence of GOD.
ALthough God does not by and by help his children when they are afflicted,
yet does he not forsake them: because by his infinite wisdom and mercy, he
turns those things to their salvation which seemed discommodities. To. 8.18.
And although the elect and reprobate are indifferently subject to the like
evils, yet there is great difference because God instructing the faithful by
afflictions, does further them in ye mark of their salvation Whatsoever
things happen to the godly, they are so tempered from above, that ye which the
world thinks to be hurtful, the issue declares it to be profitable: there is
no cause therefore why it should grieve us to be afflicted, except we take in
ill part, the election of the Lord, whereby we are fore ordained unto life: and
except we be unwilling to represent in us the image of the son of GOD,
whereby we are prepared unto celestial glory.

127 Afflictions come of Gods determinate purpose
WHen God grants satan liberty to afflict the faithful, he does it not to
pleasure him, neither is he moved of any favor that he bears toward him:
but because he has ordained it in his own purpose. He was not moved by his
suit nor persuaded by him to afflict and punish Job: but for as much as he was
minded of his own good will to chastise him, Job. 1.12.
therefore he granted his demand: yea even to spite Satan and to have the
greater triumph against him in putting him to confusion, because he made full
reckoning that Job should have cursed God to his face, that is, that he should
have blasphemed him with open mouth when he felt afflictions to come upon him.
If Satan had never uttered any word, nor made any such petition, yet God was
minded to punish his servant, and he minded it for just cause, the which he
has disclosed unto us: and if the same were to us unknown, yet ought we to
reverence the justice and counsel of God confessing that he is most righteous
and impartial in all his doings. Ps. 119.137.


128 Afflictions be the rods of God unto the just.
ALthough in the outward appearance of the world and sense of the flesh, the
just and perfect do suffer in this world the like and more grievous afflictions
then do the wicked, yet is their estate nothing so miserable: For they knowing
that afflictions be the rods of God their Father, do ask deliverance and are
assured to obtain the same. And thus on what side soever afflictions do co^^
unto the just and perfect, (because they know that God is their defender and
keeper) they are not afraid (as discouraged and desperate) but in all
assurance they say with the prophet: The Lord is my light and my salvation
whom then shall I fear? Ps. 27.1.
The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom then shall I be afraid: They
know this same because of the infallible promise: Ps. 50.15. and 145.18.
call upon me in the day of trouble and I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorifye me. The Lord is near to all that call upon him: Mat. 11.28 Luke
12.32
yea to all that call upon him in truth. Come unto me (says our Savior) all
ye that are weary and heavy laden and I will refresh you. Fear not little
flock: for it is your fathers pleasure to give you the kingdom. And God is
faithful (as the Apostle witnesses) which will not suffer his to be tempted
above their power, 1. Cor. 10 13.
but will even give the issue with the temptation that they may be able to
bear it. The wicked now cannot thus speak in deed: for although they think
themselves most safe and sure, and make great account of their own strength:
yet because they are hated of God he can well find them out, Ps. 7.15. Ps.
9.15.
and bring their enterprises and counsels to nothing.

129 Afflictions come for diverse causes.
IT is most certain that al miseries take their original and beginning at
sin: but yet God afflicts his servants for diverse causes. For as he does
not take vengeance on some men's sins in this world, but deferreth the
punishments until an other life that he may then use them with more
severity: even so oftentimes he deals more hardly with his faithful
servants, not because they have committed greater sins then other men, but
to mortifye in them the concupiscence of the flesh.

Yea sometime not respecting their sins, he only tries their obedience,
Pro. 17.3.
or else exercises their patience. Even as we see that the holy man Job was
afflicted, that by his adversity, his godliness might be the better known.
Wherefore there are two things to be noted, the first is that judgment does
oftentimes begin at the house of God: 1. Pet. 4.17
and that he over passing the wicked does severely punish his servants, and
does more sharply scourge in correcting the vices of his church. The second is
that there are diverse ends why he afflicts men, for he suffered Stephen and
other of his apostles to be cruelly tormented as if they had been wicked
persons: Act. 7.58.
whereby we may gather that in the punishments of men the causes of the same
cannot be well discerned.

130. Patience overcomes affliction.
Whatsoever he be that suffers the trouble that is laid upon him for Christ's
sake may continue without yrkesomenes even to the last end. We must not
therefore call to mind how long we are afflicted, 1. Cor. 9. He. 12.12.
but we must have respect unto the end. So run (says the Apostle that ye
may obtain.) Lift up your hands (says the author to the Hebrews) that hang
down, Heb. 12.1. and 2.
and your weak knees. Again let us run with patience the race that is set
before us, looking unto Jesus Christ the author and finisher of our faith.
What does it profit a man to be painful in any business for a time, and then
to fainte and give over before he has brought it unto good effect, does he
not loose all his labor and travail? What does it profit the runner to run
if he faint in the midst of his race, shall he have the game or reward? Not
without cause therefore does the scripture in so many places, exhort us to
patience and perseverance. Let us not therefore be weak or feeble, 1. These.
5.54. Heb. 6.12
but followers of them which through faith and patience inherit the promises,
which is everlasting life after the travail and pain of this life.

131. The patience of the faithful is tried by afflictions.
BEsides the just punishment of the open and notorious sinner, there is also
another cause wherewith God is moved to send among men misery, affliction and
griefs of this world, as namelye to try and prove such as be good and godly,
that their virtues may more shine among men to the honor and glory of God. As
silver and gold (says Solomon) is tried by fire, Iam. 1.12. Pro. 17.3.
so does God prove and try the hearts of men. In this manner God proved his
faithful servants, Abraham, Joseph, and Job, that by the trial of their
constancy, their faith might be the more notable and famous, and both
themselves more in faith confirmed, and God by them more glorified. When God
cast upon Job all these miseries, which the scriptures mention, his unnatural
wife and unkind friends with rash and uncharitable judgment, would needs
persuade him that it was the anger of God and the just punishment of his sins
that brought all these things upon him. But he staying himself upon the
testimony of a good conscience, and the constancy of his faith assured
himself of the good will of God, and therefore he took all patiently saying:
Job. 1.21.
The Lord has given and the Lord has taken away, even as it pleases the Lord
so be it. In which words, we have to learn the ex^eeding comfort which the
children of God take in the midst of troubles by the providence of God, which
extends it self to all things, so that there is nothing so base or simple
either without man, or within man, Mat. 10.29.
which he neglects or is ignorant of.

132 To be partakers of the life of Jesus Christ, we must before die with him.
IF we judge according to our own fantasy, we shall think it impossible for us
to be made alive by being dead and that death should be the means of our life,
and furthermore yt we must be despised in the world and suffer vile reproaches
if we will reign with Jesus Christ? and yet the spirit of God tells us that
it is most certain, and therefore will have us beat down al disputations, and
not rest our selves upon our own thoughts and imaginations, for seeing God
has appointed it so, 2. Tim. 2.11. To. 6.5.
if we will be his servants we must stay our selves upon his counsel, and
suffer our selves to be guided by him. If we be dead with Jesus Christ (says
S. Paul) we also shall live with him. By the word death the Apostle means
not only the death of men when God takes them from the earth: 2. Cor.
4.10.11. Col. 3.3.
but that we must bear the mortification of Jesus Christ in our bodies, to the
end that his life may appear in us. For ye are dead (says he in an other
place) and your life is hid with Christ in God, even as the life of trees is
hid in the winter. The trees in the winter are dry they seem to be but dead
wood without strength: but yet their strength shows it self in the spring
time. Even so the case stands with the faithful: for while they are in this
world, their life is shut up in hope. To. 8.24.
Now that which we hope for (as Saint Paul says) is not seen, the eye of
man cannot attain unto it. It follows then, that in dying we must live, and
living we must dye, not only with one kind of death, but we must die daily,
we must decay as touching the outward man, for sicknesses, poverty,
afflictions and such like things are messengers of death which do, or ought
to put us in mind, that our life is but a shadow, that it is nothing, and that
therefore we should renounce the world, and utterly banish and reject all the
lusts and vanities of the same.

133 All things must be forsaken for Gods sake.
A Faithful man must always more esteem and love God and his kingdom, then
his own life, body, wife, children, friends and kindred, and all things else
which are in this world: so that whenever God shall call us away from these
things, we must willingly leave all, and follow God, after the example of our
father Abraham. Heb. 11.17. Ge. 22 10. Mat. 10.37
For the Lord says in his gospel, he that loves father or mother more then
me, is not worthy of me. And he that loves son or daughter more the^ me, is
not worthy of me. Wherefore al me^ must cast away the care of temporal things,
and consider yt God in us, while we were sound and in health, provided
sufficiently for us and ours. And that therefore now, Ps. 68.5. and 146.9.
when as he has appointed to call us away from hence, he will not forsake our
family (especially seeing he is a father of the widows and fatherless) but
will provide for them some other way. Io. 19.27.
Christ on the cross was content to have committed his mother unto John. So we
also must commend unto God, and unto faithful men, those yt are committed to
our charge, 1. Pet. 5.7.
and ought to be no further careful for the^, but care for and think on things
eternal

134 Tribulation brings forth patience.
IF we will show our selves to be the sons of God, then must our
afflictions practice us in patience, and except they do so, ye work of god
(thorough our corruption) is made void and of none effect. To. 5.3.
Adversities hinder not the glory of the godly, because in bearing them
patiently they feel the help of God which nourishes and confirms their
hope, therefore it is sure that they profitte but ill which learn not
patience: Neither does this let, that there are extant in the Scriptures
certain complaints of the godly full of desperation, for God sometimes for a
while, does so urge and repress those that are his, that scarcely they can
breath or think upon consolation: but straightwaies he brings again to
life those whom he had almost overwhelmed in the midst of death. So that is
always fulfilled in them which the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 4.8. and 9.
we are afflicted on every side, yet are we not in distress: in poverty but
not overcome of poverty, we are persecuted, but not forsaken: cast down but we
perish not. Patience comes not of ye nature of tribulation, whereby we see
some are provoked to murmur against god, yea eue^ to curse God: but when as ye
inward meeknes which is infused by the spirit of god and co^solatio^ which is
suggested by ye same spirit, has succeeded in the place of stubbornenes and
frowardnes: tribulations are instruments to beget patience, which tribulation
can procure nothing in the wicked and obstinate, but indignation and murmuring.

135 Patience is a great virtue.
THe greatest part of men will easily grant that patience is a great virtue, as
it is in deed: and yet there be very few that know what it means: whereby
it may soon be gathered, that we be not very hasty to be patient, and to have
the virtue that we esteem so much. God therefore perceiving such carelessness
in men, has in diverse places (and namely in patient Job) set before our eyes
the thing that is so needful for us: Job. 1.20.
for if we be not patient, our faith must needs vanish away, for it is not
able to continue without the same. Iam. 1.3.4
For the which cause it is, the will of God, that in the midst of the miseries
of this world, we should always have a quiet heart, and be so well assured
of his goodness, as the same may make us merry and contented, so that we may
boast our selves against Satan, and against all our enemies. But how were
that possible if we did not look higher then the world, and considered not
that although our estate be miserable in the opinion of the flesh: yet ought
we to be contented with it seeing our God loves us.

136 True patience what it is.
WE commonly say that a man is patient, although he have no point of true
patience in him. For whosoever suffers adversity, him do men call patient,
but let us with all mark that to be patient, it behooves us to moderate our
sorrow. Romans 5.3.
If there be any adversity it must be assuaged by considering that God cease
not to procure our welfare continually, Deu. 30.8.
and that we ought to be subject to him, and yt it is good reason he should
govern us according to his good pleasure. Herein does patience make it self to
be known.

137 The providence of God encr^^^eth the patience of the godly.
BY gods only sufferance it is that Tyrants persecute, that they spoil men of
their goods, that they cast them into banishment into prison, and bands, and
that they exercise all kind of cruelty against them. It is his will that men
are afflicted with sickness, with poverty, with hunger and cold, with
slander and reproach, and with all the misery that may befall in the life of
man. But because the same Lord and God which as a just Judge sends all
these things is also a most tender, loving and kind father: undoubtedly he
will not suffer any thing to happen unto us, 1. Cor. 10.13.
but that which shall be profitable, and a furtherance to our salvation.
Wherefore in all troubles and afflictions, (seem they at the first never so
grievous and intolerable) the godly receive them, and abide in them not only
with patience, but also with joy and gladness. For they persuade themselves (as
truth is in deed) that God chasticeth every son yt he loves and ^^^rfo^
with cheerefulnes they rejoice in their afflictions knowing that tribulation
brings forth patience, Heb. 12.6
To. 5.3.
patience experience, experience hope, and hope confounds not, nor makes
ashamed. This comfort it was that made Job patiently to abide the loss of his
goods, the spoil of his lands, and the miserable destruction of his children.
The same comfort caused Joseph patientlye to abide bondage, imprisonment,
slander, reproach and danger of his life, for he was certainly persuaded
that nothing was done without the providence of his heavenly Father, To. 8.28.
which caused him to be resolved that it would fall out to the best in the end.

138 The providence of God is a great secret.
WHen we come unto God and talk of his works, we ought to consider yt they be
too high secrets for our weak wit to reach unto, And it behooves us to have the
same persuasion as well of Gods providence generally, Ps. 36.6.
as of the things yt belong to his spiritual kingdom. When we hear that
God orders all things, Io. 5.17. Act. 17.28.
and that there is not any thing done in this world without his will: let us
know that it is a secret which we ought to mark well. For although every man
grant that God is sovereign Lord and governor: yet notwithstanding when we
come to this point, that the things which we see to be so troblesome and out
of order, cease not to be guided by the secret providence of god, who holds
the stern above, and turns things to such end as he thinks good: we must
reverently consider yt we be not able to mount up to so high a secret, and
therefore honor God in the things we know not, until he reveal us ye things
that (as yet) are hidden from us.

139 Gods providence is over all.
WE might learn in all yt we see to confess the greatness of the Lord. Why does
not ye strength of his works make us to confess his power and all the delight
we have in them, why does it not make us acknowledge all his goodness to the
children of men? The Prophet David says, Ps. 8.3.4.
when I behold the heavens which are the works of thy hands, the Moon and the
stars which thou have ordained: What is man (say I) that thou art mindful
of him, or the son of man that thou so regardest him? Our savior Christ
declares, Ma. 6.26.28.
that when we see how God feeds the sparrowes and clotheth the Lillies: We
are a faithless people, except we see his providence over us to feed us, and
to clothe us in all our necessities. And sure the truth is, except we see with
such eyes the creatures of GOD, we are become creatures degenerat from that
image, wherein we were first formed. If we see nothing in the heuens, but
that they are light, and above our reach, the Horse and Mule see this as well
as we.

If we see nothing in the earth, but a place to walk in, or to take our rest
upon it: the beasts and fowls se this as well as we. If in our apparel we
see nothing but pride of a goodly color. If in our meat and drink we know
nothing but the pleasure and sweetness of the taste. If hearing seeing,
smelling, tasting and such like, be all the delight we can find in the works
of God: we have given our pre-eminence to the domme creaturs which have these
senses more exquisit then we, and we have turned the hearts of men, into the
hearts of beasts who with wisdom understanding, knowledge reason and prudence
can do nothing. And the words of the Pr. are fulfilled in us: Ps 49.20.
Man when he was in honor, had no understanding, he was compared to the brute
beasts, and was made like unto them.

140 The providence of God
IN six days the creation of the world was finished, but the government
thereof is perpetual, and God does continually work in preserving and
mantayning the order thereof, Act. 17.28. Ps. 104.29 Io. 5.17.
even as the Apostle teaches saying: In him we live, move, and have our
being. Therefore when we see the Sun rising, the course of the Moon and of
the stars, the force of nature in seeds, and the increase of our bodies and
of the bodies of bruit beasts: We must then consider the providence of God,
and the continual working of the Father and of the son. Neither does he by
his general providence only defend the nature, which he has created, but
does order and frame every part thereof: Pro. 30.5
But especially he defends and preserves the faithful, whom he has
taken into his protection.

141 Nothing comes by fortune, but by Gods providence
AS God of his inestimable goodness made the world, and all that therein is,
for the benefitte and commodity of man, that he might use all the inferior
creatures to Gods glory: so does the same Lord and maker by his almightye power
and infinite wisdom continuethe same. My father still works (says our
savior Christ) Ioh. 1.17. Ps. 104.29
and I work when thou hidest away thy face (says yt P.) they are trobled when
thou take away their breathe they die, and are turned to their dust. When
thou let thy breath go forth they shall be made, and thou shall renew the
face of the earth. That which we call and esteem nature, is nothing but the
very finger of God working in his creatures, Ps. 104.29
much more the alteration of natural courses and things done
extraordinarilye. wherefore when rain falls excessiuelie to hurt the earth,
Genesis 7.
or hinder mankind, as it did in the time of Noah, or when the clouds be
clean dried up, that there is no rain at all, as it fell out in the time of
Achab: 1. King. 17
It is most evident to be the work of GOD, according to his justice
punishing the breaking of his Law, and unthankfulness of his people. In like
manner I might speak of the Earth and water, the Sun and Moon, with the
residue of the stars, in all and every of which as it is the finger of GOD,
that keeps them in their natural order, so is it his power that does alter
and change them, and for causes to his wisdom known, brings out such
effects as be sometimes rather hurtful, then beneficial unto men.

Therefore when we see infections, sicknesses or such like, we must look
further then into the course of nature and understand that there is a GOD and
an ouerruler of nature, that does these things. This is not true only in those
things that appertain to nature, but in those also that are done by the will
of man, or as we say prophanelie by fortune or chance, where as in deed to
speak truly there is neither fortune nor chance. Ma. 10.26
That which we call fortune is nothing but the hand of God working by causes,
and for causes which we know not.

Chance and fortune are Gods devised by man and made by our ignorance of the
true, almighty, and everlasting GOD.

42 God by his providence preserves all
THose things which GOD made by his word, he governs and preserves with his
everlasting providence as testifies our Savior Christ and his Apostles in
diverse places of the holy Scriptures: For in ye he is said to rest the 7. day
from all his works, it is no otherwise to be understood, then that he ceased
from the creation of the heaven and the earth, Genesis 2.2.
which we see, not that he left of to govern the same, and to preserve it. For
he bears up all things (as the Ap. says) by his mighty word. Heb. 1.3.
The which thing ought to bring no small consolation to the minds of the
godly, for so they learn to rest and stay themselus on Gods providence,
without the which not so much as one hair of their head, Luke 21.18.
can perish. For he which feels by Faith, that al things depend upon God,
he believes also yt he falls into the hands of God, when he forsakes all
things, and enters into death.

143 The right considering of Gods providence.
WHen God uses worldly means, and serves his turn by men, as by
instruments, he does it not to lessen or to diminishe his own authority,
but contrariwise to show that he has the guiding of them, and that if he do
but command or hiss (as he says by his Prophet: Esa. 5.26. and 7.18.
) men must need go forward to execut his will, yea and the very Devils of hell
are compelled unto it. And although they be unwilling, and that it is utterly
against their intent: yet notwithstanding God drives them by violent power to
execute the things that he has ordained in his providence. And so we see now
after what sort we must consider Gods providence: namely that he has a care
of the whole world, Io. 5.17 Ps 104.29
and watches over all his creatures, not only to forsee what may happen (as
some fantastical personns imagine that God beholds the things as it were a
far of which are here beneath and then provides for them afterward but also
(which is more) that nothing may be done which he has not determined, so as
his will is the rule of all things. And therefore it behooves us to mind well
the providence of God to the intent, that when any adversity comes upon us,
we may always have respect unto the first cause.

144 Nothing comes but by Gods Providence.
GOD has not created the world to leave things in such sort that Fortune (as
men term it) might govern all: but he intends to the maintayning of his
creatures as he does.

Therefore when we call GOD the maker of heaven and earth, Ps. 33.6
We must not restrain it to one instant, but we must bear in mind that
like as GOD has framed the world so all power is still in him, and he
disposes things here beneath so as he has a care of us, Ma. 10.30.
and the hairs of our head are numbered, yea, and he guides our footesteppes,
so as nothing comes to pass, which is not foreappointed by his providence.

Besides him there is none set over the World, nor none set over the
earth, Job. 34.13
which beetokeneth that his creating of the world, and his governing of it,
are things that go ioyntlye together. If we imagine that GOD governs not
all things, but that some things happen by chance or fortune, 1. Tim. 1.17.
we do great injury unto God, to whom alone all praise and honor is due. It
is moreover a cursed blasphemy if we should think that the devil could do
any thing without the license of god: for it is as much as if we should make the
devil a parti-creator of the world. Let us learn therefore that there is an
inseparable band between these two things: namely that God creates all
things, and that he governs all things.

145 The providence of God is not only general.
Our Savior Christ extends the careful providence of God to Sparrowes, and
to the hairs of our head, to the end no man should think or imagine that it
is only a general providence, as many do in these days, which as they dare
not deny that the world is governed by the wisdom and power of God, so they
think it an absurd thing to teach that God is occupied about all particular
creatures, especially then of the meanest sort: And therefore they expound
these words of Christ and other such like sentences of scripture, to be spoken
by Hiperbole, that is, a manner of figurative speech passing all truth, thereby
to signifye: mean truth. But I would learn of such men what it is that saving
the nature of his godhead may in this respect be spoken of him more then
truth, Ge. 17.1. 1. Sam. 2.3
seeing he is almighty, of infinite knowledge, and is present in all places.
So much as they shall exempt from Gods disposition in his creatures, so much
shall they with dishonor of God pull from his almighty power and infinite
wisdom. We may not think it is any disgracing^ of the majesty of God, to
draw the same his providence, to the preservation and direction even of his
meanest creatures: for he works not as men do with labor and grief, or
torment of mind: his very will is enough is do, or alter all things, as he
seems best. And this is the greatest proof of his exceeding majesty that he
sees all things, that he disposes and works al things, and that he
directs all his creatures to that end, for which in the beginning he made
them, and yet is the Lord always righteous and his judgments true.

146 The faithful are surely settled in gods providence.
THe godly when the heat of persecution rises (to the end that they may not
forsake their Lord and captain.) First they persuade themselves (as truth is
indeed) that affliction comes not to them by chance or fortune, or by the
malice of me^, but by ye certain knowledge and providence of that god which is
by Christ their heavenly and merciful father, who neither ca^ do it for any
evil unto the^, nor suffer the^ to be further tempted, then by his grace they
shall be able to bear. If a poor silly sparrow, as Christ assures the^,
falls not to the ground without their father, yt is in heaven, 1. Cor.
10.13. Mat. 10.29
they are persuaded that they are far more precious in the sight of god, the^
all the sparrowes in the world, and therefore that an hair shall not fall
from their head without his will and pleasure. The example hereof evidently
appears in Job, and in the Apostles of Christ. The deuel could^ not vex Job,
until it was granted him by God. Satan desired to sifte the Apostles as men
use to sifte corn, but Christ prayde for them that their faith might not
fail. Yea a legion of devils were not able to hurt a heard of hogs, Luke
12.32.
but by the permission of Christ. This comfort never fails, and when the
faithful betake themselves to this defense, they may be truly said to rest
under the shadow of the most highest. Mat. 19.29.
They which refuse persecution offered for Christ his sake, cannot be his true
disciples, but show them selves to have been hypocrites and dissemblers.

147 The favor of God the only foundation of consolation.
EXcept God be gracious unto us, although all things look pleasantly upon us,
yet no certain trust can be conceived. And on the contrary part his only
favor is a sufficient solace in all sorrow, and a strong defense against all
tempests of adversities. And hereunto appertain many testimonies of the
scriptures where the Saints trusting to the only power of God, dare despise
what soever thing comes against them in this world. Though I should walk
through the valley of the shadow of death I will fear no evil (says the
prophet) for thou art with me. In the Lord put I my trust, Ps. 11.1.
how say ye then to my soul fly to your mountain as a bird? I will not
(says he) be afraid of ten thousand of people that should beset me round
about. Ps. 3.6.
For there is no power under heaven or above heaven that can resist the arm
of the Lord: therefore he being our defender noe harm at all is to be feared.

148 The will of God is always just, although we see not the reason thereof.
THe will of God (although the reason thereof be unknown unto us) is to be
counted just. For the Lord has his right taken from him if he be not at
liberty to do with his creatures as he seems best. This seems hard to the
ears of many. And there are also some who allege that God is put to great
reproach if such liberty be given unto him, as though they with their
disdainefulnes were better divines then the holy Ghost, who has appointed this
rule of humility to the faithful, yt they should wonder at the power of God,
and not esteem it after their own judgment. The Apostle Paul represseth this
arrogancy of striving with God in his Epistle to the To. by a most five
similitude wherein he seems rather to have alluded unto Esaias then Jeremy.
To. 9.20. Esaias. 5.9. Ier. 18.9. and 6.
For nothing else is taught in Jeremy, then that Israel is in the hand of the
lord, so that for his sins he may break him in pieces as a potter may his
earthen vessel. But Esaias goes higher saying, woe be to him ye gainesayeth his
maker, namely to the pot that strives with the potter: shall the clay say to
the potter what make thou? etc. And surely there is no cause why a mortal
man should prefer himself before an earthen vessel, when he compares
himself with God.

149 Through faith our sins are forgiven.
WHo soever believes in Christ is not judged, that is to say, by the grace
and mercy of God he is saved, the sentence of deserved condemnation also being
taken away. So the Apostle says: there is noe condemnation to those that are
in Christ Jesus. To. 8.1. Mar. 16.16
And whereas our savior Christ affirms that all the faithful are out of
peril of death, we may thereby gather, how necessary the certainety and
stability of faith is to take away the trembling, and oppressing fear of
conscience. He pronounces, that there is no condemnation, Io. 3.18.
so soon as we believe: and therefore if for faithes sake a man is not judged
(as the truth it self plainly affirms) where is then indulgences and
pardons? Where are the Romish satisfactions? And where is the feigned fire of
purgatory, and such like human imaginations and devises? Surely they are
vanished away and perished for ever: For the truth has said (which ought never
to be forgotten) that who soever believes in him has everlasting life. Io.
6.47.


150 Of the true knowledge of God.
THere is but one God in essence or nature, which is the father of whom are all
things and we in him. Ier. 23.33.
The same God is invisible and immartall. 1. Tim. 17. He is in all places, sees
all things, and fills the heaven and the earth. He is almighty, infinite,
and eternal: he is the maker and preserver of all things. He is only wise,
gentle, just, true, merciful. The Lord, Exo. 34.6.
the Lord says Moses is strong, merciful and gracious, flow to anger, and
aboundaunt in goodness and truth. In this divine essence, three persons do
subsist, Mat. 3.16. and 28.9.
being truly distinguished from everlasting in their several properties the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. But the comforter, which is the holy
Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name: he shall teach you all things,
and bring all things to your remembrance, which I have told you Io. 14.26.
These three persons are not three Gods, but they are coeternall and coequall,
1. Io. 5.7. Act. 17.23
distinct concerning their properties, and yet without any manner of
inequality, being by nature so united together, that they be but one God,
eternal, infinite and most perfect in it self.

151 The power, and godhead of God are seen, and how.
Amongst the properties and persons which are in God, which is one, there is
such distinction, that to the Father we must attribute the beginning of working
and creating, we must hold him for the fountain and spring of all things. To
the son we must attribute wisdom, counsel, Ps. 33.6.
and the government of things that are made. To the holy Ghost we must
attribute the power and efficacy of working and executing. And although that
the eternity of the Father, is also the eternity of the son, and of the holy
Ghost: (for God could never be without his wisdom and power: and in the
eternitye. there ought neither first nor last to be sought) yet is it not a
vain thing nor superfluous to observe this order in the eternity, ^^ namely
yt we set the Father first in order, and in the second place the son which
comes of him, and in the third place the holy ghost which proceeds from
them both For also the mind of every one inclines to consider first God,
afterward his wisdom which springs from him, and finally his power, whereby
he executes the decrees and ordinances of his counsel. By this reason we say
that the son comes only of the Father, but that the holy ghost, is of the
Father, and of the son together. Although the^ that we can not consider the
wisdom of God, but as it proceeds from the father, and as it is engendered
of him, yet we must take heed yt in this generation, we invent nothing
temporal, carnal or human: but rather let us worship ye same beholding it
by faith, and let us take heed from searching further the^ scriptures do teach
us thereof: otherwise we should deserve to be blinded and punished for our over
great curiosity.

152 The unity of essence is not taken away by the distinction of persons.
AS the Sun that shines has three distinct things of which every one
differs from another the globe, the light, and heat, and although every one
of these keep seueraly, their properties, yet is it but one sun, and is not
divided into 3. suns: So in ye Deity the unity of essence is not taken away by
ye distinction of persons and yet for all that, is there no confounding of
persons nor chaunginge of one into another. The doctrine of the Trinity is
every where certainly taught in the Prophets, but more plainly in the
writings of the Evangelists and Apostles. For the Angel Gabryell speaks
unto Marie the mother of the Lord in these words, Luke 1.35.
The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most highest shall
ouershadowe thee, wherefore the holy thing also which shall be borne, shall be
called the son of god. We have here truly ye Father which is the highest, the
son of God which is borne of the Virgin, and the holy Ghost which
ouershadoweth the virgin. Mat. 3.16.
At what time also Christ our Lord was baptized in the river Jordan of John the
Baptist, John saw the holy Ghost coming down like a Dove and lighting upon
him, and there was also a voice heard from heaven, 2. Pet. 1.17
saying: This is my dearly beloved son in whom I am well pleased. Io. 5.
and 14.
Furthermore Christ our Lord has often and sundry ways taught that there
is a holy Trinity, and lastly he commands all th^se that trust in him to be
baptized in the name of the Father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost.
Wherefore seeing that in the holy scriptures, Mat. 28.18. Mar. 16.16
in the Trinity the unity of the Deity is plainly and clearly taught, it
is mete that we do simply rest therein, and not curiously search nor lust
after any further knowledge in this life, then which God has revealed.

153 Gods grace is the only stay and repayrer of all things.
WHen we have well considered how brittle our life is, we must also mark
how we be repaired again by the grace of god, and specially how we be
sustained and vpheld by the same: according also as these two points are
matched together in the 104. Psalm. Ps. 104.29.30.
For it is said there, that as soon as God withdraws his spirit and working,
al goes to decay, but the Prophet adds also, yt if God spread forth his
power, all is renewed in this world, and al things take their liveliness of
him. And thus we see what we have to mark, as namely, yt when we know our
selves to be weak and so subject unto death, as that we must run thither
whether we will or no: we must also understand yt in this so great frailty,
God holds us by the hand, so as we be maintained by his power and
strengthened by his grace. But the chief point is that we should have an eye to
the benefit and good grace which God has given us above the order of nature
in restoring us by his word as says the Prophet Esaye. Esaias. 40.6.7.8.
All flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man is as the flower of grass,
the grass withers and the flower falls away: whereas the word of the
Lord endures for ever: 1. Pet. 1.24.25.
yea not only to continue in heaven, but also to the end that by it we may
have everlasting life, and be redeemed out of the universal corruption of this
earthly life, that God may dwell in us and make us pertakers of his
euerlastingnesse.

154 God is the creator of all things.
THe Lord by his eternal word has made and created al things contained
within the compass of heaven and earth, as Moses at larg describes Ge. 1. By
the word of ye Lord (says the Prophet) were the heavens made, Ps. 33.6.
and all the host of the^ by ye breath of his mouth. The Lord herein has
showed his wisdom, power, and goodness, for by his infinite and most excellent
works which make al men to wonder at them, we may in a manner judge, how
wonderful ye wisdom power, and goodness of this workemaster is. The Lord has
not only created al things, but by his everlasting spirit preserves and
governs the^. Who is like unto ye Lord our God, Ps. 113.5.6
yt has his dwelling on high, who abaseth himself to behold things in heaven
and in earth? He has established the^ for ever, he has made an ordinance
which shall not pass. Ps. 148.6.
All things yt the circuit of this world contains, whether they be visible
or invisible, all things (I say) were created of God for ye use of man as the
Prophet David likewise witnesses Ps. 8. and 23. Ps. 8. and 23
and also the Apostle Paul. It is therefore meet that men be thankeful unto
God and keep in perfect memory ye creation, and never call it into doubt,
forasmuch as the Sabbath was therefore ordained of God, that the memory of
this benefit might be kept, Ex. 20.11.
against al adversaries that deny and despise the creation.

155 Of the fall of man.
GOd at the first created man after his own similitude and likeness, that is
to say, righteous, virtuous, holy, just and good, but by his own fault he
fell from ye grace which he received and so separated himself from God, Eccl.
7.31.
Genesis 1.26.
insomuch that his nature became full of corruption, being blind in spirit,
and deprived of all perfectness. As by one man sin entered into the world
and death by sin: To. 5.12.
and so death went over all forasmuch as all me^ have sinned. Man was created
of God and made of two parts, the soul and the body, of which the body was
made of the earth, but the soul which is spirit and life, was inspired by God,
Genesis 2.7.
and thus was man made a living creature: who afterward, although having
received a just law from God, and enjoying innumerable benefits at his hand,
yet notwithstanding he was unthankful and disobedient unto his creator:
because that hearing the words of the wicked spirit, he gave more credit
unto them, then unto the words of God, and was brought unto this point, that
unadvisedly eating of the fruit which was forbidden him, he made himself
(which was before threatened unto him of God) subject unto sin, Ge. 2.17
death and damnation.

156 The first means that man had to be delivered.
THE first means that man had to be delivered from this bondage of sin,
death and other calamities, whereunto by transgression he was subject, was the
law: which although it was not of power sufficient to acquit him: yet being
thereby brought to the knowledge of his misery, he might learn to despair of
his own strength and fly unto the refuge and anchor hold of Faith: Before faith
came we were kept under the Law, and shut up unto the faith which should
afterward be reueiled: Gal, 3.23.
Wherefore the Law was our Scholemaister to bring us unto Christ, that we might
be made righteous by faith.

157 The second means.
THe Law being not able to acquit us from this corruption the celestial
father because her loved the world has restored us to righteousness by his
son: Io. 3.16.
namely by condemning sin in the flesh of Christ, and by cancelling the
handwriting of ordinances that was against us, Col. 2.14.
has done away the giltinesse wherewith we were held bound before the Lord,
and so are we absolved, that God might repute us just. For that, To. 8.3.
that was impossible unto the Law, (inasmuch as it was weak because of the
flesh) God sending his own son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for
sin, condemned sin in the flesh.

He has made him to be sin for us, 2. Cor 5.21.
which knew no sin, that we should be made the righteousness of God in
him. Greater love then this has no man: When any man bestows his life for
his freindes. Io. 15.13.
This love is sealed unto us. Matthew the 26.28.

158 Of Christ, his person and office his preisthoode and kingdom.
Our Lord Jesus Christ before the foundation of the woorlde was laid, was
ordained and appointed to be the Savior of the woorlde. In the beginning was
the word, and the word was with God, and that word was God. In substance and
nature (touching his divinity) he is coequall with GOD. Io. 1.1. Ioh. 17.5. He.
2.17. and 4.12. 1. Tim. 2. Act. 4.12.
And now glorify me thou Father with thine ownself, with the glory which I
had with thee, before the world was made

There are two natures in Christ, a Dyuine and humane, the propertye whereof do
safely remain knitte and joined in one person. He is our only Mediator and
Advocate: neither is there salvation in any other: For amongst men there is
given no other name under heaven, whereby we shall be saved.

He is our everlasting priest who by his one oblation of himself, has
satisfied for the sins of all those that by a lively faith take hold upon
him. But now our high Priest has obtained a more excellent office, inasmuch as
he is the mediator of a better testament. Heb, 8.6. and 9.11. 1. Pet. 1.19 Io.
18.36.
He is a king, but his kingdom is not of this world, for if the kingdom of
Christ were earthly, it would be unstable and transitory, but now since it is
heavenly, it is certain that the same shall continue for ever. The increase of
his government, and peace shall have no end. Esaias. 9.7.
He shall sit upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom to order it,
and to establishe it with justice and with judgment from hencefoorthe even for
ever. Dan. 7.14 Mich. 4.


His dominion, is an everlasting dominion which shall never be taken away, and
his kingdom shall never be destroyed.

159 How we ought to know and confess Christ.
WE may not think that a fleight knowledge and confession of Christ the son
of God and Savior of the world is sufficient. Ia. 2.19.
For the Devils (as Saint James says) do beeleeue, know and tremble: yea and
ye Turks and infidels do after a manner acknowledge Christ. But we must
know and confess Christ as Peter did saying: Thou art Christ the son of
the living God. Ma. 16.16
We must deeply pearce or enter into the whole course of the scripture, and
earnestlye consider by what titles Christ is called, and what he is indeed
both in person and office. To confess that Jesus is Christ the son of GOD,
is as much as to say, that we know confess and believe, that Jesus born of
the blessed virgin, is the blessed seed and the true Messiah promised by GOD,
by the mouth of all his Prophets, and the eternal and only begotten son of
GOD, that is according to his person very God and very man, and by his office
the true Christ anointed of the holy Ghost, King of Kings and Lord of Lords
the high priest, principal shephearde of our souls, the Master guider and
teacher of his flock, our only Savior, redeemer, mediator, and intercessor,
the head governor, ruler and defender of his Church. And we may not think
that the eternal providence and wisdom of God would prepare so precious
high and inestimable a means, as to send down his son to take the form
of a servant upon him in this vale of misery, to work only some part of
our salvation: and so but in part to execute the office of a savior. Wherefore
we must assuredly know and confess, that Christ is all that is before spoken
wholly and only without any part attributed to other. For as Peter says in
the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 4.12.
there is no other name given under heaven, whereby we shall be saved, but
only the name of Christ Jesus.

160 Christ is the liuelye image of the Father.
FOrasmuch as men make themselves known by countenance and by word: even so
God sends forth his voice unto us, by the voice of the prophets, and has in
the Sacraments (as it were) taken upon him a visible form, that we may know
him according to our capacity: for as God by his nature is invisible, (for God
is a spirit, so is he neither seen with corporal eyes, nor yet heard by
these corporal and corruptible ears. Nevertheless he gives unto his
servants certain signs of his presence, Io. 4.24.
and speaks unto men, in such manner of speech, as may be understood. For so
he appeared to the Prophets. Wherefore that which we read in Deuteronomy
concerning the voice of GOD which the Israelits hear^ is no otherwise to be
understood, Deu. 4.10.
then that they heard the voice of an Angel, and not the proper voice of God.

But when Christ was made manifest in the flesh, we had after a sort in him a
visible image of the invisible father He himself saying, Io. 14.9.
He which sees me, sees my father also.

He therefore which does not acknowledge God in his lively and express image,
does sufficiently thereby declare that he worshippeth no God at al, 2. Cor.
3.14.
but a God of his own imagination. Therefore the Apostle says that the Jews
have a veil before their eyes, leasts they should behold the glory of God, in
the face of Christ.

161 Why our Savior Christ came in the flesh.
WHen as Gods just wrath against sin committed by our first parents, was so
grievous that no creature in heaven and in earth, was able in any part to
appease the same, Io. 1.14.
by the inestimable goodness of God, his only and dearelibeloued son became
a sacrifice to appease his wrath and displeasure, and to reconcile us unto his
Father, and by his death and passion procured for us reconciliation with his
Father, remission of sin; righteousness before God; Col. 1.20.
and eternal life in heaven. These be the fruits and benefittes that we have
by Christ's coming in ye flesh. If the highness and excellency of the mean of
our salvation, in part or in all, could have otherwise bin wrought: the
wisdom of God would never have given his son to death to procure the same
benefits for us. But that he might declare how odious and displeasant sin
was in the sight of God, he let us by this means understand, that the offense
thereof could not be taken away, nor mankind to him be reconciled, but only
by the blood of the immaculate lamb Christ Jesus his son. Good Christians
therefore must assuredlye persuade themselves, To. 5.10.
that they have reconciliation with God, remission of sin, justification
before God, sanctification of the holy Ghost, Ephesians. 1.7.
and the heritage of eternal life, by the excellency and fulness of Christ's
death and passion only: only (I say) and by nothing else. For (as it was said
before) Christ is the only full and perfect mean of our salvation.

162 Faith in Christ the mean of our salvation.
THere is one only mean whereby the benefits of Christ's passion and
victory are applied and do also redounde unto us, and that is only faith in
Christ Jesus, and no other thing, which faith it pleases almighty God to
accept for righteousness. And this righteousness it is which only stands
before God and none other, as we are plainly taught by the Scriptures and
especially by the doctrine of S. Paul. Which righteousness thus rising of faith
in Christ, the apostle calls the righteousness of God, Phi. 3 9.
where he speaking of himself, utterly refuses the other righteousness which
is of the law, that he might be found in him, not having his own righteousness
which is of the law, but the righteousness of Christ, which is of faith. Again
the same Apostle writing of the Jews, which sought for righteousness and found
it not: and also of the Gentiles which sought not for it, and yet found it,
shows the reason why: because (says he) the one sought it as byworkes, and
the law, To. 9.30.31.32.
and came not to it, who not knowing the righteousness of god and seeking to set
up their own rightesonesse did not submit themselves to the righteousness
which is of God: the other which were the Gentiles, and sought not for it,
obtained righteousness, that righteousness which is of faith etc. Also in an
other place of the same epistle S. Paul writing of the righteousness which
comes of faith calls it the righteousness of God in these words: To. 3.25.
whom God (says he) has set forth a reconciliation through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness by the forgiveness of the sins that are past
etc. By which righteousness it is evident that the apostle means the
righteousness of faith which almighty God now reueileth and makes manifest by
preaching the gospel: but if we desire to see yet more plainly this
righteousness of God how it is taken in S. Paul for the righteousness of
faith, and therefore is called the righteousness of God, because it is imputed
only of God to faith and not deserved of man: In the same his chapter unto the
Romans his words be manifest. The righteousness of God (says he) is by faith
of Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all that believe.

163 We are justified by the grace of God in Christ, and not by works.
NO works of the law can justify men, that is to say, in gods judgment
acquit and discharge them, from sin, from accusation and damnation of the
law, reconcile them unto God, and make them perfect righteous good and blessed.
The grace of God alone in Christ Jesus does these things, and therefore he
that thinks, believes and teaches otherwise, despises the grace of God,
makes Christ unprofitable, and therefore makes also the whole doctrine of the
Evangelists and Apostles void and of none effect. For the Apostle Paul
teaches plainly that noe flesh shall be justified in the sight of God by the
works of the law. To. 3.20.
For by the law comes the knowledge of sin, but now without the law is the
righteousness of God declared by faith in Jesus Christ. For all they that
believe are justified freelye by grace through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus. Also in another place he says, a man is not justified by the works of
the law but by the faith of Jesus Christ. For in Christ our Lord, Gal. 2.16.
as in the true and living son of God, is enclosed fullness of grace and all
heavenly treasures, the which he keeps not unto himself alone, but according
to his pleasure, and according to our necessity, he bestows them upon us,
so that we shall not want at all any of those things which are requisite
unto our righteousness, perfection and salvation. Mat. 28.18 Mat. 11.28
All power is given unto him in heaven and in earth. For the which cause he
calls all men unto him, and will heal all our infirmities.

164 How faith does iustifye.
AS the passion of Christ serves to none but such as do believe, so neither
does faith (as it is only a bare qualitye or action in man's mind) it self
justify, unless it be directed to the body of Christ crucified, of whom it
receaueth al his virtue. And therefore these two, fait^ and Christ Jesus
crucified must always jointly concur and go together. As for example, when
the people of Israel were commanded of Moses to look up to the brazen
serpent, neither could the serpent have helpe^ them except they had looked up,
Number. 21.
no^ yet their looking upward have profited them, unless they had directed
their eyes upon the said Serpent set up for the same purpose for them to
behold. So our faith in like case directed to the body of Jesus our Savior,
is only the means whereby the merits of Christ are applied unto us, and we
now justified before God, according to the doctrine of S. Paul, who in
express words defining unto us, what this says is, and how it justifies
says: If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, To. 10.9.
and believe in thy heart that god raised him from death, thou shall be saved
etc. Besides this, what action ^^ quality so ever is in man, either hope,
charity or any other kind of faith and believing, be it never so true, except
it apprehend the body of Christ the son of God, it serves not to
justification. And that is the cause why we ^dde this word only to faith, and
say: that faith only in Christ justifies ^s, to exclude all other actions,
qualities, gifts, or works in man, from the cause of justifying, for as much
as there is no other knowledge nor gift given of God to man, be it never so
excellent, that can stand before the judgment of God to justification or
whereunto any promise of salvation is annexed: Io. 3.14.
but only this faith loaking up to the brazen Serpent, that is, to the body of
Christ Jesus crucified for us.

165 We cannot deserve grace by our works.
IF we will be true christians, we must first acknowledge our selves by the law
to be sinners, and that it is impossible for us to do any good work: For the
law says, we are evil, and therefore all that we think, speak or do, is
against god. We cannot therefore deserve grace by our works, which if we go
about to do, we double our offense: For seeing we are evil trees, we cannot
but bring forth (...) fruits, Mat. 7.17. To. 14.23
that is to say sins: F^^ whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Wherefore he
that would deser^^ grace by works going before faith goes about to please
God with (...) which is nothing else, but to (...) sin upon sin, to mock
God and to provoke his wrath. Secondly if we^ will be saved, we must not seek
salvation by works: 1. Io. 4.9.
For God has sent his only begotten son into the world that we might live
through him: he was crucified and dyed for us, and offered up our sins in
(...) own body. To. 3.20.
The law does nothing else, but utter sin, terrify and humble, and by this
means prepares us unto justification, and drives us to Christ. For God has
reueiled unto us by his word, that he will be unto us a merciful father and
without (...) deserts (seeing we can deserve nothing) will freely give unto us
remission of sins, righteousness, and (...) everlasting for Christ his sons
sake. For God gives his gifts fre^ly unto al men, and that is the praise and
glory of his divinity.

166 Salvation comes only by faith.
Whosoever studieth to be accepted with God and to be found righteous in his
sight, let him learn diligently by the doctrine of S. Paul to make a
difference and a separation, as far as from heaven and earth between the
righteousness of works and righteousness of faith, and in any wise beware he
bring no other means for his justification or remission of his sins, but only
faith apprehending the body or person of Christ Jesus crucified. For as there
is no way into the house but by the door, so is there no coming unto god but
by christ alone, which is by faith. And as the mortal body without bodily
susteinance cannot but perish: so ye spiritual soul of man has no other
refreshing, but only by faith in the body and blood of Christ whereby to be
saved. To. 9.30.
With this faith the Idolatrous Gentiles apprehended Jesus Christ and received
thereby righteousness. Act. 10.44.
Cornelius a baptized Romain so soon as he heard Peter preach Christ, Mat.
16.16
received forthwith the holy Ghost. Zacheus received the person of Christ into
his house and withal received salvation both to him and his whole household.
Luke 19.6.9.
What a sinner was Marie which had no less in he then seven Devils, Luke
7.47.
and yet because she set her heart and affection upon that person, many sins
were forgiven her. Lu. 23.43.
The right hand Thief, how far was he from fulfilling of the law, and yet
by faith entered he justified into Paradyse the same day with Christ. In like
manner, although the poor Publican came to ye temple with less show of
holiness after the law: Lu. 18.14.
yet went he home to his house more justified then the Pharisie with all his
works, and all by reason of faith. The parable of the prodigal son that was
lost: Luke 15.
also of the lost grote and of the lost sheep which went astray and was found
again: what do these declare but that which is lost by the law, to be
recovered by faith and grace. And thus, as the passion of Christ is only the
formal cause of our salvation: so is faith only the isntrumental cause that
makes the merits of Christ auayleable unto us.

167 The Papists can not be persuaded of free justification.
THe Papists cannot be persuaded that we become righteous through the mere
favor of God in our Lord Jesus Christ: they cannot receive the doctrine of
free justification whereby we are taught that GOD receaueth us of his own
mere mercy, and that his accepting of us is not for any respect of our own
works which are altogether sinful: 1. Io. 1.7.
but because it pleases him to wash us and cleanse us in the blood of his
only Son, and to hold us, and acknowledge us for his children, Ephesians. 2.3.
notwithstanding that by nature there is nothing in us but wretchedness and
cursednesse. For what shall become of merits (say they) and of the good works
wherein the salvation of men consists? And why do they stand upon their
merits and are so besotted with them but only because they look not up to
god? They dispute in their schools whether good works deserve recompense and
wages: but it appears how they fall a sleep upon this disputation and yet
in the mean while God cease not on his behalf to play the Judge, not in
judging according to their laws, but in behauing himself according to his
own majesty: that is to say, in finding out that thing in men which we
cannot perceive. But if our virtues were godly in deed, that is to say such
as might go for payment before God: then might we have some color to boste:
but when we shall have prised them to the uttermost they shall be but smoke.
Let men not therefore flatter their hearts in vanity, Job. 9.2.
but consider (as the truth is) that no man shall be justified through his
own virtues (seem they never so excellent) in the sight of God.

168 Faith does justify three manner of ways.
FAith first does justify the person in making him accepted, and the child of
God by regeneration before he begin to do any good work. Secondly it
justifies a man from sin, in procuring remission and forgiveness for the
same. Thirdly it justifies the good deeds and works of man, not only in
bringing forth good fruits, but also in making the same works to be good and
acceptable in the sight of God which otherwise were impure and accursed in his
sight. The office therefore of faith and works is diverse and must not be
confounded. Faith first goes before and regenerateth a man to God, Act. 13 39
and justifies him in the sight of God, both in covering his evil deeds, and
in making his good deeds acceptable to God, clyming up to heaven, and there
wrestling with GOD and his judgment for righteousness, for salvation and for
everlasting life. Works and charity follow faith and are exercised here upon
the earth and glories only before men, but not before God, in showing forth
obedience both to God and to man. Further then this, our good works do not
reach, nor have any thing to do in the judgment of God touching salvation. (I
speak of our good works as S. Paul speaks Romans 7. To. 7.18.
) as they be ours and imperfect. For else if our works could be perfect,
according to the perfection of the law, Leu. 18.5.
and as Christ wrought them in the perfection of the flesh, that is, if we
could perform them without any transgression: so might we live in them: but
seeing the weakness of our flesh cannot attain thereto, it follows that
all glory of justifying is taken from works and transferred unto faith.

169 The meaning of being justified by Faith.
IF Abraham had believed no more, but that there was a God in heaven: that
would not have served to have justified him, for the Heathen do believe so
much. Again, if Abraham had believed that god was judge of the world: that
would not also have served his turn. But when as God said unto him, I am thy
exceeding great reward, Ge. 15.1. and 17.7.
and I will be thy God and the God of thy seed after thee, and moreover in
thee shall all Nations of the earth be blessed: by accepting such promises,
wherein GOD acquainted himself with him, and witnessed to him that he took
him for one of his household and as his own child, and became his Father:
Abraham was justified by accepting that promise. For as soon as God offered him
his goodness and grace, he believed the word, and received it: and then was
he full sure of his salvation. To be justified therefore by faith, is not a
confused opinion of believing that there is a GOD, but a holding of him for our
Father and Savior, and that because he shows himself to be so by his
word, and also gives us a good pledge and earnest penny of it in our Lord
Jesus Christ insomuch that there he shows himself to be joined and united
with us, and that although we be wretched creatures and have nothing in us
but all mischife, Ephesians. 2.3.
yet he fails not to take us for his own, and to admit us into his favor:
the reason whereof is, because our Lord Jesus Christ is the mean betwixt him
and us Therefore when we have that promise, and rest wholly upon it, and doubt
not but that God does and will show himself gracious to us unto the end, and
therewithal call upon him, and resort only unto him, giving over this
world, and continuing in the hope of the heavenly life: then be we sure that
we have faith, and are justified: and that was the manner of our Father
Abraham's believing: and without that, let us assure our selves, that there is
no Christianity at all in us. For as S. Paul says until we know what the
Gospel is, To. 10.14
we cannot call God our Father. We cannot call upon God except (says he) we
knew him and believed in him. And how is it possible for us to know him till
he be revealed unto us? Therefore faith must needs go before. To. 10.17.
And whereof comes faith? Faith comes by hearing says S. Paul, wherefore
we must be trained in the gospel or else we can have no faith.

170 Of free justification by faith without works.
WHen we say that we be justified by faith, it is not meant that there is any
worthiness or desert in our faith, as who should say, that god were bound to
us, and therefore receued us for it: but that because God has showed himself
merciful toward us, and promised to be our savior: we being first bereft of
al trust in our virtues do come unto him by faith knowing well yt if be
consider us in our selus, he must neds curse and abhor us, Esaias. 2.3.
seeing then yt faith brings not any thing on man's behalf, but receueth all
things of Gods mere and free goodness, there is no questioning what
worthiness there is in us. For faith not only helps us to the attainment of
our salvation, but also brings us all perfection. If GOD have respect to our
works, woe will be unto us. Therefore he must be feign to turn away his
countenance from the considering of our persons and to receive us alonely in
our Lord Jesus Christ, or else (in his looking upon us) to mark nothing but
our miseries, that he may be moved and provoked to mercy. So then, GOD has a
double respect in iustifiing us. The one is, that he beholds our miseries:
for inasmuch as he sees us so plunged in all confusion, he is moved to pity.
Again to the intent he may no more be against us which are sinners, he must be
fain to look upon our Lord Jesus Christ and upon his righteousness, that the
same may do away all our offenses.

171 Of Freewill.
AS concerning Freewill, as it may peradventure in some case be admitted that
men without the grace, may do some outward functions of the Law, and keep
some outward obseruaunces or traditions: so as touching things spiritual and
pertaining to salvation, ^. Cor 3.5.
the strength of man, being not regenerate by grace is so infirm and weak
that he can perform nothing, neither in doing well, nor willing well. Who
after he be regenerate by grace, may work and do well, but yet in such sort
that still remains notwithstanding a great imperfection of flesh, and a
perpetual resisting between the flesh and the spirit.

From this truth of doctrine, the Church of Room does degenerate, which
holds and affirms that men without grace may perform the obedience of the
Law, and prepare them selves to receive grace by working, so that these works
may be meritorious, and e congruo obtain grace. But as for the infirmity which
still remains in nature that they nothing regard, nor once speak of.

172 The doctrine of freewill, is an arrogant doctrine
THe understanding and Freewil of man, not being regenerated, is so fowly
blotted and defaced in him, by his first transgression, and so wrapped in
sin and wickedness: that even by nature he is carried head long unto all
manner of evil, so as he is made very unfit and unapt to goodness. And then
what liberty or freewil can be attributed to such a man Saint Paul says, The
wisdom (...) the flesh is enemy to God: To. 8.7.
For it is not subject to the Law of God, neither in deed can be. But
whosoever is borne anewe by grace, through the operation of the holy. Ghost,
of him is this saying of Christ to be understood, Io. 8.34, and 36.
whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin. But if the son shall
make you free, you shallbee free in deed. That is you are made free from
sin, the Devil death and damnation, that freely and with good will by the
operation of the holy Ghost, and not by compulsion, you might do that good
thing which you do. And they which are so redeemed and endued with Christian
liberty, they attribute not the good which they do, unto their own power and
freewill: but to the grace of Christ, and to the holy Ghost, which works
the same in them. For our Savior Christ says He that abides in me, Io. 15 5
and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit, for without me ye can do
nothing.

Saint Paul also says, we are not sufficient of our selves to think any
thing as of our selves, 2. Cor. 3.5.
but our sufficiency is of God

And in an another place he says, 1. Cor 47
what have thou, that thou have not received. If thou have received it, why
reioycest thou as though thou had not received it? And again he says, Phi.
i. 29 and 2.13.
Unto you it is given for Christ, that not only ye should believe in him, but
also suffer for his sake: and furthermore, it is God (says he) which works
in you both the will and the deed, even of his good pleasure.

173 The doctrine of Freewill is blasphemous.
THey do greatly err which do attribute unto men freewil, and the power to
guide and govern themselves: they are also unthankful or at leastwise endeavor
to bring all the world to unthankfulness, and are arrogant, when so much as in
them lies, they dispossess the holy Ghost of his benefits and gifts, and
attribute them unto men, Wherefore eschuing such doctrine as a deadly
pestilence. To. 12, 13 Io. 15.5
Let us harken unto sobrietye. The which we shall do, if with humblenes we
acknowledge our selves to be the branches: and that we truly confess with
Saint Paul, that we are not able of our selves, 2. Cor. 3.5 Phil. 2.12
but our strength comes of God. Let us not be proud and arrogant, but by
humility of mind let us occupy our selves about our salvation etc.

174 We can neither attain virtue, not eschew vice by our Freewill.
WE cannot attain unto any virtue, nor yet tame and abolishe such faults and
vices as are condemned, by our freewill, nor by any ableness that is in us,
Phil. 2.13 Tit. 2.11, 12 Gal, 5.20 21
but God must work in us, and we must be members of our Lord Jesus Christ.
It is said, that we must live soberly righteously and godly. And how shall we
do so? when the holy ghost shall rule in us, then shall we have these virtues. It
is said, that we must fly dru^ke^nesse intemperancy, strife, debate, pride and
such like. And how? having the spirit of meekness, of the fear of God, the
spirit of wisdom and discretion, and all this was given to our Lord Jesus
Christ, to the end he should make them that believe in him, pertakers of it.
Therefore seeing we are of nature intemperate, full of vanity, full of ambition
and pride, given to unrighteousness deceit and wrong, let us come and submitt
our selves unto him that was appointed our head: and know that there is no other
means for us to be kept in obedience to God and to live according to his will:
unless we be united to the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, for then is the
holy ghost powered upon us, to strengthen us the better, for he is the fountain
of all holiness, of all righteousness, and to be short of all perfection.

175 Opinion of freewil, is unthankfulness
Seeing our nature is so corrupted ye as God himself says, Ge. 6 5
our heart is bent only to evil even from our youth how can any goodness
proceed from us, as of our selves? how can we challenge power to fulfill Gods
law, and by our good doings to be reconciled unto him? Io. 15.13.
Without me (says Christ) you ca^ do nothing. And S Paul acknowledges that
he is not able to think a good thought as of himself, 2. Cor. 3.5
but all his sufficiency is of God.

If Saint Paul does so humbly acknowledge his weakness, why should we stand
so proudly in our own conceits? We lost free will to love and embrace the
commandments of god through the greatness of the sin of our first Father
Adam: Wherefore men are unthankful and unkind unto ye grace of God, in
attributing much unto needy and wounded nature. Aug. ep. 107.
The first man (Adam) was so made, that nothing resisted his will, but after
through freewill he sinned, We as many as descend from his stock, are cast
down headlong into a necessity of sinning. If in the fall of Adam we lost
freewill, to love and embrace the commandment of God: if we show our selves
vnthanful to gods grace by attributing so much to our maimed and corrupt
nature: if by Adams offense we be cast into a necessity of sinning: Let us as
the Gospel teaches us, cast away this confidence of our own power. Let us
shake off this self liking hypocrisy, let us submit our selves under the
mighty hand of God and acknowledge our own infirmity, and not kick at that
doctrine of the gospel, yt lays before us our own weakness, and teaches us
what need we have of the grace of God in Christ Jesus.

176. Our will is utterly blind, till God has changed us.
IT is the power of the holy Ghost, through which we are drawn to the
obedience of God, according as he has chosen and adopted us for his children
before the foundation of the world. Moreover the holy scripture shows us,
Ephesians. 1.3.4
that we shall always be enemies unto God, until he have changed and
renewed us. And this is the cause why Moses said unto the people, Deu. 29.4.
that God had not yet given them an understanding heart, and seeing eyes. And
therefore to the end he might be obeyed, he says: that he would give them a
new heart, taking away the stony heart. Ier. 3 1.33
The prophet Jeremy in the 31. chap. and so likewise Ezechiel, and the apostle
Paul, do agree in this that God gives both to will and to perform. Eze.
11.19. and 36.27.
And in the first of John it is said, that they which believe, are not of the
will of flesh nor blood: Phil. 2.13. Io. 1.13. P^o. 3.10.
But renewed of God. Furthermore when the Apostle sp^^keth To. 3. of the will
of man, such ^^ it is by nature, he decyfereth plainly enough that there is
nothing but peruersitie and malice, as also in the 8. chap. he says, To. 8.7.
that all our thoughts are enmities unto God. Also in his first chap. to the
Ephesians. he shows well that faith and regeneration proceeded from no other thing,
then free election. And indeed it must needs be that God accomplish in us
that which (...) has spoken by his prophet Esaias: Esaias 66.19.
I appeared (says he) unto them which sought me not. And this likewise (...)
the cause, why John the Baptist reproving the rudenes and hardness of his
disciples: Io. 3.27.
no man (says he) (...) receive any thing, unless it be given him from above.

177 Man has no free will to do good.
FOr as much as we are borne of the flesh, there is nothing in us but v^ter
corruption, and we tend alwai^^ toward the earth. Men may (...) deed glory
in their own wisdom and moreover think that they have a free choice and
will of their own, to take the good and leave the evil: but those are but
dreams. For it is certain that so long as we be let alone in our own nature,
Io 3.6. Ge. 6.5.
we tend evermore unto evil, and the Scripture also condemns us of it saying
that there is not any thought conceived in man's mind, but the same is lewd,
and all our affections are enemies and rebellions against God. Wherefore let us
not beguyle our selves any more with vain flatteries, To. 8.7.
but acknowledge our selves to be utterly marred in Adam, so as there is
nothing but sinnefulnesse in us.

Notwithstanding God prouydeth for that mischief when he touches us to the
quick by his holy Spirit, and so purges our hearts as we desire to obey
him, and although we be not so perfect as were requisite, yet we fight against
our selves, and go forward still to goodness. And surely when Gods spirit is as
a bridle to us, to hold us back in his obedience, it is a sure token that God
dwells in us, Ephesians. 1.14.
and governs us (...) his flock, and holds us for his children. For we
cannot be counted christians without this record, that God warranteth himself
to be our father, and that his holy spirit is as a (...) thereof.

178 We have no freewil to do good.
IF we have free will to guide our selves to Godward and to attain everlasting
life: it would follow of necessity that first of all we should have faith,
righteousness, and holiness. But the scripture condemns us as blind wretches,
and tells us that we must not advance our selves so high, as to think to
attain to Gods secrets: but that we must confess our selves to be destitute
of wit and reason. And thus it appears that the first lesson which we must
learn when we come to gods school is to become fools as S. Paul says. 1.
Cor. 3.18.
And although the same seem strange unto us: yet must we pass that way: So
that if we attend to be taught at Gods hand, we must become fools: that is
to say, we must acknowledge that there is not so much as one drop of reason or
understanding in us, but that we be more destitute of it then the bruit
beasts. And therefore let us learn to humble our selves that God may reach us
his hand. And let us understand that to comprehend gods secrets he must be
feign to give us his holy spirit, and to inlighten our darkness: and for as much
as we be too far to seek, he must show us what is for us to know, and we
must not presume to have any knowledge, other then he gives us.

179. Free will overthrown.
AS Christ our savior denies men to be fit to believe, except they be drawn
of God the father: so likewise he pronounces that the grace of the spirit is
effectual, by which men are drawn to believe of necessity. By these two
members, Io. 6.44. and 45.
the whole power of feewill is quite overthrown, of the which the papists so
greatly dream. For if we come (...) to Christ before the father draw us, (as
the truth it self does truly affirm) we have not so much in us, (...) the
beginning of faith, nor readin^^ at al to obey. Moreover if al do come whom the
father teaches, he does not only give a desire to believe, but also faith it
self. Therefore in that we willingly obey, by the direction of Gods holy
spirit, it is a token of grace, and of our sealing: because God should not
draw us if so be, he stretching (...) his hand as it were, should leave o^^
will in the midst in suspense. For he is properly said to draw us when he
extends the power of his spirit to the full effect of faith.

180 Freewill and the law without grace can do nothing.
AS the matter and the instrument without ye form can do nothing^ even so
freewill and the commandment without grace, have no power to work. For what can
either freewill and the commandment do, except they be helped with grace both
going before and following. For grace sends ye commandment as a messenger
and minister to freewill: the commandment provoke freewil, and stirs it
up, as out of a sleep to do good works, and leads it as a blind man by the
hand, teaching him the way wherein to go: Which both if they be destitute of
grace, can do nothing of themselves. And if they begin, yet they proceed not,
neither do they perform or accomplish any thing: and if they presume, it
prospers not, and is but labor lost. For where the commandment comes
either by man or angel: and also where freewill is moved, provoked, and
informed either by the motion of man or of angel: yet unless Gods grace go
withal preventing and following the same, what is it able to do? For when man
was put in paradise, what auailed him the commandment which he heard? Ge. 2.17.
thou shall eat of every tree in ye garden, but only of ye tree of knowledge
of good and evil, thou shall not eat, which commandment wrought not to his
salvation, but to his condemnation: because grace ye saves and helps was
wanting, which he presuming unjustly upon his strength despised Or what did the
commandment (...) the law given by Moises, profit (...) people of Israel in
the wilder^^^^, which law they refused to obey: (...) what profit wrought it
to him whi^^ presumed to follow the Lord of his own free will, and not of the
Lords calling, Mat. 8.19.
saying unto him: Lord I will follow thee whither soever thou g^est? By these
and such like places of the holy scripture it is easilye to be proved, that
neither the law nor freewill have power to work of themselves unless they be
helped by Gods grace preventing and following the^.

181. Free will is highly extolled of the papists.
IF there be any drop of good and right understanding in us, it is the
special gift of the holy Ghost, and we cannot challenge the praise of it to
our selves, except we will be traitors to God, in robbing him of that which
belongs unto him. Seeing it is so, what is further to be said of the
freewill, which is so highly magnified amongst the Papists? For when they
speak of freewill, they mean the reason that men have to be so wise, Genesis 6.5.
as to choose the good and to eschuse the evil. But on the contrary part God
tells that our heart is bent to evil, 2. Co. 3.5.
and that we have not so much as a good thought of our selves: until such
time as he has made us to profit in his schole, we be all fools, yea even
they that think themselves to be most wise. And so is al our foolish
confidence beaten down, and men must be feign to understand, that until God
have called them to his truth: they be void of al reason and wisdom, and
there is no other mean to make us walk in the right way, then the utter
bereauing of us of all our vain flatteringes.

182 Free will overthrown.
SO long as we are without Christ we bring forth no good fruit acceptable
unto GOD, because we are not apt to do good, for without me (says Christ)
you can do nothing. Io. 15.5.
In which words he speaks most plainly against freewill, and against al
human strength be it never so strong, and also utterly overthrows the
same. For as the branch being cut from the vine, brings forth no fruit, but
withers away even so man can do nothing at all to attain to righteousness
and salvation, if so be through unbelief, he be separated from Christ. Now
although the Papists in word only do confess, that we can do nothing
without Christ, 2. Cor. 3.5
yet notwithstanding they feign a certain power in us, which of it self is not
sufficient to work, except it be helped with the grace of God. For they will
not abide that a man should be so empty and free from power and strength to
work that which is good, but that he may do somewhat of himself. But the
words of our Savior Christ so plainly spoken cannot in such wise be colored.
Such therefore is the imagination of the Papists that they affirm, that
without Christ we can do nothing, and yet notwithstanding being helped by him,
that we can do somewhat of our selves without his grace. But Christ
pronounces ye contrary, as yt we can do nothing of our selves, Io. 15.4.
For the branch (says he) can not bring forth fruit of it self.

183 Of grace, election, vocation, faith, justification, glorification, free
will. etc.
IN them that be chosen to life, first Gods mercy and free grace, To. 10.17
brings forth election: election woorketh vocation or gods holy calling,
which vocation thorough hearing, brings knowledge and faith of Christ, faith
thorough promise obteyneth justification, justification through hope wayteth
for glorification. Election is before time, vocation and faith comes in time.
Justification and glorification is without end. Election depending upon Gods
free grace and will, excludes all man's will, blind fortune, chance and all
peraduentures. Vocation standing upon Gods election, excludes all man's
wisdom, cunning, learning, intention, power and presumption. Faith in Christ
proceeding by the gift of the holy ghost, and freely justifying man by Gods
promise, excludes all other merits of men, all condition of deserving, and
all works of the law, both Gods law and man's law, withal other outward
means whatsoever. Justification coming freely by grace, stands sure by
promise, without doubt, Tit. 2.12.
fear or wavering in this life. Glorification pertaining only to the life to
come, by hope is looked for. Grace and mercy preuenteth, election ordeineth,
vocation prepares and receaueth the word whereby comes faith, faith
justifies and justification brings glory.

184 How we may be assured of our election, and how faith does work the
same.
Whosoever will be certain of his election in God, let him look to his faith in
Christ, which if he find in him to stand firm: be may be sure and nothing
doubt, but yt he is one of the number of Gods elect. Secondly they say faith
and nothing else, is the only condition and means whereupon gods mercy, grace,
election, vocation and all gods promises to salvation do stay, according to the
words of the holy Ghost Col. 1. Col. 1.23.
If ye abide in the faith. Thirdly this faith also is ye immediate next cause
of our justification simply without any other condition annexed. For as the
mercy of God his grace, election, vocation and other former causes do save
and justify us upon condition if we believe in Christ: so this faith only in
Christ without condition is the next and immediate cause, which by gods promise
works our justification, according as it is written: Act. 18.31.
believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, thou and all thy whole
house.

185 Election and vocation after purpose.
THe cause only of gods election, is his own free mercy: and the cause in some
manner of our justification is our faith in Christ and nothing else. As for
example, First concerning election if the question be asked why Abraham was
chosen, and not Nathor, why was Jacob chosen and not Esau? Why was Moses
elected, and Pharao hardened? Why David accepted and Saul refused, why few
chosen and the most forsaken? It can not be answered otherwise then thus:
because it was so the good will of God. In like manner touching vocation and
also faith, if the question be asked why this vocation and gift of faith was
given to Cornelius the Gentile, and not to Tertullius ye Jew? Why to the poor
and little ones of this world (of whom Christ speaks: Mat. 11.25
I thank thee father which have hid this from the wise etc.) why to the simple
unwise and outcastes in this world, of whom speaks S. Paul saying, 1. Cor.
1.26.
ye see your calling (my brethren) how not many of you etc Why to the sinners
and not to the just? Why the beggars by the high ways were called, Ma. 11.26
and the bidden gestes excluded? We can go to no other cause but to gods
purpose and election, Lu. 18.14.
and say with Christ our savior, yea father for so it was thy good pleasure.
And so for justification likewise if the question be asked why the Publican was
justified, Mat. 21.31
and not the Pharisei? Why harlots and Publicans go before the Scribes and
Pharisees in the kingdom why ye son of the free woman was received, Ge.
21.12.
and the bondwomans son being his elder rejected? Why Israel which so long
sought for righteousness, found it not: and the Gentiles which sought not for
it, found it? We have no other cause hereof to render, but to say with S. Paul,
To. 9.32.
because they sought for it, by works of the law, and not by faith: which
faith as it comes not by man's will, but only by the free gift of God: so is
it only the isntrumental cause, whereunto ye promise of our salvation is
annexed. According as we read: To. 4.16.
Therefore it is by faith, yt it might come by grace, and the promise might be
sure to all the seed. verse. 5.
Also in ye same chap. he says that his faith is counted for righteousness
which believes in him that justifies the ungodly.

186 Diverse kinds of faith.
THere be many kinds of faith: as a man may believe every thing that is true,
yet not every truth does save, neither does the believing of every truth
justify a man. He that believes that God created all things of naught,
believes truly: he which believes that God is a just god, 1. Tim. 1.17.
yt he is omnipotent, yt he is merciful, yt he is true of promise: believes
well and holds the truth. 1. Cor. 1.9 Ephesians. 1.4.
So he that believes ye God has his election from the beginning, and that he
also is one of the same elect and predestinate has a good belief and thinks
well: but yet this belief alone, except it be seasoned with an other thing, will
not serve to salvation: as it auayled not the Jews, which so sought of
themselves, and yet think to this day to be only Gods elect people. Only ye
faith which avails to salvation is that, whose object is the body and
passion of Jesus Christ crucified. So that in the act of justifying, these two,
faith and Christ, have a mutual relation, and must always concur together,
faith as ye action which apprehends, and Christ as the object which is
apprehended. For neither does the passion of Christ save without faith, neither
does faith help, except it be in Christ.

187 No remission but in Christ.
Whosoever believes to get the inheritance of heaven or remission of sin
through works, he believes not to get ye same for Christ's sake. And they that
believe not that their sins are forgiven them, and that they shall be saved
for Christ's sake, they believe not the gospel: Ma. 1.21 Luke 1.31.
For the Gospel says, that we shall be saved for Christ's sake, and that our
sins are forgeuen us through him. He that beeleeueth not the Gospel,
beeleeueth not GOD, whereby it follows, that they which believe to be saved
by their works, or to get remission of their sins by their own deeds believe
not God, but recount him as a liar, and so utterly deny him to be God. If we
believe to get the inheritance of heaven through good works, then we believe
not to get it through the promise of God. Io. 3.16 Act. 4.12.
For GOD has said that we shall have the inheritance of heaven, and that our
sins are forgeuen us for his sons sake. He condemns not good works, but
he condemns the false trust in any works, so all the works wherein a man
puts confidence, are therewith poisoned and become evil.

188 Of prayer to Saints, how it is repugnant to the Mediatorship and
Aduocateship of Christ.
CHrist is the only reconciler, mediator, and atonement maker between God and
us, and for that cause sits at the right hand of God, perpetually to appear
before his face for us: Against the which article of Christ's incarnation, the
teachers among the Papists do teach blasphemous doctrine of invocation of
saints, that they are our mediators and reconcilers, that by their merits and
prayers, we have access unto god and are for their sakes, heard, received, and
accepted into the favor of God again, evidently displacing the son of God
from the chief office of his eternal preisthood, and setting his creatures in
his place and dygnitye, and that without any warrant of scripture, either by
word or example. This doctrine is joined with two other detestable errors:
first that they conceive of Christ, as of a dreadful GOD, and terrible judge
and not as of a merciful Mediator, and therefore that we have need of other
spokesmen, to make the way to him for us, though he himself most graciously
and mercifully cries unto us, Ma. 11.28 Io. 16.13.
Come unto me all ye that trauail and be heavy laden, and I will refresh you.
And in sundry places commands us to pray unto God the Father in his name,
assuring us that whatsoever we desire, it shall be granted us. And therefore do
they show themselves to mistrust the credit of Christ. Secondly in this
praying to Saints not without great danger of Idolatry, they attribute unto
them divine power:

For in their praying to them, they imagine of them, that they be of universal
knowledge and understanding not only what men speak, but also what they think
in their hearts. Again they attribut unto them almighty power, as being able
to work and bring to pass whatsoever is desired of them. And lastly, they
show themselves to believe that they are more merciful and ready to hear
sinners, then Christ himself, which is flat blasphemy.

189 False doctrine concerning invocation.
THe manner of the Papisticall invocation, is not to God alone as they should
do, but to dead men, saying that saints are to be called upon as Mediators of
intercession, and Christ as the mediator of salvation? And affirm moreover,
that Christ was a Mediator only in time of his passion: which is manifestly
repugnant to the words of Saint Paul, Romans 8. To. 8.34.
Where he speaking of the intercession of Christ, Who is (says he) on the
right hand of God, and makes request also for us, etc. And if Christ be a
Mediator of salvation, what needs then any other intercession of the saints
for other suits? For salvation being once had, what can we require more? Or
what lacks he more to be obtained of ye saints which is sure to be saved
only by Christ? And yet in their catholic deuotio^s, why do they teach us
to pray to the blessed Virgin to save al them that glorify her etc. If
salvation only belong unto Christ? Unless they study of purpose to seem
contrary to the^ selves. Hitherto also pertains the worshipping of relics,
Deu. 6.13 Luke 4.8.
and the Idolatrous adoration of sacraments, as the outward sign for the
thing signified contrary to the sense of the holy ghost. The profanation also
of the Lords supper, and false meriting by Masses.

190 Christ is the only intercessor with the Father.
THe faithful children of God are assured, and do receive this comfort, that
our Lord Jesus Christ being now at the right hand of God in heaven, is
gentle, willing, ready and able to help all those which put their trust in him.
And therefore in all their necessities, they content themselves with the
intercession of Christ and with his mediation And that chiefly seeing S. Paul
says, Tim. 2.5.
that there is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, even the man
Christ Jesus, which gave himself for the redemption of all men.

And Saint John says, If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father
Jesus Christ the righteous, 1. Io. 2.12
and he is the reconciliation for our sins: and not for our only, but also
for the sins of the whole world: tou^hing the intercession of our Lord Jesus
Christ in heaven, we have the manifest and invincible testimonies of the holy
scriptures, but as touching the intercession of Angels and of sanctes which are
in heaven, we have no testimony thereof, and therefore the godly regard it not.
They which beeleeue the word of God, in which we have taught us but one only
intercessor Christ in heaven, they seek for none other intercessor there,
because they have the same full and perfectlye in Christ. But they which do not
believe nor acknowledge Christ, for their only and perfect intercessor and
aduocat such infidels shall never be helped with any prayers of Angels or
saints, if the case stood so that they did pray for them.

191 The Papists will have Christ to be in part a Savior.
THe Papists would weaken the ground of our Faith by a number of corrupt
doctrines. As first that in part we have salvation and remission of sins by
the merits of saints, for thus they pray: Grant us O Christ by the blood
of Thomas which he shed for thee, thither to go whither he is ascended. And to
Saint George they pray thus. Let him save us from our sins, that we may rest
with the blessed in heaven. And touching Saint Anne they say thus: O God, thou
which would S. Anne to become the mother of thy mother, grant we beseech
thee, that by the meritts of the mother and the daughter, we may obtain the
heavenly kingdom. Here are three. Saviors besides Christ, and in like manner
do they acknowledge a thousand more. Secondly they say, we have remission of
sins and salvation, in part by our own merits and good doings. For thus
writes one of their champions: that the passion of Christ may be the 1. and
principle cause of attayning grace, and opening the way to heaven, but it is
never the whole cause, for ye ever there goes with Christ some merit of him yt
receives grace. Furthermore what shall be said of pardons, of Pilgrimages,
of Purgatory, of holy water, and a number of such like superstitious and false
errors by which not without blasphemy, they match transitory things and vain
devises of men, with the blood of Jesus Christ, the son of God our savior
the most excellent price of our redemption expreslye contrary to the holy
Ghost thus writing by S. Peter. 1. Pet. 1. i8
Ye are not redeemed with tra^sitory things as with gold or silver, but with
the blood of that immaculat lamb Christ Jesus.

192 Contrariety between the religion of Christ, and the Pope.
WHereas the doctrine of Christ is spiritual altogether, consisting wholly in
spirit and verity, and requires no outward thing to make a true Christian man,
but only baptism which is the outward profession of Faith, and receiving of
the Lords Supper: If the religion of the Church of Room be examined, it
will easily be found, wholly to consiste in nothing else, but altogether in
outward and ceremonial exercises: as outward confession, absolution at the
priests hand, outward sacrifice of the mass, buying of pardons, purchasing
of obites, externe worshipping of Images and relics, pilgrimage to this place
or that: building of churches, founding of monasteries, outward works of the
law, outward gestures, garments, coulors, choice of meats, difference of times
and places, peculiar rites and obseruancies, set prayers and number of prayers
prescribed, fasting of vigiles, keeping of holy days, coming to church,
hearing of service, externe succession of Bishops, externe form and notes of
the church etc. so that by this religion, to make a true christian and a good
catholic, there is no working of the holy Ghost almost required.

193 Succession is nothing without the doctrine of the Apostles.
THe adversaries of the truth to the intent they might prove themselves to be
the true church: they object the succession of Bishops for the space of many
hundred years in the Apostolical sea: whereas their doctrine being compared
with the doctrine of the Apostles, by the diversity and contrariety thereof
will easilye appear, to be the doctrine neither of the Apostles nor of any
apostolical men. Succession (in deed) with continuance of Apostolical
doctrine, ought to be of great authority, but without it nothing. The sons
of Aaron had more allowable succession from Aaron, then the Bishops of Rome
have from Peter, and yet because they brought strange fire into the temple of
God, they were rejected and perished. Leu. 10.1.
Those which in ye church of God do imitate them, and contemning the truth
delivered by God, desire strange doctrines, and bring into the church, the
instruction of human ordinances, them does Christ sharply reprove in his
Gospel: saying, Mat. 15.3.
you cast away the commandments of God to establish your own ordinance. Annas
and Caiphas had full succession from Aaron, yet it were hard thereupon to
conclude, that they had the right of ye true church, and christ and his
apostles to be Scismatickes.

194 Succession proves nothing.
THey greatly err which think, that any thing may be proved by succession,
whilst they leave out that which is of most force therein: that is, that if
like as they have succeeded in the place of godly men, they have also succeeded
them in the spirit of Christ in doctrine, in faith, grauitye godliness,
humility, and patience. Mat. 23.2.


The high priests and prelates, who in the time of Christ, did sit on Moses
chair, could have derived the petigree of their succession from the^, selves
eue^ to Aaron, but because their life and doctrine did not agree with the life
and doctrine of Aaron, and other godly priests, their succession auayled
nothing against Christ and his Apostles: neither were Christ and his Apostles
false teachers, or disseuered from the true Church, because they were not able
to prove their succession as the Pharesies could: For the word of God and the
institution of Christ was sufficient for them. Wherefore since even we also now
have on our side the words of God, and the institution of Christ there is no
succession of Bishops that can prove us to be out of the true Church. The
histories of Popes and other like Prelates which are written, yea even by their
dear friends and defenders, do sufficiently testify, that almost all of them
have obtained this dignity and place by most filthy means, by simony, wicked
arts, violence, murders and traiterous conspiracies: Wherefore if it would
please them a little more narrowely to consider hereof, they should find by
better advise, there were no just cause to brag of their succession, but rather
to burye the same in silence, seeing by it their evils and horrible filthiness
is so clearly detected. But God has done this, to the end the truth might be
revealed, and the godly warned to gather them selves together under our head
Christ, and into his true church.

195 The description of the invisible Church and visible.
THe church sometime in the scripture is taken for the whole number of the
elect of God, that are and have been from the beginning of the world, in all
places and ages even to this day. And this is that Church which is the pillar
of truth. This is that church that never can abide in error. Mat. 16.18
This is that church that by imputation of Gods mercy, is the immaculate and
undefiled spouse of Christ, but this Church is not always seen. To. 11.4. 1.
Cor. 6.11
This is the invisible Church that is known to God alone, and is never
certainly, truly, and for the whole revealed to man. For they by hypocrisy
may seem members of this Church, which indeed are no partakers of it, as
appears by the example of Judas. And contrariwise they to man's judgment, may
seem not to be of this Church, which yet in Gods appointment, are the certain
members thereof, as evidently was showed in the example of Saint Paul. But
the visible church that is discerned of man, and by outward tokens is known to
the world, may in this manner be described. It is the multitude of all them,
be they few or many, which being upon the face of the earth, and called by
the word of the Gospel, do protest to believe in our savior Christ, looking
for sanctification and salvation by him, and worshipping him according to his
word. Mat. 28.19. Mar. 16.15
That it is the whole multitude of al believers, it is evident when Christ
himself says: go ye and preach ye gospel to al creatures. He excepteth none,
and therefore the grace of God, and benefits of his church, are not tied to any
one place: as to Rome, to Jerusalem, to Constantinople, or to any other place.
That the number of this church, may be as well small as great, Christ himself
teaches saying: My flock is very small, Luke 12 32 Mat. 18 20
And where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in ye
midst of the^. Hereby we may learn, that ye argument of multitude or great
number, is not always strong. For by it the doctrine of the prophets, the
doctrine of Christ and of his Apostles might be rejected: which undoubtedly
were but few in comparison of them that misliked and reproved it. That this
multitude must be called by the word of the Gospel, S. Paul affirms To. 10.
Faith (says he) comes by hearing and hearing by the word of god. To. 10.17
And therefore did Christ send his Apostles to preach the gospel, that thereby
men might be brought to the belief of the Church.

196 The Church may err
THe Church is clean, through the grace of God in Christ Jesus, and yet by her
own nature, and through the manifold infirmities of the flesh, which she
retayneth, even until this temporal death, she has need to be washed and
purged. For the which cause the daily prays. Mat. 6.12.
Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
Saint John says, if we say we have not sin, we deceive our selves, 1.
Io. 1.10
and there is no truth in us. Wherefore being delivered from this flesh, we are
made perfectly pure in ye life to come, and free from all blemish. But so long
as the saints live here on this earth, clothed with their flesh they are
subject to many infirmities. And therefore it is most certain by this reason
that the church both may and does erre^ although it cannot be moved, Mat.
16.18 Io. 10.27.
because she is grounded upon the true rock: and so long as she hears and
follows the voice of her true pastor, she erreth not.

197 The name of the Church abused by Wolves.
THe false prophets and enemies of the truth, do coulor and hide their
hypocrisy, under this goodlye name and title of the holy Apostolical and
Catholic Church, wherewith they seem gloriously to advance and set forward
themselves: as though that all their doctrines, traditions and devises of new
worship, proceeded not from themselves, but were established by the perpetual
consent of the Church, and allowed by the sentence and interpretation of the
best counsels, learned fathers and doctors: and yet being rightly and truly
examined, it is nothing so. Consent of the Church (in deed) to true and godly
Preachers, is not only a beautiful garment but also most necessary, that men
may not feign and devise doctrines, opinions and fantasies of their own
heads: but profess believe, and teach the consent of the true Catholic Church
in ye doctrine that was first planted by god himself in Paradyse, and after
renewed and continued by the Patriarchs and Prophets, and so published into
the whole world by Christ himself and his Apostles. The sum whereof, is
briefly contained in articles of our faith, teaching us ye inestimable
goodness of Almighty God toward us, as well in making of the world, as in
redeeming mankind by the incarnation and death of his son, etc. This faith
and belief ought to be established and conserved, by the consent of the
Catholic Church from the beginning. But it is of all Christian hearts to be
lamented, that most wicked and ravening wolves, under this title of the
Churches consent, do abuse the people of god, bring into ye church and
maintain strange worshipping of God, and whatsoever they have newly devised
without just warrant of ye holy scriptures and contrary to the manifest
doctrine of the Prophets, Apostles, and ancient fathers of the primitive
church. Yea and such they have been, yt have most cruelly persecuted Gods good
prophets and the doctrine that they have taught. For who persecuted Jeremy and
the other Prophets? Were they not those that said the Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord? Shall the truth depart from the Priests? Were it not they
that stroke Micheas, Ier. 7.4. Ier. 18.28. 1. Kings. 22 24. Ier. 32.3.
and caused Jeremy to be put in prison? Who were they that put Christ to death,
and persecuted his Apostles? Do not the Evangelists and Acts of the Apostles
declare? Does not christ give his Desciples warning yt it should be so? These
things (says he) have I spoken unto you that you may not be offended. Io.
16.1.
They shall excommunicate you out of their Synagogues, and all for my names
sake.

198 What ministers ought to be in the Church.
IT is required of al those, that take upon them, the name of gods ministers,
yt they have a desire and zeal to bring men unto God, and to follow the trace
which God has commanded al his to keep, yt is, that they win the world unto
the obedience of him. Secondly besides their good zeal, they must also have a
certainty of doctrine, so as he yt speaks may not take any thing upon him,
nor pass his bounds, 1. Tim. 4.16. 1. Cor. 11.23. 1. Co. 15.3
but from hand to hand deliver the thing that is commanded him in such wise
as Jesus Christ may always be heard, and suffered to speak, and all mouths
else be stopped, saving only in way of hearkening, yt his doctrine may be
known unto us.

199 The title of the ministry and duty.
THe ministers of the word, are called by the holy Ghost, the light of the
world, Mat. 5.13. Eze. 34.2.
the salt of the earth: They are called Pastors, and Shepheardes: they are
called Husbandmen, Guides, Stewardes, and Messengers, besides many other
excellent titles given them in the holy scriptures. 1. Cor. 4.1
Now if the minister be a light to the people, he must of necessity go and
shine before them in knowledge and doctrine. If he be the salt, he must
needs season. If he be a Pastor or Shephearde, he must needs feed. If he be
an husbandman, he must needs have a care of the Lords husbandry. If he be a
Guide he must needs know the way himself, and open and declare it to other.
If he be a Steward he must provide for the household. If he be a messenger,
he must be able and willing to do his message: for it stands for the Lords
glory and credit, to have such Pastors, and such husbandmen such stewardes,
and messengers as have wisdom and knowledge. They that be wise (says
Daniell) shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, Dan. 12.3.
and they that turn many unto righteousness shall shine as the stars for ever
and ever. Mat 24.25
The wise and faithful steward that gives meat to the household in due
season, when his master comes he shall be blessed, and made partaker of
exceeding joy and glory. Take heed says the Apostle to thy self and to
learning continue therein, 1. Tim. 4.16.
for in so doing thou shall both save thy self and those that hear thee. God
so blessed the preaching of his servant Jonas that thorough it, Jonas. 3 4
the Ninevites believed god humbled themselves, and forsook their former
wicked ways. At one preaching of Peter there were wonn to the Lord about
three thousand souls, Act. 2.41.
Thus does the Lord bless his own means and order, the minister by pure and
faithful preaching, discharges his own soul, obteyneth peace in conscience,
and so is blessed in this life, but shall be far more blessed in the life to
come, when he has finished his race, he shall receive an incorruptible crown
of glory. Act. 26.18
The people also by this means are many ways blessed, they received
knowledge, faith, To. 10.17
and salvation: their eyes are opened, they are turned from darkness to light,
and from the power of Satan unto God. All these great and notable blessings do
ensue the preaching of the word, and therefore required most necessarily in
every minister.

200 A right image of a godly Pastor.
IT is the duty of all Pastors and ministers, to bear a Fatherly and motherly
affection: not toward ravening wolves, but toward the poor sheep,
miserably seduced and going astray, patiently bearing their faults and
infirmities, instructing and restoring them with the spirit of meekness:
Gal. 6.1. 2 Timothy 2.25.
For they can not be brought into the right way again, by any other means:
and by ouersharpe reproouing and rebuking they are provoked to anger, or else
to desperation, but not to repentance. Such is the nature and fruit of true
and sound doctrine that when it is well taught and well understood, it
joins men's hearts together with a singular concord: but when men reject
godly and sincere doctrine, and embrace errors, this unity and concord is
soon broken.

201 The duty of the ministers.
THe Pastors and ministers of the Church must learn that they ought not to
exempt themselves from charge and care, nor fly labor and travail, but they
ought (as pillars) to sustain and bear the Church of God, as upon their
shoulders and not be like unto the Pope which does oppress it, and does
devour the same as a ravening wolf with his like, as it is written, Matthew.
23. verse. 4. Heb. 5.4.
Secondly that they ought not to thrust in themselves.

Thirdely that they cannot by their industry and labor attain unto this
honor, but GOD must make them apt and fit for the same: the which he does,
when he opens himself unto them by his word, and calls them to this
office, and endueth them with the wisdom of his spirit. A man can receive
nothing, Io. 3.27. 2. Co. 3.7.
except it be given him from above. And we are not sufficient of our selves to
think any thing as of our selves. Our Lord also does well show it when he
says unto his Desciples, Mat. 9.37.
that the harvest is great, but the laborers are few. He declares the same
also when he opened the understanding of his Desciples for to understand the
Scriptures. Lu. 24.25.
And although the ministers of the word be (as it were) pillars of the Church,
yet have they nothing whereupon to glory. For what have thou, that thou have
not received? 1. Co. 4.7.
And what is Paul and Apollo but servants by whom ye have believed? But they
have cause to humble themselves, seeing they could not prepare nor place
themselves where they are, and should be void of power and might, without
upholding any thing: except ye foundation did bear and uphold them, and that
they did not bear and hold up the whole building and house.

202 What every minister ought to preach.
THe ministers are not bound to deliver the counsels of men, the traditions of
the Fathers, the statutes of earthly princes, or the authority of mortal men:
but as they are the servants of Jesus Christ Prince of all Princes, so are
they bound only to preach his Gospel. The true Prophets never spoke of
themselves unto the people, Ier. 1 Eze. 3.
but as they received warning from the Lord They had no authority to speak
their own words, nor the words of any mortal man. Ma. 28. i0
The Apostles might not teach their own doctrine, but only that which they
had received from their Master, who enioyneth them to teach all things
whatsoever he had commanded them: Mar. 16, i5 1. Cor. 11.23. 1. Cor. 15 3.
Go (says he) and preach the gospel. The Apostle writing unto the Corinth.
affirms that he received of the Lord that which he delivered unto them.
Whereby we may see, al these teachers confuted, which stand upon the authority
of men, which ad or diminish any thing from the scriptures, which join their
own fantasies and the traditions of men, with the holy pure and perfect word
of God. The Law of God (says the Prophet) is a perfect law converting souls.
Ps. 197 2. Tim. 3.17,
The Scripture says Saint Paul is able to make the man of GOD absolute and
perfect to all good works. He that has a dream (says GOD by Jeremy) let him
tell a dream, Ier. 23.28
but he that has my word, let him speak my word faithfully.

And what is the chafe to the wheat, (says the Lord) Is not my word like a
fire, and like an hammer that breaks the stone? Our Savior in the Gospel
speaks against such teachers, Ma. 12, 3
saying: In vain they worship me, teaching the doctrine and precepts of men.
Woe therefore wilbee to such sons of vanity, which preach not Christ, but
themselves, and which do deface and weaken the authority of the holy
scriptures.

203 The office of Ministers, and how men ought to behave themselves toward
them.
THE Office of Ministers is to watch over the flock of the lord to feed it, to
preserve it in health and to keep it from diseases and hurt the which is done
by doctrine, exhortations, reprehension, rebuking, comfort, prayers,
administration of the sacraments, and by the example of a godly and vncorrupt
life, as may be proved and known many ways, by the writings and examples of
the Apostles. Furthermore it is necessary of all Christians to be known, how
they ought to behave themselus toward the ministers, Io 21.15.16.17. 2. Tim.
4, 2. Tit. 2.7.
and what they ought to think of them. Chieflye therefore in their function or
calling, not their persons, but Christ that works by them is to be
considered, Wherefore we must receive their doctrine (when they preach the word
of God purely) even as the doctrine of Christ. For Christ says in express
words in the Gospel, he that hears you, hears me, and he that despises
you, despises me. Lu. 10.16
We must not look that Christ should come down from heaven again, and
speak unto us, seeing he daily speaks in his church by his ministers which
preach the word of Christ. Also the ministers for their parts must behave
themselus honestly, well and Christianlike, in doctrine life and conversation.
They must not seek their own honor or gain, but the honor of Christ, and
profit of his Church. They must not think that they cannot err, but must
suffer themselves to be admonished, 1. Pet 5.2
being neither stuborn, rash, nor proud. They must not attribute or give too
much unto themselves, 2. Tim 2.24.
but must be lowlye, gentle, sage, paineful and faithful,

204 The true duty of the ministers of the gospel.
THe true ministers of the gospel, must not only have a sweet and amiable voice
to draw those to the flock which yealde themselves teachable, and suffer
themselves to be taught: but they must also disclose and drive away the Wolves
and the thieves: they must have a loud voice to cry out against all them that
scatter the flock. This is the thing whereunto Gods servant must imploye
themselves, if they purpose to execute their duty. Tit. 1.9
They must not only be instructed to teach other, but be strong and
constant to make it good, and to fight when question shall be to maintain the
doctrine of truth, that it may remain safe and sound.

Eze. 3.17
The Prophet Ezechiell compares them to such as keep watch in a watch tower,
and surely it is a charge, yea, and that a very mighty and heavy charge,
while other men sleep, to watch and have a care of all the flock. The name and
title also which the holy Ghost attributes unto the ministers, shows
plainelye what it is, Ma. 5.13. Ez. 34.2 1, Co. 4.1.
that GOD calls them unto, and what they ow to his Church, that me^ may not
think they shall be accounted faithful, and in the mean while give themselus to
rest and sleep, and to follow the pleasures and lusts of the flesh. For God
does not choose them, whom he places Shepherds in his Church, for any
outward show, but he binds them to his people, for otherwise we cannot serve
God, but by employing our selves to serve his whole flock: and the greatest
honor that the ministers of his word can have, is to be diligent in serving
all the faithful.

205 The calling of the Ministry.
THe calling of the ministry and preaching of the gospel, is no devise of any
mortal man, but the ordinance of the living God. It was he that ordained
Moses and the Prophets. 2. Pet. 1 21.
The prophecy (says Peter) came not in the old time by the will of man: but
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Mar. 3.13
The Lord Jesus himself, called appointed and sent forth into the world his
apostles to preach the gospel. It is the holy Ghost which ordeyneth
faithful overseers to feed the Church of God. Act. 20 28.
It is Christ also at this day which appoints Pastors and teachers for the
gathering together of his saints. The first preacher that ever was upon the
earth was GOD himself, Ephesians. 4.11
he preached to Adam in Paradise that comfortable Gospel, Genesis 3.16
the seed of the woman, shall break the serpents head. After that he
stirred up Noah and Lot, Moses and the Prophets: what shall be said of David, and
Solomon, of the which the one was a most victorious prince, 1. Kin- 3.
and the other most welthye, and yet have they gotten more glory and credit,
by their doctrines and instructions, then by all their riches and triumphs.
The first minister and preacher of the new testament was John the Baptist, Of
whom Christ our Savior says There was not a greater Prophet, Ma. 11.11.
Mar. 2.2
among women's children. Christ himself also was a preacher of the Gospel,
and witnesses that he came into the world to that purpose. Mar. i6. i6.
After him the Apostles also were sent into the world to the same end.

Seeing then that God himself and his son Jesus Christ have vouchsafed to
preach the word, seeing so famous men as the Prophets and Apostles were
ordained to this purpose: it must needs follow that the office of preaching
is most famous worthy and excellent.

206 With what doctrine ministers must be furnished.
IF So be that the Ministers of Christ's Gospel will do their duties as they
ought to do in the erecting and in the enlarging of Christ's kingdom by pure
preaching of the word: they must not then stand upon trifles, 1. Tim. 1.4 2.
Tim. 2.23.
upon curious and unprofitable questions: but they must labor to edify in all
godliness. This grace of GOD which was showed at the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ is daily to be published and preached of them. Tit. 2.11,
For surely, it is a wonderful secreat, that GOD should be manifested in the
flesh, and that therewithal he should show us his heavenly glory, to the end
that we might be united thereunto; and therefore if all the Ministers and
Preachers of Gods word, 1. Tim. 3.16.
should never cease from showing forth the wisdom which GOD has uttered
in the person of his only son: the time assuredly should not be spent in
vain.

Furthermore, whosoever will preach the gospel faithfully and profitablye, he
must first of all and chieflye urge the doctrine of repentance. To
repentance must be joined the doctrine of remission of sins, Ma. 11.28
which belongs only to them that repent, that are humbled and cast down,
that feel in their conscience the torment of sin and condemnation, it does
not appertain to ignorant and senseless men, to hypocrites, infidels,
athistes, iusticiaries, profane and carnal men, Mat. 9.13.
for these have nothing to do with the doctrine of remission of sins.

207 Diversity in gifts among the ministers.
Necessary it is that every minister preach, but yet all such shall not be
condemned which have not such like and so full measure of knowledge as other
have. There is difference in gifts among us at this day, as there was among
the apostles, yet they all sufficiently preached.

They which have any measure of those gifts which the Lord requires in his
ministers, 1. The. 5.19.
they must not quench the spirit, but use the means to increase their measure:
if they be painful, careful, watchful, and faithful in their ministry,
with a holy and pure affection, the Lord will bless them. Mat. 25.29.
To him that has shall be given, we cannot at the first come to perfection.
Apollos a learned doctor seruent in the spirit, Act. 8.26.
and mighty in the scriptures, yet was he ignorant in some things, and
received instruction from Aquila and Priscilla.

Some have more then others, some have ten talents, some five, and some but
one, yet let us always remember and let it never slip out of our minds, that
the slothful and unprofitable servant, Mat. 25.15. and 30.
shall be cast into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

208 Of the Gospel, and how it must be preached.
Under the voice of the Gospel is comprehended the whole history of Jesus
Christ in the flesh, and also the fruit and use of the same history. The story
of Christ is briefly comprehended under his passion and resurrection, the use
and end whereof is that we should have repentance and remission of sins in
his name.

And this does Christ himself witness when as he said to his Apostles after his
resurrection: Luke 24.46.
thus it is written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise again
the third day, and that repentance and remission of sins should be
preached in his name, among all nations. To this agrees the Apostle Peter when
as he says, with other the Apostles, to the Counsel and chief Priests. The
God of our Fathers has raised up Jesus whom ye slew, and hanged on a tree:
Act. 5.30.31.
him has GOD lift up with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior to
give repentance unto Israel and remission of sins. By this we may see how
the Gospel must be preached, the people must be taught what Christ has done
for them. The whole storye of his Incarnation, conception, birth, sufferinges,
resurrection and ascension, must be oftentimes and effectually preached unto
them, as they are set down by the Evangelists and Apostles: but yet this is
not enough to show what Christ has done, and to rehearse the story of his
incarnation, but also ye minister must be careful to preach the end, the use
and fruit of the same: which is, that the people may repent, be turned
unfeignedly unto God, and so by faith made pertakers of remission of sins
through Jesus Christ.

209 What repentance is.
REpentance is a true turning unto God, a changing of the outward and inward
man, a dying to sin, a living to righteousness, and amendment of the whole
life. He which is returned unto God, ought first necessarily to know and
understand, how he fell from him, and to know what God is, how we fall from
him, and how we ought to turn to him again. Mat 9.12.
So that he which must repent, ought to know his own noughtines, and wickedness,
and also by what means the same may be amended which is broken and spoiled:
but these things can in no wise be done of any wretched sinner, unless they
be drawn hereunto, and therein instructed by the spyrit and word of God, Mar.
1.15.
which they must also steadfastly believe. Io. 6.44.
For these things are so necessarilye required, that unless God by grace,
through his spirit open and draw the heart of the sinner, and by his word show
us the perfect way, govern and keep us in the same, give us true faith
whereby to quicken and justify us, unless (I say) he give us these, all
repentance, how hard or grievous so ever it seem, is no true repentance.
Example hereof may be taken of Judas, who repenting for his sins, confessed
the same to the Priests in the temple saying: I have sinned in betraying the
innocent blood: Mat. 27.3.5.
yea and he in this prate made satisfaction in that he threw the unrighteous
price of blood into the temple. But this repentance did nothing at all profit
him (although he had in it contrition, confession, and satisfaction) and
because he lacked true faith, he dispayred and hanged himself. On the other
side, Luke 22.61.62.
the Lord looking back upon Peter (and the Cock crowing) he remembered his
words, and believing them, departed from the wicked company, wept for his
sins and amended his faults: and this his repentance was true and perfect.
The prophet Jeremy also confirms this doctrine, ver. 18.19
when he prays unto the Lord in his 31. chap. whereby it is evident that true
repentance, and the sorrowing for our sins, must proceed from God, stirring
up the same in us by faith, so as it must not be a repentance or sorrow,
according to the world, but after the will of God.

210 Repentance is necessary to make pure the conscience, and it is not a
work of man.
THe filth and infection which defiles and corrupts the person, is of the
heart, and the principal care, we ought to have of our selves, is that we be
pure and clean in our hearts and consciences, which thing we cannot attain
unto but by faith and repentance. And we must beware that we resemble not
the Scribes and Pharesies to whom our savior Christ obiecteth their hypocrisy.

Furthermore (when calling us to repentance, God promises us, his holy
spirit) we must understand, that repentance is not a work of man, but of
God, who regenerateth us, and renews us by his holy spirit: as appears by
the witness of Ezechiell, Eze. 36.26.
a new heart (says the Lord) I will give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you, etc. and so consequentlye it is not of our freewill that we
repent, but of the only mercy of God, which will not the death of a sinner.
The which also Jeremy confesses saying: Ez. 33 11. Ier. 10.23.
O Lord I know that the way of man is not in himself: and therefore he
prays on this wise, convert thou me, and I shall be converted. We may learn
also in an other place that the words of God are hidden from us, Pro. 1.23.
if the holy Ghost be not given us to instruct and sanctify us. Wherefore we
must pray with David: Create in me (O Lord) a clean heart, and renew a right
spirit within me. Ps. 51.12.
Finally seeing that in bidding us repent, God promises us the knowledge of
his word: we may perceive who are the true repentantes and who are not: and
likewise that they which make not account to repent, do not understand the
word of God, although they make never so fair a show to the contrary.

211 Repentance is the gift of God.
MEn cannot have repentance of their own motion, and as they are self taught,
but it is God that gives it: and that of an especial goodness. I will not the
death of a sinner (says the Lord) but that he convert and live. Eze. 18.23
and 33,
And how is that possible? If we were able to turn our selves unto the Lord,
it were a more excellent work then to create us, and experience it self does
sufficientlye condemn us. It is moreover an undoubted doctrine throughout the
whole scripture: For in every place, our Lord Jesus Christ gives himself the
praise of turning us, showing that he will soften our stony hearts, Eze. 11.19
20. Phil. 2.3.
and make them bow to obey him, and it is his work not only to give us that
we may, but that we will and desire to obey his commandementes: and to be
short, there is nothing that the faithful ought to do so much, as in this
behalf to give God the glory, confessing that it is in him only to turn us,
that it is he only that has adopted us in such sort, that he must needs draw
us by the grace of his holy spirit. The Lord must open our eyes and ears,
also, before we can attain to this wonderful wisdom which is contained in
the gospel, Deu. 29.4. To. 8.7.
because the natural man understands not any part of ye secrets of God, and
therefore it follows that it is an especial gift of the holy ghost, when he
lighteneth our hearts in the faith of his truth.

212 How we ought to repent.
THe true preparatiue to repentance is, to be pricked so nearely as we may
feel the evil that is in us, and condemn our selves for it, we must learn
to streine our selves, and to hold our selves as prisoners: and although the
same fall out contrary to our desire: yet nevertheless we must go on still
further, that God may win the upper hand of us. We must learn to hate our
selves, to take displeasure against ourselves, and to be revenged of our own
naughtiness, 2 Co. 7.11
according as the Apostle says. 2. Cor. 7. For repentance imports that men
should condemn themselves, and take vengeance on themselves, when they see
their whole life corrupted, and that they should use an holy anger against it.
In steed of desiring to be revenged of our enemies, when they have done us
any harm, we should be chafed and angry with our selves, yea and punish our
selves for faults, when we cannot frame our selves unto the will of God. We
should every man enter into his own conscience, acknowledge how corrupt and
damnable sinners we are of our selves, Mar. 1.15.
confess our sins, and when we have done so, let us enter from them and
behold the great mercy of God.

213 The qualities of repentance.
ONe special quality of repentance is always to bring with it remission of
sins: for where true repentance goes before, there remission of sins must
necessarily follow after, not that repentance deserves remission of sins,
but because where God works repentance, there he pardons sin because of
his promise. Eze. 18.27
When the wicked (says the Lord) turns away from his wickedness that he
has committed and does that which is lawful and right, Esaias. 55.7
he shall save his soul a live. And again, let the wicked forsake his ways,
and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy upon him. Here we see, to whom forgiveness of sins, and the
mercy of God belongs: as namely to the penitent sinners, to those yt leave
sin, and embrace godliness: to those that forsake their own ways and
imaginations, and turn unto the Lord. And as for such as walk on in their
own ways, and follow the delights of sin, without any sorrow, or purpose to
leave them they have nothing to do with the mercy of God: and though Jesus
Christ had suffered an hundred deaths (which could not be) yet shall no
unpenitent sinner, have remission of sins by his death, nor any other
benefits of his passion, for they belong only to his Church, and chosen
people here upon the earth. He therefore, that is not of the church, he that is
not grafted into Christ by faith, he that is not a member of his mystical
body, can enjoy nothing by Christ's death. If a man abide not in me (says our
Savior Christ) he is cast forth as a branch and withers, Io. 15.6.
and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they burn. We may read
also in an other place, how God barreth all stubborn sinners from his mercy,
Deu. 29.18.19.
and does most terriblie shoot out against them. He that hears the words of
this curse and blesses himself in his heart saying: I shall have peace
although I walk according to the stubbornenesse of my own heart, thus adding
drunkenness to thirst, the Lord will not be merciful unto him, but then the
wrath of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and every
curse that is written in this book, shall light upon him.

214 Of Sacraments, and what a Sacrament is.
THE Lord has added unto the preaching of the Gospel most holy Sacraments,
as namely, Baptism, and the supper of the Lord. The Sacraments are holy
actions of the faithful in ye church of Christ, ordained by the Lord himself
to be signs and seals of true doctrine, first doubtless bearing witness
that we are received of God into grace, and into the couenaunte, and that he is
our God, that he cleanses us from our sins, regenerateth, and renews us,
and adopteth or chooses us as sons, and receaueth us unto the partaking and
fellowship of all good things, which of us must be kept holy, and we must
live godly and innocently before him. They are also testimonies that the true
Messiah (in times past promised unto the old Fathers from the beginning of the
world:) is now exhibited or given of God unto the Church of Christ, I mean
Christ our Lord, who truly gave his flesh and blood unto death to redeem us,
and with his flesh and blood to nourish us, unto eternal life: that we again
(as the Church by him redeemed) Lu. 22.19.
should keep in continual memory the death of our Lord, 1. Cor. 11.26.
praise him, extol him and give thanks unto him. The Sacraments are also to
admonish us of our duties, that we should lead our lives in true godliness and
brotherly love, and hold that one religion with whose sacraments we are
separated also from al other religions.

215 A Sacrament consists of three parts.
Sacraments do consist of three parts, the first is the outward sign, the
second is the spiritual or inward grace, and the third part is the word of
Christ's institution or promise which is (as it were) the life and soul of the
Sacrament. Water in Baptism signifies that as water naturally has a
property to wash and cleanse the filth from the body, Io. 1.7.
so does the grace of God, through Christ's blood, wash away the gilt and
filthiness from our souls. As bread and wine, by natural effect nourishes
our bodies, and strengthens and comfort our spirits: so does the heavenly
food of Chriestes body and blood, Io 6.48. etc.
broken and shed for us upon the cross, nourish our souls and quicken our
spirits to eternal life with GOD. In the old time the Sacraments and
Ceremonies were profitable for the bodily nourishment, as the water gushing out
of the rock Manna, and the Pascall lamb: but in our Sacraments, Exo. 17.6.
God smally or nothing considers our bodies, but most principally and
wholly, the relief, Ex. 16.15. etc. 12.14.
ease and comfort of our souls. Therefore as in the old Testament, so now
much more in the Sacraments, is to be considered some spiritual and
internal thing. to the understanding whereof, the likeness of the outward
signs do lead us: as in Baptism our regeneration and new birth, and the
washing away of our sins by the death and passion of Christ. In the Lords
supper the heavenly food of our souls, with the body that was broken, and
his blood yt was shed upon the cross. Wherefore good christians in receuing ye
sacrament, must not have so much regard to the sign, as to the spiritual thing
it self, for which ye outward token was ordained. For the efficacy of the
Sacraments, does not consist in the visible sign, but wholly in the working of
the spirit of God, Io. 6.63.
according as it is Gods pleasure to work by means by him ordained without
any derogation thereby to his glorious power.

216 The beginning of Sacraments, is from God.
THE Author and ordeyner of Sacraments, is none other but God himself,
neither Patriarch nor Prophet, nor Father, nor the whole Church has authority
to ordeine any Sacrament. The Sacraments are belonging to the worship of
God, they are signs tokens and witnesses of Gods will. And who can make us
certain of Gods will, but God himself? As also the Apostle teaches in the
first to the Corinth. 1. Cor. 2.11
And who can appoint gods worship, but God himself? According as he says by
his Prophet, In vain they worship me, teaching ye traditions of men. Esaias.
29.13.
The sacraments were not so ordained by God, that afterward he would have no
more care or regard of them, but he always works and brings to pass al
things in the faithful which keep his ordinance, the which he has promised
in his word. Wherefore as the faithful hear the word of God, 1. Tim. 2.4.
not as the word of any mortal man, but as proceeding from the mouth of the
most highest: so also when they receive the sacraments at the hands of the
Ministers, they acknowledge that this is the ordinance of GOD, 1. Th. 2. i3
Esa. 1.20.
and that he works in the believers, and therefore they receive and use the
sacraments as at the very hand of God, unto whom they direct the eyes of
their faith.

217. Why Sacraments were ordained.
THe first cause why it was christ's pleasure to ordeine sacraments in his
Church, is partlye our own infirmity and weakness, 1. Cor. 2.14.
being dull and slow in the understanding of heavenly things, partly the
great goodness and love of God, that would vouchsafe to attemper himself to
our simple capacity, and to seek means by outward things to ease and help
the same. Secondly that the sacrament might be to us a blessed exercise whereby
we call to our remembrance the benefit of our redemption in Christ, and yield
unto him most hearty praise and thanks for the same, Luke 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.26.
according as Christ teaches us in the institution of his last supper. And as
Saint Paul also says in the first to the Corinthians.

Thirdly, that we by the use and practice thereof might be traded to the
obedience of Gods holy will and commandments though the things seem to our
selves never so simple and mean: and also that thereby we might openly before
God and the world protest and acknowledge that we are his people, and of the
number of them that look to be saved, preserved, and defended by the benefit
of Christ only So that the open use of the sacrament is a part of that
confession whereunto the Apostle Paul, To. 10.9.
Romans 10. attributes salvation. An other cause and end of the Sacraments
is, Io. 13.35.
that they might be as hands and links of love unity and concord among our
selves. For the which cause Saint Paul when he exhorted the Ephesians. to unity
and love, Ephesians. 4.5.
among other things he adds, we have one faith one baptism. And again in an
other place: we are one body (says he as many as be pertakers of one life. 1.
Cor. 10.17.
Finally that by the sacraments as by blessed means the holy Ghost working
with them he might impart unto us and bestow upon us his inestimable graces
and benefits together with all the fruits of our redemption in Christ. For as
his word is, so are his sacraments instruments and means, by the working of his
holy spirit, to bring unto us the whole benefit of our salvation.

218 The right applying of Christ's sufferings and sacraments to our benefit.
Whereas it is said that the son of God was crucified, we must not only think
that the same was done for the redemption of the world: but also every one
must on his own behalf join himself to Christ and conclude, it is for him yt
he has suffered: So when we be baptized, as it is not for any one man alone, so
is not the water sprincled upon al men in common: but every man is baptized
severally in his own behalf, to the end that every one of us may apply it
particulerly unto himself, 1. Cor. 6 15. Ep. 5.30.
to say that we be al members of our Lord Jesus Christ. Also when we receive
the holy supper, every man takes his own portion, to show us that our Lord
Jesus Christ is communicated unto us, yea even to every one of us. For when we
once know ye the thing which was done for the redemption of the whole world,
pertains to every one of us seuerallye; it behooves every one of us to say
also, on his behalf, that the son of God has loved him so dearly, that he
has given himself to death for him. And that therefore we be of all creatures
the most miserable, if we accept not such a benefit when it is offered unto
us. For it is a common doctrine in the holy scriptures, that GOD so loved the
world, that he spared not his only son, but gave him to death for us: Io.
3.16
and also that our Lord Jesus Christ, at such time as we were his deadly
enemies, did confirm a marvelous love toward us, in that he offered himself
in sacrifice to make atonement between God and us, and to do away al our sins,
as they might no more come to account. This is the warrant of our salvation.

219 How many Sacraments there be, and first of Baptism.
THere be but two sacraments in ye Church of Christ, which be common to al men,
and which Christ him self ordained for the faithful, Baptism and the supper
of the Lord. Baptism is unto us an entrye into the church: for it witnesses
unto us that whereas we were before strangers from God, To, 6.4. Ephesians. 3.
he does now receive us in to his family. Baptism stands in two points,
first our Lord represents unto us therein, the remission of our sins,
secondly, our regeneration. The remission of sins, is a manner of washing,
whereby our souls are cleansed from their filthiness even as the filth of our
body is washed away with water. And because the beginning of our regeneration
stands in the mortification of our nature, To. 6.3
and the end that we become new creatures through the spirit of God therefore
the water is powered upon us, to signify that we are dead and buried, and
that in such sort, that our rising again into a new life, is therewithal
figured in that, that the pouring of water is but a thing of a very short
continuance, and not ordained to drown us withal. The water does not cleanse our
souls, 1. Io. 1.7 1. Pet. 1.19 Heb. 9.28
for that belongs to the blood of Christ only which was shed that all our
filthe might be wiped away, and that we might be counted pure and without
spotte even before God: yt which thing then takes effect in us, when our
co^scie^ces be sprincled therewith by gods holy spirit, but the sacrament does
testify and declare it unto us.

220 Fruitful doctrine concerning baptism
Baptism is not only a sign^ whereby we be consecrated christians, but by
faith and the operation of the holy Ghost, we do put on Christ as a garment,
that is, that we have him so fastened and appropriated to us, that he is ours,
Gal. 3.27.
and we his and that he hides and covers our nakedness according as Saint
Paul says; As many as are baptized have put on Christ. Baptism is to
Christians the fountain of life, whereby our sins are washed away. So says
Peter. Let every one of you be baptized in the name of Jesus for the remission
of sins. And Ananias unto S. Paul, Act 2.38.
Arise and be baptized and wash away thy sins, Yet do we not attribute the
operation hereof to the water, or outward element, Act. 22. i6.
but to the might of Gods word, and the power of the holy Ghost working in
us by Faith.

The Sacrament of Baptism is moreover, Ephesians 2.3.
as it were the womb of the church of Christ, where we are newborn, and
become of the children of wrath, the children of God, and prepared by this our
second birthe to enter into the kingdom of God.

Unless you be borne again (says Christ) by water and the holy Ghost, Io.
3.5.
you cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven.

And Saint Paul says, Not by the works of righteousness, which we had
done, Tit. 3.5.
but according to his mercy he saved us by the washing of the new birth, and
the renewing of the holy Ghost. Furthermore, not only we, but our seed also
has by Baptism the benefit of salvation, and therefore do we defend the
baptising of infants against the wicked heresye of the Anabaptists,

221 The grace of regeneration figured in Baptism.
FOrasmuch as we be rude, GOD is not contented only to witness to us by his
gospel, that we be washed and made clean, in the blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ: but also he has given us a figure thereof, so that when we be
baptized, it is as much as if God had showed before our eyes, that we of our
selves bring nothing to him but utter filthiness, and that it is his office to
wash us and make us clean. 1. Io. 1.7.
Howbeit the said washing consists not in the visible water: For it were
impossible that our souls should be cleansed, by an earthlye and corruptible
element. Yet notwithstanding because of our infirmity, it is requisite for us
to begin at the water, that we may be lifted up higher. For the sign that is
offered to our eyes, serves to lead us to the holy Ghost, to the end we may
know, how it is from him, that the power of baptism does proceed. The manner
of grace of the holy Ghost, which is obtained for us in being baptized, is the
grace of regeneration, and renewment. Regeneration (or new birth) imports
that we be borne again, Io. 3.5.
not that we come new again out of our mothers wombes: but that God makes us
new creatures, by vouchsafing to print his Image in us. For what bring we with
us, in that we be the children of Adam but all cursednes? Ephesians. 2.3. Ps. 51.5.
and therefore God must be feign to change us. And to the end we may know that
there is nothing in us but naughtines, that we be utterly untoward, that the
thing which we call reason is but stark folly, and that thing which is termed
freewill, is but a cursed slavery unto sin: to the intent we may know all
this to condemn it, it is said, that we must be (as it were) new again,
quite and clean changed.

222 When baptism was ordained.
Baptism was ordained of Christ before the time of his resurrection, then,
when he sent his disciples into the whole world to preach the Gospel. For John
together with the preaching of the Gospel, Mar. 1.4.1. Mat. 3.11. Act. 2.38.
and 19.4. Ephesians. 4.5.
began to baptize: and he baptized with water, unto repentance and forgiveness
of sins, and the Apostles afterward did baptize no otherwise. Wherefore
there is but one baptism, as the holy scriptures do bear witness, neither was
Christ baptized with any other baptism then ours, and we also are baptized
with Christ with no other baptism then the baptism of Christ. Wherefore
Christ after his resurrection, did not so much ordain, as repair baptism,
and showed the manner of it unto his disciples, as namely that they must
baptize, and how they must baptize. Go ye into all the world (says he unto
his disciples) and preach the Gospel to every creature, Mar. 16.15.16.
he that shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved, and he that will not
believe shall be damned. And again, Mat. 28.
all power (says the Lord) is given unto me in heaven and earth. 18.19.20.
Go therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the father,
the son, and the holy ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever
I have commanded you.

223 Papisticall untruths, concerning baptism.
THe doctrine of the Church of Rome is, that baptism does confer grace and
wash away our sins, even by the very washing only of the water, though there
be no good motion of faith or belief, in the heart of him that is baptized.
For thus they say, that besides the giving of the outward sign, there is no
good motion inwardlye required of him which receaueth it. What shall be
further said of the profane and wicked abusing of Christ's sacrament to the
baptizing of belles, the curing of sicknesses, and the driving away of
spirits and devils by the water thereof? This is most certain, that in using
this one outward sacrament of Christ by water, they practiced five or six of
their own ordinance, without any warrant of Gods word at all: (as their
salt spittle, breathing annoynting of the breast, annoynting of the shoulders
and crown of the head,) blasphemously attributing unto every of them the like
effects, that in truth do belong to the mighty and most gracious working of
the holy Ghost, through the merits of Christ our savior, and not to the
devises and fantasies of man.

224 Why we are baptized: and eat the supper.
WHen the scripture speaks unto us of Baptism, and of the supper of our Lord
Jesus Christ, it shows us that it is not in vain, that we are baptized with
water. For because God has appointed that sign, and will have us to use it:
he will surely make it auayleable, it shall be a good witness to us, that we
shall be washed and cleansed from our spots and filthiness by the blood of his
son, and shall be renewed by the virtue of his holy spirit, and that by that
means also the naughtines of our flesh and nature shall be killed in us. For
he is the author of it, his promise is joined thereunto, Mar. 16.16
and it is he only that can bind himself unto us And so stands the case
also in the Lords supper. For seeing that the mind of our Lord Jesus Christ
is, Luke 22.19
that we should keep it in remembrance of him, and to be certified and assured
that he is our meat and drink: we must not come to the table, barely to eat
bread, and drink wine, but to show forth the death, 1. Cor. 11.26.
and to be pertakers of the life of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be fostered and
fed with his very substance, and to feel that we are made pertakers of his
life. Thus does the Lord work by the virtue of his holy spirit in these
signs which he has appointed, to the end they should be effectual and pithy
instruments.

225 Of the Lords supper.
THe supper of the Lord is a testimony unto us, that god will nourish and
refresh us with food, even as a good master of an house studieth to sustain,
and feed such as be of his household. It is a reverend and blessed memorial
of the death of Christ, in celebrating whereof, we show our selves thankful
for his great inestimable benefits toward us, according to these words, do
this in remembrance of me It is also (as it were) a cognizance or badge of our
religion, Luke 22.19 1. Cor. 11.25.
whereby we be separated and distinct, from Turks, Jews, and al other
infidels, and by the use thereof confess before God and the world, that we are
of the number of them, that look to be saved by the death of Christ. And
therefore says S. Paul: Ye cannot drink of the cup of the Lord, and of the
cup of devils. Our Lord ordained his Sacrament to put us in assurance that by
the disstribution of his body and blood, our souls are nourished in the hope
of life everlasting. His body is represe^ted unto us by the bread, and his
blood by the wine, to signify that what property the bread has toward our
bodies, that is, to feed and sustain the^ in this transitory life, the self
same property also his body has touching our souls, that is, to nourish them
spiritually. And in like manner as ye wine does strengthen, comfort and rejoice
the heart of man: even so his blood is our full joy, comfort and spiritual
strength.

226 How the true body of Christ must be received.
Our Lord Jesus Christ when he gave in his supper, the bread and the cup unto
his disciples, commanding them to eat and to drink he said: This is my body,
this is my blood etc. For it is an usual thing to give unto the sacramental
signs, the names of those things which they do signify. As in this sacrament,
ye bread and wine are the signs of the body and blood of Christ, and therefore
Christ names them his body and blood. Matthew. 26.26.27.28.
The like also is to be said of baptism, circu^cisio^, ye passover, and other
sacrifices. And they are thus called, to the end we should not depend upon the
signs, that is, on the bread, or on the wine, but being by these visible
signs put in mind of things invisible, we might lift up our mind unto
heaven to the things signified, that is, to the body of Christ which was given
for us, and to his blood which was shed for us. Now the body and blood of
Christ, we receive spirituallye by faith, so as outwardly with our bodily
mouth we eat and drink the bread and the wine, and inwardly with the mouth of
our soul, that is to say, by faith, we receive the body and blood of Christ.
For like as with our mouth, we receive meats to sustain our body: so
likewise by faith in Christ, is his body and blood which he offered upon the
cross, made meat unto us, to eternal life. For the body of Christ which was
given for us, and his blood that was shed for our sins, is our life, or life
is thereby purchased to us, and these do we receive by faith, so as thereby
Christ does live in us, and we in him. In the supper of our Lord Jesus Christ
therefore, we do not eat bread, and drink wine only, but his body and
blood also: but yet (as it was said before) spiritually by faith, so as the
presence of Christ in this supper, is spiritual, as the eating thereof is also
spiritual.

227 How the body and blood of Christ is truly received.
THe body and blood of Christ, is not carnal meat and drink for our bodies,
but spiritual meat and drink for our souls, and for that cause the Apostle
says that the old Fathers did eat of the same spiritual meat, 1. Cor.
10.3.4.
and drink of the same spiritual drink. And yet it must needs be confessed
that this spiritual meat is profitable, not to ye soul only but to the body
also. For Christ dyed for preservation both of soul and body. But this
benefit of nourishment, is not first received of the body, and through it
passes into the soul, for that were monstrous, but being first received of
the soul, it profits the body. Mat. 15.11
For as Christ says, That which enters into the bodily mouth defiles not
the man, but that which comes out of the mouth from the corrupt heart and
mind. So contrariwise, not that good thing that enters by the body, does
profit the soul, but that which enters first by the soul, and is received
by it, profits also the body. For the body and blood of Christ being
indeed, the true food of life, (when it is spiritually eaten by the soul,
thorough the operation of the holy Ghost) makes us apt to resurrection, and in
due time transformeth our mortal bodies, to the likeness of his glorious
body. To. 8.11.
If the spirit of him that raised Christ from the dead, dwell in us, he that
raised Christ from the dead, shall also quicken our mortal bodies, because
that his spirit, through Christ dwells in us. Furthermore as the body is
said to eat when it receaueth that sustenance wherewith ye hunger thereof is
stayde and satisfied, and as it is said to drink, when it receaueth that
liquor wherewith the thirst is quenched: even so our soul is said to eat and
to drink, when it receaueth that heavenly and blessed food of Christ Jesus
crucified, wherewith the hungry and thirsty appetite thereof, that is, the
vehement desire of the favor of God and salvation, is fully satisfied and
appeased.

228 The right use and meaning of the Lords supper.
WHen we see the bread and the wine in the Lords supper, we know that they be
creatures, whereof we have been wont to take nourishment and sustenaunce for
our bodies: but the same do lead us to the life of our souls, and give us to
understand, that we have no life but in our Lord Jesus Christ. The cause why
the wine is added, is to show yt he has such virtue in him, as we need not
to seek any part of ye things that we want, any otherwhere: but yt he serves
us for meat and drink, and all. Furthermore in coming to the Lords supper
we must not think to get any thing of god by our own deserts but to confess
yt we be like wretched dead me^, which come to seek our life out of our selves,
and therefore must be feign to have the flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ for our
meat, Io. 6.55.
and his blood for our drink, and all things in him which we want in our
selves. And the Sacraments serve not to puff up with any presumption, but to
make us walk in humbleness: and our coming to them is yt God should warn us
of our sins, to be touched with them in good earnest. And we must not
acknowledge our selves sinners with the mouth only, or slightly and by way of
ceremonies: but we must have our hearts wounded inwardly with grief that we
have offended, and feel how dreadful gods wrath is, to the end we may be
sorry in our selves, and not have any rest til he have showed us where we shall
find it, that is to say, in our Lord Jesus Christ. And when we come to the
table of our Lord, we must take heed that we be so grounded in our Savior
Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 11.27.28.
as that forsaking all the fond illusions of Satan, and all the deceites that
he sets before us, to turn us away from the grace of god, we may embrace
our Lord Jesus Christ with ye merits of his death and passion, assuring our
selves yt it is he, in whom we have the full performance of righteousness and
salvation.

229 How we ought to be prepared to the table of the Lord.
WE must not come irreverently to the table of the Lord, nor thrust in our
selves: for such sacrilege shall not escape free. But so often as the holy supper
is prepared for us, we must know that we are put in mind of our weakness, and
yt God will help our infirmities. And although this is done when the Gospel is
preached unto us, when we pray and make supplications, and when we read at
home in our houses, or hear any matter for our salvation: yet the supper is a
special witness to us, that our God helps us, and when we are (as it were)
in the midd way, it serves to make us go on forward, to drive us still to
our God. The Supper of the Lord is also to correct and make an end of such
things as are yet out of frame. For it were nothing to begin in us, 2. Cor
3.5
unless God continued to make us feel his grace, of the which we have a good
certainty in the supper: and therefore woe will be unto us, if we come and
pollute this holy Supper which is given for us for an aid of our salvation.
For the which cause we have need to be well grounded in faith, 1. Cor. 11.28.
repentance and love, that we may be partakers thereof. And because we cannot
choose, but know well enough what weakness and feebleness there is in us,
and that we have not all that were requisite for us, Io. 15.5.
let us pray to God to strengthen us, and to advance us, and increase our faith
and hope, which we have to everlasting life, let us go thitherwarde as fast as
may be, and although we are not able to do it of our selves, Io. 16.23.
yet if we pray unto God in the name of his son, he will not fail to help
us.

230 Faith is the mouth of the soul whereby Christ is eaten.
THat faith is the mouth and means, whereby only we receive and eat Christ
to salvation: it may easily be proved by Christ's own words in the holy
Scripture. For our Savior Christ uses these words indifferently, and as of
one force and signification. To believe in him, to eat him, to drink him, to
come unto him, and does attribute to every of these, Io. 6.29.33.35.
one and the same effect. To believe in Christ is the proper word, to eat
Christ or to come unto him are Metaphores and figurative speeches, but all of
one force I am the bread of life (says Christ) he that comes to me shall
not hunger, verse. 33.
and he that believes in me, shall never thirst. He says, he that comes
to me, shall not hunger therefore to come unto Christ is to eat Christ. Again
he says he that believes in me shall never thirst, therefore to believe in
Christ is to drink Christ. To eat and to drink, are means to take away
hunger and thirst, but to come unto Christ, and to believe in Christ (as Christ
himself says) does take away hunger and thirst, therefore to come unto him,
and to believe in him, is to eat him and drink him. Christ attributes ye same
effects and fruits to the^ which believe in him, that he does to them that eat
his body and drink his blood: therefore by eating and drinking, he means
nothing but believing. His words be these, verse. 54.
Io 6. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I
will raise him up at the last day. Again he says in the same chapter: This
is the will of my Father that sent me, verse. 40.
that every one that sees the Son, and believes on him, should have
eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Who sees not here,
that Christ attributes the same force to believing, that in the other verse
he did to eating and drinking, and therefore uses the words indifferently,
as being of one meaning. Therefore by Christ's own words to believe in
Christ, is to eat Christ.

230 Of the presence of Christ in the supper.
CHrist our Lord is endued with a true and natural humane body the truth and
substance whereof is not taken away by the glorificatio^ thereof, after the
resurrection, as the holy scriptures and the articles of our faith do plainly
declare, Ph. 2.7. Heb. 2.17
for they teach us in express words that there is a divine and humane nature
of Christ, to be acknowledged and confessed in one and the same person, so that
there be no confusion made of the divine and humane natures of Christ, and
neither of them taken away of us For although Christ were then in heaven when
he lived upon the earth and was in this life, Io. 5.17
and now also when he is gone up into heaven, Ma. 28.29 Io. 14.18.
is nevertheless present with the faithful until the end of ye world, yet the
scriptures teach us, that thereby it is not to be concluded that ye humane
nature was then corporally in heaven, when it was fastened upon the cross, no
more then it is now present upon the earth when it is in heaven: and also that
the unity of person remained undivided, because that the property of the
natures remaining, cannot severe or part the same. In the mean season it is
known to all the faithful yt Christ together and inseperable true God and man,
suffered in that part, in yt which he was subject unto suffering that is, in
his flesh and blood, and that he suffered nothing in that part, in which he
could not suffer, as namely in spirit or deity. Notwithstanding (because of the
abiding properties of 2. natures) yet no man says, yt Christ is divided into
2. persons: althought therefore Christ very GOD and man, remain in one and the
same person: It therefore follows not, that the body of Christ, as well as the
divinity is in this earth, and in all places: for the humane nature reteyneth
his property in Christ, therefore he is not corporally in, or with the bread:
and yet nevertheless, we have not a supper without Christ. For the same Christ
which is corporally at the right hand of God, and according to his humane
nature is not present in this earth: Act. 1.11. Mat. 26.11
ye very same Christ wholly as the true son of righteousness, is present in
the supper by his spirit, power, life, and working, I mean in the congregation
of the faithful, and in their hearts which celebrate and receive ye supper with
true faith.

231 Christ feeds us with his substance.
Our Lord Jesus Christ did not only become mortal man like unto us in all
things, (sin only except,) to be a brother in deed to al the^ that join
themselves to him in faith but also he norisheth us with his substance, he is
our head, Heb. 4.15 Io 8.55. Ephesians. 2.22. and 4.15.
and we must draw our life from him, through the virtue of the holy ghost. He
has given us a witness hereof in his holy supper, which we have, as a most
certain pledge: and therefore as often as we come to this table, we ought to
be confirmed in this, that our lord Jesus Christ is made one with us, and yt we
can never be separated from him. That if he be rich we shall not need to fear
poverty, if he be strong, we shall not need to fear weakness if he be ye
righteousness of God, we shall not need to fear our sins, if he be the wisdom
of God, 1. Cor. 1.30. and 24. and 2.7.
we may boldly come unto him to be made new creatures Moreover our Lord Jesus
Christ does witness, that he receives us to him, and will have us fed with
his own substance and therefore let us bewarre that we come not to this table,
unless we have this remembrance whereof the Apostle speaks. the second to
Tim. 2. For first of all this is required that we be instructed in the word.
And yet it is not enough for us to be instructed, but it must be forcible in
us, and we must consider yt if we come to it daily it is a study to exercise
our selus with all the days of our life: and let us take diligent heed, that
we present not our selus to receive the supper of our lord Jesus Christ,
unless we have this before our eyes, Ma. 11.19 and 17.30.31 etc.
yt is, unless we behold ye son of God, which made himself utterly of no
reputation for us, and suffered most shameful reproach, and that he went down
even to the lowest and bottomless pit of damnation, and from thence was
exalted into glory, that in the end we might be received with him.

232 Against the real presence in the Sacrament.
Our Lord Jesus Christ in his last supper gave bread unto his disciples, and
bread he himself did eat, and not his own body. For the eating of Christ's
body has a promise of remission of sins. Christ eating the sacrament, had no
remission of sins: therefore Christ did not eat his own body. Furthermore we
are taught in the scripture, that Christ is risen ascended into heaven, Ma.
26.28 Ma. 28.6 Luke 24.6
and sits on the right hand of the father, all the which is spoken of his
natural body: therefore it is not on earth included in the sacrament. I came
out from the father (says Christ) and came into the world: again; I leave
the world and go to the father: the which coming and going he meant of his
natural body, Io.. 16 28
therefore it is not now in the world. One self same nature, receaueth not in
it self any thing that is contrary to it self, but the body of Christ is an
humane nature distinct from the deity, and is a proper nature of it self:
therefore it cannot receive any thing that is contrary to that nature, and
varieth from it self. But bodily to be present, and bodily to be abse^t to be
on earth and to be in heaven, Act. 3.21.
and all at one present time, be things contrary to the property of an human
nature: therefore it cannot be said of the humane body of Christ that the self
same body, is both in heaven and also in earth at one instant, either visiblye
or inuisibly.

233 The wicked do not eat the body of Christ.
THe Doctors and teachers of the Romish church, among other their blasphemous
errors and perverse doctrines, do strive for, and persuade men to that carnal
eating, in the sacrament: with which (as they themselves confess) damnation
may be joined. For they (directly against Christ's own words) do affirm, that
the very wicked men and horrible sinners, as Judas and such like, do eat in
the sacrament, the very real and natural body of Christ as fullye as Peter,
or any other saint of God, or other faithful Christian has done or does. The
which doctrine of theirs as it is reprochful to the body and blood of Christ,
so is it also plainly against that, which Christ himself teaches in the 6.
Ver. 56.
of John. For there he says thus, He that eats my flesh and drinks my
blood, abides in me, and I in him. As the living father sent me, and I live by
the father, so he that eats me, shall live by me. But the wiked and naughty
persons, abid not in Christ, nor live by him, therefore sinful, wicked and
faithless persons do not eat Christ nor drink his blood. Ver. 54
In the same chapter Christ says further, who soever eats my flesh and drinks
my blood, has eternal life, etc, But ye wicked have not eternal life by christ
nor shall be raised to life, but to eternal damnation: therefore it is a false
and a wicked doctrine, that Judas and such other naughty persons, do eat ye
very true, real, and natural body of Christ, for if they did, Io. 6.48. etc.
then should they be pertakers of those benefitts which Christ (truth it self)
promises to the^ that eat him.

234 The agreement of the Popish doctrine with the Apostles.
THe Doctrine of the Apostles is, that Christ is not only God eternal with the
father, but that he is man also, Phil. 2.7. Heb. 2.17 Act. 1.11
taking flesh of ye blessed virgin in all things like unto us, sin only
excepted, and that in his humanity, he is now ascended into heaven and sits
perpetually at the right hand of the Father. But the doctrine of the Church of
Rome, tells us that the humanitye of Christ, and his very natural body and
blood, are really and carnally not in heaven alone, but in ten thousand places
also upon the earth at one instant, ye which property is peculier to God alone.
For nothing but God can be in mo places but one at once, as the whole
scriptures do declare. The doctrine of the Apostles is, To. 3.25. 1. Io. 2.1.
Col. 1.20
that Christ is by GOD appointed to be our only Mediator, reconciler, advocate
and intercessor, to make atonement between GOD and us, so often as our sins
shall severe us from him, and that to that end he sits now at the right
hand of GOD, that he may appear before him for us. But the popish doctrine
putting Christ out of office, does teach, that we have an infinite number of
mediators and intercessors, to procure us favor, and to make reconciliation
between God and us: Act i0.43 Ier. 31.34. Romans 3.25 Col. 1.14,
we are taught by the Apostles that christ is our only redeemer and savior and
by the price of his blood has purchased for us, full and perfect remission of
sin. But the Romish doctrine is, yt we have remission of sin not only by
Christ, but by ye merits and prayers of saints. by masses pardons by
purgatory, and such like, matching the vain devises of men, for the remission
of our sins, with ye blood of the son of God ye most excellent price of our
redemption. The Apostles teach us that Christ is our only high priest. He.
10.14.
For even according to the order of Melchizadech, that with once offering of
himself, has made perfect for ever all them that be sanctified. But the
Papists would make us believe, that Christ has a state of priesthood
succeeding him, which must daily and continually, offer the very natural body
and blood of Christ, to God the Father, for the remission of the sins of the
quick and of the dead. Io. 3.2. Io. 14.26. Io. 16.13.
The doctrine of the Apostles is, that christ is the only Master and teacher
of his church, and in his holy word has delivered unto it all truth: but the
church of Rome persuades men to believe, that Christ has not delivered unto
us all truth, but that there be many articles of necessity to be believed
which are not contained in the scripturs. We are further taught by the
Apostles, 1. Cor. 113 Ephesians. 5.23.
that Christ is the only head of his church, and the ruler and governor of
the same: but the Papists would persuade us, that the Pope and his Successors
are the heads of the church of Christ. So likewise the Apostles teach us that
Christ is the only foundation and ground of his Church whereupon it rests
and is stayed: 1. Cor. 3.11.
and the Papists teach us, that Saint Peter and his successors be the
foundation of the Church, and that hell gates shall not prevail against that
Church that is builded upon that foundation.

235 We are utterly blind by our nature.
Certain it is that all our senses are so weak, that we shall never be able
to comprehend one word of that which God speaks unto us, except he
inlighten us by his holy spirit. For the natural man perceaueth not the
things which are of God: they are too high and profounde for us. 1. Cor. 2.14.
But whereof comes this default and blindness, but from our own corruption
and wickedness? For it is most certain and true, that the verity and truth
of God in it self, and in his own nature is easy enough, it is not dark and
obscure, but plain to be understood. And therefore if we will behave our
selves in such sort, as that GOD may make us to profitte in his word: Ps.
34.18. 1. Pet. 5.5.
we must then be humble and obedient and little in our own eyes. For it is not
for naught, that he promises to teach and instruct such as are humble. Let us
not then trust to our own wit. Let us not come to the hearing of his word with
such an hautinesse and presumption in us, Io. 15.5. 2. Cor. 3.5.
as to think we are of sufficient capacity to judge of that which shall be
said: but rather let us desire of God, that he will open our eyes, that he
will reach out his hand to lead us: and let us confess, that we are not of
such dexterity of wit, to profitte under him in his school, except he bestow
it upon us. When this humility shall be in us, we need not doubt, but the
word of God shall be easy unto us, and that we shall know and understand,
whatsoever is therein delivered unto us, necessary for our salvation.

236 The word of God is of great virtue.
THe word of God is mighty in operation, that is to say, it has in it force
and virtue, Heb. 4.12.
able to subdue all enemies, and bring us in obedience unto Christ. This virtue
of the word S. Paul notably sets out to the Corinthians, magnifiyng his
Apostleship by this means: 2. Cor. 10.
our weapons (says he) are strong by the power of God, to cast down holds,
wherewith we overthrow imaginations, and every high thing that is exa^lted
against the knowledge of God, and bring into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ, and have ready vengeance against all disobedience,
howsoever a man magnify him self: or exalt him self, in which arrogancy of
spirit he seems (as it were) buried in sin, and his heart hardened
against the grace of God, yet let him hear this word of God, and let it often
fall into his ears, Ier. 3.29.
for it is as the Prophet says, a hammer which breaks the stone in pieces,
and is able in the power of God, to mollify his heart: or if the sinner be
suncken down so deep, that he will not rise, it will crush him down deeper,
that he may perish in sin: and so God says to his Prophet Jeremy: I will
put my words into thy mouth, and it shall be as fire, Ier. 5.14.
and this people shall be as wood, and it shall devour them. And this is it S.
Paul expressly witnesses, to be the only means to glorify God, to preach
the truth of his word unto all: for so (says he) we are always a sweet
smelling savor of Christ unto God, as well in those that perish, as in those
that be saved, 2. Cor. 2.16.
to the one a savor of life unto life, to the other of death unto death.

237 The cause why the word of God is despised.
BEcause the word of God is simple, and teaches us not high and excellent
things in the opinion of the world: for this cause it is despised, and men
make no account to follow the way which it teaches: thinking it a great
dishonor to be conformable to the same: and that they should be scarce worthy
to live. Likewise men persecute, at all times those that follow it, as wicked,
and esteem them unworthy of life. But those which despising the word, seek
out things which are in price with the world, and follow them, are reputed
honest men, and are placed always in the most honorable place among
worldlinges. Which is the cause that they think themselves to be in good
estate, and of such force, as they shall never perish. Wherein they deceive
themselves, Deu. 4.6. Leu. 18.5. Mat. 22.32 Mar. 12.27.
for seeing the word of God is our wisdom and understanding, and that he
which does the things appointed by the same shall live: it follows that
without this wisdom there is nothing but death.

238 It is not for us to know the times and seasons which the father has put
in his own power.
BY the word of God we are taught and instructed that the day of the Lord
shall come upon us as a thief in the night. When the light of the truth is
taken away when the heart of the good man of the house is at rest, and his eyes
are darkened, that they cannot see: and all his senses drowned in worldly
pleasures. When we care for nothing that is godly, when we say peace and
rest: then will the son of man come to judgment, then shall destruction
suddenly fall upon us. Act. 1.7. 1. These. 5.2.
Therefore let us be ready for in the hour that we think not, will the
Son of man come. Of that day and hour knows no man (says our Savior
Christ) no not the Angels which are in heaven, Mar. 13.32
neither the son himself but the Father.

What may we think then of them that write Books and Almanackes, and say and
teach expressly that such a year, and at such a time, Christ shall come, and
with these speeches fraye and mock the world? Let men know that they are but
mortal, and that by nature they are utterly blind. God has given us
knowledge in measure: we can not know as much as we would. Let us know that
which is fit for us, and speak that that is lawful to be spoken. Let us
think upon the commandments of God to follow them: and not search into his
works, Luke. 21.25. Esa. 13.10 Eze. 32.7. Joel. 2.31. and 3.15.
to be curious in them, for he that is curious in searching the majesty of
God, otherwise then he has revealed in his word, shall be oppressed and
confounded by his glory. Thus much we may well know, that the Lord will come,
that all flesh shall appear before him: that the world, the heaven and the
earth the Sun and the Moon shall have an end: Math. 24.29. and 42.
that the day of the Lord shall come suddenly, as a theife in the night. This
warning God has given us, that we should not be taken unawares, but that we
repent, and stand in readiness continually watching and praying every minute
of an hour, that we may be caught up into the clouds to meet our Redeemer.

239 Of the second coming of Christ.
THe Son of God shall come down with majesty from heaven: the Trumpet of God
shall sonnde, and be heard from the one end of the heaven to the other: Then
shall he be ye judge over al flesh. Then shall he show himself to be king of
kings, and Lord of Lords. Then shall he not come in humility, meekness and
mercy: but with dread and terror of judgment, and justice. Not with 12. poor
Apostles: but with so many thousand Angels to attend upon him. Not in the
preaching of the gospel, and calling sinners to repentance but in the sound of
a trumpet, wherewith all the corners of the earth shall be amazed. Then shall
he not say, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, Mat. 11.28
Mat. 15.24
and I will refresh you: I am sent to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
He shall not say Father forgive them, for they know not what they do: but he
will say, you have been ashamed of me and my word before men: therefore now
will I be ashamed of you before my heavenly Father. Then shall they that
despised the word of God, know what they despised: and the blasphemers shall
reap the fruit of their blasphemy. Then the careless Shepherd and idle
Minister, which has not to his power fed the Lords sheep, but neglected
them and left them at al adventures: which following the lusts of his own
heart, has betrayed his flock, and given them to be a pray unto the wolf,
shall receive a just recompense for his treason. Then the aduterer, oppressor,
and usurer, shall have their life laid open before them. They shall see him
whom they pierced thorough. Reu. 1.7.
They shall see his sword ready drawn to slaye all his enemies and shall
fall down for fear of him that sits upon the throne. But the hearts of the
righteous shall rejoice. They shall lift up their heads, and see him in whom
they have trusted Then shall they say. This is the day which the Lord has
made, Ps. 118.24
let us rejoice and be glad in it. Let us rejoice unto the Lord: let us come
before his face with praise, let us sing loud unto him with Psalms. Such
shall be the state and countenance, and honor, and majesty of our God, when he
shall come down from heaven for our deliverance.

240 Christ is the Apostle and high Priest of our profession.
IF we be Christians we must learn to profess no other teacher, nor no other
Savior but Jesus Christ only. 1. Cor. 1.30.
We must believe and also speak, that Christ is both our wisdom and our
justification: that his word is ours, his doctrine is ours: his wisdom is
ours: and that we profess not one jot, or one title whereof he has not been
an Apostle, unto us: and whosoever he be, that teaches us other things then
what Christ has taught us al, he is not of our profession, nor of our
brotherhood: and more then this, we are sure he teaches nothing but vain
illusions and imaginations of men: for all treasures of wisdom and true
knowledge are hid in Christ. Col. 2.3. Heb. 3.1. 2. cor. 4 4. Col. 1.15.
And seeing it has pleased him to be our Apostle, who is ye son of God, the
brightness of his glory, the engraven form of his person, the heir of all
things, the maker of heaven and earth, far greater then Angels: how unthankful
be we, if his doctrine be not our profession, and how unwise be we, if we
will change him either for any other, or else for all other. Whatsoever
glorious names they bring of Fathers, Doctors, Counselles and such like bosting
words, we neither know them, Esaias. 52.7 Mat. 7.23.
nor their names: if they be ministers of Christ unto us, their feet are
beautiful, and their names are honorable: if they be their own ministers, we
know them not, nor all their glory: if they say, they be teachers, we may
well say again, they are but Phariseis that will be called Rabby. Mat. 23.8.
We have no teachers but one, and that is Christ, and he is the Apostle of our
profession.

241 The fear of God is true wisdom.
IF we desire to fulfill the will of God duly and in such sort as our life
may be agreeable unto God: we must bear him all reverence, and seek to be
under his hand, Deu. 6.13 and. 10.12.
under his guide and direction: we must seek to do him homage as our
sovereign King, Joshua. 24 14.
we must seek to dedicate our selves unto him as our creator, we must seek
to honor him as our Father. When this affection and desire shall be in us,
then have we the beginning of the whole law, and of all righteousness: and
that is the cause why it is said, Pro. 1.7.
that the true wisdom is the fear of God. And when we will know whether we
have profited in the word of God, we must examine our hearts to make the
trial thereof, to feel if we have such a zeal and desire, that God be
honored and glorified of us. For if there be such a fear in the heart, the
fruits thereof will appear, both in our hands, and in our feet, and in all
the parts and members of our body. So that they which boast themselves of the
fear of God, when their life is loosed to all wickedness, their own tongues
tell them they lie, and they show full well, how impudent and past shame they
are, when they vaunt so much of the fear of God. To serve God aright, it
behooves that our hearts he wholly given over to him, it suffices not that in
outward appearance, we have all the virtue that a man might imagine, except
such an affection, and inward desire of the heart go before. The fear of God
is no hidden and idle thing, although it be in the heart of men, yet must it
appear and show it self in their life. For it is the heart, which governs
both the hands, and the feet, and all the other parts and members of our
body. We must therefore learn to show by effect and experience, that we
fear God, by ordering our whole life, according to his will.

242 The faithful are more contented with a little, then the ungodly with
their abundance.
THe holy Ghost by the mouth of Solomon willing to lead us to sobriety,
contentation, softness and goodness, to reverence and obedience toward God,
unto peace, Pro. 16.8.
unity and amity, toward our neighbors, teaches us that a little is
better with quietness then great revenues without equity. Wherein he
agrees with the saying of the Prophet David. Ps. 37.16.
A small thing (says he) that the righteous has, is better then great riches
of the ungodly. Abraham being in the land of Canaan as a stranger, was not
after outward appearaunce to be compared in worldly wealth with the Kings and
Princes of the earth: but the little he had in respect of them, was better
then their great abundance: for he was contented and had enough, and possessed
in a sound conscience, (without doing any wrong to any man) that which he
had, and finally obtained the great heavenly riches, which he looked for. Heb.
11.10
Contrarily the great men of the earth aspiring continually unto greater
riches, having neither contentation nor enough, but having committed much wrong
and violence, and being at continual strife, Ge. 18.20. and 16.24. Eze. 16.49
Heb. 11.24 1. Kin. 17.10.
in the end perished most miserablye. Sodom is a fearful example thereof.
Moses did so understand it, when he denied to be the son of Pharoes
daughter. Elisha and the widow which nourished him prove it true. For the
reproouing and condemning of wicked riches, we may bring examples out of Saint
Luke. Luke. 12. and 16.
And for the time present, we may see, if we have eyes, that the poor which
are contented with a little, live more at their ease, then they which aspire
unto greater riches. For the poor worldlings and carnal minded men which
think they serve for nothing but to heap up riches, are in a most miserable
state: because that first of all they are never contented, but do murmr and
grudge, even against God, who seeks to kill them, as they imagine in their
fantasy, and as by impaciencie they dare spue out. Secondly they live in an
evil conscience: for being disco^tented with their poverty, they persuade
themselves that riches are common, and that they may take them where they find
them: and in deed where they are not seen, they pill, poule and steal what
so ever they can meet withal. Luke 12.15 Mat. 6.19. 2. Cor. 8.7. and 9.6.
Wherefore let us follow our Lord take heed, and beware of covetousness:
let us not lay our treasures upon earth, but make our treasures in heaven:
And as S. Paul teaches us, Heb. 13.5
let us help the necessity of the poor, and let our conversation be without
covetousness etc. Thus doing, we shall possess our goods in righteousness,
the which as concerning our present purpose, consists in this, that we put
our trust in the providence of God, and that we be good and faithful
stewardes of the riches that he has committed unto us. In this manner when we
shall have but a little after the feeling of the flesh it shall better profit,
then if we did otherwise possess great wealth. For they that are rich without
righteousness and equitye, Mar. 10.22.23.
shall perish with their goods.

243 Three marks of a christian soldier.
IT is especially required of a christian soldier, to rejoice in the mercy of
God: to be fervent in prayer, and to give thanks to God in all things: the
heathens which have no part in the kingdom of Christ, are thankful for their
life and liberty, wealth, glory and worldly prosperity: But Christians ought
to be thankful in persecution, in thraldom, in adversity, in shame, in
misery, and death it self. Who would think that a Lion, which by nature is
fierce and cruel should yield forth honey? Iud. 14.8.
yet Sampson found honye in the body of a Lion: Jonas was swallowed up of a
whale and yet not hurt. To. 8.28.
We know (says the Apostle) that al things work together for the best unto
them that love God. The Apost. reioiced in their persecution that they were
counted worthy to suffer rebuke for Christ's sake. And P speaking of this
perfection in ye godly says, we rejoice under the hope of ye glory of God: To.
5.2.3.
Neither that only, but also we rejoice in tribulation etc who has not heard
of the patience of Job his cattle were driven away: his houses consumed with
fire: Job. 1.21.
his children slain, his body stricken with a scurffe his wife loathed him, and
his friends forsook him And yet in all these miseries he fretted not, but
patiently susteining his adversity, The Lord (said he) has given, and the
Lord has taken it blessed be the name of ye lord. And again, Job. 13. i5
though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. What are we then that are neither
thankful for riches, nor for health, nor for our pleasures, nor in the
abundance of all things? which abuse the good gifts of God, to dishonor him
who has given them unto us. The earth is the Lords, and all that therein is:
the world and they that dwell therein. He opens his hand and fills all
things living with his blessing. Psa. 89.11 Ps. 145.16. Ia. 1.17. Col. 2.3.
Let us look up into the heavens, There is GOD the Father of lights, from whom
every good and perfect gift comes.

There is our redeemer Jesus Christ in whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge. When we see how mercifully and aboundantlye the Lord
has dealt with us in things concerning this life: Let us consider with our
selves, how many good men and faithful servant of GOD lack the same, and
have not received these blessings in such measure, as we: In all these things
GOD speaks unto us, and shows that he is the giver, and that we have them
at his hands, and therefore that we use them well, and not be unthankful.

244 We must not hide our talent in the ground.
WHen we shall attain unto the light of the truth through the might of Gods
spirit, in any acceptable measure: we must not hold fast this treasure (as it
were) locked up in a chest: But we must communicate the graces of God unto
others: and do the best we can to draw on the miserable ignorant people, to
the service of god: and to carry about with us the doctrine to publish it to all
men, when as it is committed unto us as a treasure, and to bestow the gift
which we have received, upon our neighbors, according to that measure of faith
which GOD has given us. 1. Pe. 4. i0 Psalm. 119.171.172.
We must not neglect those whom we might win, but we must gather as much
company to the Lord as we can. For we shall not need to fear that our blessing
shall be diminished (as the case stands in an earthly inheritance, To. 14.29
the which when it is divided into many parts, every one has but a little:)
For as for the heavenly inheritance, we are very well assured that we lose
nothing, neither diminish any part of our right, when we draw many of our
neighbors, yea an infinite multitude, they al do increase our glory and joy.
When God calls us unto him, he goes not to work by portions, as things
either increase or decrease in this world: but we shall have so much, that (as
I said before) our salvation shall be so much the more increased, and our
glory augmented, when we have gathered a multitude to our God,

245 How Satan has bewitched the Papists.
THe Devil has been no less envious, and has no less prevailed in these
latter days, then he has done in times past. For now also has he made many
men to set forth the imaginations of their own hearts, and has bewitched
many to follow their damnable ways, whereby the way of truth is blasphemed,
and for their own traditions, he has made the word of the Lord Jesus to be
of none effect, this work has he wroght (as we may see) among the Papists.
For whereas Christ has taught us to worship in spirit and truth, to drink
the wine in the sacrament of his body and blood, Io. 4.23 Ma. 26.27 1. Cor.
14.19. 1. Cor. 10 27. Heb. 13.3
to pray in a known tongue, to eat of any meats without scruple of
conscience, to use holy matrimony in all estates, as a remedy against sin:
yet as though Christ were no prophet unto us, they have abrogated these his
laws, and made other contrary of their own.

This our eyes have seen, and our ears have heard, and whether they will or
no, they must needs confess it: Yet notwithstanding they flatter themselves
in a marvelous madness, and doing all thing contrary to the Lord Jesus, they
say still they cannot err: but they shall one day see and know, that Christ is
the only Prophet of the new testament: and blessed be the Lord, who has
made us this day to believe it: and while yet the day of health and acceptable
time is, to hearken only unto him, and refuse all the vain inventions of men.

246 The doctrine of the Papists repugnant to the scriptures.
WE are taught by the Scriptures that Christ is ascended into heaven, and
sits on the right hand of GOD the father, and from thence and no place else,
Col, 3.1
he shall come to judge the quick and the dead: yet contrary to this article of
our faith, and contrary to the nature of Christ's humanity, if we beeleeue not
that Christ even in his flesh, is still in earth with us, yea and that in a
thousand places at once, the church of Rome will pronounce us detestable
heretics. The scripture teaches that we have redemption and justification by
faith in Christ's blood only, without the help of our own virtues and good
works. For S. Paul says: To. 3.18
Therefore we gather that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of
the Law. And to the Ep. Ye are justified by grace, Ephesians, 2.8.9
and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God: not of works least any
man should bost. And yet if we believe not that our works do help us to our
justification and remission of sins, the papists will condemn us as heretics
The Scriptures says, Thou shall make thee no graven image, Ex. 20.4.
neither shall thou bow down to worship it. The church of Rome says it is
godly to have the church full of images, and to kneel down before them, to
set up candels unto them, and with incense to honor them. The scriptures
teach us that Christ by once offering himself on the cross, made perfect for
ever all them that be sanctified: He. i0. i4
and yet by the Church of Room are they horrible heritickes, that say there is
not daily sacrifice propitiatory for our sins in their Mass. The scripture
says in the use of the Lords supper, Ma. 26.27
Drink ye all of this. The Papists say it is heresy to affirm that the lay
people should drink of the Lords cup. Moreover our Savior Christ
instituted a sacrament of thanksgiving (as he says) do this in
remembrance of me. They make it a sacrifice propitiatorye for the quick and
the dead, having not one syllable of Gods word for the same.

Christ gave bread, they say there is no bread. Christ gave wine, they say,
the substance of the wine is clean vanished away.

Christ said when he gave bread, this is my body, and when he gave wine this is
my blood: they say when the one or the other is given, that it is both the
body and blood. I omit their mixing of diverse corrupt doctrines, their
unfruitful and dangerous ceremonies. I omit yt they have made it a common
marchandice, to buy^ souls out of purgatory, and how^ they have made of this
heavenly mystery, a perpetual matter of idolatry, by leading the people in
their eleuations, to worship the creature, in steed of the creator. For if it
should be thoroughly declared how they have wrested and wroung the words of
Christ's institution, it might seem to al men that have the fear of God, very
marvelous: but this which has been spoken may suffice.

247 The keys of the kingdom of heaven are all one with the power of binding
and loosing, of remitting and reteining sins.
AS God to teach Pharao what he would do in Egypt by 7. years of plenty, and
7. years of famine, did use two sundry dreams, of kine, and ears of corn,
ye surer to resolve him of his purpose in the same: so Christ, to teach us what
he does for mankind in ordeyning the ministry of the word and Sacraments,
uses two similitudes, the one of keys, the other of binding and loosing, that
we may know the better the fruit and force of it. Touching the keys: he
speaks of heaven as of a house, whereinto there is no entrance for men,
unless the door be opened. Mat. 16.19.
Now we (all of Adams race) are shut out of heaven, as Adam our progenitor was
out of Paradise, through our offenses and sins. For no unclean thing shall
enter into it. Reu. 21.27. Io. 3.16.
But God of his love and favor toward us, has given us his Son, his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish but have
eternal life, which is the inheritance reserved in heaven for us. 1. Pet. 1.4.
To. 10.14
We cannot believe unless we hear his word. We hear not his word unless it
be preached. Wherefore when God the father sent his son Christ, and Christ
sent his Apostles, Luke 4.18. Esaias. 61.1 Mar. 16.15 Lu. 24.27.
as his father sent him, to preach his word to men, that they who repented and
believed in Christ, should have their sins forgiven them: the faithless and
unrepentant should not be forgiven: then he gave authority (as it were) to
open heaven to the faithful, and to shut it, against the wicked. Which
office (to shut and open) because in men's houses it is exercised by keys: 2.
Kin. 18.18. Esa. 22.22.
and the steward of the house is said to have the keye of it, to open it and
to shut it: therefore Christ ye principal steward of Gods house, is said to
have the keye of David: Reu. 3.7.
and he gave his Apostles the keys (as it were) of the kingdom of heaven, when
he made the^ his stewardes to shut out and to let in. 1. Co. 4.1. To. 5.12. To.
6.23. Pro. 5.22.
The other similitude of binding and loosing is to like effect. For we are al
by nature ye children of sin, and therefore of death. Now sins are in a manner
the same to the soul, that cords to ye body: and the endless pains of
death, (that is, 2. Pet. 2.4 1. Pet. 3.19.
the wages of sin) are like to chains wherewith the wicked are bound in
hell, as in prison. From these cords of sin, and chains of death eternal, me^
are loosed by christ, when their sins be remitted: their sins are remitted, if
they believe in him. If they believe not, their sins are retained: whose sins
are retained, they continue bound. For, he that believes not shall be condemned:
Io. 3.18.
he that believes shall be saved. None shall be condemned but they whose sins are
retained, to bind them with the chains of darkness: none saved but they whose
sins are remitted, and the cords unloosed by which they were holden. 2. Co. 2.16
Wherefore since the gospel is preached to this end, a savor of life to life
unto believers: Esaias. 61.1
unto the unbelievers, a savor of death to does as we read of Christ, that the
Lord sent him to preach deliverance to the captives, and opening of prison to
them that are bound: in like sort his ministers whom he sent to preach it, are
said to bind and loose, Mat. 16.19 and 18.18. Io. 20.23.
to retain and remit sins. So that both these kinds of speech, import the
same that is signified by keys. For to bind and to reteyne sins, is to shut:
to loose, and to remit sins, is to open the kingdom of heaven.

248 There dwells no goodness at all in our flesh.
IT is the part of a good Christian and a wise man, to know himself: and to
know the nature of this flesh which we bear about with us, which fights
always so mightily against the spirit: to know the waywardnes of our heart,
and the weakness of our mind. But many (which neither know God nor
themselves) are so far from this, yt they think al their ability is of
themselves, yt they have judgment, the light of reason, and the ordering of
their own ways, etc. But we must humble our selves under the mighty hand of
God, and acknowledge that we are nothing. To. 7.18.
We must confess with S. Paul, I know that in me, that is to say, in my flesh
dweleth no good. Our Savior Christ says, Io. 3.6.
yt which is borne of the flesh, is flesh: and that which is borne of the
spirit, Genesis 8.21.
is spirit. And God says, The imagination of man's heart is evil from his
youth. He has made us, and not we our selves he knows us, and not we our
selves. This is his saying, and his judgment of us, and this we find true.
For our will is froward, and our understanding blind. Therefore says the
Prophet, O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself, Ier. 10.23.
neither is it in man to walk and direct his steps. Solomon also says,
that the steps of man are ruled by the Lord; Pro. 20.14
how can a man then understand his own way? S. Paul confesses to the
Corinthians, 2. Co. 3.5.
that he is not sufficient of himself to think any thing as of himself: but
that his sufficiency is in God. Without me (says Christ) ye can do nothing.
Io. 15.5.
It is God that works in you both the will and the deed, even of his good
pleasure It is god ye disposes our goings and turns our hearts, Phil. 2.13.
as seems best unto him. He is able to make of the stones in the street
children unto Abraham. Mat. 3.9.
The consideration whereof ought to lead us to seek help and comfort by
continual prayer at the hand of God. Col. 4.2.


249 The flesh lusts contrary to the spirit and the spirit contrary to the
flesh.
WHen the spirit seeks wholly to obey God, the flesh withal his might
rebelieth against the same: in so much that the godly man, who only seeks
the glory of God, is constrained to abide many assaults of the flesh and the
devil. The flesh flies the cross, and desires rather ease and pleasure, and
seeks by all means to withdraw a man from the obedience of God The flesh
(as Saint Paul says) lusts contrary to the spirit, Gal. 1.17.
and the spirit contrary to the flesh: these are contrary one to another, so
that ye cannot do what ye would. The flesh says they that speak the truth
shall have many enemies: but they that can dissemble shall easily enjoy the
favor of men. But the spirit says, Iam. 4.4.
He that will be a friend of this world, is an enemy unto God. The flesh says,
to confess Christ before men is not without danger. The spirit says. Mat. 10.32
He that acknowledges me before men: him will I acknowledge before my father
which is in heaven. The flesh says, take heed how thou speak of ye gospel of
Christ for if thou be cast into prison for the same, how can thou defend thy
cause? The spirit says, Mat. 10.19 Mar. 13.11. Lu. 12.11.
when they deliver you up take no thought, how or what ye shall speak: for it
shall be given you in that hour, what ye shall say. The flesh says, it is a
hard thing to fall into ye hands of men: The spirit says it is a horrible
thing to fall into the hand of God. He. 10.31.
The flesh says let a man look well always to himself: The spirit says, he
wc loves his life shall lose it. Io. 12.25.
The flesh says, it is pleasant to enjoy ye pleasures of the world and lusts
of the heart, and it is pain to mortify and kill them: The spirit says. Luc.
6.24.
Woe be to you that are rich, for ye have received your consolation. Woe be to
you that are full, for ye shall hunger, Woe be to you that now laugh, for ye
shall wail and weep. The flesh says, he is a wise man, and like to come to
preferment, that will seek to please God and man: The spirit says, No man
can serve two Masters. And again, If I should please men, Mat. 6.24. Gal.
1.20.
I were not the servant of Christ. For if any man love this World, the love of
the Father, 1. Io. 2.15.
is not in him.

FINIS.

