THE LAWIERS LOgike, exemplifying the praecepts of Logike by the practice of
the common Law, by Abraham France.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by William How, for Thomas Gubbin, and T. Newman. 1588.

To the Right honorable, Henry Earl of Pembrooke, Lord Herbert of Cardyffe,
Marmyon, and S. Quynten, Lord Praesident of the principality of Wales, and the
Marches of the same, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and Lord
Liuetenant of Wales, of the Marches, and of the counties of Wy^ and Sommerset.
IF Laws by reason framed were, and grounded on the same;
If Logike also reason be, and thereof had this name;
I see no reason, why that Law and Logike should not be
The nearest and the dearest friends, and therefore best agree.
As for the fond conceyt of such which never knew them both,
Better believe some men's bare word, than their suspected oath.
I say no more then what I saw, I saw that which I sought,
I sought for Logike in our Law, and found it as I thought.
If all that I have sought and found your Honor do content,
(Let scribes and pety penmen talk) I thinck my time well spent,
And labor herein well imployd: Acceptance is my meede,
I crave no more, I have no less, if you vouch safe to reed.
Your Honors most unfeignedly affectionate Abraham France.

TO THE LEARNED Lawyers of England, especially the Gentlemen of Grays Inn.
THere be almost seven years now ouergone me, since first I began to be a
medler with these Logical meditations: And whilst I have said and unsaid,
done and undone, and now done all a new, me thinks these seven years
have quickly ouergone me. I first began, (when I first came in presence of
that right noble and most renowned knight sir Philip Sydney) with a general
discourse concerning the right use of Logike, and a contracted comparison
between this of Ramus and that of Aristotle. These small and trifling
beginnings drew both him to a greater liking of, and my self to a further
trauayling in, the easy explication of Ramus his Logike.

Six times in thease seven years have I perused the whole, and by a more
diligent ouerseeing corrected some ouersights: thrice at S. John's college in
Cambridge, thrice at Grays Inn, since I came to London. This last alteration
has changed the name of the Book, and this new name of the Book proceeded
from the change of my profession. For having resolutely determined to acquaint
my self with our English laws and constitutio^s, I thought good to make
trial, whether my eight years labor at Cambridge, would any thing profit me
at an Inn of Court, wheather Law were without Logike, or Logike not able to
help a Lawyer. Which when I proved, I then perceived, the practice of Law to
be the use of Logike, and the method of Logike to lighten the Law. So that
after application of Logike to Law, and examination of Law by Logike, I made
plain the praecepts of the one by the practice of the other, and called my
book, The Lawyers Logike; not as though Logike were tied only unto Law, but
for that our Law is most fit to express the praecepts of Logike. Yet, because
many love Logike, that never learn Law, I have retained those old examples
of the new Shepherds Calendar, which I first gathered, and thereunto added
thease also out of our Law books, which I lately collected.

I doubt not, but that some welwillers, and many maliciously disposed cauyllers
will as much reprehend this strange conjunction of Law and Logike, as they
did marvel at my sudden departure from Philosophy to Law. To those that
mean well, and speak according to their meaning, I wish no worse use of
Logike than may be had in Law. For the rest, which make proclamations without
authority, and exclamations with greater indignation than discretion, I leave
them to their standish, and pray for their good success, that after the term
of seven years fully complete and ended, they may be in their blewe velvet
night-caps solempnly called to the Bar for their extraordinary skill in
making of obligations.

Tully, at the earnest request of Trebatius, a towardly Lawyer of Rome, has
eloquently put down the first part of Logike in his Topikes, to the praecepts
whereof he applies Law-like examples, for the better instruction of Trebatius
and help of other Lawyers. Seruius Sulpitius, as the same Tully reports,
became the most excellent Lawyer in all Rome, and that only by the help and
direction of Logike: insomuch that he only, by thease means, was said to have
the art and knowledge of the Law, whereas the rest had nothing but the
practice of the same, by continual beating of their brains about endless
controversies. He knew what was Law, and what was the reason of Law; they like
good Catholics and modest minded men, believed as the Church believed, but why
the church believed so, it never came within the compass of their cogitation.

But all this notwithstanding, it cannot be, said one great Tenurist, that a
good Scholar should ever prove good Lawyer. God forbid, good sir, you offer
your self tootoomuch injury: for we, countrymen, take your woorship for a
great wise learned man, and I doubt not but that your self are well persuaded
of your woondrous knowledge in the Law, and yet you say, that Law and Logike
can never stand together. It Is great pity, God wot, that thease two excellent
qualities can never be reconciled. Alas; what should ayle them, if it like
your good Maystership? Mary, quoth he, thease fine University men have been
trained up in such easy, elegant, conceipted, nice, and delicate learning,
that they can better make newfound verses of Amyntas death, and popular
discourses of Ensigns, Armory, Emblemes, Hieroglyphikes, and Italian Impreses,
than apply their heads to the study of the Law, which is hard, harsh,
unpleasant, unsavory, rude and barbarous. Well said good John a style. Dij ^e,
Damasippe, deaeque
Uerum ob iudicium, donent ionsore; sed vnde
Tam been nos nosti?


For my self, I must needs confess I was an University man eight years
together, and for every day of these eight years, I do not repent that I was
an University man. But for that delicacie of study whereof you dream,
because it seems somewhat strange, a word or two, before we go further.
Surely sir, by your patience be it spoken, it seems you came abruptly from a
country school to an Inn of court, or else riding poast toward London, you
changed horse at the University, and coming thither late in the evening, and
riding away early in the morning, saw nothing but by candell light. It was
incident to my nature (as I think) to be carried away with as delicate and
pleasant a kind of learning, as any of my time in Cambridge. Which
(notwithstanding an inestimable delectation that drowned the pains of study)
did yet so rack my raunging head, and bring low my crased body, that I felt at
last when it was too late, the perpetual vexation of Spirit, and continual
consumption of body, incident to every scholar.

And if the most easy conceits in Universities be so hard, the most delicate
studies so full of toil, how troublesome then and painful the foundation of
arts, the framing of an English tongue to unknown languages, must in any case
be, I leave to be judged of them, who can discern between a superficial
appearance and true substance, between the bravery of a Midsommers Comencement,
and the seven years pains of a Master of arts.

Now for the study of the law, which, by these lawmens report, is so hard, so
unsavory, so rude, and so barbarous, she may well pronounce of her professors,
as Horace of his guestes.

Tres mihi conuiuae prope dissentire videntur,
Poscentes vario multum diuersa palato.
Quid them? quid non them? renuis tu, quod iubet alter,
Quod petis, id certe est inuisum acidumque duobus.
For the hardenes and difficulty, I say no more, but (...): and if Philosophy be
hard, and law be hard, I am sumus ergo pares. In deed the want of teachers
and good discipline which is in Universities, makes law seem hard, and
Philosophy very easy, which, if either we had, or they had not, no doubt, law
would sooner be learned in seven years, then seven arts in one and twenty.
But the law is unsavory, says an other: But the fault is in your corrupt taste,
say I, not in the nature of the thing, which unto the wisest is most
acceptable, unless you play the part of Philoxenus, and under pretense of
abhorring the loathsome savor of the law, intend the devouring of all profits
proceeding from the law, which seems indeed to be the scope you aim at.
You would love the law but sine riuali: you would reign, but alone: Hinc illae
lachrymae. For otherwise I can hardly think so hardly of you, as to measure
your discretion by the improbable assertion comprised in your two last
Epithetes, wherein you disgrace the law with rudeness and barbarism. For, as
for that Hotchpot French, stufft up with such variety of borrowed words, wherein
our law is written, if this be all the Dunsicalitie you talk of, you are far
more nyce then any University man of mine acquaintance. I know by experience,
there is no word so outworne, no speech so vast and gaping in Brytton, Bracton,
Glanuyll, Lytleton, Parkins, and the rest of our Law autors and reporters of
the law, as is in Bricot, Burley, Bonauenture, Duns, Durand, D'orbell, Aquinas,
Andreas, Albertus, and a far more infinite number of those Moonkish
cloysterers devoured of Scholars, than be of thease others perused by
Lawyers. And yet, notwithstanding all their Persoities, Formalities,
Quiddities, Haecceities, Albedinities, Animalities, Substantialities, and such
like, he that would not gather gould out of Aquinas dregs, as Virgill did
out of Ennius, I shall think him as wise, as some seelly Pettyfogger, who
rather than he would trouble his conscience with Feetayle and Feesimple, will
live like a simple fool, and never take fee.

Whether it be malice therefore and envy, or ignorance and simplicity, that
causes you to wrangle and chatte so vndiscreatly, you may see how you do err
by the one, and are deceived by the other. For neither are University men so
daynty, as to loose their dinner because the Cook had not on his holiday
apron, neither is the Law more unsweet, than other learning unsavory,
whatsoever you cast out to the contrary.

But the Law is in vaste volumes confusedly scattered and utterly undigested:
so was all other learning not long ago: yet herein blame not the Law, if it
be datke, but Lawyers themselves that had no light: blame not the Law, I say,
which was out of order, but Lawyers themselves that never knew Method: Nay,
blame neither Law, nor ancient Lawyers, who by reason of the general misery
of their obscure age, could not see every thing, but exclayme against your
selves, who in this floorishing time and blessed opportunity, will see nothing.
If those ancient fathers of our Law had lived now, all had been well, but if
you had been extant then, all had been worse. For neither can you do what
you should, nor will let others do what they would for the more orderly
explication of the Law. Such is the untowardly disposition of this scornful
age of ours, wherein no man prayseth any more, then he thinks himself able
to perform, but seeks to cloak his own ignorance by deriding other men's
skill, being himself so simple in other men's judgment, and wise in his own
conceit, that when he has spoken without measure to a doosen of points, all
is not worth a penywoorth of pinnes: for neither himself can well understand
his unjointed discourse, nor the hearers conceive his vncohaerent iangling.

But I fear me, I have moved their patience, whom I most desire to be
patient, and to suffer without grudging Scholars to be Lawyers, as they wish
some Lawyers to become better Scholars. Which if it were so, then would there
not be so many vpstart Rabulae Forenses, which under a praetence of Law,
become altogether lawless, to the continual molestation of ignorant men,
and general ouercharging of the country, with an ouerflowing multitude of
seditious cauyllers: who, when their fathers have made some lewd bargayne in
the country, run immediately to the Innes of Court, and having in seven years
space met with six French words, home they ride like brave Magnificoes, and
dashe their poor neighbors children quyte out of countenance, with Villen in
gros, Villen regardant, and Tenant per le courtesy: much like the swarming
rabble of our coystrell curates, which when their fathers have either compounded
with their Landlord for some pelting vicaredge, or paid ready money for a
better parsonage, convey themselves to Cambridge or Oxford, where having once
known the price of an Admission, Salting, and Matriculation, with the
intertayning of Freshmenne in the Rhetorike schools, they return whence they
came, with their mothers wit and fathers learning carefully kept together,
that when they have wearied men with reading skarce true English on the
Sunday, all the week after they may plague poor boys with false Latin in a
belfraye. Or else, if the old Parson be not yet dead, they stay a little
longer, and under a precise cloak of Divinity, (notwithstanding they be
Arch-asses in all humanity) creep in among Batchlers of arts with cross
caps on their gross pates, and sheep skins cast over their lubberlike
shoulders, whereof they are more proud then ever was any fool of his bell and
bauble: then come they home to ring their belles, to the utter disgrace of the
Universities, the perpetual plague of the Country, and everlasting shame of
the corrupted Clergy.

Yet I hear say, that some great lawyers have had little learning, and some
good churchmen have been no great clearkes: Whereunto I answer, that it were
but folly to contemn ordinary means, because some men have extraordinary
gifts, and if those rare qualities of nature had been directed by precepts of
art, I think they had proved much more excellent.

But to return thither from whence I came, and to make an end with that
wherewith I began, thus much I dare be bold to affirm, notwithstanding the
praeiudicate conceit of twenty Ciuilians, and as many common Lawyers to the
contrary, that if the Ciuyll law be elegant and delectable, the Common law is
neither barbarous nor unsavory. For the volumes, theyrs be far greater, and
much more infinite. For the style, it is more easily determined that both be
bad, then which is better: and yet both Bartolus his Latin, and Brytton his
French, in some men's judgment is therefore sufficiently elegant, because it is
fully significant. For the matter, all is Law, although not all one Law: and
he that lyketh the one, let him leave the other, or join them both together,
if his leisure be so good, and his ability correspondent.

It is not my meaning to disgrace the one, or advance the other in comparison
wise, by superlatiue words, and hyperbolicall amplifications: I have yenough
if I have this granted, that our Common law is as easy, as short, as
elegant, and as delightsome as is the Cyuill, which every man extolleth, and I
am well content, as long as I see these two things in credit with other men,
whereunto I have already betaken my self. For, as for Fortescues comparing of
them both together and praeferring of ours, it makes all with me, yet I urge
not all: albeit I think, as by office he was a Judge in Court of conscience,
so in this Treatise he dealt not summo iure, with the Cyuilians, but
reasonably and with (...).

But the Cyuill law will some man say, is both in it self more constant and
philosophical, and also by Justinian more methodically, and by later writers
more eloquently put down.

I said before my meaning was not to enter into any needles discourse of
comparison between thease two laws, yet because thease be objections of
latter time, I must praesume a little further. And first, for the constancy and
philosophical foundation of the Romayne Law, which Justinian calls the
Cyuill law (...), (as Homer is called the Poet) the name, Cyuill, being common
to the several laws of any peculiar kingdom: no doubt, this objection was
made by them, that heard somewhat at the University of the Cyuill law, but
never read any thing of our Common law. They have Plebiscita, Senatus
consulta, Principum placita, Magistratuum edicta, Responsa prudentum: We have
ruled Cases, Maximaes and Principles, Customs and Vsages both general and
special; and lastly, continual reformation of new abuses by Statutes and
Acts of Parliament. Now let any one skillful in both, judge of the reason and
certeinty of either, and remember withal, what Aristotle says of the
imperfection of all Laws, least he impute that as a special blemishe to our
Law, which is a general want incident to the nature of every Law.

There is no Lawmakers so provident, as that he can in particularity foresee,
and, as it were, by some prophetical spyrite foretell and praeuent the
infinite variety of future inconveniences, by application of so many peculiar
prouisoes, and special constitutions, but must of necessity leave his Law
general, referring the addition, detraction, or mitigation of words, unto
the conscience and discretion of the learned and understanding Judge. Thus much
would I have remembered, and then let that Law be accused as least sufficient
which is most general, and therefore not so well able to praeuent imminent
myschiefes.

For, as for the method of Justinian, it does not so well content the
Cyuilians, but that they daily contend with new innouations and continual
printing of fresh methodes, to bring it unto better order. Yet if it be such,
as some say it is, then I say, we have our Common law penned after the self
same method two hundredth years ago, by that famous and learned Judge Henry
de Bracton, skillful in both thease Laws. And if it be not Justinians order
that thease men fancy, but rather the late Abridgements of finer heads, let
them not then with reuyling speeches discourage them, which hope to see the
Common law of England brought to as good and easy a method, as ever was any.

For the style of thease late Cyuilians, which is somewhat more labored and
less unseemly then that of their forefathers, we may as justly say that
there is the like diversity to be manifestly perceived between the homely
speech of our ancient Lawyers, and the finer phrase of late writers in our
Common law. Words are like leaves, as Horace reports: leaves spring
before Summer, and fall before VVinter; and the same inconstancy is in words.
Let us therefore use that phrase which is most usual: and though in knowledge
and conceit we contend to be singular, yet in uttering our thoughts, let
all be made partakers.

But lo, I see on the sudden this extrauagant discourse abruptly cut off by
the importunate exclamations of a raging and fireyfaced Aristotelean; who
seeing Ramus his Logike in some estimation, makes small accoumpt of his own
credit in uttering such impatient speeches.

Good God, what a world is this? What an age do we now live in? A Sopister
in times past was a title of credit, and a word of commendation; now what
more odious? Aristotle then the father of Philosophy; now who less favored?
Ramus rules abroad, Ramus at home, and who but Ramus? Antiquity is nothing but
Dunsicality, and our forefathers inventions unprofitable trumpery. Newfangled,
youngheaded, harebrayne boys will needs be Masters that never were
Scholars; prate of method, who never knew order; rail against Aristotle
as soon as they are crept out of the shell. Hereby it comes to pass that every
Cobbler can cogge a Syllogism, every Carter crake of Propositions. Hereby is
Logike profaned, and lies prostitute, removed out of her Sanctuary, robbed
of her honor, left of her lovers, rauyshed of strangers, and made common to
all, which before was proper to Schoolmen, and only consecrated to
Philosophers.

I have heard the like speeches to thease before this, and I look for no
better hereafter: I never esteemed of those, and I little care for thease. Yet,
good master Quidditary, if you had been as diligent in meditation of the
cause, as you have been over earnest in admiration of the effect, the
knowledge of the one would have removed the straungenes of the other. For, if
the wisdom of the ancient Sophi be now degenerate into the idle subtleties
of the newfound Sophistae, what marvel is it, if when the thing is not
aunswering to the name, the name become odious?

Ramus does not so rule, but that he can suffer reason to over rule him. Old
doting graybeards talk much of Baralipton, whilst youngheaded boys bear
away Logike. They think much that a boy should conceive that in a week, which
they could skarce perceive in a year: but more, that their old learning
should be corrected by new teaching, and their labor lost with so little
profiting.

Cobblers be men, why therefore not Logicians? and Carters have reason, why
therefore not Logike? Bonum, quo communius, eo melius, you say so your selves,
and yet the best thing in Logike you make to be the woorst, in thinking it
less commendable, because it is more common. A spytefull speech, and a meaning
no less malicious, to lock up Logike in secreate corners, who, as of her
self she is generally good to all, so will she particularly be bound to
none. Touching the gryefe you conceive for the contempt of Aristotle, it is
needles and unnecessary: for, where Aristotle deserves praise, who more
commends him then Ramus? Where he has toomuch, Ramus cutteth off, where too
little, adds, where any thing is inuerted, he brings it to his own proper
place, and that according to the direction of Aristotle his rules. Then,
whereas there can be no Art both invented and perfected by the same man, if
Aristotle did invent Logike, as he persuades you, he did not perfect it, if
he did not finish it, there is some imperfection, if there be any want, why
then allow you all?

But alas, see how far I have ouershot my mark: it is more then time to make
an end of this raunging digression. I end therefore, yet with an endless
desire, that no less profit may be perceived by others in practicing, then I
had pleasure in perusing this last explication of Ramus his Logike.

Abraham France.

Faults escaped.
Page: 6, a: line, 3: after (...) read, of (...): Page: 12, b, line, 11: for
pius, read, puis: Page: 15. a: line, 23: for deius, read, deius: Page: 19: b:
line, last but two, for, or, read, ou: Page: 26, b: line, last but 4: for
miguarde, read mignarde: Page: 39: a: line, last but 8: for essigne, read,
assign: Page: 40: a: line, 2: for reddit read, redit: Page: 45: a: line, last
but 6: for le, read, de: Page: 48: a: line, 10: for his, read, her, and line,
11: for her, read his: Page: 56: b: the first four lines of the 13 chapter be
out of their proper place a little: Page: 61: a: line, 21: for Britton, 17: read,
Britton 17: and elsewhere: Page: 62: b: line, last but four, for possuit read,
posuit: Page: 73: a: line, last but one, for cause, read, cause: Page: 86: b:
line, last: for men's, read, men's: Page: 99: b: line, last but one, for the word
that is blotted out, read, a plague, a torment: Page: 108: a: line, 19: for
n'est, read, est: Page: 110: a: line, 13: for there, read, then: Page: 113. a:
line, last but two, for, and syllogism, read, and a syllogism. Page: 113: b:
line, 21: for, the, read, this. Page: 119: a: line, last but two, for learnings,
read, learning. Page: 122: b: line, 8: for, appears: read, apeareth. Page: 128:
a: line, last but flue, for, les, read, lease. Page: 129. b: line, 17: for de,
read, le. Page 137. a: line, last, for 4. 4. 4. read, 7. 7. 7.

Some other faults there be: but thease be the greatest.

THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE FIRST BOOK.
What Logike is. Logike is an Art of Reasoning. Annotations.
ALthough this word, Logike, be generally received of Englishmen, and used
even of them that know no Logike at all, yet for that it was a stranger at the
first, I think it not impertinent to seek from whence it came, and what it
does betoken: (...), therefore in Greek signifies Reason, of (...), is
derived this word, (...) that is to say, Reasonable, or belonging to Reason,
which although it be an adjective, and must have some such like word, as
Art, Science, or Faculty, to be adjoined unto it as his substantive, yet is
it substantiuely taken and used in Latin, as also in our English tongue.

Sturmius and some ^ers, derive this word Logike from (...) as (...)
betokens ^eech or talk: whose opinion, although the other name of this Act
(which is (...), of (...), to speak or talk) do in some respect seem to
confirm, yet for that the whole force and virtue of Logike consists in
reasoning, not in talking: and because reasoning may be without talking, as in
solitary meditations and deliberations with a man's self, some hold the first
deriuation as most significant.

Dialectica and Logica, says Hotoman, dictae sunt a sermon sieve oratione, sed
illa proprie ab eo genere sermonis, qui cum altero interrogando and respondendo
commiscetur. Fictum enim verbum est (...) quod est, verba cum altero commutare,
colloqui, disputare, sermocinari, sermones caedere. Nam cum philosophoru^
consuetudo haec esset, vt de rebus ad arts suas pertinentibus saepe inter se
commentarentur, eruditas illas collocutiones, (...) (vt Laertius in Platone
scribit) apellarunt, earumque habendarum artem, Dialecticam, qua de causa
eandem Laertius eodem loco definit artem sermonis, per quam ex eorum quibuscu^
sermo est interrogatione, and responsione aliquid vel confirmatur vel
refellitur. Quod cum ita sit, difficile dictu est, dialecticae nomen non eius
sermonis esse proprium, qui in dialogis habetur, cum perpetua non continuatur
oration, sed in rebus singulis insistitur and intelligitur quid quisque concedat
aut abnuat, vt ex concessis disputatio concludatur. Et infra.

Ex quo intelligi potest, cum and Graecorum and Latinorum consuetudin^e, nihil
quicqual^ inter dialecticae and Logicae verbum, preter vocis sonum intersit,
videri tamen Logicae vocabulum, ad eam disserendi rationem quae perpetua
oratione constat, and qua hodie plurimum vtimur, ac multo magis ad eas
disputationes quae literis mandantur, accommodatum esse. Thus far Hottoman.

Some others have said, that this art may be called (...), of the internal
form, essence, and nature thereof consisting in reason: but (...) of the
external manner and order of woorking, which is commonly done by speech and
talk, as that word imports, although Ramus use them both as one, following
Plato herein, who expounds (...), by (...), which is to use reason.

Diogenes Laertius in the life of Plato, writes, that Plato was the first who
called this Art Dialectica, and Valla reports that Aristotle was the first
that named it Logica.

(...), has a certain relation to accounts, whereupon (...), and (...), as
also (...) it self whence both they come, are used for accompting and
deducting of sums, and by a Metaphorical sense are applied to Logike, but
especially to Disposition the second part of Logike, where discoursing and
drawing of one reason from another is put down. But use has accepted them in
a general sense for the whole Art of Logike, as we shall see hereafter the
like in those Latin words, Disserere and disputare.

[Is in Art:] An Art is a Methodicall disposition of true and coherent
precepts, for the more easy perceiving and better remembering of the same: and
this Methodicall or orderly disposition of diverse precepts is taught in
Logike, as perteining essentially thereunto. So that Logike was deservedly
called the Art of Arts, the iustrument of instruments, the hand of
Philosophy, because by the help thereof, not only the grounds of natural
reason are artificially put down, but all other Arts also are made to be Arts,
as we shall hereafter show when we come to the place appointed for the due
explication of Method.

It is therefore said here, that Logike is an Art, to distinguish artificial
Logike from natural reason. Artificial Logike is gathered out of diverse
examples of natural reason, which is not any Art of Logike, but that engraven
gift and faculty of wit and reason shining in the particular discourses of
several men, whereby they both invent, and orderly dispose, thereby to judge
of that they have invented. This as it is to no man given in full perfection,
so diverse have it in sundry measure. And because the true note and token
resembling nature, must be esteemed by the most excellent nature, therefore
the precepts of artificial Logike both first were collected out of, and
always must be conformable unto those sparks of natural reason, not lurking
in the obscure head-peeces of one or two loytering Friars, but manifestly
appearing in the monumentes and disputations of excellent autors. And then is
this Logike of Art more certain then that of nature, because of many
particulers in nature, a general and infallible constitution of Logike is put
down in Art. So that, Art, which first was but the scholar of nature, is now
become the maystres of nature, and as it were a Glass wherein she seeing and
viewing herself, may wash out those spots and blemishes of natural
imperfection. For there is no one particular nature so constant and absolute,
but by examining and perusing her own force, she may be bettered: no nature
so weak and imperfit, which by the help of Art is not confirmed.

Hottoman in the third Chapter of his first book has these words: Estne
igitur dialectica quaedam naturalis, quaedam artificiosa? nequa quam: sed eius
initia and semina quaedam in hominum mentibus natura ingenerauit, quae cum
praeceptis ac disciplina, tum vsu and assiduitate excoluntur. Eademque cum
aliaru^ artiu^ omniu^, tum praecipue Musicae ratio est. Na^ omnibus a natura
rudis quaeda^ cane^di facultas data est: ab art vero, qua^ naturae notatio
atque animaduersio peperit, certa ratio traditur. No^ enim ars natural imitatur
tantummodo, verumetiam, vt veteres docuerunt, confirmat and amplificat:
causamque, cur quidque, vel hoc vel illo modo fieri debeat, reddit, quod
praestare natura non potest, eaque sola re artifex ab inscio discernitur.

Wasserleider therefore in seeking to reform Ramus his Logike, bewrays his
own ignorance; for having first generally defined Logike to be an Art, he
afterward divides it into natural Logike and artificial, as though the
natural faculty of reason were an Art of reasoning, which is contrary to all
reason, and includes in it self a manifest contradiction. To conclude this
point, there ought nothing to be put down in Art, whereof there is no ground
in nature, for ars imitari debet naturam, and as that paynter is most cunning
who can most lively express his face whose counterfaite he is to draw, so
he that teaches Logike must set forth no idle conceiptes of extrauagant
brains, but the true use of natural reason and understanding: which is a
necessary confutation of that absurdity mayntayned by Logicians, and invented
in Cloisters, that ficta, yea falsa exempla, be good enough to make precepts
plain, whereas Plato in Theaeteto calls examples, (...) sponsores and
praedes rations, tanquam ab eis fideiussum persolueretur. And Aristotle in the
eight of his Topikes requires such examples as Homer can afford, not such as
the pelting Poet Chaerilus did invent.

[Of Reasoning:] This our English word, Reasoning, is more proper and fit to
express the nature of Logike, then either that other word, of disputing,
derived from disputare, or the like, as disserere, and docere, used of Cicero
and Melanchton: although I know that Beurehusius stands in defense of these
words, disserere, and disputare, which Ramus also uses: and I am not much to
mislike them in respect of any other Latin word, yet not altogether to
compare them with this our English word of reasoning. For the word, disputing,
which comes of disputare, it is Metaphorical, as Varro reports, and so is
disserere: the one being borrowed of the Uinemayster, the other fet from the
sower: for as the first cutteth off superfluous branches in his Uine, which is
properly disputare, so the other disperseth his seed in diverse places, and not
confusedly throws all on one heap, which is the natural signification of
this word, disserere. Now because the Logician cutteth of all idle and
unnecessary curiosities, whereof there is no use in reasoning, seuereth truth
from falsehood, that which follows from that which follows not, order from
confusion, and handles diverse arguments and axioms in diverse places
distinctly, not every thing in every place disorderly: therefore has he
friendly presumed upon the good nature of these two countrymen, in using their
words of husbandry, to express a more elegant conceit, although at the
first not properly, yet by continuance of time, so conveniently, as that the
Metaphorical sense is now better known than the natural signification. Yet
for that both these rehearsed properties of Logike, be rather particular
functions of method, than general operations of the whole art, it is plain,
that this word disputing, with his original disputare, and that, disserere,
if you respect the natural signification thereof, cannot express the whole
nature of Logike. Although I am not ignorant, as I said before, that Ramus and
his interpreter Beurhusius, apply these words to the general use of this
art, not restraining them to those two functions belonging to method: whose
judgment as use allows, so I do not reject, yet by their leave leave their
Latin words behind our English.

Melanchton uses this word, docere: Docere, is to teach, and Logike is an art
of teaching: but then mark what I mean by teaching, for you must not
restrain the signification of it in such sort, as though there were no
teaching but only in schools among Philosophers and schoolemaisters, or in
pulpits among doctors and divines: but generally, he teaches, whosoever
makes any other man know that, whereof before he was ignorant, whether he
do it by explication and illustration, or proof and conclusion: and thus if
we take this word, docere, it is somewhat more general than disputare, or
disserere, put down by Tully and Ramus: yet not so ample, as the nature of
this art, whose virtue is seen not only in teaching others, but also in
learning thy self, in discoursing, thinking, meditating, and framing of thine
own, as also in discussing, perusing, searching and examining what others have
either delivered by speech, or put down in writing: this is called Analysis,
that Genesis, and in them both consists the whole use of Logike.

As far then as man's reason can reach, so far extends it self the use
and virtue of this art of reasoning, whose most ample and almost infinite use
and power, has never had in any tongue a more general and yet proper name,
than this of reasoning, as we use it now adays. Men reason in schools as
Philosophers, in Westminster as Lawyers, in Court as Lords, in Country as
worldly husbands: whatsoever it be, nay whatsoever thou can imagine to be,
although it be not, never was, nor never shall be, yet by reason it is
invented, taught, ordered, confirmed: as the description of fame in Virgil, of
famine in Ovid, of Elysian fields, of Styx, of Acheron, of the golden apples,
and a thousand such poetical imaginations. And therefore Logike has been of
a loong time vntollerably abused by those miserable Sorbonists, and dunsicall
Quidditaries, who thought there was no reasoning without, Arguitur quod sic:
Probatur quod non: no part of Logike without Ergo and Igitur. Whereas indeed
the true use of Logike is as well apparent in simple plain, and easy
explication, as in subtle, strict, and concised probation. Read Homer, read
Demosthenes, read Virgill, read Cicero, read Bartas, read Torquato Tasso,
read that most worthy ornament of our English tongue the Countess of
Penbrookes Arcadia, and therein see the true effects of natural Logike which
is the ground of artificial, far different from this rude and barbarous kind
of outworne sophistry: which if it had any use at all, yet this was all, to
feed the vain humors of some curious heads in obscure schools, whereas the
Art of reasoning has somewhat to do in every thing, and nothing is any thing
without this one thing. Same Arts are appliable only so some certain
subject, but Logike is scientia scientiarum, as I said before, not tied to one
thing, but apt for any thing, free from all, yet fit for all, framing orderly,
proouing strongely, expounding plainly, persuading forcibly, any Art, any
cause, any question, any man whatsoever.

What then, will some man say, need we any other Arts, if Logike alone can
suffice for all? I answer, Logike alone is sufficient to help all, yet
Logike suffiseth not for all. Logike ^elleth how to reason, dispute, examine,
prove, or disprooue any thing* but the thing that is to be reasoned,
disputed, examined, proved or disprooued, that Logike cannot afford, and
therefore it is to be sought for at such Arts, as profess such things, so
that Logike is profitable unto all, and yet not any of them unprofitable: but
even as they without this be mangled and confused, so this without them is
bare and naked. Logike is necessary for a divine, yet Logike yields no
divinity: but when a Preacher has by continual perusing of the sacred
Scriptures furnished himself with store of matter, then Logike will teach him
how to teach others, and not only that, but also how to learn himself, to
defend, to confute, to instruct, to reprehend. Logike shows generally what an
argument is, and how to use an argument, but the several arguments are else
where to be had. For as Arithmetike teaches to count money, not to find
money, and Geometry to measure ground, not to purchase ground: so Logike can
tell you how to reason of things, and yet reserueth the peculier doctrine of
the same things to the several professors thereof. I do not deny, but one
and the same man may purchase ground, measure ground, and also reason of the
same ground, but he purchases it by one Art, measures it by another, and
reasons of it by a third, he purchases it as a worldling, measures it as a
Geometer, reasons of it as a Logician: and although one man may be furnished
with all these three properties, yet every Art must have her own by the law
of Justice, confusion must be avoided, and the precepts of every Art
distinctly put down, although the use of the same precepts may be common and
concur altogether in one man, if one man be skillful in all these Arts.

Ramus adds this word, well, in the end of the definition, which me thinks
were as well left out as put in, for although it may seem to sever the
perfection of Art from the imbecilitie of nature, yet indeed, the very name of
an Art, includes this word, well: every Art being an habit of doing that
well whereof it is an Art. Howsoever it be, it appears, that to reason well
and artificially, is the duty and end of Logike: for it is not essential
unto Logike always to persuade, no more then to a Physician always, to heal,
but to perform those things which are prescribed in his Art, although the
hoped event and success do not always ensue.

The second Chapter. Of the parts of Logike, and the several kinds of
Arguments.
THere be two parts of Logike, Exposition of the nature of arguments, and
Disposition of the same. Exposition is the first part of Logike which
expounds the diverse kinds of arguments by their several affections and
mutual relations one to another, which for that it helps to invent
arguments, is called Invention. An argument is any several conceit apt to
argue that whereunto in reason it is referred.

First, an Argument is either inhaerent, or fet elsewhere. Inhaerent is that
which is invented by consideration of the nature of the thing argued: and is
either original and first or secondary and derived. First is that which has
his beginning of it self. It is agreeable or disagreeable. Agreeable is that
which agrees with the thing which it does argue. The agreeable is either fully
agreeable, or agreeable in part: fully agreeable is that, where there is a
greater cohaerence and affinity between the argument and the thing argued:
fully agreeable is first, the cause and the thing caused.

Annotations.
THe Art of Logike, as is declared already, lays down the right use of
natural reason: and this that we call showing or declaring how to reason, is
no giving of reason to him that had it not, but an applying or directing of the
mind to the view and contemplation of that, which of it self it might
perceive, if it were turned and framed thereunto. For, as Plato says, 7. de
repub. the truth of the things comprised in Arts is as naturally propounded to
the view of the mind, as colors be to the sight of the eye: and therefore
Aristotle in his first book of Elenchs has set down that which common
experience does confirm, that every common person or silly soul uses Logike
in some part, and practices of himself by natural instinct that which
artificial Logike does prescribe in her several rules and constitutions.
Artificial Logike then is the polyshing of natural wit, as discovering the
validity of every reason, be it necessary, whereof comes science: or
contingent, whence proceeds opinion. Although I know there is a great
controversy and contention among the ancient Philosophers, concerning these
two: whilst some of them maintain only Science, some others hold with
opinion only. Heraclitus called opinion the falling sickness, for that
thereby men many times fell headlong into diverse delusions and erroneous
conceiptes. So in like manner, the Stoikes held this for one of their Paradoxes,
that Sapiens nihil opinatur, a wise man is not opinatiue, a wise man never
judges according to opinion. On the other side Anaxarchus was of this opinion,
that all man's judgment was but opinion, and that his understanding could
perfitly understand nothing, which the Pyrrhonians taught after him, and the
new Academikes: and a man may conjecture that Plato and Aristotle sometimes
inclyned that way; for Plato in his book called Timaeus, ascribes truth to
God and Gods children, leaving nothing but truelike to mortal men, and
Aristotle in the second of his Metaphisikes compares man's understanding in
respect of perfect knowledge of truth to the dazeling eyes of a Batt in the
broad day light. But yet notwithstanding these forealledged places, both Plato
and Aristotle have elsewhere evidently declared that man is capable both of
Science and certain Knowledge, as in things contained in Arts: and also of
opinion, as in infinite affairs which are daily incident: and this was long
before their time, elegantly put down by the famous Poet and Logician
Parmenides.

(...),
(...),
(...).
Oportet vero te omnia nosse,
Tum veritatis suasufacilis sententiam,
Tum vero mortalium opiniones, quarum non amplius fid^s vera.
Because of these two kinds of conceiptes, Aristotle would^ needs make two
Logikes, the one for Science, the other for Opinion: wherein (if so it may be
said of so great a Philosopher) it seems he was but an Opinator. For
although among things conceived and known, some be necessary and infallible,
some doubtful and contingent, yet the Art of Knowing and Reasoning of the
same (I mean Logike) is only one and the same, as the sight of the eye in
perceiving all colors, be they chaungeable or not chaungeable. And as well
might a man say there must be two arts of Grammar (if Grammar be a distinct
Art) one for courtly speech, an other for country talk: or two distinct arts
of making of cups, one for golden cups, an other for cups of silver, as two
Logikes, one for infallible Arguments, and another for Contingent. Therefore
one Logike suffiseth to dispute of all things, necessary or contingent
whatsoever. Yet this one Logike her self in respect of her precepts is always
necessary and never contingent, for otherwise it were no Art, but the
application of it may be in contingent causes as well as necessary.

[Two parts of Logike:] The Stoicall division of Logike into Invention and
Judgment, although both Aristotle himself seem to commend it in some places,
as in 8. Topi. 3: Rhet: and Tully and Quintilian do altogether observe it* is
yet reprehended of some, who think that Judgment is not any several part of
Logike, but rather an adi^ct or property generally incident to the whole Art:
because, say they, there is use of judgment even in invention. But in my
fancy they might better have found some fault with these words, Judgment,
and Invention, then reprehended the distribution, which is most true, if they
consider what the Stoikes did understand by these words. For by the first
part called (...), they intend the explication of the diverse kinds, natures,
affections, relations, and proprieties of several arguments, which because it
helps invention, is called Invention, as I said before: although indeed a
man shall no more find arguments by this first part ^f Logike, then he shall
get Latin words by Etymology the first part of Grammar: which made me alter
the words, as not proper, but rather borrowed from the Mathematikes, where two*
or three numbers being received or put down, a third or fourth number
proportionable is found out, which of them is called (...), Invention.

And by (...)* Iudicium, Judgment, is meant nothing else, but a Disposition,
ordering or placing and settling of these several arguments already invented,
to the intent that a man may the better judge of them, so that here Judgment
is taken for Disposition, the effect for the cause, for Judgment arises of
the ordering and disposing of arguments.

They might therefore have changed the words, and kept the thing, which yet
they have not done: but brought in new divisions of Logike, correspondent to
the settling and placing of Aristotle's Logical discourses in his book called
Organon: sometimes into three parts, as Apodicticall, Topicall, Elenchticall,
sometimes into two, by name Apodicticall and Dialecticall* Topicall, or
Dialecticall they will have to be a several kind of Logike by probable
arguments. Apodicticall, that which disputes by necessary conclusions, as
though there were not one and the same Art, Science, and order of reasoning
both by probable and necessary arguments, as I said before, and the self
same places of arguments both in the one and in the other, as causes,
effects, subjects, adjuncts, etc. both contingent and necessary. For, as for
that third kind of Logike, which they call Elenchticall, seeing it is no
Logike at all, but rather the abuse and peruersion of Logike, I see no cause
why it should be taught in Logike: yet if any man think that the true
precepts of Logike once known, will not be sufficient to des^ry the
falsenesse of sophistical argumentations, he may for his contentation seek
for a full discourse thereof out of some commentary, and not ouercharge the
Art it self with unnecessary institutions. I grant there is something
profitable in the Elenches, as also in some other tractates of the same kind,
but if we shall put down all in Logike, for true Logike, which does in any
respect help Logike, we shall never make an end of Logike.

[Exposition is the first part:] As in Grammar, Aetymologie concerns several
words, and Syntaxis the due coherence of the same, so Exposition the first
part of Logike, declares the particular affection and nature of every several
argument, and Disposition the second part, by ordering and settling the same,
causes judgment and understanding. And as several words be in respect of
Grammar, so severed reasons in respect of Logike, and as of many words is made
speech, so of diverse arguments arise axioms.

Exposition and Disposition are not two several arts of Logike, as though we
should have one Logike to expound the natures of several arguments, and
another to judge of the same by Disposition, but they be two essential parts
of the whole, which joined together make one true Logike.

The doctrine of Invention or Exposition is general, and not restrained only
to the finding out of a Medium, which they commonly take for the only
argument, but absolutely and universally appliable to the inuenting of any
thing, either true or fained whatsoever.

Again, the arguments in Invention must be considered severally, singlely,
and alone, then after to be disposed and ordered by certain precepts, thereby
to judge of the truth or falsenesse of the same: as for example.

Paris A good shepherd. These two singly put down as two arguments, to wit,
the subject and the adiunct, are afterward disposed in an axiom, to judge of
the truth thereof, as thus: Paris is no good shepherd.

But because this proposition is contingent and doubtful (for the arguments
be but in part agreeable) therefore it is confirmed by another argument, that
is to say, by an effect and woorking of Paris, I mean that which Thomalin
puts down in July, in these words. But nothing such thylk shepherd was
whom Ida hill did bear:
That left his flock to fetch a less, whose love he bought too dear.


So then, here be three several arguments, or two joined in the axiom
before, and the third following in these verses of Thomalin: which third they
call, Medium, or third argument, thus:

1 Paris: 2 A good shepherd. 3 To leave his flock to fetch a less.
Whereof it is concluded in this wise syllogistically, by disioyning the two
first arguments, the subject and adiunct, Paris, and, The good shepherd. He
that leaves his flock to fetch a less, is no good shepherd: But Paris did
leave his flock to fetch a less, Therefore Paris is no good shepherd.


That which they call Medium, and third argument, is, as it were, an Arbiter
honorarius, a determiner, a reconciler, a days man: which if it agree with
both the other arguments, makes the conclusion affirmative: but negative, if
with one only, as in the former example of Paris, the Medium, the arbiter, the
determiner, is that effect of Paris, To leave his flock to fetch a less:
which because it is agreeable with the nature of Paris, but is flatly repugnant
to the duty of a good shepherd, therefore is the conclusion negative, Paris
is no good sheepeheard. So in Master Ploidens reports, fol. 474. Saunders is a
murderer. The Medium is that effect of Saunders, to minister venim to the
intent to poison: which, because it agrees as well with the nature of murder,
as the affection of Saunders, makes the conclusion affirmative, thus: He that
does minister venim to poison any one, is a murderer: But Saunders ministered
venim to poison one, Therefore Saunders is a murderer.


In this order, first of single arguments we make axioms: which axioms, if of
themselves they be perceived and granted, they be straightway judged as true
or false. And this is the first part of judgment in axioms, called
axiomaticall, determining only truth and falsenes in propositions or axioms.
Now if these propositions be doubtful, then thereof be made questions, which
are to be proved by third arguments, fet from the affections of the other two
which were joined in the axiom, and lastly are to be concluded by syllogism,
the only judge of all coherence or consequence: as finally, Method has only
to deal with the ordering and settling of many axioms, thereby to give sentence
of methodicall proceeding or unorderly confusion. And therefore I see no reason
why I should with the common Logicians, cho^ in Canons, Maximaes, and rules of
consequence, as they call them, applying them to every argument of invention,
seeing that syllogismes, and only syllogismes are the true and only rules of
consequence and inconsequence, as I said before.

The occasion, as I think, of this their error, hereof arose: because if an
Enthymeme be denied, we commonly confirm it by some axiom, which indeed is
nothing else, but the supplying of the part wanting, as either the Mayor, or
Minor, as they term them, or else some prosyllogisme. And this rule, Canon or
Maxima, being so supplied, a plain syllogism proceeds, the only
determiner of coherence. And as all the force of consequence is in syllogismes,
so all the virtue of arguing is in the several affection of every argument to
the thing argued: which affection is truly and artificially put down in
Invention: in such sort that from every definition, and precept in Invention,
such rules, maximaes, canons, axioms, consectaries, corollaries, or howsoever
you term them, may easily be deduced: and, when necessity requires, shall
be of us put down distinctly in their several places. For, as for most of
those outworne maximaes hudled up in schools, they be either unnecessary, and
may be easily perceived by the definitions and explications of the arguments,
or else not generally true, but in part: and therefore in no wise to be put
down in art, but rather to be reserved for Commentaries, as that, Quod efficit
tale, magis est tale, etc. which cannot stand, but by a number of frivolous and
sophistical distinctions. Let him read Beurhusius, if any list to see the true
canons of Ramus his Logike, compared at large with these lame rules. It shall
suffice at this time to understand, that ye true maximaes, or canons of
Invention, are nothing else but certain rules concerning the several force or
affection of arguments: The canons of axioms, such precepts as declare the use
and force of axioms: and so, in a word, the canons of syllogisms and method,
are precepts touching the consequence and inconsequence of the one, and the
perspicuitie or confusion of the other. Neither are there any rules of
consequence at all, but only those of syllogisms. I have in my text kept my
self only to such maximaes both in Invention and Disposition, as are put
down orderly by Ramus, and are essentially belonging to this art: yet for the
satisfiyng of the expectation of some young Logicians, somewhat unacquainted
with this newfound Logike, as it pleases some to term it, I will hereafter,
as occasion shall serve, put down in the annotations, some of the other stamp.

But here may a doubt arise? For, seeing that every axiom and rule of
Invention is a part of Judgment (because it is an axiom, and every axiom is
of judgment) it may seem that Invention and Judgment be not distinct parts,
but rather, as was objected before out of Carpentar, confounded the one with
the other. I answer, the rules and precepts of Invention be indeed axioms,
and therefore consequently proceed from Judgment: but so, as you must take
them to be the fruits of Judgment already showed in ordering the axioms and
rules of Invention: or examples of Judgment, teaching the part of Invention:
Not as though these precepts were put down in Invention to teach a man how to
judge, either axiomatically, syllogistically, or methodically, which only
belongs to the second part of Logike called Judgment or Disposition: And if
you so take them, then every axiom is not straight way a part of Judgment:
but only such rules and precepts, as teach to make, order, and frame axioms.
For otherwise, every precept of every art, because it is an axiom, should be
taken for a part of Judgment in Logike: whereas indeed they be but the
fruits and examples of that Logical judgment appeering in the orderly
constitution of every art. And so in Invention, every rule is an axiom, every
rule does judge, but every rule teaches not how to frame an axiom, every rule
shows not how to judge, which only is the peculiar duty of Logical
judgment.

The art and doctrine of every argument, is distinct, firm, constant, and
immutable: yet the affection of arguments may be altered, changed, and
diversely considered, either in the same things diversely compared among
themselves, or in one thing referred to diverse, as in those examples, put down
by Beurhusius and Talaeus,

God Created man. So the affection is of the Cause procreant with the effect.
Preserves man. Cause conseruant with the effect Is not man. Disparats among
themselves. Is not like man. Unlikes among themselves.

Where the things be as they were, I mean, God, and Man, which are here
compared together, yet the diverse kinds of relations and respects, make the
self same things have diverse names and titles, according to their several
and diverse affections.

In like manner also it is, if one thing be referred to many, and drawn, as it
were, through the places of arguments, although some arguments be not incident
to some things:

As, Man referred unto God, his maker, has ye affection of Effect procreated.
Body, his matter, Effect material. Reason his form, Effect formed. Gods
glory, his end, Effect final. Actions, his effects, Cause. Body, his part,
Whole. World, his whole, Part. Living creature, general, Special. Paul,
special, General. Earth, subject, Adiunct. Riches, adjuncts, Subject. Tree,
his disparate, Disparate. Beast, contrary, Contrary. Homo ab humo, the
notation. Name interpreted. Reasonable, living, The thing defined. Creature,
definition, Angel, equal, Equal. Blub, like, Like.

Yet the art is certain and immutable, for, that which is a cause, can never
be an effect in the same respect and relation, which relation changing,
alters the argument, not the art.

[An Argument:] Every thing has his several name according to his natural
propriety, or by the imposition and fancy of man, but Logike respecting a
second use in these several things, has given them an artificial and
secondary name. As, fire has this his name usually known: but because it is
sometimes considered of Logicians, as a cause of heat, therefore has it his
second note and name, and is called a Cause, one of the arguments, for that it
argues heat as his effect, and so in others. And by this affection we learn
whether one argument agree or disagree with another, and how it agrees,
whether as a cause with his effect (which is an absolute and full agreement) or
as an adiunct with his subject, which is but an agreement in part, and after a
certain manner, and so of the rest. So that arguments be nothing else, but
singularum rerum affectiones extra collocationem consideratae, quibus ad
arguendum sunt affectae and comparatae, sed vt Grammatica non voces, non vocum
significationes, sed vocum affectiones, sic Logica non res, non rerum naturas,
sed rerum inter se habitudines explicat. Itaque omnia argumenta sunt relata:
sed quia istae relationes variae sunt, itaque varia sunt argumentorum genera.
This affection of arguments is by Hottoman expounded in this manner. Affectio
ista est ratio quam quaeque res habet ad altera^. Graeci (...) appellant;
itaque commodius rationem appellare possemus, sed vitandae ambiguitatis causa,
nomen affectionis delegimus, quo eodem Cicero, and in topicis, and in
perartitionibus hac eadem in re est vsus. Rationis aute^ verbu^ a Mathematicis
sumptum est, qui (...) definiunt duarum eiusdem generis quantitatum
comparationem; interpretes proportionem Latin nominarunt: quidam habitudinem:
nonnulli habitum: qui commodius, respectum: barbari fortasse correspondentiam
appellarent. Huius vis ac facultas ea est, vt declaret, quaenam rei cuiusque
cum altera ratio sit, quemadmodum inuicem affectae sint, quomodo se inter se
habeant, qualis inter ipsas comparatio aut affectio sit, sitne pars an totu^,
genus an species, consentanea an dissentanea, etc.

[To argue:] To argue, is general; either in inuenting only one argument by
the affection of the other, as when by the notion of the cause we seek the
effect, or else in placing them axiomatically, syllogistically, or methodically,
we argue some other thing either by explication or confirmation. The first
consideration is of arguments severally conceived and alone by themselves, the
second as they be placed by disposition: and therefore Piscators animaduersion
in this place is to small purpose, whereas he reprehendeth Ramus, for saying
that every several thing considered alone is an argument. For he in so saying
meaned not, that an argument should be so alone, as though it had no affection
or relation to any other thing, but so severally considered, as that in
Invention we should not intermeddle with axiomaticall, syllogisticall, or
methodicall conioining and setting together of the same several arguments, for
that does wholly and only belong to Disposition.

[Any several conceit:] Except those words which do but bind and knit
together the parts of speech, as conjunctions, which signify no several and
distinct thing in nature. Except again copious and Rhetorical phrases, where
many words express but one thing, as, A man of an excellent and heavenly
wit, where the words be many, the arguments but two, that is, the subject and
the adiunct. Lastly, except full comparisons, divisions, definitions, and
descriptions, where the argument is put down in a whole proposition. This is
Beurhusius exception, although to small purpose: for Ramus says not, all such
words as are alone, but all such reasons, conceits, and things as are
alone, and by themselves conceived severally, as these arguments be which he
here excepteth: for though there be many words, yet they all express but
one conceit of reason, and that is this single and sole argument which we
here talk of.

But to let that pass, he that takes this word Argument, only for a proof
or confirmation, deceaueth himself, and bereaueth Logike of half her
dignity. Indeed it is usually taken for that thing only which does prove
and confirm, but here it has a more general signification, and betokens
not only confirmations, but also declarations without any syllogism or form
of concluding, and so does arguere in Latin signify, declarare, ostendere,
perspicuum manifestumque facere, vt in Virgilio,

Degeneres animos timor arguit, id est, ostendit.

Yet nevertheless the same kind of argument may commonly serve both to
declare and to confirm (although some there be which only declare) so in the
end of the first Aegloge of the shepheardes Calendar, Hobbinol uses an
argument of the cause, only for explication sake. Ah faithless Rosalynde, and
void of grace,
Thou art the root of all this ruthful woe.


And in the ninth Aegloge, Diggon Dauy uses the same kind of argument to the
same purpose. Their ill hauiour garres men missay,
Both of their doctrine and of their fay.


And yet here the cause argues the effect, although there be no
syllogisticall probation intended, for that the proposition of it self seemed
to Diggon true enough. And in our law, In every count, bar, replication,
reioynder, etc. Arguments of asseueration and exposition be as much used as
those of proof and conclusion. Now for the other part, no man doubts but
that an argument of the cause may be very well used for confirmation, whereof
examples are every where apparent. Let no man therefore think there is no
Logike, where there is no syllogisticall conclusion, for every argument serves
not every where only for confirmation.

[Inhaerent:] I use this word till I meet with a better. I mean not so
Inhaerent, as though it should always agree with the thing argued, for many
times it is flatly repugnant thereunto, but so conjoined, as that the thing
argued in manner offers the argument to the Invention of the Logician, and
this is true in disagreeable arguments: otherwise it is in testimonies, which
be as it were borrowed from other matters, and brought to the Logician to be
framed accordingly.

Ramus divides an argument into artificial and inartificiall, whereupon
Piscator took occasion of reprehension. For I see no reason, says he, why
testimonies should be called inartificiall arguments, seeing that there is
as good Art showed in applying them, as in finding other arguments: and if in
Art there ought to be nothing without Art, either Invention wants Art, or
testimonies are not inartificiall, they answer him thus. They be not called
Inartificiall, for that they want Art, but because they argue not of
themselves, but by the force of some artificial: Which answer does not fully
satisfy me: For the testimony of God argues most absolutely of it self,
neither can we well say, that his testimony were not to be believed, unless
he were verus, bonus, iustus etc. since we cannot distinguishe these so from
his divine essence, but that whatsoever is in God, is God: and therefore it is
an infallible argument, God spoke it, therefore it is so, ipse dixit, is here
sufficient, neither need we seek for any artificial argument to confirm
it, as we do in the testimonies of men.

I hold on the same course which Ramus does in dividing still by certain
steps and degrees, till I come at last to the lowest. For it were against
Platoes precept and all Art, to iumpe abruptly from the highest and most
general, to the lowest and most special, without passing by the subalternal.

[First:] First may be conceived of it self, without respect had to any
other, as not depending on those that follow. So the cause may be known
without any mention of a definition, but the definition can never be conceived
without notice of the cause, as being made thereof: therefore the cause is
first and original, the definition secondary.

[Fully agreeable:] Seribonio and Piscatori non placet ista distinctio: nam si
Logice considerentur, aequalis and eadem est consensio: nam subiecta and
adiuncta aeque non possunt alterum esse absque altero, atque causa and
effectu^: sin physice, tum accidentalis illa consensio est aeque in his and
illis: nam faber po^est non facere, quomodo puer potest non esse tinctus
literis. Et nec omnis causa essentialiter conuenit cum effecto, nec omne
subiectum accidentaliter cum suo adiuncto. haec illi. Quia tamen diuersi sunt
gradus dissentaneorum, ideo and consentaneorum videntur esse eodem modo. Itaque
hic nihil mutaui. haereo.

These general heads of arguments have been diversely termed of diverse
Philosophers, as appears by Diogenes Laertius, and Aristotle. For sometimes
they are called Categoremes, and the handling or discoursing of the same,
Categories, both which are Greek words of like signification, borrowed from
the place of judgment, and applied to phylosophicall conceits. (...)
signifies to say, or affirm one thing of an other, as in accusations it is
usually ^eene, and in arguments easily perceived: where one thing added to an
other, is affirmed of the same, or else denied. Otherwhiles the precepts of
them be called (...), whereupon, Aristotle's books where these be handled,
are entitled (...) is a place, and therefore Tully called them in Latin,
locos, seeds, fontes, places, seats, springes or fountaynes of arguments.
Sometimes they have more apt and easy titles, as when they be called
Principles, Elements, Reasons, Proofs, Arguments, Termini and Media. Of all
which, I use for the most part, this word Argument, and sometimes Reason, and
Proof, as most usual and significant, the rest being rather strange and
metaphorical.

The third Chapter. Of the efficient and material cause.
ACause is that by whose power and force a thing is caused: therefore this
first place of Invention is the fountain of all knowledge, and that thing
only is known, whose cause is understood. A cause is either before the thing
caused, or else, in and with it. The cause before the thing caused, is either
the efficient or the material. The efficient is a caus^ from the which a thing
is: which although it cannot be artificially divided, yet it may be for
order, thus distinguished. First the efficient woorketh either of it self and
by his own proper force, or else accidentally and by some external power. By it
self, either naturally as the winds blow, the fire heateth, or with advice
and voluntary deliberation as man in his several actions. Accidentally, either
by necessity, as when the efficient is by some violent compulsion constrained
to do this or that, or by chance and hazard, when any thing happens
contrary to the purpose and intent of the woorker, as if a man digging for
stones should find treasure, which coming to pass by some secret cause, is
by us ascribed to fortune: Secondly the cause efficient either woorketh alone,
which of it self without any help of others brings to pass his effect, as
fire heateth, these be (...), or with others, which is helped by others, these
be called (...) or (...), this is either principal, which in woorking rules
the instrumental, as the Carpenter the axe, or instrumental which is used of
the principal: and is either idle, and of it self has no action, but is only
moved of the principal, as the Saw of the Sawyer, or helping, as being
moved of the principal, and yet moving it self also, as all such
instruments which have life, as the Ox ploweth partly by his own motion,
partly moved by the plowman. Again it is such as the efficient cannot work
without it, as the writer without a pen, or contrarily.

Lastly, the cause efficient either makes or destroys: that which makes
causes a thing to be (...), and does either procreate or bring forth that
which was not before, as God the world, king Lud the City of London, or
preserve and keep that in being which before was procreated, as God the
world, magistrates the cities. The destroying is that which causes a thing not
to be that was, and does either utterly abolish and make that to have no
being which before was, as the flood, or in part destroy and deface, as
sickness the body.

In June Hobbinoll recites a number of particular efficients of delight and
pleasure, describing thereby the place where he was, thus:

Lo Collyn here the place whose pleasant syte
From other shades has weand my wandering mind,
Tell me what wants me here to work delight?
The simple air, the gentle warbling wind,
So calm, so cool, as no where else I find.
The grassy ground with dainty daysies dight,
The bramble bush, where birds of every kind
To the waters fall their tunes attemper right.
Collyn in the first Egloge makes love the efficient of his weal and woe.

A thousand sithes I ^ursse that careful hour,
Wherein I lou'de the neighbor town to see,
And eke ten thousand siths I bless the stowr^
Wherein I saw so fair a sight as she.
Yet all for naught, such sight has bred my bayne,
Ah God, that love should breed both joy and pain.
In April Hobbinoll declares the procreant causes of Elissa* Pan may be proud
that ever he begot such a bellibone,
And Syrinx rejoice that ever was her lot to have such an one.


And in July, Thomalyn describing that time of the year, poetically, in the
end brings in the doggestare as causing death.

And now the sun has reared up Such examples as want in the Calendar, shall
be supplied out of our law.
his fiery footed teame
Making his way between the cup and golden Diadem.
The rampant Lion hunts he fast with dog of noisome breath:
Whose balefull barking bringes in haste pynes, plagues, and dreary death.
In May, Piers uses conseruant causes. But tract of time, and long prosperity,
That nourse of vice, this of insolency:
Lulled the sheepheards in such security, etc.


Master Plowden, Folio, 262: a: Et quant a ceo, ils disoyent, que le forfeture
icy auera relation al temps del original offense commence, que enforce le mort,
et ceo est le metter luy en ewe, et ceo fuit fait en sa vie, et ceo act fuit
felony, et l'enditement dit, et doyt dire, que il mist luy en le eawe
feloniousement. Car ceo que cause mort, doyt estre dit feloniousement fayt: et
pur ceo si un per^ust un after, issintque apres, il de ceo morust, l'enditement
doyt dire, que il luy feloniousement percusse, issintque felony est attribute
al act, lequel act est fait per viue home, et en sa vie, come Brown dit. Car
il dit; sir James Hales fuit mort, et coment aueigne il al mort? Poet est redit
per surrounder, et que surrounde luy? poet este responde, sir James Hales. Et
quant ^ist il ceo? Poet estre responde, en son vie. Issint que sir James Hales
esteant en vie causa sir James Hales d'estre mort, et l'act del viue home fist
le mort del mort home. Here sir James Hales did of himself voluntarily drown
himself.

Issint. Fol. 366. Si estrange al fine, que est de bon memory, deueigne de non
sane memory, ou est imprison le tierce an apres les proclamations fait, et
issint continue tanque les sinque ans soyent expire, et pius il vyent en son
memory, ou est horse del prison, il ne serra conclude: carlach^ ne puit estre
assign en luy que fault memory, ou liberty en son prosecution, et pur ceo ne
fueront comprehend en le intent. Mes si en ceo case lestraunge al fine, en le
tierce an, vst ale ouster le mere, ou vst prise baron, et issint vst continue
tanque les sinque ans vssent estre pass, la ils serront lie. Car le aler
oustre le mere, ou prender del baron fueront acts voluntary: Mes insanitie del
memory, et imprisonment sont encounter le volunt del party, et issint ils
disoyent, que reasonable sense doyt estre add al letter.

Fol. 9. b. 13. b. 18. b. 19. a. b. Les parols del ley de nature, del ley de
ceo realm et dauter realms, et del ley de dieu auxi voile yelder et doner lieu
a ascun acts et chooses faits encounter les parols de mesme le leys et ceo est
lou les parols del ley sont infringe pur auoyder greinder inconveniences, ou
pur necessite, ou per compulsion, ou per inuoluntary ignorance. Pur auoyder
greinder inconue^iences, come le bater del person de ascun home en ascun cases,
uncore le batre et naufre de ascun home per auter, est cybien encounter le ley
de nature, come encounter le ley del terre.

Mes uncore en 22. lib. ass. lou home fuit en arrage et non sane memory, et
fist grand male, et le home, et ses parents auxi luy pristeront, et luy
lieront, et bateront oue vierges, et est la tenus, que ils puissoy ent ceo
iustifier en auoydance del grand male que il puissoit fair, esteant de non
sane memory. Et uncore le ley de nature, et le ley del realm prohibit
generalment ascun de bater auter: mes cest especial case pur auoyder de
greinder mischief, ad^ un exemption et special privilege. Et nous voiromus
auxi (come iay dit) que necessity en toutes leys serra bone excuse, et que
touts leys done lieu al necessity. Car il est common proverb, que Necessitas
non habet legem: et pur ceo, In praecipe quod reddat, le tenant excusera sa
default per cretein de ^aw, et uncore chescun default est abhor en nostre
ley, pur ceo que il est un contempt del court: mes pur ceo que sans peril de
mort, il ne puit veigner, le necessity del chance en tiel case, entant que
null default est en luy, luy excusera.

Issint enfriender del prison est felony en le prisoner mesme per lestatute De
frangentibus prisonam, uncore si le prison soit ignie, et ils que sont eins,
enfreindre le prison pur le salvation de lour vies, ceo serra excuse per le ley
del reason: et uncore les parols de lestatute sont encounter ceo. Issint in 14:
H. 7. les jurors que fueront iures sur lissue, pur fear d'un grand tempest
departont dillonques et seuero^t eux mesmes, (...) fuit la tenus que ils ne
serra amercies, et que lour verdit apres fuit bone, et que ils ne fesoyent
malement, et ceo fuit issint tenus pur le necessity del chance: mes auterment
ils serra greeuousement punye. Et issint pur salvation de ma vie, ie^ puis tuer
auter que assault moy. Car coment que effusion del sange, et tuer des homes est
prohibit per le comen ley, uncore chescun home en son defense, ou come
champion en trial en brief de droyt, ou tiels semblables poyent tuer autres;
et ceo est pur le necessity del salvation de son vie ^n son defense, et en
l'auter case pur le necessity del trial.

Issint per le common Custom del realm, les hostelers serra charges pur les
biens de lour gestes perdus, ou embeseles de lour measons: uncore si lour
measons soyent enfreints per les enemies de roy, et les biens dillonques
prises, ils ne serra charge pur eux. Car per reason, ceo ne poet estre resist:
et pur cest cause ceo violence infringera le violence del custom. Et auxi le
ley de Dieu done lieu al necessity. Issint que les parols del ley de dieu
poient este infringe per necessity sans offense al dieu: et pur ceo en le viel
ley, per le ley de dieu il fuit prohibit que null comederoit le sacre pane l.
panem propositionis: uncore il appiert que David pur necessity de famyne
comede le dit pane, et il ne infringe le ley, coment que il infringe les parols
del ley, come Christ mesme declare en le gospel, pur ceo que il ceo fist pur
necessity.

Issint les Apostles del Christ per necessity del famyne auolsont les spices
del frument dauters persons, et les comederent, et coment que ils infringe
le^presse parols del sarre scripture, que prohibit a prendet les biens del
auters sans le volunt del owners, uncore ils ne offenderont per ceo, come il
apiert per le gospel. Issint que per ceux cases nous veyomous que le ley des
homes et de dieu yield et done lieu al necessity.

Et compulsion auxi est bon excuse en nostre ley, come (...) home fist
obligation per dures, il auoydera ceo. Issint si le brache de ascun est traie
per compulsion, et le weapon e^n main tue un auter, ceo ne serra felony: et
issint en touts auters cases lou home fait chose esteant a ceo coa^ et compel,
il ne serra pur ceo damnifie. Et auxi si home infringe les parols del ley per
inuoluntary ignorance, (...) (...) enfreinder del ley. Come si un infant de
tender age ^ue un home, ceo ne ferra felony en luy, pur ceo que il nauoit
discretion, ne intelligence, et pur ceo le ley impu^e (...) a so^ ignorance, le
quel est a luy a ceo age per nature, et issint null default en luy, et pur ceo
il est dit Inuoluntary ignorance. Car it ne puit esse ^ayient ne ^age, coment
que i^ voil, mes est ignorant per compulsion; et pur ceo il serra excuse, et
^iel act est proprement dit destre fait ex Ignorantia. (...). lou inuoluntary
ignorance est aiudge le cause del act. Issint si vne home de non sane memory
tue un auter, coment que il ad enfreint les parols det ley, uncore il and
enfreint le ley, pur ceo que it nauoit a^m memory, ne intelligence, mes mere
ignorance, lequel vient a luy per le main de dieu; et pu^ ceo est dit
inuoluntary ignorance; a quel le ley impute le act deste fait, en tant que null
default est en luy, et pur ceo il serra excuse, entant que it est ignorant per
compulsion, et tiel act est dit et term de^e fait ex ignorantia, s. eoque
inuoluntary ignorance est is cause. Et in Deuter. in principio cap. 9: Dieu
provide especial remedy, que ce^y que fi^t chose per tiel ignorance ne serra
puny pur ceo: car la il est ordeigne, que si un laborer est al labor one un
hatchet, et le test del hatchet eschew, et tue un que est south luy, que tiel
laborer ne serra mise al mort, mes un especial ville fuit ordeigne pur
sanctuary pur luy, pur ceo que il ceo fist per inuoluntary ignorance. Mes lou
home enfreint les parols del ley per ignorance voluntary, la il ne serra
excuse: come si un home que est yure, s. drunk, tue un auter, ceo serra
felony, et il serra pende pur ceo, et uncore il fist ceo per ignorance. Car
quant il fuit yure, il nauoit intelligence ne memory: mes entant que ceo
ignorance vient a luy per son act et folly demesne, et il puit resister cest
ignorance, il ne serra privilege pur ceo, et Aristotle dit, que tiel home est
digne de dooble punishment, pur ceo que il ad dooblement offend, s. en esteant
yure, en male example de auters, et en feasance del act. Et ceo act est dit et
term deste fait ignoranter, s. ou il est cause de son ignorance demesne: et
issint le diversity perenter chose fait ex ignorantia, and ignoranter. Et
issint come iay dit, lou les parols del ascun ley sont infringe pur (...)
greinder inconvenience, ou per necessity, ou per compulsion, ou per
inuoluntary ignorance, que en touts ces cases le ley nest offend. Et adonques
veyoromus et examineromus nostre case. Et en nostre case le Woade fuit eiect,
et le incerteintie fait pur auoyder le grein der mischief. Car le vie de
chescun home est plus precious que ascun biens sont, et le perder del vie del
home est plus grand mischyefe que le perder del biens. Et issint en auoydance
del ceo plus grand mischief, le eiectement, et le incerteintie fueront faits.
Auxi ceo fuit per necessity, et per le plus grand necessity que puissoit este
fait, s. per necessity en auoydance del mort. Et le necessity icy fuit cy
grand que en les auters cases aua^t dits, s. le necessity en le case de
creteine de ewe, et del famine: car est pur salvation de vie en l'un case et
l'auter. Et auxi l'act poet estre dit d'estre fait per compulsion: Car quant un
chose veigne a tiel point, que sil ne fait tiel act, que adonques il
presentment morera, et en auoydance del present mort il ceo fait, tiel act poet
bien este dit d'estre fait per compulsion, et per le plus grand compulsion que
poet estre. Car il and plus grand compulsion que compulsion del mort, s. que il
morer^, sil ne fist tiel chose, et issinticy (...) del wo^de, et le
incerteintie del remenant vient per compulsion. Et auxi il ne peet este deny
mes que le ignorance icy del incerteintie fuit inuoluntary, entant que
l'eiectement del woad que fuit cause del ignorance, fuit per compulsion, que
est inuoluntary. Et entant que le ignorance del incerteintie est deste ascribe
et impute tantsolement al necessity et compulsion, et pur auoyder greinder
myschyefe, queux chooses per prouydence ne puissent este prevent, ne per
circumspection eschew, ne per poiar resist, adonques ieo dye, que null default
est in Fagassa etc.

Principal, instrumental. Fol. 98. Car ils disoyent, que quant plusors veignont
a fair un act, et lun solement ceo fait, et les auters sont present, abbettant
luy, ou prist de luy aider en le fait, ils sont principalles a tous entents cy
fortement come cesty que fait le act. Car le presence de les auters est terror
a cesty que est assault, et occasion que il ne osast luy mesme defender. Car si
un viest son enemy, et 20. de ses servants veignant a luy assaulter, et ils
touts trayeront lour espees, et luy enuyron, et un solement luy percust, issint
que il de ceo morust, ore les auters serro^t per bone reason aludge cy grande
offendohrs que cestuy que luy percust.

Car si les auters, nussent este present, il peradventure voile aver luy
defend, et issint eschape. Mes le number de les auters present et priest a luy
percusser auxi, serra aiudge grande terror a luy, et abatement de sa courage,
et occasion a fair luy despeirer a se defender, et est occasion de sa mort.
Issint que lour presence est la cause de son terror, et le terror est cause que
il receive les plagues, et les plagues sont cause de sa mort, et donques entant
que ambideux les chooses, s. les plagues, et le presence les auters que ne
donont pas les plages, sont aiudges la cause de sa mort, il ensuit que touts
eux, s. les ferriors, et les auters present sont en semblable degree, et
chescun est participant del fait del auter. Et le fait, quant a cesty que est
mort, et quant al punishment de ceo, (coment, que il consist de deux parties)
uncore en le ley il est sans division. et nyent contristeant que ne soit que un
plage, done per un solement, uncore il serra aiudge en le ley, le plage de
chescun, s. done per cesty que le done pur luy mesme, et done pur les auters
per luy come lour minister et instrument. et est cy fortement le fait de les
auters, sicome ils touts ount tenus ioyntment oue lour maynes le baston, ou le
auter instrument, oue que le plage fuit done, et vssent touts ensemblement
percusse l'occise.

Fol. 497. et 498. Touts les Justices agreont en un, que le ordinary, le
Patron, et le roy, doyent agreer a fair un appropriation, et sont actores
huius fabulae (come le seigniour Dyer le term) cestassauoir, le ordinary
inferior, ou supreme. Car il est le principal agent en ceo, eo que il ad le
spirituel jurisdiction, et lact del appropriation est chose spirituel. Et
lordinary dit, Appropriamus, consolidamus, and vnimus, come principal actor en
le cause, come Manwood Justice dit: eoque le chose que concern le cure de
esglise, est chose que concern les alms des parochians, de queux, deins sa
diocese, le euesque ad charge. Et pur ceo en le appropriation le ley attribute
a luy principal part. Et ceo que le ordinary del diocese puit fair, ceo le
pape que vendicat a luy supreme jurisdiction oultre touts ordinaries, vsast de
fair deins le realm, come supreme ordinary, et fuist long temps suffer de ceo
fair, et issint il vsast de fair visitations, corrections, dispensations, et
tolerations, deius chescune diocese de ceo realm, et toll de les euesques
deins ceo realm tout come luy plest: et ensuant cest usage il vsast de fair
appropriationes sans l'euesque, quel fuit prise d'estre bone et l'euesque, que
ne fuit accoumpt forques come inferior ordinary, ne vnques counterdist ceo, mes
ceo fuist use et accept come bone et tiel authority et jurisdiction que le pape
vsast deins ceo realm fuit agnise per le parlyament in Anno. 25. H. 8. et
auters statutes, deste en le dit roy Henry le Huyte: et de luy descendist al
successors: donques le appropriation fait per le roy solement sans l'euesque,
est si bone, come si l'euesque vst le fait, ou sicome il fuist prise en
ancient te^ps quant le pape le fist. Mes coment que le ordinary inferior, ou
superior est celuy que doit fair le apropriation uncore il ne poet ceo fair
sans le bon volunt del patron. Carle Patron ad en le aduouson, temporal
inheritance cestassanoir, fee simple, le quel le ordinary, ne en ancient temps
le pape, ne puit toller de patron, ne alterer sans le bone volunt del patron.
Mes en appropriations le patron est un part, car il doit accepter ceo: et le
ordinary est le agent, et il est le patient. Et son assent en submission de luy
al volunt le ordinary, et en acceptance del son order, et en exeqution del ceo
que est ordeigne, est declaration de son intent: et tout serra entende deste
fait a son request, car le benefit est soen: et issint le ordinary, et le
patron sont duo actores huius fabulae. Et oultre eux, il y ad un tierce, que ad
part a fair en cest action, et ceo est le roy, come roy: car il puit este
led per cest marriage. Car le auouson est tenus de luy mediatment, ou
immediatment, etc.

Fol. 79. a. Car troys chooses font ceo un act (il entende un act de Parliament)
s. l'assent de les seigniors, de les commons, et de le roy: et l'un, ou deux
sans le tierce ne fait ceo un act. Car eomentque les seigniors et commons agree
al chose, uncore n'est act tanque le roy ad assent auxi. Cause en compaigne.

Cause procreant. Fol. 214. Adonques icy en le principal case, le roy Henry le
quart fuit fits et heir a John de Gaunt, que fuit un des fits le roy Edward le
tierce, et fuit auxi fits et heir al Blaunch feme del dit John de Gaunt, que
fuit file et heir Henry Duke de Lancaster. Issintque le Duchy de Lancaster
vient aldit Henry le quart per disce^t del part sa mere.

Folio 242. b. Car del heure que tout justice, tranquillity, et repose est
deryue del roy come del fountain de ceo, le ley e^ tous ses besoignes et
chooses luy favor come le chief test del ceo.

Cause conseruant. Fol. 315. b. le roy est le test del bien public, et les
subjects ses members: et l'office le roy que le ley a luy appoint, est, de
preserver ses subjects.

The matter is the cause of the which a thing is made.

So in August Willy shows what matter his cup was made of, thus: Then lo,
Perigot, the pledge which I plight,
Amazer ywrought of the maple war.
In December Collyn in his complaint, Where I was wont to seek the honny Be
Woorking her formal rooms in waxen frame,
The grisly toadestoole grown there might I see,
And loathed paddocks lording on the same.
Again, And learn'de of lighter timber coats to frame,
Such as might save my sheep and me fro shame.
Again, To make fine cages for the Nightingale,
And baskets of bulrushe was my wont.
Master Plowden. Fol. 15. b. Les vlnes del pan sont le matter del toge.

Annotations.
ARistotle sometimes calls the efficient, the beginning of motion and rest,
as in the first of his Metaphysikes, and second of his Physikes. And
otherwhiles he uses this very name, Efficient, as in his Topikes and
Demonstrations.

The ancient Philosophers made great discourses concerning this cause, but
some very fabulous, says Aristotle 3. Metap. As Hesiodus and Parmenides made
Love the maker of all things; some obscure and ambiguous, as Hermotimus and
Anaxagoras said that a certain divine spirit was the author of all; so
Empedocles gives all to Concord and Discord, and diverse others to other diverse
things. Wherefore Aristotle compares them to young fresh soldiers and
unexperienced fellows, that many times hit home, and lay on load, but without
either artor order.

(...) or (...) in Greek is a cause in English. It is sometimes taken generally
for any reason or argument by common custom and use of speech: but here it
has a more special and proper signification, and conteyneth only these four
kinds of causes following. (...) and (...), be very significant words to
express the cause and that which is made of the cause: The Latinistes have
none so good, unless you take that dunsicall deriuation, Causa, Causatum,
which we imitate in English to very good purpose, thus, the cause, and the
thing caused: Where, as the word, Cause, comprehends efficient, material,
formal, and final cause, so, the thing caused, aunswering (...) in Greek,
and Causatum in Latin, conteyneth the several effects of every particular
cause, as proportionably we may say, the end and the thing whose end it is:
the form and the thing formed, the maker and the thing made, the matter and
the thing materiate. For otherwise, although in Latin, Effectum do stand for
all four, yet properly it only betokens that which is caused by the
efficient. For thus we may distinguishe the several virtues of the four
causes, although I know they all concur together in causing, so that the
constitution of the thing caused is not fet from this or that alone, but from
all four jointly.

Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas, says Virgill. For although by
effects and other arguments we may have a probable guess and make sensible
conjectures at things: yet no true science or knowledge is had but from the
causes: By the effects and euentes we see (...), that things be so: but by
the causes we know (...), why they be so: and that is only worthy the name
of knowledge.

These diverse sorts and distinctions of efficients are greatly to be
considered in daily affairs, as containing in them the reason of the well or
ill doing of any thing: of all punishments, rewards, excuse, compassion. etc.

Omnis procreatio and conseruatio fit natura, consilio, per se, vel per
accidens: itaque illa primo, haec postremo in loco collocaui.

[Naturally:] So all natural things be made, marde, augmented, diminished,
altered, and removed from place to place by this operation of nature.

I said before that the efficient was rather distinguished then artificially
divided. For in truth the preserving cause is the efficient rather of the
preservation it self, than of the thing preserved. And the isntrumental
cause, as it is an instrument, is no efficient at all, but rather a helping
member or part of the efficient, since it has no power in it self to cause the
thing caused. Causa sine qua non is of some referred to helping causes. Occasio
est agendi tempestiuitas sieve opportunitas casu oblata, quod postremum ex
nominis etymologia intelligitur, reliquum ex appellationibus graecis, (...),
quorum nominum extremum, notat tempus vnde agens initium agendi facit, quod
graece expressius sonat, (...). videtur occasio esse causa per accidens, sed
diuersa ab illis duabus a Ramo positis.

Aristotle in the second of his Physikes distinguishes between Fortune and
Chance, as making Fortune properly incident to those efficients only which
work with advise and deliberation, yet then use it not, and this is called
Imprudentia, when we do a thing unawares. But Chance he will have that to
be which is found in things void of such deliberation. So that if a man should
call the stones that cover some honorable personage, fortunate, for that they
be somewhat honored, this were but an improper kind of speaking by Aristotle's
rule.

A man goes toward Westminster to talk with his cou^seller, and misseth of
him, here his going was in vain: but in going he finds a ringe: His going
to Westminster was the cause of the finding of the ringe, but yet such a cause
as we call Fortune, or Haphazard. So Ovid excuses himself for seeing
somewhat more than he should, before he would.

Cur aliquid vidi? cur noxia lumina feci?
Cur imprudenti cognita culpa mihi est?
Inscius Actaeon vidit sine vest Dianam,
Praedafuit canibus non minus ille suis.
Scilicet in superis etiam fortuna luenda est,
nec veniam laeso numine casus habet.
In like manner Tully reports in his third book de natura deorum, what good
fortune befell Jason Phaereus, who having an impostume, as he thought,
incurable, went to fight with purpose to dye, but with a wound his impostume
was opened, a thing which neither himself nor his physicians ever imagined:
Here then was fortune on either side, in Jason that was wounded, and in him
that gave him the wound: good in the first, bad in the second. For the enemies
weapon was by fortune a cause of Iasons unexpected health, whereas death was
desired of the one, and intended by the other, for he that gave the stroke,
thought rather to make a new wound than cure an old disease. This is fortune
with Aristotle. Now on the other side, if a three-footed stool should fall
from aloft, and yet in falling stand on his feet, this with him is chance,
for the stool fell for no such end, and it is a thing altogether senseless.
Epicurus said that the world was made by the casual concourse and mixture of
little round indivisible bodies, like moates in the funne, whose ridiculous
blasphemy Tully mocketh not without deserved cause, 2. de not. deorum: for so,
if a man should by chance cast abroad an hundred thousand or more of
characters or Printers stampes, he might as well read on the ground all saint
Austins works or Cowpers dictionary by the casual scattering of A. B. C.
These be examples of chance with Aristotle, not of fortune. But it is folly
t^ stand upon this nice and frivolous distinction of Chance and Fortune, since
in common speech they be taken all as one, and so they be here to be
understood.

In this kind of cause, ignorance and unwitting simplicity have place as I
said before, whereof come excuses and supplications, when a man pleads
ignorance, and therefore hops to find pardon, as Tully for Ligarius, Ignosce
pater, errauit, lapsus est, non putauit, si vnquam posthac. And again, Erraui,
temere feci, ad clementiam tuam confugio, delicti veniam peto, vt ignoscasoro.
But indeed, this name of Fortune, Chance, Hap, or Hazard, was only invented
by such as knew not the first cause, Gods providence: And therefore when any
thing fell out contrary to their expectation, whereof they neither understood
the cause, nor could yield any reason, they said it came by chance, fortune
and hazard. Whereupon Fortune was made a goddess of good luck: and many
christians use these profane terms, God send me good luck, and good
fortune. Whose idle prayers be noted by an Ethnike Poet.

Nullum numen abest, si sit prudentia; sed te
Nos facimus, fortuna, deam, caeloque locamus.
Aristotle calls Fortune, (...), improuidum, incertum, dubium, humano iudicio
ambiguum, and yet (...), vt diuinum quiddam and beatum.

Canons incident to causes generally.

God only is the first and principal cause of all things. All other causes
whatsoever are secondary, and subject so his eternal direction.

Nothing is without a cause.

If all the causes concur, the effect will follow.

To whatsoever thing you ascribe the cause, or deny the cause to ye same you
attribute or deny ye effect or thing caused.

Such as the cause is, such for the most part is the thing caused: this
holds not in destroying causes.

Particular Canons of the efficient.

When many efficient causes join and concur together in any action (as the
principal cause with other helpers and instruments) there they all jointly
together be only the full and perfect efficient cause of that effect.

Cause natural, voluntary, accidental, violent.

God has distributed to every creature some natural proprieties, virtues and
operations.

If the natural virtue, and property of any thing be affirmed, the natural
effect will follow, unless that natural faculty be otherwise let or
hindered, and if the effect be, the cause must also have gone before.

If will, and advise, or deliberation be, then the effect may be.

Such as the natural disposition and will is, such is the effect judged to
be.

If the cause be in hazard, that is, if the cause be to us uncertain and
unknown, then may the effect fall out uncertainly and by hazard, or when we
look not for it.

Alone and with others.

If the sole cause work continually, the thing caused is always, if not,
then otherwise: if the efficient do necessarily require the help of others in
woorking, then without them nothing can be done: if not, then otherwise: if
it work by instruments, then are those instruments required. If the
efficient work alone, then it dserueth the more, either praise or
condemnation, if with others, then the less, so Nisus 9. Aeneid. accuses
himself, and excuses

Euryalus. Me, me, adsum qui feci, in me conuertite ferrum, o Rutuli, mea fraus
omnis, nihil iste, nec ausus, Nec potuit.

Procreant, conseruant. No efficient cause, except God, can make any work
without matter. Hinc illud, gigni,

E nihilo nihil; in nihilum nil posse reuerti. And if the matter be, the
work may be made.

If the procreant and conseruant cause be, the thing may be procreated and
conserved. If the undoing and destroiyng cause be, then must the thing decay.

If the cause efficient be good, the effect will be good: and bad, if bad.

If the destroying cause be good, ye thing destroyed was bad: If the thing
destroyed be bad, the cause destroying must be good, y^ is to say, has done
some good, has brought some profit.

The efficient may be expressed by variety both of Grammatical cases and
Rhetorical figures: as in procreant causes, God is the father and fountain
and well of all goodness. The beginning of every good thing is in, of, and from
God.

From procreant causes the Poets do oftentimes fetch their epithites and
circumloqutions, as, Sole satus Phaeton, etc. Phaeton borne of the sun.

If you put down, or take away, that is, if you affirm or deny the cause
efficient, procreant and conseruant, in time fit and convenient to work, and
being not idle, then the effect must be put down, or taken away: but
diversely, according to the diversity of the causes themselves. For,

If such a cause be, as that it woorketh of his own proper force, plainly and
certainly, no other thing helping it, then must the effect follow certainly.

Now let us see a little the use of these Canons, in comparison of the plain
definitions and explications of proprieties put down by Ramus. Let this serve
for an example. He that is idle, is wanton: But Paris is idle, Therefore Paris
is wanton.


In the proposition, which is the first axiom of the three, Idleness, as a
procreant cause, does argue Wantonness, as his effect. In the second axiom
which makes the assumption, the same Wantonness, is an adiunct of Paris; that
is, a quality adjoined, or incident to the nature of Paris. Now according to
the common Logicians, in this sort must you judge by disposition.

Paris is idle,

Therefore he is wanton,

For the cause being put down, the effect will follow. But otherwise; if you
believe Ramus, thus:

The proposition, which was this; He that is idle is wanton, is a doubtful and
contingent axiom, and yet, for the most part, most true, by reason of the
affection of such a cause to such an effect. The assumption was this, But Paris
is idle, which is also a contingent axiom, and must be confirmed by the
manners and behauiours of Paris. The conclusion it self does follow
necessarily, by force of the form and constitution of the syllogism: but yet,
of it self, it is but a contingent axiom, although the deduction of it from
the premises, be, as I said, necessary, by reason of the lawful framing of
the syllogism. If therefore the proposition be denied, I answer, that it is
a contingent axiom, for the most part true, and therefore you cannot judge it
altogether false. And this I confirm by the definition of the efficient cause
already put down, thus; The efficient is a cause from which a thing is, which
cause if it be, the thing caused either is, or may be. This now is a new and
prosyllogisticall argument, fet from the very natural definition of the
argument it self, that is of the cause efficient: nay rather this is that
common maxim used of others, if the efficause be (that is, in due time, and
not hindered) the effect will follow. But here, the variety of efficient
causes is diligently to be marked, as some be alone, some with others, some
accidentally, some of their own force; as before I have showed. So then, by
this we perceive, that the Canon or Maxima, does nothing concern the
consequence, but only the confirmation of the proposition and thing it self.
Thus much for the proposition.

Now if any man deny the assumption, it must, as I said before, be proved by
the life and conversation of Paris himself. For in every syllogism, the
premises, as they term them, that is, the proposition and the assumption,
must be proved and confirmed, either by axiomaticall judgment in Logike
proceeding from the several affection of arguments to the things which they
argue, or else by other arts and daily affairs incident to man's life. And
commonly the propositions are proved to be either contingent or necessary
axioms, by Logical definitions of arguments, and certain rules or canons,
which are, as it has been told, brought in for new and prosyllogisticall
arguments for the confirmation of the said proposition, and not as proofs of
the conseqution. And if you thus apply rules, canons, and maximaes, whether
proper to this Art, or those common received ones, you shall not do amiss.

Lastly, concerning the conclusion of this syllogism, if any man do so much
want good manners, as to deny it, you may justly say, there is no reason why it
should be denied, unless the constitution of the whole syllogism be not
lawful and artificial.

I will here insert a few examples gathered out of our Law books, for the
better understanding of some of these canons, and those distinctions of
efficient causes put down before.

Cause principal and isntrumental. Hitherto may be referred, what is said
of principal and accessaries. Stamford, lib. 1. cap. 44. Nota que in grand
treason, yly ad null accesiories, eins touts sont principals. Vt patet, An. 3.
H. 7, fol. 10. Issint que quecunque offense fait home accessarie en felony,
mesme l'offence in grand treason fait luy principal. Mes en petit treason, ou
felony, ou auters ^els crimes, accessaries poient estre.

Accessaries sont deuant l'offence perpetrate, in procuring or commanding
auter de fair un felony, mes n ient esteant present a le fait: issint, apres
l'offence perpetrate sont ceux qui receuont un felon attaint, bien conusants
del fait que il ad fait, ou luy fauoront, ou aydont, etc. In attainder sur
appearance et default, le principal doit estre attaint deuant l'accessory: et
l'acquitel del principal est auxi acquitel del accessory.

Accidental. De Homicide per misaduenture, vide Fitz. tit. co. 3. E. 3. P.
354. and P. 302. P. 2. H. 4. P. 69. and P. 11. H. 7. F. 24.

Si homicide soit fait nient per home, eins per auter casualtie, de ceo surda
Deodandum. Deodandum est ou home auient a sa mort per misaduenture d'ascun
chose que chiet sur luy, ou per misaduenture dun laps que il mesme suffra, in
chiant de ascun chose sans estre enche sonee per ascun auter home; ceste chose
quelle enchesona sa morte, serra forfet, et pris come Deodand. Vide Fitz. tit.
coron. P. 403.

Concerning casual homicide, I remember an odd history of a certain man who
falling from the top of a house, lighted on an other man's neck, and crushing
him to death, preserved himself. The son of the dead man, procuring the
revenge of his fathers death, caused him that fell to be had before the Judge:
Where he no less pretily then reasonably, offered him this fair play: get
thee up, quod he, to the top of the same house: I will stand where thy father
did: and if by falling upon me thou bruise me to death, and save thy self, I
promise thee, my son shall never seek to revenge my death.

Necessity, Fortune, etc. Stamford: lib. 1. cap. 5. Homicide fait de
necessity inevitable pur auancer justice, est Justifiable. Car le vicount,
Baylie, ou ascun auter, qui ad garrant darrester home endite de felony peut
bien Iustifier le tuer de luy, sil ne voile suffrir luy mesme estre arrest,
eins estoit al defens tielment, que l'officer ne peut fair l'arrest sans luy
tuer. et en tiel case l'officer serra discharge sans attender le grace le roy.
s. sans, acquerer pardon, vt patet 22. lib. Ass. p. 55. et tit: coro in Fitz:
P. 22. E. 3. P. 2. 61.

Item si plusors veignont a comburer ma meason, moy esteant la dedeins, et
inuironnont la meason, mes ils ne ceo comburont: et ieo saetta horse, et occida
un de eux, ceo nest felony, vt patet 26. lib. ass. p. 23. Mesme ley est sils
veignont a ma meason pur moy robber, et mon garcon qui est one moy in la
meason, tua un de eur. Fits: tit: coro: 3. E. 3. Itiner. North: P. 330. per
Louth.

Mes coment necessity serra interpret in homicide seipsum defendendo. Vide
Fitz. tit. coro: P. 266. an 43. lib. ass. P. 31. and 3. E. 3. P. 284. P. 286.
P. 287. and P. 297.

Item, 21. H. 7. 39. Per Tremayle Justice, servant poit occider home in sauant
le vie son maistre, sil ne poit auterment eschaper.

That this has been practiced in England continually, it may appear by the
discourse of Bracton, who wrote in king Henry the thirds time, in this manner.

Est enim inter alia crimina, crimen quod ex part tangit ipsum regem cuius pax
infringitur, et ex part priuatam personam, quae nequiter and contra pacem
regis occiditur. Vnde primo videndum est de homicidio, quid sit and vnde
dicatur, quae eius species, and qua poena homicidae punientur.

Est enim homicidium, hominis occisio ab homine facta. Si autem above, cane,
vel alia re: non dicitur proprie homicidiu^.

Dicitur proprie homicidium, ab homine, and caedo, quasi hominis cedium.

Species homicidij sunt multae. Nam aliud spirituale, aliud corporale: de
spirituali vero ad praesens non est dicendum.

Sed corporale est quo homo occiditur corporaliter: and hoc dupliciter
committitur; lingua, and facto. Lingua tribus modis: s. praecepto, consilio,
defensione vel tuitione. Facto quatuor modis; s. iustitia, vt cum iudex vel
iusticiarius reum just damnatum occidit. Istud autem homicidium, si fit ex
liuore, vel delectatione effundendi humani sanguinis, licet ille just
occidatur, iudex tamen peccat mortaliter, propter intentione^ corruptam. Si
vero hoc fiat ex amore iustitiae, nec peccat iudex ipsum condemnando ad mortem,
and praecipiendo ministro vt occidat eum; nec minister si iussus a iudice
occidat condemnatum. Et peccat vterque si hoc fecerint iuris ordine non
seruato.

Necessitate: quo casu distinguendum est vtrum necessitas illa fuit
ineuitabilis, an non: Si autem euitabilis, and eam euadere potuisset occisor
absque occi sione, tune erit reus homicidij. Si autem ineuitabilis, quia
occidit hominem sine odij meditatione, in metu and dolor animi, se and sua de
liberando, cum aliter euadere non potuisset, non tenetur homicidij.

Casu, sicut per infortunium, cum quis proijcit lapidem ad auem, vel animal,
and alius transiens ex insperato percutitur, and moritur. Vel siquis arborem
inciderit, and per occasum arboris aliquis opprimatur, and huiusmodi. Sed hic
distinguendum est, vtrum quis dederit operam rei licitae an illicitae, vt si
lapidem proijciebat quis versus locum per quem consueuerunt homines transitum
facere: vel dum insequitur quis equum, vel bouem, and aliquis a boue vel equo
percussus fuerit, and huiusmodi, hic imputatur ei. Si vero licitae rei operam
dabat, vt si magister causa disciplinae discipulum verberauit, vel dum quis
deponebat foenum de curru, vel arborem incidebat, and huiusmodi, and adhibuit
diligentiam quam potuit, s. respiciendo, and proclamando, nec nimis tarde aut
dimisse, sed tempore congruo and ita clamose, vt si aliquis ibi fuisset, vel
illuc venisset, potuisset aufugere, aut sibi praecauere, non imputabitur ei.
(...) ^is est de magistro non excedendo modum verberandi ^ipulum.

Voluntate, vt siquis ex certa scientia, and in assultu praemed^tato, ira vel
odio, vel causa lucri, nequiter and in felonia, contra pacem domini regis,
aliquem interfecerit. Et fit aliquando hu^smodi homicidium pluribus astantibus
and videntibus, aliquando vero clanculum and nemine vidente, ita vt sciri non
possit, quis sit occisor: huiusmodi homicidium dici poterit murd^m, secundum
quod inferius dicetur.

Poena vero homicidij duplex est, spiritualis videlicet and corporalis:
spiritualis tollitur per poenitentiam. Et occidit quis alium dupliciter:
quandoque lingua, quandoque facto. Lingua, vt si quis dissuadendo, retrahit
aliquem a proposito volentem alium liberare a morte. Et sic aliquando indirecte
facit quis homicidium. Poena vero homicidij commissi facto variatur. Nam pro
homicidio iustitiae iusta and recta intention facto, non est aliqua poena
infligenda.

Si sit aliquis qui mulierem pregnantem percusserit, vel ei venenum dederit,
per quod fecerit abortiuum, si puerperium iam formatum vel animatum fueri^t,
and maxim si animatum, facit homicidium (Mes contrarium tenetur. Fitz. cor. P.
263. and 146. Car a fair homicide, il est requisite, que le chose occise soit
in rerum natura.) Possunt and multi-culpabiles esse homicidij sicut and vnus,
vt si plures rixati fuerint inter se in aliquo conflictu, and aliquis sit
interfectus inter tales, nec apparet a quo, vel a cuius vulnere; omnes dici
possunt homicidae, and illi qui percusserunt, and tenuerunt malo animo
percussum dum percussus fuerit. Item and illi qui voluntate occidendi venerunt,
licet non percusserint. Item and illi qui non occiderunt, nec voluntate^
occidendi habuerunt, sed venerunt ad praestandum auxilium and consilium
occisoribus etc. Item and ille qui praecepit percutere and occidere, quia cum
non sint immunes a culpa, immunes esse non debent a poena.

I have written the whole discourse, for that there is herein contained the
practice of most of these precepts concerning efficient causes.

Hereunto may be added also, our Essoynes de malo lecti, del creteine del
eawe, etc. as standing all upon the same grounds of violent and compulsiue
causes, and therefore in themselves reasonable excuses of absence.

Ceux parols, Heirs, tantsolement font l'estate d'enheritance en touts
feofme^ts et grau^ts. Litleton page 1. for the sole cause. So again Littleton,
fol. 166. a. Home ne voyt vnques que cest paroll, Defendemus, fuit en ascun
fine, mes tantsolement cest paroll, Warrantizabimus. Perque semble que cest
paroll et verb, Warrantizo, fait la Garrrantie, et est la cause del Garrantie,
et null auter verb en nostre ley.

For the destroying cause, Vide 47. E. 3. fol. vltimo. Nota, que divorce poet
estre per cinque voyes, s. Causa professionis, praecontractus,
co^sanguinitatis, affinitatis, frigiditatis. Et nota, que apres divorce causa
professionis le feme serra endowe, et le heir inherit: mes en auters cases el
ne serra endowe, ne le heir inherit. Here divorce is a dissolution of
matrimony, and the constitution of the one is the destruction of the other.

For isntrumental causes, see 21. E. 4. 16. per Brigges: Qui fait per auter,
fait per Luymesme; Come de servant etc. et Fayrfax, la. 44. b. For voluntary
advise and deliberation, 41. E. 3. 30. per Finche. Si deux sont vouche per lour
fayt demesne, et al sequatur sub suo periculo l'un vient, et l'auter fayt
defaut; et le tenant surmit que cestuy que fist defaut n'ad rien de fair en
value, il auera l'entiere garrantie verse cestuy que appiere, car fuit son folly
de ioynder en garrantie oue cestuy que rien ad. Sic si feme sole ad title
d'entre en terres, et prist baron, que suffer descent et ne entra, la feme
serra bar del entry apres le mort son baron: car serra dit sa folly de
prendre tiel baron, que n'entra en temps. Here the free choice, will, and
election takes away all occasion of excuse.

Material cause. The material causes, as also all other arguments Logical,
are not to be tied only to sensible or bodily matters: but generally to be
applied to any whatsoever, be it subject to sense, or conceived by reason. As,
a man conceiueth in his mind or memory the Art of Logike or any other science,
the matter whereof is their several rules and precepts, the form, the due
disposition of the same: and yet nether first nor last is subject to sense, but
only understood by reason, and imprinted in the inward power of man's soul.
The old honest philosophers have had many odd conceiptes and fantastical
imaginations touching this cause, as appears by Aristotle in the first of his
Metaphysickes. For Thales thought the water was the material cause of all
things, as the Mystical fellows and Pagan divines thought ye Ocean, Thetis,
and Stix to be. Anaximenes said it was the air, Heraclitus, the fire,
Hesiodus the confusion of the world, Pythagoras numbers, Plato little and
great, all which and others also are but derided of Aristotle, as though they
had thus spoken of the Logical material cause, which should be general to
all things, and not rather of the material ground of natural things.

Canons. If the thing be made, then the matter must needs be. If the matter
be, the thing materiate may be: if not, then it cannot be, in secondary
causes.

The matter shows the excellency or goodness of the things made thereof:
for if the matter be good, the thing made is good: if better, better:
therefore in deliberation and consultation of diet, of building, of weapons, of
garments and such like, as also in praising or dispraising of any thing made,
there is an especial consideration and regard had of the matter.

Theloall his definition of a writ contains both the material cause and
others also. Un brief est un formal letter ou epistre del roy, escript en le
langue latyne, en perchemyne, selee ouesque son seal, direct al ascun judge,
officer, minister, ou auter subject, al suyte del roy mesme, ou al playnte et
suyte d'auter subject, commaundant ou autorisant ascun chose conteigne en mesme
la letter de estre fait pur la cause brieffement en celle letter express, que
est d'estre discuss en ascun court le roy per la ley.

The fourth Chapter. Of the formal and final cause.
THe cause before the thing caused, is as I have already taught. Now follows
the cause in and with the thing caused, which is either the form, or the end.

The form is a cause by the which a thing is that which it is, and therefore
by the form things be distinguished.

The form is ever engraven, as it were, in and together with the thing formed,
as the reasonable soul in man, and with man the self same instant.

The form is either internal, or external: Internal which is not perceived
by sense. External, which is subject to sense. External is either natural,
which is engraven in every thing naturally: or Artificial, which Art has
framed and performed.

The natural and internal forms of things be hardly either known and
understood, or expressed and made plain.

The artificial and external, is much more easily both conceived in reason,
and expressed by word: and of such there be many.

In August, Willy describes the form of his cup which he laid against
Perigots spotted lamb.

Then lo, Perigot, the pledge which I plight,
A Mazer ywrought of the maple war,
Wherein is enchased many a fair sight
Of Bears, and Tigers that maken fierce war.
And over them spread a goodly wild Vine
Entrayled with a wanton yuy twyne.
There by is a lamb in the Wolves laws:
But see how fast runs the shepheardes swayne
To save the innocent from the beasts paws,
And here with a sheephooke has him slain.
Tell me, such a cup have thou ever seen?
Well might it beseem any harvest queen.
In February, Cuddy describes the girdle he gave Phillis by the form. I wan
thee with a girdle of gelt,
Embost with buegle about the belt.


And in the same Egloge he lays down the accidental and external form,
together with some effects of his bullock.

See how brag yond bullock bears
So smirke, so smooth his pricked ears?
His horns been as broad as raynebowe bent,
His dewlap as lythe as less of kent.
See how he venteth into the wind.
Weenst of love is not his mind?
Master Plowden: Fol. 15. b. vt supra in le material cause: Car le shaping et
^esance del toge, est form del toge.

The end is a cause for the which, or for whose sake the thing is. Palinode in
the fifth Aegloge, Good is not good, but if it be spend:
God gives good for none other end.


Thenot in the second Aegloge.

It chanced after upon a day
Th'usbandman self to come that wa^.
Of custom for to survey his ground,
And his trees of state in compass round.
The end of goods, is to be spent: the end of the husbandmans going abroad,
was to view his ground.

Master Plowden: Fol. 18. a. Et pur ceo le scope et fine de chescun matter est
deste consider principalment en toutes chooses: et si le scope et fine del dit
estatute est satisfy, donques tout le matter et lentent del matter est
accomply. Et icy le substance et fine del dit estatute, et lentent del feasors
de ceo fuit, que le roy auera le subsidy, et ceo solement fuit le scope et
sum del dit estatute, et del intent del feasors de ceo. et si lagreement icy
est sufficient a doner le subsidy, et de fair le roy deste en suertie de ceo,
adonques il ensuist que lestatute et l'entent del feasors de ceo est perform
et satisfy. Et que ceo issint est, ieo ay prove deuant; car lagreement garrant
et autorize le roy del weyer la woade per son collector, a quel temps que
plerra luy, et quant ceo est fait, le roy ad title de action, et essint est en
suertie.

Fol. 59. a. Et issint chescun vener sur le terre ne'st enter, Car fuit dit que
Littleton en son lyeur tyent le ley destre, que contynuall claim doyt estre
fayt sur le terre, s'il osast vener la. et en tiel case, sil vient sur le
terre, et fayt claim, et depart mayntenant, ceo ne serra en son disadvantage
adiudg un enter; car il auera assise del primer disseisin, et recouera damages
del primer iour del assise* car son intent fuit de fair claim, et nyent de
prendre profit, ou de expeller le tenant tout ousterment, et de custodier le
possession: et issint lintent del vener sur le terre est destre respect.

Annotations.
THe formal and material cause be essential parts of the thing caused: the
end and the efficient are not so.

The form is always made by the efficient, the matter is commonly prepared,
not always made by it, as the quill is the matter whereof a pen is made, here
the maker of the pen, does but order, polish, and prepare the quill, but he
altogether makes the form and fashion of the pen. And although forma be
effectum efficientis, yet it is causa formati. Dicitur forma a formando,
differentia vero quia differ facit: vna enim eademque res est, etsi diuersa
nomina: and according to these two names, has Aristotle in the first of his
Topiks assigned it two properties; The one for giving essence and knowledge of
the same essence, the other for causing difference: And in respect of the
former, it is sometimes called, (...), quod quid erat esse, as 1. post.
Sometimes (...), ratio essentiae, 1. de ortu animal: sometimes (...), essentia
rei, 1. Philo: sometimes (...), ^atio specifica and essentialis, 4. Phil:
sometimes (...), specifica, completiua, constitutiua, as in Porphyry: and
sometimes (...), forma and ratio: sometimes (...), species and exemplar, 5.
Phil. In consideration of the latter propriety, it is commonly called (...),
differentia, for that especially by the form things differ one from another;
so the formal cause of man is his reasonable soul, for this makes man, to
be man, and to differ from all other things that be not man. So eu^y
natural thing has his peculiar form, as a lion, a horse, a tree, etc. the
heaven, the earth, the sea, etc. So every artificial thing also, as a house, a
ship, etc. So things incorporall, as virtue, vice, etc. So in a word,
whatsoever is, by the formal cause it is that which it is, and is different
from all other things that it is not.

Only the form among all other causes is (...), simul congenita, extant at
the same instant with the thing formed: so that there is a most necessary and
reciprocal consequence between the form and the thing formed. But now, as
the understanding of the formal cause causes surest knowledge, so hardly can
we understand what the formal cause is; which peradventure made Democritus
think that truth lay hidden in the bottom, and plunged in the deep. Indeed
we generally conceive and gather, that every particular thing has his
peculiar form, but what is the peculiar form of every particular thing, that
we know not; or if peradventure we guess at them now and then, yet hardly can
we express our conceits with laboursome and tedious circumlocutions. So that,
for the most part things be not known, and if they be in part perceived,
then have we no name^ for the things. Here therefore the ancient
philosophers were woonderfully troubled, as Aristotle reports 2. Meta.
Pythagoras would have his numbers to be y^ cause of things, and that every
thing was an image or resemblance of numbers: and Plato altered their words a
little, saying that Idaea was the form, and that things formed were
communications and participations of Idaeas: of whom Aristotle concludes
thus* that they valde simpliciter and imperite egerunt, and he seemed but
nugari, and poeticas metaphoras loqui.

Canons. IF you remove the form, it is impossible for the thing formed to
consist.

Such is every thing, as the form permits it to be.

The form is the fountain of actions.

The form of every thing is the especial part of ye thing, and the alteration
of the form changes the thing formed, and makes it an other thing: but
here we must distinguish between the universal changing of the form, and
the particular alteration thereof. For if a house be utterly defaced, though
it be reedi^ied of the self same timber and stone, yet it is not the same
house, but if it be but a little decayed and so repaired in part, it remains
the same house still, though in continuance of time, every stick and stone be
altered by often repayring of it.

The formal cause is general, as all other parts of Logike. For the
declaration whereof I will purposely note out some examples of the formal
cause in actions and exercises as well as things corporal.

Formalitie in pleading is now partly abridged by the statutes of 32. H. 8. ca.
20. 18. Elis. ca. 14. and 27. Elis. but how much it was esteemed heretofore,
see 14. H. 8. 27. per Brook Justice. Car un form couyent d'estre tenus et
use, ou auterment touts chooses serra en confuse et sans order. Car en trespass
couyent doner color (et uncore le sentence n'est le melieur en le verity del
matter) pur ceoque est formalitie. Et a vne plee en l'affirmatiue couyent
prendre auerment: et si soit en le negative, couyent concluder al negative, et
ceo n'est forsque formalitie: et formalitie est le pluis chief chose en nostre
ley.

And the book of Entries stands all upon formal precidents of declarations,
bars, replications, reioynders, surreioynders, rebutters, issues, verdites,
judgments, executions, process, continuances, essoynes etc.

Brytton, whose book was published in Edward the first both time and name. Fol
42. describes the order and form of battle, but somewhat discrepant from
the form described, 17. E. 3. and 19. H. 4.

In 11. H. 6. 7. the joining of battle in a writ of right is solempnly set
down, between sir Piers Colts and the Earl of Northumberland for the manner
of Capenhow.

See 14. E. 4. 8. the form of punishment called Fort et dure, pronounced in
Newgate by Justice Needham. vide 8. H. 4. 2.

Final cause. Ramus in his French Logike places the end first, since,
according to Aristotle in the second of his Physikes, the end is first in
conceit and consideration, though last in execution. But in the last edition
of his Latin Logike he sets it in the last place, respecting rather finem
rei, then efficientis scopum and intentionem, which last resolution of his I
follow at this present, yet not so resolutely, but that I can be content to
hear their advise, who bid us take heed that we confound not the final cause
with the thing caused: which we shall the better do, say they, if we
consider exactly the order and due coherence of the four causes in the
absolute constitution of a thing caused. For first, the final cause, the end,
purpose, intent, drift, mark, or scope, as it were of the whole action, is
propounded to the efficient, and so urges and moves him to prepare the
matter, and apply the form thereunto for the full accomplishing of the
enterprise: which being once performed, the efficient cause now cease, as
having obtained that it sought for. And this being thus achieved, is not the
final cause, but the thing caused. As for example, I purpose to sweat, and
therefore I dance: here the sweating is not the final cause, but the intent
and purpose which I had to sweat, is the cause that moved me to dance, and
so caused me to sweat, which sweating is the thing caused: and although in
vulgar speech, the use of a thing and the end of the same thing be confounded,
yet by art and reason they should be distinguished, the one a cause, the other
a thing caused. If any man object, that if we say the end is only the purpose
of the efficient, then this place will be restrained to such things only, as
use reason, and can purpose, where all Logike must be general, and applyable
as well to Non ens, as to Ens, to that which is not, as that which is: they
answer, that we need not take this word, purpose or deliberation so
strictly, as to apply it only to reasonable creatures, but generally say, that
every thing woorketh for some end and purpose, whether it be by natures
instinct, or voluntary consultation. Or if this seem more philosophical then
religious, we may say, that in all artificial things, and such natural
things as have no deliberation, that which we call the end, is but the thing
caused by them, and the cause final is the purpose of God in natural things,
and the intent of the artificer in things that be artificial.

Et finis mouet efficientem, and cogitatio de fine: finis vt obiectum,
cogitatio de fine, vt adiunctum agenti inhaerens, says Piscator. Some others
make the final cause to be nothing but a part of the efficient, and no
distinct cause it self, since it only moves the efficient to forward the
operation.

The end is chief, or subordinate: chief, which the efficient desires for it
self, as the covetous man Riches, and it is either universal, to the which
all things in the world generally be referred, as Gods glory; or special,
whereunto every thing in his kind is referred, as the house is the end of the
builder, for he seeks no further. Subordinate is that which is not for it
self desired, but referred to the chief end.

Canons. If the end be, then the thing must also be whose end it is: and if
the end cease to be, then the thing whose end it was, can no longer be,

Every thing is referred to his end.

The end does either allow or disallow every man's action; Or thus, that is
good, whose end was good, and contrarily: Sic Aristotle 3. Rhet. Laco, cum
rationem de Ephoratu in iudicio redderet, rogatus, an ipse alios iure perijsse
existimaret, assensus est: Ille vero, nonne haec tu cum illis decreuisti? and
ille assensus est: nonne igitur and tu (inquit) peribis? Minime vero, inquit:
illi enim pecunijs acceptis haec commiserunt, ego vero nequaquam, sed ex
sententia.

The end is more to be desired, than those things that be referred to the
end. He that seeks the end, seeks also those things that be referred to
the same end.

All the arguments that common Rhetoricians fetch from Honestum and Vtile, are
for the most part derived from the end or final cause, since for the cause of
these two, most things are enterprised. In like manner, the gesses and
conjectures of Judges are fet from the end, as, he was most like to work the
mischief, who might have any end or profit in practicing of the same.

Whose use is good, that is good, but not contrarily, the thing is bad, because
it is abused.

The end does not always follow the efficient cause, either because the
efficient could not accomplish the thing alone, or else because he would not.
Theloall. lib. 7. cap. 2. Le final intent del chescun que pursuyte brief,
est, ou a recouerer seisin ou possession de terre ou tenement, ou d'auer those
don't home peut aver heritage, ou franktenement, ou term; ou d'auer remedy et
recompense pur injury et damage a luy auenue per le act, ou non feasance d'un
auter, ou pur le non performance des contracts et obligations ou auters parts
et causes que sont come contracts.

Home vient pur auower son attorney, cest presence ne serra dit appearance, car
son intent, ne fuit d'apperer al brief etc. 8. H. 7. 8.

Abuses of causes. Sophistry, as I have said elsewhere, is no Logike: and
therefore least I should injury the art by joining sophistical fallacians with
Logical institutions, I have rather reserved them to these annotations, then
thrusted them in among the precepts. Some use, I confess, there may be had of
them (although I know, that who so thoroughly perceaueth the truth of this art,
needs to seek no other means to avoid these deceipts, since Rectu^ est index
sui, and obliqui.) But if we shall put down every thing in Logike, which has
any little show of profit thereunto; Grammar will be good Logike, because it
helps us to utter y^ which we have Logically conceived.

The word, Sophista, was at the first, a title of commendation, and only
applied unto him that was a Philosopher or teacher of wisdom. But now it is
become odious, as Tyrannus, and such like. Sophistry therefore is the abuse of
Logike, deceiving the simple with a glorious show of counterfeit reasons,
commonly called Fallacians.

Fallacians be either in the word, or in the reason. Fallacians in the word
be of two sorts, some in a simple word, some in the conjunction of words.
In a simple word be three. The first is when v^uall and vpstart words be
foisted in, as he puts his felicity in circumpugnable goods,
circumpugnabilibus bonis, meaning Riches, because men fight about them. Le
seignieur des Accords in his Bigarrures, page 198. has many of this making,
although somewhat more tolerable, because of the ridiculous application. Ils
font (says he, speaking of some French Carmini^cators) de petitelettes
descriptionettes qui so^t fort agreabletets aux oreillettes delicatelettes,
principallettement des mignar delettes damoisellettes, Come Ma nymphe
follastrelette,
Ma follastre nymphelette.
And after Ie vous vens une goutette,
Vne gout clairelette:
Vne claire goutelette,
Qui vient d'une fontenette,
Miguarde fontenelette,
Fontaine mignardelette. etc.
And page 65. of another sputatilicall goose, he says thus.

Un certain predicant qui veuloit* Pindariser en chair, et choisir des mots
courtisans, pour applaudir a quelques damoiselles fraischeme^t revenues de la
cour, auoit coustume ^e ^uenter des mots, et enter auters, il appelloit la
destinee, Fatu^ in latin, fat in Francois, sur quoy un gentil personage
rencontra ce distique

Friar Iehan Chassepoi, tu te romps trop la test
De nous prescher le fat escrit par Ciceron:
Ne t'eschauffe pas tant, va, tu n'es qu'vne best,
Pour bien monstrer le fat, oste ton Chapperon.
The like absurdity would it be for a man of our age, to affectate such
words as were quite worn out at heels and elbowes long before the nativity
of Geffrey Chawcer.

The second is, when doubtful and ambiguous words be used, as in those
verses of Martial, where, tuus, is either thine by ^argayne, or by invention.
Carmina Paulus emit; recitat sua carmina Paulus: nam quod emis possis dicere
iure tuum.
And that, All the maids in Camberwell may dance in an egg shell.


Of a little village by London, where Camberwell may be taken for the Well in
the town, or ye town it self. So that, Ware and Wadesmill be worth al
London. Where Ware is either ye town Ware, or else merchandise. So lastly, the
Mayre of Earith, is the best Mayre next to the Mayre of London. Where the
town, God knows, is a poor thing, and the mayre thereof a seely fellow, in
respect of the Mayres of diverse other cities, yet it is the very next to
London, because there is none between.

Accords page 96. vne ieune damoiselle interrogee en quelle espece d'oy seau
elle desireroit veoir son amy, si nous estions aux temps des Metamorphoses,
elle dit, qu'elle le voudroit veoir en Phaisant: vrayement vous aues raison,
dit dame Iaquette caquillon, il ne scauroit estre plus agreeable qu'en le
^aisant. Hear not the word written, but the voice and sound caused the
ambiguitie.

The third and last is, when store of Metaphorical words is the cause of a
ridiculous obscurity, as if a man meaning to be brief, should promise that
he would gallop over all the rest of his text. Wherefore Arist. reprehended
Plato for that his speech was obscure and ambiguous by reason of Metaphors*

When any of these three fallacians be used, we may say with him in Tully,
Sputa quid sit, scio: Tilica, nescio. We may desire him to speak better
English.

In the coupling or conjunction of words be two: the first is Amphiboly,
when the sentence may be turned both the ways, so that a man shall be
uncertain what way to take, for this is the signification of the greek
word Amphiboly, and this fallacian comes not from the diverse signification
of any one word, but from the ambiguous construction of many words, as that
old sophister the Devil deluded Pyrrhus by giving him such an intricate
answer. Aio te, Aeacida, Romanos vincere posse.
I now foretell the thing to thee which after shall be known;
That thou, king Pyrrhus, once shall see, the Romans overthrown.


Where this word, overthrown, may either be the nominative case and
appliable to king Pyrrhus; or the accusative, and attributed to the Romans.
The like is that given to Craesus.

Craesus Halyn penetrans magnam peruertet opum vim. Where he hoping to have
destroyed Cyrus and the Persian power, ouerturned his own estate, as Herodotus
reports. Such an one was that also given to the countess of Flaunders
concerning the battle between her son Ferrande and king Philip, Que le roy
seroit abatu, foulle aux pieds des cheuaux sans sepulture, et Ferrand receu a
Paris en grand pomp et triomphe apres la victory. Where the king, although
trodden down, yet dyed not, but overcame, and triumphed at Paris over Ferrande,
who was then taken prisoner contrary to the expectation of the Countess.
Cardan de Martin Abbot of Assello, had this verse over his gate.

Porta patens esto nulli.
Claudaris honesto.
Where, by the error of the Paynter, the point being mace after, nulli, caused
the Pope which road that way, to displace Mar^yn, and prefer another to his
room, who retained the verse, but altered the point, and put it immediately
after esto, thus. Porta patens esto. Nulli claudaris honesto.

Whereupon these verses went together.

Porta patens esto. Nulli claudaris honesto.
Ob solum punctum caruit Martinus Asello.
The verse of it self is very ambiguous, if the point be altogether omitted,
Porta patens esto nulli claudaris honesto.

The second is in the unorderly expounding of the words, as

No sickness can be health: Dido is sick, Therefore she cannot be whole.
For if you turn the words into good order of exposition, the falsenes of the
proposition will easily appear, thus, No sick body can be whole.

Thus much of such fallacians as be in the words either severed or conioined:
which indeed are rather Grammatical and Rhetorical than belonging to Logike:
Those that are in the reason be more Logical: whereof some belong to
Invention, some to Disposition.

Fallacians of Invention are either common to all the places, or peculiar to
some certain places.

Common to all be two. The first is called, Petitio principij, the requesting
of the thing in controversy: when, to prove any thing, we seek to have,
either the same in effect granted us, or some other thing as doubtful.
Petitio principij then, is either when the same thing is proved by it self,
as, The soul is immortal, because it never dies: Or when a doubtful thing
is confirmed by that which is as doubtful, as The earth moves, Because the
heaven stands still.


The second is, Superfluity: either when we cast in things impertinent: or
else in unnecessary repetitions of the same things.

For the first, that may serve for an example, which Tully has in his second
book of Divination: as if a physician should command his patient to take such
a beast, as is bred of the ground, walks on grass, carries her cottage, and
wants blood, whereas he might with less labor, and to better purpose have
willed him take a Snaile, which he calls

Terrigenam, herbigradam, domiportam, sanguine cassam.

To this example you may add that of Martial, as more convenient. lib. 6.

Non de vi, neque caede, nec veneno,
Sed lis est mihi de tribus capellis:
Vicini queror has abesse furto,
Hoc iudex sibi postulat probari.
Tu Cannas, Mithridaticumque bellum,
Et periuria Punici furoris,
Et Syllas, Mariosque Mutiosque
Magna voce sonas, manuque tota.
Iam dic Posthume, de tribus capellis.
Much like as if a preacher in expounding a text of charity, should talk out
his houre-glasse, in discoursing of Bell the Dragon of Babylon. To such
fellows we may say, turn to your text, or Iam dic Posthume de tribus
capellis.

For the second, which is unnecessary repetition of the same thing, this shall
suffice, that when I have generally put down the nature of an argument, it
were sophistical to repeat the same in every particular, as, when I have once
said generally, that an argument is that which is affected to argue, what need
I in the particular discourse of a cause to say, a cause is that which is
affected to argue.

Now let us come to the particular fallacians of several places, And first for
the causes. It is sophistical to argue from that which is no cause: as if it
were a cause. So Sinon the false caytife fayneth a cause why the wooden horse
was builded. Hanc pro Palladio moniti, pro numine laeso,
Effigiem statuere, nefas quae triste piaret.


It is, and always has been a common practice among lewd men, to pretend
counterfaite causes to cloak their malicious intent, and disgrace other men's
good meaninges. The true cause therefore must be carefully distinguished from
the shadow ouercast: Arist. 2: Rh. a non causa quasi causa, quippe prop terea
(...) simul, aut post eam euenerit: quod enim post illam est, aeque ac propter
illam accipiunt, maximeque qui in republica versantur, vt Demades, Demosthenis
politiam causam calamitatum omnium extitisse, quia post eam bellum est
excitatum.

Also in efficient causes, the diverse kinds of woorking must be diligently
considered, as, what causes can work alone, what require the help of others,
what work necessarily, what voluntarily, and so forth.

The fifth Chapter. Of the thing caused.
THe thing caused is that which is made by the force of all the causes, which
usually, although not so properly, is called the effect.

Howsoever any thing be altered, moved or changed, the motion, and the thing
moved, or changed, belong to this place, and are called effects, or things
caused: as also, sayings and writings, thoughts and all cogitations,
although neither uttered nor accomplished.

Matter of praising and dispraysing commonly is fet from this place. So in
February, Thenot tells how the Briar made a pitiful complaint to the
husbandman, dispraising the Oak, and exclaiming against it, by reason of his
injurious dealing: which he at large puts down to incense the husbandman
against the Oak.

How falls it then that this faded oak,
Whose body ls sear, whose branches broke,
Whose naked arms stretch unto the fire,
Unto such tyranny does aspire?
Hindering with his shade my lovely light,
And robbing me of the sweet suns sight?
So beat his old boughs my tender side,
That often the blood springs from wounds wide.
Untimely my flowers forced to fall,
That been the honor of your coronall.
And often he lets the cankred worms light
Upon my branch to work me more spite*
And often his hoary locks down does cast,
Wherewith my fresh flowers been defaste.
For this, and many more such outrage,
Craving your goodhyhead to assuage
The rancorous rigor of his might,
Naught ask I but only to hold my right.
In May Piers proves the sheepheards to be evil, by their effects, thus:

Those faytors little regarden their charge,
While they, letting their sheep run at large,
Passen their time that should be sparely spent,
In lustyheade and wanton meryment.
Thylke same been sheepheards for the devils sted,
That playen whiles their flocks be unfed.
In the same Aegloge Palinode sets forth the effects of youth agreeable to
the pleasantnes of the time.

Youths folk now flocken in every where
To gather May buskets and smelling brere.
And home they hasten, the posts to dight,
And all the kirk pillars ere day light,
With hawthorne buds and sweet Eglantine,
And gyrlonds of roses, and Sops in wine.
In July, Thomalin prayseth Christ the great shepherd, by his effects. O
blessed sheep, o shepherd great, that bought his flock so dear,
And them did save with bloody sweat from Wolves that would them tear.


In the eight Aegloge Piers rehearses the effects of love, in these words.

Ah fone, for love does teach him climb so hye,
And lifts him up out of the loathsome mire.
Such immortal myrrour as he does admire,
Would raise ones mind above the starry sky,
And cause a captive courage to aspire,
For lofty Love does loath a lowly eye.
Colyn in December repeateth the pastimes and effects of his youth in these
verses.

Whylom in youth, when flowrd my joyful spring,
Like swallow swift I wandered here and there.
For heat of headless lust me so did sting,
That I of doubted danger had no fear.
I went the wastfull woods, and forest wide,
Withouten dread of wolves to been espyde.
I wont to raunge among the mazy thicket,
And gathered nuts to make me Christmas game,
And ioyed often to chase the trembling pricket,
Or hunt the hartles hare till she were tame.
What wreaked I of wintry ages waste?
Thoe deemed I my spring would ever last.
How often have I skaled the craggy oak,
All to dislodge the raven of her nest?
How have I wearyed with many a stroke
The stately wallnut tree? the while the rest
Under the tree fell all for nuts at strife,
For ylike to me was liberty and life.
And so after, in the same pitiful lamentation, the effects of his summer and
winter be set down.

But in March, Thomalins long tale of Cupide, has almost nothing else, but a
rehearsal of his own dooinges and Cupids. The narration is this.

It was upon a holyday
When sheepheards grooms han leave to play,
I cast to go a shooting:
Long wandering up and down the land
With bow and bolts in either hand
for birds in bushes tooting.
At length within an yuy tod,
There shrouded was the little god,
I heard a busy bustling.
I bent my bolt against the bush
Listening if any thing would rush,
But then heard no more rustling.
Thoe peeping close into the thick,
Might see the moving of some quick,
Whose shape appeared not.
But were it fayry, feend, or snake,
My courage earnd it to awake,
And manfully thereat shot.
With that sproong forth a naked swayne,
With spotted wings, like peacocks train,
And laughing lope to a tree:
His golden quiver at his back,
And silver bow which was but slack,
Which lightly he bent at me:
That seeing I, leueld again,
And shot at him with might and main
As thick as it had hayled:
So long I shot that all was spent,
The pumy stones at last I hent
And threw, but naught auailed.
He was so wymble and so wight,
From bough to bough he stepped light,
And often the pumyes latched.
Therewith affrayd I ran away,
But he that erst seemd but to play,
A shaft in earnest snatched:
And hit me running in the heel;
For then I little smart did feel,
But soon it sore increased;
And now it rankleth more and more,
And inwardly it festreth sore,
Ne wot I how to cease it.
Master Plowden: Fol. 163. a. Et certes, les Cloysterers communement en
feasant lour leases et faits, auoyent un form, lequel ils cy precisement voile
te^er, et pursuer, que ils voillent, marrer tout, pluistost que alterer lour
custom: et i^int purceoque ils ne voilent encliner lour form al ley, mes
voilent aver le ley a incliner a lour usage, ils destroyeront le force de
plusours fayts.

Annotations.
THis argument of the thing caused conteyneth not only deeds and works, but
also thoughts, and words, counsayles and deliberations, and all motions
whatsoever. Parmenio the father, and Philotas the son, were both put to death
for suspicion of treason against Alexander: Where, their cogitation and
compassing of their Souereignes death, were such effects as were plagued by
death. For like occasion also were Lentulus, Cethegus and other accomplices of
Catyline brought to confusion.

Yet when sayings, writings, counsayles, and deliberations be brought in as
testimonies, then are they arguments borrowed, assumpta aliunde.

Canons. We commend men by their causes and adjuncts, as for their noble
ancestors, great possessions, etc. but especially by reason of their effects,
as for that they did this or this etc. Nam genus, and proauos and quae non
fecimus ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voco.


And as for Riches, perinde sunt, as he that uses them: good, if he apply
them well: bad, if otherwise.

If the thing caused be, then the cause either is or was, but not always
contrarily.

Such as the thing caused is, such commonly is the cause.

That which is attributed, or not attributed to the thing caused, must be
applied or not applied to the cause.

Fit. Cor. 22. E. 3. p. 26. Thorpe recita coment un jailer vient al jail oue
un lantern en sa maine a veier ses prisoners, queux auoyent debruse lour fers,
et estoye^t touts prests d'auer occise luy, et batoyent et naufroyent luy
malement: mes il auoyt un hatchet en sa maine, oue quelle il occist trois de
eux, et puis eschapa, et fuit aiudge per tout le counsel, que il auoyt bien
fayt.

Stanford: lib. 1. ca. 9. Nota, que en ancient temps la volunt fuit cy
material, que il fuit repute pur le fait. Fit. Cor. 15. E. 3. P. 383. ou un
compassant le mort d'auter, luy naufra^y greeuousement, que il luy lessa giser
pur mort, et pius s'enfua, et l'auter reuiua, et non obstant, fuit aiudge
felony, (...); quant sa volunt apiert cy ouertment de luy aver tue, voluntas
reputabitur pro facto et oue ceo accorda Bracton qui dit, In maleficijs
spectatur voluntas and non exitus, and nihil interest vtrum quis occidat, an
causam mortis praebeat. Mes le ley n'est issint a cestiour. Car il doyt morir
en fayt, auant que il serra aiudge felony. Et si home ferist auter oue intent
de luy bater, mes nemy a luy tuer, uncore sil morust de tiel bater, il est
felony en luy que ferist: perque a cest iour, home peut conuerter le dit tert
de Bracton, et dire, que Exitus in maleficijs spectatur, and non voluntas
dundaxat.

Elenchs. Martial uses this argument sophistically in his first book.
Extemporalis factus est meus Rhetor,
Calphurnium non scripsit, and salutauit.
As though this were an affect of an extemporall Rhetor, to salute a man by
name without premeditation. But here his meaning was to be merry, in taunting
the man for his ill memory, who could skarce remember his familiar friends
name, unless he had written it before, and learned it without book.

The sixth Chapter. Of the whole, part, general, special.
HItherto of the first division of arguments fully agreeable, in the cause and
the thing caused. Now follows the second. Secondly therefore the argument
fully agreeable is either the whole and his part, or else the general and his
special.

The whole is that which conteyneth parts: the part is that which is contained
of ye whole. The whole is integrall, or universal: The whole integral is that
which has his essence or being of the parts, as Logike has two parts,
exposition of arguments, and disposition of the same, and of these two parts
the whole essence and nature of Logike confisteth. So a message is made of two
parts, del terre et structure. And here the part is called a member, and is
that which gives essence to the whole, as Exposition and Disposition in
respect of Logike, terre and structure in respect of a message.

The whole universal, called the general, is such a whole as gives the
essence or being to his specials; as, an Inherent argument, is the general,
containing original arguments, and those y^ are secondary as his specials. For
here an inherent argument is a whole essence, which does equally perteyne to
original arguments, and such as are secondary.

The special is a part of the general, as arguments first and secondary are
specials of an Inherent argument, as being parts put under it indifferently and
equally or alike.

The general is either most general or subalternall, the special is either
most special or subalternall, that is, put under.

The chief or most general is that which has no general above, As in
Logical Invention, an argument, is the most general, comprising both Inherent
and borrowed arguments under it.

The general and special subalternall, or under another, are those which may
be in diverse respects both generals and specials: generals, in respect of
their inferiors; specials, in respect of their superiors, as, a cause, is a
special in respect of an argument fully agreeable: but it is a general in
respect of the material or formal cause.

The most special is that, which cannot be divided into specials, as this or
that singular material or formal cause containing none other under it.

Generals are certain resemblances of causes in themselves comprehended; as
specials are of effects. Special examples referred to their generals, belong
to this place.

Annotations.
HOttoman. Totum and parts vtrum prius an posterius sunt, anne simul? primum
distinctio adhibenda est, vt aliud sit totum natural, veluti arbor, fundus,
auis, equus: aliud artificiosum, veluti domus, nauis, currus. si natural totum
est, verissimum est quod Aristoteles libro de natura octauo scribi^ prius esse,
and naturae, and temporis, and rationis ordine, id quod perfectum est, eo quod
est inchoatum. sin autem artificiosum est, tum eiusdem Aristotelis monitu,
altera distinctio adhibenda est, vtrum subtiliter and artis ratione, an
populariter ex sermonis consuetudine disseratur. Nam quia subtili ratione ea
demum pars vere proprieque dicitur, quae suo munere fungitur, fungi autem suo
munere, nisi suo toti inhaerens, non potest, certe totum and pars naturae ac
temporis ordine simul sint necesse est. Nam vbi est domus, ibi necesse est esse
tectum, and vbi tectum reuera tegens, ibi necesse est esse domum: vbi currus,
ibi rota; and vbi rota reuera, and actu voluens est, ibi currus: sin autem
populariter loquamur, and homonymia, id est, communione nominis abutamur, tum
vero pars dicetur esse prior, totum vero posterius, vt area, quam iuris
consulti potissimam domus partem appellant, prior est aedificio: and fundus
prior vitibus, aut arboribus, aut fructibus,

Canons of the part. If you put down or affirm all the essential parts, you
must also put down the integrall it self. But if you put down one, or some
of the parts only, you cannot therefore put down the whole; for the parts,
not seu^d, but all jointly, make up the nature of the whole.

If you de^y or take any one essential part away, the whole is also gone.

Of the Integrall. Prohibitus a toto, prohibitus est a qualibet part.

He that has the whole, has also the principal or essential parts.

Although ye put down all the parts, yet unless they be conjoined, the
whole will not necessarily follow.

If you deny the whole, all the parts are not therefore straightway denied,
unless you mean, that the whole being gone, the remnant is not properly to
be called a part, Vt non est tectum, nisi tegat, etc.

7. H. 7. 8. a. b. 20 acres fueront agree d'estre touts temps parcel del manor,
Ergo sil deuy seisie del manor, il deuy seisie des. 20. acres.

That which agrees with the whole Integrall, must also agree with the parts
conjoined, but not severed.

If the whole be not attributed to any thing, it will not follow, that
therefore no part should be applied unto it.

The whole Integrall cannot be affirmed of any one of his parts: for a part is
not the whole: but all the parts together make the essence of the whole. But
the general may be affirmed on one special, for that the whole nature and
essence of the general is in every one of the specials, so that the special
is the same thing indeed with the general, (although not in such ample manner)
or rather a pattern and resemblance of the general. Yet, as the special
conteyneth in it somewhat more than the general (I mean, his proper formal
cause moreover and besides that he had of his general) so the general
comprehends under it more than one special; as being therefore common and
indifferently applyable to many, because it is abstract from all, and not
determinately bound to any. Whereupon they say in schools* Genus abstrahit ab
vtroque, vt possit esse vtrumque, and conteyne^ under it, not in it, repugnant
specials, according to Porphyry. Yet, notwithstanding all this, you may affirm
the Integrall on his part in a simple axiom, so that this word, Part, be
added thereunto, as, Invention is a part of Logike, the body is a part of man.
Integrall.

21. H. 7. 21. per Fineux, and Tremayle Justices, le person auera trespass de
arbres coupes et emportes en le cimitorie, et d'entry et infreindre del eglise,
car l'eglise, le cimitorie, et les dismes ^ont le Rectorie. General.

Litleton. page 80. Si soit rent, il serra rent service, charge ou seck, mes
n'est, etc. Ergo. Et page 90. Chescun que ad francktenement, ad vel fee, vel
tail, vel pur vie, vel auter vie: mes n'est issint icy. Ergo. General.

21. E. 4. 79. Si essoine gist pur corporation, tum yel hoc vel illud, etc. sed
nec l'essoyne de mal vener gi^ pur ceo, nec de malo lecti: car ceur excuse
defaut, et ils ne poient appearer in person; et ils touts ne serront sick
ensmble: nec de seruitio, nec de vltra mare, nec de terra sancta, car ils ne
serro^t intendes d'estre touts in tiel case, Ergo null essoin gist pur
corporation.

In assise, le pl. dit, que le terre est tenus d'un tiel, come de son manor de
D. que est ancient demesne: le def. in manner confess ceo, et tamen il prist
general auerment, que parcel del mesme le manor, le quel il ad conus d'estre
ancient demesne, serra francke fee, sans monstre coment per matter special;
que n'est reason, car chescun chose serra intend del mesme le nature, come le
chose est, don't il est parcel. Sic hic le manor de D. est conus d'estre
ancient demesne, and sic per conseqnens serra intend, que tout ceo que est
tenus del dit manor, serra del mesme le nature prima facie. 3. H. 6. 47. a.

General. Special. The general is nothing else, but a multitude or
universality of things like in essence, or one like essence in many things.

Hottoman. (...) (vt Zeno apud Laertium definit) (...). Itaque plures cognati
qui sanguinis eiusdem communione inter se co^aerent, quam ab vno eode^que
capite duxe^unt, idcirco a Graecis appellantur (...) vel (...), cum alij, qui
gentis ac stirpis alterius sint, (...) vel (...), alieni and extranei
nominentur. So that this word, Genus; is Metaphorical.

The higher you ascend, the more general things be: the more general
things be, the fewer particular proprieties are they tied unto: and therefore
the most general does agree to most particulers. But, the lower you descend,
the more is always in particularitie comprehended in the words, so that they
can not be applied to so many.

The general precepts put down in all Arts, were first invented by the
induction of many particulers and specials.

The general being affirmed universally, every one of his specials must also
necessarily be affirmed. But if the general be but indefinitely, simply, or
vndeterminately put down; some one of his specials must indeed be put down
also, and that necessarily, but no certain one above the rest, but only
contingently, as If there be any driggle draggle in Shrewsbury she must be
either Ienny Dymmocke, or some other: this is necssarily true: but it is but
contingent to say, that if there be any, it must needs be she: for there
may be many others also.

Generi per speciem derogatur. Nam qui de vna aliqua specie loquitur, is
caeteras sub eodem genere contentas species non dissimulanter excludit, sic
legatum speciale detrahit generali.

Deny the general, howsoever you list, and all his specials be denied.

Whatsoever is attributed to the universal nature of the general, must be
given to the specials. But there may be many things applied to the indefinite
nature of the general, which cannot be ascribed to any of his particulers,
unless the thing be common both to the general and special.

Of the special. The special does only conclude affirmatively, unless all
the specials be denied together.

If you put down one, more, or all the specials, you also put down the
general, for that the nature and essence of the general is in every of the
specials. If you deny one only special, you deny the whole general in his
most ample and largest universality: but not as he is indefinite. But if you
deny every special, then the general is taken away, howsoever you mean it.

Whatsoever agrees with the specials, agrees also with the general: if so
be that the thing applied ^ee common, and not peculierly proper to one
special alone, as apud Tribalos patrem immolare est laudabile, ergo (...).
Hottoman.

Quod vni speciei non conuenit, non continuo generi indefinito non conuenit,
vt, si homo est animal, quod non est animal id non est homo: sed non, siquid
non sit homo, id continuo sequitur, non esse animal. Nam etsi contrariorum
contraria sunt consequentia, tamen differentiae causa hic est in negatione
posita, quae cum priuatio sit; aff^matione, quae habitus est, semper est
deterior neque pare^ cum illa vim habet.

Species eiusdem generis sunt simul natura: est tamen aliqua differentia
ordinis, vt in art speciem hanc illi preponas.

The Grecians call the most special, (...), Indiuiduum, quod diuidi in parts
corporatas sine interitu non potest. Nam si totum in parts distrahatur, nulla
pars erit totum, neque totius nomine appellari poterit. There was never any
Logician before Ramus that durst absolutely pronounce an Indiuiduu^, as
Socrates, to be a special, or a man to be a general: yet I could never see
either good reason, or reasonable experience to the contrary. Neque enim
audiendum est quod dici videtur a Porphyrio, and nonnullis praeterea in
Aristotelea bibliotheca locis, indiuidua non differ forma essentiali, sed
proprietate accidentiu^, vt mas, and faemina: quae accidentia in He^maphrodito
miscentur. Nam tum detractis (quod omnino saltem cogitatione fieri potest)
accidentibus, omnes homines essent vnicus and singularis homo: imo neque deus,
neque demon, neque homo, neque vlla prorsus essentia esset (quod est ab
Aristotele nominatim improbatum, cum idealem hominem eiusmodi derideat) sed
accidentia sola. Talaeus.

Hottoman. Plato ea demum esse vere ac proprie dicebat, quae a sensibus remota,
tantum ratione and animo perciperentur, propterea quod semper vniusmodi essent,
neque ortu^ neque interitum haberent: cum indiuidua infinita, fluxa, and caduca
essent, orirenturque and occiderent, nec diutius vno and eodem statu essent.
Aristoteles vero nullas putabat esse extrinsecus substantias, sed intellectam
plurimorum inter se differentium similitudinem, vel genus, vel speciem
appellabat. Primus Aristoteles, ait Cicero, species labefactauit, quas mirifice
Plato fuerat amplexatus, vt in ijs diuinum quiddam esse diceret. Ac de vtrisque
istiusmodi substantijs idem Cicero in lib. de vniuersitate ex Platonis Timaeo
ita scribit.

Quid est quod semper sit (haec idaea est) neque vllum habet ortum. Et quod
gignatur (hoc indiuiduum est) nec vnquam sit. Quorum alterum intelligentia and
ratione comprehenditur, quod vnum semper atque idem est: alterum quod affert
opinionem per sensus, rationis expers, quod totum opinabile est, id gignitur
and interit, nec vnquam esse vere potest?

Vtrius igitur illorum probabilior sententia videtur? Non est humilitatis
nostrae tantam inter summos omnium philosophos controuersiam disceptare. Magis
tamen aliquanto ad notionum nostraru^ rationem accommodata Platonis sententia
videtur: quippe cum satis constet, non omnes notiones ex oblata extrinsecus
indiuiduorum corporum impulsione existere, sed quasdam per se constare; neque
vel aliunde originem habere, vel alto quam suo ac proprio fundamento niti. Quo
in genere sunt intellectae res omnes, vt quantitates and qualitates, veluti
longitudo, latitudo, and altitudo. Item iustitia, temperantia, eloquentia: Item
morbus, valetudo, imbecillitas: quae si in subiecto aliquo insunt, per se
tamen, and tanquam auulsae and abstractae considerantur. Infra.

Videsne quam sutores and calceolarij formam calceorum appellant? Nimirum
lignum oblongum, calcei instar, proportione aptum, atque incisum. At ijdem
formam calcei aliam in mente atque intelligentia impressam atque insignitam
habent: quae vna vere proprieque, tum Idaea, tum forma, and est, and dici
debet. Ad quam, tanquam pictores ad exemplar, suam picturam; ita illi opus suum
dirigunt. Forma igitur calcei lignea subiectum est: species in mente insita,
auulsa atque abstracta est.

In an other place more plainly.

Iubent enim (s. Plato and Aristoteles) poni Calliam procul ad nos longo
interuallo venientem. Ea species extrinsecus oblata sensibus continuo generis
vniuersi notitiam in animo informat. Primum enim corpus esse intelligimus, mox,
vbi propius accessit, animal: tum hominem: ad extremum, Calliam, Sic, qui in
statione sunt, and procul aliquem venientem intuentur, primum corpus esse
animaduertunt; secundo, ex cursu animal esse iudicant: tertio, equitem: quarto,
ex color, amicum vel hostem: postremo, Titium, vel Sempronium. Atque hi sunt
nimirum notionum and intelligentiarum gradus.

So much I have borrowed of Hottoman, concerning general Idaeas: too little
for Quidditaries: yenough for our purpose. He that desires more shall be sure
to find too much, if he do but once show himself willing to entertain
those everlasting praters de vniuersalibus.

Morrell in July, to enforce the general commendation of hills, brings in
special examples, as saint Michaels mount, S. Brigets Bower, Mount Oliuet,
Parnassus, Ida: etc.

Before I go further, it were expedient to yield some reason why I sever the
general, special, whole and part from the tractate of division, where Ramus
placed them. For Genus says Talaeus, significat causam speciei, and species
ideo significat effectum generis. itaque originem suam e primis argumentis
ostendunt, quotiesque genus explicatur a speciebus causa arguitur ex effectis;
quoties contra species arguitur e genere, effectus arguitur e causis. Alia
tamen est hic inuentionis via, quam illic. Causa enim and effecta subtilius
illic explicantur, hic comprehenduntur. Which yet can hardly make me believe
that they be arguments made of the first, as they should be, if they were
secondary arguments: For I call that secondary which is made of some
original, as division and definition is. For as for Coniugates and notation
although I give them leave for a time to soiourne among the annotations, yet I
dare not admit them into the text.

[The generall] haec definitio generis and speciei aduersas superioris and
huius topici differentias ostendit: illic integrum sumit essentiam e membris:
hic genus essentiam speciebus tribuit: illic membra constituunt totum, hic
species constituuntur a genere.

Theloall. Et sunt quaedam breuia formata super certis casibus de cursu, and de
communi consilio totius regni concessa and approbata, quae quidem nullatenus
mutari possunt absque consensu and voluntate eorum: il intend original briefs.
Sunt etiam breuia ex ijs sequentia, dicuntur Iudicialia, and saepius variantur
secundu^ varietatem placitorum etc. haec ex Bracton.

Done est vne nosme general pluis que n'est feofment. Car done est general a
touts chooses moebles et nyent moebles, et feffment est riens forsque de soil.
Britton 87. a.

Generale crimen falsi plura sub se continet crimina specialia, quemadmodum de
falsis chartis, de falsis mensuris, de falsa moneta etc. Glanuil.

Essoniu^ est de malo veniendi vltra mare de seruitio regis. terra sancta.
citra mare
malo lecti

Bracton. 339. 21. H. 7. 16. Frowike. Si ieo voyle prescriber, que ieo et touts
ceux etc. ont use de temps etc. a distreyner touts les tenantes a term de vie,
ou d'ans del manor de D. pur un haroit apres le mort de chescun tenant etc. ceo
est bon prescription: car il est in le generality; issintque comentque un ou
deux, ou trois des tenures soyent determines, uncore auters poyent demurrer,
issint la poet il estre un contynuance de les tenants, comentque diverse
morreront etc.

In 4. H. 6. 30. There is an argument used from the denial of all the specials
to take away the general. Recordare, le def. fist conusance come bailey A. B.
file et heir P. le pl. dit, que A. B. est bastard etc. et sur ceo le def. pria
aid de A. B. et per Bab et Cott: il auera aid: mes contra per Strange et Martin.
car par luy, il doyt aver pria l'ayde in le conclusion de son conusance: et in
ple personell home auera aid puis plee plede et nemy deuant; mes in ple real
home auera aid deuant ple plead. Et n'ad mes deux manners de entries de aid:
l'un est de aid deuant ple plead, s. quod defendens vel tenens petit auxilium
de A. sine quo ipse non potest respondere, et si soit puis ple plede, le entry
est, quod def. petit auxilium de B. ad manutenendum exitum. Et in cest case il
ne poet estre ad manutenendum exitum, car null issue est join: et il ne poet
estre, sine quo non potest respondere, car il ad responde al action, et in le
conclusion del ceo ne ad pry aid et ideo il est passa l'adua^tage del ceo et
ne sont plusors entries del aid, mes ceux deux.

Elenchs of the whole.

A double Elench lurketh in this place, one of composition an other of
division: for composition thus. Humfrey Crowther is a good fiddler, therefore
he is good: and this fallacian is from the whole, because those two things so
joined together seem to make up the whole, whereupon afterward the part may
be concluded, as though in this example, Humfrey Crowther were a whole
integrall thing, made and consisting of these two parts, goodness and
fidlery. Some other call this a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter,
when we apply that absolutely and generally which was spoken but in part and
in respect, as here Humfrey is called good, not generally, for his good
conditions, but particulerly in respect of his gitterne. Issint in 9. H. 7. 19.
a. Cestuy que est heir al pere et mere, est heir al pere, mes l'issue del
baron et sa second feme donees in special tail, est heir al pere et mere,
ergo il est heir generallment al pere et simpliciter, non sequitur, car le
pere poet aver fits per le primer feme. Vauisor. expone Maiorem and apparebit
fallacia, Cestuy que est heir al pere et mere coniunctim, est heir al pere
diuisim; ore ceo est false. Vide. L. 5. E. 4. 43. Leas fuit fait per abbe et
covent, ergo per abbe sole, null reason. q. an serra intend mesme le leas.

Now on the other side, Division is a fallacian, as it were from the parts,
when things are severally propounded and jointly concluded, as Antony Now-Now
is good, and a singer, therefore Antony Now-Now, is a good singer.
For indeed these two things severally put down are not essential parts of
Antony Now-Now, but only accidental qualities: whereas if they had been his
essential parts the argument would have followed, as here A man is a living
and sensible creature, and also reasonable, therefore A man is a reasonable
living creature.
And so in composition, thus, A man is a sensible creature endued with reason,
therefore A man is sensible; or therefore A man is reasonable.


Elenchs of the part.

First when you infer the who^e, some of the parts wanting. Isabell
Greenesleeues has a fair hand, a good leg, a quick eye, therefore she is a
proper fair woman: it follows not, for she is splayfooted, crookbacked:
tunnebellied, sawtoothed etc. The like is that of Catullus. Quintia formosa est
multis, mihi candida, longa, recta est: haec ego sic singula confiteor.
Totum illud, Formosa, nego. Nam nulla venustas, nulla in tam magno corpore
mica salis.
So elsewhere of Formianus his trull.

Salve nec minimo puella naso,
Nec bello pede, nec nigris ocellis,
Nec longis digitis, nec ore sicco,
Nec sane nimis elegante lingua,
Decoctoris amica Formiani:
Ten' prouincia narrat esse bellam?
Tecum Lesbia nostra comparatur?
O saeclum insipiens and infacetum.
Vide 44. E. 3. 13. a. b. Vbi Wickingham and Persay disputant, ytrum le playnt
d'un molyn in assise abatera, eoque fuit troue, que parcel del molyn fuit sur
auter terre, issint il n'auoit entier molyn. Et sic come un sophister petit
plus qua^ oportuit.

Home esteant seisie en fee de certain terres in un ville, et in deux hamlets
del mesme le ville, deuisa touts ses terres esteants in le ville, et in vne de
les hamlettes per nosme et deuy; riens del terre in l'auter hamlet passera: car
son intent appear per l'expressing d'un des hamlets. Mes Brown ex rigore
Logices fuit e contra, per un argument a toto, car le ville conteigne les
hamlets, Ergo etc. mes le ley favor devises, quia sont faits quant homes
gisont in extremis, sans reason ou erudite counsel pur le pluis part, 9. Eliz.
27. Dyer. Mes certes auterment, le deuisor plaide but the sophister. Come in
trespass verse I. del parish del Aluale in com. S. yeoman; le def. dd. judgment
del brief, car in le parish del Aluale est un ville appelle Wilton, et le
def. iour del brief purchase fuit demurrant en Wilton, sans ceo que il demurra
in le parish del Aluale; cest, sans ceo, est repugnant al matter deuant; car
s'il demurra in le ville, et le ville est in le parish, donque il demurra in le
parish, L. 5. E. 4. 20. a. Issint in l'auter case, il dona touts ses terres in
le ville, et ambideux les hamlets sont in le ville, Ergo il dona touts ses
terres que sont in les hamlets.

Secondly, this place is abused, when the whole is divided into such parts as
be not his own: as when Rhetorike is divided into Invention, Disposition,
etc. For both these be the parts of Logike, not of Rhetorike, as they are
commonly taken: but of Elenchs in division more in the tractate of Division.

Elenchs of General and Special.

If a man, when he knows one or two specials, thinks that he knows the
general; he is much deceived: but more, if when he has gotten a general
notion of any Art, he thinks himself a sufficient artificer. For it is one
thing to have a general and superficial sight in an art, but another matter,
to be able to practice those general precepts in every particularitie.

In 26. H. 8. 6. a. Shelley abuses this argument: Si ieo ay le manor de grand
Dirtleby, ieo ay le manor del Dirtleby. Et le case fuit, que fine fuit leuy del
manor de D. et in mesme le county fueront deux D, grand et petite, et null sans
addition, hic Shelley dit, que passa per le fine pur le reason aua^t dit: mes
Fitz. denia ceo, car ne fuit ascun tiel manor, mes per feffment le manor
intendus passeroit per le livery. Shelley fuit deceive in ceo que il prist
grand D et petit D, d'estre specials, et D, sans addition d'estre le general:
et issint reuera, st ieo ay grand D, ieo ay D, come, ceo que est, homo est
animal: mes in verity, grand D et petite D, s^nt indiuidua, s. singular lieues
conues per tiels nosmes sans ascun general chose que conteigne ambideux.

Issint 7. H. 6. 39. Hals arguit eodem modo, Uous ne dedits, mes que il y ad D
mayor, and D minor deins le county, Ergo il yad D, argumentum ab inferiore ad
suum superius, issint est prove, que il yad tiel ville. But by his favor it
follows not, because there is upper Dale and nether Dale, therefore there must
be a third Dale, without addition at all, that is neither upper Dale nor
nether Dale, but distinct from them both. For, if in one county there be two
manors, the one called grand Higham, the other petite Higham, t^ true general
to these two singular manors, is, this word, Manor; and so it will follow well.
Is. has the manor of grand Higham, Ergo Is. has a manor: but the manor of
Higham is no such general as should include the manors of grand Higham and
petite Higham. Vide L. 5. E. 4. 47. Mesme le error, que Comb conteigne long
Comb et short Comb.

The seventh Chapter. Of the Subject.
THus much shall suffice for the argument fully agreeable: now it follows to
speak of that which is agreeable but in part and after a certain manner, as is
the subject and the adiunct.

The subject is that whereunto some thing is adjoined. The subject receives
the adiunct, either in it, as the mind learning, the place the thing placed:
or to it: and this is either affected by the thing adjoined, as the body
receives garments to it, and is of them affected: or else it does affect the
thing adjoined, as a sick man receives unto him the physician, and does
affect him, by occupying and busiyng his head and mind in inuenting remedies
for him.

Thenot in February.

You thinken to be Lords of the year,
But often when you count you freed from fear,
Comes the breame winter with chamfred brows,
Full of wrinckles and frosty furrows.
Where the brows be the subject of wrinckles and furrows.

In April, Hobbinoll begins his song, in praise of Elysa, with the subject
of the place, in these verses.

Ye dainty nymphs that in this blessed brook do bathe your breast:
Forsake your watery bowres, and hither look at my request.
And eke you Virgins that on Paernaesse dwell,
Whence flows Helicon the learned well.
Help me to blaze
Her worthy praise.
Which in her sex does all excel.
Where the Brook is the subject to their bodies, and Parnassus Mount, to the
Well, Hellicon.

In April by Hobbinoll, Elysa is described by her garments and place.

See where she sits upon the grassy green o seemly sight.
Yelad in skarlet a maiden queen and Ermynes white.
Upon her head a cremosin coronet,
With damask Roses and Daffadyllies set,
Bayleaues between
And Primeroses green
Embellishe the sweet Violet.
Where Elysa is the subject to these particulers, and the grassy green the
subject to Elysa.

Master Plowden: Fol. 217. b. Et enfancy, que est grand disabilitie, est
repugnant all estate del roy; et coment que enfancy est in le natural corpse,
uncore quant le corpse politic del roy est conioyne a ceo, et un corpse fayt de
eux ambideux, tout le corpse auera les properties, qualities, et degrees del
corpse politic, que est le greinder et le pluis digne. en que il and my, ne
poet estre, ascun enfancy.

Fol. 237. a. Le roy auoyt en luy troys chooses, s. poyar, Justice, et Mercy,
poyar a fair, Justice a enforcer luy de fair: et Mercy a stayer luy de fair.

Fol. 500. b. Et quant al quart point, si usurpation poet este eu sur person en
personee, touts les Justices agreeent en un que il ne poet, eo que leglise ad
incumbent, et est pleine. Car cesty a que le appropriation est fait, est
incumbent, et cy perfect, sicome auter incumbent serroyt, que vient eins per
presentment, institution, et induction. Etadonques ne poyent esse deux
encumbents d'un mesme eglise a vne mesme temps. Car destre incumbent est
l'office d'un corpse, et si un incumbent est, et auter est present, admit,
institute, et inducte, tout ceo est void, sicome vne est officer dune office
pur vie, come seneschall del manner, ou tiels: patent fait a auter de mesme
l'office presentment, est void, et le primer person auera action de trespass
verse cesty que est darreynement admit; et issint person en personee auera
action de trespass verse un auter que est present, institute, et induct al eglise
appropre a luy, sil intromitte oue le glebe et dismes.

Fol. 280. a. Si home vst morust intestate le property de ses biens vient per
le comen ley, al ordinary, entant que le mort nauoit appoint eux a ascun. Car
sicome franckt^nement per le course del comen ley serra en ascun, et ne serra
en suspense, issint per le comen ley, le property del biens serra en ascun, et
ne serra en suspense. Et quant home ad property en biens, le property ne poet
estre pluis longement que il viue, et apres sa mort les biens sont a un auter.
come le ancient verse est, da tua dum tua sunt, quia post mortem tua non sunt:
adonques entant que ne point estre soiens apres sa mort, et il and appoint eux
a ascun auter, mes ad relinque eux al monde, le ley done le property de eux al
ordinary, et a luy (pur ceo que auoyt cure de sa alme en sa vi^) le ley done
les bi^s a disposer apres sa mort.

Lieu. Fol. 149. b. Et issint religious, persons serront entende touts foits a
demurrer a lour meason, et ne poyent estre entende destre ail^s.

Fol. 37. b. Et en ceo realm sont diverse autorities, et null poet exceder ses
limits et bounds, et pur ceo si le marshall teigne plee de chose fait horse del
vierge, ou le Admiral de chose fait en corpse le county, ceo serra void, car
lour authority sextend al lieu certain, et deins certain precinct, et nemy
aylours. Et si cesty que prist sanctuary, va horse, chescun poet luy prender car
il nest privilege de horse, et issint touts foits le precinct del liberty ne
poet estre excede, et icy le vicounte and a fair forsque en Loundres, et
donques quant le prisoner vient horse del liberty del Loundres, a mesme cesty
instant il est discharge.

Fol. 396. a. Mes icy, sir Thomas White et les compagnions ne fueront justices
auterment ne as auters cases, que a ceux, queur le commission le roy essigne.
et sils sont assign a fair vne chose, et ils font auter, cest auter est sans
authority. Come si un est eslie arbitrator a fair arbiterment sur vue chose,
et il fait arbiterment sur auter chose, tiel arbiterment est void tout nest.
Issint icy, ceo que sir Thomas White et ses compagnions ficront fuit coram non
iudice, et merement void.

Fol. 15. a. b. Et pur ceo ieo entende ceo come un principle, quant il est
agree perenter ascuns que un principal chose serra fait ou ewe, et deuant que
ceo poet este fait ou ewe, (...) yad un auter chose primes deste fait, et n'est
certeinement agree, que fair le dit auter chose, que le ley appoint cesty que
ad le pluis science et skyll, a fair le dit auter chose, come le brasier a
weyer et mettre en few les bells, le taylour a shaper un toge, le collector a
weyer chose pur que le subsidy serra pay al roy.

Vide Fol. 320. b. Le proper subject del courts le roy, come Eschequer, common
bancke, Banck le roy, en l'information pur mines, l'analysis du quel est annexe
al fine de cest liver.

Annotations.
A [Subiect:] Not only, (...), an essence, or substance, as the common
Logicians usually take it, but also whatsoever can ^ee imagined or feigned to
have any thing adjoined unto it, in it, or about it: so one quality may be the
subject to another, as in this axiom, Virtue is commendable, where
commendation is adjoined to virtue, being the subject thereof.

That subject wherein the adiunct is exercised and (as it were) used, is called
an object, or matter subject, as colors be the object of seeing, sounds of
hearing, soldiers be busied in fighting, plowmen in plowing, etc. as in those
verses, etc.

Nauita de ventis, de tauris narrat arator,
Enumerat miles vulnera, pastor oues.
Which being turned, tutch those that intermedle with matters of other men's
professions.

Nauita de tauris, de ventis narrat arator,
Enumerat pastor vulnera, miles oues.
The verses be made by Propertius, and by Ronsard translated into French, thus,

Des vents parle le marinier,
Le labourer de ses toreaux,
Ses plays compte le guerrier,
Et leurs brebis les pastoreaux.
Claudian has the like.

Omnia quae sensu voluuntur vota diurno,
Pectore sopito reddit amica quies.
Venator defessa thoro cum membra reponit,
Men's tamen ad syluas and sua lustra re^dit.
Furto gaudet amans, permutat nauita merces,
Etvigil elapsas quaerit auarus opes.
Iudicibus lites, aurigae somnia currus,
Vanaque sollicitis meta cauetur equis.
Me quoque Musarum studium sub nocte silenti
Artibus assuetis sollicitare solet.
Canons. If the subject be, then by nature, the proper adjuncts must also be:
the other that be not proper, may be, and may not be.

If the subject be taken away, the adiunct cannot stand.

To whom you give the subject, to the same you give the adiunct.

Whatsoever you attribute to the subject, that you must give the adiunct: but
in due and convenient order.

Of the subject things be sometimes praised and dispraysed. The house is
esteemed by him that dwells in the house. The place gives occasion to judge
of that which was borne in the place, as, He was borne in Boeotia, therefore
he is but a muddy-pated ass.

Explications, illustrations, amplifications, and extenuations are fet from
this place: So Cicero to his son, Thou art at Athens, therefore thou
should be learned. It Is a Northern Nagge, therefore quick, It Is a
Shrewsbury fryse, therefore the best.

From hence are almost all poetical epithetes deducted.

As the subject is, such is the adiunct. The place oftentimes augmenteth the
crime. Locus est entis and non entis, corporum, daemonum, etc. sic domus somni,
hortus Hesperidum in loco collocantur.

2. H. 4. 19. Per touts les Justices, que les Justices de peace ne poyent
prendre appel de null approuer, ne de auter. Car lour commission n'extend cy
auant.

9. H. 6. 5. In pleading d'arbitrement, le party doyt monstrer le lieu ou le
submission fuit fait, et les nosmes des arbitrours.

Master Crompton, Folio. 79. 80. etc. Les Justices de peace enquirera ad
chescun le lour general sessions, de ceux que parlont irreuerentment de
sacrament de corpse et sanke nostre seigniour Jesus Christ. 1. E. 6. cap. 1. and
1. E. cap. 1.

Item de reteyners, liueries, maynteiners, imbracers, bowstaues, archers,
illoyall games, forestallers, regrators, vitailers et Inholders, et de chescun
de eux, per, 33. H. 8. cap. 10. and 37. H. 8. cap. 7.

Item de cestuy que tue weinlinges que sont desus l'age de deux ans, al intent
de vender. contr. 24. H. 8. cap. 9. and 14. El. cap. 11. Et issint de plusors
auters.

Pur le subject del lieu, Vide L. 5. E. 4. 7. 8. En annuitie verse le Prior de
S. Mary Oueres in Southwarke, in le county de Surrey, le pl. count sur fait a
Londres in le parish de S. Dunstane, in le guard de Faringdone, et le fait est
dated, in domo capitulari eiusdem domus. Per Choke, ceo ne poet estre per comen
entendement, que le Chapter del S. Mary Oueres in Southwark que est in Surrey
ferra le fait in Fleetstreete in Londres etc. mes per special matter monstre
il poet, car vbi personae, ibi Capitulum: Mes si le date esset, in monasterio
domus praedictae, ceo per null intendement serra prise alibi, que in Southwarke
ou le meason est, car le material meason n'est remouable, come le Chapter est.

Accessorium sequitur suum principale, hinc versus
Quicquid plantatur, seritur, vel inaedifi^atur,
Omne solo caedit, radices si tamen egit.
Sublato principali, tollitur accessorium.
Nam, non entis non sunt qualitates. Ieo enditera un home pur asporter ieunes
pigeons horse de mon Columbier, ou ieunes goshauks engendres en ma park, car le
property est in moy et ieo poy eux prendre a mon pleasure, car ils ne poyent
aler dehors. Contra del ancient hawks ou pigeons que poyent suer. Sic ieo
enditera pur prisel des pikes ou tenches horse d'un ponde ou troncke, causa qua
supra, contra sils soyent prises en le river, eoque a ore ieo ay null property
in eux, 18. E. 4. 8.

Elenchs. The Law abhors such things as are done without or commission,
coram non iudice. So 10. H. 4. 2. Praemunire facias issist de ceo que le def.
aver sue al court de Rome de chose don't conusance apertient al court le roy.
See the book called, Diversities des courts et lour Jurisdictions, wherein
the matter subject of the Marshalsea, Kings bench, Common place, Chauncery,
Eschequer, Cinque ports, etc. is distinctly put down. For the authority of
courts is limited, neither is it lawful to intrude sophistically, or
injuriously incroache one upon another. Vide 3. 4. P. and M. 14. Dyer. Fuit
enact, que les quarter sessio^s de Anglesey serront tenues in Beaumaris: et les
Justices de peace teigne eux ad Newburghe, et la preigne inditements de felony:
ceux inditments fueront void, et coram non iudice. Vide 22. E. 4. 33. a. b.
Commission est direct as certain homes de oyer tantum, et ils oyont et
determinont, cest coram non iudice: Sic s'ils oyont matters horse del compass del
commission. Sic si in common bancke un appele de mort ou robbery soyt port,
etc. et le party est attaint, cest coram non iudice, car lour patent ne dona al
eux cest poyar et authority.

The eight Chapter. Of the Adiunct.
AN adiunct is that whereunto something is subject. An adiunct is either
Inherent in the subject, or adherent to it.

The adherent adiunct does either affect the subject: or is affected by it. So
virtues, vices, learning, and all such qualities are adjuncts to man's mind.

And as every place is the subject of the thing placed: so, time, that is to
say, the continuance of every thing, is the adiunct of those things which do
continue in time.

So all qualities which either be proper, as laughing to a man: or common, as
whiteness to a stone, and a wall, are truly called adjuncts.

Finally every thing which agrees unto an other, being neither the cause, nor
the effect thereof, is an adiunct of the thing whereunto it does agree.

Colyn Clowt in January says.
All as the sheep, such was the shepheardes look,
For pale and wanne he was, alas the while.
May seem he loved, or else some care he took, etc.
Thenot in February of himself, Self have I worn out thrice thrittie years,
Some in much joy, many in many tears:


Where the thrice thritty years, be an adiunct.

In March Thomalin argues the spring to be at hand, by these adiunctes. The
grass now gins to be refresht,
The swallow peepes out of her nest,
And clowdy Welkin clears.


In July Thomalin describes Abell by his adjuncts compared.

As meek hee-was as meek might be,
Simple, as simple sheep:
Humble, and like in each degree
The flock which he did keep.
And in the same discourse displaying the demeanor of our shepheardes and
their pomp and gorgeous attire.

But now (thanked be God therefore) the world is well amend,
Their weeds been not so nighly wore,
Such simplesse might them shend.
They been y^lad in Purple and Pale
So has their God them blist.
They reign and rulen over all,
And Lord it as their list
Ygyrt with belts of glitter and gold, etc.
In August Perigot describes his bou^cing Bellibone by hi^ attire.

I saw the bouncing Bellibone hey ho Bonnibell
Tripping over the Dale alone,
She can trip it very well.
Well decked in a frock of gray.
Hey ho, gray is greet.
And in a kirtle of green say
The green is for maidens meet.
A chapelet on her head she wore
Hey ho chapelet:
Of sweet violets therein was store,
She sweeter then the Violet.
In November Colyn uses this argument very often in declaration manner, where
he bewayleth Didoes death, as

Colored chapelets.
Knotted Rusheringes.
Gilt Rosemary.
Mantled Meadows etc.
Thomalin in July.

The hills where dwelled holy saints
I reverence and adore,
Not for themselves, but for the saints,
Which have be dead of yore.
By consideration of all these agreeable arguments, things that differ one
from an other, are called one, the same, or agreeable.

So before, Colyn in January, was said to have the same look that his sheep
had, All as the sheep such was the shepheardes look,
For pale and wanne he was, alas the while etc.
Meaning one in adiunct, not in essence. And so in like manner of the rest of
the agreeable arguments we may say.

Fol. 357. a. Et quant al ceo, ils disoient que fines ou^t estre de tresgrand
antiquity al comen ley. Car ils ount este si longement come ascun court de
record ad estre. Et ils fueront per le comen ley assurance pluis fort, et de
plus grande force et puissance. Et issint sont term per lestatute de modo
leuandi fines. etc.

Fol. 413. b. Le deuisour serra accoumpt inops consilij, pur ceo que voluntes
de pluis souent sont faites quant homes sont gisant en extremes et faudront
council. Et pur ceo le ley enterpretera les parols, et directera sa operation
accordant al intent del party.

Fol. 101. b. Et donques icy, quant il fuit arraigne pur le tuer del home sur
malice prepense, le substance del matter fuit, s'il luy tue ou nemy, et le
malice prepense n'est que del form ou circumstance de tuer. Et coment que le
malice prepense fait le act plus odious, et pur ceo cause l'offendour de perder
diverse advantages que auterment il aueroit, come sanctuary et clergy, et tiels
semblables, uncore il n'est auter que le manner del fait, et nemy le substance
del fait. Car le substance del fait est le tuer-de luy: et adonques quant le
substance del fait et le manner del fait sont mise en issue ensemblement, si
les jurors troueront le substance, et nemy le manner, uncore judgment serra
done sur le substance. Come si home arraigne assise pur disseisin oue force, et
le defendant plede al general issue, et les jurors troueront le disseisin, mes
nemy oue force, uncore le pl^intife auera son judgment: car le torcious
expulsion fuit le substance, et le force, le manner. Et adonques quant le
substance est troue, il auera judgment pur ceo, et serra acquit del force,
etc.

Fol. 381. Et quant al auter point, il dit que coment que le rent charge est
nouel rent commenceant per grant, uncore il est issint appropre al office que
il ne serra severe del office cy longement come le office continue: issint que
si le office ne serra forfeite, le rent que est annexe al ceo ne serra
forfeite. Car si un grant estouers a un autre d'estre arse en tiel meason, il
est appurtenant al meason. Et issint comen grant en tiel lieu a un pur ses
auers leuant et couchant en son ferme de Dale, le commen est fait appurtenant a
ceo, issint que il que ad le meason per quecunque title que il vient a ceo
apres, auera les estouers: et il que apres viendra al ferme, auera le comen: et
les estouers ne poient estre severe del meason, ne le comen del ferme, si non
per extientisment. Car s'il que ad le meason voile graunter les estouers a un
auter reseruant a luy le meason, ou le meason a un auter, reseruant a luy les
estouers: les estouers ne serront separate del meason per ceo, pur ceo que
serront expende en mesme le meason. Et issint le fee icy est grant pur le
exercise del office, et l'office fuit receive en respect del fee, and sic
officium and foedum sunt concomitantia, et l'un ensue l'auter et le fee
continua oue l'office come incident inseparable: and quae sequuntur in eodem
loco, del annuitie grant pro consilio impendendo; de office del roy de
Haroldes, grant a Garter, cum foedis and proficuis ab antiquo etc. 5. E. 4.
Fol. vltimo. Et del grant dex. li. a Garter ad terminum vitae suae ratione and
causa officij. 7. E. 4. Fol. 23. et del annuitie grant per le roy, Iohanni
clerico coronae, ad terminum vitae suae; en queux cases, le fee est annexe al
office, et est determinable oue l'office.

Fol. 26. b. Si un reteigne un auter a seruer pur an pur le salary de xx. s. la
si le servant demand les xx. s. il doit monstrer que le temps est pass, cest
assauoir, l'an expire, et doit ceo pleder certain, pur ceo que son action est
done en respect del an pass, et del chose fait en temps, et le temps est
parcel del cause del demand, et precede le demand.

Annotations.
ADiunct:] The same almost which the Graecians call (...), and (...),
circumstances, if you take that word largely for whatsoever is added to a
thing after it is once framed and made of his essential causes, and some of
them proceed from the uniting and conjunction of the form and matter
immediately, which are commonly inseparable, as laughing to a man etc. Some are
but hangbyes and remoouable, or separable, and, as it were, tenants at will, as
white, black to the wall, etc.

Adjuncts therefore, not Accidents are they here called: for Accidens is of it
self, infinite and vndeterminate, and does properly apperteine to the
accidental cause, which we before termed chance, hap, or hazard: and it
conteyneth effects, adiunctes and comparates; so that the name being neither
fit, nor applyable to this place, I have displaced it purposely.

[One and the same:] Here is Logically put down all that, which others
peruersly teach in their diverse sorts of Idemtitie. as, Genere, Specie, Numero.

Some there be that give a proper and peculiar place to signs and
coniecturall tokens: but friuolously. For they belong all either to this of
adjuncts, or that other of effects, or else they be testimonies and witnesses.

Canons.

If the proper adiunct be, then the subject must commonly be: and if the
subject be, the proper adiunct must also be.

To whom soever you ascribe the adiunct, to the same you must attribute the
effect proceeding from the same adiunct.

That which is rightly applied to the inherent adiunct, must be applied also
to the receiving subject.

Here are gathered diverse phisiognomicall conjectures, as that of Martial.

Crine ruber, niger ore, breuis pede, lumine loesus, Rem magnam praestas,
Zoile, si bonus es.


Hence are also fet praises and disprayses, deliberations and consultations.
Herein are contained all those Rhetorical places concerning the gifts and
qualities of body and soul, as also external and those of fortune.

If the adiunct be occupied or exercised, then the subject must be that
exercises the same.

To whatsoever you ascribe the adiunct which is occupied, to the same you must
give the subject: and what you apply to it, you must also attribute to this.

Sometime the adiunct together with the subject is taken but for one only
argument, as when I say: The murdering and usurping Tyrant, Richard the third,
was deservedly slain: and yet nevertheless here the subject is argued in some
respect by the adiunctes, in that it is thereby described and declared.

Some adiunctes be antecedent or going before, some again present and
conjoined, lastly some others consequent and following. Therefore some other
Logicians have made these three kinds of adjuncts, three several kinds of
arguments, as Antecedentia, adiuncta, consequentia.

Natural Philosophers, Physicians, Astronomers, and other professors use much
this place: as when they dispute of change of weather, diversity of causes
and occasions of diseases, signs of storms and tempests, as, vento rubet
aurea Phoebe, when the Moon is red, she betokens wind. These common
adiunctes be called (...).

10. H. 6. 21. Merchant est bon addition, and eadem lex de wydowe, on single
woman.

Servant n'est addition, car est trope general. L. 5. E. 4. 22. Vide 14. E. 4.
7. quel serra le addition d'un feme, que est ne maid, widow, ne wife.

Vide 31. and 32. H. 8. 5. Dyer. Spynster est addition cybien al home, come al
feme, car per Spylman in Norfolk sont diverse homes qui sont woorsted spynsters.

Master Lambard. Iustit. lib. 2. cap. 5. M. Marrow says, that five principal
things be most commonly requisite in presentiments before Justices of peace.

1 The name, surname, and addition of the party indicted. 2 The year, day, and
place, in which the offense was done. 3. The name of the person to whom the
offense was done. 4 The name and value of the thing in which the offense was
committed. 5 The manner of the fact, and the nature of the offense, as the
manner of the treason, murder, felony, or trespass.
Ad: Temp. Master Lambard. Just. lib. 2. cap. 19. Touching the continuance of
these quarter sessions, I have shortly but this one thing to say: that almost
two hundred years ago, it was ordained by statute (12. R. 2. cap. 10.) that
they should be continued three days together, if need were, upon pain of
punishment. And yet, in these days of ours, wherein the affairs of the
sessions be exceedingly increased (and consequently more need to continue
them now then before) many do skantly afforde them three whole hours, besides
that time which is spent in giving of the charge.

Master Crompton. Just. Fol. 65. has a number of adjuncts, effects, subjects,
etc.

Inprimis couient consider le quality del home, lequel, il est semble a fair
tiel felonious act, ou nemy.

Item quel chose doyt luy mouer d'attempter tiel enterprise.

Item lequel il fist le murder, sur ascun displeasure deuant conceue, ou sur
sodein anger.

Item lequel il expect per son mort, d'auer ou receiver ascun co^medity, come
terre, office, argent, ou ascun auter gain.

Item lequel il est un que ne regard le tuer de home, ou sil ad ew pardon ou ad
estre acquit pur tuer de home auant cest te^ps, car tiels chooses face homes
d'auer luy in suspicion.

Item le pais ou home fuit nee, declare ascun foits son natural inclination,
come sil vst etre nee, ou educatus enter les homes de Tyddesdale et Ryddesdale,
poet estre plutost suspect.

Item dequel trade il est, et per quel occupation il viue.

Item lequel soit gamester ou haunter de alehouses, ou un companion inter
ruffians.

Item dequel ability il est, et coment il auient a ceo que il ad, sil ad ascun
chose.

Item quel apparel il use, et lequel il ama daller brauement ou nemy.

Item dequel nature il est, lequel soit hasty, heady, ou pressed de quarreler.

Item queux shyftes il ad de temps en temps, et quel chose luy move de fair
tiel heinous act.

Item lequel le home fuit tue In le haut chemyn ou en boys, ou perenter deux
hills, ou lequel prochein un hedge, ou auter secret lieu.

Item lequel fuit en le matyne, ou sere en le nuite, et lequel fuit view la
circa ciel temps.

Item lequel il senfua apres l'act commit, ou auera ascun sank sur luy, ou sil
tremble ou staggar, ou soit contrary, en disant de son tale, et coment il guard
son countenance.

Item lequel aver esperance de garder son fact secretment per reason del place,
temps, et le manner de son secret feasans.

Item dauer tesmoignes examines de son esteant en ceo place, ou en auter place,
al temps del act fait.

Item compare le force de murderer oue le weakness, armor oue le nakedness,
stoutnes oue le simplicity d'auter.

Item son confess ion demesne, Wilson Rhet. Fol. 17.

Item si soit vagarant, and nullam exercens a^tem, neclaborem, ou si certain d
esbiens embles fuer in son possession. 7. E. 4. 10.

Item siquis appellatus fuerit a probatore, and f^gerit propter appellum, and
mortuo probatore redierit, est suspiciosus per Bracton.

Item fama quae suspicionem inducit, oriri debet apud bonos and graves, non
quidem maleuolos and maledicos, sed prouidas and fide dignas personas, non
semel, sed saepius; quia clamor innuit, and defamatio manifestat, and vanae
voces populi non sunt audiendae. Idem Bracton.

Item si ascun soyt imprisone pur suspicion de felony, et eschapa, ou fait tout
que en luy est, de eschaper, est grand suspicion que il est culpable. Stamf.
180.

Item si quis noctu cubauerit in domo solus cum aliquo qui interfectus sit, vel
si duo vel plures ibi fuerint, and hutesium no^ leuauerint, nec plagam a
latronibus vel interfectoribus in defensione facienda acceperint, nec ostendunt
quis, de se, vel de alijs hominem interfecerit, his casibus mortem dedicere non
possunt. Bracton.

Item si quis notum vel ignotum in domum suam acceperit, qui viuus ingredi
visus sit, verum postea nunquam nisi mortuus: dominus domus, si tunc domi sit,
vel alij de familia qui tunc interfuerunt, poenam capitalem subibunt, nisi
forte per patriam fuerint liberati. Idem.

Item communis vox and fama est sufficient cause de suspicion de felony, sans
auter especial matter allege. per Curiam. 5. H. 7. 2. H. 7. 6.

Item si home soit rob, ascuns voile prender le measure de les pees de les
robbers, et de les chiuals, et si cesty que est rob ad suspicion d'ascun il
voile causer le measure d'estre mis al pee de tiel person, et son chiuall, et
sils accord, il poet estre suspicious.

Item si home appelle auter traitor, et il dit rien a ceo, il est cause le luy
arrester pur suspicion, et pur ceo couient que il responde a ceo. Fitz. coro.
24. 37. H. 6. per les Justices, issint semble ou home appelle auter thief, et
il dit rien a cell, etc.

Item Nota, il est use, on home est suspect d'auer murdre auter, d'amesner luy
al mort corpse et sur cel il ad estre view, que le corpse ad nouelment met horse
sanke, videlicet, has bled freshly, sicome vst este nouelment tue. Et sur ceo
il ad este pris, et condemn, et quant il ale al execution, il ad conus le fact.

Adjuncts be more plentiful, says Ramus, but subjects more forcible in
arguing, as, he looks, ergo he loves, it follows not so well, as thus, he
loves, ergo he looks. Yet some like not of this note. For, say they, if you
consider the subject and the adiunct Logically, then the one does equally
argue the other, but if phisically, then that is heterogeneum and impertinent.

As the place, so the time may inhaunce or diminishe the value of things. So
that, as a man may plus petere loco, so may he also tempore. Qui tardius
soluit, minus soluit, sic qui commodori loco. Qui citius petit, plus petit, sic
qui loco magis remoto. Nam vt dies est pars obligationis, sic tempus.

11. H. 4. 31. b. Hill. Home prist mon fits bien vestue, luy dispoyle, et dona
a luy un drape, ieo auera le drape quia ieo auera le corpse que il cover: sic
adulter vest ma feme etc.

A les Justices pertient pur doner judgment, oyer, recorder, agarder process
etc. a les Clerks pur escriuer ceo que les Justices agardont, a le vicount pur
returner briefs a luy directes etc. 7. H. 6. 30. Hals.

Si action de wast soit ore done generalment verse tenant in tail apres
possibility dissue extinct, treble damages serront recover verse luy sans
plusors parols, car ceux sont adioynts a ceo per le former statute: et quant
ceo est done in nouel case, tout que est adioynt a ceo est done oue ceo
similiter.

Donatio officij del Exigenter de London etc. pertinet ad dispositionem
capitalis Iusticiarij pro tempore existentis, vt incidens inseparabile ad
personam dicti capitalis Iusticiarij spectans, and hoc ratione praescriptionis
and vsus. 1. and 2. Elis. 25. Dyer.

1. H. 4. 6. per Gascoigne, si le roy per parols generals graunta chooses a
queux auters sont incidents queux ne sont seuerables, les incidents passont.
Come sil graunta moy terre cum pertinentiis, a que common est appendant, le
common passa.

Tyrwit dit, si le roy graunta moy le foundation d'un abbey, le corody passa:
Issint sil graunta fair, ieo auera un court de pipouders incident a ceo.

Vide Parkins page. 24. Des incidents que passont per le grant des principals:
come fealty est incident al homage et al rent, rent al reuersion, aduouson al
manor.

Acquitall est incident al franckalmoigne, Littleton, 32. a. acquitall et
garrantie sont incidents al Homage auncestrel, Little. 32. Distress al rent
service, 51. Distres al rent reserve sur egalitie del partition, 55. Suruyuor
al Ioyntenancy. 62.

Vide 12. H. 8. 7. 8. 9. Brook Justice says that, le person ad le feesimple
in iure ecclesiae, whereunto agrees Elyot. Brudnell, semble que le person ad
le feesimple, car le patron n'ad ascun interest mes solement le presentment.
But pollard will have it in the Patrome.

Elenchs. This place, as others, is then abused, when false adjuncts ^ee
applied, or others not orderly applied.

The ninth Chapter. Of the diverse or different.
HItherto of arguments ageeable, now follow the disagreeable.

A disagreeable argument is that which disagreeth from the thing which it does
argue.

The one of these joined or compared with the other appears more plainly.

Disagreeable arguments be either diverse or opposite. Diverse or different are
disagreeable arguments which differ only in respect, and are only fit for
declaration: they are often in authors, and many of them be expressed by these
signs, Not this, but that.

Colyn in January, Colyn lo'ude not Hobbinol, but Rosalinde.

Master Plowden: Fol. 82. a. Car parols, que ne sont auter, que le verberation
del air, ne sont l'e statute, mes solement le image del statute, et le vie del
statute rest en les ments del expositors del parols, quels sont les seasors del
statute.

Annotations. Elenches.
Only in respect:] not indeed, and naturally, in respect of the things
themselves, which may very well oftentimes concur in one, but only in
respect of his meaning, that so put them down. Therefore the use of diverse
arguments is in dinstinction, and evident explication, not in confirmation. L.
5. E 4. 7. per Bryan: les walls, timber, couerture, pieres etc. del
Chapterhouse, ne serront dits properment le Chapterhouse, mes lou le covent et
Chapter sont, l^ properment est le Chapterhouse. In that saying of Christ, I
come not to send peace, but the sword, if we entend this conclusion, I come to
send the sword, therefore not peace, then the arguments be repugnant, says
Wasserleider: but if we take it as spoken only for explication and
distinction, then they be used as diverse.

Ramus first found, diuersa: Rodolphus Agricola, disparata, which he calls
differentia.

This place is abused, when such things be put down for diverse, which are
not diverse properly.

The tenth Chapter. Of Opposites.
OPposites are disagreeable arguments which disagree both in respect, and in
matter it self, and therefore cannot agree unto the same thing, according to
the same part, respect, or time, as the same man cannot be hot and cold in
the same part of his body, at the same time. So Socrates cannot be father and
son to the same man: sick and whole at the same time: Insomuch that if one
of them be affirmed, the other must be denied, and contrarily: but
necessarily in the first; contingently in the second.

Opposites are either Disparates or contraries. Disparates are sundry opposites
whereof one is equally and in like manner opposed unto many.

Hobbinoll in April in his song of Elisa.

Bring here the Pincke and purple Cullambine with Gelliflowres:
Bring Coronations, and Sops in wine worn of paramours.
Strew me the ground with Daffadowndillyes,
And Cowslyps, and Kingcups, and loved Lillyes,
The pretty Paunce,
And the Cheuisance
Shall match with the fair Flowredelice.
All which herbs be equally differing one from another, and are therefore
Disparates.

M. Plowden Fol. 170. a. b. Mes un gross nosme poet conteigner diverse chooses
corporal, come Manor, Monastery, Rectory, Castle, Honor, et tiels semblables.
Car eux sont chooses compound, et poyent conteyner tout ensemble, messaages,
terres, prees, bois et tiels semblables.

Annotations.
AEQually:] not as though one Disparate should differ equally from all the
other. But equally signifies vicissim, simul, alike, in like manner, again,
etc. Wasserleider.

Disparo signifies to sever, or separate. Of that word comes Disparata, that
is, things severed, or put a sunder one from another.

Canons. If one Disparate be equally opposed to many, then certainly, if one
of them be affirmed, all the rest must be denied. But if one among all be
denied, you cannot straightwayes infer any other what you list, but some one of
the same kind of things. And therefore, from the first part of the Canon,
comes a necessary axiom, but from the second, a contingent. What then if I
should thus reason?

If this man be not a Lawyer, he is a Divine.

Or thus, out of Virgill.

If the Spartane maid be not a woman, she is a goddess. Be these axioms
false or no? I answer, they be not altogether false, but contingent. And
therefore I said before, that if one of them ^ee affirmed, the other must be
denied, and contralily, that is, if one of them be denied, the other must be
affirmed: for, as in this argument, so in many others, the common Logicians
very rashly say, it does not follow, if it do not follow necessarily: Whereas
notwithstanding it may follow, although it follow contingently. So then the one
affirmed, the other is denied necessarily: but the one being denied, another
shall be affirmed contingently, as I said in the text.

Master Lambard. Just. lib. 1. cap. 12. Capital or deadly punishment is done
sundry ways, as by hanging, burning, boiling, or pressing.

Not Capital is of diverse sorts also, as cutting of the hand or ear,
burning or marking the hand or face, boaring through the ear, whipping,
imprisoning, stocking, setting on the pillory or cucking-stoole, which in old
time was called the tumbrell, and of old, but not now, pulling out of the
tongue for false rumors, cutting off the nose for adultery, taking away the
privy parts for counterfeiting of money.

Pecuniary punishments be diverse, as issues, fines, amerciaments, and
forfeiture of offices, goods, and lands etc.

The Romans used specially eight sorts of chastisements, Damnum, vincula,
verbera, talio, ignominia, exilium, seruitus, mors.

Elenchs. When diverse be put down as Disparates. So in Martial. Pinxisti
venerem, colis, Artemidore, Mineruam,
Et miraris opus displicuisse tuum?


For both these things might be done together by Artemidorus well enough, and
yet his work displease no man.

The eleventh Chapter. Of Contraries.
COntraries be such opposites, whereof either one is only opposite to one, or
one to two, but more to the one of them, than to the other. They be Relatiues
or repugnant. Relatiues are contraries, whereof the one is so opposed to the
other, as yet there may be in other respects a mutual consent and reciprocal
relation between them, whereupon they be called Relatiues, as father, son,
husband, wife, etc.

In May Palinode. So schooled the gate his wanton son,
That answered her mother, all should be done.
Master Plowden. Fol. 121. b. Le greinder est in respect del meynder: et
issint en ceo que il affirm le conusance del greinder number, il affirm auxi
le conusa^ce del meynder etc.

Repugnant arguments be such contraries, whereof one is so opposite to one, or
at the most to two, as that there can never any agreement be found between
them. So War is only opposite to peace: but covetousness to liberality and
prodigality, yet more to prodigality.

Shepherd I list none accordance make
With shepherd that does the right way forsake:
And of the twain, if choice were to me,
Had lever my foe than my friend to be.
Colyn in December. Love they him called that gave me checkmate,
But better might they have behot him hate.
Perigot in August. Ah Willy, when the heart is ill assayde,
How can bagpipe, or joints be well apayde?
Master Plowden Fol. 467. a. Et issint il apiert diversity, (he should have
said rather Repugnancy) enter les deux equities, car l'un abridge, l'auter
enlarge: l'un dymynisha, l'auter amplify: l'un toll de le letter, l'auter ad
al ceo.

Fol. 274. a. Car horse de memory, et horse de conusance, est tout un. Et
ambideux ces phrases signify ignorance del temps^et quant le party prist
conusance del temps, iln'estroit en sa bouche a dire, que il est ignorant de
mesme le temps. Car ignorance et science sont contraries repugnant, et
d'affirmer contraries, null serra suffer per nostre ley.

Under Repugnant arguments be contained Priuatiues, as blindness is opposed to
sight; darkness to light; death to life.

Piers in May. For what concord han light and dark sam?


Uillen et franck home sont priuatiues. see Plowden 397. a.

And thus much of disagreeable arguments, by which one thing is said to be
different from another.

Annotations.
THis word, Contrary, betokens no distinct and special determinate
argument, but is a general affection incident to diverse specials. Therefore in
Judgment we should not say, the argument is from the contrary, but from this
or that kind of contrary, for all contraries argue not alike. And so in other
arguments we must not stick in the generality, but descend to particulars,
as, what cause, what subject, what adiunct.

Cum res duae ita comparantur, vt ex earum altera affirmata, affirmetur altera,
ex altera negata, negetur altera, tum illae sunt consentaneae, vt Aegistus est
otiosus, ergo adulter: Efficiens non habet instrumenta ad aedificandum, ergo
non potest aedificare: Causa and efficiens vtrobique: Sed cum ex vna affirmat
a, altera negatur, vel ex vna negata altera affirmatur, tum sunt dissentaneae,
vt Sophroniscus fuit pater Socratis, ergo non filius: and Socrates fuit
Sophronisci filius, ergo non pater: hic causa and effectum sunt, sed
considerantur, vt dissentanea: quia ex altero affirmato negatur alterum. Et non
est absurdu^, quod vna eademque res, diuerso respectu, sit and consentanea and
dissentanea. Itaque te neamus Relata. Piscator.

Scribonius would have the nature of Relatiues generally put down immediate ely
after the general definition of an argument in the first chapter. Because, as
a father cannot be so much as imagined without a son, nor a son without a
father, so no more can a cause without a thing caused, thing caused without a
cause, subject without adiunct, adiunct without subject etc.

Sometimes the Relatiues have both distinct names, as father, son, sometimes
but one name, as a brother is he that has a brother, a disparate is that
which has a disparate.

One Relative does define and expound another. So the cause is defined by the
thing caused, and this by that etc.

Relata sunt simul natura, for though David were David before Solomon was
borne, yet David was never Salomons father, before Solomon was David's son.

Relata ita contraria sunt, vt non sint sine medio: nam inter patrem and
filium, est medius, qui neque pater, neque filius est.

I. Guyer fuit endite deuant le Coroner super visum corporis, del mort Emeline
Guyer sa feme. Et l'enditement fuit, que le dit Emelyne fuit in pace domini
regis, quousque antedictus I. Guyer, vir praefatae Emelyne Guyer etc. cest
indictment fuit challenge. Car il poet estre intend assets bien per
l'enditement, que le feme n'est occise, mes est in vie, et issint repugnant en
luy mesme, eoque le dit I. Guyer est appelle vir prefate Emelyne, ou il
serroyt, nuper vir, car vir est correlatiue al feme, et ne poet estre vir nisi
in respectu vxoris etc. 31. 32. H. 8. 3. Dyer.

Il ne est possible, que un person poet estre sovereign et subject. 4. Elis.
22. Dyer.

That which agrees with one of the Relatiues, commonly agrees with the other,
as if it be honest to teach, it is no shame to learn.

Relatiues in our law be, as, seignior tenant, paramount per avail, playntife
defendant, demandant tenant, guard gardeine, feffor feffee, donor donee,
grauntor grauntee, lessor lessee, disseisor disseisee, conuser conusee, baron
feme etc.

Repugnants. If one repugnant argument be denied, the other must be affirmed,
if there be no third thing put between them.

Although Contraries cannot be applied unto the same thing, yet the same thing
may be applied unto contraries.

Priuatiues. Priuatiues they call those whereof one denies only in that
subject whereunto the affirmative agrees by nature (affirmative is that which
does affirm and lay down some thing to be or imagined to be) and here the
affirmative is called the habit, the negative the privation thereof. A stone
therefore cannot be called blind, for that it was never framed of nature to
be capable of sight, but it may be called, not seeing.

Crompton: Fol. 29. Home tua auter quant est ebrius, il serra pendus quant est
sober.

Priuatiues be, In prison alarg, compos mentis, non sane memory: auengle
surde, mute. etc.

Priuatio praesupponit habitum, vnde illa consectaria, non videtur rem amittere
cuius propria non fuit. Non potest videri desisse habere, qui nunquam habuit.
Quod quis, si velit, habere non potest, id repudiare non potest. Eius est non
velle, qui potest velle. Expressa nocent, non expressa non nocent. Qui tacet,
non vtique fatetur, sed tamen verum est eum non negare. Cum architecti quidam
palatium aedificarent in via publica, and cum proiecto lapide proclamassent,
quidam iter illac faciens, lapide vulneratus, architectos omnes in ius vocauit:
ab his consultus Pyleus, animaduertit, eos probare non posse, quod
proclamassent: itaque non ius, ait, deficit, sed probatio. Cum igitur cras in
iuditium veneritis, cauete, ne verbum proferatis, sed me solum loqui sinatis:
die igitur iudicij constituto, cum a iudice accusationi respondere iussi
essent, and Pyleus illos vt mutos excusaret, ibi aduersarius id pernegare
caepit, quoniam ipsos, cum vulneraretur, clamantes audisset, vt sibi caueret:
quae verba Pyleus statim ad acta referri iussit, and ita eos a lite liberauit.
Baldus in sua pract. tit. de cautelis.

As for contradictories, it were utterly impertinent to make any discourse of
them in this place, as wholly belonging to axiomaticall disposition, whereunto
all contradictions are naturally incident, howsoever Beurhusius distinguish in
this case.

Elenchs. In relatiues, Omnia castor emis, fic fiet vt omnia venda^, Martial.
Indeed if Castor buy all, some body must needs sell all: but it follows not
that therefore, Castor must sell all.

In Repugnant: Whitenes is a color, therefore blackenes is no color. It
follows not. For, as I said before, contraries generally are not such, of the
which one and the same thing cannot be affirmed, but such as cannot be
affirmed of one and the same thing.

So in Relatiues. Tibullus lib. 1. At vos exiguo pecori, furesque, lupique
Parcite: de magno est praeda petenda grege.


It follows not, that because a pray is to be taken of a great flock,
therefore nothing is to be taken of a little one.

So in Priuatiues, He that sees is alive, therefore He that is blind, is
dead.


The 12. Chapter. Of secondary Arguments.
THus much of original and first arguments. The secondary remains which is
made of the joining together of the first, and argues as the first do from
whence it is derived, as the cause therefore argues absolutely, so such
secondary arguments as are made of the cause, and so in the rest, according as
their several kind of arguing is.

The Argument made of the first is either Distribution or Definition.

Annotations.
RAmus to these two which I have put down, adds other two, Coniugates, and
Notation, as arguments made of the first. As for Coniugates, I see in them no
new different force of arguing, as he is just, for he deals justly: here
is nothing in effect, but the cause and the effect. For as for the deriuation
of this word, Just, from Justice, it seems altother grammatical: and
whereas they both do fitly allude in she end and falling, thus, Justice Just,
Justly, that comes from a Rhetorical figure, called Polyptoton, which
concerns the elegancie that is in the diverse fallinges and terminations of
words.

So in Notation, the interpretation of the name, seems rather the duty of a
dictionary, then of any Logical institution, as Argumentum ab arguendo: where
again there is no force of arguing but from the cause and the thing caused.
For as for the pretty and co nceipted change of the word, argumentum ab
arguendo, it seems also a Rhetorical agnomination: yet as not fully resolved
herein, I leave them in these Annotations.

Coniugates or offspringes, be words diversely derived from one head, as
Justice, Just, Justly, he deals Justly, therefore he is just. The primitive
word contains the cause of his offsprings, as here Justice of just dealing.

Aristotle commends this place highly 7. topie.

Canons.

If you put down or remove one Coniugate, you must put down, or remove the
other: That which is given or taken, to or from the one: is given or taken, to
or from the other: but here Contingency is more usual then necessity,
therefore heed is to be taken in distinguishing the one from the other.

In 4. H. 7. 9. b. Un brief de partitione facienda del terre et rent fuit
port. Et Keble plead pur le rent, que le def. fuit sole seisie, sans ceo que
il tient pro indiuiso oue le pl. et per Bryan, cest bon plee, car il n'auera
partition del chose don't il ne ad ascun part.

Coniugates from the cause.

Terence in Hecyra Act. 3. scoen. 4. Dedecet iam ira haec, etsi merito iratus
es. This anger becomes you not, although you have cause to be angry.

From the thing caused.

Tully in his oration for his house: Primum dico, Senatoris esse boni, in
Senatum venire. First I say, it is the part of a good Senator, to come into the
Senate house.

From the subject.

Tully to Atticus, Quia homo es, humana tibi ferenda est ratio. Because thou
art a man, thou must bear such things as are incident to men.

From the adiunct.

Tully in his epistles: Rege interfecto, regios omnes nutus tuemur. The king
being killed, we maintain every kingly beck and countenance.

Elenchs.

Some learned men be lewd livers, therefore learning is lewd: Where it should
be thus; Learned men live lewdly, therefore they be lewd: or thus, Learning
makes men loud, therefore it is lewd.

Notation.

Notation or Etymology, is the interpretation of the word. For words be
notes of things, and of all words either deriuatiue or compound, you may
yield some reason fet from the first arguments, if the notation be well made.
It is called Originatio, quod originem verborum explicet: and Etymologia, id
est, veriloquium.

Nomina sunt argumenta, non quatenus ad rem significandam referuntur, sed
quatenus referuntur vel inter se mutuo, vt coniugata: vel ad suae originis
interpretationem, quae Notatio dicitur. Sed sic non considerantur vt nomina, id
est symbola, sed vt res quaedam, seu (...) quaedam. Piscator.

Grammatica notatio exponit vocu^ adsignificatione^: Logica vero causam
explicat, cur hoc nomen huic rei sit impositu^.

Piscator putat, a nomine ad rem significatam argumentari, nihil aliud esse
quam a testimonio argumentari: vt Christus in scriptura dicitur Deus, ergo est
Deus.

Canons.

To whom the interpretation of the name agrees, to that also the name itself
and contrarily. Yet, says Corasius, ab interpretatione ad nomen ipsum
deriuatum, sicuti est a genere ad speciem, desumpta argumentatio inanis est,
quod etymologia latius pateat, quam nomen ipsum. Certe re ciprocatio in his
obscura and incerta est. Sed a deriuato ad deriuationem argui melius potest, vt
tutor est, ergo tueri debet.

When the name is false, unknown, or ambiguous, then the reason is dangerous.

That which agrees with the one, agrees with the other.

Duips, taunts, jests, and conceits are often fet hence.

All Platoes Cratilus is spent in the interpretation of words after this
manner.

Nihil ambigi potest, ait Cicero, in quo, non aut res controuersiam faciat, aut
verbum, in dictionibus igitur aeque atque in rebus versatur Dialectica.
Hottoman. Examples of notations.
From the cause.


Billinsgate, a gate in London builded by king Belus.

From the effect.

Provident, of foreseeing future chances. And so in the rest.

Gospel, a good spell, or Gods spell, or saying. A Lordane signifies an
imperious idle fellow, of a lord Dane. Winchelsea, of wind, chilly, and sea: so
in Latin it is called Frigmareuentus, of frigus, mare, ventus. Little John,
for that he was woonderfully tall and big, here the notation is from the
contrary, as Lucus, quia non lucet, parcae, quia non parcunt, Bellum, q^a non
bellum, and so of Ludus, Eumenides etc. Mutuum quasi meumtuum. Victima, quae
dextra cecidit victrice, vocatur:
Hostibus a domitis, hostia nomen habet.


Arist. 2. Rhet. Draconis leges, non hominis, quod erant asperae. Dracoes laws
were a Dragons laws, for their cruelty.

Territorium dicitur, quia magistratus eius loci, intra suos fines, terrendi,
id est, coercendi ius habent.

The Court of pipowders incident to fayres, is called Curia pedis puluerisati,
for fayres commonly are dusty. 13. E. 4. 8.

Choke in 17. E. 4. b. Conclude que null contract serra, si non ambideux les
parties simul consentiant. Car contractus dicitur a con, quod est simul, and
traho, to draw together.

Seruus a seruando, as well as of seruiendo, quia seruaban^ capti in bello, vt
postea venderentur. Manumissio, quasi (...) manu dimissio. Mancipia, quasi manu
capta. Bracton lib. 1. Fol. 4.

Dyer semble que un remaynder al feme pur vie apres le mort le baron, ne poet
estre termed ne prise pur vne ioynture, purceoque el doit prendre estate
ioyntment one son baron accordant al etymology del parol, ioynture. 17. Elis.
50. Dyer.

Per Needham 4. E. 4. Praecipe quod reddat gist properment verse le tenant del
terre, de terris ou tenementis, car la il poet reddere: contra del common de
pasture appendant ou in gross; la quod permittat gist que il suffer le
demandant occupier son common etc. Socage a soca. Littleton. 26. 7.

Fearmes, quasi feormian, qu'est un Saxon paroll, signifiant pur feeder ou
render vittayle, car les ancient reseruations fueront pur le pluis part in
vittayles et nemy argent. Terms of the law. page 967.

Aulnage, ex quo Aulnager, est le measure et le metter per le yard, in Latin,
Vlnagium and vlnator, ab vlna. 13. and 14. Elis. 49. Dyer.

Shyrreeue, of two Saxon words, Geresa, a ruler, and Scyran, which is to cut:
as it were the ruler of the shire. For the Realm is divided and cut, as it
were, into such parts, called heerevpon shires, and allotted to several
shyrreeues as their shires. In Latin he is called Vicecomes, quasi vicarius
comitis, in seeing justice executed in the shire, and the kings revenues
brought in aerarium. Which the Count, Earl, Comes himself should, but could
not by himself, as attending for the most part upon the king in wars, as the
name bears, Comes quasi comitans principem.

Constable, quasi Kyninstaple, or Kingstaple, the stay and hold of the king,
for so was the Lord great Constable of England, who had authority in matters
of war within and without the Realm. Out of which office this lower
Constableship was first fet. 13. E. 3. Stat. Winchester: where two constables
in every Hundred were appointed to take view of armor.

Tythingman, Headborough, Chiefepledg, Borsholder, is in a manner all one with
a petite Constable. Although before William Conqueror it was ordained, that
all free borne men should cast themselves in companies by ten in each company,
and that every of the ten should be pledge and surety for his fellow, and
amerced for his default if he escaped. Hereof these companies be called Boroes
or Bo^hes, a pledge, and Tything of ten. And because ten of these companies
sometimes met for matters of weight, and ten times ten is an hundred, their
general assembly was called an hundred. The speaker and chief man was called
the Tythingman, the Borsholder, quasi elder Boroe, and head-borohe, chief
pledge. In these meetings among other things it was observed, that every of
these pledges should yearly be presented by the chief pledge at a general
assembly, yet called the view of Frankepledge, visus Franciplegij, or the Leete
court. Master Lambard.

Lathes, Rapes, and Wapentakes, be so called of the divisions of parts of
shires. Lathe is a barn, Rape a reaping. Sir Thomas Smith thinks them to be
names of service, for that so many towns met in one day to reap or carry the
Lords corn into his barn, and Wapentake of taking weapons, for that in those
assemblies* he that could not find surety for his good abearing, had his
weapon taken from him.

But M. Lambard in legibus Edwardi regis, writes thus.

Totus ille conuentus dicitur Wapentac, eo quod per tactum armoru^ suorum ad
inuicem confederati sunt: of W^pun and Tac, tangere vel confirmare, quia omnes
praesentes cum lanceis suis tangebant hastam praefecti ipsius Wapentachij, and
ita se consirmabant.

Bracton. Dicitur ideo breue, quia rem de qua agit, and intentionem petentis,
paucis verbis breuiter enarrat, etc.

Master Plowden. Fol. 357. a. Quia fines in curia nostra leuati finem litibus
debent imponere and imponunt, ideo fines vocantur maxim. Sic Fol. 368. b. ex
Bracton. Finis est extremitas vniuscuiusque rei, hoc est, idem in quo
vnaquaeque res terminatur, and ideo dicitur finalis concordia, quia imponit
finem litibus.

Fol. 250. a. b. Et le nosme del estate fee tail fuit done sur le certeintie
del inheritance, come Littleton dit, car il dit, que Talliare, idem est quod in
certitudinem ponere. Et pur ceoque en le done il est express de que corpse les
heirs que enheritont, isseront, pur cel cause il prist, que il fuit appelle
tail. Ou plustost puit aver le nosme de cest Francois paroll, tailor, lequel
est decowper, car a tailor boys, est a cowpe^ poys, et purceoque l'estate est
docked, on cut off (car deuant il fuit fee simple, et a ore le fee est decise
de ceo, et l'estate per ceo est docked, cut off, ou fait meynder) il poet bien
estre dit estate tail, cestascauoir, estate decoupe, decise, ou deminue.

Fol. 193. a. Terres venues en mains des ^omes de religion, sont appelle en ley
de viender en mortmayne, per le resemblance (come Weston Justice dit) al tenure
d'un home en extremes, que tient en son main queconque que il soit, tanq* que
il soit mort. Et issint le continuance del inheritance en ceux de religion est
suppose cy longement, que le meason continue. Vide Doctor and Student accordant
oue ceo. page 172. a.

Fol. 198. b. Et le paroll, Expiration, est properment breathing up, ou
yielding up the breath, come le seigniour Dyer dit, et est apply al home ou
auters chooses animate: et est use pur le mort d'un home; car quant il yield up
his breath, adonques il morust, car sans son breath il ne poet viuer. Et
comentque il est properment use a chooses animate, que breathont, uncore per un
similitude il est refer al chooses inanimate. Come vsomus en nostre ley,
Reuerter, que est properment use in chooses animate que soy remouent: mes ascun
foits nous vsomus ceo in chose inanimate, come diomus, lou tenant en tail
morust, le terre reuertera al donor. Et issint expiration use icy per
similitude del chooses vi^ant, implye ^ine queconque. Car come signifiomus per
expiration le mort del home, et son darreine fine, queconque voy, que il vient,
issint ceo paroll, expiration, add al estate pur ans, poet aptement signifier
le fine de ceo queconque. Et issint expiration del estate pur ans, et fine del
estate pur ans, est tout un.

Court baron, of Barons, quasi virones, magnates, among the Saxons called
Thani. Court Leete, of the Saxon word Lant, which is law, so Lant-day by
corruption of speech is come to be called Law-day. Barrettor, of the French
Barat, deceit: or of the Latin, Baratro, or Balatro, a vile knave. Apprentice
of Apprendre to learn. Sessions a sedendo. Acquittance, quasi acquietantia,
etc.

Indictment, of the French word, Enditer, which Stephanus, deriueth from the
Greek (...), defero, accuso, postulo in iudicio, and (...), deferor, causam
dico quod circa publica secus aliquid admiserim. Hereof is (...), delatio, and
(...), delator, quadruplator. Master Lambard in his Justice of peace. lib. 2.
cap. 5. says thus. The understanding or knowledge which the justices of peace
do take by the travail of these enquirours is by the mean of their report,
put in writing, and commonly called an enditement, or presentment: between the
which two words (howsoever they be confounded in common speech) me thinks
that there does easily appear a certain difference. For I take a presentment
to be a mere denuntiation of the jurors themselves or of some other officer
without any other information: and an enditement to be the verdict of the
jurors, grounded upon the accusation of a third person. So that a presentment
is but a declaration of the Jurors, or officers without any bill offered
before, and an enditement is their finding of a bill of accusation to be true.
The one seems to come of the Greek (...) I accuse, the other of the French,
presenter, to offer unto a man, or set before him.

Master Lambard: Just. lib. 2. cap. 16. Hereof also the fine took first his
name, of the Latin Finis, because it makes an end with the Prince for the
imprisonment, for the offense committed, against his law, and in that respect
chiefly does it differ from an amerceament. For when the offender has not so
deeply trespassed, that thereby he deserves not any bodily punishment at all
(as if he be nons^ite in an action, or do commit any such like default) he
is said to fall into the kings mercy, because he is then mercifully to be
dealt with. And by the great charter, cap. 14. that amerciament and sum of
money which he is to pay for y^ same, ought to be assessed and affeered by
the good and lawful men of the neighborhood, which also Glannil, lib. 9. cap.
11. affirms to have been the law of the land long before that time, saying
misericordia domini regis est, qua quis per ^uramentum legalium hominum de
vicineto eatenus amerciandus, ne aliquid de suo honorabili contenemento
amittat. But when the offense or contempt falls out to be so great, that it
asks the imprisonment of the body it self, and that during the kings will and
pleasure, then is the party to redeem his liberty with some portion of money,
as he can best agree with the king or his Justices for the same, which
composition is properly called his fine, or his ransom, and in Latin
Redemptio, as may be plainly seen by the statute of Marlebridge. 52. H. 3.
cap. 1. 2. 3. and 4. and by the statute called Ragman, and diverse other
ancient statutes.

The humanity and conscience which Christian religion does teach, has
engendered a certain fear and scruple in the hearts of our men, to have slaves
and bondmen. Yet necessity on both sides, of the one to have help, and the
other to have service, has kept a figure or fashion thereof. So that some
would not have bondmen, villeins in gross, as ye would say immediately bond to
the person and his heirs; but ascriptitios glebae, or agris censitos, and
villeins regardant and bond to the manor or ground, as members belonging to the
place, and following him who had the place; to the intent their service might
be furnished, and that the country being evil, unwholesome, and otherwise
barren, should not be desolate. Others afterward found out the ways and
means, that not the men, but the land should be bound, and bring with it such
bondage and service to him that occupyeth it, as to carry the Lords dunge unto
the fields, to plow his ground at certain days, sow, reap, come to his
court, swear faith unto him, and in the end to hold the land but by the copy
of the Lords Court roll, and at the will of the Lord. This tenure is called
also in our Law, villeine, bond, or service tenure. Yet, to consider more
deeply, all land, even that which is called most free land, has a bondage
annexed unto it, not as naturally the lower ground must suffer and receive the
water and filth which falls from the higher ground, nor such as Justinian
speaks of de seruitutibus praediorum rusticorum and vrbanorum; but the land
does bring a certain kind of servitude to the possessor. For no man holds
land simply free in England, but he or she that holds the crown of England:
all others hold their land in fee, that is upon a faith or trust, and some
service to another Lord of a manor as his superior, and he again of a higher
Lord, till it come to the prince and him that holds the crown. So that if a
man die, and it be found that he has land which he holds, but of whom no
man can tell, this is understood to be holden of the crown, and in capite,
which is much like to knights service, and draws unto it three services,
Homage, ward, and marriage: that is he shall swear to be his man, and to be
true unto him of whom he holds the land. His son who holds the land
after the death of his father, shall be married where it pleases the Lord. He
that holds the land most freely of a temporal man (for francke alms and
francke marriage has an other cause and nature) holds by fealty only, which
is, he shall swear to be true to the Lord. So that all free land in England
is holden in fee, or fedo, which is as much to say, as in fide or fiducia, that
is, in trust and confidence, that he shall be true to the Lord, of whom he
holds it, pay such rents, do such service, and observe such conditions, as
were annexed to the first donation. Thus all, saving the Prince, be not very
domini, but rather Fiduciarij domini and possessores. This is a more likely
interpretation then ye which Littleton does put down in his book, who says
that foedum, idem est quod haereditas, whith it does betoken in no language.
This happens many times to them who be of great wit and learning, yet not
seen in many tongues, or mark not the deduction of words which time does
alter. Fides in Latin, the Goths coming into Italy, and corrupting the
language, was turned first into feed and at this day in Italy they will say,
in fide, en feed, or a la fe. And some uncunning lawyers that would make a new
barbarous Latin word to betoken land given in fidem, or as the Italian
says, in feed, or fe, made it, in feudum, or fedum. The nature of the word
appears more evident in those which we call to feffe, feoffee or feoffees,
the one be fiduciarij possessores, or fidei co^missarij, the other is, dare in
fiduciam, or fidei commissum, or, more Latinely, fidei committere. The like
error is in Wythernam, which some interpret vetitum nauium: whereas in truth
it is in plain Dutch, and in our old Saxou language wyther nempt, alterum
accipere: iterum rapere: nam is, pignoris ablatio, wyther, signifies altera.
But to return thither where we did digress: ye see that where the persons
be free, and the bodies at full liberty and maxim ingenui, yet by annexing a
condition to the land, there be means to bring the owners and possessors
thereof into a certain servitude, or rather Libertinitie: that the tenantes,
besides paying the rent accustomed, shall owe to the Lord a certain faith,
duty, trust, obedience, and, as we term it, certain service, as Libertus or
cliens patrono: which, because it does not consist in the persons, (for the
respect in them does not make them bond) but in the land and occupation
thereof, it is more properly expressed in calling the one tenant, the other
Lord of the fee, then either Libertus or cliens can do the one, or Patronus
the other: for these words touch rather the persons, and the office and duty
between them, then the possessions, but in our cause, leaving the possession
and land, all the obligation of servitude and service is gone.

So much have I collected out of sir Thomas Smith, concerning this word fee.
lib. 3. cap. 8.

Master Lambard. Just. lib. 2. cap. 14. Arraignement seems to have borrowed
the name out of the word Arraye, which is the pannell or jury, because he
that is arraigned, must be tried by them, being first called, sworn, and tried
in order for that service.

Master Lambard. Just. lib. 1. cap. 13. This saving then, or delivery of a
person out of prison, before he has satisfied the law, is uttered by three
terms in our statutes, that is to say bailement, maineprise or manucaption,
and repleuine: and they be indifferently used to express that surety, which
the prisoner is to find in such a case. Nevertheless it seems that a
repleuine had his original of the word, pledges, which denotes them that
undertake for the party, that he shall abide to be justified by law: and it
is used in diverse other cases* as in repleuine of cattle upon distress,
repleuine of fraunchises in a quo warranto, repleuyne of land upon a grand cape
in old time, and repleuine of the person of a man in case of villenage.

Baylement is derived from the French term Bayler, and that also comes of
the Greek (...), they both signifiyng to deliver into hand. For he that is
bayled, is taken or kept out of prison, and delivered, as it were, into the
hands of his friends, as sureties for him. Whereof also the word
Manucaptio, or Maineprise, which is all one, gives good evidence, the one
mentioning the delivery, the other the receyning. And in this respect, the
book of the Norman customs calls baylement, a live prison, for that the
party thereby becomes prisoner to his friends that do undertake for him.

Master Lambard. Just. lib. 1. cap. 21. As in old time every killing of a
man was of the effect, called Murder, because death ensued of it (and of the
Hebrew word Moth, says Postellus, comes the Latin Mors, which the Saxons
our elders, called Morth and Morthor, as we yet sound it) so was that wilful
manner of ^aying with malice prepensed, long since, and most properly, called
Felony, because it was done felleo animo, in malicious heat and displeasure,
and therefore per feloniam, as the statute at Marlebridge cap. 15. does
plainly term it.

Master Lambard. Just. lib. 2. cap. 19. Riot seems to come of the French
word Rioter, which signifies to brawle or scolde; for that commonly Riots
indeed, do follow of brawling in word. And it is taken to be where there is
any unlawful assembly (An unlawful assembly is the company of three persons
or more gathered together to do such an unlawful act, although they do it
not indeed) of men gathered together, and going about to commit an unlawful
act, and they do execute it indeed, as to beat a man, or to enter upon a
possession forcibly, or such like.

Our Rout is the same which the Germains yet call Rot, meaning a band or great
company of men gathered together, and going about to execute, or executing
indeed any Riot or unlawful act. And, says Marrow, it is said properly of
the multitude that assemble themselves in such disorderly sort for their
common quarrel: as if the inhabitants of a towneship do assemble to pull
down a hedge or pale, to have their common, where they ought to have none, to
beat a man that has done them some public offense or displeasure.

M. Lambard. Just. lib. 1. cap. 17. The words Affray and Assault be
indifferently used of most men, and that in our book cases, but yet in mine
opinion, there wants not a just difference between them. For Affray, is
deryued of the French, Effrayer, which signifies, to terrify, or bring fear,
and is the more heinous irespasse: for the Law understands it to be a common
wrong, and therefore it is enquirable and punishable in the turn of the
shiriffe, and in a leete, 4. H. 6. 10. and 8. E. 4. 5. Otherwise it is of an
assault, as it seems by those very books. Yet may an affray be without
word or blow given: as if a man, shall show himself furnished with armor or
weapon, which is not usually worn and borne, it will strike a fear into others
that be not armed, as he is, and therefore both the statute of Northampton. 2.
E. 3 cap. 3. made against the wearing of armor and weapon, and the writ
thereupon grounded, do speak of it, by the words, Effray del pais, and, in
terrorem populi.

But an Assault, as it is fetched from another fountain, namely from the
Latin Assultus, which denotes a leaping or flying upon a man: so can it not
be performed without the offer of some hurtful blow, or at the least of some
fearful speech. And therefore to rebuke a collector with foul words, so that
he departed for fear without doing his office, was taken for an assault. 27.
lib. Ass. Pl. 11. And to strike at a man although he were neither hurt, nor
hit with the blow, was adjudged an assault. 22. lib. ass. pl. 60. For this
assault does not always necessarily imply a hitting: and therefore in
trespass of assault and battery, a man may be found guilty of the assault,
and yet excused of the battery. 40. E. 3. 4. and 45. E. 3. 24.

Estreates are called of the word Extracta, because they be short notes or
memorials, extracted or drawn out of the Records by the Clarke of the peace,
and by him indented and delivered sunderly to the shiriffe, and to the barons
of the Eschequer, bearing this, or the like title: Extracta finium,
amerciamentorum forisfactorum, ad generalem sessionem pacis tentam apud
Maydstone etc. coram etc. For the whole form of the making hereof, there is
full direction given to all clerks of estreates, by the statute. 7. H. 4. cap.
3. whereunto I refer them.

I have purposely inserted a number of notations, for that I would make it
plain, how the notion of the thing is oftentimes expressed by the notation of
the word, contrary to the preiudicate opinion of some seely penmen, and
illogicall lawyers, who think it a fruiteles point of superfluous curiosity,
to understand the words of a man's own profession.

Elenchs.

A Woman is a woe man, because she woorketh a man woe. Agreamentum, quasi
aggregatio mentium. But all the sport is to hear the Moonkish notations of
words both Greek and Latin, whereof they knew neither sense nor
signification, as Diabolus, of Dia, that is two (say they) and bolus, which
signifies a morsel, because the devil makes but two morsels of a man, one
of the soul, and another of the body. Hypocrisis, of (...), which is over, and
(...), gold, because hypocrites be cloaked with a golden show ouercast:
whereas the one comes of (...), to cast in accusations: the other of (...),
to dissemble.

The 13. Chapter. Of Distribution.
IN Distribution and Definition there is a most necessary reciprocation or
conversion: in distribution, of all the parts with the whole: in definition, of
the thing defined, with the definition it self.

A distribution is, when the whole is distributed into his parts. And as the
distinguishing of the whole into his parts, is called Distribution: so the
collection or gathering together of all the parts to make up the whole, is
named Induction.

Distribution is made of arguments which are agreeable to the whole, but
disagreeable among themselves: so that it is so much the more perfect
distribution, by how much the parts do more agree with the whole; and
disagree among themselves.

Annotations.
REciprocation:] In other arguments not necessary. For it is not in all causes,
but only between the form and the thing formed: not in all subjects, but
between the subject and his proper adiunct, not in all contraries, but only
in Relatiues. Whereas in distribution and definition, the reciprocation is
perpetual.

Such is the excellency of distribution and definition, that almost they alone
do suffice for the absolute putting down of any art. Therefore Socrates in
Phaedro Platonis says, that if he find any man who can cunningly divide, he
will follow his steps, and admire him for a God.

[Induction:] Therefore as the one is an argument, and no argumentation, so
also is the other. Nam Inductio arguit distributum sieve totum, sine vlla
dispositione tertij argumenti.

[More agree with the whole:] For in distribution of the subject and adiunct,
the parts and the whole do not essentially agree, as we shall see hereafter.
Therefore by this rule the best division is from the cause and effect. Again,
the more that the parts do disagree among themselves, the better is the
division. By which it appears that the best division must be of parts that
be most repugnant, which can be but two, therefore Dichotomia is most
excellent, a division consisting only of two parts. For, as among agreeable
arguments the cause and thing caused do best agree, so of all disagreeable;
the repugnant be most disagreeable. But as in the most general and
subalternall, Dichotomia must be observed, so in the most special it is not
to be exacted.

Elenchs.

Plato in Phaedro compares inartificial diuiders so bungling Cooks, who in
stead of artificial ear^ing, use rudely to break and dismember things. This
is a lamentable want in our law, I mean exact divisions, in place whereof we
have nothing else, but either A B C method without coherence, or primo
notandum, 2. not. 3. not. 4. not. and so on (...) till he come to decimotertio
notandum, like dunses in schools, and seelly bablers in pulpits: that a man
were far better make a new speech, than remember their waste and confused
Schediasmata. Lyttleton did what he could in this behalf, although it were
but little, as in those his distinctions, Estate tail is general or special:
Dower is per le comen ley, per custom, ad ostium ecclesiae, ex assensu patris,
de la pluis beale. Uillen per prescription ou confession: Item in gros ou
regardant. Rent est rent service, charge, seck. Conditions in fayt, en ley.
Garrantie, lineall, collateral, perdisseisin, etc.

Well then, one general Elench in a distribution, is the not using of it, when
the matter requires. Another is, when we use it, but inartificially, when any
thing either wants in it, or is supersiuous. Want, as in that which Virgil
has 5. Aeneid. where he propounds in his distribution only four kinds of
exercises, but afterward expounds five.

Prima citae Teucris ponam certamina classis,
Quique pedum cursu valet, and qui viribus audax,
Aut iaculo incedit melior, leuibusque sagittis,
Seu crudo fidit pugnam committere cestu,
Cuncti adsint, meritaeque expectent praemia palmae,
Ore fauete omnes, and cingite tempora ramis.
For besides these four, follows the fifth, not named here in the
distribution, and that is the race of horses.

For superfluity, that shall serve which Tully has in his second book De
finibus, where he speaks thus of Epicurus.

Quomodo autem philosophus loquitur tria esse genera cupiditatum? Naturales and
necessarias, naturales and non necessarias, nec naturales nec necessarias.
Primum diuisit inleganter: duo enim genera quae erant, fecit tria: hoc est, non
diuidere, sed frangere rem. Qui si diceret, Cupiditatum duo esse genera,
naturales and inanes: naturalium quoque duo, necessarias and non necessarias,
confecta res esset. Vitiosum est enim in diuidendo, partem in genere numerare.

The 14. Chapter. Of Distribution of Causes.
DIstribution is made either of arguments fully agreeable, or agreeable in
part: fully as first of the cause.

The distribution made of the cause is, when the parts are the causes of the
whole. And this is called partition, when the whole integrall is divided into
his members.

Hobbinoll confuteth Diggon Dauy in September, proouing by a distribution of
England into her parts, no Wolves to be in England.

Fie on thee Diggon, and all thy foul leasing,
Well is known, that since the Saxon king,
Never was Woolfe seen, many nor some,
Nor in all Kent, nor in Christendom.
For most part of England being Christian in Ethelberts time, Kent only
continued in Paganism, and was therefore counted no part of English
Christendom. So that partition is used both in a distinct propounding of
parts, where any long matter is to be handeled of Poets, Orators, Preachers,
Lawyers, etc. and also syllogistically in arguing either the whole by the
parts, or the parts by the whole.

Master Plowden. Fol. 170. a. Terre ne poet perteigner al message. Car
message consist de deux chooses, del terre et structure, et terre ne poet
perteigner al terre, etc.

Fol. 151. a. Reuersion del terre consist des deux chooses del terre, et del
residue ou remnaunt estate. Come Manor del services et demesne; stagnum del
terre et eawe; Piscaria del eawe et terre etc.

Annotations.
ECausis singulis distributio esse potest. Ex efficiente, vt ius est natural,
civil, gentium; ex materia: vestes sunt laneae, lineae, etc. Ex forma, lanx
est, quadrata, rotunda, etc. Ex fine, vestes sunt induendi causa, vel
praecingendi, insternendi, etc.

For the Elenchs touching distribution of the integrall, see before in the
tractate of the integrall.

The 15. Chapter. Of distribution of Effects.
THe distributio^ of the thing caused or of the effects is, whose parts are
effects of the whole, and this is properly called Division, when as the
general or universal is divided into his specials. And as the first called
Partition; so this called division is handeled as well in form of
Distribution, as in arguing the one by the other.

Master Plowden. Fol. 132. b. Il n'est rent: car si serroit rent, adonque il
couyent de necessity d'estre rent charge, rent seek, ou rent service, car ne
sont plusors rents que ceux trois, et rent charge il n'est my, car null distres
est done, nec ascun terre charge oue ceo, nec seck ou service, quia n'est
issant horse d'ascun terre, Ergo n'est rent.

Elenchs.

Althusius thus divides unlawful pleasures: into stuprum and adulterium.
Stuprum inter personas solutas, and is voluntarium or violentum. Voluntarium
fit ab extraneis, aut a consanguineis, vt incestus. Ab extraneis, naturaliter,
vel contra naturam: naturaliter a mare and faemina. Contra naturam, a mare cum
mare, a faemina cum faemina, aut cum bestiijs. Adulterium est cum alterius
coniuge vel marito. The whole constitution of this division is erroneous. For
most of the things which are contained under stuprum, may as well, and do as
well belong unto adulterium. Fenners division therefore is far better: where
he says they be

Praeter naturam, or secundum naturam: praeter naturam est vel coufusio tum
specierum, tum sexuum, vel incestus. Specierum, cum bestiae vere vel spiritus
specie hominibus miscentur voluptatis causa; sexuum, confusio est, cum mares
maribus, faeminae faeminis miscentur. Incestus sunt, cum propinqui carne
miscentur etiam in coniugio.

Secundum naturain est scortatio vel adulterium: Scortatio est, cum matrimonio
soluti illegitime miscentur. Adulterium, cum altera persona saltem sit
desponsata. Nam si vtraque sit desponsata, grauius est adulterium.

It is all one whether the general be divided into his specials, or into the
forms of the specials, as Animal is either rationale or irrationale, where the
specials be as significantly put down as if they were expressed by their own
proper names, man and beast.

The 16. Chapter. Of Distribution of arguments after a certain manner
agreeable.
THe second kind of Distribution is made of arguments agreeable after a
certain manner, as of subjects and adjuncts.

The Distribution made of the subject is, when the parts are fet from the
subject.

Hobbinoll in his song of Elysa, divides her beauty being the adiunct, into
her several subjects, as, face, eye, cheek, etc.

Tell me, have ye seen her angelike face like Phaebe fay re?
Her heavenly hauiour, her princely grace can you well compare?
The red Rose meddled with the white yfeare,
In either cheek depaynten Iiuely cheer:
Her modest eye,
Her majesty,
Where have you seen the like but there?
M. Plowden Fol. 279. b. Et quant a ceo, troys y sont (come Walshe dit) que
ount a intromitter oue les biens del mort, cestassauoir, l'executor, le
ordinary, et les administrators etc.

The Distribution of the adiunct is, when the parts are fet from the adjuncts.

Diggon in September.

For either the she pheards been idle and still,
And led of their sheep what way they will;
Or they been false or full of couetise:
And casten to compass many wrong emprise:
But the more been fraught with fraud and spite,
Ne in God nor goodness taken delight.
Master Plowden Fol. 328. Mines de plumbe sont fertile, on sterile, etc,

Annotations.
PIscator would have some divisions to be of things, as those that Ramus has
put down: and some of words, to distinguish the diverse acceptions of
ambiguous words, as Littleton page 51. in this word Assise, which he says
is equiuocum, etc. But that belongs rather to a Dictionary-maker, then a
teacher of Logike, says one. And, indeed, as another answers, words be
divided together with the things: as Liberty and freedom is either bodily or
spiritual: where, as well the thing, as the word is diuyded.

All Logike is general, and applyable as well to things imagined, as things
that be extant in truth: and therefore to words also, as words have causes,
effects, subjects, adjuncts, and other arguments to be considered. Logicus,
says Hottoman, insitam vocum inter se rationem, habitum, respectum,
affectionem: Grammaticus tantum accidentia, and popularis sermonis in ijs
iungendis consuetudinem exquirit, etc.

Since these two last kinds of distribution be said to be made of arguments
agreeable after a certain manner; we are to understand, that neither the
whole here, is of the essence of the parts, nor the parts of the nature of
the whole: so that this is no true distribution indeed, but rather an imagined
distinction. And these be parts, not of any whole, but rather of order,
distinction, and particular rehearsal or enumeration.

Canons.

Therefore if you affirm or deny, either the adiunct which is the whole, or
the subjects which be the parts, you may contingently affirm or deny the one
or the other.

And so in the other of the adiunct, the adiunctes as parts being affirmed,
the subject as whole may be also affirmed.

Distrib. in Sub.

Stamford. praerog. reg. cap. 1. For which cause the laws do attribute unto
him (the king) all honor, dignity, prerogative and pre-eminence, which
prerogative does not only extend to his own person, but also to all other
his possessions, goods, and cattels. As, that his person shall be subject to
no man's suite, his possessions cannot be taken from him by any violence or
wrongful disseisin: his goods and cattels are under no tribute, toll, or
custom, nor otherwise distreignable.

Elenchs.

If a false adiunct be divided into false subjects: as arguments be either
affirmative or negative. Or if a false subject be divided into unfit adjuncts,
as spirits some be white, some black.

The 17. Chapter. Of a Definition.
A Definition is that which declares what a thing is: it consists on two
parts, the general and the difference. Whereof the first is common to the
thing defined, and all his other fellow specials, but the difference is proper
only to the thing defined, and distinguishes it from all other his fellow
specials.

A definition is perfect or imperfect; whereof the first, for the excellency,
is called definition by the common name: the second is termed a description,
by a more special title or word.

A perfect description is that, whose difference is fet from the formal cause
of the thing defined, as, A man is a sensible creature endued with reason,
where, sensible creature is the general, and endued with reason, is the
difference: so that whatsoever is in a definition placed after the general,
that I call in this place the difference.

By an argument from the definition, Piers in May proves hyrelinges, to be no
shepheardes, because the true definition of a shepherd agroeth not with them.
Thilke same been shepherds for the Devils stead,
That playen whilst their flocks be vnfead.


Where after follows a definition (a country definition) of an hirelyng, by
application whereof unto them, he proves them to be h^relings.

Well is it seen their sheep be not their own,
That letten them run at random alone:
But they been hired, for little pay,
Of others that caren as little as they,
What fallen the flock, so they han the fleece,
And get all the gain paying but a piece.
Master Plowden Fol. 54. b. Car couyn, solonque le vray definition de ceque
est un secreate assent, determine en les coeurs de deux ou plusors homes, al
prejudice d'auter. Come si tenant pur vie voyle secretement conspirer oue un
auter, que l'auter recouera en prejudice de cestuy en reuersion. Car per ceo
son reuersion serra toll. Et ceo conspiracy est et poet estre term, et dit
couyne; car touts les parts del couyne sont la perimplies. Car la est unity de
lour deux coeurs; et est secretement fayt, et est en prejudice del tierce
person, et issint perfect couyne sans mayheme ou blemish.

Fol. 261. a. Et quant al quality del offense, quel le offender icy ad fayt,
il dit, que est in degree del murder, et nemy de manslaughter. Car manslaughter
est le occider del home fe^niousement sans malice prepense. Mes murder est
occider del home sur malice prepence. Et icy le occider de luymesme, fuit
prepence et resolve en sa meant deuant le act fayt. Et auxi il agree in auter
point oue l'auncient definition del murder, que fuit tiel, Murdrum est occulta
hominis occisio, nullo praelente, nullo sciente. Issint icy sir James Hales
secreatement surround luymesme, ne auterment il serroit stay ou interrupt de
ceo fair.

Fol. 359. a. Le seigniour Dyer define claim en tiel manner; Claim est
challenge per ascun home del propriety ou ownership del chose que il ne ad en
possession, mes que est deteigne de luy per tort.

Annotations.
DEfinition is not set among the last, as though it were one of the woorst, but
because it is made of those other going before, and therefore cannot be
conceived without them.

Here we teach what a definition is, and how to make it, therefore it comes
after the other arguments of which it is made: but in the tractate of Method,
we show how and where to place a definition already made; and therefore
according to her excellency, we allow her the first place.

Diuisio est quasi sectio rei in parts: Definitio contra, quasi collectio and
comprehensio partium ad rem explicandam.

Theloall has taken some more pains in defining and dividing a writ, than
either the author of the Register, of old Natura breuium, or Fitzherbert.
Theloals definition is already put down elsewhere.

Tenant in fee simple est celuy que ad terres ou tenements a tener a luy, et a
ses heirs a touts iours. Littleton page 1. Disseisin est un tortious ousting
del francktenant per entree nyent congeable. 62. a. Plowden.

Nous voulons que prisone soyt tenue place per nous bound dedeins certain
bounds assigns pur le guard del corpse del home. Brytton, 17. Appele est
pleynte de home fait sur auter, ouesque purpose de luy atteyndre de felony par
mots a ceo ordeynes. Brytton, when he had thus defined matrymony, Fol. 246.
Matrimony est assembly de home et de feme, a lour deux assents par ioynture de
saint eglise, pur demorer ensemble ausi come un chair a touts lour vies, sans
espoyre de partir: afterward, Fol. 252. he proves that if a man have two
wives, the second is not feme de iure by this definition, thus; et deux ne poyt
il my aver a vne foits, sicome apiert per le definition de matrimony, ou est
dit, que matrimony est assembly de home et de feme, et nemy de home et femes,
ou feme et homes, mes singulerment feme et home. It is shame that Brytton were
not newly printed, and pity that he and Bracton be no more read: for
though the Law be much altered since their time, yet there is no essential
part of the Law, which he and Bracton do not define, divide, and handle
accordingly. So that by discretion a man shall by one chapter of Brytton more
plainly perceive the nature of Guard, villen, etc. then by turning and tossing
of forty vncoherent cases in yeare-bookes, which do not expound the nature of,
Guard, villen, etc. but are spent in the determination of some obscure point
touching Guard, villen, etc. and do presuppose a general notice of them,
before we come to the examination of particular difficulties discussed in
yeere-bookes. And indeed it seems a preposterous thing to iangle of moote
conceiptes in Essoyne, Protection, etc. not knowing what an Essoyne is, what a
Protection means. But as in Uniuersities, so in Innes of Court, the greedy
desire of a superficial show in unnecessary tryfles makes us want the true
substance: they for have to get a prebend by a degree, make light work and
run over two or three Epitomes; and we by a moote book and a Brooks
abridgement climb to the bar, and bar our selves utterly from the substance
of the common Law. But omnis definitio in iure civilly periculosa est, and so in
the common Law. That's true, but M. Theloall, as also Freigius, who is of the
same mind, mistook the word; for I think Vlpian, by this word, Definitio,
meaned not the Logical definition which expounds the nature of a thing, but
breuem and circumscriptam quandam iuris sententiam, quam iurisconsulti regulam,
Dialectici Thesin, seu positionem; Medici Aphorismum nominant. And yet, be it
as it may be, I doubt not but who so attempteth to make Logical definitions
in the Law, shall find it somewhat dangerous, because it is very difficult.

Cambiparticipes sunt, qui per se vel per alios placita mouent, vel mouere
faciunt, and ea suis sumptibus prosequuntur, ad cambipartem, vel pro part
lucri habenda. Stat. an. 33. E 1.

Toftum est ou meason ad este, et ore est null mesuage, mes le site del meason
apier^. Curtilagium est un soil ou garden apperteignant a vne mease, quasi
curta pecia terrae. Fayrfax. 21. E. 4. 52.

Glanuil. lib. 9. Fol. 7. Dicitur autem purprestura, vel porprestura proprie
quando aliquid supra dominum regem unjust occupatur, vt in dominicis regis,
vel in vijs publicis obstructis, vel in aquis publicis transuersis a recto
cursu, vel quando aliquis in ciuitate super regiam plateam aliquid aedificando
occupauerit, etc.

24. H. 7. 12. Read. Misprision properment est lou un chose est agree destre
vray, come nosme del ville ou del pe rson, et puis en mesme cel plee, cel chose
est autrement nosme, Come ou ieo sue nosme en formedome R. Read, a que ieo
face defense, et en mon bar ieo moy entitle per le nosme del T. R. ceo serra
amend, car serra entend que le clerk fuit ignorant que ceo escript issint. Mes
si en brief verse moy per le nosme de R. ieo die, vous aues cy le dit T. ceo
nest misprision amendable.

In stead of giving a true definition or explication of the nature and essence
of any thing in our law, these singlesowld Lawyers and golden Asses answer,
(...): put down a particular case, as if I should ask what is a man: A man,
say they, is such a thing as Willy the milman: Robin the pannierman, etc. Where
a general definition being put down, would give a special light to the
matter in hand.

Accurata definitione vtendum est in artibus, and cum doctis hominibus: in
vulgus autem, and imperitorum sensus, descriptiones aptiores sunt.

Heriettum est quaedam praestatio, vbi tenens liber vel servus in morte sua
dominum suum respicit de meliori auerio suo, vel de secundo meliori: quae
quidem praestatio magis degratia quam de iure fit. Fleta: lib. 4. cap. 3. Elis.
58. Dyer.

Collegium est societas plurium corporum inter se distantium: and dicitur
collegium proprie, cum simul habitant, quoniam simul colliguntur, and collegium
constituitur in ecclesia vel per priuilegium concessum a superiori post
fundatam ecclesiam, vel si a principio fuit ordinatum, quod ecclesia esset
collegiata, vel si longo tempore vixerint collegialiter and sunt in quasi
possessione collegij. Item ecclesia potest fieri collegiata cum consensu
episcopi and patroni. 9. and 10. Flis. 13. Dyer.

If some of these examples by me collected seem rather good descriptions,
then perfect definitions: thou that so think, must think this also, that I
could find no better.

Therefore Si quid nouisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti: si non, his vtere mecum.


A definition is called of the Grecians, (...). Which is a translated word
from bounds and limittes of ground. For as they hedge in and include the
ground: so does a definition limite and circumscribe, or, as it were bind in
the nature of that which is defined.

And that also is the natural signification of this word which the
Latinistes vs^, finire, or definire: from whence come finitio, and definitio:
Which we now use as an English word. Finis is an end, finire, and definire,
signify to limite and end, or circumscribe one from an other, that so it may
be known from other. The chief use then of a definition is, to show and make
plain: yet an argument proouing may be fet both from the definition to the
thing defined, and from this to that, negatiuely, and affirmatively, and so it
is in descriptions.

[The difference:] This difference is sometimes fet from the very internal
form and essential cause of the thing defined: which is best, but hard to be
found: and therefore, instead thereof, sometimes the end is used, sometimes the
proper adiunct, sometimes many adiunctes together, sometimes the subject.

One Relative does define an other.

Canons.

If the definition be, then the thing defined must be, and contrarily: but if
not that, then neither this, and contrarily.

To whatsoever, the definition either may or may not be applied, to the same
also the thing defined either may, or may not be attributed, and contrarily.

Whatsoever agreeeth, or not agreeeth with the definition, the same thing
either will agree or not agree with the thing defined and contrarily.

In genere asciscendo satis erit proximum ponere, neque altius a capite
repetere. Nam qui proximum genus po^suit, is etiam superiora omnia posuisse
intelligitur. Quandoquidem (ait Aristoteles in topicis) in inferioribus ea quae
supra sunt intelliguntur.

Hottoman.

Master Lambert; Just. lib. 1. ca. 1. Justices of the peace be Justices of
record appointed by the Queen to be justices within certain limits: for the
conservation of the peace, and for the execution of sundry things
comprehended in their commission, and in diverse laws committed unto them.

The 18. Chapter. Of a Description.
AN imperfect definition or description, is that whose difference is fet
elsewhere then from the formal cause, and it is sometimes brief, sometimes
more largely amplified.

Thenot in February describes the oak, thus,

There grew an aged tree on the green,
A goodly oak sometime had it been,
With arms full strong and largely displayde,
But of their leaves they were disarayde:
The body byg, and mightily pyght,
Thoroughly rooted and of wondrous hight:
Whilom had been the king of the field,
And muchel mast to the husband did yield,
And with his nuts larded many swyne,
But now the gray moss marred his ryne.
His bared boughs were beat with storms,
His top was balde and wasted with worms,
His honor decade, his branches sere, etc.
In May Piers describes the kid.

She set her yongling before her knee
That was both fresh and lovely to see,
And full of favor as Kid might be.
His vellet head began to shoot out,
And his wreathed horns began to sprout.
The blossoms of lust to bud did begin,
And spring forth rankly under his chyn. etc.
Where afterward follows the description of the counterfayt peddler, the fox,
by adjuncts, effects, etc.

It was not long after she was gone,
But the false fox came to the door anon,
Not as a Fox, for then he had be kend,
But as a poor peddler he did wend,
Bearing a trusse of tryfles at his back,
As bells, and babes, and glasses in his pack,
A biggen he had got about his brain,
For in his headpeece he felt a sore pain.
His hinder heel was wrapped in a clowte,
For with great cold he had got the gowte.
There at the door he cast me down his pack,
And laid him down, and groand, alack, alack.
Ah dear Lord, and sweet saint Charitee,
That some good body would once pity me. etc.
Master Plowden Fol. 273. a. Terminus, si sit refer al temps, est le fine
del ceo, come Weston dit: et poet estre refer al lieu, come le seignior Dyer
dit, come terminus loci; et adonques il est prise come precinct ou lymite del
un lieu, come bound est inter terres de diverse homes, et issint ad mesme le
sentence, come certeintie ad, soit il refer al te^ps, ou lieu: et terminus
loci poot estre dit certeintie en lieu: terminus temporis est certeintie en
temps.

Fol. 88. a. Et moy semble que pretensed droyt ou title nest forsque en vne
case, et ceo est l'ou un est en possession de terres, ou tenements, et auter
que est horse del possession, claim ceo ou sue pur ceo; ceo est pretensed droyt
ou title.

Fol. 368. b. Description de peace per Catlyn, et Fol. 195. a. Description del
fearme per Brown et Dyer etc. Ibidem,

Le Common ley, n'est que comen use.

Annotations.
AS breuity is commended in a perfect definition, so copious amplification is
fittest for a description: yet so as swelling superfluity be always avoided.

Descriptio is called of the Graecians (...). Some call it in Latin, Allusio:
it has of diverse men, upon sundry occasions diverse names. Sometimes (...), as
it were a certain delineation: if any person be described, they call it
Prosopographia, if a place, Topographia, if a nation, Chorographia, if the
earth Geographia, if the water, hydrographia, if the wind, Anemographia, if a
tree, Dendographia, if the time, Chronographia, etc.

Aristoteles a^t, neque vnam duaru^ rerum, neque vnius rei duas definitiones
esse posse. (...). Nam cum vnius rei vna natura sit, quae definitione
explicatur, rectissime a Galeno scriptum est, (...). Licet plures vnius rei
definitiones conficere vocibus tantum differentes, non rationibus.

Quod Zeno de Dialectica and Rhetorica dixit, illam pugno, hanc palmae similem
esse, idem de definitione dici and definito potest, idque multo magis
accomodate. Re namque sunt eadem, sed alterum euolutum, alterum inuolutum.

M. Lambard. Just. lib. 1. cap. 16. Budaeus in his Greek Commentaries is of
the opinion, that the French word Arrest, which with them signifies a decree
or judgment of a court, took beginning of the Greek (...), that is Placitum,
and, as we might say, the pleasure or will of a Court. And albeit that it were
not out of our way, to think that it is called Arrest, because it stays, or
rests the party, yet I believe rather that we received the name from the
Norman laws, because we use it in the same sense with them: for commonly with
us, an Arrest is taken for the execution of the commandment of some Court, or
of some officer in Justice. But howsoever the name began, An arrest is a
certain restraint of a man's person, depriving it of his own will and liberty,
and binding it to become obedient to the will of the law; and it may be
called the beginning of imprisonment. The precepts and writs of the high
courts of law, do use to express it by two sundry words, as, Capias, and
Attachias, which signify to take or catch hold of a man. But this our precept
notes it by the words duci facias, cause him to be conveyed etc. for that
the officer has after a sort, taken him before, in that he comes to him,
and requires him to go to some justice of the peace.

Ibidem. Surety of the peace is an acknowledging of a bond to the prince,
taken by a competent judge of record for the keeping of the peace, and it is
called surety of the word securitas, because the party that was in fear, is
thereby the more quiet and secure.

Idem. Lib. 1. cap. 13. The Latin men use, Recordor, when they will signify,
to keep in mind, or to remember, in which sense the poet said: Si rite audita
recordor.


And after the same sense also does our law use it: For Records be nothing
else but memorials or monumentes of things done before Judges that have
credit in that behalf.

One may affirm a thing, and another may deny it, but if a Record once say the
word, no man shall be received to auerre or speak against it. For otherwise
there would never be any end of controversies.

Stamford. lib. 2. cap. 38. Sanctuary est un lieu privilege per le prince, ou
sovereign governor, pur le safeguard de vie de home qui est offe^dour, et est
fou^due sur la ley de mercy, et sur le grand reverence, honor et devotion, que
le prince ad al lieu, deins quel il granta tyel privilege, etc. An issue is
said to be status causae, it is called Issue, of an issue in some vessel,
whence only the water is voyded etc.

Elenchs of all definitions.

First, if it want where it should be: Then if it be, but be false: or be
obscure, as that of the snayle, where the definition is more obscure than the
thing defined, and that in Pac^ius, Testudo est quadrupes tardigrada, agrestis,
humilis, aspera, capite breui, ceruice anguina, aspectu t^ci, cuiscerata
inanima, cum animali sono.

Arist. in 6. Top. compares an obscure definition to the pictures of old
bungling paynters, (...); which had the names of the things painted, put over
the pictures, or else they would never have been taken to be the pictures of
such things.

Homo est animal bipes, implume, quod erectum ingreditur, quod. Plato. And the
next day after comes me Diogenes with a cock plucked clean without feathers,
and throwing him into Plato his school, said, Ecce hominem Platonicum, lo
here is Platoes tall man, a twoo-footed creature, without feathers, going
upright.

Again, if it either want, or have too much.

In an imperfect definition, the conversion and reciprocation of it with the
thing so defined is not precisely to be exacted: but in the other, it is
necessarily required, the want whereof is an infallible token of a
sophistical definition.

The 18. Chapter. Of the argument borrowed.
Since we have sufficiently discoursed of the nature of inherent arguments, it
now remains to speak of the borrowed elsewhere, which is properly called a
testimony or witness, and is only fit for proof or confirmation. First, a
testimony is either a famous sentence, as proverbs, etc. or a law. A law is
either natural, or written.

Secondly a testimony is either simply propounded, as an edict, etc. or
written before.

Thirdly, a testimony is either with oath, or without oath. So much of the
common affections of a testimony: the specials follow.

A testimony is either of God, or of man. Of God either immediately, or by
prophets, Angels, etc, of this kind be diuinations, etc.

That of man, argues not of it self, but by the virtue of some inherent
argument: and in exquisite searching out of the truth of any thing, is but of
small force, but in civil affairs it much preuayleth, when the testimony of
any man is believed, by reason of his virtue, wisdom, etc. which indeed be
inherent arguments.

In May, the Fox would prove himself kynne to the Kid, because his grandsyre
told him so. And if that my Grandsyre told me be true,
Siker I am very sib to you.


Morrell in July. Besides (as holy fathers said) there is a hilly place,
Where Titan rises from the main, to ren his daily race.


And Thomalyn in July uses a proverb to confute Morrell, the commender of
hills. Ah, God shield man, that I should clymbe, and learn to look aloft,
This reed is rife, that oftentime great clymbers fall vnsofte.


And again, To kerke the nar, from God more far, has been an old said saw,
And he that strives to touch a star, often stumbles at a straw.


Man's testimony is either of one man, or of many. That of one, is either
obligation or confession. To obligation be referred pledges or sureties. So in
August the two sheepeheards, Perigot and Willy, for want of better arguments to
prove their skill in singing, lay down wagers, the one a cup, the other a
spotted lamb. This is commonly called the fools argument.

Willy.
Then lo, Perigot, the pledge which I plight,
A mazery wrought of the maple war,
Wherein is enchased many a fair sight
Of Bears and Tigers, that maken fierce war,
And over them spread a goodly wyld vine,
Entrayled with a wanton yuy twyne.
Thereby is a lamb in the wolves jaws,
But see how fast renneth the shepherds swayne,
To save the innocent from the beasts paws,
And here with his sheepehooke has him slain.
Tell me, such a cup have thou ever seen?
Well might it beseem any harvest queen.
Perigot.
Thereto will I pawn yonder spotted lam,
Of all my flock there nis syke another,
For I brought him up without the dam,
But Colyn Clowt raft me of his brother;
That he purchaste of me in the plain field.
Sore against my will was I forced to yield.
I remember Diggon in September swears by his soul, to give credit to his
assertion, which I should have put before.

They say they com to heaven the nigher way,
But by my soul I dare vndersay,
They never set foot in that same troade,
But balke the right way and strayen abroad.
Master Plowden Fol. 5. a. b. Et quant al distinction de Brytton parenter
inheritance et purchase, sir ieo n'ay grande regard a ceo, car son lyeur
conteigne mults errors.

Mes le lyeur de Lyttleton, que est solonque le primer edition, en que les
nouels additions sont omise, que est le verey et pluis sure register del
fundaments et principles de nostre ley, define, quod foedum simplex idem est
quod haereditas legitima vel pura. Et issint il prist chescun fee simple deste
inheritance. Et il dit que ceo parolle, inheritance, n'est solement entende lou
home ad terre per descent, mes auxi chescun fee simple, ou tail, que home ad
per son purchase, est inheritance tamen vis verbi hoc non vult.

Fol. 161. b. Et le cauillation oue les parols contrary al simple intent, come
Tullius dit en son liver de officijs, est calumnia quaedam and nimis callida,
sed malitiosa iuris interpretatio, ex quo illud, summum ius, summa iniuria.
Come il mist exemple de un que auoyt prise truce pur 130 iours oue son enemy,
et en le nuyet il destruist et depopulate ses possessions pur ceo, come il dit,
le truce fuit pur iours, et nyent pur les nuyctes. Lequel Tullius account mere
injury et injustice.

Fol. 321. b. Et ialemeins fuit dit per Gerrard que en le liver appelle
expositiones vocabulorum, que fuit mise en print 40 ans pass, il est declare
que mines de ore et argent en quecunque terres, que ils sont, afferont al roys
del ceo realm. Issint Wray dit, que Hesket apprentice que fuit bien apprise en
le ley, en son lecture extant sur lestatute de charta forestae. affirmast, que
si fueront mines de ore et argent en terre del subjects deins le forest, que
ceux afferont al roy. Issint il dit, que il auoyt vieu les leyes de s. Edward
le Confessor, en queux fuit conteigne, quod Thesauri de terra pertinent domino
regi. Et issint dit Barham del leys William conqueror, queux il anoyt view,
queux auoyent semblables parols.

The offering of trial and proof, belongs to this place, as when a man
seeing his words not believed, bids them try and then trust, as in Terence
of the boy, fac periculum in literis, fac in musicis, fac in palestra: quae
liberum scire aequum est, solertem dabo: try the boy in learning, try him in
singing, try him in wrestling: I will undertake you shall find him sufficient
in whatsoever belongs to a free borne boy.

Annotations.
ADrianus recte rescripsit, se testibus, non testimonijs crediturum, itaque
testium dignitas consideranda est: neque enim quia affirmatum sit, aut negatum,
ideo erit, aut non erit, Arist, de interpret: but because he that spoke it, was
so honest and wise a man, as that he would not affirm an untruth. Arist. 20.
Rhet.

God is to be believed without exception, because God spoke it: but men are so
much either more or less credited, by how much their behavior and learning is
more or less esteemed. Therefore the Pythagorians were very foolish in
thinking their master Pythagoras so wise, as that it were a sufficient
argument, the thing were so, because Pythagoras said it was so, (...) ipse
dixit: ipse autem erat Pythagoras. Those men, says Plato in Protagoras that
use the authority of others instead of arguments of their own, are like to
seely souls of the country, when they keep their wakes: quum enim propter
inscitiam nequeant inuicem propria voce suisque sermonibus ipsi colloqui,
mercede exhibita tibicines introducunt, vt aliena voce, id est tibiarum flatu,
conuiuium transigant. Vbi autem boni, praeclarique and eruditi viri conueniunt,
neque tibicines, neque saltatrices, neque cantatrices vllas videas, sed voce
propria, remotis ijs nugis iocisque conuiuium celebrare and alternis
interrogationibus responsionibusque modeste disserere, etiamsi vinum abunde
bibant. And in Gorgias he says truly, that in these borrowed testimonies
there is no reason or persuasion, but rather violence and compulsion.
Therefore, in Charmide, he bids us consider, not who speaks, but how true
that is which is spoken. So said Aristotle of his own master Plato, Amicus
Socrates, amicus Plato, magis amica veritas. I love Socrates and Plato well,
but I like the truth better. So in 5. E. 4. 112. est dit, que precedents et
course ne rule le ley, mes le ley rulera cux. Et pur ceo la fuit dit, que un
vtlagary fuit reuers, quia il fuit ad Com. Lancaster ibidem tent. et ne dit
apud Lancaster, ou tiel lieu certain, a que le ibidem poet estre refer, nient
obstant que fueront 100 precedent de cel return. Donque a fortiori, d'un
precedent, quia vna hirundo non facit ver. 1. and 2. M. 14. Dyer.

Canons.

Here, they are usually wont to say, Vnicuique in sua art perito, credendum
est. Every man is to be believed in that art which he professes, and wherein
he has skill and experience.

The Rhetoricians dispute with, and against extort testimonies, as present
occasion is ever offered unto them.

In our law, twelve be chosen and sworn; their verdict is quasi veredictum.
The suspected men may be ousted by challenge. Heerevpon we have challenge
peremptory, challenge per cause, etc.

Master Lambard Just. But especially there ought to appear such Jurors, as be
returned by the shiriffe, and warned by his bayliffe, whether it be for
enquiry or trial: and in this behalf, both the commission, the common form
of the precept, and the Law it self (11. H. 4. cap. 9.) wills that they
should be probi and legales homines. For if any of them be discredited in Law,
as by attainder in conspiracy, attaint, Decies tantum, subornation of perjury,
or such like, they be not probi, and their presentment is void by it, unless
there be 12. besides them, that are not so blemished. Again, if they be
outlawed, abiured, condemned in a Praemunire, or attaynted of treason, felony,
or such like, then be they not legales, and their presentment is merely void
also, as it may be gathered upon the case. 11. H. 4. 41.

And women, infants under fourteen years of age, aliens, and such as be
within orders of the ministry of the clergy, cannot be impannelled amongst
others. Generally also, these Jurors ought either to be inhabiting within the
shire, or else to have lands there: for, the commission wills, that they
should be such per quos rei veritas melius sciri poterit: which must needs be
understood of such, as have cause to know the country: and the precept is
usually according to the same form. But especially in the county Palatine of
Lancaster, each Iurour ought to have to the yearly value of five pounds by
order of the statute. 33. H. 6. ca. 2. Now by 27. Elis. every Iuror must have
iiij. pound by the year.

But these men be not truly Jurors, till they be sworn, as their name
pretends, and otherwise their presentment is utterly void.

Each Jury of Enquiry ought to contain twelve in number at the least, and if
there be 18. or more, it shall not be amiss. Yea the common order with us is,
to have them of an odd number, as 17. 19. or 21. to the end (as it seems)
that if they should dissent in opinion somewhat equally, yet there should be
always one, to wey down the side, and cast the balance: but if 12. of them
do agree, the gaynesaying of the residue cannot hinder the presentment. Les
Jurors tryeront le fayt, et nemy le ley, quia sont ignorants: mes les Judges le
ley, itaque trauers est prise sur le matter in fayt et non sur le matter en
ley. Vide Plowden. Fol. 231.

Fortescue, Lord Chauncellor, in Henry the sixth his time, prefers this order
of trial before that used in the Civil Law. His comparison is to this effect.

Si coram Iudice contendentes, ad litis perueniant contestationem super materia
facti (quam legis Angliae periti exitum placiti appellant) exitus huiusmodi
veritas per leges ciuiles, per testium depositionem probari debet, in qua duo
testes idonei sufficient. Sed per leges Angliae veritas illa non nisi duodecim
hominum de vicineto vbi factum huiusmodi supponitur sacramento, Iudici constare
poterit: and afterward.

Per leges ciuiles pars quae in litis contestatione affirmatiuam dicit, testes
producere debet, quos ipsemet ad libitum suum nominabit. Negatiua autem probari
non potest, videlicet direct: licet possit per obliquum. Ex illis quippe
creditur esse potentiae, minoris quoque industriae, qui de omnibus quos noscit
hominibus, duos reperire nequit ita conscientia and veritate vacuos, vt timore,
amore, vel commodo, omni velint contraire veritati. Hos potest tunc ipse in
testimonium producere in causa sua; and si contra eos pars altera dicere velit,
vel contra eorum dicta, non semper continget eos, eorum quoque mores aut facta
apud contradicere volentem agnosci, vt ex eorum foeditate and vitijs testes
illi possint reprobari. Et dum eorum dicta affirmatiuam contineant, non facile
poterunt illa per circumstantias aut obliqua alia improbari. Quis tunc poterit
suorum aut suijpsius sub lege tali viuere securus, dum cuilibet sibi inimicari
volenti lex tale praestat subsidium? Et qui iniqui duo tam incauti sunt, quod
facti de quo ipsi examinabuntur in iudicio, non, antequam in testes
producantur, occulte fingant imaginem and figuram; componant quoque eidem omnes
circumstantias, quales sibi affuissent, si illud in veritate constitisset?
Prudentiores namque, vt dicit Dominus, sunt filij huius mundi, quam filij
lucis. Sic Iesabel sceleratissima, testes duos filios Belial, contra Nabot in
iudicio produxit, quo ipse vitam perdidit; and Achab rex, eius vineam
possidebat. Sic duorum senum etiam Iudicum testimonio, mortua fuisset pro
adulterio vxor castissima Susanna, si non eam miraculose liberasset Dominus
inexcogitabili prudentia, quam a natura non habuit puer junior nondum aetate
prouectus. Et si ipsos depositione sua varia conuicerat puer ille esse
falsarios, quis nisi solum Dominus nouisse poterat eos in dictis suis taliter
variaturos? dum non de arboris natura sub qua imputatum facinus fiebat, lex
aliqua eos arctabat reminisci, quia testes sceleris cuiusque considerare non
putantur omnia vmbracula and caetera vicina illi facto, quae ad aggrauationem
vel detectionem criminis illius minime operantur. Sed dum de arborum speciebus,
Iudices illi nequam vltro deponentes variabant, eorum dicta ipsos veritatis
fuisse praeuaricatores demonstrabant, quo and talionis poenam merito
incurrerunt. And so forth in the example of one John Fringe, that at his death
protested he was not guilty of the fault, whereof two men accused him. Et
alibi. Non igitur contenta est lex Franciae, in criminalibus vbi mors imminet,
reum testibus conuincere, ne falsidicorum testimonio sanguis innocens
co^demnetur. Sed mauult lex illa reos tales torturis cruciari, quousque ipsi
eorum reatum confiteantur, quam testium depositione, qui seepe passionibus
iniquis, and quandoque subornatione malorum ad periuria stimulantur. Quali
cautione and astutia, criminsi etiam and de criminibus suspecti tot torturarum
in regno illo generibus affliguntur, quod fastidit calamus ea literis
designare. Quidam vero in equuleis extenduntur, quo eorum rumpuntur nerui, and
venae in sanguinis fluenta prorumpunt. Quorundam vero dinersorum ponderum
pendulis dissoluuntur compagines and iuncturae: and quorundam gaggantur ora,
vsque dum per illa tot aquarum infundantur fluenta, vt ipsorum venture montis
tumescat more, quo tunc venture ille fossorio vel simili percussus instrumento,
per os aquam illam euomat ad instar balaenae quae cum halecibus and alijs
pisciculis mare absorbuit, aquam despumat, ad altitudinem arboris pini. Piget,
proh pudor, iam penna exquisitorum ad haec cruciatuum enarrare immania. Nam
eorum variatus numerus vix notari poterit magna in membrana, Leges etiam ipsae
ciuiles deficiente testium copia, in criminalibus, veritatem consimilibus
extorquent tormentis, qualiter and faciunt etiam quamplurima regna. Sed quis
tam duri animi est, qui semel ab atroci tanto torculari laxatus, non potius
innocens ille omnia fateretur scelerum genera, quam acerbitatem sic experti
iterum subire tormenti; and non semel mori mallet, dum mors sit vltimum
terribilium, quam totiens occidi, and totidem gehennales furias morte amariores
sustmere? Then follows an example of one that by torture confessed things
untrue etc. Taliter, proh dolor, and quamplures alij miseri faciunt, non
veritatis causa, sed solum vrgentibus torturis artati. Quid tunc certitudinis
resultat ex confessionibus taliter compressorum?

Caeterum, si innocens aliquis non immemor salutis aeternae in huiusmodi
Babylonis furnace, cum tribus pueris benedicat Dominum, nec mentiri velit in
perniciem animi sui, quo iudex eum pronunciat innocentem, nonne eodem iudicio
iudex ille, seipsum reum iudicat omnis seuitiae and poenarum quibus innocentem
aff^ixit? o quam crudelis est lex talis, quae duni innocentem damnare nequit,
iudicem ipsum condemnat?

Et alibi. Praeterea si ex contractibus illatisue iniurijs, vel haereditatis
titulo, ius accreuerit homini, agendi in iudicio, si testes non fuerint, vel si
qui fuerint, moriantur, succumbet ipse agens in causa sua, nisi ius suum
probare valeat iueuitabilibus coniecturis, quod facere crebro non contingit.
Quare de dominijs and alijs possessionibus iure civilly regulatis similiter and
in omnibus actionibus cadentibus sub eodem iure, actiones agentium pro defectu
testium quampluries suffocantur, ita quod earum vix pars media optatum finem
sortiatur, etc. The order of our common law follows.

Regnum Angliae per comitatus, vt regnum Franciae per Balliuatus distinguitur,
ita vt non sit locus in Anglia, qui non sit infra corpus alicuius comitatus.
Comitatus quoque diuiduntur in Hundreda, quae alicubi Wapentakia nuncupantur.
Hundreda vero diuiduntur per villas, sub quarum appellatione continentur and
burgi atque civitates. Villarum etenim metae non muris, aedificijs aut stratis
terminantur, sed agrorum ambitibus, territorijs magnis, hamletis quibusdam, and
multis alijs, sicut aquarum, boscorum, and vastorum terminis, quae iam non
expedit nominibus designare, quia vix in Anglia est locus aliquis qui non infra
villarum ambitus contineatur, licet priuilegiati loci quidam infra villas, de
eisdem villis pars esse non censentur. Praeterea in quolibet comitatu est
officiarius quidam vnus regis vicecomes appellatus, qui inter caetera sui
officij ministeria, omnia mandata and iudicia curiarum regis in comitatu suo
exequenda exequitur. Cuius officium annale est, quo ei post annum in eodem
ministrare non licet, nec duobus tunc sequentibus annis ad idem officium
reassumetur. Officiarius iste sic eligitur. Quolibet anno in crastino animarum,
conueniunt in Scaccario regis omnes consiliarij eius, tam domini spirituales
and temporales, quam alii omnes iusticiarii, omnes barons de Scaccario,
clericus rotuloru^, and quidam alii officiarii, vbi hi omnes co^muni assensu
nominant de quolibet comitatu tres milites vel armigeros, quos inter caeteros
eiusdem comitatus, ipsi opinantur melioris esse dispositionis and famae, and ad
officium vicecomitis comitatus illius melius dispositos: ex quibus rex vnum
tantum eliget, quem per literas suas patentes constituet vicecomitem comitatus
de quo eligitur, pro anno tunc sequente. Sed ipse antequam literas illas
recipiat, iurabit super sancta Dei euangelia, inter articulos alios quod been,
fideliter and indifferenter exercebit and faciet officium suum toto anno illo,
neque aliquid accipiet color aut causa officij sui ab aliquo alio quam a rege.
His iam sic praesuppositis, ad eorum quae quaerimus, indaginem procedamus.

Quotiescunque contendentes in curijs regis Angliae ad exitum placiti super
materia facti deuenerint, concito, Iustitiarij per breue regis scribunt
vicecomiti comitatus in quo factum illud fieri supponitur, quod ipse venire
faciat coram eisdem Iustitiarijs ad certum diem per eos limitatum, duodecim
probos and legales homines, de vicineto, vbi illud factum supponitur, qui
neutrum partium sic placitantium vlla affinitate attingunt, ad recognoscendum
super eorum sacramenta, si factum illud factum fuerit, sicut vna earundem
partium dicit, vel non, sicut altera pars negat. Quo adueniente die, vicecomes
returnabit breue praedictum coram eisdem Iustitiarijs vna cum panello nominum
little quos ipse ad hoc summoniuit, quos, si venerint, vtraque pars recusare
poterit, dicendo quod vicecomes panellum illud fauorabiliter fecit pro part
altera, viz. de personis nimis indifferentibus. Quae exceptio, si comperta
fuerit vera per sacramentum duoru^ hominum de eodem panello ad hoc per
Iustitiarios electorum, mox panellum illud quassabitur, and Iustiriarij tunc
scribe^t coronatoribus eiusdem comitatus, quod ipsi nouum faciant panellum.
Quod cum fecerint, si and illud consimiliter repertum fuerit viciatu^, etiam
and illud quassabitur: and tunc iustitiarij eligent duos de clericis curiae
illius, vel alios de eodem comitatu qui in praesentia curiae per eorum
sacramenta facient indifferens panellum, quod deinde per nullam partiu^ illarum
calumniabitur. Sed cum venerint sic impanellati in curiam, quaelibet partium
excipere potest contra personam cuiuscunque coru^, ficut and potest in omni
casu and omni tempore, quo aliquis qualitercunque impanellatus comparuerit in
curia super veritate exitus huiusmodi iuraturus: dicendo, quod impanellatus
ille est consanguin eus vel affinis parti alteri, vel amicitia quacunque tali
sibi coniunctus, quod indifferens ipse non est ostendere inter eos veritate^:
qualium exceptionum tot sunt genera and species, quod non licet eas breui
explicare sermon: quarum si aliqua reperta fuerit vera, non tunc iurabitur
ille contra quem exceptio illa proponitur, sed cancellabitur nomen eius in
panello. Sic quoque fiet de omnibus nominibus impanellatorum, quousque duodecim
eoru^ iurentur ita indifferentes, quod versus eos neutra partium habeat aliquam
materiam calumniae. Horum autem duodecim ad minus quatuor erunt de hundredo vbi
villa in qua factu^ de quo contenditur, fieri supponitur, sita est. Et quilibet
iuratoru^ huiusmodi habebit terras vel reditus pro termino vitae suae ad minus,
ad valorem annuu^ 40. s. (now 4. li. by stat. 27. Eli.) Et hic ordo obseruatur
in omnibus actionibus and causis criminalibus, realibus and personalibus,
praeterquam vbi damna vel debitum in personalibus non excedunt 40. marcas
monetae anglieanae quia tunc non requiritur, quod iuratores in actionibus
huiusmodi tantum expendere possint. Habebunt tamen terram vel reditu^ ad
valorem competentem iuxta discretione^ iustitiariorum, alioquin ipsi minime
iurabu^tur, ne per inediam and paupertatem iuratores huiusmodi de facili
valiant corrumpi and subornari.

Et si per tales exceptiones, tot iuratorum nomina in panello cancellentur,
quod non remaneat numerus sufficiens ad faciendam inde iuratam, tunc mandabitur
vicecomiti, per breue regis, quod ipse apponat plures iuratores: quod and
saepius fieri potest, ita quod inquisitio veritatis super exitu placiti, non
remanebit ob defectum iuratorum etc.

Iuratis demum in forma praedicta duodecim probis and legalibus hominibus
habentibus vltra mobilia sua, possessiones, vt praedicitur sufficientes, vnde
eoru^ statum ipsi continere poterint, and nulli partium suspectis nec inuisis,
sed ijsdem vicinis, legetur in Anglico coram eis per curiam totum recordum and
processus placiti quod pendet inter parts: ac dilucide exponetur eis exitus
placiti de cuius veritate iurati illi curiam certificabunt. Quibus peractis,
vtraque partium per se vel consiliarios suos in praesentia curiae referet and
manifestabit eisdem iuratis, omnes and singulas materias and euidentias quibus
eos docere se posse credit veritatem exitus taliter placitati. Et tunc adducere
potest vtraque pars cora^ eisdem iustitiarijs and iuratis omnes and singulos
testes quos pro part sua ipsa producere velit, qui super sancta Dei euangelia
per iusticiaros onerati, testificabuntur omnia quae cognoscunt probantia
veritatem facti de quo parts contendunt. Et si necessitas exegerit diuidentur
testes huiusmodi, donec ipsi deposuerint quicquid velint, ita quod dictum vnius
non docebit, aut concitabit eorum alium ad consuniliter testificandum. Quibus
consummatis, postquam iuratores illi deinde ad eorum libitum super veritate
exitus huiusmodi, deliberatione quantam ipsi opta bunt, colloquium habuerint,
in custodia ministrorum curiae in loco eis ad hoc assignato, ne interim eos
aliqui subornare valiant, reuenient illi in curiam, and certificabunt
iustitiarios super veritate exitus sic iuncti, in praesentia partium, si
interesse velint, and maxim, petentis. Quorum iuratorum dictum per leges
Angliae, Veredictum nuncupatur; and tunc secundu^ huiusmodi veredicti
qualitatem, iustitiarij reddent and formabunt iudicium suum. Tamen, si pars
altera, contra quam veredictum huiusmodi prolatum est^, conqueratur se per
illud unjust esse grauatum, prosequi tunc potest pars illa versus iuratores
illos, and versus partem quae obtinuit, breue de attincta. Virtute cuius, si
compertum fuerit per sacramentum viginti quatuor hominum in forma praenotata
retornatorum, qui multo maiora habebunt patrimonia quam iuratores primi, quod
ijdem iuratores primi falsum fecerunt sacramentum, corpora eorundem primorum
iuratorum prisonae regis committentur* bona eorum confiscabuntur, ac omnes
possessiones eorundem in manus regis capientur; domus quoque eorum and
aedificia prosternentur, bosci succidentur, and prata arabuntur, ipsi etiam
iuratores primi extunc infames erunt, nec alicubi recipientur in testimonium
veritatis, and pars quae succubuit in priori placito, restituetur ad omnia quae
ipse perdidit occasion eius. Quis tunc, etsi immemor salutis animae suae
fuerit, non formidine tantae poenae, and verecundia tantae infamiae, veritatem
non diceret sic iuratus? Et si vnus forsan tantus sui honoris prodigus esse non
pepercerit, aliqui tamen iuratorum tantorum famam suam non negligent, neque
bona and possessiones suas taliter distrahi patie^tur propria culpa sua. Nonne
ia^ hic ordo reuelandi veritatem potior and efficacior est, quam est processus
qualem pariunt ciuiles leges? Non hic pereunt cauiae aut ius alicuius per
mortem, aut ob defectum testium, non hic producuntur testes ignoti,
conductitij, pauperes, vagi, inconstantes, aut quorum conditiones vel malitiae
ignorantur. Vicini sunt testes isti de proprijs viuere potentes, famae
integrae, and opinionis illesae, non per partem in curiam ducti, sed per
officiarium nobilem and indifferentem electi, and coram iudice venire compulsi.
Isti omnia sc unt quae testes deponere norunt, and isti testium productorum
agnoscunt constantias inconstantiasque and famam. Quid vltra? Vere nihil est
quod veritatem dubij de quo contendi poterit, detegere valebit, quod
iuiatoribus talibus latere quomodolibet potest aut ignorari, dummodo possibile
sit, illud venire posse in cognitionem humanam.

And then after, de causis criminalibus. Si reus quispiam de felonia aut
proditione in Anglia rettatus, crimen suum coram iudicibus dedicat, mox
vicecomes comitatus vbi facinus illud commissum est, venire faciet coram eisdem
iudicibus viginti quatuor probos and legales homines de vicineto villae vbi
illud factum est, qui rettato illi nulla affinitate attingunt, and quorum
quilibet centum solidatus habeat terrae and reditus, ad certificandum iudices
illos super criminis illius veritate. Quibus comparentibus, rettatus ille eos
calumniare potest eadem forma qua in actionibus realibus fieri debere superius
deseribitur. Et insuper reus ipse, in fauorem vitae suae calumniare potuit olim
trigintaquinque homines quos ipse maxim formidat, qui ad eius calumniam
cancellabuntur in panello, aut signis talibus notabuntur, quod (vt verbis legis
vtar) illi super eum non transibunt, licet ipse nullam causam assignare sciat
exceptionis seu calumniae suae. Quis tunc mori possit inique in Anglia pro
crimine, cum tot iuuamina habere ille poterit ob fauorem vitae suae? Et non
nisi vicini eius, probi and fideles homines, versus quos ipse nullam habet
materiam exceptionis eum condemnare poterunt? Mallem reuera viginti facinorosos
mortem pietate euadere, quam iustum vnum in just condemnari.

Nec tamen reum quemplam sub hac sorma, reatus sui poenam euadere posse
suspicandum est, dum eius vita and mores timori deinceps erunt eis qui eum sic
purgatunt a crimine.

In hoc equidem processu nihil estcrudele, nihil inhumanum, nec laedi poterit
innocens in corpore aut membris suis, quare nec formidabit ille calumniam
inimicorum eius, quia non torquebitur iste ad arbitrium ipsorum. Igitur sub hac
lege viuere, quietum and securum est etc.

So Much I thought good to borrowe of Fortescue, concerning witnesses and
testimonies, tortures, rackinges, and such other grievous and extort
confessions used, as he says in France and elsewhere. The rudeness of the time
wherein he wrate, must excuse the manner of his writing, which is not over
elegant.

Read the statutes made, 17. E. 2. and there see the oath of a villeine doing
fealty unto his Lord: from whence Littleton, has fet the precscript forms of
oaths to be used of freemen in doing homage, and fealty to their Lords,
partition, 91. 85. 86. 87. 88. 89.

Of the writing, ensealing, and delivering of deeds and evidences, Parkins
has a special tractate cap. 20. Where the misdating, rasing, interlyning,
adding new letters upon the old, ha^ging in the smoke, breaking of ye seal,
utter quashing of the print, heating of the wax and fastening thereof to the
Labell from whence it was once severed, with other such imperfections, make the
deed suspcious.

Of the ancient manner of sealing with crosses and such marks, of Edward the
thirds fashion in biting the wax with his tooth, read the exposition of our
Lawtearmes.

Elenchs.

A false testimony is descried by the wickedness, and malicious nature of him
that gave witness. The world is full of false forsworn knaves, desperate
careawaies, and rascallike shwashbucklers, that borrow citizens gowns to sell
hired oaths, to the utter subversion of Justice, and undoing of wel-meaning
neighbors. So that no one thing is more common then that damnable speech,
Iuraui lingua, mentem iniuratam gero, and Iura, periura, secretum prodere noli.

The 20. Chapter. Of compared arguments.
HItherto then of the first division of arguments. Now secondly, an argument
is either simple, or compared. Simple is that which is simply considered
without any respect of comparison. Compared is that which is compared with
another. Compared arguments are sometimes briefly expressed by plain and
evident signs, and sometimes largely distinguished by two parts, whereof the
first is called the proposition, which propounds and puts down the first
part of the comparison in the first place: the second is the Reddition, which
adds the second part, and applies it unto the first.

Comparison is either in quality, or quantity. Quality is that whereby
things compared are called either like, or unlike.

Like are those which have the self same quality: this likeness is called
Proportion, and the things like proportionable. The signs be these, like as,
even as, so, and a denial of the unlike.

Diggon in September. They looken big, as Bulls that been bate,
And bearen the cragge so stiff and so state,
As Cock on his dunghill crowing cranck.


Again

Well away the while I was so fond,
To leave the good that I had in hond.
In hope of better that was uncouth,
So lost the dog the flesh in his mouth:
And below. Thus chatten the people in their steds,
Ylike as a monster of many heads:


The gate of her kiddy in May: For even so thy father his head vphelde,
And so his hawtie horns did he welde.


Piers in May.

Sike men's folly I cannot compare*
Better then to the apes foolish care,
That is so enamoured of her young one,
And yet, God wot, such cause has she none:
That with her hard hold and strait embracing,
She stops the breath of her yongling.
Sometimes there be no notes at all, as, Thenot in February.

For youth is a buble blown up with breath,
Whose wit is weakness, whose wage is death,
Whose way is wilderness, whose Inn penance,
And stoope-gallant age the host of greeuance.
The parts of a similitude are sometimes more largely put down, and that by
three parts and deegrees of comparison, or else by four. The first is called a
continued similitude, the second a distinct and severed similitude: For the
first, Cuddy in February has this:

The keen could blows through my beaten hide,
All as I were through the body gryde:
My ragged rontes all shiuer and shake,
As done high towers in an earthquake.
Where one part must be twice repeated to couple and continue the similitude,
thus, As towers shake in an earthquake, so my ronts shake, where this word,
shake, is twice mentioned.

Colyn iu January uses a distinct similitude with four terms.

You naked trees, whose shady leaves are lost,
Wherein the byrds were wont to build their bower
And now are clothed with moss and hoarie frost,
Instead of blosmes wherewith your buds did flower:
I see your tears that from your bows do rain,
Whose drops in dreary Isicles remain.
Also my lustful leaf is dry and sear,
My timely buds with wailing all are wasted.
The blossom which my branch of youth did bear,
With breathed sighs is blown away and blasted.
And from mine eyes the drizling tears descend
As on your boughs the Isicles depend.
Feigned similitudes have like force with others: and here in these similitudes
thus largely put down, Esopicall fables have very good grace. So Menenius
Agrippa using the tale of the rebellion between the belly and other parts of
the body: and comparing that with the rebellion between the common people and
senators of Room, persuaded those that were fled to the holy hill, quickly
to return home to Room, and become conformable citizens.

Master Plowden. Fol. 31. b. Semblable reason semblable ley.

Fol. 369. b. Et Catlyne resemble le fine per ceo act, al Ianus, quel, il dit,
fuit Noe: mes les Romans sur occasion luy nosme Ianus, et use de picter luy
oue deux faces, un aspectant arere, s. backward, en respect que il auoit view
le former monde que fuit peri per le inundation, et auter, aspectant auant, s.
forward, in respect que il comence nouel monde commenceant de le inundation et
procedant dillonques en euant. Et pur ceo ils luy appelle Ianus Bifrons et auxi
portant clyffe en sa main, signifiant per ceo clyffe son poyar per son
generation de renouater le nouel monde. Issint ceo act fait un inundation, per
quel tout former droit deuant le fine serra merge per non claim, car non
claim est le flud et le fine produce nouel generation, quel est le nouel
droyt. Car le fine fait nouel droit, et est le commencement de nouel monde,
quel proceed del temps del fine en auant.

Fol. 272. Et il dit que il y ad diversity enter lease conditional, et
condition, d'auer lease. Car lease conditional est bone tanques le condition
est enfreint, et la le lease va deuant, et le condition vyent apres. Mes en
condition d'auer lease, le condition va deuant, et le lease vient apres, et le
lease ne serra vnques aiudge destre lease, tanque le condition soit primes
perform. Come si ieo grant a vous que si vous faces tiel chose, vous aueres
lease en tiel mon terre, la, il dit, le condition precede le lease, come le
nedle precede le file, et sicome le nedle tray le file puis luy, issint fait le
condition le lease la.

Fol. 465. a. De cest judgment, et le cause poyes veyer, (lecteur) que les
parolles del ley, ne sont le ley, mes le internal sense. Et nostre ley, come
touts autres leyes, ad deux parts, cestassauoir, carnem and animam. Le letter
de le ley est le chair de le ley, et le sense et reason del ley, est le alme
de le ley, quia ratio legis est anima legis. Et le ley poet estre resemble a un
noix, que ad un test, et un cerneau deins. Le letter represent le test, et le
sense le cerneau; et sicome ne serres le meliour pur le noix si arrestes sur le
test, nyent pluis serres pur le ley, si arrestes sur le letter. Et sicome le
fruit et profit est en le cerneau, et nient en le test, issint le fruit et
profit de ley est en le sense pluis toft que en le letter, et souent foits
quant vous saches le letter, vous ne saches le sense. Car ascun foits le sense
ne serracy large come le letter est, et ascun foits le sense serra pluis large
que le letter: et equity, que en Lattin est appelle, aequitas, amplify, ou
demenuist le letter, come sa direction veult.

Fol. 486. a. Car soyt le atteinder per statute, ou per commen ley, le
forfeyture al roy ensue, come le vmbre ensue le corpse, come Dyer le term.

Fol. 529. b. Et il dit, sicome femme que ad recover dower, ne poet entrer, mes
doit aver seisin deliver a luy per le viscount. Et sicome un copyholder, a que
un copyhold tenement est discende, doit este admit per le seigniour auant que
il auera seisin in judgment del ley. Issint cesty que est admit, ou institute
al prebend, parsonage, ou vicarage, ne poet aver seisin, ne est plein
incumbent, tanque le archdeacon ad luy induct, ou, si soit prebendary, deuant
que le Deane et le chapter del Cathedral eglise lou sa prebend est, ont luy
enstalle.

Annotations.
Feigned similitudes be very populare and plausible, and have in them this one
good thing, that where as it is sometimes hard to find out true similitudes, it
is an easy matter, to feign some odd parable. But like examples of things
done in deed be best. Aristo. 2. Rhet. has that of the bridled horse, and
hungry flies.

Bracton: descen dit ius quasi ponderosum quid, cadens deo^sum recta linea, vel
transuersali, and nunquam reascendit ea via qua descendit post mortem ante
cessorum: a latere tamen ascendit alicui propter defectum haeredu^ inferius
prouenientium. Master Lambard Just. lib. 2. cap. 1. As a man that has
received hurt in his body by a stroke whereof he bleedeth freshly, will be
content for the present to admit the help of any leeche or surgeon coming next
to hand, for the stanching of the blood and binding up of the wound, and yet
would more gladly have used the conference of diverse expert surgeons for doing
the same if the danger of the hurt would have granted the time, that will be
lost in calling them together: so also, the common counsel of this realm,
finding that the body thereof may be deeeply wounded in some one member, and
perceiving that some evils must be resisted at the very first (least otherwise
they grow past help and wax incurable) has many times thought it good to
commit to one or to a few Justices of the peace (for that they be ready and at
hand) the stopping of the blood, as it were, and first dressing of the wound by
repressing of force and other outrages that do suddenly arise: and has yet
nevertheless, when as the time and matter will permit, politikely established
an assembly and conference of all the Justices, at certain times in a full
court and open session.

When it appears that the things which we compare together, be like, because
that thing wherein they be compared, may be applied to them both; then we
look whether it be applied to them in equal proportion and quantity, or
unequal: if in equal, then they be pares, equal: if in unequal, then
impares, of the which the one is the more, the other is the less, which is the
comparison of quantity: therefore I have put quality before quantity. For it
were absurd to ask wheather Higs of Balkot, or Shepherd of Tugford, were the
falser knave, unless it were first granted that they were both false knaves.

Affectio similium inter se, (vt caeterorum argumentorum) est (...): Inuerse
and alterne. Inuerse quando inuertitur ordo propositionis and redditionis
tantum, aut etiam terminorum. Itaque si quaedam similia fuerint, inuerse
similia erunt, vt aurum ad ignem, sic fides ad periculum, ergo vt fides ad
periculum, sic aurum ad ignem, Item ergo, vt periculum, ad fidem, sic ignis ad
aurum. Alterne, quando similitudinis antecedens antecedenti, and consequens
consequenti comparatur: si quaedam fimilia fuerint, alterne similia erunt, vt
aurum ad ignem, sic fides ad periculum, ergo, vt aurum ad fidem, sic ignis ad
periculum.

I have made a second general division of arguments, into simple, and
compared, as perceauing the nature of comparison to be incident to every
argument that is not simple.

Canons.

One like argues an other: as this is in respect of that, so the other in
respect of the other: As this is in that, so an other in another.

Of likes there is like reason. Lykes agrre to like.

Vbi eadem ratio, ibi idem ius. 19. H. 6. 18. b. Newton and Littleton, que sont
en semblable reason, sont en semblable ley. page 301.

Vide 9. H. 6. 24. b. Bab. Home poet deviser que sa terre serra vendue per les
executors, et issint home auera francktenement de cestuy que ne auera riens,
come home auera fire dun flynte, et uncore null fire est in le flynte. Sic in
19. H. 6. 24. Mark: Executors poyent doner chose que ils n'auoyent, come un
whetstone, que done sharpenes a un cuttell, et uncore null est en luy.

Si cui simpliciter via per fundum cuiuspiam concedatur vel relinquatur, qua
primum viam direxerit, ea demum ire, agere debet, nec amplius mutandae eius
potestatem habet, argumento riui, quem primo qualibet ducere licet, posteaquam
ductus est, transfer non licet.

Elenchs.

As a new coat is better than an old: so new friendship, and new wine; these
be not like.

The 21. Chapter. Of the unlike.
THe unlike is that whose quality is unlike. The notes are these, unlike,
differing, otherwise, and the denial of the like.

Thomalin in July. But nothing such thilke shepherd was, whom Ida hill did
bear:
That left his flock to fetch a less, whose love he bought too dear.


The notes be oftentimes omitted, and the dissimilitude more fully enlarged.

Colyn in June.

O happy Hobbinoll, I bless thy state,
That Paradise have found which Adam lost,
Here wander may thy flock early or late:
Withouten dread of woolues to been ytost,
Thy lovely lays here may thou freely boste:
But I unhappy man whom cruel fate
And angry Gods pursue from coaste to coaste,
Can no where find to shrowde my lucklesse pate.
Master Plowden Fol. 76. b. Et quant a ceo que est dit, que en le brief de
droyt, quando capitalis dominus remisit curiam, que l'assent del seigniour est
primes conus, et issint en le Recordare, le clause est, si causa sit vera,
aliter non: sir, ceo est bon reason, et nyent semblable a nostre case. Car la,
est parcel del inheritance del seigniour d'auer le plee tenus en son court, et
d'auer les profits et casualties veignant per ceo, lequel n'est reason a
toller de luy sans cause. Mes en nostre case le viscount n'est forsques
minister al roy per luy appoint, et n'ad ascun profit, mes solement allowance
pur son labor, s. les fees usual pur le execution del briefes: et si auter
serve les briefes, le viscount ne perde riens, car il ne prist ascun labor. Et
issint si le roy change son officer, n'est ascun tort fayt al officer, et
issint il ne poet este semble a les auters cases. So much of Quality.

Annotations.
DIssimilitudinis explicatae redditio, hic appellatur (...), dissimilis
redditio.

Ramus.

The difference between arguments unlike and arguments diverse, is, that in
diverse, the simple and absolute disagreeing of two things is considered: but
in unlike arguments, the unlike comparison of four terms, that is of two
things, and the two qualities of the same. In diverse we affirm the one, and
deny the other after a certain manner; in vnlykes we deny neither, but only
distinguish the one from the other by the difference in quality. So that all
disagreeable arguments may be handled as unlike, if the diverse quality he
respected.

Canons.

Of vnlikes there is unlike reason.

Unlikes agree with unlike, etc.

Examples be every where extant of likes and vnlikes in our law.

Elenchs.

Gold is tried in the fire, but not so, is trust and fidelity in adversity.
This is false: for these things be like, not unlike.

The 22. Chapter. Of the Aequall.
Quantity is that whereby things compared are said to be of this or that
quantity.

Quantity is either equal or unequal. Equal are those whose quantity is
equal. And therefore it is an argument from the equal, when one equal is
argued or declared by an other.

The equal has certain proper signs, whereby it is often expressed in
authors, and may, if they want, always be added, for the playner declaration
thereof, as, Equal, Alike, The same that, As Well as; So Much howmuch; Somany
howmany; No less, no greater; and such like. Yet equals are sometimes
expressed without any note at all.

Thomalin in July uses notes. Al soon may shepherds clymbe to sky, that
lead in lowly dales,
As gotheard proud that sitting hye upon the mountain sails.


Willy in August. Never dempt more right of beauty I ween
The shepherd of Ida, that judged beauties queen.


Master Plowden Fol. 15. a. Car come proprement come il appent al office del
brasier en l'auter case a weyer et metter en fiew le dit belle, ou al office
del tailor, a shaper le pan; cy properment il appent al office del collector
a weyer chose pur que le subsidy serroyt pay.

Fol. 7. a. Issint si home est tenus in un obligation sur condition de
enfeoffer I. St. et il fayt lease pur ans, et release a luy en fee, il ad
perform le condition, coment que il n'ad perform les parolles. Et uncore les
parolles d'un condition d'obligation doyent este perform cy straytment come
les parols dascun statute: mes entant que l'entent et effect est perform et
ceo que counteruaylera les parols, il suffist.

Annotations.
Canons.

THis Logical quantity is most generally to be understood. And therefore all
those words be utterly rejected, which are not ample enough to express the
general nature of this Logical quantity: As (...), facilis, difficilis,
credibilis, incredibilis. Aeque, magis, and minus probabilis; etc. As though no
argument were of the more or greater, but that which were rather in, which had
more probability, which were more easy: And so in the less and equal. If a
man will restrain the general nature of this quantity in this sort, he shall
find himself entangled with repugnant examples in such sort that for his
heart he shall not be able to ryd himself out. If any think I do but
jest, let him read the third part of Beurhusius, and make a trial of his
own skill.

Canons.

Of things that be equal, there is equal reason and judgment.

Of equals, if one either be, or not be; the other must in like manner be,
or not be.

Equal things agree with equal.

Such things as are equal to any other thing, are also equal among
themselves. This holds not in unequals, as 3. and 3. are unequal to 2, and
yet equal among themselves.

If you do either add or detract equal things from things that be equal,
the whole, or remnant will be equal.

You shall, as is said, sometimes meet with equals without any notes at all,
as in Terence.

Quando ego non curo tuum, ne cura meum. Since I meddle not with thine, meddle
not thou with mine.

Again, the equal is returned against the equal now and then, without any
form.

If any one thing be, or seem to be in some two things equally: then if it
be not in the one, it shall not be in the other, but if it be in the one it
shall be in the other. For the last part, take this example.

If a tutor must be faithful, then also a procurator.

But a tutor must;

Therefore the procurator must also.

Or thus more briefly in a contracted syllogism called an Ethymeme.

A Tutor must be faithful and true,

Therefore a procurator must be so also.

Other Logicians commonly, to confirm and prove the consequence in the
Enthymeme, bring in the Canon before alleged out of Aristotle, if any one
thing etc. But I had rather say, that this connexed syllogism is good and
artificial, so that no man ought to doubt of the consequence, which is already
determined by the lawfulnes of the syllogism, which is the only rule of all
consequence and coherence.

Now for the parts of this consequence, I mean the proposition and the
assumption; I say, the proposition is true, and that I prove by the definition
of the equal. Because there is one and the same, or equal quantity, that is
to say, an equal reason in a tutor, and in a procurator. And as for the
assumption, it is allowed by the civil law.

Yet we are not altogether to reject these rules and Canons, but to use them
in writing and speaking, as certain corollaries, or fruits of this art: and
not to put them down in the art, for that most of them be too particular, or
doubtful and contingent, and also unnecessary and superfluous.

The second Canon is this. If two things be equally in a third; then if the
one be, the other shall be: if not this, neither that. As, he uses to lie,
therefore to steal. It is not proper and peculiar to man for to see, therefore
neither to hear.

The third and last. If two be equally and indifferently in two, then if this
be not in that, the third shall not be in the fourth: but if that be, then
this also, as in that out of Terence whereof we spoke before, Demea said to
his brother Mitio:

Quando ego, non curo tuum, ne cura meum. Since I care not for thy son,
Aeschinus, meddle not thou with my son Ctesiphon.

To this place also belong those consectaries, which proceed from contraries,
but are handled by a certain comparison of equals, as that in Martial. Tum
seruum scis te genitum blandeque fateris
Cum dicis dominum, Sosibiane, patrem.


Sosibian calls his father master, therefore he confesses himself to be
a servant.

Arist. 2. Rhet. Iphicrates, when he saw his yoongest son, because he was
big and tall, preferred to office; said thus. If you take great boys for
men; you will surely make little men boys.

4. E. 4. 33. b. Ardern. En precipe verse un que n'ad riens in le dd. iour del
brief, mes puis il enter in le terre on purchase ceo, ore per son fait demesne
il ad fait le brief bon. Donque come le fait le tenant fait mal brief bon,
per mesme le reason, le fait le demandant fra un bon brief male, come en le
case al bar, si le demandant enter en parcel del demand pendant le plee on
brief.

Choke in 8. E. 4. 21. b. confuta Markam: Fol. 11. 4. Que sic argua, les
parties que submittont etc. ne dischargeront les arbitrors sans notice, Ergo
les arbitrors ne chargeront les parties sans notice. A que Choke dit, que ceux
ne sont contraries, s. discharger les parties sans notice: et charger les
parties sans notice: mes charger les arbitrors sans notice, et discharger eux
sans notice sont contraries, car come le charge, ne serra sans notice, issint
le discharge ne serra sans notice.

This kind of arguing is not always effectual, as a man is mortal,
therefore a beast is immortal: it holds best when the arguments be
repugnant.

Elenchs.

Martial in his first book.

Quod Alpha dixi, Codre, penulatorum,
Te nuper aliqua cum iocarer in charta,
Si forte bilem mouit hic tibi versus.
Dicas licebit Beta me togatorum.
These be not equal. For although Alpha and Beta seem neighbors in the
Greek Alphabet, yet they are nothing equal in signification. For Alpha
signifies the chief or principal: whereas Beta either signifies that which
is second, or else has no signification at all.

The 23. Chapter. Of the Greater.
HItherto of Equalles. Unequals are those which have not the same quantitis.

Unequal is either more or less.

The more is that whose quantity is the greater: The signs be such as these.
Not only, but also: Rather this, then that: more then: if this, much more
that: and also the Grammatical comparison.

Diggon in September. For lyker been they to pluck away more,
Then ought of the gotten good to restore.


And after Yet better leave of with a little loss,
Then by much wrestling to leave the gross.


Master Plowden: Fol. 85. a. Le roy poet wayuer un issue, et demurrer en ley,
et contra: et auters prerogatives il y ad, mes uncore, per misrecitall, ou
misuser, ou misconceiuer del action, il serra lie, et sur tiels matters les
briefes abateront, come en les cases de comen persons. Et si le ley soit tiel
lou le roy est sole party, a multo fortiori sera tiel, lou auter person est
party oue le roy.

Fol. 160. Et si le habendum donera estate en chose nyent done deuant, et a
person nient nosme deuant, et altra l'estate done deuant, adonques il mieux
puit declarer le sense del parolles en les premises en nostre case, et nosmant
ou les premises comprehend le chose en le habendum, come il fait en nostre
case. Here is oftentimes a Logical gradation, sometimes joined with a
Rhetorical climax.

Annotations.
WHen this note is in the consequent, much more, then it is an argument from
the less, that is, from the less probable. But when it is said, Much less,
it is an argument from the greater, that is, from the more probable. This is
Piscators judgment. So that all arguments from the greater should be
negative; and, affirmative from the less. But, as I have already showed, so I
now affirm again; that we may reason as well affirmatively as negatiuely
from equals, greater, less, and all other arguments whatsoever, except diverse.
For Ramus does not tie this Logical quantity, to such particular
consideration of probability, as Piscator does imagine and teach out of
Aristotle (for if he so did, contrary examples would confute him) but leaves
it free and general, applyable to any thing whatsoever we can imagine to be
equal, more, or less in any respect or consideration whatsoever, and as fit
for confirmation as confutation.

This Logical quantity therefore may be attributed to any thing incident and
convenient to our purpose, as, to dignity, praise, reproach, ability and
power, greatness, multitude, conueniency, commodity, opportunity, facility,
difficulty, care, neglect, excellency, vileness, and in a word, to
whatsoever may be said to be equal, more, or less.

They that do otherwise determine of this matter, are, as I said, woonderfully
troubled with repugnant examples, contrary Canons, and variety of opinions.

They that will have all arguments of the more to be negative and only fit
for confutation; all of the less, affirmative and serving for assertion, do
put down these Canons out of the 4. chapter of the a. book of Aristotle's
Topikes.

When two things are affirmed of one, if that which is more like to be in it,
be not in it, neither shall that which is less like, as, Satrapes, si siet
amator, nunquam sufferre eius sumptus queat: nedum tu possis.


If a Lord were her lover, he could never maynteine her; much less thou.

When one thing is spoken of two, if it be not in that, where in it is more
like to be, neither shall it be in that, wherein it is less like to be: as,
If the just shall scarce be saved, where will the wicked appear?

When two things are affirmed of two things, if that which is more like to
be in the one, be not in it, neither shall the other be in the other: as,
You break not the saboth day in loosing your ox, and bringing him to the
water; therefore much less I in loosing the daughter of Abraham from the bands
of Satan.

Others, as Cicero, Quintilian, and sometimes Ramus, would have the greater
only to serve for confirmation, and the less, for confutation: taking that to
be the greater which is the more excellent, more difficult and more incredible:
that to be the less which is more abject, easy, and sooner believed: and
therefore they lay down these Canons.

That which has force in the greater, must have also force in the less, as,

We have suffered worse things then these;

Therefore these that be less may be borne of us.

Ramus in his last edition leaves this place free, loose, and at liberty, fit
for affirmations and negations. An affirmative argument from the greater, is
this out of Virgil, which I put down last.

If the Troianes have suffered greater things, they may also suffer less.

But the Troianes have suffered greater dangers then these.

Therefore they may also bear these less.

The proposition is true, as gathering the less of the more. For if the
greater be, the less will also be: and in this place, that is called the
greater, which is more incredible and intolerable, as to suffer greater
mischiefs.

The sillogisme itself is connexed, and artificial, therefore the consequence
is good. A Negative example is, that in Terence.

If a Lord cannot maintain her, much less thou. But a Lord cannot, therefore
neither thou.

Feigned arguments from the greater have good grace as in this last example.

From this place be derived pretty gradations conjoined sometimes with a
Rhetorical climax, and sometimes alone without it. With it as,

Neque vero se populo solum, sed etiam senatui tradidit: neque senatui modo,
sed etiam publicis praesidijs and armis: neque his tantum, verumetiam, etc.
Tully pro Milone.

Without any climax, is that in Terence between Thraso and Gnatho.

Th Magnas vero agere gratias Thais mihi? Gn. Ingentes. Th. A'in tu? laeta est.
Gn. Non tam ipso quidem dono, quam abs te datum esse: id vero serio triumphat.

Where, (although there seem to be nothing but a simple exposition) is
contained a syllogisticall probation, thus.

Thais gives you exceeding great thanks, and she triumphs for joy, that
the gift came from such a giver.

Therefore, no doubt, she thanketh you, and is glad that you bestowed this on
her.

Sometimes the greater is used without any notes or signs at all, as in that
of Virgill.

Talibus insidijs periurique art Sinonis,
Credita res, captique dolis, lachrimisque coactis:
Quos neque Tydides, nec Larissaeus Achilles,
Non anni domuere december: non mill carinae.
Counterfayt tears circumuented them, whom neither the cruel Diomedes, nor
fierce Achilles, nor ten years war, nor a thousand ships could overcome.

Canons.

If a greater quantity be (I take quantity generally, as I said before) then
the less may also be: but if the greater be not, neither shall the less be.

If the greater and more valiant cannot perform a thing, neither can the less
and weaker. But if the greater can do it, it follows not straightway that
the less shall also do it.

If any chance unlooked for, happen to the greater, it may more easily light
upon the less and inferior.

Si grammatica comparatio addatur ei quod comparatur and in quaestione
versatur, reddit idipsum maius, vt id cui comparatur, sit minus, argumentumque
sit a minori: si vero addatur ei, quod ad arguendum adhibetur, argumentum est a
maiori, itaque tam in maiorum quam in minorum collocatione locum habet. Nam
comparatiuus and superlatiuus superant positiuum, and id cui adduntur, maius
esse significant, vt etiam verba quae similem vim habent; vt malo, praestat
etc. Wasserleider.

Falsum est, says Snellius, quod vulgo dicitur, propositionem hic continere
maius, redditionem minus: imo respiciendum est perpetuo ad id quod arguit, si
enim illud est maius, argumentum est a maiori, sin minus, a minori, quocunque
in loco ponatur.

In maiori inest minus. Non debet, cui plus licet, quod minus est, non licere.
Vnde illa consectaria: Cui ius est donandi, eidem and vendendi, and co^cedendi
ius est, plus enim est donare: (quod profusionem quandam patrimonij continet)
quam vendere (quod administrationis and vtilitatis est propter pretium) aut
concedere, quod amicitiae est, vt in commodato aut precario. Et illud, cum quis
poterit alienare, poterit and consentire alienationi.

3. E. 4. 24. Danby lest: de 8. H. 6. ca. 9. Done treble damages verse cestuy
que enter oue force, ou teigne oue force. Et si lesta: done treble damages pur
l'un tort tantum, a fortiori pur ambideux. Issint le brief bon que join
vtrumque.

He that may do the more may do the less: Doct. Stud. page 114.

The 24. Chapter. Of the less.
THe less is that whose quantity is less. The signs of it are these. Not
this only, but not that. The denying of the equal, or equality: a
grammatical comparison.

In August, Perigot and Willy. A chapelet on her head she bore, hey ho chapelet:
Of sweet Violets therein was store, she sweeter then the Violet.


Thenot in November. She, while she was (that, was, a woeful word to said)
For beauties praise, and pleasaunce had no pear.


Master Plowden Fol. 57. a. Et quant a ceo que fuit auxi dit per luy, que si
le party serroyt force a monstre coment il auoit title, que donques poet estre,
que il auoyt duble title (come en le case mise) et le monstrans de ceo fairoyt
le plee double: sir, quant a ceo, les plaintifes ont prevent ceo assets bien:
car pour doubt que le plee serroit double, ils ount monstre riens: et ore il
est pier que double plee: car double plee ad matter de substance, mes icy n'est
ascun matter de substance.

There is also a gradation sometimes from the less.

Annotations.
AS before in the greater, so here in the less, the common Logicians differ.
Some will have that to be less which is less probable: briefly, when the
antecedent in the Enthymeme is less probable than the consequent. These men
will have all arguments from the less, to be affirmative; and they frame
axioms hereof accordingly, correspondent to those of the greater.

If any thing be in that, wherein it is less like to be, it shall also be
in that, wherein it is more like to be, as, If brute beasts love their young
ones, how tender a care should we have of our children?

If that be in a thing which is less like to be in it, then that must be in
it, which is more like to be in it, as, God cares for the fowls of the air,
therefore much more for you.

If two things seem to be in two, the one in the other: and that be in,
which is less like to be in, then the other shall be in the other. If we,
being enemies to God be reconciled unto him by Christ his death, then We,
being now reconciled unto God, shall be saved by Christ his life.


Others, (whom Ramus followed in two editions of his Logike) take that for the
less, which is less difficult, which may sooner be in the thing: Where they
might perceive, if they marked, that indeed, such things as are more easily
in, be commonly the greater in strength, power, and dignity. But they, not
regarding this, have framed such an axiom or Canon.

If a thing be not in that, wherein it is most like to be, then it shall not
be in that, wherein it is less like to be: so that, according to their mind
this place should serve only for negative arguments, they use this example.

A Lord cannot keep her, therefore neither thou.

Where the argument is rather from the greater.

Ramus therefore at the length left this place also general and appliable as
well to affirmation as negation. An affirmative is this out of Ovid. If thou
care for the body, much more will thou care for the soul:
But thou do that: therefore this.


A Negative.

If God do not reject the sparrowes, much less you: But he contemns not
them: therefore not you.


As the argument of the equal is used oftentimes in opposing one equal
against another, so these of vnequalles, be sometimes in a very long continued
speech matched together, as in Ovid, where he by a continued comparison of
his own miseries with those of Ulysses, infers that which he intended, that
he was more to be lamented then Ulysses: And these may be feigned also, as
ante leaves ergo etc. in Virgil. Here is also sometimes a gradation, as in
this, facinus est vincire ciuem Romanum: scelus verberare: prope parricidium
necare: quid dicam in crucem tollere? Ramus.

Glanuil chief justice in H. 2. days, lib. 7. ca. 10. Notandum quod si quis
in capite de domino rege tenere debet, tunc eius custodia ad dominum regem
plene pertinet, sieve alios dominos habere debeat ipse haeres, sieve non, quia
dominus rex nullum habere potest parem, multo minus superiorem.

Elenchs.

As when you take that for less which is not less. As if a boy can paynt,
then a man can paynt, for although a boy be less then a man, yet a boy may
sometimes sooner paynt then a man.

So then by these general heads thus distinguished, we have the means and
way of invention put down. Although Menon make a great show of proof that
there is no art or order in invention: for it were in vain, quoth he, to
seek for that which we have found already, and it is impossible by search to
find ye which we know not when we see it: Socrates goes about to dissolve
this Dilemma, by I cannot tell what mystery of Pythagoricall philosophy, and
says that our Discere is nothing else but Recordari; and that our souls were
adorned with perfection of all knowledge from eternity, but enclosed in this
fleshly dungeon of the body, waxed dull, yet by the application of one thing to
an other, remembered that again which they had forgotten before.

Aristotle answers it after an other manner, and says, that he who seeks,
knows generally what he seeks, though not in particularitie: so by this
general note and mark he may observe the special, whereof he was ignorant
before. And this is true in part, for when we have conceived the general
precepts of any art, then do we search the particularities by the general
direction of those rules. But if Menon should go further, and bring in that
first invention of man, when there was no observation either of general or
special, how would this answer suffice? Therefore, for a final resolution,
I say, that man's soul has in it a natural power and ability, whereby it is
apt to conceive any thing, if it be directed, turned, applied, and bent
thereunto: so says Aristotle, 2. de demonst. that our soul brought not with
it into the body the knowledge of things, as Socrates imagined, but only a
faculty and power of understanding; as our eyes have not the distinct kinds
of colors engraven in them by nature, but only an ability of seeing colors.
So then, as a man looking on colors, sees: in like manner by applying his
spirit and understanding to things unknown, he may by the diligent perusing
of these general heads, find, what he seeks now, and knew not
heretofore. But to him only, as Tully says, will these general
predicamentes or Categories of arguments become profitable indeed, which has
been a travailed and a well experienced man in matters of importance, which
age and continuance of time affoordeth, or has read much and heard more, which
study and diligence yields. Subacto enim ingenio opus est etc.

If we shall for exercise sake use to draw any one word through these general
places of invention, it will breed a great plenty and variety of new
arguments, while we mark what be the causes, effects, parts, whole,
general, special, subjects, adiunctes thereof, and so forth in all the
rest: and this either in making and enditing our selves, or else in resolving,
and as it were dismembring that which others have done.

For the first, let that example of Nobilitas, serve, put down by Sturmius:
For the later, we will take, Amicitia, out of Tullies dialogue, called Laelius.
The examples be placed according to the usual distribution of arguments framed
by Ramus, not according to this lately put down by my self. The matter is not
great: it may soon be altered, and should have been now, if time had suffered.

Causae efficientes Nobilitatis. (...).

Maiorum praeclara facta, and generis diuturna comprobatio, stirpisque
antiquitas atque amplitudo: hae procreantes, conseruantes istae.

Virtus and continentia in posteris, quae maiorum laudibus respondeat.

(...).

Liberalitas, fortitudo, clementia, caeteraeque virtutes cum corporis
pulchritudine copulatae.

Destruentes.

Morum turpitudo, ignoratio, inhumanitas, vultus Centau^icus, and habitudo
Polyphemi Cyclopica.

Materia.

Ipsa generis antiquitas, and propria virtutis praestantia, frequenti actionum
celebritate confirmata.

Forma.

Ista ipsa nominis amplitudo, longinquitate temporis confirmata, and hominum
comprobatione stabilita.

Finis.

Vt quae a maioribus praeclare iacta sint nobilitatis fundamenta, a posteris
perficiantur, vt and sibi honori, and amicis voluptati and reip. emolumento
esse possint.

Effecta.

In Tyrocinio and exercitationibus militaribus aut caeteros aequales superasse
viribus and virtute, aut melioribus and magnis, industria fuisse parem: Sub
literarum magistris magnam and diuturnam operam nauasse, and progressus magnos
in doctrina fecisse: summa semper temperantia and sobrietate praeditum fuisse:
optimis and clarissimis imperatoribus stipendia fecisse: In nullo nisi iusto
bello militasse: in hostem lenem and misericordem, non saeuum and crudelem
extitisse: in acie and oppugnandis ciuitatibus femper inter primos visum
fuisse: Duxisse exercitum: Appellatum imperatorem a militibus: Parua manu
magnas copias saepe fudisse: Sese pro patria deuouisse, aut voluisse deuouere,
si permisissent milites: Ex praeda, vel nullam pecuniam accepisse, vel ceteris
parem: Res a se gestas historia complexum esse: Domi and in pace prudentem
senatorem, charum suis, iucundum omnibus sese praebuisse: Principem senatus
fuisse: Bis triumphasse: Tertio consulem fuisse: semper fuisse verum and
constantem, nunquam vanum and leuem.

Subiecta.

Animus reuera nobilis and magnanimus, and virtutum praesidijs vndique
circumseptus.

Adiuncta.

Clarum esse, and illustrem: omnium gentium literis ac linguis celebrari:
deduci: assurgi: etc.

Diuersa.

Non omnem a maioribus habuit nobilitatis opinionem, sed and suis virtutibus
exornatam.

Disparata.

Non in simulata ementitae nobilitatis vmbra delitescit, non pecuniarum copijs
euectus est, sed and suis and suorum factis illustratus.

Relata.

Nobilitas est rei nobilitatae nobilitas.

Aduersa.

Nobilitas and obsc^ritas: nouitas and antiquitas: humilitas and amplitudo.

Priuantia.

Nobilis and ignobilis. Clarus, obscurus.

Paria.

Claritas and splendour: Antiquitas and vetustas.

Maiora. Minora.

Pulchrius est fieri, quam creari nobilem.

Ortus praeclarus est exoptandus, multo magis itaque animus generosus, and men's
excelsa.

Similia.

Ciuitas in qua nobiles non sunt, similis est ijs hortis, in quibus flos nullus
est insignior.

Dissimilia.

Non vt herbae vitiosae abijciuntur, ita si quis nobilis vitiosus aliqua in
part sit, spoliari debet auito nomine.

Coniugat^.

Nobilitas, nobilis, nobilitare, nobilitari, nobile factum, homo nobilitatus,
and virtus nobilitata; nobili loco natus, and natus nobili genere, and
nobiliss^a familia, aut stirpe (...) ortus, and generosa stirpe procreatus.

Notatio.

Nobilitas inde nominata est, quod eorum qui nobiles sunt, nota virtus esse
debeat.

Distributio ex causis.

Nobilitas in ciuitatem, familiam, gentem distributa est.

Ex effectis.

Nobilitas alia vera, orta ex clara familia, and virtutibus maiorum respondens,
alia noua quidem, non adiuta maiorum gloria, bona tamen and industria, and
cupida honestatis. Tertia, calida and malitiosa, quae non virtute, sed
simulatione, and falsa specie virtutis sibi nomen ^natur comparare. Quarta vero
quae vitijs atque flagitijs dedita est, dedecus familiae suae, profundens omnes
opes, amittens domesticam laudem, profligatae audatiae atque malitiae.

Ex subiectis.

Nobilitas, vel Graecorum est, vel Romanorum, vel Persarum, vel Medorum, vel
gentium aliarum.

Ex adiunctis.

Hominum alij nobiles* alij ignobiles.

Definitio.

Nobilitas est generis antiquitas, ortum habens vel a dinino aliquo principio,
vel maiorum virtute praeclara, humanae societatis consensu comprobata.

Descriptio.

Nobilitas est nominis amplitudo, virtutis comes, virtu^e conformata, quae
breuitatem vitae posteritatis memoria consolatur, quae facit vt absentes
adsimus, viuamus mortui: cuius denique gradibus homines in coelum videantur
ascendere.

Testimonia.

Malo, pater tibi sit Thersites, dummodo tu sis
Aeacidae similis, Uulcaniaque arma capessas;
Quam te Thersitae similem producat Achilles.
Inquit Iuuenalis.
Nobilitas sola est, atque vnica, virtus. Vt recte Poeta.

Non domus dominum, sed dominus domum nobilitare debet si fidem Cicer oni
adhibeamus.

Thus have we drawn this argument, Nobilitas, throughout most of the places of
Logical Invention: which shall suffice at this time for an example of Genesis
in this first part of Logike. Now let us in order of Analysis. apply such
arguments to this word, Amicitia, as we can readily find in the forenamed
Dialogue.

Causa efficiens. Natura, Uirtus.

Quapropter a natura mihi videtur potius quam ab imbecillitate orta amicitia,
and applicatione magis animi cum quodam sensu amandi, quam cogitatione quantum
illa res vtilitatis esset habitura etc.

Quod si tanta vis probitatis est, vt eam vel in eis quos nunquam vidimus, vel,
quod maius est, in host etiam diligamus, quid mirum si animi hominum
^oueantur, cum eorum, quibuscum vsu coniuncti esse poss^t, virtutem and
bonitatem perspicere videantur?

Causa adiuuans.

Quanquam, confirmatur amor, and beneficio accepto, and studio perspecto, and
consuetudine adiuncta, qu^bus rebus ad ill^ primum motum animi and amoris
adhibitis, admirabilis quaedam exardescit beneuolentiae magnitudo, quam siqui
putant ab imbecillitate proficisci, vt sit per quam quisque assequatur quod
desideret, humilem sane relinquunt, and minime generosum, vt ita dicam, ortum
amicitiae, quam ex inopia atque indigentia nasci volunt etc.

Adiungitur etiam and rerum conuenientia, and morum similitudo, and voluntatum
summa consensio.

Destrue^.

Contentiones, luxuriae conditiones, vel commodi, honoris ambitus, pecuniae
cupiditates, iniquae postulationes, morum dissimilitudo: dispares enim mores
disparia studia sequuntur: quorum dissimilitudo dissoluit amicitias, etc.

Materia.

Id in quo est omnis vis amicitiae, voluntatum, studiorum, sententiarum summa
consensio.

Form^.

Ipsa an^morum coniunctio.

Finis.

Vt vsu eius quem diligere ceperunt, fruantur and moribus; sintque pare^ in
amore, and equales, propensioresque ad been me^endum quam ad reposce (...)

Et in^a.

Alios autem dicere aiunt etiam multo inhumanius, quem locum breuiter
perstrinxi paulo ante, praesidij adiumentique causa, non beneuolentiae neque
charitatis, amicitias esse expetendas.

Effecta.

Cui potest esse vita vitalls, vt ait Ennius, qui non in amici mutua
beneuolentia conquiescat? Quid dulcius, quam habere quocum omnia audeas sic
loqui vt tecum? Quis esset tantus fructus in prosperis rebus, nisi haberes qui
illis aeque ac tu ipse gauderet? Aduersas vero res far difficile esset sine
eo qui illas grauius etiam quam tu, ferret. Denique, caeterae res quae
expetuntur, opportunae sunt singulae rebus fere singulis: diuitiae, vt vtare;
opes, vt colare; honores, vt laudere; voluptates, vt gaudeas. Valetudo, vt
dolor careas, and muneribus fungaris corporis: Amicitia plurimas res continet,
quoquo te verteris presto est, nullo loco excluditur, nunquam intempestiua,
nunquam molesta est.

Infra.

Nam et secundas res splendidiores facit amicitia, and aduersas patiens
co^municansque leniores. Cumque plurimas and maximas commoditates amicitia
contineat, tum illa nimirum prestat omnibus, quod bona spe prelucet in
posterum, nec debilitari animos aut cadere patitur: verum enim amicum qui
intuetur, tanquam exemplar quoddam intuetur sui. Quocirca and absentes adsunt,
and egentes abundant, and imbecilli valent, and, quod difficilius dictu est,
mortui viuunt: tantus cos honos, memoria, desiderium prosequitur amicorum, etc.

Subiectum.

Sed hoc primum sentio, nisi inter bonos amicitiam esse non posse.

Et

Quanta autem vis amicitiae sit, ex hoc intelligi maxim potest, quod ex
infinita so^ietate generis humani quam conciliauit ipsa natura, ita contracta
res est, and adducta in angustu^, vt omnis charitas aut inter duos, aut inter
paucos iungeretur.

Et,

Itaque verae amicitiae difficilime repe^iuntur in ijs, qui in honoribus reque
publica versantur.

Adiuncta.

In amicitia autem, nihil est fictum, nihil simulatum: and quicquid in ea est,
idem verum and voluntarium est.

Et,

Vt igitur and monere and moneri, proprium est verae amicitiae, and alterum
libere facere, non aspere; alterum patienter accipere, non repugnanter, sic
habendum est, nullam in amicitijs pestem esse maiorem, quam adulationem,
blanditias, assentationem.

Diuersa.

Suis autem incommodis grauiter angi; non amicum, sed scipsum amantis est.

Disparat^.

Quocirca, moerere hoc ^ius euentu, vereor ne inuidi magis quam amici sit.

Relata and Coniugata.

Sed vt tum ad senem senex de senectute, sic in hoc libro, ad amicum
amicissimus de amicitia scripsi.

Aduersa.

Quae enim domus tam stabilis, quae tam firma ciuitas est quae non odijs atque
dissidi^s funditus possit euerti?

Priuantia.

Beneuolentia, amor, affectio, and (...).

Paria.

Itaque non aqua, non igni, non ae^re, vt aiunt, pluribus locis vtimur quam
amicitia.

Et,

Verum enim amicum qui intuetur, tanquam exemplar quoddam intuetur sui.

Et,

In amicitia, eque nefas sit, turpe aliquid and facere rogatum, and imperare.

Maiora. Minora.

Aperte enim odisse magis ingenuum est, quam front occultare sententiam.

Et,

Quid enim potest esse tam flexibile, tam deuium quam animus eius, qui ad
alterius non modo sensum ac voluntatem, sed etiam vultum atque nutum
conuertitur?

Quod si haec apparent in bestijs, volucribus, agrestibus, natantibus,
cicuribus, feris, primum se vt ipse diligant (id enim pariter cum omni animante
nascitur) deinde vt requirant atque appetant ad quas se applicent eiusdem
generis animantes, idque faciunt cum desiderio, and cum quadam similitudine
amori^ humani, quanto id magis in homine fit natura, qui and seipse diligit,
and alterum requirit, cuius animum ita cum suo commisceat, vt efficiat poene
vnum ex duobus?

Similia.

Est igitur prudentis, sustinere, vt cursum, sic impetum beneuolentiae: quo
vtamur quasi aquis tentatis, sic amicitijs, aliqua ex part periclitatis
moribus amicorum?

Et illud.

Veterimae quaeque, vt ea vina quae vetustatem ferunt, esse debent suauissimae:
verumque illud est quod vulgo dicitur, multos modios salis simul edendos esse,
vt amicitiae munus expletum sit. Nouitates autem, si spem afferunt, vt tanquam
in herbis non fallacibus fructus appareat, non sunt illae quidem repudiande,
vetustas tamen suo loco conseruanda est.

Dissimilia.

Nec enim illa prima vera est, vt quemadmodum in se quisque, sic in amicum sit
animatus.

Coniugata.

Plurimum in amicitia amicorum been suadentium valeat autoritas.

Notatio.

Vtrumque enim, and amor and amicitia, dictum est ab amando.

Diuisio.

Sed nescio quo pacto, ab amicitijs perfectorum hominum, id est sapientum* ad
leaves amicitias deflexit oration.

Definitio.

Est autem amicitia nihil aliud nisi omnium diuinarum humanarumque rerum, cum
beneuolentia and charitate summa consensio.

Descriptio breuis.

Amare autem nihil aliud est nisi eum ipsum diligere, quem ames, nulla
vtilitate quaesita.

Descriptio explicata.

Equidem exomnibus rebus quas mihi aut fortuna aut natura tribuit, nihil habeo
quod cum amicitia Scipionis possit comparari. In hac mihi de Republica fuit
consensus, in hac rerum priuatarum consilium, in eadem requies plena
oblectation^ fuit. Nunquam illum ne minima quidem re offendi, quod quidem
sens^m, nihil audiui ex co ipso quod nollem: vna domus erat, idem victus, isque
communis: neque solum militia, sed etiam peregrinationes, rusticationesque
communes. Nam quid ego de studijs dicam cognoscendi semper aliquid atque
discendi? In quibus remoti ab oculis populi, omne otium tempusque contriuimus?

Testimonium.

Agrigentinum doctum quendam virum, carminibus Graecis vaticinatum ferunt, quae
in rerum natura totoque mundo constarent, quaeque mouerentur, ea contrahere
amicitiam, dissipare discordiam.

Et,

Recte Ennius, Amicus certus in re incerta cernitur.

Et illud.

Verum igitur illud est, quod a Tarentino Archita, vt opinor, dici solitum,
nostros senes commemorare audiui, ab alijs senibus auditum; si quis coelum
ascendisset, naturamque mundi and pulchritudinem syderum perspexisset, insuauem
illam admirationemei fore, quae iucundissima fuisset, nisi aliquem cui
narraret, habuisset.

Postremo

Sed nescio quo modo verum est, quod in Andri^ familiaris meus Terentius dicit,
Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit.

Thus much for these two words, Nobilitas and Amicitia. The like would I have
all Logical Lawyers to attempt in our common Law. At the first it will seem
hard and troublesome: but undoubtedly the speedy profit accompanied with a
sweet delight, will soon overtake, and quite overcome the pains before
sustained: and so much the rather, for that it is impossible, any profession
whatsoever, to be more Logical then is the Law. For proof; if you take but
that little tractate of Uillenage in Master Littleton, you shall find, if not
all, yet not many less then all these arguments, used in the same discourse,
within the compass of eight little leaves, whereof some be bestowed on some
other matters.

THE SECOND BOOK. Of Disposition. THE FIRST CHAPTER.
Hitherto of Exposition of Arguments called Invention, the first part of
Logike: Now follows the second, which is Disposition.

Disposition is the second part of Logike concerning the disposing of
Arguments, thereby to judge well of them: and therefore this second part is
called both Judgment and Disposition.

Annotations.
(...) among the Grecians, is Disposition with the Latinistes. So then the
second part of Logike is called Disposition of the form of the same second
part, for that, as in Grammar Syntaxis being the second part, orders and
disposes simple words handled in the first; so (...), Disposition in Logike
does artificially place, settle, and dispose single arguments one with an
other, and that first axiomatically, in severed axioms: then, proceeding
forwards to a Syllogism and method, as occasion shall serve. For examples
sake, this sentence, a villeine regardant is a villeine, is true English,
because the nominative case and the verb be placed Grammatically, according to
the prescription of Syntaxis: so the same sentence is a true Logical axiom,
because the general is affirmed on the special, in a simple axiom, according
to Art in Disposition. Now, this second part of Logike is also called (...),
Iudicium, Judgment, of the use, commodity, and end thereof. For that, by a
certain direction, rule, and prescription of Disposition, arises judgment of
the truth or untruth of any axiom; the consequence or inconsequence of any
Syllogism: and the perspicuitie or confused obscurity of any method or
proceeding.

The second Chapter. Of Axioms affirmative and negative.
DIsposition is either of one sentence, called Axiomaticall: or of more then
one, called Dianoeticall. An Axiom or proposition is a disposition of one
argument with an other, whereby we judge a thing to be, or not to be.

An Axiom has two parts, the band, and the parts bound: the band is that,
which binds the other parts together. The parts bound, be either the former
or the later. The former is that which goes before, and is called the
antecedent: the later, that which follows, called the consequent, As

Ah God that Love should breed both joy and pain.

Where, Love, being the cause and first part, is coupled, by the band, should
breed; with his effects, both joy and pain, the latter part.

An Axiom is either affirmative or negative, affirmative when the band of the
Axiom is affirmed. Negative, when it is denied, and although in English, the
negation come after the band, yet in reason it goes before, and denies the
band as well as in other languages.

From this affirmation and negation arise all contradictions, when the self
same Axiom is both affirmed and denied, As, Dido my dear, alas, is dead,
Dido n'is dead, but into heaven hent.


Dido is dead, Dido is not dead.

Master Plowden. Fol. 10. b. Les statutes doyent estre construes solonque les
reasons del common ley: the negation whereof will make this contradiction, les
statutes ne doyent estre construe solonque les reasons del common ley.

Annotations.
SIcut (...), a verbo (...), sic (...), a (...) dicitur. Illud verbum a nomine
(...), meus; hoc a (...), mentis agitatio. (...) apud Aristotelicos est
cognitio principiorum indemonstrabilium. (...) vero, mentis seu rationis quidam
quasi discursus, qui aliter (...), ratiocinatio dicitur, cum ratio ex quocunque
proposito aliud deducit, mouens se ab vno ad aliud inuestigandum, vt
praepositio declaret motus tractum, ac transmissionem ipsius (...).

[An Axiom:] The Greek word, (...), signifies dignity, authority. The
Logicians, as it should seem, took it for any thing spoken, pronounced,
told, as it were, with authority. It here signifies any sentence or
proposition whatsoever, wherein one argument, reason, conceit, thing, is so
conjoined with, or severed from another, as that thereby we judge the one
either to be or not to be, the cause, effect; whole, part; general,
special; subject, adiunct; diverse, disparate, relative, repugnant,
distribution, definition, testimony, like, unlike, equal, more or less to the
other.

[Affirmatiue:] It is proper then to axioms, not to simple arguments, to
affirm or deny: as it is to a syllogism, to confute or confirm. Affirmatio
and negatio enunciati, nihil aliud est quam partium compositio and diuisio.

[The band:] The band in a simple axiom is always a verb: but this verb
is sometimes put between the two arguments, sometimes of it self it
supplyeth the place of the second argument, as will appear if you resolve such
implicate propositions thus, Plato disputes learnedly, Plato is a learned
disputer.

[Contradiction:] In our Trauerse, which took name of the French Trauerse
(that is de transuerso, on the other side) there is always a manifest example
of an exact and Logical contradiction between two axioms, the one affirming,
the other denying the self same thing that was affirmed: See Master Lambard
Just. lib. 2. cap. 13.

Home n'auera express auerment encounter le return del vicount, quia il est
officer al court, itaque le court doyt doner credence a luy. Mes si le vicount
return attache, le party dira encounter ceo, nyent attache per 15 iours:
issint s'il return, que le ten. est summons, le tenant poet dire, nyent
summons solonque le ley del terre, car ceo ne trauerse expresmentle return del
vicount, mes estoit oue ces assets bien sans ascun contradiction.

Vide 1. H. 6. 8. Rolf. Enseint et nyent enseint, bon issue.

The third Chapter. Of a true and false Axiom.
SEcondarily, an axiom is either true or false. True, when the thing is even
so as it is said to be: false when contrarily: and here according to the
affection of the arguments, we must grant the true, and deny the false,
absolutely.

Both these be either Necessary, or Contingent. Necessary, when an axiom is
either true or false without exception: (yet to a general axiom, exceptions
may be added to make it generally true.) What ever wants changeable rest,
Must needs decay when it is at best.


This is necessarily true, and his contrary, necessarily false, so this:

There is no greater estate, then see simple. Contingent is, when it is true in
such sort, as it may be false, or so false, as yet it may be true. As,

Great climbers fall vnsoft. This is doubtful and contingent.

So Master Plowden: Fol. 50. Femes facile sont illudes et entice al couyne:
For although some great climers have great falls, and many women be seduced,
yet oftentimes it falls out, that many of the first escape from falling: and
more of the second prevent illusions. Here we must neither absolutely affirm
nor deny, but distinguish. The judgment which we can have of this Contingent
or doubtful Axiom, is called Opinion, which in things already past or
present, may be certain unto man; but in things to come, it is altogether
uncertain, although to God there is no such difference of things in respect
of time, to whom all things be present.

All precepts of Arts are or ought to be necessarily and always true
without exception, and so rules of truth: but besides this, they must also be
rules of justice, as it were, and also of wisdom or discretion, or
compendious brevity.

A rule of justice is an axiom which gives unto every thing his own, in
coupling those things together which agree naturally, wherein usually are
disposed together, the formal cause and the thing formed; the general and his
special; the subject and his proper adiunct.

A rule of wisdom, discretion, or breuity, is an axiom wherein the arguments
disposed may be mutually affirmed one of another. So that, as the later is
verified of the former, so the former may be of the later. The judgment of
these three kinds of axioms is most certain and infallible knowledge.

Annotations.
THe first rule which Ramus calls a rule of truth is termed of the Graecians
(...), of the Latinists, de omni, because it is absolutely and in most general
manner pronounced of all, without any exception. And it must be affirmative.
For a negation does but deprive and take away; and not imprint in man's mind
the knowledge of any thing certainly. So that no negation, although it be
generally true, is fit to make any precept of art, exactly put down: whose
duty is, to teach truth; not vnteach untruths, or to tell what is not true.
Therefore says Aristotle, an affirmation is more honorable then a negation.

As a true axiom is either contingent, or necessary: so the false axiom in
like wise is either variable, or else necessarily false, that is impossible.
For, the necessary false has a proper and distinct name, to wit, impossible:
but the necessary true has no several name: but is called necessary, by that
general word.

The second rule of arts is the rule of justice: so called of Ramus, for that
according to the nature of justice, in this axiom every argument has that
adjoined unto it which is by natural right, his own, as the form his thing
formed, the subject his own proper adiunct, the general his special:
examples whereof I thought it nothing necessary to heap up in the text, for
that in the chapters of the form and formed, subject and adiunct, general and
special, they are already discoursed upon: and there wants nothing but the
putting of them together in an axiom, which may soon be performed by the
direction of rules of axiomaticall judgment. This rule is called in Greek
(...), in Latin, per se: for that both the arguments in this kind of axiom,
be essentially and by themselves, their own nature, force, power, virtue, and
inclination linked together. Of these Latin words, per se, Paulus Venetus,
and other schoolmen, have framed this dunsical word of art, Perseitas, and
thereof made many kinds, and long discourses.

The third and last rule, is named of Ramus, the rule of wisdom or
discretion; of the effect which it woorketh in us, which is wisdom, says
Rodingus. For, then only are we wise, then only have we the perfect
knowledge of any thing, when we know it by the first causes, that is, by such
which are immediate, equal, neither higher, nor lower, neither too general,
nor too special, but iumpe, fit, meet, that is, first, and therefore
reciprocal: and this is performed by this rule. This rule is therefore the
rule of wisdom; teaching general things in their due place, once, and
generally: Special things in their convenient time and order, specially, with
their several specials. Whereas, if a man teach a special thing generally, in
general, and in a general place: or a general thing in special, specially,
and in a special place, he shall bewray his folly and want of discretion in
troubling the auditors with his gross error, and tedious Tautologie: Error,
in applying a special and peculiar thing to a general and universal matter:
Tautologie and vain inculcation of the same thing, in repeating that many
times confusedly, which both might and should have been taught but once, and
distinctly. For if I teach a general thing specially, that is, in a special
and inferior place, I must of necessity repeat that so many times, as there
be special things to which it is applyable, because I left it out in the
beginning: whereas if I had put it down generally, in his higher place, above
his specials, this once putting down had sufficed for all: because it is
placed as a general; and every general includes the whole society of his
specials, and to every of them is equally appliable, by the order of art and
nature.

The Grecians call this rule, (...): the Latinistes, vniuersaliter primum.
(...), is then, as I said before; when in an axiom, both the arguments joined
together be iumpe, fit, meet, first, equal and therefore reciprocal: equal
I call them, which are as general or special, the one as the other: so that
the one contains no more then the other, neither is the one higher then the
other, such an one is this, A man is apt to laugh: A man is reasonable: A
villeyne is either, in gross, or else regardant: Logike consists in
Invention, and Disposition: Logike is an Art of reasoning, for here either the
definition and the thing defined, or the subject and his proper adiunct; or the
form and the thing formed, or the general and his specialles, or else whole
and parts be joined together. Such as these, be according to this rule,
(...). And it is so called because the second part of the axiom (in this, A
man is apt to laugh) is verified of no other thing before man in general, but
first of man, then secondarily of singular men, as Plato, Socrates, etc. and
whatsoever is thus spoken first of the whole antecedent, must needs be
reciprocal with the same antedent. Hereupon, I say, was it called (...),
vniuersaliter primum.

Prima regula, says one, falsos; secunda peregrinos; tertia nimis elatos aut
abiectos ciues e ciuitate philosophica excludit. The first excludes all false
and lame precepts, which if it were observed in our law, then all repugnant
dreams of Serieantes and Counsailers that serve the time and speak for money
should not run so current for good law: nay every judgment given either
without reason, or with partiality, should not stand for Justice: every
Semble, should not pass for a sentence, nor every Dictum fuit, for a Dictators
constitution.

It is not necessary that every ariome (...), should be general, says
Scribonius, for, in astronomy, there be many particulers, but it is therefore
called De omni, for that it is necessarily true, with affirmation, without
exception. Yet a general rule with his particular exception is (...), nam
exceptio non solum restringit regulam, sed etiam confirmat.

The second rule rejects all impertinent matters which are not coherent, nor
suitable to the proposed argument, but discrepant and disagreeable, as precepts
of Rhetorike among axioms of Logike, as in a discourse of Garrantie, to talk
of Rickhils remaynders: in a chapter of releases, to lay down the pleading in
a writ of right: in the explication of conditional estates, to declare the
nature of a deed indented, and a deed polle: among the precepts of tenants
in common, to cast in pieces of releases; as the custom is among little grand
mootemen, who cast case upon case, as Carters do billets upon billets, and for
every collateral trifle, run over all the 633. titles of Brooks abridgement.

The third rule, as it is in practice hard, so in observation it is most
commendable, and if it be violated, it argues a most gross oversight in the
unskillful artificer. As if a professor of Logike should say, that a cause is
ever inherent, or, as it were, engraven in, and together with tho thing caused;
this were absurdly spoken, for in teaching a special thing generally, he
applies that generally to all causes, which is appropriate naturally to one
cause, and only one cause, I mean the form, which is always inherent in the
thing formed, and imprinted in the same, whereas other causes be not so.
Again, if the same Logical Doctor should say, that the material cause were
the fountain of all knowledge, or should affirm the same of all the other
kinds of causes specially and in seueralty, he might justly be reprehended
for a double fault, the one, for making a general adiunct be restrained and
tied to one peculiar subject: the other, for vainlie repeating that in diverse
specials, which was in generality to have been laid down but once for all.
There is in effect no part of our Law that ever was ordered according to this
rule: yet it appears that the founders of our Law had a liking thereof, in
that they detested the contrary vice. Car nous eyomus vne erudition, que si
home ad brief framed in le Register pur son special case, praeter le general
brief, et il use le general brief pur son special case, c^o brief abatera.
Et vide 7. H. 7. In trespass per le baron et feme, et count del trespass fayt
al feme dum sola fuit, ceo abatera le brief. 7. E. 6. 80. Dyer.

Aristoteles affectiones has tres ad propositiones syllogismi Demonstratiui
restrinxit, sed Ramus eas ad omnia artium praecepta rectius accomodauit. In
Logike, says Scribonius, we are not to give peculiar precepts fit only to
put down arts (as Ramus in this place seems to do, where he makes the
foresaid rules of Truth, Justice, and Discretion, proper and peculiar
directions for the conformation of arts) but general for Ens, and non Ens. So
that he would have no mention made of the constitution and framing of arts
purposely and ex professo, for that were impertinent, but only obiter, and by
the way, in manner of a Corollary or Consectary, that it might be the more
tolerable and Homogeneum, that is, the more suitable and coherent. And so I
make it here no distribution at all, but only a Corollary.

Impossible quadruplex, says one, Naturae, vt coelum digito attingere: Iuris,
quod bonis moribus and rationi repugnat: Contradictionis: Facti; hinc
impossibilium nulla est obligatio, the like whereof is in Parkins and diverse
year books.

The fourth Chapter. Of a simple Axiom.
THus much of the common proprieties of axioms, the specials follow.

An axiom is either simple or compound: Simple is that whose parts be
coupled together with a verb.

In July. They been y^lad in Purple.

Master Plowden. Fol. 497. a. Le prior de. s. John's auoit l'estate del
templers.

In November, Dido n'is dead.

M. Plowden. Fol. 5. a. Ex nudo pacto non oritur actio. And this is the first
disposition of arguments invented.

In the first affirmative example, the former part is the subject: the later
the adiunct: In the first negative, Dido, the former part, is opposite unto
dead, which is the later part: and dead is opposite unto Dido, which is the
former part.

And as we see in these examples the disposition of agreeable arguments, as
of the subject with his adiunct in the first: and of disagreeable arguments,
as of the opposite with the opposite in the last: so we may dispose after the
same manner all arguments agreeable and disagreeable: always affirming the
agreeable, and denying the disagreeable: except distributions and full
compariso^s, such as have three or four terms or parts, and therefore
cannot be disposed in a simple axiom, but in a compound.

The simple axiom is either general or special: General is when the later
part is generally referred and attributed to the former. And in general
axioms, one of them contradictory to the other, is not always true or always
false; for if they be both variable, they may be both false, as,

All that is lent to love will be lost. Naught that is lent to love will be
lost.
Chescun tuer d'un home est prohibit per le ley. Null tuer d'un home est
prohibit per le le ley.
As also if they be not varyable, as here:

Every creature is reasonable. No creature is reasonable.
Chescun Custom est ground sur reason. Null Custom est ground sur reason.
The special axiom is, when the consequent or later part, is specially
attributed unto the antecedent or former part, not generally: whereof one
being contradictory to another, is always true, or always false.

The special is either particular or proper: Particular, when the later part
general is attributed unto some of the former, but without any certain
limitation, and to this the general is contradictory.

In May Piers, of sheepheards. Some began to gape for greedy governance.


The general contradictory whereof, is, None began to gape for greedy governance.
Ascunes mines sont royal
Null mines sont royal


The proper Axiom is when the latter part is attributed unto the former, being
a proper, singular, or one thing.

Diggon in September. Indeed thy Ball is a bold big curre,


Whose negative and contradictory, is In deed thy Ball is not a bold big
curre.
John vane Salsbury tue l'home feloniousment,
John vane Salsbury ne tue l'home feloniousement.


Annotations.
The judgment of this simple axiom is most natural, but in part common to
brute beasts as well as to man, as in all singular matters comprised in the
axioms called proper. For as Aristotle teaches in the second of his
demonstrations, every sensible creature has a natural power and faculty of
judging, which is called sense; and this sense 2. Topic: is of him said to be
a certain kind of judgment: and without doubt, the sense is a most upright
judge of such things as are properly under his jurisdiction, as the sight of
colors, the hearing of soundes, the smelling of smelles, 4. Metap.

This judgment of the senses is more exact and exquisite in some sorts of
beasts, then it is in man. For although man do surpass other creatures in
tutching, yet the Egle sees more clearly than he, the Vultur smells
better, and the Mowld hears sooner, as Plynie reports in the second of his
natural history. So that the judgment of a simple axiom is not altogether
proper and peculiar to man only, but that of the general axiom is man's
alone. For although it seem that beasts have some little sparks of reason,
as Aristotle in the second of his Physikes speaks of the Spider and the Ante,
whereunto Galen also seems to yield, yet in truth this judgment is nothing
else in them, but only the fantasy or imagination of sensible notions, neither
can any beast conceive any general. And though Epicurus did so much abase man's
dignity, as to attribute the sovereign judgment and determination of all
things unto sense, not unto reason and understanding, yet we know what an
infinite and unspeakable capacity man's soul is endowed withal, how far the
general is more honorable then the singular, and how woonderfully man's mind
woorketh of it self alone without any help of sense, whatsoever be objected
by that sensual, or rather senseless and brutish Philosopher Epicurus.

[And in the general, one of them contradictory to the other, is not always
true or always false:] this is false, says Scribonius, therefore we must say
thus, All that is lent to love will be lost: Not all that is lent to love will
be lost.


For, says he, the general nature of a contradiction is, to divide between
truth and falshoode. But there is a general kind of contradiction in
propositions or axioms, when two general axioms are so opposed the one
against the other, as what the one does affirm, the other denies of and in
the self same thing, and these can never be both true, but they may be, both
false. This general contradiction is of Aristotle called a contrariety in
axioms by a distinct name and title, not a contradiction.

An other kind of contradiction there is which is special, and is called by
the general name, a Contradiction, not a Contrariety, when ye one is a
general affirmative axiom, the other a particular negative, or contrarily:
which indeed as Scribonius says, can never be either both true or both
false; Thus then we see the cause of this reprehension, what it is and how
much worth. The diverse acceptance of this word, Contradiction, caused an
error, and this error a needles reprehension.

Et quia quidam recognitorum modo comparentium non fecerunt visum, and quidam
non venerunt, ideo iurata remanet vsque ad proximam assisam. Ceo fuit error per
troys Justices, car l'un part del record est contrariant alauter: car per le
pri mer parcel, s. quia quida^ recognitorum modo comparentiu^; IN appearance de
touts est affirm: et in le second part, s. and buid^m non venerunt, le non
appara^ce del parcel des Jurors est affirm, sic contrariant, s. omnes
Iuratores venerunt (car comentq le general note, Omnes, ne soit la mise,
uncore est include et implye solonque cest opinion:) and quidam Iuratores non
venerunt. 22. E. 4. 16. 17.

33. H. 6. 26. b. Prisot. Le brief est repugnant en luymesme, s. quod cum ipse
habeat quoddam Cheminum ratione tenurae suae ad ecclesiam de D. le def. leuauit
quendam murum, per quem murum Cheminum habere non potest. Issint il reherce
coment il ad un chemyne in le premis del brief, et in le perclose, il reherce,
quod habere non potest, nisi ita exponas, habeat de iure, habere non possit de
facto.

A general:] Axioma generale esse potest, etsi nullum symbolum generale
adijciatur, cuiusmodi sunt omnis, nullus, etc. Itaque sententia axiomatis
consideranda est, sic, Malus vsus abolendus est, generale est axioma. In every
general axiom both the former and later part must be a thing general and
common to many: and also the later part must be generally attributed to the
former part, that is to say, to all the nature of the former part, and to all
things contained under the same former part.

A simple axiom, says Piscator, is general or special: general is
universal or particular: universal either definite, as every man is
reasonable, or indefinite, as man is reasonable: But Ramus expels that
uncertain and indefinite axiom; for every conceit of the mind is
determinatly either general or special, and special, either particular or
singular, as in that axiom uttered by Hanck. 11. H. 4. 47. Damnum poet estre
absque iniuria, the sense is determinate, that aliquod damnum est absque
iniuria, as in that case of the three schoolemaisters, where the thirds
diligence withdrewe all the scholars from the other two.

As for those which they call Subcontrarias; or under contraries, they make no
true contradiction. For they may be both true: nay they rather make an
argument of partition. For, these axioms: Some men be lawyers, Some men be not
lawyers.
Be nothing else but a distribution of men, as if a man should divide men into
two parts, whereof the one should be lawyers, the other should be no
lawyers: and these axioms may be both true.

The other that are called Subalternae, be both affirmative, or both negative,
the one being general, the other his special: so that they make an argument,
of the general to his special: As, Every knights service draws with it
guard, marriage, and relief. Some knights service draws with it, guard,
marriage, and relief.


Equipollence is Grammatical, Brian in 11. H. 7. 23. intangleth a plain case
with this obscure sophistry of Aequipollentia. Conversion of propositions
turns good axioms many times out of their wit: whatsoever is good in it, is
fet either from reciprocation in arguments, or from syllogismes: De modalibus,
they say, Non gustabit asinus: Let fine headed cloysterers love them, sine
riuali: they be nothing but additions of several affections of arguments in
an axiom. Suppositions are built rather upon idle supposals of schoolmen,
then grounded upon any sure foundation of natural experience. For these and
all like these, no more, but this, As good they were never named, as ever
believed.

The fifth Chapter. Of the congregatiue Axiom.
HItherto of the simple axiom. Now follows the compound. The compound axiom
is that whose parts be coupled together with a conjunction, and the parts of
the contradiction are always one of them true and the other false. Here the
turning of the parts is very usual.

The compound axiom, according to the nature of his conjunction, is either
congregatiue, or segregatiue. Congregatiue is that which gathers or coopleth
together the agreeable and disagreeable arguments, affirming the one, and
denying the other.

The congregatiue is either copulative, or connexiue: copulative is that, whose
coninuction is copulative, as that of Thomalyn in July. But shepherd might be
meek and mild, well eyed, as Argus was:
With fleshly folly vndefilde, and stout, as steed of brass.


Master Plowden. Fol. 75. b. Assizes sont le plus speedy suites que le ley
done. Et le ley plus grandement ceux favor, et favor auxi les chooses que font
speed et expedition en ceo, et abhor touts delays que sont en retardation
del assizes. The negation and contradiction is,
But shepherd might not, etc.
And Assizes ne sont, etc.


The true judgment of this copulative axiom depends on the truth of every
part: for if all the parts be true, it is then a true axiom: false, if any
be false.

Hereunto must be referred full comparisons and similitudes, wherein the
conjunction is the very relation it self, as, Colyn in January. And from mine
eyes the drizling tears descend,
As on your boughs the ysicles depend.


Here the judgment is compound, as if he had said, the ysicles depend on
your boughs, and the tears fall from mine eyes.

The contradiction of these, are the denials to every part.

Annotations.
COmpound:] the word, hypotheticall, which is here commonly used, is neither
proper nor fit for this purpose. For, in absolute copulative and discretiue
axioms, there is no (...), no condition at all.

Whereas I have already oftentimes in this second book used these words, a
Uerbe, and a Ceniunction: it is to be understood, that I mean not the naked
words: (for that were Grammatical, and belonging only to speech: not
Logical, and perteyning to reason:) but the verb and conjunction of the
mind, wit, and reason: which indeed is commonly, although not always,
expressed by some such Grammatical Uerbe and Conjunction.

The negation in a copulative axiom is not the denying of the parts conjoined;
but the denying of the conioyning of the p^rtes As thus,

Shepheardes must not be both meek and mild, and welleyd, and vndefil'd, and
stout, altogether.

Q. An copulatum axioma sit sine notis copulatiuis, vt Titius, Meuius, Decius
haeredes sunto.

In 22. E. 4. 32. In dett sur le custom de Londres de foreign attachement, le
def. plead en bar, un copulatine, s. le record del recovery, et auxi le
custom de Londres, le pl. trauerse l'un part, s. le custom, et est troue faux
per certificat, ergo tout est faux, car le nature d'un copulatyue, est que si
part de luy soit faux, tout serra faux. Bryan.

Legulei aliquando accipiunt, Et, pio, aut, and contra. Vt, home bargain ou
vende sa terre a un auter, et covenant de fair un bone et sufficient estate in
feesimple al bargainee et ses heirs in le term de s. Michael, procheine; et
deuant le term de s. Michael, le bargaignee morust, hic le bargaignor poet et
doyt fair estate in term de s. Michael al heir le bargaignee: et uncore les
parolles fueront, que il fairoit estate al bargaignee et ses heirs: hic, et,
est prise, pro, aut. Sed barbarismus imperitoru^ ne doit estre prejudicial al
art.

In omni composito axiomate, praeter discretum, duplex est modus contradicendi.
Primo, cum contradicitur vinculo compositionis, and tum contradictio diuidit
verum and falsum, vt Esopus and ingeniosus fuit and formosus, Esopus non and
ingeniosus fuit and formosus. Secundo, cum contradicitur compositi partibus, vt
Esopus fuit and ingeniosus and formosus, Esopus nec ingeniosus fuit, nec
formosus, and tum non diuidit verum and falsum ait Piscator.

The sixth Chapter. Of a connexiue Axiom.
AConnexiue Axiom, is that, whose conjunction is connexiue, as, Hobbinoll in
June. Then, if by me thou list advised be,
Forsake the soil that so does thee bewitch.


Master Plowden Fol. 11. b. Car en 2. R. 2. in trespass, i^ est tenus come un
maxim, que si ascun home ad interest a ascun chose per le grant ou assent
d'un auter: et le partio que ad tiel interest, ne poet aver le principal chose
sans fair auter chose, que il poet fair le dit auter chose, et ceo iustifier,
eo que il est le meynes a vener a son profit.

Whose contradiction is, though thou be advised by me, yet thou need not
forsake the soil etc. And, comentque il ne poet aver le principale chose sans
fair auter chose, uncore il nauera ceo etc. For, the affirmation signifies,
if the former part be true, then the later must needs follow; wherefore the
negative and contradictory must be thus: if, or though the antecedent be
granted, yet the consequent does not necessarily follow.

Wherefore when we judge the connexiue a^iome to be absolutely true, we
judge it also to be necessary. Albeit the necessity arises only of, or
depends upon the necessary coopling together of the parts: which may be when
as, notwithstanding, both the parts severally disposed are false, as in the
first example: for neither did he leave the soil, nor follow Hobbinols
counsel: which counsel if he had followed, then must he necessarily have
left that country: for this was his counsel.

The judgment of this axiom is certain knowledge, when the connection of the
parts is necessary, but if the parts be variable, and the connection only
probable, then our judgment thereof is only an opinion.

In May the gate to her kiddy: Thy father had he lived this day
To see the branch of his body display,
How would he have ioyed at this sweet sight?


Hitherto must be referred that relation which is expressed by an aduerbe of
time.

In December. Whylom in youth when flowrd my joyful spring,
Like swallow swift I wandered here and there.
As often as thy brother offends, so often forgive him.


Master Plowden: Fol. 541. Quant diverse chooses sont dit a un mesme instant, et
l'un ne poet prendre effect sans auter; le comen ley aiudgera ceo de preceder
et ensuer, eu feasant lentent de parties de prender effect.

Annotations. Elenchs.
THe other axioms are not so easily abused as this. For here the negation is
of no force at all, unless it be directly referred to the band which is a
conjunction. Therefore although a man might think this to be a Negation.

If Dido live, she is not dead: Yet indeed, it is an affirmation, whose
negation should be thus.

Not if she live, therefore she is not dead, or, it does not follow, that if
Dido live, therefore she is not dead.

Beurhusius gives this Canon, which seems strange to many. There may be an
affirmation, though both the parts be denied, as, if he be not industrious,
he will not be learned.

This is Berhusius his example: the like whereof is this.

If he be not in London, he is not in Cheapeside. Ista negatio aequipollet
affirmation^ s. he that is out of London, is out of Cheapeside.

And unless this be granted to be an affirmative axiom, there will be a
very good syllogism made of only Negatiues, contrarily to the common received
verse: for, I can very well reason thus. If it be not in London it is not in
Cheapeside: But it is not in London, therefore It is not in Cheapeside.


A connexiue axiom is that also in Master Plowden: Fol. 10. b. Et il y ad un
principal on foundation en le comen ley pur construction des parolles, ou
clauses, ou sentences, s. que en chescun grant, ou done, (...) les parolles
soyent ambiguous et doubfull, que ils serra prise plus fort encounter les
grauntors ou donors, et plus beneficial a ceux as queux le grant ou done fuit
fayt.

[Connexion only probable:] Contingens est connexio, quando parts pro sua
probabilitate tantum ponuntur, id est, neque absolute consentiunt, neque plane
dissentiunt. Itaque etiam axiomatis veritas ex argumentis sieve rebus
dispositis, non ex sola connexione dependet: si enim necessitas ex sola
connexione esset, omnis connexio esset necessaria, quod nemo dixerit.
Wasserleider.

[Aduerbe of time:] Fit. cor. P. 385. P. 15. Quant le defendant pleda al appele
de rien culpable, prist a defender per son corpse, il doyt getter son gaunce in
le court, etc. The same force is in an aduerbe of place in our law, as in that
of 1. H. 5. 3. per Hull. Lou un home demand certain chateux, et per son
brief est prove, que le property est deuestue de son possession per le prise,
la il couyent a luy de metter le price. Here these words, lou and la, be in
sense no more but, if, and then, or when and then.

Connexum duobus modis negatur: simpliciter quando negatio praeponitur
coniunctioni; apertius, quando inconsequentia etiam exponitur; vt fi dies est,
lucet: non, si dies est, lucet. Et, si dies est, non ideo lucet, vel non
sequitur lucere. Itaque, non satis accurate Boethius dicit, ad consequentem
propositionem respiciendum esse, vt affirmatiua vel negatiua, propositio
connexa iudicetur: vt, si est A, est B: affirmatiua est, ait Boethius: si est A,
non est B; negatiua: at, inquam, tam est affirmatiua secunda propositio haec,
quam illa prima. Deceptus est author huius dogmatis dissensionis specie, quia
illa enunciata dissentirent, nec simul esse vera possent, ideo contradicentia
putauit. At contradictio est affirmatio and negatio eiusdem de eodem, illic, si
est A, est B; affirmatio est consequentis affirmati de antecedente affirmato:
hic, si est A, non est B, affirmatio item, sed consequentis negati de affirmato
antecedente: at affirmatio affirmationi non contradicit, licet opponatur alio
genere.

Connexiue axioms be called Conditional: of these there be infinite in our
law, as may appear by the large titles and discourses of conditions in
Littleton, Parkins, Fitzherbert and Brook. Conditio, says one, triplex est:
concipitur enim aut in praeteritum, praesens, aut futurum. In futurum conceptae
sunt possibiles vel impossibiles. Possibiles sunt vel simpliciter voluntariae
fortuitaeque (volgo potestatiuae and casuales dicuntur) vel mixtae.

The seventh Chapter. Of the disjunctive Axiom.
THe segregatiue axiom is that whose conjunction is segregatiue, and therefore
is fittest to dispose disagreeable arguments, which must be severed.

The segregatiue is either Disjunctive or Discretiue. Disjunctive is that whose
conjunction is disjunctive, whereunto is referred the distributive. These are
fittest to dispose repugnant arguments, and divisions of two parts.

In September. Diggon Dauy I bid her good day.
Or Diggon her is, or I missay.
Touts mines sont royal ou base mines.


Here the contradiction does not make the parts necessarily true or false:
for if the disjunction or separation be true absolutely and also necessarily
without any third thing put between, then the whole axiom is true and
necessary, notwithstanding the special parts by themselves considered may be
contingent, as here: Or Diggon her is, or I missay.
The disjunction is necessary; and yet Diggon her is, is a contingent axiom;
also, I missay, is a contingent axiom. But the necessity of the disjunction
depends on the necessary opposition or disjunction of the parts, not on the
necessary truth of the parts. If therefore the disjunction be but contingent,
or upon a supposition, then it is not absolutely a true axiom, as when
Laeander said, he would either be drowned or have his desire. Otherwise the
judgment of this axiom, when the opposition is necessary, is a certain
knowledge.

Annotations.
PIscator ait axioma disiunctiuu^ praeponendum esse discreto, vt copulatiuum
prius est connexo. Nam in copulatiuo and disiunctiuo, pars altera notio simplex
est, altera vero notionum complexio; at connexi and discreti vtraque pars tum
antecedens tum consequens non simplex notio est, sed notionum complexio
enunciatiua.

Idem Piscator putat axioma disiunctiuum differ a distributiuo. Nam
disiunctio est qua partium disiunctarum vna aliqua pro vera asseritur, ita vt
caeterae res sint falsae, scilicet, cum parts de specie aliqua eius generis,
ad quod parts proprie pertinent, enunciantur, vt Socrates est rationalis, aut
irrationalis, sanus aut aeger. At distributio est, qua parts enumeratae omnes
pro veris asseruntur, vnaquaeque cum toto quod distribuitur, particulariter
disposita, scilicet cum parts de ipso genere aut integro, ad quod proprie
pertinent, enunciantur, vt animal aut rationale est aut irrationale, aut sanum
aut aegrum, ac si dicerem, animalium aliud est rationale, aliud irrationale,
aliud sanum, aliud aegrum.

[Laeander:] the verses be these;

Aut mihi continget foelix audacia saluo,
Aut mors solliciti finis amoris erit.
Lease fait pur ans, payant annuelment xx. s. ou un toge. This, as also the
whole title of Election depends on this disjunctive axiom. The difference is
now when it is but for once, or when continual; if continual, eliget grauntor
etc. Vide 9. E. 4. and 17. E. 4.

Congregare, segregare, copulare, connectere, discernere, disiungere, be
Latin words, yet by use made English. I need not make any interpretation of
them.

The necessity of the disjunctive axioms, as is said before, depends of the
necessary opposition of the parts, not of the necessary truth of the same.
Which thing being not considered, caused not only Epicurus, who was but a
dunsicall Logician, to be deceived, but those also who thought themselves
great experienced men in this profession, as Chrysippus and Diodorus: for they
imagined that if the disjunction were necessary, then the one or the other part
of the axiom should be also necessary, and into the same error does Tully
himself fall in his book de fato.

Elenchs. Since the disjunction is not necessary, but when the parts have no
third thing between, this axiom is false when we thus say, Paris must needs
either walk or dance, for he may as well hold his peace and stand still. So
this, Every francktenement is either feesimple or feetayle, for there be other
freeholds, as pur term de vie, and pur auter vie.

The eight Chapter. Of the Discretiue Axiom.
THe discretiue or discerning axiom is that whose conjunction is discretiue.
Wherefore of disagreeable arguments it is fittest to dispose those that are
diverse and differ only in respect.

In December.

But ah unwise and witless Colin Clowt,
That kidst the hidden kind of many a weed,
Yet kyds not one to cure thy sore heart root,
Whose ranckling wound as yet does rifely bleed.
Master Plowden: Fol. 82. a. Car parols, que ne sont que le verberation del
air, ne sont lestatute, mes solement l'image del statute.

This axiom is judged to be true, when the parts be not only true but
diverse also the one from the other: false and ridiculous, when otherwise.

Annotations.
Dissentanea argumenta etiam congregatiuo axiomate enunciari possunt, vt mel
and dulce est and flauum, hic diuersa enunciantur congregatiuo copulato. Quin
and simplici etiam axiomate diuersa enunciari possunt, vt flauedo mellis non
est du^cedo eius.

Vt occupatiua axiomata non admittunt contradictionem, ita nec discretiua; sed
illa apta sunt ad respondendum and contradicendum consequentibus falsis
enthymematum illlorum hominum quibuscum loquimur: haec ad contradicendum
enunciatis copulatis ex part falsis, vt Aesopus and ingeniosus fuit and
fonnosus, hoc falsum est ex part posteriore: Si ergo hanc falsitatem velim
ostendere contradicendo, non satis erit negare copulationem, sic, Aesopus non
and ingeniosus and formosus fuit. Hinc enim nondum liquet, vtram partem falsam
putem: instituenda est ergo discretio sic, Aesopus non fuit ille quidem
formosus, sed tamen fuit ingeniosus, and hic solus est discretorum vsus.

Enunciata per, quanquam, et, tamen, videntur (...), non (...), vt,

Hic Priamus, quanquam in media iam morte tenetur,

Non tamen abstinuit etc. Vbi Virgilius, nihil discernit, sed lectoris
cogitationi occurrit, and contradicit, nam lector videns Pyrrhum a^matum,
facile obijceret, Priamum non audere loqui. Occurrit itaque Virgilius and
dicit, quanquam etc. Non tamen etc. Hic est solus horum vsus. Piscator.

Elenchs. It is a ridiculous discretiue axiom wherein such things are severed,
which naturally go so together, as that they can not so much as be severed in
respect, much less in deed.

The ninth Chapter. Of a Syllogism and his parts.
THus much touching the disposition and judgment axiomaticall, or of one
axiom. Now follows the disposition of more then one which is called
Dianoeticall.

The disposition Dianoeticall is, when one axiom by reason is inferred of
another, or drawn out of an other, and then it is called either syllogism or
method.

A Syllogism is a disposition of three axioms, whereby or wherein a doubtful
question disposed with an argument invented, and the antecedent or former part
being put and granted, is necessarily concluded and determined: for, where an
ariome is doubtful, it makes a question: therefore for proof of the truth,
we must invent a third argument, and dispose it with the parts of the
question severally, one with the one, and one with the other.

There be two parts of a syllogism: the antecedent, and conclusion: The
antecedent proves the conclusion, and has two parts, to wit, the proposition
and the assumption.

The proposition is the first part, wherein the whole question, or at the
least, the latter part of the question is disposed with the argument invented.

The Assumption is the second part, which is taken out of the proposition.

The conclusion is the last part, proved by the antecedent, and concluding the
question which was in doubt.

If any part of a syllogism be wanting, it is called then an imperfect
syllogism, or enthymeme. If any thing be added more and above these three
axioms appertaining thereunto, that addition is called a prosyllogisme:

The parts also of the syllogism are oftentimes disordredly and confusedly
disposed or placed: notwithstanding, if any doubt shall arise hereof, the
axiom which is wanting must be supplied, the superfluous prosyllogismes or
additions must be cut off, and every part orderly reduced to his own place.

Annotations.
A Man may here ask, why I do not as well put down the nature of a false
syllogism as I have done the definition of a false axiom. I answer: that,
truth and falshoode being incident to the nature of an axiom, both were to be
put down, for that in them both, appears the fruit of axiomaticall
judgment: but it is one thing to divide an axiom into that which pronounces
truth, and that which conteyneth falshoode: and another thing, to tell what is
a false, and an inartificiall axiom, made against these rules and
prescriptions of Art: the one I did, for it was to be done: the other, as I
did it not in the tractate of axioms, so will I not do it in this discourse
of syllogismes: the ambiguous signification therefore, of this word, false, was
the only occasion of this doubt.

As in Grammar, and Rhetoric, the natural ordering of nownes and verbes with
other parts of speech is commonly altered and changed into a more elegant and
artificial conjunction, so in Logike the proposition is not always in the
first place: but is diversely disposed, to avoid satietie, and suspicion of
Art.

We perceive here, by the definition of a syllogism, that the necessity and
virtue of consequence depends upon the orderly disposition of the question
with the argument invented: so that, not the argument properly, but the
syllogisticall disposition does either prove or disprove the question.

He is greatly deceived who thinks there is no part of judgment but only
in syllogismes. For, besides method; the first, and almost the chief kind of
judgment is in axioms, yea and the very foundation of all other judgment.
For hereby we judge of all the principles of all arts, of all plain and
manifest axioms. Yea all such questions to the which we cannot answer yea or
nay (as these be: what is it? what parts has it? where is it? what qualities
has it? when will it come?) are answered by this kind of judgment. For, if
you make answer to that which is demanded; the hearer is satisfied.

But if these axioms be not plain enough of themselves, they must be sent
to syllogism, there to be discussed, and so to method, there to be ordered.
So that, whatsoever is either by syllogism, or method judged, it is all
judged by the help of this first and axiomaticall judgment. For if the
premises in a syllogism be not sometimes certain and so judged by
axiomaticall judgment, and granted; there will be no end of making
syllogismes: when still we call the grounds thereof into controversy, for
want of axiomaticall judgment.

[A Syllogism:] (...) is, as it were, (...), an Arithmeticall deduction of
sums in accounts, and so here metaphorically of axioms and arguments.

The necessity of the consequence in a syllogism depends on that old
ground, that such things as agree in any third thing, must also agree among
themselves. As then, in things that be to be measured with line or by
weight, we judge of them as they agree both either in line or weight: so it is
also when an axiom does affirm or deny any thing of an other, whereof we
doubt. For, if the line or measure, I mean the third argument, agree with both
y^ parts of the question, it shows y^ then the affirmation is true: but if it
agree but with one of them, it declares the negation to be true.

(...), says Aristotle, (...). Non enim ex omnibus propositionibus veris
syllogismus duntaxat efficitur, sed ex duabus necessario consequentibus, and
inter se non minus cohaerentibus, quam annuli inter se cohaerent. Oportet enim
conclusionem ex superiorum propositionum consecutione exprimi.

There is but one kind of argumentation, and, that is a syllogism. For, an
Enthymeme is nothing but a contracted syllogism. If the subject be one and the
same in both the propositions, then the Mayor wants: but if the predicate,
then the Minor. Aristotle calls it (...). It has his name (...), that is in
Latin cogitare, and commentari, to think, to excogitate; to toss a man's
mind, and meditate. For the mind never rests when an imperfect syllogism is
put down, before it has supplied that which wants, the better to judge of
the whole perfect syllogism: whereupon the satyricall poet says, aut curtum
sermon rotato, Torqueat Enthymema. Iuuenal satyr. 6.

Master Plowden Fol. 361. a. Stowell le ayel fuit estrange al fine, et de
pleine age al temps del fine leave, ergo il fuit lie. Add the proposition
hereunto, it will be a plain and perfect syllogism. So again in the same
place;

Stowell le demandant fuit estrange al fine, et deins age al temps del fine
leave: Ergo il est exempt. Add the proposition, and this also will be a full
syllogism.

[The proposition:] in a compound syllogism, which they call hypotheticall,
the proposition, that is, the Mayor, as they term it, conteines the whole
question: but in a simple one, which they term a Categoricall syllogism, it
conteyneth only the later part of the question, which is called of them
praedicatum* or attributum, the predicate or attribute, because it is spoken,
affirmed, attributed or applied to the former.

[The assumption is taken out:] as from a thing put down and granted, and now
applied more nearely to the purpose, of the Latin, Assumo.

The schoolmen have commonly four kinds of Argumentations, Syllogism,
Enthymeme, Induction, Example, to the which some add Sorites and Dilemma:
others also there be, but these are the most famous: and all these, as I said
before, come all to one. For an Enthymeme is but a contracted and short
syllogism: An example, but an argument from the like or equal, a facto simili
seu pari, and no argumentation of it self without the help of a syllogism:
An Induction, which is called the Socraticall Argumentation, is but an argument
concluded by a syllogism, from the enumeration of the parts: A Sorites, but
an Enthymematicall progression by certainy degrees. Tully calls it Penelopes
telam, because it is wouen as it were, by ascending and affirming, but vnwouen
again by descending and denying: the Stoykes used this very much: it is called
Sorites of (...). aceruus, a heap, because, as of many graynes is made a^
heap of corn, so of many degrees an argument called Sorites, by this
enthymemati^all progression. Whereupon the Poet says:

Inuentus, Chrysippe, tui finitor acerui.

It is commonly called, a primo ad vltimum, but not so aptly, for as well may
it be called, ab vltimo ad primum. As in that which Themistocles was wont to
use:

The Athenians rule all the other Graecians: I rule the Athenians; my wife,
me; my boy, my wife:

Therefore my son rules all Greece. Or thus,

My son rules my wife; my wife commands me:

I the Athenians; the Athenians all Graece:

Therefore my son rules all Graece.

Master Plowden Fol. 229. b. has a Sorites of diverse degrees. Le playntife
derive son lease de Cock, quel derive son title del Count del Pembroke, quel
derive son title del roy Edward, quel derive son title per descent del roy
Henry le huict, quel derive son title per descent del roy Henry le scpt, quel
deryue son title per le fine, et per le morant del Marquis sans issue.
Issintque si le plaintiff ne prove sufficientment, que le Marquis est mort sans
issue, et que le roy auoyt estate en la terre puis sa mort, il ne prove
sufficientment sa title ne interest.

Bracton. lib. 5. Fol. 335. Item, cum nulla summonitio nec defalta, nulla sequi
deberet Captio: and cum Captio nulla, nulla sequi deberet possessionis amissio:
Ergo a primo, vbi nulla summonitio, nulla sequitur possessionis amissio, quia
vbi primum and principale, quod est summonitio, non subsistit, nec ea quae
sequuntur, locum habere debent.

Lastly, a Dilemma, is nothing else, but an argument from the contraries or
opposites, or any disagreeable argument. It is called Dilemma, of (...), and
(...), to take on both the sides: because the arguments are so set, as that
there is no way left to escape, as in that of Protagoras the master, and
Euathlus the scholar: where Euathlus gave some money in hand to his
Rhetorical Doctor Protagoras, and couenanted to pay the rest when Euathlus
should win the first cause that ever he pleaded for. Protagoras suing Euathlus
for his money, said, if Euathlus overcome me, then by bargain and
composition he must pay me the money; if he loose, then by the course of
Law. Nay quod Euathlus, if I loose, then by covenant you get nothing: if I
win, then will the judgment discharge me.

The like is that which Bias used, and was reforted by Phauorine: If you marry
any woman, she must either be fair and so shall you have her (...), common:
or else foul; and then you shall find her (...), (...): therefore mary none at
all. Nay, said Phauorine, there be women of middle beauty, neither so fine,
as to make every man to love, nor so foul, as to make every man hate them.
Therefore a man must marry.

So in Arist. 2. Rhet. A certain precise priest would not suffer his son to
have any dealing or conference with the people. For says he, if thou speak
truth, thou shall displease men, if untruth, God: Nay rather fear not to
meddle with the multitude, sor if thou tell the truth, thou shall please God,
if untruth, men.

Plowden: Fol. 362. Brown a most Logical Lawyer concludes his witty
disputation with this Dilemma, si Stowell fuit lie per le puruieu del statute,
il est apres except: si ne'stlye per le puruieu, ne besoigne destre except,
ergo il est, alarge.

I said before, that Exemplum, an example, was but an argument a facto simili,
seu pari, and that the only force of argumentation therein proceeds from
disposition syllogisticall: so it is in 4. H. 6. 13. brief de mayntenance fuit
port per deux, ou le tort fuit fayt al troys, la Newton prove que le brief
abatera, quia ne fuit port per touts troys, sic, si le tort fuit en common,
donque eur couyent de prendre lour action en common, et que le tort fuit en
common, ieo prouera, car si eux fuesont nonsuit per cause del mayntenance, cest
in common: si soysoyent bars per cause del mayntenance, cest in common, et les
expenses del suite sont en common. ergo, etc.

Neither in these, nor in that called (...) Violentum, and such like, is there
any new disposition or art of consequence, but only that of syllogism.

[A prosyllogisme:] Vide 4. H. 6. 30. In repl bastardie fuit allege in le
master le auowant, le question fuit, an il auera aid de son master, deuant
que il reioy^ ^l bastardy, et per Martyn, il ne auera.

Le syllogism est is^t.
ou null entry del aid, la null aid. Icy null entry del aid, car Si ascun entry
del aid icy, (...) serra v^l ^co que est duuant ple, s. petit auxilium d'un
ti^l, sine quo ipse non potest respondere: vel apres ple, s. petit auxiliu^ ad
manutenendum exitum, le consequens est prou^, ne sont plusors que deu^ manners
de ent^ies del aid, deuant ple, ou apres, ^'un in real action, sauter in
personell. Ergo si sort omnino, opo^ tet quod sit vel hoc, ve illud.
mes icy. il nauera l^ntry deuant ple, s. fine quo no^ potest (...) spondere,
car (...) ^sme ad responde, s. ad fayt Conusance. Nec l'entry apres, ad
manutenendu^ ^xitum, car icy null issue est join inter eux.
Ergo null entry omnino. In 3. H 6. 21. b. Rolf vsa vne prosyllogisme, vide le
lieu,

Ergo null aid icy.
Canons, Elenchs. In every simple syllogism that is not proper, there must be
some affirmative and general argument.

Interdum quoque simplex syllogismus ex enunciatis compositis constare potest,
si modo compositio ipsa argumenti simplex sit. Vt apparebit alias. Freigius.
Snellius. Ramus.

Here then generally it is a false syllogism, when all the ariomes be either
negative or proper. Ex omnibus enim specialibus, aut negatis, nullus communis
syllogismus in vlla figura simplici, concluditur. Ramus. 2. lib. animaduers.

Proximum genus syllogismi and Methodi ignoratur, itaque ponitur dispositio.

Vt in connexo and disiuncto axiomate veritas pendet ex connexione and
disiunctione, non veritate partium, sic syllogismus ex necessitate
consequutionis, licet omnes parts sint impos^ibiles, vt, omnis arbor est
lapis, omnis leo est arbor, ergo omnis leo est lapis.

In every syllogisticall conflict and controversy, there is a defendant and an
opponent. The first is to urge, prove, conclude; the other to repel, avoid,
and drive back. The disputation being once begone, it is an unorderly confusion
for the same man sometimes to answer, sometimes to reply, and never
constantly to play out his own part: much like the two clownes in Virgill,
which, when they could not answer what was propounded, begin a fresh with a
new doubt on the neck of the old: Dic, quibus in terris, quoth the one, and
Dic, quibus in terris, quoth the other, Arreede me a riddle, says Damaetas:
and Arreede me a riddle replyeth Menalcas, thincking it a fair conquest, to
have taken and given blow for blow, as Bakers and Butchers use to do, who
never care for any curious wards, but lay on load like good fellows, one for
one, till both begin to stagger, with their valiant blood about their bruised
pates. I have therefore in a word or two, laid down some general,
instructions and directions for orderly disputations.

Logical exercise is that which expresses that in particular practice which
is generally put down in art. For as art follows nature, so exercise
follows art Herein let us consider 1. The adjuncts and affections of it, for
it is performed. either by writing or speaking. and either of these is either
continued, as in long discourses and tractats. or interrupted as, in Di^logues.
Disputations. Vide B B.
2. The specials of it. Vide A A.


B B. Disputation is an argumentable discussing of a doubtful proposition*
where ^te. 1. The disputers The proponent, who defends the proposition or
position: whereunto also the modera for and determiner of the disputatton is
referred, who commonly man^eyneth the position. The opponent, who defends
the contrary.
2. The duties of the disputers, either, common to both them, as in preparation
and fur niture, of instruments for the disputatiion, as be Logike. Rhetorike
things re quisite for the same, it must be noted therefore. 1. What may
confirm or confute the position. 2 What sect of philosophy the adversary
follows. 3. They must have in memory the general heads of arts, which are
commonly used in disputations.

Conflict and asassault: they must neither Wrangle about trifling words, Nor
make long and impertinent excursion and vagaries. Nor seek starting holes. Nor
bring in any such thing as may rather make against them, then with them. Nor
seek to supplant or circumuent one another injuriously. ^or ouerweene
themselves, or be obstinate and singular in conceit. Nor fa^ to threatening and
railing with indecent terms.

Proper to either of them. C C.



C C. The proper duties of the Opponent be 1. To have his weapons in a
readiness, that is, to have his objections framed artificially with
syllogisticall disposition. 2. Not to cast his arguments confusedly on a
heap, but to use them distinctly, one after another. 3. To have Prosyllogismes
in a readynes, for the confirmation of such parts of his syllogismes, as may by
likelihood, be denied. 4. To bring in nothing which has not some probability
or show of truth in it. 5. Sometimes to deal directly and openly: sometimes
covertly, and by bringing his adversary to an absurdity or impossibility. 6.
Never to choppe in impertinent matters, which make nothing at all to the matter
in controversy.
Defendent be 1. In choice of his position, that it be not Repugnant to sense.
Contrary to equity and honesty. Too hard and difficult.
2. Both in Repetitions of the objections made, and that either by the
selfsame words, or with the self same sense, in the like order as they were
propounded: with a kind of courteous preface: that both himself may have some
meane-space of conceauing a solution, and the auditors better understand what
was objected. And also in aunswering of the same.




D D. The obiectio^s be answered. either By skorning, and rejecting, if absurd
fooleries be objected, or such as no man understands. By granting and
confessing, when such things be brought in, as make nothing against the
position. By affirming or denying, when any interrogation is ^adr: or else by
asking what he means by his interrogation, if it ^e ambiguous and
sophistical.
Or by direct soluti on, and that either perfect, when the very cause is
showed, why the conclusion is not sufficient, and it is 1. by denying either of
The premises and prosyllogisms when they be false, Or the consecution and
consequence, when the fault is in the form of conclusion: for the conclusion
it self must never be denied.
2. either by distinguishing when either The questions and interrogatio^s be
captious and doubtful. Or the premises be true not absolutely, but in part.
And here fryuolous distinctions must be avoided.
Or conditional granting, as I grant, if you so understand it. Sometimes the
defendent doubts of the truth of some one of the premises, and does therefore
leave it* of purpose to answer to the other that is more plain, Thus, Let
the Mayor pass for a while, I now answer to the minor.

Imperfect by bringing in some instance, that is by taking a particular
exception to a general proposition.



A A. so much of ye affecctions of this logical exercise ye specials now follow,
which be Analysis, in vnd^ing and examining that which is already made, and is
either belo^gyng to Invention: as to search and invent the question it self.
to pick out the arguments and proofs. do refer them every one to their
several heads, and there to inquire of their sufficiency, as whether y^ be used
for a Cause which is no cause, etc.
or to Disposition and that either Axiomaticall, where all the axi^mes must be
also brought to their heads, and their truth or falsnes diligently examined. or
Dianoeticall which is either Syllogisticall, for the examination and trial of
consequ^ion, what follows, or not follows. Methodicall, for proof of order
and Methodicall handling of the ma^ter discoursed upon.


Genesis, in making or frami^g of any thing by our own industry, (...) that
either by way of imitation and that either of the whole work or of some part
either of these is in words, called Translation. in things called properly
imitatio^, we must Imitate neither all autors, but the best of ^l: nor al
things but the best, and that freely, not seruile^y, as bindyng our judgment
to othermens fancy.

Or by proper Invention, where we must First peruse every place of Logical
invention for the inuenting of proofs and arguments. then dispose them
artificially both by judgment. Axiomaticall: and Dianoeticall and that both
Syllogistical, and Methodicall.






The tenth Chapter. Of a simple syllogism.
A Syllogism is either simple or compound. The simple is that, wherein the
later part of the question is disposed in the proposition, the former part in
the assumption, and is affirmative when all the parts be affirmed: Negative,
when the conclusion with the proposition, or the assumption is denied. General
when the proposition and assumption be general; Special, when one of them
only is general: Proper, when both of them are proper or singular.

The eleventh Chapter. Of the contracted syllogism.
THere be two kinds of simple syllogismes. The first when of the former
argument in the proposition either affirmed or denied, but in the assumption
affirmed, the conclusion is special.

Affirmative general.
Constancy is a virtue. Da-rap-ti.
Constancy is confidency, Therefore some confidency is a virtue.
Neg. general.
Rashness is no virtue, Fe-lap-ton.
Rashness is confidency: Some confidency is no virtue.
Affir. special.
Some wise man is rich, Di-sa-mis.
Every wise man is praise worthy, Some prayseworthy man is rich.
A wise man is prayseworthie, Da-ti-si.
Some wiseman is poor, Some poor man is prayseworthie.
Neg. special.
Some fool is not fortunate, Bo-car-do.
Every fool is contemned, Some contemptible man is not fortunate.
Fools be not happy, Fe-ri-son.
Some fools be fortunate, Some fortunate men be not happy.
Affir. proper.
Socrates is a philosopher, Socrates is a man, Some man is a philosopher.
Neg. proper.
Thersites is no philosopher, Thersites is a man, Some man is no philosopher.
But the clearenes of reason and judgment requires no such disposition, but
is content with a more contracted kind of argumentation. This contraction is,
when the argument invented to a particular question, is put for an example, in
such sort, that it go before either part, and be affirmed in the assumption,
thus: Some confidence is virtue, as Constancy: Some confidence is not virtue,
as Rashness.


For here the argument invented comes before both the parts of the
question, as though it were expressed thus:

That constancy is a virtue, and confidencie a virtue, Therefore some
confidencie is a virtue.
And, Rashness to be no virtue, yet a kind of confidency, Therefore some
confidency to be no virtue.


And after this manner, Use, the master of syllogisticall judgment, does
always contract it, and never otherwise express it. So in that example.

Ascun Husbandman tua sa file, come Saunders; which, if you express it, will
be thus: Saunders poisoned his daughter, Saunders was an husbandman, Therefore
some husbandman poisoned his daughter.


Annotations.
THis chapter conteyneth the third figure of Aristotle.

In all those artificial words, Darapti, Felapton, etc. and others of the
same kind, there be certain significant letters to be observed, as, A,
signifies a general affirmative axiom: E, a general negative: I, a special
affirmative: O, a special negative: besides some consonantes which be notes
of Reduction, which I little esteem of.

The old verses be thus,

Asserit, A: negat, E: sunt vniuersaliter ambae:
Asserit, I: negat, O: sunt particulariter ambae.
Valla rejects this contracted syllogism, so does Scribonius, since, as they
think, there is no example hereof to be found: and by Scribonius, there is
no new syllogistical disposition here, but only an argument from the
special. But Lazarus Schonerus, adducit haec exempla, Primum est in Miloniana.
Negant intueri lucem fas esse ei, qui a se hominem occisum fateatur. In qua
tandem vrbe hoc homines stultissimi disputant? Nempe in ea quae primum iudicium
de capite vidit, M. Horatii fortissimi viri, qui nondum libera ciuitate, tamen
populi Romani comitijs liberatus est, cum sua manu sororem esse interfectam
fateretur, syllogismus hic est, M. Horatius populi comitijs absolutus est, M.
Horatius confessus est se sua manu caedem fecisse, Ergo aliquis a se hominem
occisum fassus, est absolutus.


Item in eadem. Quod si duodecim tabulae nocturnum furem quoquo modo, diurnum
autem, si se telo defenderit, interfici impune voluerunt, quis est, qui quoquo
modo quis interfectus sit, puniendum putet, cum videat aliquando gladium ad
occidendum hominem ab ipsis porrigi legibus?

Syllogismus hic est, Furem nocturnum interficere licet, Furem nocturnum
interficere, est hominem occidere, Ergo hominem occidere aliquando licet.
Huius generis est illud, Riuos deducere est licitum diebus festis, Riuos
deducere est opus rusticum, Quaedam igitur opera rustica sunt licita festis
diebus.
Virgilius sic iudicat, 1. Georgic. sed pro argumento exemplum sextuplex,
subijcit particulari quaestioni.

Quippe etiam festis quaedam exercere diebus
Fas and iura sinunt: riuos deducere, nulla
Relligio vetuit, segeti praetendere saepem,
Insidias auibus moliri, incendere vepres,
Balantumque gregem fluuio mersare salubri.
Saepe oleo tardi costas agitator aselli,
Vilibus aut onerat pomis, lapidemque reuertens
Incusum, aut atrae massam picis vrbe reportat.
Exempla specialia suo generi particulariter sic interdum in artium praeceptis
accommodantur, quale est illud de similitudine, lib. 1. dialecticae Rameae,
cap. 20. aliquando nota nulla est, Virg. Aeg. 2. O formose puer etc.
Syllogismus hic est. In hoc exemplo nota est nulla, Est autem similitudinis:
Ergo aliquando similitudinis nota est nulla.


Sic in Rami Arithmetica, lib. 1. cap. 1. Numerus potest esse minimus, vt
vnitas, syllogismus hic est. Vnitas est res minima, Vnitas est numerus: Aliquis
igitur numerus est minimus etc.


Elenchs. Among all these syllogismes, there is not any one good, where the
assumption is negative.

The twelfth Chapter. The explicate Syllogism.
IN a Syllogism simple of the second kind the proposition must be always
general or proper: the conclusion negative, if either the proposition or
assumption be negative.

There be two kinds of them: The first wherein the argument invented does
follow both in the proposition and assumption, and must be denied in one of
them.

The first general; Piers in May.

He that plaieth while his flock is vnsed, can give Cae-Sa-Re:
no account to great God Pan, A good shepherd can give account to great God
Pan. Therefore a good shepherd plays not while his flock is unfed.
Master Plowden Fol. 213. b.
Null secret verdit del jurors fait le plaintiff nonsue, Ce-Sa-Re.
Chescun verdit de droit bien rendue, fait le plaintiff nonsue. Ergo Null verdit
bien rendue, est secret.
The second general in May.
The hyreling lets his sheep run at randon: Ca-Mes-Tres.
The good shepherd lets not his sheep run at randon, Therefore The good
shepherd is not a hyreling.
Master Plowden: Fol. 5.

Chescun bone agreement couyent este perfect, Ca-Mes.-Tres.
Null incerteine agreement est perfect: Ergo null incerteine agreement est bone
agreement.
The first special in July.
A good shepherd is not idle: Fes-Ti-no.
Paris is idle, therefore, Paris is not a good shepherd:
Master Plowden: Fol. 28. b.

Null bone remaynder poet co^mencer sur condition: Fes-Ti-No.
Cest remaynder fait per le prior de bath a William Beiushm est limite de
commencer sur condition, s. si ipse habitaret, and residens esset etc. Ergo
Cest remaynder n'est bone remaynder.
The second Special.
He that sits safely sits below: Ba-Ro-Co.
Algryn did not sit below, Therefore Algryn sat not safely.
Master Plowden: Fol. 34. a.

Chescune bone condition est compulsiue, Ba-Ro-Co.
Cest limitation en William Beiushm, n'est compulsiue. Co. Ergo cest limitation
nest bone condition.
The first proper.
Morrels brain was not bruised by an Egle, Algrins brain was bruised by an
Egle, Therefore Algrin is not morrell.
Master Plowden, Fol. 101. a.

John vane Salisbury ne tue Olyuer ap David auec malice prepence: Richard
Salisbury tue Olyuer ap David auec malice prepence. Ergo, Richard vane
Salisbury n'est John etc. vel, N'est d'estre acquit, come, John etc.
The second proper.
Paris was proud Moses was not proud, Therefore Moses was not Paris,
Master Plowden: Fol: eodem.

Richard Salisbury fuit murderer, John vane Salisbury ne fuit murderer Ergo,
John n'est semblable al Richard etc.
Annotations.
Negative if:] Here upon the schoolmen give out this rule. Conclusio sequitur
deteriorem partem. For a Negation is worse then an affirmation, as we have
heard already. But that which they put down generally as incident to all
syllogismes is here artificially set down in his proper place.

Others have left out these two last kinds of syllogismes; but injuriously:
for they are as artificial as the rest, and oftentimes used to discern
singulers that seem to be the same. Singularia, say they, non considerantur in
art etc. absurd. Nam tota Astrologia est de singularibus de sole etc. tamen
praecepta sunt catholica. Sic in foro, curia, rostris, etc. omnia singularia.
Sic accusare solemus hunc, defendere illum, etc. Omnia singularia.

As before, the contracted syllogism was according to the disposition of the
third figure put down by Aristotle, where the Medium is the former part in
either of the premises: so this first kind of the explicate syllogism is the
same that Aristotle comprehends in his second figure, where the Medium, or
third argument is the later part in either premisse. Lastly, the second kind of
explicate syllogismes, which follows in the next chapter, is contained in the
first Aristotelicall figure, wherein the third argument is the former part in
the proposition, and the later part in the assumption: according to the verse:

Sub, prae, prima: bis prae, secunda: tertia, bis sub.

Annotations. Elenchs.
NO good syllogism can be made in this kind, if either all the axioms be
affirmative, or the proposition be special, as, That which uses reason is
best, The world is best, Therefore the world uses reason.


For so (says Cotta in the third book of Cicero concerning the nature of
Gods) a man may conclude, that because nothing is better then the whole world,
therefore the world can play on the Lute.

Yet I say not this, as though no truth could be concluded by the like
disposition: for, true things are sometimes concluded by sophistical and
deceiptfull disposition, as that of Persius in his ^st satyr. An quisquam est
alius liber, nisi ducere vitam
Cui licet, vt voluit? licet, vt volo, viuere: Non sum
Liberior Bruto?
He is free that lives as he list, I live as I list, therefore I am free.


But it is therefore noted as sophistical, for that, of true things, by the
self same disposition, an untruth may be concluded, As, A man is a living
creature, A horse is a living creature. Therefore, A horse is a man.
Again, He that affirms a man to be a living creature, says truly. He
that says, thou art an ass, affirms a man to be a living creature,
Therefore He that says, thou art an ass, says truly.


Thus much for the first fallatian, when all the axioms be affirmative. The
second follows, when the proposition is special, as in that which was
objected against Diogenes. Thou have that which thou did never loose, But
horns thou did never loose, Therefore thou have horns.


For if you resolve it thus, He has horns that never lost horns, Diogenes
never lost horns, Therefore Diogenes has horns.


Then either the proposition will be false, if it be general, or the
syllogism will prove sophistical, if it be special.

The proper duty therefore of a syllogism is, to lay down a certain, true,
and infallible rule of reasoning in such sort, that the premises once
granted, the conclusion must in any case follow, and therefore this manner of
reasoning, as all such like, is left out, as not artificial, constant, and
immutable; but, doubtful, uncertain, and deceiptfull. For, although sometimes
thereby a truth may be concluded, yet seeing that it also for the most part
causes error, it is not admitted as a law syllogisticall.

The 13. Chapter. Of the second kind.
IN this second kind, the argument goes before in the proposition, and
follows affirmatively in the assumption.

The general affirmative.
Bar-Ba-Ra.
That which brings to good, is good, Death brings to good, Therefore Death
is good.
Colyn in November.
Unwise and wretched men to weete what is good or ill.
We deem of death as doom of ill desert:
But knew we fools what it brings us until,
Dye would we daily once it to expert.
Fair fields and pleasant lays there been,
The fields ay fresh, the grass ay green.
o happy hearse:
Make have ye shepherds thither to reuert,
o joyful verse.
Master Plowden Fol. 315. a.

Bar-Ba-Ra.
Les chooses pluis excellents del terre perteignont al roy, Ore est le chose plus
excellent del terre: Ergo ore perteigne al roy.
The general negative.
Ce-La-Rent
Men must not be bound to more misery then men can bear, Shepherds be men,
Therefore shepherds must not be bound to more misery then etc.
Hobbinoll in September.
Ah Diggon, thylke same rule were too strayte,
All the cold season to watch and wait,
We been of flesh, men as others be,
Why should we be bound to such misery.
What ever thing lacks changeable rest,
Might needs decay when it is at best.
Master Plowden Fol. 332. b.

Ce-La-Rent
Ceo que vient al roy en respect que il est possessor del corone, ne passera per
grant del terre, Ore vient al roy come possessor del corone: Ergo, ore ne
passera per grant del soil.
The special affirmative.
Da-Ri-j.
He that has loved, ought to pity lovers, Pan has loved, Therefore Pan ought
to pity lovers.
Colyn in January. And Pan thou shepherds god, that once did love,
Pity the pains that thou thy self did prove.


Master Plowden Fol. 64. a.

Da-Ri-j.
Cestuy que prist obligations come vicount pour lesser home a mainprise, fayt
ceo color officij, Lewis Dyue prist obligation de John Maningham etc. Ergo
Lewis Dyue fayt ceo color officij.
The special negative.
Fe-Ri-O.
The pipe which pleases where it should not, shall not be kept, Colyns pipe
pleases where it should not, Therefore Colyns pipe shall not be kept.
Wherefore, my pipe, although rude Pan thou please,
Yet for thou please not where most I would,
And thou unlucky muse that wontst to ease
My musing mind, yet can not when thou should,
Both pipe and muse, shall sore the while aby,
So broke his oaten pipe, and down did lie.
Master Plowden Fol. 64. b.

Fe-Ri-O.
Null obligation fait pur ayder le vicount pur un tort, (...) est loyal, Cest
obligation de Maningham al Dyue est fait pur ayder le vicount pur un tort, Ergo
cest obligation n'est loyal.
The proper affirmative in July.
The great God Pan saved his flock with bloody sweat, Christ is the great God
Pan, Therefore Christ saved his flock with bloody sweat. O blessed sheep, o
shepherd great, that bought his flock so dear, And them did save with bloody
sweat from wolves that would them tear.
Master Plowden, Fol. 401. a.

Richard Cole tue Elizabeth Penbrooke, Cestuy que done le coupe le 12. iour del
February, est Richard Cole, Ergo cestuy que done le coupe, tue Elizabeth
Penbroke.
The proper negative, in April.
Elysa cannot be blemished with any mortal blot, She that sits upon the
grassy green, is Elysa, Therefore she that sits upon the grassy green cannot
be blemished with any mortal blot.
Master Plowden Fol. 475. a.

Alexander Archer ne fuit culpable del mort del Elyanor Saunders, Cestuy que
counsel John Saunders de tuer sa feme, fuit Alexander Archer, Ergo cestuy que
counsel etc. ne fuit culpable del mort del Elyanor Saunders.
Annotations.
BArbara, is fittest for a general confirmation; Celarent, for a general
confutation; Darij, serves to prove in part, Ferio, to disprove in part,
according to those two old school verses which I rehearsed before.

As for that kind of demonstration of syllogismes which is done by Reduction,
it is more troublesome than needful. For, syllogismes, if they be once
artificially made, need no further demonstration, as being of themselves
sufficiently confirmed by their several definitions, divisions, examples, and
explications.

Elenchs. The syllogism is here naught, if either the proposition be
special, or the assumption negative, as, A liquod animal est equus: Omnis homo
est animal: Homo igitur est equuus.
And, Omnis homo est animal: Nullus equus est homo Nullus igitur equus est
animal.


The 14. Chapter. Of the first kind of a connexiue Syllogism.
THus much for the simple syllogism. The compound syllogism is that wherein
the whole question makes the one part of the proposition affirmed and
compounded: And the argument invented, makes the other part of the
proposition, or is contained in it.

To deny or remove any part in a compound syllogism is to set down the
special contradiction thereof.

The compound syllogism is either connexiue, or disjunctive.

The connexiue is that whose proposition is connexiue, and is made after two
sorts.

First when the former part of the proposition makes the assumption, the later
part the conclusion. As in this, And if that my grandsire me said be true,
Sycker I am very sib to you. If my grandsire told me truth, I am sib to you,
But my grandsire told me truth, Therefore I am sib to you.
Master Plowden Fol. 76. a.

Si le brief est fait en le nosme du roy, et seal oue son seal, adonques est
le fait le roy. Mes icy, ceo brief, est fayt en le nosme etc. Ergo est le fait
del roy.
Here oftentimes the former part of the proposition makes not the
assumption, but that which is greater, and of more force to conclude then it
is, as, If there were none but other beasts thine enemies, yet ought thou to
take heed, But now the Fox also, the master of collusion, is thine enemy,
Therefore much more ought thou to take heed.


Piers uses this in May, in the gates speech to her little one.

Kiddy, quoth she, thou kenst the great care
I have of thy wealth and thy welfare,
Which many wild beasts liggen in wait
For to entrap in thy tender state:
But most, the Fox, master of collusion,
For he has vowed thy last confusion.
For thy, my kiddy, be ruled by me,
And never give trust to his treachery.
And if he chance come, when I am abroad,
Sperr the yate fast, for fear of fraud:
Ne for all his worst, nor for his best,
Open the door at his request.
Master Plowden: Fol. 11. a.

Si null forsques un comen person est grauntee, on donee, uncore les parolles
ambiguous serra prise pluis beneficialment a luy. Mes icy, le roy mesme est
grauntee ^u donee, Ergo, a multo fortiore, les parolles doubtful ferra pluis
beneficial a le roy.
The same kind of syllogism or reasoning is framed by a conjunction of time,
with the same force, which this connexiue has, As When night draws on, it is
time to go homeward, But now night draws on, Therefore it is now time to get
homeward.
Willy in March. But see, the Welkin thicks apace,
And stouping Phoebus steepes his face,
It Is time to haste us homeward.


Master Plowden: Fol. 263. a.

Quant sir James Hales met luymesme en le eawe, donques il forfetoit ses
biens. Mes il met luymesme en le eawe, quant il fuit en vie, Ergo, quant il
estoit en vie, adonques il forfetoit ses biens.


Annotations.
THe special contradiction:] when that which was affirmed in general, is
denied in special: or contrarily, affirmed, when it was denied: and when the
same thing in special, is both affirmed before and denied after.

[Connexiue or disjunctive:] So then of an axiom copulative or discretiue, we
understand, that no several and peculier disposition arises.

Vide 10. E. 4. Lyttleton contra Danby: si le property des biyus le mort soit
en ascun, tunc serra in le testator, vel in les executors: mes est en ascun,
ergo in l'un ou l'auter: ^est connexiue: Then again: Le property est in le
testator, ou in les executors, Mes nemy in le testator, Ergo in les executors:
cest un disjunctive.


In composito syllogismo, assumptio, praeter argumentum, nihil assumit
quaestionis; quod tamen fit semper in simplici syllogismo.

If not the whole question, but only the latter part of it be contained
together with the argument invented, in the proposition, then the syllogism is
simple, although the proposition be compound. For as I said elsewhere,
whenever the disposition is simple, there the syllogism is simple, though
the parts be compound. So that in Catullus is a simple syllogism. 1. Genesis

Si quicquam cupidoque optantique obtigit vnquam and insperanti, hoc est gratum
animo proprie.
Quare hoc est gratum nobis, quoque charius auro, quod te restituis, Lesbia, mi
cupido,
Restituis cupido, atque insperanti ipsa refers to nobis: o lucem candidiore
nota.
Quis me vno viuit foelicior? aut magis hac quid optandum vita dicere quis
poterit?
Ramus format sic: Quod optandum redierit, gratum est, Lesbia Catullo optata
redijt: Optata igitur est.
So in 2. Genesis Si quicquam sit homo, tum erit animal, Lapis non est animal,
Lapis ergo non est homo.
Nay, which is more, the syllogism may be simple, though all the parts be
conditional and compound, thus: Si sit honestum, erit laudabile, Si sit
iustum, erit honestum, Ergo si sit iustum, erit laudabile.
As Ramus more at large puts down in his French Logike.

Elenchs. There be two other connexiue syllogismes different from these
already rehearsed: but because they are not certain, constant, and always
infallible: therefore they be not put down in the text, as precepts of Art:
yet are they diligently to ^e observed, for they are often in autors:
especially the first, which is very usual: but the second is not so common.

The first kind is that which takes away the former part, that it may also
take away the later. Terence in Adolphis.

Them: Caeterum. Placet tibi factum Mitio? Mr: Non, si queam mutare: ^nc cum non
queo, aequo animo fero.

Cicero for Muraena.

Etenim si largitionem factam esse confiterer, idque recte esse factum
defenderem, facerem improbe, etiamsi alius legem tulisset. Cum vero nihil
commissum esse contra legem defendam, quid est quod meam defensionem latio
legis impediat?

Ovid in his second book of sorrowful songs.

Si, quoties peccant homines, sua fulmina mittat
Jupiter, exiguo tempore mermis erit:
Nunc vbi detonuit, strepituque exterruit orbem,
Purum discussis era reddit aquis.
Iure igitur, genitorque deum, rectorque vocatur:
Iure, capax mundus nil Jove maius habet.
Caesar in Salust. Si digna poena pro factis little reperitur, nouum consilium
approbo: sin magnitudo sceleris omnium ingenia exuperat, his vtendum censeo,
quae legibus comparata sunt.

Colyn in June has the like.

But if in me some little drops would flow
Of that the spring was in his learned head,
I soon would learn these woods to wayle my woe,
And teach the trees their trickling tears to shed.
Then should my plaints, causd of discurtesie,
As messengers of this my plainfull plite,
Fly to my love where ever that she be,
And pierce her heart with point of worthy wite,
As she deserves that wrought so deadly spite.
And thou Menalcas that by treachery
Did vnderfong my less to wexe so light,
Should well be known for such thy villainy.
But since I am not as I wish I were,
Ye gentle shepherds which your flocks do feed,
Whether on hills, or dales, or otherwhere,
Bear witness all of this so wicked deed,
And tell the less whose flower is wax a weed,
And fautles faith is turned to faythles pheare,
That she the truest shepherds heart made bleed
That lives on earth, and loved her most dear.
For, although all the examples of this kind be not false and deceiptfull,
but good and sufficient, as in these now rehearsed; yet, false may be
concluded by the self same disposition, as Si arbor equus est, viueret: Sed
arbor equus non est: Non igitur arbor viuit.


In which example, the proposition and assumption are both true, yet the
conclusion is false: but it is the office of a syllogism, as has been said,
to lay down, a necessary, perpetual, and immutable rule, by the which, upon
the premises once granted, the consequence must be necessary.

The second, which is not so usual, is that which takes the latter part,
that it may also have the former concluded, as in that of Ouide in the fourth
book of his transformations. Quem si cura deum tam certa vindicat ira,
Ipse precor serpens in longam porrigar aluum:
Dixit; et, vt serpens, in longam tenditur aluum.


The argumentation is thus: Si dij statuerunt vindicare Cadmum, fiat serpens:
Sed fit serpens: Ergo dij statuerunt vindicare Cadmum.


Take an other example, and you shall see, that by the same rule you may
conclude that which is stark false, As Si arbor equus esset, viueret: Sed
viuit arbor: E^go, arbor equus est.


For here the forerunning axioms being both true, the conclusion for all
that, is manifestly false. This is called of Aristotle an Elench of the
consequent: yet in truth it is no Elench of argument, but of argumentation:
when we are persuaded foolishly that the consequution is reciprocal, and that
the putting down of the one brings in of necessity the other, and
contrarily, As, Si cygnus est, albus est color.
This follows. Sed albus est color,
It follows not. Cygnus igitur est.


So, that of Melissus. Si quid factum est, habet principium, Ergo si principium
habet, etiam factum est


The consequution, says Aristotle, is not reciprocal.

Ramus in the 20. of his Logical animaduersions, the sixth Chapter says thus.

Theophrastus autem and Eudemus docuerunt in connexo, Antecedentis negati, and
consequentis affirmati tolli posse antecedens, vt tollatur consequens; and
consequens retineri, vt retineatur antecedens. In quo genere, etsi rarus error
est, est tamen aliquando: Vt, Si nullum animal est irrationale, omnis homo est
rationalis. Sed aliquod animal est irrationale: Ergo aliquis homo non est
rationalis.
Item, Sed omnis homo est rationalis, Ergo nullum animal est irrationale.


Cum maius aliquid concluditur, videntur esse tres termini, sed reuera, res
illa mayor contine ^rem ante propositam in se, and quiddam amplius: Itaque tres
tantum termini sunt.

The 15. Chapter. Of the second kind of a connexiue syllogism.
THe second connexiue is, wherein the later part of the proposition is removed
in the assumption, that the former also may be removed in the conclusion, As
If thou had been ruled by me, thou should have left that unlucky soil.
But thou did not leave that unlucky soil: Therefore thou wast not ruled by
me.
Master Plowden: 281: a.

Si apres le mort le testator, tambien l'ordinary, come l'executor aueroit le
property del biens le testator, adonques serront deux properties d'une chose.
Mes deux properties ne sont d'une chose, Ergo apres le mort le testator etc.


The 16. Chapter. Of a disjunctive syllogism.
THe disjunctive is that whose proposition is disjunctive: and is framed after
two sorts also.

The first does remove one part of the proposition in the assumption, and
infers the other in the conclusion. Or Diggon her is, or I missay, But I do
not missay, Therefore her is Diggon.
Master Plowden Fol. 295. b.

Ou John Carrell ayel al enfant de part son pere, on Elisabeth Cuddington ayels
al enfant de part sa mere, doit estre gardeine in socage al dit enfant on manor
de Suytterton: Mes nemy Elisabeth Cuddington: Ergo John Carrell.


The second is that which makes the assumption of one part of the proposition
being affirmed, and remooueth the other in the conclusion, as, Or Diggon her
is, or I missay, But her is Diggon, Therefore I do not missay.
Master Plowden, Ibidem. Ou John etc. ou Elisabeth etc. Mes Elisabeth doit
este gardeine etc. Ergo nemy John etc.


The same syllogism is also made of a copulative proposition being denied,
because it has the same force with a proposition disjunctive being affirmed,
as, Shepherds cannot live in pleasure and pain at once: But they must live in
pleasure: Therefore not in pain.
Master Plowden Fol. 281. a.

Le executor, et le ordinary ne poyent aver le profit del byens le testator
ensemble, apres le mort le testator: Mes le executor le auera: Ergo nemy le
ordinary.


Annotations. Elenchs.
FOr the first, if the assumption contain not a special, but a general
contradiction, the syllogism will be sophistical.

For the second, if the proposition have not all his parts affirmative, the
syllogism is sophistical.

The proposition in a syllogism is commonly fet from some grounds of liberal
arts, as Logike, Khetorike, Ethike, Physike, etc.

It is not a syllogism, unless it conclude and judge necessarily: yea,
notwithstanding, the premises of themselves be false.

Syllogism is only proper and peculiar to man; whereof, no beast does in any
respect participate.

Strict syllogismes be never lightly used among authors, but either contracted
or amplified, or else inuerted, as I said before. The quicknes of man's wit is
such, that it conceaueth the whole sometimes without any proposition, another
while without any assumption, and now and then it preuenteth and foretaketh the
conclusion.

Ramus in his French Logike reduces all the Oration which Tully made in
defense of Milo to these three lines, making one simple syllogism.

Le guetteur et espieur meschant est iustement occis:

Car l'autorite du peuple, et des judgments du Senate, de Marie, de la ley
naturelle et human le tesinoignent: et n'y a aucune ley contraire ny du
Senate, ny de Pompee. Tell est le profyllogisme de la proposition.

Or Clode est guetteur et espieur meschant:

Car il a epsy Milon, esmeu d'vtilite, de haine, de mauuaises meurs,
d'esperance d'impunite: Ce qui a este entendue per ses parolles et sayts. Et
qu'il ayt este meschant, les faicts contre hommes et les dieus, le demonstrent.
Tell est le prosyllogisme de l'assumption, don't est conclu.

Purtant Clode est iustement occis.

This is the brief sum of all that long oration.

The 17. Chapter. Of Method.
THus much for a Syllogism. Now follows method.

Method is a disposition of diverse coherent axioms, whereby the most general
is ever first placed: and of diverse syllogismes whereby the best and principal
is first put down, in such sort that thereby all of them may be the more
easily perceived and better remembered. I call that the principal syllogism
which proves and concludes the principal question; and that the principal
question which was first propounded to be concluded.

So then, as an ariome determines truth and untruth, and syllogism
consequence or inconsequence, in like manner is method the only judge of order
or confusion.

This method is then observed, when as that which is best known, is placed in
the first room, and those which be less known of themselves, do follow in
order, as eueryone is better known then an other.

Therefore this method descends always from the general to the specials,
even to the most singular thing, which cannot be divided into any more parts.

The most general definition is first to be placed, and distribution next,
which, if it be manyfold; partition into the integrall parts must be set
down first and the general proprieties of the thing so parted; then division
of the specials must follow. And these parts and specials are in the same
order to be handled, as they were divided.

If the discourse be long, it must be knit together, with transitions,
telling briefly what is done, and what is to be done, for confirmation of
memory, and recreation of the reader.

This method only, and none other is to be observed, so often as we teach
any art or science, or take upon us to entreat perfectly of any general
matter.

Historiographers, Poets, Orators, and such other speakers or writers, are not
bound so strictly to observe the perfection of the first method: but may,
according to their matter, meaning, purpose, time, place, persons, wisely
observe the best for their intent, altering, hiding, adding, detracting, when
and how they lift. Poets seek to please the multitude, a beast of many heads.
Therefore Homer, makes not an historical narration of the Trojan war, from
the beginning to the ending thereof, but so mingleth truth with tales, and
tempereth them both with a probable show, and delightsome continuation, that
neither the middle do seem discrepant from the beginning, nor the ending from
the middle.

And Virgil begins the Narration of Aeneas his voyage from Sicile: making
him declare the rest at supper in Carthage with Queen Dido. Comicall poets
also, albeit they very exactly divide their Comedies into Acts and Scenes, yet
for the pleasure of the people, bring in every thing in such order, as though
it were by chance, hap, or hazard, come so to pass,

Orators, as referring all to persuasion and victory, omit orderly
distributions; obscure things purposely; amplify; digress; flatter;
insinuate; alter; change; and turn all vpside down, placing the best
arguments first and last: leaving the woorst, in the middle of their speech
altogether, the one to help the other; that with forcible things in the
beginning, the auditors may be woonne; and with as good in the ending, have
their mind and memory wholly occupied.

This is called the concealed or hidden method: the method of wit and
discretion, for that it is rather seen in the provident conceit of him that
writes or speaks, then perceived by any general rule of art, or precept
whatsoever. So it is a good policy, if thy cause be honest and good, to use
such Exordiums and beginnings, as may make the matter best known and
understood plainly and simply: but, if not so good, as thou could wish, then
to pass away stily with a smoothing insinuation.

In like manner, if thou be to speak before thy enemies, and such as thou
fear, discretion must be used, in putting this general note which I have
now delivered, in particular practice. Socrates in this sort cogged with the
old Grecian Sophisters, making them say and unsay, and therefore say this,
that he was a wrangler, an inchaunter, a dissembler, a deceiuer. In one word,
it is not amiss, to imitate the cunning Surgeon, who hides his knife, because
his patient should not be discouraged. So let us in this point show our selves
skillful in art, that we may use art, without any suspicion of art.

Yet, notwithstanding all this license upon such necessary occasion, granted
to these people pleasing men, they must, as much as they may, follow and
express generally, the method which I first put down: and that so much the
rather, because it is easy to be practiced in some part; and unto reason most
agreeable.

Annotations.
SOme think, the rule (...), to belong to method; but it is not so. For,
axiomaticall judgment considers the axioms alone, and several by
themselves; but Method, the coherence of many distinct axioms together. The
rule (...) does simply and only show, what axiom is general, and to be
taught generally; what special, and specally to be put down, because such
only be reciprocal: but it tells not which of these axioms must in order
have first or second place, which only is Methodicall.

(...), of (...) which signifies, with; and (...), which is a way. For this is
the right and compendious way, in writing or speaking to be observed. The word
therefore is metaphorically applied to any orderly proceeding.

Method then, as we take it here, is an ordering of diverse axioms already
inuen^ed: not a direction how to find out ariomes. The inuenting of Arts came
by observation of particulers; but the teaching and conformation of them now
invented, begins at the universal. For, it both gives more light then the
special, and may be known without the special: but not the special without
it: as a tree, in respect of a pearetree.

Of a little spark comes a great flame. Yet the spark is not therefore more
clear then the flame: so although the knowledge of generals comes by
observation of particulers; yet these particulers give not more light then the
generals.

Examples are always lastly to be put down, for that they are most special;
and cannot be divided into any other specials: as being nothing else but the
singular observation of this and that proper and peculier thing.

Method is like to Homers golden chain, whereby things are sweetly united
and knit so together, that if one Lynk fall of, the whole chain is broken and
dissolved. And Plato calls it Vinculum artis etc.

As far as man excels a brute beast, by the judgment syllogisticall; so
far does one man surpass an other by disposition methodicall. As then the
practice is hard, the praise most excellent, so the Elench in Method, causing
obscurity, and tautologie, is most soul and detestable.

Homer is noted for his peruersion of Method, insomuch that Tully writing to
Atticus, where he purposed to answer the last question first, said he would
talk of the last question first, (...).

As in the other parts of judgment, so in this especially, use, practice, and
continual exercise woorketh all in all, he that has a general sight in
Logike, has but the shadow. He that is acquainted with the particular
practice, is the only true and perfect logician.

I will never call him a Musician that never sang: a Carpenter that never
builded house: a Soldier that never fought, notwithstanding the general
speculation of the first in Music, of the second in building, of the third in
fighting: no more will I think him worthy of the title and name of a
Logician, that never put his general contemplation of logical precepts in
particular practice. For, as it is not yenough to know what virtue is, unless
you live virtuously, and express your learning by your living, so it is but a
fruitless ostentation to brag of a general conceit, without continuance in
special and particular exercise.

What precepts soever the common Rhetoricians put down for ordering of
Exordiums and framing and disposing of the whole course of their speech fitly
and according to cause, auditors, time, place, and such like circumstances; all
those I say, are altogether Logical, not in any respect perteining to
Rhetoric, but as a Rhetor may be directed by Logical precepts of judgment
and disposition.

[Coherent axioms:] For otherwise a man may say here, as Horace did of a
Poem patched like a beggars cloak, wherein no one piece is like another.

Humano capiti ceruicem pictor equinam
Iungere si velit, and varias inducere plumas,
Vndique collatis membris, vt turpiter atrum
Desinat in piscem mulier formosa superne;
Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici?
Credit, Pisones, isti tabulae fore librum
Persimilem, cuius, velut egri somnia, vanae
Fingantur species, vt nec pes, nec caput vni
Reddatur formae. And after,
Sed non vt placidis coeant immitia, non vt
Serpents auibus geminentur, tigribus agnae.
[Most general:] Le chose general serra tousiours mise en demand ou pleynt
deuant le chose special, et l'entier deuant ses parts, Come terre est genre a
pree, pasture, bois, etc. et serra mise in pleint ou demand deuant eux.

Issint bois est un genre de terre ou tours manners de arbres crescent, et pu^ed
serra mise en demand deuant alnetum and salicetum, que ne sont que especes de
bois. Theloall. lib. 8. cap. 20. Fol. 129.

Notiora sunt, says Wasserleider, non quae facilius percipiuntur, sed quae
percepta and intellecta plurimum notitiae and cognitionis afferunt, vt
vniuersalia, quae pluribus insunt and conueniunt. Sic, obscu^iora, non quae
difficilius percipiuntur, sed quae percepta and intellecta singula parum lucis
and scientiae prebent, vt singularia, and specialissima, quae etiam sensibus
percipiuntur. Heerevpon is the distinction of notiora naturae, and notiora
nobis. But this is confuted of others.

[Syllogismus:] Nam est quaedam methodus in syllogismis. Methodus inueniendae
artis dicta est in genere and specie. Hic agitur de methodo disponendi.

[Definition first:] for it gives light to all that follows.

[Partition first:] for it is made of causes, whereas division is of effects.

[Transitions:] Transitio inter figuras Rhetoricas a Cicerone numeratur, cum
sit plane logica. Transitio reficit auditorem, certo singularum partiu^ fine,
non aliter quam facientibus iter multum detrahunt fatigationis notata
inscriptis lapidibus spatia: Nam and exhausti laboris nosse mensuram, voluptati
est: and hortatio ad reliqua fortius exequenda, scire quantum supersit: nihil
enim longum videri necesse est, in quo, quid vltimum sit, certum est. Transitio
imperfecta est conuenientior, quando longa partis disputatio non fuerit, vt
memoriae renouatione minime sit opus.

Crypsis methodi est in Elleipsi vel redundantia. Elleipsis est, non omnium
amissio, sed quarundam in methodo. Redundantia est Heterogenia vel Tautologia.
In perfecta methodo docendus est auditor, in crypsei fallendus and mouendus.
Sic enim mutato auditoris stomacho, salubria fiunt venenata, and contra.

As an Enthymeme is a defect of a full syllogism, so Elleipsis is in method;
as a prosyllogisme is superfluous there, so digressions here: as the inuersion
of the premises is in the one, so the entangled circumduction is in the other.
Whereof, besides Homers Iliades, and Virgils Aeneis, the Ethiopicall history is
a sweet example.

Argumentum semper disponitur, nunquam disponit: Methodus semper disponit,
nunqua^ disponitur, vt summu^ genus and infima species: sed enunciatu^ and
syllogismus sunt vt subalterna. Nam enunciatum disponit argumenta, disponitur
in syllogismo, syllogismus disponit enu^ciata, disponitur a methodo.

Vbi materia nulla est, ibi forma nulla esse potest, vt si pars Rhetorices
imperfecta in pronunciatione docenda sit, methodus perfecta non est
desideranda.

Socrates compares the oration which Lysias made of love, to the four verses
which were written on Mydas tomb, wherein the matter did so wisely hang
together, that the first might be last, and last first without any danger.

(...) etc.
Aenea virgo sum, Midae sepulchro imponor,
Quamdiu and aqua fluet, and longae arbores virescent,
Ipsius hic manens lamentabili in tumulo,
Nuntio praetereuntibus, Midas quod hic sepultus est.
And like to Lysias speech, or Mydas epitaph, be all our balductum and
vncoherent pamphlets, all our yeare-bookes and abridgements.

Imagine, says Ramus, that all definitions, divisions, and rules of any art,
as of Logike, were already invented and allowed for true, and every rule were
written in a several schrole, every schrole being put into an earthen
pitcher, as they use in lottaries, and there shuffled together: what part of
Logike now must order these confused rules and scattered schroles. Not
Invention, for they be found out already: not axiomaticall Judgment, for they
be judged and allowed as true, every Axiom severally: nor Syllogisticall; for
now every question is answered, all controversies concerning these rules, be
discussed: only method remains, by the direction whereof, I will seek in
this pot for the definition of Logike, and will set it in the first place: then
for the division thereof into Invention and Disposition, placing it in the
second room. This done, I will take the definition of Invention and put it in
the third degree; and consequently the definition and division of arguments,
until all the first part of Logike be thus put down, by defining, dividing,
exemplifiyng, and binding together the several tractates by convenient
transitious. Then will I in like manner proceed to Disposition.

Method and order is the chiefest help of memory: therefore since all method
is altogether Logical: instructions for memory, if they belong to any art,
must needs be Logical. Therefore, Sit puer, says Ramus, qui querimoniam
Penelopes apud Ouidium epistola prima de Vlyssis absentia post euersam Troiam
memoriae commendare velit.

Sed mihi quid prodest vestris disiecta lacertis
Ilios, and murus, quod fuit ante, solum,
Si maneo qualis Troia durante manebam,
Virque mihi dempto fine carendus abest?
Diruta sunt alijs, vni mihi Pergama restant,
Incola captiuo quae boue victor arat.
Iam seges est vbi Troia fuit, resecandaque falce,
Luxuriat Phrygio sanguine pinguis humus.
Semisepulta virum curuis feriuntur aratris
Ossa, ruinosas occulit herba domos.
Victor abes, nec scire mihi quae causa morandi,
Aut in quo lateas ferreus orb, licet.
Quisquis ad haec vertit peregrinam littora puppim,
Ille mihi de te multa rogatus abit.
Quamque tibi reddat, si te modo viderit vsquam,
Traditur huic digitis charta notata meis.
Nos Pylon, antiqui Neleia Nestoris arua
Misimus, incerta est fama remissa Pylo.
Misimus and Sparten, Sparte quoque nescia very,
Quas habitas terras, aut vbi lentus abes.
Vtilius starent etiam nunc moenia Phaebi:
Irascor votis heu leuis ipsa meis.
Scirem vbi pugnares, and tantum bella timerem:
Et mea cum multis iuncta querela foret.
Quid timeam, ignoro, timeo tamen omnia demens,
Et patet in curas area lata meas.
Quaecunque aequor habet, quaecunque pericula tellus,
Tam longae causas suspicor esse morae.
Hunc totum locum cum viderit puer primo connexo syllogismo comprehensum,
parts singulas notabit, earumque praecipuas exornationes. Propositionem igitur
aspiciet initio in quatuor primis versibus positam.

Sed mihi quid prodest vestris disiecta lacertis
Ilios, et, murus quod fuitante, solum:
Si maneo qualis Troia durante manebam,
Virque mihi. dempto fine, carendus abest?
Deinde sequitur assumptionis sententia: At tu abes: and amplificatio ex
adiunctis ruinis euersae Troiae: vbi sex sunt versus.

Diruta sunt alijs, v^i mihi Pergama restant,
Incola captiuo quae boue victor arat.
Iam seges est vbi Troia fuit, resecandaque falce
Luxuriat Phrygio sanguine pinguis humus.
Semisepulta virum curuis feriuntur aratris
Ossa, ruinosas occulit herba domos.
D^hinc repetitur assumptio, and augetur a maiori: non modo abes, sed ita abes,
vt scire nequeam vbi lateas. Quod exaggeratur factis Penelopes, interrogo,
scribo, mitto in omnes orbis parts, nec quicquam de te audio. December sunt hic
versus.

Victor abes, nec scire mihi quae causa morandi,
Aut in quo lateas ferreus orb, licet.
Quisquis ad haec vertit peregrinam littora puppim,
Ille mihi de te multa rogatus abit.
Quamque tibi reddat, si te modo viderit vsquam,
Traditur huic digitis charta notata meis.
Nos Pylon, antiqui Neleia Nestoris arua
Misimus, incerta est fama remissa Pylo.
Misimus and Sparten, Sparte quoque nescia very
Quas habitas terras, aut vbi lentus abes.
Conclusionis sententia tandem vicesimo primo secundoque versibus per
contrarium significatur. Vtilius starent etiam nunc moenia Troiae,
Irascor votis heu leuis ipsa meis.
Sed and ipsi conclusioni amplificatio accedit ex adiunctis: sex sunt versus:

Scirem vbi pugnares, and tantum bella timerem,
Et mea cum multis iuncta querela foret.
Quid timeam ignoro, timeo tamen omnia demens,
Et patet in curas area lata meas.
Quaecunque aequor habet, quaecunque pericu^a tellus,
Tamlongae causas suspicor esse morae.
Quamobrem cum hac interpretationis diligentia puer totam sententiam
distinxerit, vel a diligenti pr^ptore distinctam acceperit, and ex octo and
viginti versibus, quatuor propositioni, sexdecim assumptioni, and octo
conclusioni tribuerit, hac syllogismi descriptione non solum parts, sed
partium quoque sententiam sibi repraesentabit. Nam cum scie^t hic primo loco
propositionem, secundo assumptionem, tertio conclusionem esse, sciet itidem ex
cognitis syllogismi legibus quae vis cuiusque partis esse debeat: quinetiam hac
ratione facilime (...) animo concipiet, per quas, imagines rerum absentium ita
subijciet animo, vt cernere oculis ac presents habere videatur. Vt in hoc
exemplo concurrent antiquae vrbis ruinae, agricolae, ossa, nautae, mulier
solicit inter^ogans, tabellarij, bella, naufragia, caedes. In longioris autem
orationis and disputationis ambitu, praesertim si methodus seruata sit,
memoriae praesidium praecipuum erit. Exemplum nostra dialectica co^modissimum
erit, vt dialectica suijpsius inprimis memoriam confirmet, que alijs opem
confirmande memory pollicetur. Figuretur igitur hic primis rerum notis, artis
dialecticae summa and vniuersa partitio, quae quod dicimus, oculis etiam
spectandum proponat.

A general Table of the whole Book.
(...): is in Invention of arguments, 1. In^aerent Original agreeable fully 1.
Cause Efficient of it self, or accide^tally, alone, or with other^, procreant,
or co^seruant.
material, formal, final.
thing caused.
2. the whole and his parts. the general and specials.

in part ^abiect. ^diunct.

disagreeable diverse. opposite disparates. contraries Relatiues. Repug^nts,
priua^ues.



Secondary 1. Coni^gates. Notation.
2. distribution of cause and effect. subject and adiunct.
definition perfect. imperfit, description.



Borovved, as testimonies of God. of M^n.

Disposition axiomaticall where note 1. the parts the b^nd. things bound the
former part. the later part.

2. both affections for (...) is 1. affirmative* negative.
2. true false
and ^hease necessary: hereof those rules of truth. of justice. of discretion.
contingent.

and specials simple general spec^all particular. proper.

compound congregatiue copulative. connexiue.
segregatiue d^unctiue and distributive. di^tiue, and praeoccupatiue.




diano^icall Syllogisticall parts antecedent proposition. assumption.
consequent* conclusion.
Specials simple affir: gen: spec: pro:
contracted explicate 1. 2.

neg: gen: spec: pro:
contracted explicate 1. 2.


compound connex: 1. 2.
di^ct: 1. 2.



Methodicall from the general to the specia^


2 all these be either simple compared in quality like. unlike.
quantity aequall unequal (...) (...)






Itaque propositis hoc modo distributisque rebus, vt verborum quoque contextus
facilius ediscatur (qui ab art auxilij nihil admodum capit, nisi forte quod
res ordine distributae sua vocabula secum rapient*

Verbaque prouisam rem non inuita sequentur) accedat, si placet, meditatio, vt
per parts paulatim memotia ducatur: quinetiam modica voce in meditando animus
excitetur, vt duplici motu dicendi and audiendi memoria iuuetur: tum siqua
ratio memoriam possit adiuuare, illa dispositionis admonitio iuuabit:
licebitque philosophis and oratoribus, qui locis and imaginibus artem quandam
memoriae confinxerunt, per nos quidem valere: nihil enim pollicentur, quod non
vberius multo faciliusque teneamus. Aiunt enim ordinem prodesse memoriae, sed
externis and commentitijs eam fignis and simulachris instruunt, nos ordinis
rebus insiti doctrinam certissimam and veros locos pro rerum gradibus and
generibus distinctos, rerumque verissimas imagines adhibemus: illi verboru^
memoriam infinitate formarum conturbant, dum propter singula verba ad singulas
species est respiciendu^: Nos hanc partem rerum compositione and collocatione,
quantum natura sert, adiuuamus. Quapropter quicquid est, quod ad confirmandam
memoriam doctrina possit efficere, id totum dialectice dispositionis doctrina
praes^abit.

Hitherto Ramus concerning the help of memory by Logical disposition: to the
which counsel of him, if we add some comfortable simples, and have a careful
heed y^ we distemper not our selves either with unorderly diet, or dishonest
exercise, I am persuaded it will be more available, then all the volumes of
the art of memory.

Examples of the perfect method, appear in the artificial putting down of
Arts (as in this type of Ramus his Logike already drawn) and also in some other
philosophical discourses.

For our Calendar, although shepheardes be not wont to bind themselves to
any over strict method in speaking, yet that song of Colyn Clowt rehearsed by
Hobbynoll in May, may make us believe, that even shepheardes, by the light of
nature, did, as much as in them lay, express this method in their speeches.
For there he, after a poetical invocation, and general proposition of that
which he has in hand, I mean the praises of Elysa, comes nearer y^ matter,
and first puts down the causes, then adiunctes, and other arguments,
incident to Elysa.

In stead af a definition we may use this general propounding of the matter:
then divide it into some few heads: and orderly discourse of every head,
using the places of invention, the help of judgment etc.

Sir William Stamfo^d in his crown plees does first de^ne and propound, thus:

Plees del corone sont les ples queux conteigno^t l'offences faits encounter la
corone et dignity le roy, perque pur le mieulx entendement de eux, est
requisite a veier queux sont les dits offenses: et puis de la maniere coment
ils serront pledus, et darreinement de la manier coment ils serront tries et
iuges. And so goes on forward, defining, dividing, and making plain by
examples all the special sorts of offenses against the crown.

Bracton follows the order of the civil law altogether, insomuch that he that
has seen the one, may easily judge of the other.

Perkins in every of his several tractates does, as Stamford, propounde,
divide, and add examples.

Lyttleton in like manner, by definitions, divisions, and induction of special
cases insteede of so many examples, made up his book.

Master Theloall took occasion (as in his preface to the Lord Chancellor he
confesses) by Stamfords good motion, to make a more methodicall discourse of
writtes, then was extant heretofore. I will use his own words to show his
own order.

Pour ceo que mon intent est de entraiter de brief, et des chooses concernantes
brief, il moy semble conuenyent de commencer per la definition de brief, et
de monster quelle chose il est.

And afterward, I'ay enterprinse de framer un definition, on plust ost
description de brief solonque le form et doctrine ^'eux, que le art de ceo
professont, per les, genres, differences, proprieties, en tiel manner, etc. The
definition I have put down in the first book.

Then having defined it, he says, me voyes a diuider mon brief.

After the division he uses a transition, wherein he briefly tells, what he
has done, and orderly declares what remains to be done moreover.

Which kind of Transitions, wanting in Lyttleton, make the coherence of his
discourses somewhat obscure, as in that tractate of estates sur condition,
where he first divides conditional estates, thus:

Estates que homes out en terres ou tenements sur condition sont de deux
manners, s* ou ils out estate sur condition en fait, ou sur condition en ley.
And after the laying down of so many several cases of the first part, as
could be contained within the compass of sixteen leaves: he immediately, if
not abruptly, proceeds to the explication of the second, without any
transition at all: Neither telling what was done, nor what was to be done. So
also in the discourse of releases, he first deuideth releases thus. Releases
sont in diverse manners, s. releases de tout le droyt que home ad en terres ou
tenements; et releases d'actions personels et reals et auters chooses. And then
having bestowed ten leaves wholly upon the first member of his distribution,
he sets upon ye second part suddenly without any warning given at all.

Digressions be sometimes tolerable upon necessary occasion: but impertinent,
or rather repugnant imaginations continually cast in, mar all. A man takes
upon him to ^ade upon the statute of fines, and he thrummeth in 50. s^attered
and undigested cases of estate tail in possession, and as many of the same in
reuersion, with a cluster of other sophistical and vncoherent points, much
like a foolish paynter, who because he had some little skill in paynting a pear
tree, but no cunning at all in expressing anything else, would be sure to make a
pear tree grow on every man's wall. So this fellow having met with some add
learning^ of estate tail, will needs have utterance for it. An ^ther makes
every case have one idle point of a fine, for fashion sake, whereas he
foysteth in 6. 8. 10. 12. or more extrauagant conceits, as well agreeing with
the nature of a fine, as a Harp does with a Harrow; yet, who but he? Non
equidem inuideo: miror magis, at the frenzy of the reader, and folly of the
hearer. For if the readers intent be to explayne the statute, then quorsum haec
tam putida tendunt? but if he mean to make ostentation of all his
imaginations, me thinks he should not make a well meaning statute the cloak of
two hundred ambiguities. I grant the matter may be well worth the hearing,
but Nunc non erat his locus: Therefore as Horace says. Amphora caepit,
Institui, currente rota, cur vrceus exit?


To conclude I could heartily wish the whole body of our law to be rather
logically ordered, then by Alphabeticall breuiaries torn and dismembered. If
any man say, it cannot be, he should add, by himself: if he think it should
not be, then I do not so much envy his great wisdom, as pity his rusticall
education, who had rather eat Acornes with hogs, then bread with men; and
prefers the loathsome toffing of an A. B. C. abridgement, before the
lightsome perusing of a Methodicall coherence of the whole common law.

Yet I am not he, that will once open my mouth, generally to condemn the
contracting and abridging of dispersed and tedious cases: But as, Lyttleton,
Parkins, Stamford, Theloall, Bracton and Britton have excelled the abridgers in
light and order, so the paynefull abridgements of Statham and those reverend
Judges Fitzherbert, and Brook, are more convenient for many purposes, then
those vast heaps of scattered discourses, thrown into every corner of our
year books: Which, notwithstanding, are diligently to be r^ teyned: but the
matter may be, for the benefit of students, more orderly contrived.

It is not my purpose, at this time to dispute, whether the law of England,
being one only proper, and singular law, appropriate to our nation, consisting
of so many particularities, being subject to such continual change and
alteration, can be made an art: But that the confusion of writers may ^e
removed, the manner reformed, the matter better ordered, I do surely believe,
because I know assuredly.

Thus have I at last, made an end of a confused meditation, patched up, I fear
me, rather in great have, then with good speed. Wherein I think the art of
Logike to be as I have put down: but the precepts of the same must be
continually practiced, as I have elsewhere said, or else the general
contemplation thereof will prove a fruitles conceit and naked speculation.
Let us follow therefore the counsel of Apelles; Nulla dies sine linea. Let no
day pass without some practice, either in making, framing, and inuenting of
our selves, or in resolving and dissoluing of things done by others, for the
trial of their skill, and confirmation of our own. Neither would I have this
practice continued only in reading or writing, but in every civil assembly or
meeting: wherein yet I will not be so severe a censor, as to exact every
speech to the formal rules of axioms, syllogismes, etc. It shall be
sufficient for us to follow a more easy and elegant kind of disputation,
joining Rhetorike with Logike, and referring that precise straitness unto
Philosophical exercises.

Neither let any man think, that because in common meetings and assemblies the
words and terms of Logike be not named, therefore the force and operation
of Logike is not there used and apparent. For, as in Grammar we name neither
Noune, Pronoune, Uerbe, nor any other part of speech: and as in Rhetorike, we
make mention neither of Metonymia, Synecdoche, Exclamatio, nor any other
Rhetorical figure or trope: yet use in our speech the help of the one in
speaking grammatically, and the direction of the other in talking eloquently:
so, although in common conference we never name syllogismes, axioms,
propositions, assumptions, and other words of art, yet do we secretly
practice them in our disputations, the virtue whereof is, to make our
discourses seem true to the simple, and probable to the wise.

I have, for examples sake, put down a Logical Analysis of the second Aegloge
in Virgill, of the Earl of Northumberlands case in Master Plowdens reports,
and of sir William Stamfords crown plees. For the Aeglogue although the verses
of Vugill be better known in Latin, then I can make them understood in
English, (especially observing the same order of verse) yet I have attempted
the interpreting of the same by a poetical Paraphiasis, for the contentation
of such as understand no Latin: and withal inserted the Latyne verses, for
their pleasure, that disdain the English.

Alexis 2. Aegloga Virgilij.
FOrmosum pastor Corydon ardebat Alexin
Delitias domini, nec quid speraret, habebat.
Tantum inter densas, vmbrosa cacumina, fagos
Assidue veniebat. Ibi haec incondita solus
Montibus, and syluis studio iactabat inani.
O'crudelis Alexi, nihil mea carmina curas;
Nil nostri miserere; mori me denique, coges.
Nunc etiam pecudes vmbras and frigora captant:
Nunc virides etiam occultant spineta lacertas:
Thestylis and rapido fessis messoribus aestu
Allia, serpyllumque herbas contundit olentes.
At mecum raucis, tua dum vestigia lustro,
Sole sub ardenti resonant arbusta cicadis.
Nonne fuit satius tristes Amaryllidis iras,
Atque superba pati fastidia, nonne Menalcam,
Quamuis ille niger, quamuis tu candidus esses?
O formose puer, nimium ne creed colori:
Alba ligustra cadunt, vaccinia nigra leguntur.
Despectus tibi sum, nec quis sim, quaeris Alexi,
Quam dives pecoris niuei, quam lactis abundans.
Mill meae Siculis errant in montibus agnae.
Lac mihi non aestate nouum, non frigore defit.
Canto, quae solitus, si quando armenta vocabat,
Amphion Dircaeus in Actaeo Araoyntho.
Nec sum adeo informis, nuper me in littore vidi.
Cum placidum ventis staret mare, non ego Daphnim
Iudice te metuam, si nunquam fallit imago.
O tantum libeat mecum tibi sordida rura,
Atque humiles habitare casas, and figere ceruos,
Haedorumque gregem viridi compellere hibysco.
Mecum vna in syluis imitabere Pana canendo.
Pan primus calamos cera coniungere plures
Instituit: Pan curat oues, ouiumque magistros.
Nec te paeniteat calamo triuisse labellum,
Haec eadem vt sciret, quid non faciebat Amyntas?
Est mihi disparibus septem compacta cicutis
Fistula, Damaetas dono mihi quam dedit olim,
Et dixit moriens, te nunc habet ista secundum:
Dixit Damaetas, inuidit stultus Amyntas.
Praeterea duo, nec tuta mihi valle reperti
Capreoli, sparsis etiam nunc pellibus albo,
Bina die siccant ouis vbera, quos tibi seruo.
Iampridem a me illos abducere Thestylis orat:
Et faciet, quoniam sordent tibi munera nostra.
Huc ades, o formose puer, tibi lilia plenis
Ecce ferunt nymphae calathis: tibi candida Nais
Pallentes violas, and summa papauera carpens,
Narcissum, and florem iungit been olentis Anethi.
Tum Casia, atque alijs intexens suauibus herbis,
Mollia luteola pingit vaccinia caltha.
Ipse ego cana legam tenera lanugine mala,
Castaneasq nuces, mea quas Amaryllis amabat:
Addam cerea pruna; and honos erit huic quoque pomo:
Et vos, o Lauri, carpam, and te, proxima myrte:
Sic positae quoniam suaues miscetis odores.
Rusticus es, Corydon, nec munera curat Alexis:
Nec si muneribus certes, concedat Iolas.
Eheu quid volui misero mihi? Floribus austrum
Perditus and liquidis immisi fontibus apros.
Quem fugis ah demens? habitarunt dij quoque siluas,
Dardaniusque Paris. Pallas quas condidit arces,
Ipsa colat: nobis placeant ante omnia filuae.
Torua leaena lupum sequitur; lupus ipse capellam;
Florentem Cithysum sequitur lasciua capella,
Te Corydon, o Alexi: Trahit sua quemque voluptas.
Aspice, aratra iugo referunt suspensa iuuenci,
Et sol crescentes decedens duplicat vmbras:
Me tamen vrit amor, quis enim modus adsit amori?
Ah Corydon, Corydon, quae te dementia caepit?
Semiputata tibi frondosa vitis in vlmo est.
Quin tu aliquid saltem potius, quorum indiget vsus,
Viminibus, mollique paras detexere iunco?
Inuenies alium, si te hic fastidit Alexis.
The same in English Hexameters, verse for verse.
SEelly shepherd Corydon loved heartily fair lad Alexis,
His masters dearling, but saw no matter of hoping.
Only amid the forest thick set with broad-shadoe beachtrees
daily resort did he make: thus alone to the woods, to the mou^tains
With broken speeches, fond thoughts most vainly revealing.
O hardharted Alexis: I see my verse to be scorned,
My self not pitied, my death by thee lastly procured.
Now do the beasts eun seek for cooling shade to refresh the,
Grene lyzards now too in bushes thorny be lurking,
And for faint reapers by the suns rage, Thestylis hastening,
Strong-smelling wild thime, and garlyke beats in a mortar*
But whilst I trace thee, with sun beams all to bescorched,
Groves by the hoarschirping grasshoppers yield a resou^ding.
Wast not far better to have borne with surly Menalcas,
And sore displeased, disdainful, proud Amaryllis,
Although thou white were, although but swarty Menalcas?
O thou fair white boy, trust not too much to thy whitnes:
Fair white flowers fall down, black fruits are only reserved.
Thou carst not for me, my state thou know not, Alexis:
What flocks of white sheep I do keep, of milk what abundance,
On Sicil high mountains my lambs feed more then a thousand:
New milk in summer, new milk in winter I want not.
My song's like Thebane Amphions song, when he called
His wandering bullocks, on Greekish mount Aracynthus.
Neither am I so foul: I saw my self by the seashore,
When seas al calm were: I doubt not, but by thy censure,
Daphnis I shall surpass, unless my face do deceive me.
O, let this be thy will, to frequent my rustical harbors,
And simple cotages, and stick in forkes to uphold them,
And drive on forward our flock of kids to the mallows:
We will amid the forest contend Pans song to resemble:
Pan was first that quils with wax ty'de jointly together.
Pan is good to the sheep, and Pan is good to the sheepsman.
Neither think it a shame to thy self to have played on a cornpipe:
For, that he might do the same with skill, what did not Amyntas?
Damaetas long since did give me a pipe for a token,
Compact of seun reeds, all placed in order, unequal:
And thus said, when he died: One used it only before thee.
Thus said Damaetas, this grieved foolish Amyntas.
Also two pretty kids do I keep, late found in a valley
Dangerus: and their skins with milk white spots be bedecked,
Of dams milk not a drop they leave; and for thee I keep them.
Thestylis of long time has these kids of me desired;
And they shall be her own, for that thou skornst what I give thee.
Come near, o fair boy, see the nymphs bring here to the lillies
With full stuffed baskets: fair Nais now to thy comfort
White violets gathering, and poppies daintily topping,
Daffadil ads to the same, and leaves late plucked fro the sweet Dill.
Then mingling Casia with diverse sauory sweet flowrs,
With yelowish Marygold, she the tender Crowtoe bedecketh.
I Will pluck hoare quinces, with soft down all to besmeared,
And Chessnuts which were loud of my sweet Amaryllis.
Add will I wheateplumbs too: for this fruit will be regarded,
And you laurel leaves will I pluck, and thee, pretty myrtle
Next to the laurel leaves: for so plast yield ye the sweet sent.
Thou Art but a fool Corydon, for first gifts move not Alexis,
Then, though thou give much, yet much more give will Iolas.
But what alas did I mean, poor fool? I do let go the southwind
Into the flowrs, and boares send forward into the clear springs.
Whom flyest thou mad man? Many gods have also resorted,
And Paris of old Troy, to the woods. Let towers by Minerua
Buil't, by Minerua be kept; and woods of us only regarded.
Grim Lioness runs to the wolf, and wolf to the young got,
And wanton young got to the flowring tetrifol hastneth,
And Corydon to Alexis: a self joy draws on each man.
But see the plow coms home hanged fast by the yoke, to the bullocks,
And shadoe by Phoebus declining double appears:
Yet do I burn with love: for what mean can be to loving?
Ah Corydon, Corydon; what mad rage has thee bewitched?
Thy vin's scarce half cut, pestred with leaves of her elm tree:
Leave this churlish boy, and bend thy self to thy busnes,
With twigs and bulrush some needful thing be a making:
Thou shall find others though thou art disdaind of Alexis.
A Logical Analysis of the Earl of Northumberlands case.
There be, says Freigius 2. parts of the Aeglogue. First the propounding of
the argument, which is of the incontinency of a lover lamenting his love in
solitary places. Secondly the complaint and lamentation of Corydon the lover,
speaking First to his love, and that by Acccusing his cruelty, which is argued
First by comparison of the vnlikes, the proposition consists of three
vnlikes, the beasts, Lysardes, and reapers seek shade: the reddition is, but
yet I burn with love. 2 By the less Amaryllis and Menalcas are too cruel,
but thou more cruel then they. 3. By the cause of his pride, which was his
beauty, and y^ is extenuated by a simily. As white primprint fales, but black
Uiolets be gathered, so beauty decays, and blacknes remains.
Enticing him to come to his house to sing, to drive the Kids to the Mallows,
etc. and that by praising of himself by his adiunctes. A A A*
D D D


AAA Corydons adjuncts be these: he is Rich, and his riches he proved by
specials his lambs his milk.
Skillful in singing, and that is proved. By a comparison of the equal, in
that he is equal to Amphion: and here an objection is prevented by a
comparison also of the equal: neither think it a shame to play on apype, for
Amyntas thought well of it. Then the praise of his singing is continued by his
pype, and his pype by the author that gave it, which was Damaetas, and another
that enuyed it, to wit Amyntas.
Fair and comely: it is proved by The adiunct of his image in the water
Comparison of the equal, as was Daphnis.
Frank and free, which is proved by his sundry gifts. 1. His Kydds, commended
by their adiunctes, in that they were white spotted, well sucking, and desired
of Thestylis. 2. His basket of sweet flowers gathered by the Nymphs, they be
herbs and also flowers, as, Lillyes. Uiolets. Poppy. Dylle. Daffadil. Casia.
Marigold Crowtoe.
3. His diverse kinds of Fruits as Quinces. Chestnuts. wheatplums.
Boughs as be The Laurel. The Myrtle.





DDD. Secondly to himself, by resisting himself, as it were, and here is
contained both a doble correction or calling back of himself. the first is
both of the adiunct, pride, and contempt of his gifts and here is First a
double exclamation: and here in the first he notes Alexis his pride by two
similies, y^ south wind, and the boar. in ye second he entreats again, by
the equ^le, as Paris, and y^ gods etc.
More, or greater, for Iolas gave mor large ly then he.
Secondly a permission by the unlike. Let Palace keep her Palaces, and we
the woods which is our delight. The reddition is made plain by comparison of
lykes: where also the general is concluded by the specialles in a Clymax of
three degrees, Grimme Lioness to the Wolf etc.
the second is of the adiunctes both of The time, where there is a Pe^phrasis
of night, and an argument of the diverse, albeit the heat of the sun is
mitigated by the coming of the night, yet I burn still with love: the reason
follows of the adiunct of love: for love has no mean. his business neglec
ted, where is a double negligence: of his vine half cut his elm full of
boughs
for both de naught.

Remedy of love by co^traries which be: business in making some needful
thing of twigs and bulrush. and hope of some other lo^, if Alexis should still
thus disdain him.



For the Earl of Northumberlands case, I have rather showed what is done by
master Plowden, then what might have been done by a better Logician. Le
matter fuit argue en Leschecquer M. 9. and 10. Elis. deua^t touts les Justices
d'angleterre et Barons deschecquer, per Onslow Solicitor, Gerard Attorney,
Wray and Barrham seriants le roigne, del part le roigne: et per Shirborne et
Bell. appre^tices et Meade seriants del part le Count. Le case fuit tiel;
Pattorney le roigne inform le court, que ou le roigne doyt aver touts mines de
ore et d'auter mettail conteignant ore per prerogative, el 10 Martij. An. 8.
regni sui esteant seisie en son demesne, come de fee en droit la corone, del
wast dit Newland, in com. Northumberland, en queux certene veins de quyure
sont, conteignants ore; assign T. and D, de four etc. queur fowont 600000
poys etc. et le Count eux disturb: le Count, protest: que le roigne ne doit
aver per prerogative etc. pro ple dit, que quant al 500000 parcel del 600000,
le terre in que etc. fuit done al count per patent le roy et roigne P. and M.
dat. a Richmond, le 15 del August 4. and 5. An. reg. etc. exgratia speciali,
certa scientia, and mero motu suis etc. et que il disturb etc. et auerra, que
cest vein fuit ouert primes puis le dit 15 iour del August. an. 4. and 5. reg.
etc. s. 1. April. an. 7 Elis. et trauerse le seisine le roigne le dit 15. iour
del March. Et pur les auter 100000, residue del 600000, il plede patent le dit
roigne del honor del Cokermouth, oue wrecks, mines, etc. et que le mine in que
etc. fuit ouert iour del date del patent et deuant etc. issint il disturb
prout bien a luy list. sur que l'atturney le royne, demurre en ley. Les points
sont general, ou special. les general points sont deux: le primer, si touts
mines d'ore et argent in terres del subjects, oue poyar de four le terre et
asporter le ore etc. apperteigne al roy per prerogative, car nest in le
treatise de praerogatiua regis, et le four tutch le francktenement et
l'inheritance d'auter. Le second, si mines de Copper conteignant ore ou argent,
perteigne al roy vt supra. Le proper et special poyntique immediate meant
concern le case del Count, est, si les mines de quyure co^teigna^t ore ou
argent, perteigne al roy per prerogative, Vtrum le grant P. and M. del terre
en le primer case, et de touts et singular mines en l'auter case per patent de
gratia etc. fait les mines de passer del eux al dit Count, on nemy.

Or doncques primerment est a dire de les arguments de les dits seriants et
apprentices, puis de le indgment et opinion des Justices.

Les arguments del primer point, pur le roigne, sont in confirmando, ou
confutando: les confirmant arguments sont inherent ou borrowed, come testimonies
et autorities: les inherents sont quater, et Onslow fait troys de eux, et
Gerard le quart.

Le primer est deryue del adiunct excellency del royet de ceux mettayles. etc.
sic, Les chooses plus excellents del terre perteigne al person pluis excellent
que est le roy: pro batur a pari. Les chooses plus excellent del mer et eawe
perteigne al roy per common ley. A A. Ergo et ceux del terre, come ore et argent,
Mes ore et argent sont le pluis excellent chooses del terre: Ergo ore et argent
perteigne al roy, etc. et les mines eux conteignants etc.


A A. Cest premier part del enthymeme est confirm per nouel syllogism,
conteignant un argument del special, issint constitute. Le comen ley appropre
al roy sturgions et baleynes que sont deius le mere en engleterre: s^s braches
del mere: et ceo est prove per deux testimonies. Mes del chooses de la mer, les
pisches, e^ de pisches, les sturgions et balemes sont plus excellentes. Ergo le
comen ley appropre al roy les chooses plus excellentes de la mere et ^aw.


Le primer est de treatise de praerogatiua regis, cap. 11. (que n'est nouel
ley, mes declaration de^ common ley) (...). Rex habebit balenas and sturgiones
captos in mari, vel alibi in^ra regnum.

Le second est del Britton que escry long temps deuant le treatise de
praerogatiua regis et il monstre en son chapter de trouours que le roy auera
les pisches per pre rogatiue per le comen ley en son temps.

Le second argument est del causes principalls et coadiuuants: s. le roy, et le
treasure: queux ambideux deuont concurrer al mayntenaunce del realm: Il est
reason que il que ad le regiment et tutel del people come principal cause,
queux il ne peult defender sans adiuant et isntrumental causes, aueroit ces
aids et causes adiuuants. Mes Poffice le roy que le ley a luy appoint est de
defender ses subjects: et le treasure, que est term les senows del guerre,
est le adiuuant cause pour defender eux verse tout hostility. Ergo il est
convenient que le roy aueroyt le treasure et mines de ore et argent, eu queux
consist cest treasure.


Le tierce conteigne un final cause et use del money que est, d'estre coigne,
prince, et value. Car donques solement il est current pur le commodity del
subjects en lour mutual commercion ou traffic A que il apperteigne de metter
certain print et price sur le ore et argent issint que il poet estre disperse
enter les subjects, per intercourse de merchandise, vender achater etc. A
cestui il apperteigne dauer l'ore et argent. Mes ces chooses tant solement
apperteignont al roy mesme, et a null auter. Car il fuit graund treason per le
comen ley deuant l'estatute de Anno. 25. E. 3. ca 2. come il apiert per 23 E.
3. lib. ass. ou feme fuist arse pur fauxer ou counterfeister money Ergo al roy
apperteigne les mines et owres del ore et argent.


Gerard fait le quart argument, conteigna^t les pernicieux effects del cest
donation de ore et argent al subjects. Ceo que ouste le conueniency et bone
proportion del members del bien public en feasant le subject et servant
greinder que le roy et governor: doyt estre remove horse del bien public, come
chose pernicieux et causant rebellion, contempt, et honor en le subject, mes
deposition, peril, et danger en le roy. Mes le granting del mines de ore et
argent al subjects fait etc. Ergo ceo doit estre remove horse del bien public.


Ore est adire del testimonies queux sont de deux genres: les primers sont
matters de record, et charters le roy: les auters sont escripts, dicts, et
edicts del certain homes: primer me^t pur les primers, mittomus cest
foundement derive del effects et uses et customs del predecessors, et certain
adjuncts incidents a les dits chooses. Ceo que est use de temps del un roy puys
auter, one l'assent del judges et auters sages del ley, et don't les charters et
records sont enrolles en leschequer, come chooses de effect, et come
foundations al accoumpts, ne poet estre dit torcious. Car ley n'est scye (...)
non per usage, et usage prove que il est ley. Mes que mines de ore et argent,
en auters soyles sont al roygne per prerogative, est consonant al use etc.
Vide, A A A. Ergo il n'est torcious.


A A A. Le minor est confirm per diverse precedentes, et mat ters de record
horse de lesch equer que est l^ court del revenues le roy en te^ps de diverse
royes: les ^cords sont primerment recitees et so^t en troys manners, ascuns sont
charters fait de grant de mines de ore et argent en auter soil: Vide, O O.
Ascuns prouont accoumpts de revenue del tyel mines en auter soil, d'estre
rendue al roy. R R. Ascuns prouont que le roy ad impled pernours del prosite
des owres etc. in terre de auters. N N N.
Puys, lour anctoritie est confirm. B B.


O O. Les records del 1. genre sont huyct: 1 En temps le roy, E. 3. 32. Anno.
2. Fuit charter le roy: R. 2. (...). en le explicacation du quel, est conteigne
cest syll: Si le owre de ore et argent est al roy, le ley done a luy means de
vener a ceo, que est per four. Mes le owre de ore et argent est al roy. Ergo
le ley done a luy means de vener a ceo, que est per four.
3. Per le roy: H. 4. 2. 4. Per le roy. H. 6. 5. 5. Per le roy. H. 6. 11. 6.
Per le roy. E. 4. 15. 7. Per le roy. E. 4. 18. 8. Per le roy. H. 7. 1.


R R. Ceus de second espece sont deux: L'un accoumpt fuit fait et rendue en
l'eschecquer sur le lease del mines de ore et argent et quiure fait per le roy
Ed. le tierce a Johan Balauncer, et Walter Goldbeater: per quel apiert que le
roy fuit responde del 20. marks pur le primer an, et ryens pur le second an,
pur ceo que les lessees moreront, et le roy auoyt grant les mines as auters.
Lauter accoumpt fuit fait per Henry euesque de Winchester Cardinal
d'engleterre, un del executors John Duke de Bedford, fermour de les mines de
ore et argent en les counties de Deuon. et Corn. de le 15. part del pure argent
reserve sur le grant, s. de le 15. iour de December an: 22. H. 6. iesques al
16. iour de August an. 23* mesme le roy: et sur ceo accoumpt il rende trent
size lyuers pois de pure argent, et deux ounces surdant de mesme le 15. part.


N N. N'est forsques, un example de pernours del owre, impledees per le roy.
36. H. 6. s. ceo de Roger Chambe^oume, que pur son discharge fuit chase de suer
al roy pur pardon, sachant per son counsel, que il ne puyst defender le matter
per le comen ley.

BB Lautoritie del records auandits est confirm en deux manners 1. ^er un
general axiom. que est tiel, ^es Records de chescune court sent le pluts
effectual proufes del ley en chooses treates en ceo court: et ceo que est use
en un court, est lay en touts courts, et per tout le realm: sic hic, null
proof del revenue le roy est pluts fortque les records del court en que le re
uenue est rend s. Leschequer. le axiom an^ntdit est prove per le particular
enume ration de les special matters subjects del courts le roy, Car Quant ^l
matters del corone, s. en appeals de felony, et endytementes de murder et
treason, et ty^s semblables, (...) question surde, quel est ley en tyels chooses
et quel non, les Records del bank le roy, sont le pluis effectual proof de
ceo: et c^o qu^est use l^ doit estre prise come proof del ley ^er tout le
realm. Car ceo court treat de tiels chooses et a jurisdiction te eux, et les
records la, sont tesm^ignes del ley en ^ux points. ^t les Records et
precedentes del comen bank, in le property delbiens on ch^telsteals o^
personals, on droits o^ tytles en terres et tenementes. Ergo codem modo les
Records del ^schequer, pur chooses concernants le reuen^e le ^oye, et que
opperteign^nt al ^oye et que port on attr^t revenue al ^oy, et ^o est confirm
per le recital del sp^al cases don't judgment fuit done accordant al Records
del exchequer. M. M.


MM. Les special cases sont ceux Primerment le case de Littleton cap. socag.
que action de accoumpt ne gist verse executors pur ascun, st non pur le roy
tantsolement, est prove per le Records del eschequer, lou accoumpts pur duities
le roy sont discuss and responde, et que accoumpera, et que nemy. 2. In le
case vouche per Littleton cap. de grand seriantie, horse del. II. H 4. Cockein
chief baron demand des justices del comen bank, s^ un tient del roy a trouer
a luy un home al guerre deins les 4. meres, si fuit grand seriantie ou nemy, on
fuit responde, que fuit: et adonques it demand s^ le roy auera relief
solonque le value del terre ou nemy, ad quod non fuit responsum, car ils ne
besoigne de responder luy a ceo, pur ceo que si fuit grand seriantie, il poet
seyer per le usage en le eschequer, quel sum il payera etc. 3. Et dillonques
vient le notice del ley a Littleton, que s^ le villeine le roy purchase biens,
et alien eux deuant seiser, que uncore le roy poet eux seiser apres, car
tyelment fuit le usage del eschequer, en quel court tiels biens fueront
respondue al roy, et la il apprise, quod nullum tempus occurrit regi. 4. Issint
en le case sir William Sentlow, que a mary le feme de sir William Candish, mise
per Gerard per que il apiert, que si ascun est accoumptant al roy, ou si ascun
money ou biens ou chatels personals del roy, veigne al mains dascu^ subject per
matter de record, ou matter en fait, que le terre de tiel subject est charge
pur ceo, et subject al seizure le roy, en quecunque mains que il veigne apres,
soitil per descent, o^ purchase, ou anterment. 5. Et sur semblable reason le
case est rule in 50. lib. Ass. lou un R. auoit rec^aue certain b^s de sir Hugh
Spencer que suit atteint, per que les denyers attient al roy. R. que auoit les
ioyntement oue sa feme, morust: et per agreement de touts les justices, le
term e^les mains le femme suruiuor fuit charge al execution le roy pur les
denyers. Car le roy pu^t aver execution de ceo en le vie le baron, que fuit
garrant per moults records en le eschequer.


Iesques icy nous auons propose le confirmation del Records, per vne general
axiom prouee per diverse specials: ore est a dire del second proof, que est un
argument a fortiore. Les reports de nostre ley sont fait pur le pluis grand
part de les parols et dits de les judges, et ceo en que ils assentont est prise
de estre le ley. Ergo a fortiori lour judgments et lour affairs entres de
Record en courts, doyent estre prise de cy grand, ou pluis grande effect, que
lour parols, ou dits.


Ore est adire de second kind de testimonies s. de les escripts, dicts, et
edicts de certain homes, Et sont quater. le quart de qucux est illustre per un
argument a diuersis. 1. Fuit dit per Gerard que en le liver appelle
expositiones vocabulorum que fuit mise en print 40. ans pass, il est declare
que mines de ore et argent en quecunque terres que ils sont, afferont al roys
de realm. 2. Issint Wray dit, que Hesket apprentice que fuit perbien apprise
en le ley, en son lecture extant sur le statute de charta forrestae, affirmast,
que s^ fueront mines de ore et argent en terre del subjects deins le forest,
que ceux afferont al roy. 3. Issint il dit que il auoyt view les leys de saint
Edward le confessor, en queux fuit conteigne, quod thesauri de terra pertinent
domino regi. 4. Issint dit Barrham del leys William Conqueror queux il auoyt
view, queux auoyent semblables parolles, queux leys fueront recites a luy per
les sages del realm a ceo iures, que ils deuant mesme le roy W. Conqueror
verament reciteront les leys detterre, nihil praetermittentes. Queux parolles
Thesauri de terra, les dits seriaunts pristeront pur owres de ore et argent, et
nient pur treasor troue. Car disoyent que ils sont appelles, Thesauri in terra,
et nemy de terra, et issent diuersa.


assets est dit de les arguments que fueront in confirmando, ore est besoigne
de dire de les arguments in confutando. Car il poet estre dupliciter object 1.
tyelment per un argument a toto. Touts les prerogatives le roy sont conteines
en le treatise de praerogatiua regis. Mes que le roy aueroyt les owres etc.
n'est conteigne en le treatise de praerogatiua regis. Ergo n'est ascune
prerogative le roy.


A cest objection il est dupliciter respondue: Car le proposition, s. le mayor
est false pur deux causes. Primerment, le treatise de praerogatiua regis n'est
ascun cause per quel le roy aueroyt ceux prerogatives. Car le'effect ne poet
preceder le cause. Mes les prerogatives la recitees en manner touts sueront al
roy deuant le dit treatise escrye. Ergo ceo treatise n'est cause del
prerogatives le roy, le minor, ou assumption est prove ab adiuncto temporis,
car le pluis grand part de eux est recite per Britton en son lyeur en le
chapter de trouers et de droits le roy quel lyeur fuyt fayt deuant le treatise
de praerogatiua regis. 2. N'est ascun argument a toto ad parts, car le
treatise auantdit n'est totum, en respect del particular prerogatiuts le roy.
Car ceo treatise ^e conteigne touts les prerogatives le roy, mes part de cux:
et issiut le argument nient conclude. Et il est prove que ceo treatise ne
conteigne touts les prerogatives le roy, per un induction de moults special
prerogatives, ^ent comprehends en ceo treatise, tielment. NN.


NN. 1. Le roy auera action on sutte d'accoumpt verse les executours del
testator le roy, per prerogative done a luy per le ley. 2. Il auera les biens
son villcine vende deuant seisur. 3. Il seysers le terre que fuit a cesty que
doit render accoumpt a luy, ou que auoyt receu ascune biens ou chateux del roy,
en quecunque mains que mesme le terre veigne apres. 4. Il poet wayuer issue, et
demurrer en ley, ou econtr^, poet wayuer demurrer, et plcader al issue. 5. Il
auera treasure troue. 6. Il auera escheate de eux attteint de treason. 7.
Deuant l'estatute de 1. Ed. 3. il aueroyt en feel terre tenus de luy, et alien
sans license. 8. Il auera, pur satisfaction de sa det, ceo que est deliver en
court en execution al dettour le roy. Ed. 3. 43. 9. Sl le patron ne present
deins 6. moys, et le euesque ct apres luy de metropolitan suffer le laps, ou
(...) euesqu^ patron, et le metropolitan suffer le laps, le roy auera le
presentment, per son prerogative: 27. E. 3. Et uncore ceux prerogatives ne sont
recite en le treatise de praerogatiua regis. Ergo le treatise de praerogatiua
regis ne conteigne touts les prerogatives le roy.


Le second objection est tyel ab adiuncta iniuria. Ceo que touch le
francktenement et inheritance del subject, ne doyt estre fayt per le roy, Mes
de four terre, et prender dillonques (...) owre, quel est part del soil,
touch le fran^tenement le subject. Ergo le roy ^e doit ceo fair. (...).


LL. Le mayor, le proposition du cesty syllogism est false: que poet estre
prove perdeux arguments. ^e primer est a pari, a le pareil. Car sicome
prescription et usage poet doner title ou interest al subject en le
franktenement ou inheritance le roy, come in commen, ou boy, ou estouers claim
per prescription en le terre del roy, ou en wayues, estrayes, wrecks, ou tiels
semblables pertinent de droyt al roy, et uncore claim per prescription per les
subjects: Issint et per mesme le reason, prescription et usage poet doner al
roy title ou interest en auter fra^ktenement: call il ne serra de pyer co^ditio^
que le subject, que auera ceo per prescription verse les subjects et verse le roy.
Le second est derive del un enumeration de special prerogatives que le roy ad
en franktenements dauters. FF.


FF. 1. Deuant le estatute de magna charta, le roy per son prerogative puit
entrer en auter boys et prendre arbres pur reparation de ces castles. 2. Deuant
l'estatute de charta forestae. cap. 2. le roy puit afforester le boys del auter
home per que il fuit restraygne de succider son boys demesne sans license. 3.
Il apiert P. 7. H. 3. que le roy, et auter per son commandment poet
enfreinder un stewe, que est auter francktenement, et prendre le pische pur son
provision per force de son prerogative. 4. Uilleine, que est le francktenement
et l'inheritaunce d'un auter, vient en le presence le roy: le seigniour del
villeine, ne puit luy prendre en le presence le roy, 27. lib. Ass. Car le
presence le roy est protection pur luy pur le temps. 5. Si le roy ad rent
charge en fee horse del ascun terre il poet distreyner pur ceo per son
prerogative, en tout auter terre de cesty que le doyt payer: 13. E. 4. Mes en
touts ceux cases, le francktenement et inheritance del auter est touch. Ergo
le roy poet per prescription aue^ prerogatives touchant le francktenement
dauter.


Touts ceux arguments fueront faits del part le roygne. Ex part comitis,
Shirbourne sole, allege le opinion de Newton: 19. H. 6. per implication deste
al contrary: ou il dit, que si home done terre en fee que ne vault 40. d. et
percase le terre per casuel adventure en cell, come per mine de ore ou argent
troue, vault per an 100. li. Si i'impledee vouche le feoffor al garranty, i^
poet monstrer coment le terre ne vault forsques 40. d. al temps de feoffement,
et a cel i^ est prist dentrer en le garranty, ceo serra bon plee, et ne
garrentera pluys que fuit al temps del ^ment. Mes sil enter generalment en le
garrantie, il rendra in value tant come il estore: ex que dit (il dit) que fuit
imply per l'int^nt del Newto^, que le mine de ore et argent serra recover oue
le terre, et ne serra al roy.

Quant al second general point fuit infer pur le roygne, que si issint soit
que le roygne auera per prerogative touts les mines de ore et argent en les
terres de subjects, que de ceo il voet ensuer en manner come consequent, que il
doyt aver ceux ow res et mines de quiure ore en question, s. cybien le
cinquecent mill pois contenus en le primer ple en bar, come l'auter cent
mill pois contenus en le second bar: plusors sont reasons. Le primer est
quast a part precipua que treyt a luy le tout Si le ore et argent apperteine
al roy, donques lequiure apperteigneroit: car le ore ou arge^t et le quiure
sont ensemble, et en le seile indivisible, et leur commix ture fait cuxcome vne
chose entier: and omne magis dignum trahit ad se minus dignum, come ere et
argent le quiure: cest confirm per troys specialles que sont semblables. (4.)
Mes le ore et argent apperteigne al roy, et est confess que mesme s^zcentmille
pois de quiure conteigne en soy ore ou argent. Ergo le quyure a luy
apperteigneroit.
Le second est ab adiuncta absurditate, Si nuiure apperteigne al subjects que
ne poet estre severe mes per foundre, issint le roy serroit servant al subject
pur four et foundre son quyure. Mes ceo est tout irreasonable et absurd. Ergo
il ne apperteigneroit al subjects, mes al roy.



4. ^n cause del charters del inheritance esteantes en un cyste ou box
enseale, s^ le possessor ent morust, les charters affer^nt al heir, et le
box, si fuit ouert, al executours: Mes entau^t que est enseale, et issint les
charters, et le box sont fait vne chose entier, et les charters so^t pluis
precious que le box le heir que ad property al charters, auera le box auxi,
et nyent les executors, sur le reason auantdit. Issint si vne chariot que est
traye oue size chiuals eschew sur un, et luy tue: les chiualles serront forfayt
al roy come Deodand cybien come le charyot que ^ue ^home, pur ceo que ils
fueront attache al chariot, et issint fueront come un chose ensemble, que
occasionont son mort. Issint si obligation est fait a deux, ou deux sont
possess d'un chyuall, et l'un est attaint, le roy auera le obligation, et tout
le duitie, ou le chyuall, pour ceo que il est chose entier. Donques per
semblable reason et ley, pur ceo que le ore (...) argent et le quiure sont
ensemble, et en le soil indivisible, et lour commixture fait ^ux entier, le
roy auera tout ensemble. Quia magis dignum etc.


3. A genere tyelment, Touts mines ^t owres porta^ts ore ou argent et base
mettayle en semble que sont en soil dauters perteignont al royne: et ceo est
prove per specials. (...). Records don't le Primer est a^. 7. E. 3. 2. 17. R. 3.
3. 7. H. 4. 4. 17. H. 6. 5. 30. H. 6. 6. 31. H. 6. 7. 33. H. 6. 8. 34. H. 6. 9.
2. E. 4. 10. 3. E. 4.
2. accoumpts rende al roy don't, Le primer suit fait per William Wymoundham del
profits del mines en les counties de Deuon. et Corn. del 12. ^our de August.
An. 22. E. (...). iesques le 23. de September, 25. eiusdem regis. Le second per
William de Aulton clerk pur les profits del mines en les counties de Deuon. et
Corn. de^ quart del March, 26 E. 1. iesques le 18. de April, 27. eiusdem
regis. Le tierce, per Matthew Craw. thorn, de les mines in Deuon. et Corn 15.
E. 3. Le quart per John Maneron que succeed Crawthorne, fait del 19. E. 3.
iesques al 23. ^iusdem regis. Le si^que per un Roba^ Glouer.

Mes le informa tion conteime que cest mine co^teigne en luy ore et argent a
uec le quiure: et n'est dedit per respons, mes pleinement confess. Ergo cest
mine e^ le terre le count perteigne al ^oyne:


Le quatt est deduct horse de les vits records et est a genere, Issint, Teuts
mines en quex est asc^n argent o^ ore, apperteigne al roy, Mes les mines de
quyure conteignone argent, Car null mine d'estayne est void d'argent: Ergo
touts les mines de quy^re apperteigne al roy.


Et ceo est confirm per charter le roy Edw. le primer grant al subjects del
count de Cornewale, confirm per le charter le roy R. 2. que fuit mitigate per
lesta: de 50. E. 3. per queux apiert que lour authority en Cornewale et Deuon.
de four et de aver estayne fuit derive del roy: et certain quantity del
estayne est payable al corone pur tyel liberty i^sque a ceo iour: come en
ascun lieus en le county de Darby le roy ad certain quantity del plumbe sur
consideration que argent est en ceo, et que il absteynera de vser le extremity
de son prerogative. Mes en Darbyshire et ailours ou sterile mines de plumbe ont
este apiert tout temps, et le roy nauoyt ascun profit, les subjects ^a p^ient
prescriber pur ceo verse le roy, et le four et prisel del plumb sans payment,
est prescription pur le pays, ^t come Hesket auantdit tient, le prescription en
tiel case est bone. Car il y auoit diversity del mines de plumbe, car ascunes
fueront fertile, cestassauoir, conteignants en eux ore ou argent: et ascuns
sterile, cestassauoir, sans ore, ou argent.

Iesques icy del part le royne: ore est a dire del respons fait per part le
count, et ceo en deux manners. Car Primerment ils, supposant le authority de
Records estre tresgrande, d^nont a eux un re^sonable exposition. Car il ny ad
ascu^e mine de estayne, de quiure, ou de plumbe, ne de far, mes que asc^ ore
(...) argent poet etr^ treat ou finate horse de ceo (et ^ssint le roy aueroit
touts mines de base m^ale deins le realm, que est absurd) donques ^y le roy
auera ceux prerogatives, ou le ore et argent que est en le base mettale, excede
le value del base mettale, ou al meins suff^st al porter touts les expenses
destre defray entour le acquisition de ceo, it s^lon cest exposition ils
primerment interpretont les parols del records et le maxim de magis digno, p^s
print exception contre l'information. A A. 1. ils denyont tam bien. Le
authority de Records, come chooses faits al importunate request de eux que suer
ont al royes ^ur gaigne^, et tolerate per les subjects, to que ils aueront
part del gain, issint ils vituperant l'effect pur le cause etc. Come ceo que
est collect de^ charier le royes al ceux de Cornewale: Car apiert per les
parols del charter que lour liberty ne prist original commencement, mes
t^solement confirmation et direction per ceux charters et coment que le roy ad
ascun profit. ceo nest en respect de ascun interest en le chose, mes pur
porter le charge des officers, s. tryers, controllers etc. si come il ad del
merchants, car il appoint serchers etc. Queux auont s^ ipends de les merchants
etc. tam^n n^nt ascun property in lour merchandise etc.



A A. Selo^ l'exposition auant dit, ils primerment interpretont Ceux parolls,
aliquid auri vel argenti habetur, issint que ceo aliquid soit tant que vault le
charge del Four et sercher etc. car auterment cest aliquid, n'est aliquid, mes
cest aliquid nihil est, et meyns que nihil, Car ex nihil home auera nihil, mes
icy de cest aliquid il auera perde, si pur acquirer le ore de value de 4. d. il
serra al charge de 5. d. Et le maxim, quod omne magis dignum etc. Car ceo est
intendible ou le chose pluis digne est de ascun value, ou de pluis value que le
base chose est. Car de minimis non curat lex, come en action de wast del 2. d
le plaintiff nauera judgment: et cest lour interpretation de ceux parols de
etre intelligibles lou fuit grand abondance de ore en les mines est confirm
per le reservation del roy H. 4. S. Nonam libram de argento puro inde
proueniente, issint que le roy intend grande quantity de argent de estre en
les mines, entant que il n'ad reserve ascun part dauter metal.
puis reprehendont l'information per argument a descriptione. Car, Information
pur le roy est le declaration le roy, quel doit conteiner certeintie, issint
que le party auera perfect science a quel chose respo^dera, et le court de
quel chose il adiudgera. Mes icy per l'information et le respons est disclose
et confess que le count ad prise sizecentmille pois de owre de quiure
conteignant en soy ore ou argent troue et fowe en son terre demesne, s.
sinquecentmille pois en mine apert puis que le count fuit seigniour del soil,
et centmille pois en mine en son soil apert deuant que il fuit seigniour del
soil: et ne api^rt si le ore et argent en tyel owre fuit de greinder value que
le quyure ou al meyns d'ascun value ouster le charge de acquisition, et ouster
le base mettell, pur sacher le loyalty del fayt del count. Ergo n'est bon
Information.



Iesques icy del general points ore est a dire del special, que est prove del
part le count per un enthymeme conteynant leffect et grant le roy et royne: a
partibus ad totum. Le roy et royne P. et M. ont en l'une case grant al count
le terre en que le owre fuit, et en lauter case le mine per le nome de touts et
singular mines. Car le vain don't les 500000. pois etc. ne fuit mine al temps
del date al count, eo que fuit close, pur ceo passera per grant del soil,
come part de soil. Mes en le second plee le vain passera per nome de mines,
car le vain fuit patent etc. Cest antecedent del enthymeme est pleinement
illustre per un amplisication del objections que poent estre fait del auter
part encounter le count: et cest preoccupation est derive del diverse adjuncts
incidents al patents le roy et royne QQQ.
Ergo tout ceo que est conteigne en l'information perteigne al count.


QQQ. Les adjuncts incidents al fait et patents sont, primerment recites
briefement, et opposes encounter les objections del auter part car les pa*
rols, De gratia sua speciali, pretend grand favor le roy, et son bountifulnes
verse le patentee. Ex certa scientia pretend pleine intelligence de roy et royne
en le matter, et exclude tout ignorance. Ex mero motu, testify, que il nauoit
ascun suyt ne suggestion de patentee, mes que le primer motion, et tout le
sequel al perfection del patent proceed del roy mesme, et pur ceo, le effect
del patent serra le pluis amplement extend al benefice le patentee.
secondement pluis amplifies, Tam bien per un distinct proposition de les
objection (...) et several applying de respons, B B, Come de nouel confirmation
d^ ceo per induction de specialls. S S.



B B. Do^ques le, Primer objection est tyel, car, Ascun de part le roy et royne
poet dire, que quant ils granteront le terre, que ils ne conusteront que tyel
vain de owre fuit en ceo, ou quant ils graunteont omnes and singulas mineras,
que ils ne conusteront que ore ou argent fuit en les mines.
respons est, 1. Propose tielment. Sir, ils mesme ont tesmoigne le contrary,
south le grand seal dengleterre, que est tesmoigne de verite, et nient
impugnable en eredit. Car, ont dit, ex certa scie^tia, que est tant a dire, qne
ils ont conusance de chescune chose material.
2. Confirm per un argument, a maiori* In 43. E. 3. Thorp dit, si un manor a
que un auowson est appendant soit en le main le roy per escheate, ou purchase,
si le roy a ceo iour done le manor a un home auxi entierment come un tiel
tenoyt deuant que il vient en nostre mains per voy descheate, ou que un tiel
tenoit que nous enfeoffa, le auowson passera, sans dire, cum soedis and
aduocationibus: et le cause est pur ceoque le ley ente^d en tiel case, que le
roy est apprise de sa droit, quod curia concessit la, et si serra dit issint en
ceo case, ou n'est prise mes per implication que le roy est apprise de son
droyt: a fortiore serra prise issint, l'ou le roy issint dit perexpresse
parolles.


Second, O. Tierce, R.


O. Le second objection, Si ascune voet dite que les parolls serron^ strait^ent
prise verse le patentee, et beneficialment verse le roy ct le royne.
respons, Sir, ceo patent fuit fait per le roy ct royne de gratia sua speciali:
per queux parols ils signifiont lour favor et grace al patentce, et per ceo
donont intelligence que les parolles serront fauorablement interpret et
largemente extend a son benefit et commodity, et estraitment verse le royne.



R. Letierce, objection, Si home voet dire que le patentee ad done information
al roy et royne, et ad fait suit de aver grant, et pur ceo chescun parol serra
prise estraitement verse luy.
respons: Sir, le roy ct le royne ont tesmoigne le contrary, car ils ont dit,
que le grant est fait ex mero motu suo, per quel ils voilent, que c^o fait de
sour mere motion prendra effect amplement.



S. S. Le nouel confirmation est per induction de siz special cases, ^u ceux
parols, ex gratia speciali, certa scientia, et mero motu, sont semblablement
expoundes. 1. Per Hussy. 9. H. 7. 2. que prist difference inter patent ex
certa scientia, et per informamur. 2. 1. H. 7. 13. en charter de pardon. 3. 3.
H. 7. 6. en case de prior de Norwich. 4. 22. E. 4. 44. en case abbe de Waltam.
5. 36. et 37. H. 6. 24. eu le case de Quatermaynes. 6. 41. E. 3. lib. Assis.
19. License de doner en mortmaine. A cest derniere case est adioigne un auter
reason, que si le count nauera l^s mines, donques riens passer^ per ceux
parolles, omnes and singulas mineras etc. et en le general conclusion est dit
que le patent fuit fait deuent lestatute de 4. et 5. de le raygne de les dits
roy et royne, fayt touchant ^our letters patentes, and sic, est mult aid per
cest statute, que patents serront beneficialment expound pur le patentee, nient
obstant le defect del very nosmer de l^s natures, genres et sorts de les
hereditaments cent^nes in uels letters patents.


Le counsel le roy encounter ceo, et co^ sider deux points Le primer est, si
per le grant de soil en que le owre fuit, fait ex gratia speciali, certa
scientia and mero motu, le owre de quyure conteignant ore, ou arge^t (le vayn
de quel ne fuit apert, mes secret) passera al patentee, ou nemy, et semble a
eux, que nemy, Car. 1. Issint arguont, Ceo que vient al roy en respect que il
est possessor del corone, ne passera per grant de terre Vide, L. L. L. Mes le
owre de ore et argent apperteigne al roy come il est possessor del corone, et
nemy del terre: et en ceo respect il ad le owre en son soil, et en soil
d'auter. Ergo ne passera etc. Car sil alien le soil, il n'ad per ceo alien ceo
point de prerogative sa corone en sa soil.
2. Issint, et est respons al dit argument sur ceux parolles ex gratia speciali
etc. Tar le patent que est issint fait, ^erra prise fauorablement al patentee:
mes ceo est quant al chose express en le patent, que les parolles monstre de
estre entende de passer, mes ceo ne voet fair auter chose de passer que n'est
express per parolls de patent destre entende. Car si le roy grant et entende
un chose, tyels parolls ne poyent fair deux chooses de passer, come est en le
case de Prior, de Wenlocke: Nou^ natura bre: Fol. 232.

Le second est, si per le grant fait de touts mines, oue les parols su^dits,
si ceo mine de quiure conteigna^t ore ou argent passera al patentee ou nemy, et
semble a eux que nemy. P. P. P.


L. L. L. Cest mayor, seu propositio est prove per enumerati on de, Particular
chooses del prerogative que ne passont per done le soil, come Wayue, Fstray,
Wreck, Et tyels semblableschoses que sont collateral a le terr e.
Special cases ceo confirmants don't le Primer est de manor deins un forest le
roy escheate al roy et done per le roy al auter etc. Second est le lyuery
grau^^ al heir de tenant le roy en capite, en quel le clause de salua al feme
sa Dower per le roy assignanda, n'est conteigne. Tierce est en 31. E. 3. de un
aduow^n, descend a troys coperceners et Fitz: Quar^ impedit 1.



P P. P. Quant alseco^d point, et le grant specify ^n le second plee, s. de
omnibus and singulis mineris, il est tielme^t argue encounter le count, 1.
Issint. Terms en patentes de roys que comprehendont chooses annexe al corone ou
prerogative royal, ou de grand importance et chose de pluis base degree,
serront prise et construe de fair les chooses base solement de passer al
patentees, et ceo est confirm per special cases. R. R. R. mes en c^o patent
est is issint. Car sont deux ma ners de myns mines royal que consist de ore ou
^argent ou de base met^alles conteignant en soy ore ou arge^t. Base mines que
consist solement de base mettalle et substance s. quyure, estayne, plumbe far
ou carbones, et neyant en eux ore ou argent.
Ergo en ceo patent les terms serront construe de fair le base mines pass^r,
et nemy le royal.
2. 4. 4. 4. 3.


R. R. R. Special cases. 1. En. 22. E. 3. lib. ass. 45. En grant al master ^e
S. Lenard de bonis felo^um, vbi excipitu^ treitor. 2. En return de touts manner
de briefes grant alvn, ou somons sont except, car touch le roy. 3. En grant
de fynes, issues etc. de s^s tenants; il nau^ ^ynes del home que est tenant de
luy et del auter. 4. En 3 E 3, ^z assise 4 45. de pount eschew et destre
repair^ ou general charter le roy ne excuse le abbe que fuit charge pe^
special cause. 5. En 9. H. 6. 56. En grant le roy de terres en f^ oue
garrantie, le patentee ne recouera en value sans express parols. Car garrantie
ad deux ^ffects, ^une a rebutter, et ceo il fra la: lauter a recover en value,
et ceo n^ fra en l^ case le roy sans precise parols. 6. En 2. H. 7. 6. En le
case del count de Northumberland, lou le grant le roy des amerciamentes en
ty^l county, ne tra'y^ les amerciamentes del vicount, coroner, ou auter grand
officer pur son ^sdemeanour, car ceux sont royal amerciaments. 7. En 43. E. 3.
15. lib. ass. En grant le roy d^ duchy de Cornewale a son eigne ^s, ou per
general grant, un special guard ne passa. 8. 5. E. 2. Fitz Quareimpedit. 165.
ou le roy pur aduowson en le county Palantine de Durrham suist Quare impedit
en le common banck, lo^ pleder al jurisdiction del court grant per le roy, ne
excuse le p^adar. 9. 3. E. 3. Fitz. Grant: 102. Ou le r^y auoyt grant a un
abbe que il puit amorttser terres al value de 100. s. ^t uncore ne puit
purchase auowson tenus del roy en chief. Cest case differ del case en 4 lib.
ass. cite del auter part: car la, le charter le roy nosme le mease etc iss^t
que ne poet estre entende, que il fuit ignorant del tenure, mes icy in 34. E.
3. Le patent est general que il amortisera terre de value le 100. s. etc. Come
dit Wray apprentice: mes auters ceo denyent, car le aduouson fuit hic nosme
auxi. 10. 19 Fitz: Grant: 58. lou license le roy de appropre l'aduowson ne
puit fair aduowson tenus del roy destre appropre. 11. 1. H. 7 23. et 26. En
case de^ sanctuary, ou le charter le roy general ne ^uist sufficient de fair
sanctuary pur treason. 12. 18. H: 8: Brook Estates: 84: et Patents, 104. En le
case de Bowrehall en Essex, l'ou fuit tenus, que null estate de inheritance
passers, nyent obstant les parolls de gratia speciali, etc, per queux le roy
auoyt grant ceo a un home et ses heirs males. Donques les parols en charters
le roy enureront al comen ^ntent, et ne deuesteront del roy, chooses de haut
degree, ne chose^ a^ere al corone in point de prerogative.


4 4 4. Secondment ils respo^d a ceo que est dit del auter part Car quant a ceo
que Shi^borne dit, que s^ le count nauera les mines royal, il auera ryens per
le parolle, Mines, ^ar le base mines passeront per le grant del terre. Sir,
que adonques? ils sont parols de surplisage pur mines en mesme le terre, come
sont les parols de graunter gards, maryages, et escheates, que sont plusors
foits mise en patentes: ou auterment p^ient prendre ^ffect pu^ mines que Henry
le count auoyt en terres dauters. ^t quant a lestatute de 4. et 5. P. et M.
Barrham dit, que voyer est que l'act fait les letters patents bon nyent obstant
l^ defect, del very nosmer de le natures*, genres, et sorts de les
hereditamentes: mes ceo serra solo^que le tenor de mesme les letters patentes.
Et voyer est que l'act dit que les letterspatentes serront expound pluis
beneficialment pur les patentees, mes solonques les parols et purport de les
letters patents, et sur ceo ils issint conclude. Si en le parol, terre, en lun
case le owre royal nest grant: ne en le parol, mines, en lauter case:
donques, le ct nextende me^ al base owre: et pur ceux serra benefificialment
expound en auantage del patent^e: car ceo est solonque le tenor et purport del
patents. Mes en le parol, terre, en lune case etc. Ergo le act nex^d ^es al
nature del base owre etc. car ^extender al owre royal, serra contrary a^
purport del patent.



7. 7. 7. 3. Deux several opin^o^s de ceux de ceo part sont recite, car ascu^s
arguont Issint Ceo que est incident al corone inseparablement, ne poet estre
grant ou severe del corone, per express paroll. Mes ceo mine, est ^ant mine
royal, est incident al corone inseparablement, come escheate pur ^reason: Ergo
per express parolles ceo mine ne puit ^stre grant ou sever del corone, multo
minus sans express parolls.
Aascuns encounter ceo, a maiori. Si le ley soit ti^l que le roy poet graunter
point de sa prerogative a auter, a ^ortiore il le poet en nostre case, ou le
chose n'est que revenue ou pro^te del corone, que poet estre icy bien lease ou
demise a auter, sans r^nt, come pur rent. mes le ley est tyel: que est prove
per deux special cases Le primer est en 20. E. 3. Fitz. Corone. 12. 5. lou le
roy auoyt grant as cytisens de Loundres que null gagera battle verse eux en
appeal et uncore ceo est un chose annexe pluys prochein^ al prerogative le
roy, et al person le roy. Le second est issint: s^ home prist les bi^ns le roy
torciouesment le roy poet prendre ou seiser ses biens tanque i^ ad fait
restitution, come le comen use del eschequer est, uncore le roy grant ceo al
ville de Lynne. 8. R. 2. Fitz. Grant pl^ito vl^mo.
Ergo multo magis il poet en nostre case etc.



Hactenus des argu ments in v^amque partem: ore del opinion des Justices que
est co^ cernant, Le matter en ley, in les points. General, ^r Pur le primer
ils agreont. Que touts mines d'ore et arge^t, en quecunque soil, perteigne al
roy per prerogative, oue liberty de four, caryer etc. Que mines de quyure,
estayne, p^, ou far sans ore ou arge^t, perteigne al proprietor del soil,
^ar ^n base mettayle, null prerogative. Et per Baron F^euil, que ^l y ad quiure
in vne vein sans ore, et in four outer il aptert ore, et petite d'^uter
m^ttayle, ceo serra dit mine de quyure de ore, et nyent de quyure solement.
Pur le second, fuit agree per Harper, Southcot, et Weston, que s^ le value de
ore ou arge^t ne exceed le value del bese mettayle, tout (...) al proprictor
del terre: mes si exceed, tout est al roy, et serra ^it Mine Royal.
Special, Fuit agree per touts, que touts mines Royal, soyent de pure ore ou
argent, ou soyent de base mettayle contey^ ^re ou ^rgent, poyent per apt
paroll^ estre grant, ^ar ne sont inseparablement incident al corone. Fuit
agree per to^ts forsque les ^oys auantdits, et per eux auxi, si ceux mines in
question ^nt royal mines, que les ^wres in le primer ple spec^e ^er grant del
soil, ne le mine in le second per grant del mines, ^e passeront al count per
le patent, mes beso^gne d'auer special parolls, car soil et my ne icy serront
prise al common intent pur base mines etc. Lact del 4 et 5. P. et M. ne aid: car
l'inte^t del charter est del mines base, et nextend al mines royal, mes per
Dyer s^ null mine soit forsque royal, donque pass^roit, car aliter les parols
serroint void, ^s i^y s^nt auters mines, s* base pe^que etc et per mesme (...)
Dyer co^tque le mine in le primer p^ ne fuit api^t al temps de^ date de^
pate^t, vncor^ s^rra dit mine, car de Mineris aliquae su^t occul^ae, and
aliquae apertae. Catlyn dit, que, les parols ad humilem petitionem eiusdem
comiti^, diminuont le force des parols, ex gratia speciali etc.

Le pleading ^t information. L'informatio^ fuit challe^g per Mead, quia ne fuit
mo^stre en quel vi^ o^ H^mel New^ands ^mes fuit respo^d, que ne besoigue, quia
^'est en effect ^orsque pur trespass, et null serra recover forsque da^mages:
contra in action real, car l'a sur recovery, (...) vicount ne puit luy metter
en ^tsin sa^ notice del v^lle etc. Le pleading del part le co^te suit (...):
car doit a^er mo^stre que le ^ne conteigne forsque petite ore, ne tant come
ferra les charges: mes ceo il ne ad fait, i^aque per le general confession que
i^ ad ore, serra prise pluis beneficialme^t put le roigne encounter le
pleadant, que il ad assets del ore. Imo touts forsque les tr^ auantdits agree
que tout serra al ro^gne, comentque le bas^ ^tayle soit de gre^nder ualue,
coque est confess que as^ ore et argent fuit en ^o.



A Logical Analysis of Stanfords crown pleaes.
Plees del corone, sont que co^teigne offenses faits encounter le corone et
dignity le roy atque hic Stanford agit, 1. del nature des dits offenses, vbi
fait ascauoir que les accessories deuant, s. les procurers, ou apres s. les
receiuors ou favorers, pari paena plectentur. Stanf. 40: 41: 42. 43: Home poet
estre accessory al accessory, sil felonice receive un accessory, 43. b. et la,
44: Licet un statute que fait ascune chose felony, ne parle des procurers et
receivers, uncore serront deins l'^statute. Offenses encounter le corone sont.
Felony, que est offense del corone, immediate verse un common person, et co^cerna
les Biens, A. A. Le person, B: B:
Treason, que est offense del Corone immediate encounter l'estate le roy and
royalme, estque Grand Come compasser ou imaginer le mort le roy, sa roigne,
lour eigne fits, violare le roigne, ou leigne file le roy nyent mary, ou le
feme l'eigne fits le roy; Lever guerre, adherer as enemies le roy: counter
feiter le grand ou privy seal, ou sa money: porter faux money in le realm
cou^terfait au money dengleterre, tuer Chauncellor, Treasuror, Justice dascun
banck, en cyre, ou assizes, doyer et terminer, scants in lour place, et ce per
Lest. de 25. E. 3. cap: 2: de proditionibus: Item counterfaister de privy
seignet 1. M. cap: 6: vide lest: de Elis: ca: 11 et 18. Elis. ca. 1. de
clippers, washers, silers, rosiders, et lour abettours, quelconque soit le
coin, dummodo soit current icy.
Petire Vide mesme lest: de 23. E: 3: ca. 21: que n'est que explication del
common ley. Come, Quant un servant tua son master, feme sa Baron, home seculer
son prelate: feme sa mystres per 12. Ass. p. 30. 10. H. 6. 47. come^tque soit
horse de service du^modo sit de malice conceive in service. Fitz: 210. Imo les
abbettors hic pu niuntur eode^ modo. Fitz: 216. Ite^ mitter excommengement
south bull le pape, 30: Ass. 19. Item vtlage debrusa le prison et amesne
prisoners, 1: H: 6: 5: Vide Stamford, page: 10. a. b.


2 Des penalties de mesmles offenses. QQ.


Huc refer misprision, s. le concealing de felony ou treason come, Justice de
peace enrolla un bille denditement nyent troue per le pais: Estranger utter
faux money, 3. H. 7. 10. Home trahe son espce de Ferir Justice seant en son
place 22: E. 3: 13: Ferir ou bater un Iuror, in presence des Justices Fitz:
Judge. 174, un ferist auter in le sale de West. Fitz. Cor. 280. Vide lest 33. H.
8. ca. 12. Pur drawing blood in le meason le roy. Item per Britton, Bibaud
ferist un honorable home, Justice arrests un que fayt fray deuant luy, et un
auter luy rescussa, 22. E. 3. 13.

A, A, Felony in biens est In bonis abductis Del person dascun home hinc
surdont, Robbery scilicet,

Sil prist de mon person licet soit south xii. d. Del lieu, ou ieo suis
present. Sil manace de moy occider, ou fist moy iurer: Item sil gist en agayst,
olim, contra hodie.

Hic de scinsors de burses: de queux Britton, 24, b.

Hic de Hue et Cry: Vide lest. de West. cap, 9. an, 3, E, 1. Lest, de
Winchest, 13. E, 1: Lest, de. 28, E. 3. ca, 11. Et 27. Elis. ca: 17,

Pyracy Vide lest. 28, H, 6, ca. 13, Rastall, Trial, 8.
Vel aliter, and est Larceny si supra xii. d. aliter n'est felony, mes petit
Larceny per Stanford. q. atque hic, 1. Agit in genere de Larceny, vbi, Primum
explicat naturam rei, and definit Larceny, et met diverse cases et exemples:
Larceny est fraudulenta rei alienae pluris quam 12. d. valentis tractatio,
animo furandi: inuito illo cuius res illa fuerit. Vide page 24. 25. Deinde
latius illustrat furtum per les adjuncts Vide, C. C.

2. De certis specibus furti per statura. Records emblees, 8. H. 6. ca 12.
Prisel del feme inuit, 3. H. 7. cap. 2. Hunting in painted visors pur stealer
Uenison, et denier ceo 1. H. 7. ca. (...) Servant prist les biens son master,
except prentises, et ceux que sont deins le age de 18. ans, 2. H. 8. cap. 7.
Selling horses into Scotland, que est un stealing d'eux horse D'england; 23 H.
8. cap 16. and 1. Elis. cap. 8. Soldier steal away sans license, 2. E. 6. 2.
Multiplication, 5. H. 4. ca. 4. Prisel de castles le roy, towers, ships, armor,
ou practice de prendre: 14. Elis. cap. 1. Servant stela les biens son master
apres sa mort, et ne voet aperer apres proclamations, per lest. de 33. H 6. ca
1. Escipper lane forsque a Calice. 18. l^. 6. 15


Destructis et ceo per Arsons des measons felonice, ou des Barnes adioinant al
measons. Bourglours, que felonice in temps de peace debrusont measons, eglises,
mured, towers, ports noctantes, licet riens import. Huc refer Drawlatches,
Wastors, R^byeardes men, que serront arrestes pur suspicion, per lest. 5. E. 3.
14.



C C. Illustrat Larceny per ses adjuncts. s. De queux chooses Larceny ne serra,
Come de Beasts savages, columbes horse del douecoate, poisons in le river, car
nulluis in bonis. Cor. 185. 18. H. 8. 2. contre del debruser del douecoate, et
prender les young pigeons, 18: E: 4: 8. 10. E. 4. 15. embicer domestical dame,
felony. q. sil ne conust destre domestical, mes sil prist mort, cest felony.
Item serra de personel chooses, et nemy de real; itaque si home succida arbre
et prist, nest felony, contra si suit succide deuant, Cor. 119. Box oue
charters null felony, 10. E. 4. 15. treasure troue, wrecke, del mere, wayf,
stray prise, null felony: Cor. 187. 265. car incertum, quis dominus: contra de
bonis capellae. Endit. 15.
Poet estre de ses proper biens, come beylor stela biens baylees, and tamen le
property fuit en luy semper, 7. H: 6: 45. 13. E. 4. 10. Larceny le possession
eficant in le owner. q. page 26. Quis non potest co^mitter Larceny, s. quis ne
serra dit larson comentque il prist etc. Feme per coertion ou commandment son
Baron, q. vt nec ioyntment oue son baron: car serra l'art le baron: mes feme
poet, inscio viro. Item feme ne serra accessory pur receiver son Baron. Infant
de tender age, come deins 12. ans per Bracton: mes contra hodie.



Huc pertinet le tractate de Theftboote, quant home reprist ses biens emblees:
mes properment est, quant home prist ses biens dun laron pur luy fauorer: nest
felony mes punishable per ranson and imprisonment. Ass 346: tamen, Cor. 353.
fuit felony. Biens confisques, que sont dones al roy, quia ne sont claymes per
ascun auter, mes disauowed del laron. Vide Stanf. 186. diversity inter biens
confisques, et biens forfets. Wayf quant le laron sur hue and cry and
pursuit, pur easer luymesme del portage, wayua les biens ou part d'eux perque
les officers le roy, ou auter in droit le roy seisist les biens, la le roy cux
retiendra come waife, si non que le owner fait fresh suite, car donque il
reauera ses biens, issint, si le laron ne wayna, mes home in droit le roy prist
eux de luy pur suspicion, le owner reauera sur fresh suyte. Null wayfe des
biens prises per trespass: null wayfe de bie^s d'un qui ad saufe conduite in
bonis and corpore. 13. E. 4. 10. Freshsuyte, quant le party pursue le laron cy
hastyme^t que il luy apprehend oue le mayor, et sur ceo port son appeal et luy
convince per verdit, mes hodie suf^st sil fait son deuoyr, come^tque ne soit
prise deins un an apres, ou soit prise al suite d'un auter, et suffist
conviction sans atteynder. Mes per lest. 21. H. 8. ca. 11 il auera ses biens
sur lenditement del felon, imo sil procure evidence destre done, sans ascun
fresh suite, et semble, que si le servant soit rob, le master poet doner
euydence et reauer etc.

B. B. Felony in le person, et ceo vel. in part Sublata come in Couper des
langues Ouster des oyeles,
Vtrumque felony per 5, H, 4, cap, 5, Hic del Mayme, vbi le pl: poet eslyer de
fair chescun principal, ou soleme^t cestuy que luy ferust, et les auters
accessories. Mayme per Britton, est ou ascune member est toll don't home est
pluis feeble a co^bater, come oyel, main, pee, ^ste debruse, anterior dents:
mes dents moliers, orialles, neese, n'est mayme, eins blemishe, hic lex
talionis, est lex Dei: mes nostre ley agard tout in damages. Corrupta per
carnalem copula^: haec copula est Contra natural, and haec vel, Confusio.
Specierum, home ou feme oue brute beasts, Sexuum, home oue home, feme oue feme,
ceo est Bug gery, et est felony per lest: 25, H. 8, 6. and 5, Elis: cap: 17.
Incest, inter gradus prohibitos.
Secundum naturam. Scortatio inter personas solutas, Adulteriu^, cum altera
persona est desponsata, vel vtraque.
Si violence soit use, dicitur Rape: fuit felony al common ley: puis, trespass
per lest: West: 1: cap: 13, tempore E. 1: postremo idem rex per West: 2: ca.
34, fist ceo felony, come^tque le feme assent apres: vide lest: de 6, R, 2,
cap: 6, several punishment verse le feme que consents, apres.
In toto, D: D:



D. D. In toto, s. in occisione, cum quis unjust priuatur vita, hic vide
Stan^: del coroner et son poyer de veyer le corpse, a page: 48. ad. 53. et del
vicount, que st decolla un home ou doit luy pender, cest felony: Hic agit. 1.
de certain statutes come, Per lest. de 3. H. 7. ca. 13. st ascun del hostell le
roy conspire ^e ^ort le roy, seigniour de privy counsel, Steward, Treasorer,
Controller del hostell, cest felony. Wilful poisoning est fayt felony, s. est
fayt wilful murder, per lest: de 2. E. 6. ca. 2. Si Gaylor per dures fayt home
approuer, cest felony per lest, de 14. E. 3. ca. 9. Vide lest. de 1. et 2. P.
et M. ca. contra aegyptios: and 5. Elis. cap. 16. que fait coniuration felony.
Britton dit, que sorcerers et miscreants serront arses.
2. del comen ley vbi, 1. Breuiter describit ex Bracton, Homicidium est hominis
occisio ab homine facta: sed ista descriptio nimi^ est specialis, and excludit
Deodanda. 2. Explicat latius perspecies, s. Homicidium, manslaughter, sance
malice pre pence: hic st ascun chose que n'est home, tua home, le chose mesme,
and tout que est move oue ceo. serra forfet come un Deodand. hic volu^tas olim
fuit felony sans act, contra hodie. Olim le stryking d'un feme pregnant, fuit
felony, (...) causoit abortum, mes hodie doit estre in rerum natura, et deuy
deins l'an and iou^ puis le coupe.
murder, auecmalice prepence: hic de felo de se.




Q Q. Dictum est del offenses: dicendum de penalties, et de manner use in
punishing, vbi considerantur. Le nature del suyt et ceo tum In le commencement
del suyte, vbi docetur Que serra judge in le suyte, s. Justices del banck,
d'assise: et steward del hostel del chose deins le hostell. Que serra le mean
de sue^, s. per, Appeal: G. G. Inditeme^t. F F

In le prosecuting del ceo, atque hic: Del order in pleading. N. N. Manner del
trial. T. T.

Final judgment et determination del suyt. X. X.


G. G. Appeal atque hic. 1. Le general nature de ap peles exponitur. 1. Per un
brief definition ex Brytton. Appeal est pleynte del home fayt sur auter,
ouesque purpose de luy attaynder de felony, per motes a ceo ordeynes.
2. per un large explication conteynant Certain general adjuncts del appeles
Come, verse queux Appeal gist, s. verse touts, que poyeut fair fe. lony. Deins
quel temps serra port, s. deins ^an ^t iour, in appeal de mort. q. de robbery
et Rape. Deins quel county. s. ou le felony fuit fayt. Vide lest. de 2. et 3.
E. 6. ca. 24. Deua^t queux. s. Coroner. vicount, Justice de banck, et jail
delivery, Justice de peace. Ou un a^ra diverse appeles pur un felony. Olim ^cuit
aver un verse le principal, et auter verse l'accessory. contra iam. Tamen in
speciali casu licet, come st un in un county procure auter de robber moy en
autercounty. q. Ou un respondra al diverse appeals, s. home committ several
robberies as several homes, il r espondra al appele de chescune q. in mort ou
rape. Si l'appellant surcessa son appele per nonsuyte, releas, retraxit,
marriage apres declaration, ou sil deuy, le roy pursuera, ct le party ne irra
alarg, mes serra arraigne al suit le roy sur mesme le declarati^.
Le process en appeal. M. M.

2. Les particular properties del singular appeals: Mort. S. S. Robbery 4. 4.
Rape. 8. 8.



M. M. Le process in appele ou inditeme^t vt Capias, Exigent, Certiorari etc.
67: hic le principal serra primes attaint, et puis le accessory, 45. hic 1. Le
manner del entreating les priseners quant ils sont in prison, est declare Vide
lestatute de 14. E. 3. ca. 9. contra le cruelty de gaolers. Vide lest. West.
1. ca. 13. que notorious et rebellious felons serront en prison fort et dure.
hic de Escapes. V. V. V. 2. Le order, del amesner eux al bar, Per Britton,
ils serront dischances, disceints, sans coif, en lour pure coat, horse de
ferres, ne poena faciat timidos: tamen per Bracton, propter euasionis periculum
interdum compedes gestare possunt. Bract. lib. 2. Britt. fo. 14.
de lesser a mainprise Per le come^ ley ils ne serront mainprise -- Qui fueront
prises pur more dun home, Per commandment le ^oy o^ ses Justices. ou pur le
forest.
Per lest. West. 11. cap. 15^ ne son^ masnp. -- Uilages deuant, foreiuors
prouors, prises oue le manor, debrusers del prison, notorious larons, appellees
des prouors viua^t les prouors nis^ soye^t de bone fame, arso^s, fauxers del
money, ou del seal le roy, excomme^ge per prier leuesque ou pur apert
malneste, ou pur treason. Itaque ceux que sont in^te de Larceny per inquest
d'office ou purlegier suspicio^, ou pur petite Larceny, nisi sint culpable
d'auter fayt, so^t mainpernables. sic appellees del prouors puis le mort de^
prouor.






V. V. V. Escape per lest. 1 E. 2. de fra^ gentibus prisonam, rumper le prison
n'est felolony, si no^ que it fuit imprison pur felony. Nuil esscape deuant
arrest. hic, 1. Explicat le nature des escapes, tum Per quandam definitionem
del prison, s. Imprisonment n'est auter que un restraynt del liberty, itaque
si home soit south arrest, come in cippes, ou in le possession de ascune home,
cest un prison, et lescaping del ceo, est un debruser del prison. Quin et
rescus est rumper del prison, come si home prist le felon horse de ma possession.
per species Uolun tarry. Quant home arrest un, et puis lessa luy aler horse del
bounds del prison ou il veut, voluntario.
Negligent. Qua^t un est arrest, et escape encounter le volu^t le arrestor, et
n'est freshment pursue et repris deuant que le pursuor ad perde le vieu del
cestuy, que escape, Vide Stanf. 33.


Ponit quae damgeneralia adiuncta. Double esscape, come Home arreste, escape al
eglise, et puis auxi fua del eglise: ceo est un doble escape.
Escape sans arrest, come Home est murder in un ville, per le iour, ou in city
mured, per le nu^cte: le murdrer escape sans estre prist, cest un escape. Vide
lest: de Winchester.
Que serra charge oue lescape, s. le vicount, garden, ville, Hundred, etc. 34.
Coment escape serra try et aiudge, cat prisoners sont per matter de record
Quant un present in court est committ al prison per le court: la li^ le garden
n'ad luy semper prist, il est escape fans auter enquyry nisi ad rea sonable
excuse.
per matter en fayt Quant un est arrest per le vicount, constable, ou auter, et
escape, la il ne respondra al escape deuant que l'escape soit present deuant
Iustees.

Le penalty De voluntary, felony. De negligent, fine. Si sott pur felony, Un
hundred pound. D^nt arrest, amerciament.




Particular appeals come sont, Appeal de mort S. S. Feme auera appele de mort
son Baron, mes de null auter, le feme doit estre sa feme de facto and etiam de
iure. Item doyt estre sole. Ou le feme poet aver appele, null auter auera ceo.
Mes st le mort n'ad feme, son procheine heir male per le common ley auera ceo.
vide 60.
4. 4. De Robbery. Servant auera ceo. Baylet. Feme. Infant. Executors.
Merchauntes in common.
8. 8. Rape. Feme sole rauy auera appele: feme covert oue son Baron: mes st el
assent apres, tunc le Baron sole auera ceo, per lest. de 6. R. 2. ca. 6. mes
doyt estre Baron de iure and facto. Pur defaut del Baron, le pere ou auter
procheine del sang auera le appeal.



F. F. Inditements. st inditor discover le counsel le roy, cest felony. Cor.
272. 207. hic describit. (...). Le nature et form del bon Indictment per
lestatute Vide lest. de 4. H. 4. cap. 2. 37. H. 8. cap. 8. que, les parols, vi
and armis non ponentur in inditements de necessitate.
per common ley, doyt estre, certain, in le matter. l'an. le iour. le lieu.
express, et nemy, per implication come abduxit equum, mal, sans cepit and
abduxit. Furatus, malsans felonice. Carnalirer cogno^ uit, mal sans rapuit, and
tamen les auters parolls implyont tant, mes ceo formalitie serra use.


vicious et incerteine, hic, et si ne vaut pur felony, tamen les Justices
poyent fair eux serve come inditementes de trespass, a mitter le party a^
fine, et poyent agarder veniref. verse linditor d'amender lincerteintie.

Vide, 16. 16.


16. 16. 2. Certain ad^uncts per statutes et auterment, come. Del statutes
dinditementes in Leetes Deins county Palatine, 33. H. 6. cap. 2. 31. E. 3. cap.
14. West. 2. cap. 13. 1. E. 3. cap. 17. 1. R. 2. cap. 4. 1. E. 4. cap. 3. Vide
lest. Elis.
Deuant Just. de peace. 11. H. 4. cap. vlt. 3. H. 8. cap. 12. contra. 3. H. 7.
cap. 1.
In un county del chose fait in auter county 33. H: S: cap. 23. 1: and 2: P:
and M: 10: 35: H: 8: cap: 2: 33: H: 8: cap: 20: 2. and 3: E: 6: 24:
Le form del indictment d'accessary, s. Que il expressera le manner del felony,
81. Ou verdit in auter action ou return del vicount serve pur Inditeme^t, car.
verdit in auter action seruera, car il y ad un verdit de 12. homes etc. contra
de return de vicount licet soit matter de record. Vide lest: de 25: E: 3: ca:
4: de ceo.
difference inter appele etinditement. In appele de mort, mortui nomen pouetur:
contra del indictment, car le mort poet estre mangled, et issiut incognitus.
Inditee ple^ra misnosmer del surnosme, et poet approuer, contra d'appellee. Si
appellee pria clergy, il ne vnque fra sa purgation, contra d'inditee. In
appeal le def. poet aver trial per battle contra in indictment.



N. N. Order in pleading, et 1. Le count, que expressers le fact vel come fuit
fayt, come le ley appoint.
2. Le responce d^appellee, quel responce, vel, Excuse, idque vel orderly et
solonque le ley, et ceo vel, defense f. Que if defenda touts manners de ap^
peles, agaites, assauts, purpences, et quecunque est encounter le peace le roy,
sa corone et dignity.
plees, que vaont al brief, carle brief abaters pur faux latyne, ou defaute
del form etc. in bar, sontque vel proper al appeals 333: Inditeme^t 444.
common al ambideux, come, Auterfoits acquit. OO. Sanctuary, RR. Clergy, 555.


trenchont al fayt, come Rien culpas ble. 444.

peruersly, hic del peine fort et duce. 10: 10: 10:
Coufess. 7777777.



333. bars in appele, et hic, 1. special et particular bars, come in appele
de mort, per le feme, a dire que el est marye arere, que ne fuit vnque accouple
in loyal matrimony.
per le heir Le mort ad feme in vie. Il n'est heir, eins ad eigne friar. Il
est bastard. Ne fuit port deins l'an et iour. Le party n'est mort, eins in vie
a tiel lieu etc. ou d'amesner lui in le court: ceux deux sont common al feme.

In appele de robbery, adire, que le pl: est son villen. In appeal de rape per
baron et feme: a dire, ne vnque accouple, ou a pleder villenage in le pl.

2. general, come a dire, Le pl: est attaint de felony ou treason: est moigne:
prestre, mayme per auter, insanus, surdus, mutus, lazar, ou fool natural. Le
pl: auterfoits fuit nonsue in appele de mesme le felony apres declaration, ou
fist un Retraxit, ou que le def: fuit attaint et acquit al suite le pl: Le pl:
ad releas al defendant. Licet le pl: plead issint in bar, tamen in fauorem
vitae il poet pleader ouster al felony, et son plee ne serra dooble, s^non in
le case del releas, car per ceo il confess le felony per implication: et quant
le def: in appeal de robbery, plead villenage in le pl: car s^l concluderoit
ouster al felony, le pl: serroyt enfraunchise.



444: Bars all Indictment, come pardon le roy, vide Stanf, a page: 99. ad 105.
diverse statutes des Charters de pardon, et coment ils serront pleades.

OO. Auterfolis acquit^ de mesme le felony, vide Stanf. 105. etc. n'e^ ple iam
in appele de mort per lest: 3. H. 7. cap. 1 sic auterfoits convict ou atteint
semble bon plee, nisi il debrusoit le prison del ordinary et escape, car la il
serra auterfoits arraigne sur l'inditement.

R. R. Sanctuary doit estre plead al commencement sur l'arraignement, icy 1.
Definit sanctuary. Sanctuary est un lieu privilege per le prince pur le
safeguard del vie del offender. Fuit foundue sur le le ley de mercy, et sur le
devotions des princes al certain lieues.
2. Agit del sanctuary men Quenx auero^t le privilege del sanctuary, queux
non, vide plusors statutes reherses per luy, 208. etc. Quomodo ils serrent use
et demesnes. Vide statutes cites 115. etc. huc pertinet Abiuration, que est 1.
De^ne, Abiuration est un serement, que home prist quant il ad committ ascun
felony et fua al eglise ou cimitory pur tuition de sa vie, essyant pluistoft
perpetual banishment horse del realm, que a estoyer al ley, et destre try del
felony. 2. Latius explicata, et rehearse diverse statutes, 117. etc. del usage
des abiurors in Itinere etc.




555. Clergy 1. del Clergy briefeme^t per description, Clergy est un ancient
liberty del saint eglise qua quiconque poet lyser, s^ soyt arraine de felony
deuant seculer judge, poet suer destre dismiss al ordinary, de fair fa
purgation del dit offense. Lifer come clerk, est lyser tout le verse. Licet
speller.
Largely per adjuncts Quant Clergy serra plead, Non sur son arraignement. vt
quondam, eins il serra mise al responder al felony, et sil soyt troue culpable
a son mise demesne, donque il demandera sa Clergy; si non que le prisoner voyle
Wayuer le benefit del ceo, et pryer son lyeur sans oyer le verdit.
Que serra judge d'allower ou disalower ceo, s. le te^porall court. Car il
appoint le verse. Il met fine sur l'ordinary, ^l did, que Lysa, quant ne
Lysa. Il allowa clergy in absence del ordinary. Issint le court ne vsa
l'ordinary forsque come minister a confir mer lour judgment, quia est eruditus.


2. Del clerk quis auera ou non per common ley. Il que ad ascune impediment
destre priest, come blind, mayme, sacrilegus n'auera, sic insidiatores viarum,
depopulatores agrorum. Cestuy que tua se defendendo, ou per misaduenture
n'auera, nec petite laron, car ne sont de prendre judgment de vie, traitor
^auera: c^stuy que confess felony n'auoit tanque lest. artic. Cleri. I^ que
auoit semel, aueroit rursus per common ley tanque lest. 4. H. 7. 13. mes home
deins orders videtur exemptus. Bigamus auoyt tanque lest. de Lions, et ore
lest. 1. E. 6. 12 accord our le common ley in Bigamy.
Per lest. vide Stan. 125. vide lest. 1. E. 6. 12, 2. and 3. E. 6. 33: 5. and
6. E. 6. 10. and 9, 1. and 2. P. and M. 4.
Quomodo serra use, cap. 48, 49. 50. vbi, de purgation.



H H. Purgation fit per inquest des Clerks 13 9. ostendit. Quel Clerk, Ferra
sa purgation: Clerk convict: et est celuy que pria son Clergy deuant judgment
done sur luy del felony, et ad sa clergy allow: tiel Clerk poet fair sa
purgation, sl non in special cases.
^e ferra Clerk attaynt, et est celuy que pria son clergy apres judgment, et
ad son clergy allow, il ne ferra son purgation, eoque quant il est condemn del
felony per judgment, il ne p^ut contrary al judgment estre purge de ceo, le
dit judgment remainant en sa force, itaque vel paret pardon, vel demurrat in
prison tout sa vie.

Du, non obstant Clergy allow, il ne serra deliver al ordinary eins remayncra
in prison le roy. Si abiuror reuyent fans license, (...) esteant al bar,
demand sa Clergy, et ad ceo allow, vucore il ne serra deliver al ordinary,
eins serra mise a prison le roy tanque il ad purchase pardon pur son revenue:
car comentque le Clergy excuse le felony, uncore il ne tolie le contempt de
reuenuer in le realm sance license.



4 4 4. Rien culpable exponit. 1. Le nature et form del cest ple. Car il
pledra primum son ple, et priera allowa^ce de ceo, et ouster, quant al felony,
Rien culpable.
2. Les adjuncts. Il est le plus usual plec sur appele ou Iuditement. Quia
trench al fayt, il est mult favor in ley, car il auera cest plee puis que il
ad plede in abatement ou bar del appeal ou indictment. Chescune que est
arraigne serra enforce a cest plee, si non qu^ il ad matter de Justification ou
matter en ley de pleder, come sil tua le home de necessity inevitable pur
aduancer Justice, 13. 14. ou sil tua se defendendo, mes icy le necessity doyt
estre inevitable. 13. 14. 15. 16. Mes in cest ple de rien culpable, nauera
ascune counsel verse le roy sur indictment (contra in appele) mes pledra in
pro per person nisi le plee excede son connyng, quia cum cest plee va al fayt,
et le party mes^e conust le fayt optime, il poet mieux responder al ceo, et sil
auoyt connsell, ils oue lour sophistry turbarent omnia, ou, st le party mesme
parla, son conscience ^y poet stimuler, son gesture et countenance poyent
declarer le verily, ou son simple pariance etc.



10. 10. 10. Peruersly, vbi. il expound, Quel peruersity ceo doyt estre, Quant
cestuy que est arraigne fur felony (car in treason null tiel matter, vide left.
West. 1. cap. 12.) riens responde, eins e^oit mute de malice et mal volunte, ou
plede tiel matter que nest ascun responce al felony, ou tiel perverse matter
que ne directment respoigne, ou fayt tiel conclusion sur son plee, que il ne
peut aver as^une trial.
Quomodo il serra use, per pain fort et dure: Il ferra remaunde al prison don't
il v^ent, et mise en vne base meason estoppe, et la girra nude sur le nude
terre sans ascune littour, s^rps, ou auter drapes, et sans ascune garnishe
enuyron luy, sauant un chose que couera ses privy members, etque s^ girra sur
son dorse, et que son test soit vest, et ses pees estrahees, et que un brache
soit trahe al un quarter del meason oue un cord, et lauter brache al auter
quarter, et in mesme le manner soit fait de ses ia^bes: et que sur son corpse
soyt mise fer et pier tant come il poet porter et pluis. et le primer iour
ensuant, il auera pane fayt de barley, troys morsells sans ascune boyer, et le
second iour il boyers troisfoits, tant s^come il peut del cawe que est
procheine al huise del prison, except cawe current, sans ascune pane, et ceo
serra son diet tanque il soyt mort.



7777777. Confession est le pluis sure respo^ce: apres confession it poet
approuer: approuer auera sa vie, quia il co^bata pur le peace, mes serra ba^.
nis le realm. 1. Exponit le nanature del appro uer. briefly per description
del etymoligy del nosine. Il peut approuer, s. accuser auters qui fueront
coadiutors oue ^uy de fair felony. Hinc dicitur approuor, s. probator, coque
il doyt prouer, vel per battle, vel per pais, al election appellee, ceo que
est co^tcigne en son appeal.
Largly per adjuncts. De queux offenses home approuera, s. de ceux felonies
tantum queux il ad fayt oue auters. Enqueux actions In null action, nisi
indictment soyt action, car in appeal il ne approuera, car stc il delayeroit
le pl. dauer execution de luy, mes il poet conuster l'inditement, et prier
corouer, ^t sic approuer.
Deuant queux Ceux que poyent assigner luy Coroner, come Justices de banks,
Air. Gaoledeliuery. co^tra de Just. de peace, Steward and suitors in court
Baron, vicount et futors in le county courr, fans commission.
coment il ferra use, deuant son approuer. Il doyt confessor et prier le
Coroner deuant ascune ple plede. sil mentu, le court luy tollera de son appele.
I^ serra iure d'appeller de touts felonics et treasons que il^acha, cerren
number des tours ferra a luy appoint, in chescune de queux, il doyt approuer,
ou ferra pendus. Il anera gages cheseun tour i. d, detroy. quant le coroner est
assign^ a luy, il serra less horse del prison, vt appellet fans coertion.
Apres Quant il ad fayt son appeal deuant le Coroner il rehercera ceo deuant
Justices, car ils n^ voyle^t liar ceo a luy, et sil fail in ascu^ paroll que
le Coroner ad record, il ferra pendus, come sil di^ (...) chyuall pur rouge
etc. Car p^r le repugnancy ferra intend que il men^u.



vide, a a a. 2.


(...). 2. Dappellee vbi exponit. 1. le process verse lappellee. St lappellee
soft (...) mesme le cou^ty ou lappeale est fayt le Coroner agardera process
tanque al exigent. Si in auter county, tunc les Justices deuant queux le
Coroner record le dit appeal, come Just: de banck, et ^yre per common ley, et
del gaoledeliuery, per lest. de 28. E. 1.
ses ecceptions verse l'approuer. Que (...) est attaynt de treason ou felony.
Que il est Clerk convict. Que il ^est imprison put felony ou treason, eins put
debt ou trespass. Que il n'est prisoner, ^ins alarge. Que il est deins age, ou
ouster l'age de 70. aus, prestre, feme, maime etc. Si l'appellant apres so^
appele, est pendus, ou prist soy a son clergy, le roy poet pursuer l'appellee,
et aver luy arraigne etc. Imo si soyt destre discharge verse le roy et party, le
court poet luy ^er de se been gerendo.



T. T. Manner del Trial. In indictment est vel, Proper al peers del realm, s.
per 12. pares al meynes, Vide le order, Stanf. fol. 133. and ceo ferra tantum
in Judgments, et ne^y in appeles.
Common as auters, s. per pais, per ho^es de vicineto ou le felony fuit fait, et
serve at Indictment et appeal. exponit. 1. De quel county le pays vien dra.
Vide lest. de 2. et 3. E. 6. cap. 24. quant felony est fayt en un county, et le
receipt in auter, le trial in un, ct bon. Vide lest. 22. H. 8. cap. 14. and
Stanford, ^ag. 154.
2. per quel process, s. venire facias: Habeas corpora: Distingas, hic del,
Tales, 155. Nisi prius. 156. 157. Challenge. peremptory fans cause in fauorem
vitae, al number de 35. per common ley, mes per lest: 22. H. 8. cap. 14. tantum.
20. per cause Come, il fuit son Inditor etc. Et al array, si touts ^nt engloys
verse estranger. Item pur defaut defrancktenement, Vide lest. de 27. Elis.

Evidence, chescune serra admit a doner evidence pur le roy. 163. verdit,
estque vel general. Special, s. alarge, quant ils doubtont an soyt felony.



In appeal hic trial per battle est allow. sil appelle plusors d'un
felony, il co^batera oue touts, lune apres l'auter: descri^ bit, Le order del
co^bate ex Britton, 41. Vide Stanf. 117. Les counterplees al battle, s.
Ascune presumption, come sil fuit endire pur ceo, ou prise oue le manor. Que il
esteant arrestu, fus, ou debrusa le prison. Imbecilitie in l'appellant, si soyt
maime, deins 14. ans: ou ouster 70. Deins order, ou feme. Item privilege del
person, come sil soyt arraigne al suite le roy in lappeale. Le def. acquit
recouera damages verse le pl: ou, sil ne soit sufficient, verse les abettors,
Vide Stanf a page 168. vsque ad 117.




X. X. Final judgment, vbi, Exponit les several judgments, s. Del felony, quod
suspendatur per Collum. Treason Grande, In home, I^ serra reamesnue al lieu
dout il vient, et ferra trahe sur vne hurdle iesque al lieu dexecutio^, et la
destre pendus per le colie, et viue destre decoupe, et ses entrayles et pryuy
members destre excises de son corpse, et combures deins son view, et son test
destre abscisse, et son corpse destre dyuyde in quater parts a disponer al
volunt le roy. In feme, destre trahe et combure tam in grande treason quam
petite. Si feme soit ensein^ de viue enfant, el serra semel respite del
execution, mes le judgment serra done mayntenant.
Petite: In home, est destre trahe et pendus. pur misprision il forfetra ses
biens, mes nemy terres forsque pur vie, et serra in perpetual prison. q. Vide
Stanf. 37. 38. diverse several penalties accordant al offenses.

les penalties, que ensuo^t cest Judgment, and implicantur etsi non
exprimuntur. Corruption del sangue vient per atteinder del felony ou treason,
issintque les infants ne poyent estre heirs a luy, ne al ascune auter
auncestor. Et sil fuit noble ou gentleman deuant, il et touts ses infants sont
deuenus ignobles, et cest corruption ne poet estre salve forsque per Parliament
solement. Forfeiture.



Forfeiture. 1. que serra forset, s. Biens pur treason et felony. Clerk
convict forfetra ses biens, comentque ad fayt sa purgation, et les issues del
terre que il ad in son droyt, ou in droyt sa feme, tanque il ad fayt sa
purgation. Home forfetra son droyt al biens, et chose in action, come
obligation etc. Item il forfetra biens in queux il n'ad ascune propriety, come
ieo bail argent horse del bag a rebayler a moy, le baylee est attaynt, le roy
auera l'arge^t, car ne poet estre conues etc. quia horse de bag. Home forfetra
ses Chatteaux sur fugam fecit comentque soyt acquit del mesme le felony, ou ad
son charter de pardon pur mesme le felony, cest fuer en fayt. Home forfetra ses
biens sur exigent agard, sur un fuer en ley, comentque soit acquyte del felony.
Home poet forfeter ses biens sans attainter per presentment apres sa mort, Come
Felo de se. Home arrestue fua, et est tue in le pursuyte, ou si soit tue deua^t
le arrest, repugnaudo, etc. Home que leua guerre, et est tue in ycell.
Quant un est troue culpable del homycide deuant le Coroner, le Coroner scisera
ses biens et lyuera al ville. Sur sugam fecit troue deuant le Coroner, le
vicount ferra in mesme le manner. Mes si un soyt indite del mesme le felony, ses
biens ne serront remoues horse de sa meason tanque il soyt attaynt, eins serront
en guard les vicins, et le felon aver a via^ds de ceo. Le ville serra charge
oue le custody des biens, nisi ils poyent monstre, que auter ad cux. Mes le
vicount est semper chargeable^ oue les issues del terre.
Vide l l l
Vide *** 2.


l l l. Terres et droyt del terres serra forfet pur treason ou felony. mes hic
l'estate serra consider, cat Tenant put vie on ans ^e forfetra forsque pur son
term, sic put petite treason ou felony, teuant in tail ne forfetra forsque
pur sa vie, contra in grand treason, per lest. 5. et 6. E. 6. cap. 11. et per
mesme lest home ne forfetra terre que il ad in auter droyt, come in droyt sa
feme, sa egli^e etc. vna cum terre, les charters del terre serront forfets. Pur
treason del baron, (g^a^d et petite) le feme per^ra sa dower; mes ne^ put
felony, per lest. 1. E. 6. cap. 12. 5. and 6. E. 6. cap. 11. In petyte treason
ou felony le roy auera l'an, iour, et Waste des terres que sont tenus d'auter
que de luy, et donque le seigniour auera lescheate, mes in grand treason, le
roy auera lescheate, de quocunque le terre soit tenus.


* * *. 2. quant serra forfet, Re lation del forfeture. In terres il relate al
temps del act fayt mayntenant, itaque (...) done ou alien apres le fayt, le
relation del attaynder defeatera tout. Mes in biens nest issint, car le done de
eux inter le felony et lattaynder, est bon.


FINIS.

