decorative border, showing christogram and two kneeling angles atop an altar
IHS AN INTRODVCTION TO A DEVOVTE LIFE

COMPOSED IN FRENCH By the R. Father in God, FRANCIS SALES, Bishop of Geneua
AND TRANSLATED IN TO ENGLISH, By I. Y.

By JOHN HEIGHAM, With Permission 1613.



TO THE RIGHT VIRTVOVS GENTLEWOMAN MISTRESS ANNE ROPER, DAVGHTER TO THE RIGHT
WORSHIPFVLL SIR WILLIAM ROPER, OF WELL-HALL IN ELTHAM.
THIS excellent summarie of spiritual life (Right worshipful and truly
Religious) has gained so great credit with all devout minds, for the exceeding
profit and delight which they have found by perusing it: that no book
whatsoever has been in so short a time, so often, and in so many places
reprinted; none by so many men, and those of so great judgment, and in such
variety of books treating of the same subject, so much commended* Little
indeed it is in quantity, but in substance, and effect, (as I may say)
infinite. Like the philosophers stone, which being but small in bigness, and not
very beautiful in show, contains in it the seeds of all metalls, and with
the only touch, changes baser metalls into the soueraignest of all, which is
gold, the sole governor now, of this iron world. For even so truly not only
in my judgment, (which in these heaueuly matters reaches but low) but in the
judgment of great divines, and very holy men, th^re has not come out any
abridgement of devotion like this, containing so copiouslie in few leaves, so
plainly in sweet language, so profitablie and aptly for practice of all men,
the rules and instruction of spiritual perfection, nor so pregnant in
efficacy, to convert the iron affections of our souls, into the golden virtue
of charity, and true devotion the queen of virtues, that enamoureth God him
self with her heavenly beauty. This made me desirous to peruse it carefully,
for the bettering of my own soul; and to translate it painfully, for the
benefit of many souls in our poor distressed country: which more then any
other country, stands in need of such good books, for counter poisons
against so many venomous writings, as worldly and fantastical heads daily
publishe. This also made me so bold, as to dedicate the book, and my labor,
taken in translating of it, unto your good self: as a treatise likely to be
most pleasing to that excellent disposition which inclines your mind to all
holy and virtuous exercises: and an argument almost proper and peculiar, to
the fervent zeal of Gods glory, descending unto you, and all your worthy
family by inheritance, and natural affection received from your glorious
progenitour, that excellent true statesman, and learned counselor, englands
honor, faithes zealous champion, and Christ's constant martyr, SIR THOMAS
MOORE, your great grandfather. His admirable virtues may easily persuade any
man, that you neither would nor could degenerate from so lively a pattern: and
your devout and virtuous life, does as easily prove you to be descended from
that fair root, by so goodly branches as your worshipful father and
grandfather; of whom as you have taken the worthiness of your blood, so have
you learned their piety and godliness, which makes you delight in nothing so
much, as in the practice of devotion and Christian perfection. This I say,
makes me so hardy as to desire you to accept of this my labor, and not only
to patronize it with your title, as a thing vowed to your service: but also at
your best leisure to read it, and practice it; that so I may be, not only
repayed by your courteous accepta^ce of my good will, but likewise be partaker
of those spiritual joys, and increase of piety, which I doubt not but you
will reap out of this fertile field of devotion: which is the principal fruict
that in this my poor labor, I desire to have, generally in all devout souls
that shall read this book, and more particularly in yours; to whom I dedicate
it, and my self, to remain always,

Your servant in our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, I. Y.

A DEDICATORY prayer of the Author.
O Svveet Jesus, my Lord, my Savior, and my God: behold here prostrate before
thy divine majesty, I entitle and consecrate this vvriting unto thy glory;
give spirit and life unto these lines by thy heavenly blessing, that those
souls for whom I vvrote them, may in reading these words, receive the
sacred inspiratio^s, which I vvishe the^: and particularly may be moved to
implore thy divine mercy for me: that shevving unto other the way of devotion
in this world, I become not a reprobate myself in the world to come; but to
gether with all thy devout souls, who shall profit by this labor of mine, I
may joyfully sing that triumphant song of the blessed Saints in heaven, which
amidst the dangers of this mortal life I pronounce from my heart as a
testimony of my faith and fidelity; Life and glory to my Lord and Savior
Jesus; even so svveete Jesus, live and reign graciously and gloriously in our
souls for ever, and ever. Amen.

MY DEAR READER, I beseech thee to read this Preface for thy satisfaction
and mine.
1. THE Paynim historians report of a maiden called Glycera, greatly delighted
in making of nosegayes, who could so fitly and properly vary and change the
disposition and mingling of the sweet flowers in her posies, that with the self
same flowers, she would frame many diverse kinds of nosegayes; in so much that
the painter Pausias came short of his cunning, striving as it were by emulation
to express the variety of her flower-workes, for he could not change his
colors into so many fashions in his pictures, but Glycera would find more by a
new manner of placing of her flowers in her nosegaies. Even so does the holy
Ghost dispose and order with enterchaungeable variety the instructions of
devotion which he gives by the tongues and pens of his servant; that the
doctrine which they teach being one, and the self same: the discourse
notwithstanding which they make, and in which they deliver his doctrine do much
differ, according to the diversity of methods, and fashions (that I may so
say) in which they be couched and composed. I cannot therefore, neither ought I,
or would I, in any sort write in this introduction, any thing but that, which
has been already published by our learned predecessors concerning this
matter; they be the self same flowers that I present unto thee (gentle reader)
which diverse before me have offered unto thy view but the nosegay which I have
framed of them, is of a different fashion from theirs, as being handled in
another form, and wrought after another manner.

2. Those that have treated of devotion before me, have almost all attended
only to the instruction of persons altogether retired from worldly
conversation; or at the least have taught a form of devotion, which properly
and principally directs and tends to that retired state of life. But my
intention is particularly and principally to instruct such as live in cities
and towns, busied with the affairs of their household, or forced by their
place and calling to follow their princes court; such as by the obligation of
their estate, are bound to take a common course of life in outward show, and
exterior proceeding; which kind of persons for the most part of them, under
color of a seeming, or pretended impossibility, will not so much as once
think upon the undertaking of a devout life: persuading them selves, that as
no beast (if we may believe the naturalists) dare taste of the seed of the
herb called palma Christi, so no man ought to endeavor to obtain the palm
of Christian piety, so long as he lives in the press of temporal
occupations. To these men do I demonstrate: that as the mother pearls do live
in the sea, not taking one drop of salt water into their shelles; and toward
the Chelidonian Islands there be fountains of sweet water in the midst of
the brackish sea; and a small kind of fly called Pycaustes borne and bred in
hot burning ouens and furnaces, flies in the flames without scorching her
wings: so a vigourous and constant heart may live in the world, and yet not
participate of the vain humors of the world; may find out fresh springs of
sweet devotion, in the midst of the brinish waters of temporal affairs; and
may fly without harm among the flames of earthly occupations, and yet not
burn nor sear the wings of holy desires which lift up a devout soul to
heaven, although the body necessarily, tread upon earthen mould. True it is in
deed, that this is a thing of some difficulty: but therefore would I desire
that many men would employ their cares in the attaining of so high a thing with
more zeal then ordinarily they do, and they should find it not so uneasy as
they imagine it. My self, weak and feeble as I am, have endeavored by this
work, to co^tribute something of mine own cost, toward the helping of such,
as with a noble heart will undertake this enterprise.

3. Yet notwithstanding this present desire of mine, it was neither by mine
own choice nor liking, that this introductio^ came to the public view of the
world. A certain frind of mine, endewed indeed with true honor and virtue,
having some good while received the grace of God, to aspire unto a devout life;
requested my particular aid and assistau^ce in this kind: and I being many
ways obliged unto him, and having long before noted in him a singular good
disposition for this matter, easily suffered my self to be ouer-intreated by
him, and took great care in teaching him to my power; and having conducted him
through all the exercizes, which I thought convenient to his holy desire, and
agreeable to his estate, I left him in writing for to help his memory these few
rules, that he might have recourse to them when so ever he needed. Since which
time he communicated them, unto a great, learned, and devout person, who
esteeming them so profitable that many other might reap commodity by them,
did earnestly exhort me to publishe the^: and easy was it for him to persuade
me, because his love had great power over my will, and his judgment had great
authority over mine.

4. Wherefore, that it might be more acceptable, I have took a review of it,
enterlacing many things in diverse places, and adjoining some aduices and
instructions, fit for the purpose which before I said that I entend: and all
this have I done, having all most no leisure at all to spare. For which cause
look here for no exact or curious discources: but only a plain heap of good
aduertisments, simply and nakedly set down and declared in easy and
intelligible words: at least wise I desired so to do. As for the adorning of
the style and language, I could not so much as think of it, as having other
things enough to do.

5. All my words throughout the book are addressed to Philotheus. For my
intention being to reduce to the common good many souls, that which I had
first writ for one only: I think I may fitly use that name which is common to
all such which will be devout and dilligent in gods service: for Philotheus is as
much to say as a lover of God.

6. Therefore in all the treatise, laying before my consideration a soul which
by exercise of devotion aspireth to the love of God: I have divided this
introduction into five parts. In the first, I endeavor by persuasions and
peculiar exercizes, to allure and win the will of my Philotheus, to an
entire and firm resolution of living well: which he makes at length after a
general confession, with a round and sound protestation, seconded by the
receiving of the holy communion, in which giving up his soul unto his savior,
he receaues his savior into his soul, and so enters happily into the
retreat and closet of his heavenly love, That done, to lead him farther on, I
show him two special means how to unite him self more and more every day unto
his divine majesty: the one, the use of the sacraments, by which our good God
comes unto us: the other, the exercize of holy prayer, whereby he draws us
unto him self: and in this I spend the second part. In the third, I set before
his eyes, how he may exercise him self in such virtues as be fit and
convenient for his profit and advancement: in which yet I only busy my pen,
in laying together some particular aduices which I thought he could hardly have
had of another, or found out of him self. In the fourth part, I discover the
embushments and lurking dens of his enemies, showing him how he may escape
their snares, and deliver him self from their enticeme^ts, that so he may go
forward without hindraunce in his worthy enterprise. In the fifth and last
part, I teach him to with draw him self as it were from other ordinary
exercises to the cabinet of his soul, to refreshe his weerie devotions, and
renew his holy purposes, taking breath as it were, and repairing his forces,
that he may afterward courageously get ground and advance him self in his
journey to perfection and devotion.

7. Well do I see in this curious age of ours, that many will say, it
appertains to religious votaries, to undertake the particular guidaunce of
souls, unto this singular exercise of piety, which requires more leisure
then a Bishop can well spare, charged with a diocese so heavy as mine is; that
these devout instructions too much distract the understanding, which should be
employed in affairs of greater importance. But as for me, to speak what I
thinck, I say (dear reader) with great S. Denis that it appertains
principally to Bishops to conduct the souls committed to their charge unto
perfection: since their rank and order is supreme among men, as is the order
of Seraphins among the quyres of Angels; so that their leisure cannot be better
spent, then about such business. The ancient Bishops and fathers of the church
were at the least as much affectioned to their charge, as we: yet let they
not for all that to undertake the particular care of guiding many souls, which
singulary had recourse unto their assistau^ce, as it appears by their
epistles. And heerin they imitated the Apostles them selves, who in the midst
of the general harvest of all the world, gathered notwithstanding many times
with peculiar care and affection, certain notable scattered ears of corn;
not only contented to tie the whole sheafs of wheat, but also not disdaining
even to gleane, as they say, where they perceived any remarkable soul, that in
particular offered it self to their ^are. Who knovveth not that Timotheus,
Philemon, Onesimus, Thecla, and Appia were the dear children of the great S.
Paul? as S. Marck and S. Petronilla of S. Peter? S. Petronilla I say, who (as
Baronius learnedly proves, Gallonius following him) was not the natural
daughter, but only the ghostly child of S. Peter. And S. John the beloved
disciple of our Lord, writes he not one of his canonical epistles unto a
devout Lady, whom for her piety he calls electa, the elect, and chosen
lady?

8. It is a painful charge I confess, to take the particular care of souls,
and conduct them in such singular manner in the way of perfection; but as
painful as it is, it brings withal excessive comfort: much like unto the
painful toil of thriftie husbandmen in time of harvest and vintage, who are
never more merry, then when their hands are most full of such labors. It is a
burden which recreateth and reuiueth the heart of him that is laden with it,
through the abundance of delight which flows from it: as the bundles of
Cinnamom with sweet and recreatiue odor comfort those that carry them
through the boiling sands of Arabia. They report of the Tygre, that having
recovered one of her whelps (which the crafty hunts-man leaves in the way,
to busy her with all while he caries away the rest of the litter) she takes
it up presently be it never so great, and finds her self never a whit the
heavier or slower, but rather lighter and swifter in her course, natural love
as it were lightening her with her very load. How much more willingly then
will a fatherly heart take upon him the charge of a soul, which he finds all
melting with desire of holy perfection? why should he not most carefully bear
such a soul in his bosom (as I may say) like as a loving mother does her little
child, being never weary of cariyng the burden which she loves so entirely?
But it must be indeed a fatherly heart that undertakes so toilsome a task: and
for that cause the Apostles and Apostolic men, do call their disciples not
only their children, but with a term of more tender affection, their little
children.

9. To conclude (gentle reader) I confess that I write of devotion, being my
self without devotion, yet truly not without an earnest desire of attaining
thereunto. And this very desire is that which has given me courage to undertake
to instruct thee in the way to devotion. For, as a great learned man said, it
is a good means to become laarned, for a man to study hard: a better, to
hear a learned master: but the best of all to teach another. And it often
comes to pass (says S. Aug. writing to his devout Florentin) that the
office of distributing to others, serves us as a merit to receive the same
things our selves: and the office of teaching, becomes a foundation of
learning. The great Alexander, caused his lovely Compaspe to be pictured by the
pencill of the famous Appelles: who forced by often reflection to contemplate
wishfully Compaspes perfection, as he drew the lineaments of her fair body
upon his table, so imprinted he withal the love of her beauty in his heart,
and became so passionatly enamoured of her, that Alexander perceauing it, and
pitiyng his case, gave him her in marriage, depriving him self for his sake, of
the dearest love he had: showing heerin (as Pliny judges) the greatness of his
heart more plainly, then by any bloody victory over a puissant enemy. I
persuade my self that it is the will of God, that I should procure in the best
colors that I am able, to paint the forms of beautiful virtues upon the
hearts of those which are committed to my charge, and especially the beautiful
virtue of Devotion, most amiable and acceptable in his divine eyes. And I
undertake the office willingly, as well to obey, and perform my duty, as for
the hope I have, that engrauing this lovely virtue in the minds of other men,
mine own perhaps may wholly be enamoured of the sweetness thereof. And I doubt
not, but if ever his divine majesty perceive my soul sincerely in love with
this beautiful virtue, he will bestow her upon me, in a happy marriage for
ever. The fair and chaste Rebecca watring Isaaks camels with a ready good
will, was presently chosen to be his espouse, receiving out of hand in his
name, precious earings and golden braceletts, as pledges of his love. So do I
persuade my self, through the boundless goodness of my God, that carefully
leading his beloved sheep to the wholesome waters of devotion, he will make my
poor soul his spouse, fastening in my ears the golden words of his holy
love, and binding on my wrists, force and vigor to practice them, in which
consists the essence of true devotion; which I humbly beseech his heavenly
majesty to bestow upon me, and upon all the obedient children of his holy
church. To whose decrees and correction I do, and will, allway submitt my
writings, my actions, my words, my wills, and my thoughts. At Necy, on S. Mary
Magdalens day, 1609.

THE FIRST PART OF THE INTRODVCTION: Containing aduices and exercises requisite
for the conduct of a soul from her very first desire of a devout life, until
she be brought to a full resolution to embrace it steadfastly in all her actions.
What a devout life is. CHAPTER I.
1. YOU aspire to devotion (my dear Philotheus) because being a good Christian
you know that devotion is a virtue most amiable and acceptable to Gods divine
majesty. But for so much as small faults committed in the beginning of any
affair, in the progress thereof grow infinite, and in the end, become almost
irreparable, and past all amendment: it is necessary before all things, that
you learn what kind of virtue Devotion is; for since there is but one manner
of true devotion, and many kinds of forged and false, if you know not which is
the true and sincere virtue that you seek after, you may very easily be
deceived, and entertain your self with some impertine^t superstition, instead
of true and profitable devotion.

2. Aurelius, a Roman painter, was wont to picture the faces of all the images
which he made, to the likeness and resemblance of the women whom he loved: and
so ordinarylie most men paint their devotion, according to the passion or
fantasy which predominateth in them. He that is given to fasting, holds him
self for devout enough, if he fast often, be his heart never so full of rancour
and malice: and not daring to moiste^ his tongue in wine or water, for fear of
tra^sgressing his affected so brietie, makes no difficulty at all, to suck the
blood of his harmeles neighbor, by slanderous backbiting, and detracting from
his good name. Another will account him self full of devotion for hudling up a
multitude of prayers every morning, allthough all day after his tongue never
cease throwing forth of way ward speeches, or arrogant and reproachefull
taunts among his neghbours and familiars. Some there be, that can very easily
pull an alms out of their putse to relieve a poor needy beggar, and therefore
are esteemed devout men, whereas they cannot find any sweet disposition in their
heart to forgive their enemies; or any readiness to satisfy their creditours,
unless the force of law and the sergeants maze do co^straine them. And yet are
all these men in the deceivable judgment of the common people deemed devout
persons: though indeed they be very far (God knows) from true devotion. The
servant of king Saul seeking for David in his house, Michol his wife laid
an idol in his bed, clothed in David's apparel, and made them believe it was
her husband David, sickly and sleeping in his chamber: even so do these men,
cover them selves with certanie external actions of seeming devotion, whereas
in deed they are but vain shadows, and idle Idols of devotion.

3. True and lively devotion (my Philotheus) presupposes in our hearts the love
of God: nay rather it is nothing else but a certain perfect and high degree of
the true love of God: for when we consider the love of God, as the thing that
beautifieth our souls, and makes them lovely in the eyes of his majesty,
then do we call it heavenly grace: and because this self same love of God, if
it be true and unfeigned love, gives us strength and force to do good works,
it is called charity: but when it grows to that degree of perfection, that it
not only stre^gtheneth us to do well, but also urges us vehemently to do good
works diligently, frequently, and fervently, then is it properly called
devotion. Austriches because of their monstrous waighte, never fly in the
air, but only run upon the ground by help of their wings: Hens fly
sometimes in the air, but very seldom, and then also low and slowly: but
doves, and eagles soar aloft in the skies, with speedines, and delight to see
them selves far from the ground, and nigh to the element: In like manner
sinful men, laden with the burden of offenses, fly not at all to Godward,
but make al their courses upon earth, and for earthly delights: Good honest
men, that endeavor to abstain from mortal sins, but are not yet arrived to
the hight of devotion, fly to God with their actions and good deeds, but
slowly, and rarely, and in ordinary things, as being hindered with the weight
of their imperfections, and heavy winged thoughts from higher exercises. But
devout souls fly to God with swifte and nimble wings of holy affections,
readily, and feruourously, soaring and mounting higher and higher to the
heaven of perfection. Briefly, devotion, is nothing else but a spiritual
swiftnes and nimblenes of love, by which charity works our actions in us, or
we by her, with readiness of will, and alacrity of mind; And as it is the
office of charity, in what degree soever it be, to make us keep the
commandments of God generally and universally: so is it the proper function of
devotion, to fulfill the commandments with promptnes, fervor, and nimble
vigor of our minds, as it were delighting, and rejoicing in doing our duty
toward, God and man. Hence it is, that he which keeps not the commandments
of God, can neither be esteemed good, nor devout: since to be good, he must be
endued with charity; and to be devout, it is not enough to have any degree of
charity whatsoever, but besides he must have a quick and ready affection and
habit of exercising the highest and perfectest actions of charity: which
readiness of mind, is the true virtue of devotion.

4. Devotion then consists in a certain degree of excellent charity, making
us prompt and ready, not only in the keeping of Gods commandments: but
besides that, it provoke us to do with joy and delight all manner of good
works, although they be not in any sort commanded by Gods law, but only
commended unto our free will by his counsels and holy inspirations. For like
as a man but newly recovered from a long and dangerous sickness, walks now
and then as much as is necessary for his health, but yet slowly and leasurely
for want of strength and vigor: so a sinner but lately reclaimed from the
diseases of iniquity, walks in the way of Gods commandments, but yet
slowly, and faintly, no more then is necessary for his salvation, until such
time as he gain the strength of devotion, for then like a man in sound and
perfect health, he not only walks lustely and cheerfully in the high way of
Gods commandments, but with exceeding courage, and earnest desire of pleasing
his Savior, runs speedely, as it were leaping and dancing for joy and
exaltatio^ of mind, in the paths of Gods councels and heavenly inspirations.
To conclude, charity and devotion do differ one from another, no more then
fire from flame: for charity is a spiritual fire which God kindles in our
hearts, and when it breaks out in to flames, then is it called devotion: So
that devotion adds nothing to the fire of charity, saving a bright flame of
redines and promptnes of mind to exercise actiuely, speedily, with out delays,
or difficulties, at all occasions, the commandments of God, and works of his
counsels, and inspirations, which it pleases his divine goodness to infuse
into our hearts.

The properties and excellency of Devotion. CHAPTER II.
1. THEY that endeavored to discourage the Israelits from going forward unto
the la^d of promise, told the^ it was a country that devoured the inhabitants
thereof, having an air so contagious, that it were impossible to live long in
health there, and that on the other side, the inhabitants of that land, were
huge monstrous giants, that did eat up other men, as if they were but shrimpes
or locusts. So plays the world (my deer Philotheus) it strives by all means
possible to defame holy devotion, painting us out devout persons with frowning,
sad, and griesly countenances, and publishing maliciously that devotion
engenders melancholy humors, and insufferable conditions. But as Joshua and
Caleb, constantly protested, not only that the country was beautiful and
fruitful, but also that the winning and possession thereof would both be easy,
and agreeable to their wishes: so does the holy Ghost by the mouths of all his
saints, and our Savior Christ him self by his own blessed mouth assure us,
that a devout life is sweet, happy, and full of unspeakable delights and
comforts.

2. The world sees that the lovers of saintlike devotion, fast, pray, watch,
serve the sick, give to the poor, bridle their anger, restranie their
passions, deprive them selves of sensual pleasures, and do other such acts as
are of them selves both sharp and rigorous. But the world sees not the inward
cordial affection which renders all these actions most pleasant, sweet, and
easy to perform. Look but on the little Bees, busily beset upon the thime,
the juice whereof every man knows to be bitter: and yet no sooner have they
sucked it from the herb, but presently they convert it into honny. Devout
souls (o you worldlings) feel (no doubt) the bitterness of these
mortifications: yet such is the nature of devotion, that even in the very
exercise of these austerities, it transformes them into pleasant and sweet
delights. The fires, and flames, the racks, and tortures, swords, and scourges,
seemed flowers, and perfumes to the valiant martyrs, because they were devout:
if then devotion can give so sweet a taste to the most cruel torments, yea even
to death it self: how dainty and divine a taste will it give unto virtuous
acts and exercises? Sugar sweetneth sower and vnripened fruit, and corrects
the cruditie thereof when it is ouer-ripe: and devotion is the spiritual
sugar, which takes away all sowernes from mortification, and mendeth the
surfeting sweetness of consolation. It takes away discontentement from the
poor man, and the disordinat appetit and desire of riches: despair from the
oppressed, and insolence from the fauourised: sadness from the solitary, and
dissolution from him that keeps company. It serves for fire in the winter
of adversity, and for morning dew in the summer of prosperity. Devotion
knows how to abound in plenty, and how to be patient in poverty: devotion
makes equal esteem of honor and disgrace, and receaueth pleasure and pain,
almost, with one and the same unchangeable mind; and finally fills our
souls brim-full of inestimable delights.

3. The mysterious ladder which Jacob saw in his happy dream, (the true
pourtraict of the devout life) the two sides whereof, signify prayer which
obtains the love of almighty God, and the holy sacraments which co^fer it
unto us, when we duly receive them: The staves, or steps fastened to the sides,
betoken diverse degrees of charity, by which devout souls do go from virtue
to virtue: either descending by action to succor and help their neighbors, or
ascending by contemplation up to the happy union with almighty God. Now look
(my Philotheus) upon those which be on this ladder, and you shall find them men
that have Angels hearts, or Angels, that have men's bodies; They seem young
though indeed they be not, because they be full of force and spiritual vigor
in all their actions: They have golden wings, to soar up to the very throne
of God, and to dart them selves into him by fervent prayer, but they have feet
also to walk among men, by an holy, amiable, and exemplar conversation; fair
and goodly are their faces, for they receive all things with joy and sweetness.
Their legs, their arms, and their heads at always uncovered, for as much as
their thoughts, affections and actions are void of all other motive or
designement, saving only a pure and naked intention to please God: The rest of
their body, is covered with a fair and light robe, because though they use
the self same world that worldlings do, yet take they but sparingly of worldly
things, no more then is requisite for their estate. Such Angels as these, be
devout persons. Believe (me loving Philotheus) devotion is the sweet of all
sweetes, the queen of virtues, for it is the ornament and perfection (...)
^aritie: for if charity be milk to feed our faint ^oules, devotion is the
cream; if charity be the plant, devotion is the flower; if charity be the
precious gemme, devotion is the luster of it; if charity be a healthful
baulme, devotion is the comfortable odor thereof, which recreateth men and
refreshes the Angels.

That devotion is an instrument, and an ornament befitting all vocations, and
professions. CHAPTER III.
1. GOD commanded the plants in their creation, to bear fruit, every one
according to his kind: even so commands he all Christians, (who are the
living plants of his Church) to fructify and bring forth the works of
devotion, every one according to his kind and quality. For devotion ought to
be exercised differently by the gentleman, by the artificer, by the servant, by
the Prince, by the widow, by the maid, and by the married. And the practice of
devotion is not only diverse in diverse estates, but even in the self same
estate must it be acco^modated, to the forces, affairs, leisure, and duty of
every one in particular. For I pray thee, would it do well if the Bishop
should be solitary like the Carthusian? or the married man should lay up no
more in store for the maintenance of his family, then the Capuchin? or that
the Artificer should be all day in the church like the monk: and the monk
busy him self in all kinds of occurrents, for the service of his neighbor,
as does the Bishop? Were not such devotion ridiculous, disorderly, and
intolerable? And yet is this preposterous manner of proceeding now a days most
usual: and the world either not able, or not willing to discern devotion,
from indiscretion, murmureth and blames devotion, which not-withstanding, can
nether help, nor redress these disorders.

2. No (my Philotheus) true devotion never marreth any thing, but rather makes
and perfecteth: and devotion that is contrary to the lawful calling of any
man, is undoubtedly forged and false devotion. The Be (says the philosopher)
sucketh honey from herbs and flowers without hurting or endamageing them, but
leaving the^ as whole and as fresh as she found them: but true devotion does
more then so: for it not only hurts no state, vocation or affair, but
contrariwise bettereth and adorneth it. All kind of pearls and precious ge^mes
being steeped in honey, become more glittering, every one after its native
color: and so every christian becomes more perfect, and excellent in his
vocation, joining the same with true devotion: the care of family by it is
made more quiet and peaceable; the love of man and wife more sincere and
durable; the service of subjects to their prince more loyal and acceptable; and
all kind of occupations become more easy and tolerable.

3. It were an error, nay an heresy, to go about to banishe devotion from the
companies of soldiers, out of the shops of artificers, the courts of princes,
and from the household or family of married folk. True it is, that the devotion,
altogether contemplative, monastical, and religious, cannot be exercised in
these vocations: yet are there many other degrees and exercises of devotion,
which sufficiently and easily lead secular persons to perfection; Abraham,
Isaak, Jacob, David, Job, Tobias, Sara, Rebecca, and Judith, are witnesses
heerof in the ancient law: and as touching the new, S. Joseph, S. Lydia, and S.
Crispin, were perfectly devout in their open shops; S. Anne, S. Martha, S.
Monica, amonghst their families: S. Cornelius, S. Sebastian, S. Maurice, amidst
the armies: and Constantin, S. Helen, S. Lewis, S. Ame, and S. Edward in their
royal throanes and duke-domes. Nay it has oftentimes happened, that many have
lost their perfection in solitude (which not withstanding is so much desired to
perfection) and have conserved it amidst the multitude, which seems little
favorable to perfection. Lot, (says S. Gregory) that was so chaste in the
city, defiled himself in solitude: whersoeuer we be, or of whatsoever calling
we are, we may and ought to aspire to perfection.

The necessity of a guide to enter and go forward in exercises of devotion.
CHAPTER IIII.
1. YOUNG Tobias, commanded by his father to go to the city of Rages, said, I
know no whit of the way: go then (replied his father) and seek out some
faithful guide to conduct thee. The same say I to thee (my beloved Philotheus)
desire thou in good earnest to walk to the city of devotion? seek some
skillful man to direct and lead thee. This is the rule of rules: and the
aduertisment of aduertisments: for albeit thou search never so curiously (says
the devout Auila) thou shall never so securely and certainly find out the will
of God, as by this safe way of humble obedience, so much recommended and
practiced by all his devout and faithful servants in former times. The blessed
Mother Teresa, foundresse of the reformed Carmelits, seeing the strange and
extraordinary penances, which the great Lady Catherin of Cardoua, exercised
in a cave, in a wilderness of Spanie, was much moved in heart to imitate her
therein, contrary to the advice of her confessor, who had forbid her such
kind of austerities: yet was she tempted not to obey him in that behalf: but
God (who many times familiarly talked with her) said unto her: my daughter thou
have already begun a very fafe and assured way: see thou the penance of
that good lady? but I do make more account of thy obedience. And therefore
this blessed woman ever after so loved this virtue, that beside the ordinary
obedience due unto her superiors, she made one vow in particular, to a
certain learned and excellent man, to follow in all things his direction, by
which she found inestimable comfort and profit; as both before, and after her,
many devout souls have done the like, who to subject them selves more
perfectly to the will of God, submitted their own wills to the disposition of
his servants: a thing which holy S. Catherin of Siena highly commends in her
spiritual dialogues. The most virtuous princess S. Elizabeth, submitted her
self most extraordinarily to the direction of her ghostly confessor
Conradus. And one of the last aduices that great S. Lewis gave to his son
before his death, was in this in kind: confess often and choose a confessor
of learning, and discretion, that can, and dare advertise thee, to do such
things as are necessary for thy salvation.

2. A faithful frind (says the holy scripture) is a strong protection: he
that has found him, has found a treasure. A faithful frind is a medicin of
life and immortallitie: such as fear God do find such a frind. These sacred
words, as you may see, are principally spoken of immortallitie, for the
obtaining whereof, it is needful above all things to have this faithful
frind, who may guide our actions by his prudentiall council, and countergard
us, against the ambushments and slightes of our ghostly enemy. Such an one
shall be unto us, as a treasure of wisdom in all our afflictions, desolations,
and falls: he shall serve us as a medicine to ease and comfort our hearts in
our ghostly diseases: he will keep us from evil, and make what is good in
us, agreat deal better: and if any infirmities chance to befall us, his
careful asistance will procure, that it shall not be mortal, for he will lift
us up again from our downfall.

3. But who is he (say you) that shall be so happy as to find such a frind?
The wise man in the same place tells us, saying. They that fear God, they that
with an humble mind, affectuoufly desire their aduacement in piety, and in
the service and worship of their Creator. Seeing then that it imports thee so
much (my Philotheus) to go accompanied with a good guide in this holy voyage
of devotion, pray unto God with very great instance, that he will furnish thee
with one according to his heart, and dout not, albeit it were needful for this
end, to send an Angel from heaven, as he did to young Tobias, but that he will
give thee a good one, and a faithful.

4. And in very deed, in place of an Angel ought he to be unto thee, when thou
have once found him. Regard him not simply as a man, nether trust in him, nor
in his human prudence, but in the providence of almighty God, who will no
dout favor thy endeavors, and speak unto thee by the means and interposition
of this man: putting into his mind, and into his mouth, that which shall be
most expedient for thy spiritual advancement: so that thou ought to hearken
unto him, as unto an Angel descended from heaven, to conduct and lead thee
thither. Treat with him freely, and with an open heart, manifesting without al
dissimulation or fayninge, the good and evil which thou find in thy soul:
and by this means, thy good shall be more examined and assured, and thy evil
corrected and amended: thou shall be both eased and fortified in thy
afflictions, and moderated and ordered in thy consolations. Place then an
exceeding confidence in him, joined with a religious and respective reverence
yet so, that the reverence diminishe not thy confidence in him, nor thy
confidence hinder the reverence due unto him: but trust in him with trembling,
as a chaste maiden does respect her severe, but loving father: and respect him
with an assured trust in his love and care, as an obedient son, would do his
dear and tender hearted mother. In a word, the frindship betwixt thee and thy
ghostly instructor, must be strong and sweet, al holy, al sacred, and all
celestial.

5. For this cause, choose one among a thousand, says Auilla, but I say unto
thee, one among ten thousand, for there are fewer to be found then men imagine,
who are fit and capable of such an office. He must be replenished with
charity, knowledge, and with prudence, for if but one of these three parts be
wanting in him, it will be dangerous for thy soul. Therefore once again I
advise thee, to demand him instantly at the hands of almighty God, and
having once obtained him, bless his divine majesty for so great a benefit.
Stand firm and steadfast under his conduct, and change him not lightly for any
other, but go to him simply, humbly, and confidently: and so shall thou make a
prosperous voyage.

That the beginning of a devout life, must be taken from the purgation of the
soul. CHAPTER V.
1. FLowers appear in our ground, (says the spouse in the Canticles) the
time of pruning our vines is come. What be the flowers of our hearts (o
Philotheus) but our good desires? So soon then as they appear, we must lay
hand to the hook, and cut from our conscience, all withered, dead, and
superfluous works. In the law of Moses, the stranger woman taken prisoner,
that would marry with an Isralite, was to put of the robe of her captivity,
to pare her nails, and to cut away the tresses of her hair: in like manner,
the soul that aspireth to the honor to be the espouse of the Soune of God,
must first put of the old man, and put on the new, cast away and forsake sin,
and then pare and shave of all kind of impediments, which do divert from the
love of almighty God. It is the first beginning of our health, to purge our
corrupt and peccant humors. S. Paul even in an instant, was purged and cleansed
with a perfect purgation. So was S. Marie Magdalen, S. Pelagia, S. Gatharin of
Genua, and certain others. But this kind of purgation, is altogether
miraculous and extraordinary in grace, as is the resurrection of the dead in
nature, and therefore we must not pretend thereunto. The ordinary manner of
purging and healing either body or mind, is not wrought but by little and little,
and by proceeding from degree to degree, with pain, leisure, and expectation.

2. The Angels had wings, upon the mysterious ladder of the Patriarche Jacob,
yet they flew not therefore, but ascended, and descended by order from one step
to another. The soul which arises from sin to devotion, is fitly compared
to the morning star, which in rising expels not the darkness in a trice or
moment, but gradatim and by degrees. That cure (says the Physiciens Aphorism)
which is done fair and softly, is always most assured. The diseases of the
soul, as well as those of the body, come to us, as a man may say, in post, or a
horse back, but they depart from us on foot, and fair and softly. We must
then be courageous (o Philotheus) in undertaking this enterprise. Alas, what
pity is it of these souls, which seeing them selves subject to sundry
imperfections, after they have been exercised some few months in devotion,
begin to trouble, disquiete, and discourage them selves, suffering their hearts
almost to be borne away unto the temptation of leaving of all, and returning
back? But now on the other part, is it not an exceeding peril unto those
souls, which by a contrary temptation, persuade them selves to be purged from
their imperfections, the first day, as it were, of their purgation, reputing
them selves to be made perfect, before, in a manner, they be scarcely made, and
presuming to fly, before they have wings. O Philotheus, in what great danger
are they, of falling again into their former diseases, for taking them selves
to timely out of the hands of the phisicien? It is in vain to rise before the
light (says the kingly Prophet) rise after you have sitten. And he him self
putting the same lesson in practice, having been washed and cleansed from his
sin, yet humbly demands to be washed again.

3. The exercise of purging souls, can not, nor may not end, but with our
life. Let us never therefore afflict our selves about our imperfections, for our
perfection chiefly consists in resisting against them, and we can not resist
them unless we do see them, nor can we van quish them, unless we encounter them.
Our victory consists not, in not feeling them, but in not consenting nor
yielding unto them: for to receive vexation and trouble from them, is not to
consent unto them: nay it is necessary for the exercise of our humility, that
we sometime receive some small blows or foiles in this spiritual battle: but
we are never to be accounted for overcome, but only when we leese either life or
courage. Now certain it is, that imperfections and venial sins, can not take
from us the life of grace, for that is never lost but by deadly sin. The only
care then that remains is, that these imperfections do not daunt our
courage. Deliver me o Lord, said David, from cowardlines, and faintnes of heart.
For this is the happy condition and advantage which we have in this ghostly
war, that we shall ever be conquerors, provided always that we will combat.

Of the first Purgation: which is, from mortal sins. CHAPTER VI.
1. THE first purgation then which we must minister to our soul, is, to
cleanse and void away the filth of sin: and the means to make this
purgation, is the holy Sacrament of Penance. For the due receiving whereof,
thou must seek out the best confessar that can be found. Then take in hand
some little treatise, that has been set forth, to help consciences to confess
well, as Granada, Bruno, Arias, Augerius, or such like. Read it with good
attention, and mark from point to point, in what thou have offended, beginning
from the time in which thou had first the use of reason, until this present
hour of thy conversion. And if thou do distrust thy memory, set down in
writing what thou have observed: and having in this sort prepared and gathered
together the peccant humors of thy guilty conscience, detest them, and reject
them by Contrition and displeasure, even as great and as profound as ever thy
heart is able to suffer, dilligently pondering these four points. That by sin
thou have lost the grace of God. Forsaken thy part of heaven. Accepted of the
perpetual pains of hell. And renounced the vision, and everlasting love of
almighty God.

2. Thou perceiuest, Philotheus, that I speak in this place of a general
Confession of all thy life, the which truly, although I grant that it is not
always absolutely necessary, yet do I consider, that it will be exceeding
profitable unto thee in this beginning: and for this cause I do most earnestly
exhort thereunto. It happneth often times, that the ordinary Confessions of such
as live a vulgar life, are full of great and gross defaultes: one while they
prepare not them selves any whit at all, or at the least very little: another
while they come, but not with that Contrition and sorrow that is requisite for
their sins: nay, sometimes it happens that they go to Confession, with a
secret purpose to return to sin, namely when they do not shun and avoid
the occasions, nor use the necessary dispatches, which are meet and proper
for the amendment of life: and in all these cases, a general Confession is very
requisite to assure our souls. But besides this, a general Confession,
recalleth us to the knowledge of our selves: provoke us to a wholesome
confusion for our life past: and moves us to admire the mercy of God, who
has expected us with such incredible and exceeding patience: furthermore, it
pacifieth our consciences: eases our spirits: exciteth good purposes:
ministers matter to our ghostly father, to prescribe us aduises, fit and
convenient for our condition: and opens our heart, that we may with more
confidence manifest our Confessions that be to come.

3. Being then in this Introduction, to discourse of a general renewing and
reforming of our hearts, and of an universal conversion of our souls unto God,
by the enterprise of a devout life, I have great reason, as it seems to me,
Philotheus, to counsel thee to make this general Confession.

The second Purgation: which is from the affections of sin. CHAPTER VII.
1. ALL the Israelites departed in effect out of the Land of Egypt, but they
departed not all in heart and affection; which was evident to be seen, in that
many of them in the desert repined, for that they had not the onyons and flesh
potts of Egypt: even so there are certain penitents, who in effect go forth
of sin, but nevertheless do not utterly leave nor forsake the affection: that
is to say, they purpose indeed to sin no more, but it is with a certain
harts-breake which they have, to deprive them selves, and to abstain from the
accursed delights and contentments of sin. Their heart renounceth sin and
stands a loofe of, but they leave not for all that, often times to look that
way, as Lotts wife looked back toward Sodom. They abstain from sin, as
sick men do from millons, which they forbear, because the phisicien threatens
them death if that they eat them: but not withstanding this constrained
abstinence, their fancy still longs after those forbidden meats, they speak
of them, cheapen them, and would likewise buy of them, if it were lawful, at
the least they will sinel to them, and account them happy that are not bound to
forbear them: even so these feeble and faint hearted penitents, refrain them
selves from sin for awhile, but to their grief, they wish to God, that they
might sin, and not be damned: they talk with a kind of taste and savor of
sin, and account the^ co^te^ted that do commit them.

2. A man resolved to be revenged, will change his will when he comes to
Confession, but immediately after, one may find him amongst his frindes, taking
pleasure and contentment in recounting his quarrel, saying, that had it not
been for the fear of God, he had done this, or he had done that: and that the
divine law, in this point of pardoning is very hard, and wishes to God that it
were lawful for him to be revenged. Alas, who sees not, that although this
poor man be gotten faintly out of sin, yet that he is altogether incensed to
the affection of sin? that being forth of Egypt in effect, he is yet there
still in will and appetite, greedely desiring the rustic fare of the onyons and
garlic, which he was wont to eat: even as a wanton woman, that has newly
detested her lewed loves, finds still a delight to be courted and environed
with her fond wooers: alas what exceeding danger are such people in?

3. O Philotheus, seeing thou resoluest to undertake a devout course of life,
thou must not only forsake sin, but withal, wholly purge thy heart from all
affections, which any way depend or savor of sin. For besides the danger
that there is of relapse, these miserable affections will continually tire thy
spirit, and will make it become so heavy and lumpishe, that it shall not do
any good works promptly, dilligently, and frequently, wherein not withstanding
consists the true essence of devotion. Such souls as having gotten out of
the estate of sin, and retain notwithstanding these bad affections and
languishinges, resemble in my opinion, the maidens that have the green
sickness, who are not sick, and yet all their actions are sick: they eat
without relishe, sleep without repose, laughe without joy, and dragge them
selves, rather then go or walk: even so these souls do well, but with a
spiritual wearisomnes, and that so great, that it takes away all the grace
from their good exercises: which are but few in number, and small in effect.

Of the means of applying this second Purgation. CHAPTER VIII.
1. NOW the foundation of this second purgation, is a lively and strong
apprehention of the great harm which sin brings unto us, by means
whereof, we enter into a profound and vehement Contrition. For as never so
little Contrition (if it be true and unfeigned) especially conjoined with the
virtue of the Sacraments, does purge us sufficiently from the guilt of sin, so
also when it is great and vehement, it purges us from all the affections
depending of sin. A hatred or rancour which is feeble and weak, causes our
heart to rise at the very sight of him whom we do hate, and makes us to fly
his company, but if it be a violent and deadly hatred, it makes us not only
to fly his company, but even to be disgusted, and not to endure the
conversation of any of his kindred, parents, or frindes, no, not so much as his
picture it self, or of any thing else appertayninge unto him, but is
abominable and odious unto us: even so when the penitent hates his sin,
only with a weak and cold, though true Contrition, he resolves fully and
truly indeed, never to offend nor sin any more, but when he hates it with a
Contrition vigorous and forcible, he not only hates and detesteth the sin,
but likewise all the affections, dependances, and paths of sin.

2. We must then endeavor fervently, Philotheus, to augment as much as is
possible for us, our sorrow, contrition, and inward repentance, to the end that
it may stretch and extend, to the least appurtenance and spark of sin. So
blessed Marie Magdalen in her conversion, lost so perfectly all taste of sin,
and of the pleasures she had taken therein, that she never afterward thought
more upon them. And holy David protests, that he not only hated sin, but
also all the ways and paths of the same. And in this resolution, consists
the renouation of the soul, whereby she returns by innocence to her youthful
days; which the same prophet compares to the renewing of the eagle.

3. Now to attain this apprehention and Contrition, thou must exercise thy
self dilligently in these meditations following, which being duly practiced,
will (by the help of Gods heavenly grace) root out of thy heart all sin, as
also the principal affections to the same: to this end have I principally
ordained them. Thou shall practice them therefore in order as I have placed
them, taking but one for every day, and that in the morning, if it be possible,
which is the time most proper for all the actions of the spirit: and the rest
of the day following, ruminate and chew that which thou have meditated in the
morning. If thou be not yet accustomed to meditation, see that which
afterward shall be said in the second part.

The first Meditation; of our Creation. Chap. 9.
Preparation.
1. Place thy self with reverence before God. 2. Pray him to inspire thee with
his grace.
Considerations.
1. COnsider that there are but so many years past, when thou wast not yet
come into the world, and thy being was a just nothing. Where were we (o my
soul) in that time? The world had then lasted so many ages, and yet there was
no news of us.

2. God has caused thee to be hatched of this nothing, to be this something
which now thou art: without having any manner of need of thee, but moved
thereunto by his only bounty.

3. Consider the being that God has given thee, for it is the chiefest and
most excellentst in this visible world: capable to live eternally: and to
unite thy self perfectly unto his divine majesty.

Affections and resolutions.
1. Humble thy self profoundly before the presence of God, saying from the
bottom of thy heart with the Psalmist: O Lord before thee, and in comparison of
thy majesty, I am just nothing? and how wast thou then mindful of me to create
me? Alas my soul, thou wast hidden (as it were) in the abisse of nothing: and
in this abyss of nothing should thou have remained until this present, if
God had not drawn thee forth from thence. And what could thou have done,
within this nothing?

2. Give thancks to God. O my great and good Creator, how infinitely am I
indebted unto thee, for that thou have taken me out of this nothing, to make me
by thy mercy that something which I am? What shall I ever be able to do
worthelie, to bless and magnify thy name? and to render thancks to thine
exceeding bounty?

3. Confound thy self. But alas my Crea^our, instead of uniting my self unto
thee by pure love and loyal service, I have always been rebellious by my
unruly affections: separating and withdrawing my self from thee, to join and
unite my self unto sin and iniquity; doing no more honor to thy goodness,
then if thou had not been my Creator.

4. Prostrate and debase thy self before God. O my soul, know that our Lord
is thy God: it is he that has made thee, and not thou thy self. O God, I am
the work of thy hands. I will then no more henceforth take pleasure in my
self, since in my self, and of my self I am truly nothing. Whereof do thou
brag and boast, o dust and ashes? whereof do thou extolle thy self, o
mere nothing? Wherefore to humble my self I will do such or such a thing, I
will support such or such contempt, I will change my life, and hereafter follow
my Creator, and do my self honor with the condition and being which he has
given me, employing it wholly in the obedience of his blessed will, by such
means as shall be taught me, and as I shall be informed of by my ghostly father.

Conclusion.
1. Give thancks to God. Bless thy God (o my soul) and let all my bowels
praise his holy name, for his bou^tie has drawn me forth of the abisse of
nothing, and his mercy has created me.

2. Offer. O my God, I offer unto thee with all my heart, the essence and being,
which thou of thy bounty have bestowed upon me: with all my heart do I dedicate
and consecrate the same unto thee.

3. Pray. O my God, strengthen me in these affections and resolutions. O holy
virgin mother of our Lord, commend them by thy blessed intercession unto thy
merciful Son, together with all those for whom I ought to pray etc. Pater
Aue. Credo.

After thou have ended thy exercise, walk a while, and of these considerations
which thou have made, gather and bind together a little nosegay of devotion to
smell unto, and to recreate ^he sent of thy soul all the day followinge.

The second Meditation; of the end, for the which were created. Chap. 10.
Preparation.
1. Place thy self with reverence before God. 2. Pray him to inspire thee with
his grace.
Considerations.
1. GOD did not place thee in this world for any need that he had of thee, who
art altogether unprofitable to him, but only to exercise and declare his
bounty in thee, in bestowing upon thee, his grace and glory. And therefore
has he enriched thee, with understanding to know him, remembrance to be
mindful of him, will to love him, imagination to represent his benefits unto
thy thoughts, eyes to behold the wonders of his works, and a tongue to praise
him, and so forth of others.

2. Being created, and set in the world for this intention, all actions
contrary to this end, must be rejected and cast away: and such as serve not to
obtain this end, ought to be despised as vain and superfluous.

3. Consider then the miserable case of most men in the world, who never thinck
of this end, but live as if they believed that they were not made, but only to
build fair houses, to plant pleasant orchards, and to heap together riches,
and such like fooleries.

Affections and resolutions.
1. Confound thy self, reproaching and obiecting to thy soul her misery; which
has been so great heretofore that she has seldom or never thought of any of
all this. Alas what did I busy my thoughts upon (o my God) when I placed them
not upon thee? what was I mindful of, when I forgot thee? what did I love,
when I did not love thee? Ay me, I should have fed my soul with thy verity,
and I have sild it with vanity, and have served the world, which was not made
but to serve me.

2. Detest thy life past. I defy you utterly o vain cogitations, and
vnprositable fancies: I abhor, and abjure you, o detestable and friuoulous
imaginations: I renounce you unfaithful and disloyal loves, miserable and
lost services, ungrateful gratifications, combersome and unpleasing pleasures.

3. Turn thy self to God. And thou, o my God, and my Lord, thou shall be for
the time to come the only object of my thoughts: no, I will never more apply
my spirit to any cogitations, which may be offensive or dislikinge to thee. My
memory all the days of my life, shall be filled with consideration of thy
excessive goodness, so lovingly declared in my behalf: thou shall be the
deliciousnes of my heart, and the sweetness of my affections.

4. Hence therefore from my sight for ever, such and such toys and trifles,
whereunto I have vainly applied my mind: such and such idle exercises, in which
I fondly spent my days; such and such affections which entangled my heart,
shall hen ceforth be a horror unto my thoughts: and to this end I will use
such and such remedies.

Conclusion.
1. Thanck God that it pleased him to create thee for so excellent an end. Thou
have made me o Lord for thy self, to enjoy everlastingly the immensitie of thy
glory: o when shall it be that I shall be worthy, and when shall I praise
thee according to my duty?

2. Offer. I offer unto thee (o my dear Creator) all these good affections
and holy resolutions, with all my heart and all my soul.

3. Pray. I beseech thee (o God) to accept these my desires and vows, and to
give my soul thy holy blessing, that she may faithfully accomplish them,
through the merits of the blood of thy blessed Son, shedd for me upon the
cross etc. Pater. Aue. Credo.

Remember to make a little nosegay of devotion as aforesaid.

The third meditation: of the Benefits of God. CHAP. 11.
Preparation.
1. Place thy self with reverence before God. 2. Pray him to inspire thee with
his grace.
Considerations.
1. CONSIDER the corporal graces which God has given thee: what a body, what
commodities to maintain it, what health, and lawful consolations to
entertain it, what frinds, what helps, and what assistaunce. But thou shall
consider all this, with comparison of many other persons in the world, which
are far better and worthier then thou, who notwithstanding are destitute of
all these benefits; some spoild in their bodies, health, and members: other
abandoned to the mercy of reproaches, contempts and dishonours: other
oppressed and overwhelmed with poverty: And God would not suffer thee to
become so miserable.

2. Consider the benefits and gifts of mind; How many are there in the world,
senseless, foolish, and besides them selves? and why art not thou one of the
number? God vouchsafed to favor thee: How many are there whose education has
been rude, brutish, and barbarous, who have been nourished and bred up in
gross ignorance, and clownish behaueour? whereas the providence of God has so
provided, that thou have been brought up ciuilie, and in honor.

3. Consider the supernatural benefits of heavenly grace. O Philotheus, thou
art a child of the Gatholique church. God has taught thee the knowledge of
his true religion, even from thy infancy and youth. How many times has he
given thee his holy sacraments? how many times inspirations, internal
illuminations, and for thy amendment gracious reprehensions? how often has he
pardoned thee thy faults? how often has he delivered thee from occasions of
casting away thy self, when thou wast in danger? And these last years of thy
life, which he has so liberally lent thee, did they not affored thee leisure
enough, to advance thy self in the spiritual profit and good of thy soul?
Consider at the least how sweet and gracious God has been unto thee.

Affections and resolutions.
1. Admire the goodness of God. O how good and how merciful is my God in my
behalf! O how gracious is he! O how rich is his heart in mercy, and liberal in
bounty? O my soul, let us recount for ever how many favors he has done
unto us.

2. Admire thy ingratitude. But who am I (o Lord) that thou have been so
mindful of me? Ah how great is my unworthiness, how into lerable is my
vnthanckfulnes? Alas I have trodden under foot these benefits, I have
dishonored thy favors, turning them into abuses, and contempt, of thy
sovereign bounty: against the infinite depth of thy graces, have I opposed the
bottomless depth of my ingratitude.

3. Stir thy self up to acknowledgement of his benefits. Up then my heart, be
no more unfaithful, unthankful, and desloyal unto thy great and gracious
benefactour. And how shall not my soul, be subject wholly unto God, who has
wrought so many wonders and graces both in me, and for me?

4. Go to then, Philotheus, from hence forward withdraw thy body from such
and such voluptuous pleasures; subject it entirely, to the service of God, who
has done so much for it. Apply thy soul how to know and acknowledge the
goodness of thy God, by such and such like exercises, which be requisite for that
end. Employ diligently the means which are in holy Church, to save thy soul,
and to profit in the love and worship of God. Yea, o my God, I will frequent
the exercise of prayer, and the use of thy sacraments: I will hear thy holy
word, I will practice thy holy inspirations and thy counsails, etc.

Conclusion.
1. Give God thancks for the knowledge he has given thee at this present of
thy bounden duty, and of the benefits heretofore received.

2. Offer him thy heart with all thy good purposes and resolutions.

3. Pray unto him to fortify thee, that thou may practice them faithfully,
through the merits of the death and passion of his Son our dear Savior.
Implore the intercession of the blessed Virgin, and of the Saints, etc.
Remember to make a little nosegay of devotion, as aforesaid.

The fourth meditation: of sin. CHAPTER 12.
Preparation.
1. Place thy self with reverence before God. 2. Pray him to inspire thee with
his grace.
Considerations.
1. CALL to mind how long it is since thou beganst to sin, and examine how
much from that beginning, sins have been multiplied in thy heart: how every
day thou have increased them, against God, against thy self, and against thy
neighbor: by work, by word, by desire and thought.

2. Consider thy naughty inclinations, and how much thou have followed them.
And by this means thou shall plainly see, that thy sins are greater in
number then the hairs of thy head, yea then the sands of the sea.

3. Consider and ponder in particular the sin of ingratitude against God:
which is a general sin, and extends it self above all the rest, and makes
the^ infinitely more enorme and heinous. Behold then how many benefits God has
bestowed upon thee, and how thou have abused them all against the giuers
goodness: in particular consider how many good inspiratio^s thou have despised,
how many good motions thou have unprofitably neglected. But above all, how
many times have thou received the holy sacraments, and where are the fruits
thereof? what are become of all those precious Jewels wherewith thy dear spouse
adorned thee? all these have been hid and covered under the filth of thy
iniquities. With what preparation have thou received them? Thinck I pray thee
upon this ingratitude: that God having run so after thee, and that to save
thee, thou have out-runne him, and that to destroy thee.

Affections and resolutions.
1. Be confounded, and ashamed of this thy misery. O my God, how dare I appear
before thine eyes? Alas I am but an aposteme of the world and a very sincke of
sin and ingratitude. Is it possible, that I have been so disloryall, that I
have not left any one of my senses, nor any one of the powers of my soul,
which I have not polluted, violated, and defiled? and that not so much as one
day of my life has passed, in which I have not brought forth such naughty
effects? Is it thus that I ought to recompense the benefits of my Creator, and
the precious blood of my redeemer?

2. Crave pardon for thine offenses. O my Lord, I cast my self dowe before thy
feet, like the prodigal child, like another Magdalen, like a woman convinced
to have dishonored her marriage bed with all kind of adultery O pitiful
Lord, mercy on this poor sinful wretch. Alas o lively and neuer-ceasing
wellspring of compassion, have pity upon this miserable suppliant.

3. Purpose to live better hereafter. O my blessed Lord, no; never any more
with the help of thy grace; no, never any more will I abandon my self to
sin. Alas I have loved it but too too much: but now I detest it, and embrace
thee. O father of mercy, I will live and die in thee.

4. To blott out my sins past, I will accuse my self courageously I will not
leave one, but thrust it head long out of my heart.

5. I will do all that I can to pull up by the very roots, all the plants of
sin from my heart: and in particular, such and such which do most annoy me.

6. To accomplish this, I will consta^tly embrace the means which shall be
advised me: and never thinck I have done euough, to repair the ruins of so
great offenses.

Conclusion.
1. Give God thanks, for expecting thy amendment, until this hour: and bless
him that he has given thee these good affections.

2. Offer him up thy soul franckly and freely, that thou may putt them in
execution by the help of his grace.

3. Desire him to strengthen thee with his heavenly aid, for his dear Sonns
precious death: for our blessed Ladies intercession, and the prayers of all his
Saints, etc. Pater. Aue. Credo. Remember to make a little nosegay of devotion
as aforesaid.

The fifte meditation: of Death. CHAPTER 13.
Preparation.
1. Place thy self reverently in the presence of God. 2. Pray him to inspire
thee with his grace. 3. Imagine thy self to be extremly sick, liyng upon thy
death-bedd, without any hope at all of ever escaping.
Considerations.
1. CONSIDER the uncertainty of the day of thy death. O my poor soul, thou
must out of this body one day: but when shall that day be? Will it be in
winter, or in summer? In city, or contrie? By day, or by night? Shall it be
unawares, or with aduertisment? by sickness, or by casuallity? Shall thou have
leisure to confess thee, or not? Shall thou have the asistance of thy ghostly
father, or not? Alas, o my soul, of all these things we know not one, only
certain it is that dye we must, and always sooner then we imagine.

2. Consider that at that time the whole world shall have an end, so far forth
as concerns thee, that is, there shall be no more world for thee, yea, it
will turn vpside down before thine eyes: for then the pleasures, the
vanities, the worldly joys, the fond affections of our life, will seem unto
us like flying shadows, and fadinge clouds. Ah wretched caytiue that I am,
for what trifles, and bables have I offended almighty God? Thou shall then
evidently see, that we have offended him for just nothing. Contrary-wise, at
that hour, al devotion, piety, and other good works, will seem unto thee
the greatest and sweetest treasure in the world. O wherefore did I not follow
this fair and pleasant path? At that sorrowful time, thy sins, which before
seemed unto thee but little moule-hilles, will appear biggar then huge
mountains: and thy devotion so little, that thou will scarcely be able to
perceive it.

3. Consider the long and languishing farwells, that thy distressed soul will
then give to this world: how sorrowfully she will bid adieu to riches, to
honors, to vanities, to vain company, to pleasures, to pastimes, to frindes,
to neighbors, to parents, to kinsfolk, to husband, to wife, to children, and
in a word to all creatures, and finally to her own body, which she must
likewise leave, al pale, wrinckled, hideous, loathsome, and most detestably
stinking.

4. Consider the impressio^s that one shall have, to lift up, or lay hand on
this thy body: the great have, that even thy best frindes will make, to carry
thy carcass out of doors, and to hide the same full deep under the ground,
far enough from their sight and behoulding: and this done, how seeldome
afterward the world will think upon thee, surely no more then thou thy self
have thought upon other men, who have deceased before thee. God have mercy on
his soul, say they, and there is all. O death how art thou to be pondered? How
art thou terrible, pittiles, and without compassion?

5. That at this departure from the body, the soul takes his way on the right
hand, or the left. Alas, alas, wither then shall thine go, what way shall it
take? surely no other then that, which it has heretofore begun in this world.

Affections and resolutions.
1. Pray earnestly to God, and cast thy self with trembling love beiwixt his
arms. Alas o my Lord, receive me into thy protection at that dreadful day:
make that last hour happy and favorable unto me, and let rather all the rest
of my life be nothing else but days of sorrow, affliction, and calamity.

2. Despise the world. Seeing I know not the hour wherein I must leave thee, o
wretched world, I will no more set my love upon thee. O you my dear frindes,
knisfolkes, and allies, suffer me to bearge you only that affection, which is
compatible with an holy amity, and may therefore last eternally: for why
should I unite my self unto you in such sort, as that afterward we should be
forced to break the knot of amity betwixt us?

3. I will therefore from this very instant, prepare my self for that perilous
hour, and take that care which is requisite, to end this journey happily: I
will secure the estate of my conscience, to the utmost of my ability, and take
present order for the reformation and amendment, of such and such defaultes.

Conclusion.
Give thanks unto God for these resolutions which he has infused and given
unto thee: and offer them again thankfully, lovingly, and lowly unto his
majesty. Entreat him a new to give thee a happy death, for the death of his
dearly beloved Son, our Lord and Savior. Implore the asistance of the B.
Virgin, thy Angel guardian, and all the Saints in heaven. Pater. Aue. Credo.
And bind up a sweet posie of myrhe, to recreate thy soul the day following.

The Sixth Meditation, of Judgment. CHAPTER 14.
1. Place thy self in the presence of God. 2. Pray him to asist thee with his
grace.
Considerations.
1. AFTER the time that God has ordained for the continnance of the world, and
after a number of dreadful signs and horrible presages, the terror whereof
shall make men wither for fear and anguish, a co^suming fire, coming like
aflood, shall burn and reduce to ashes, every thing that is upon the face of
the earth, nothing which we see excepted, nothing to be priueledged from this
fiery deluge.

2. After this flood of flames and lightninges, all men shall arise from their
graves (excepting such as already be risen) and at the summoning of the
Archangels voice, they shall appear before the judgment throane, in the valley
of Iosaphat. But alas with what difference? For the one sort shall arise with
glorifed bodies, casting forth rays of exceeding light, and the other in
bodies, or rather in carrions, most hideous and loath some to behold.

3. Consider the majesty where with the sovereign Judge will appear,
environed with all the armies of his Angels and Saints. Before him shall be
borne triumphantly his sacred Cross, shining much more brighter then the
sun: a standart of grace to the good, and of righour and terror to the
wicked.

4. This sovereign Judge by his redouted commandment, and which shall
suddenly and in a moment be put in execution, shall separate the good from the
bad, placing the one at his right hand, and the other at his left: everlasting
separation, after the which these to bands shall never any more meet again
together.

5. This separation being made, and the books of consciences being laid open,
all men shall see clearly the malice of the wicked, and the contempt which they
have borne to the majesty of God: and on the other side, the penance of the
good, and the effects of the grace of God which they have received, and
nothing at all shall be hidden or kept secret in that great consistory. O good
God, what a shameful confusion will this be fore the one, and what a glorious
consolation for the other?

6. Consider the last sentence pronounced against the wicked. Go you cursed
into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels Weigh well these
words which are so weighty. Go, says he, a word of eternal reiection and
abandoning of those unfortunate wretches, ba^nishing them eternally from his
glorious face. Next he terms them accursed: o my soul how dreadful a
curse? how general a curse? a curse co^prising in it all manner of mischief
and misery; an irreuocable curse, comprehendinge all times and eternity. He
adds, into everlasting fire. Behold, o my heart, the grievous horror of this
eternity; O eternal eternity, and boundles infinity of pains, how dreadful
art thou?

7. Consider the contrary sentence given and pronounced in favor of the good.
Come, says the Judge; O sweet word, and beginning of salvation, by which God
draws us up unto him self, and receaueth us into the bosom of rest and
glory. The blessed of my Father. O dear blessing, treasure of bliss. Posesse
the kingdom which is prepared for you from the beginning of the world. O good
God what excess of favor: for this kingdom has no end.

Affections and resolutions.
1. Tremble, o my soul, at the remembrance hereof. O my God, who can secure me
at that dismal day, in which the pillars of heaven shall tremble for fear?

2. Detest and abhor thy sins, for only they can cast thee away at that
dreadful hour.

3. Ah wretched heart of mine resolve to mend all. O Lord I will judge my self
now with all care and stricktnes, lest I be then judged far more rigorously. I
will examine and condemn my self, accuse and chastise my self, that the
eternal Judge condemn me not in that latter day. I will with all sorrow and
humblenes, frequent the Sacrament of Confession, and will accept all necessary
penances and aduices, etc.

Conclusion.
1. Thank the goodness of God, that has given thee means to provide for that
day, and time and opportunity to do penance.

2. Offer him thy heart to perform it.

3. Pray him to give thee grace, well and truly to accomplish it. Pater. Aue.
Credo. And provide a posie for all the day.

The seventh Meditation, of Hell. CHAPTER 15.
1. Place thy self in the presence of God. 2. Pray him to asist thee with his
grace. 3. Imagine to thy self a dark city, al on fire with pitch and
brimstone, and thronged with miserable citizens, which cannot get out.
Considerations.
1. CONSIDER that the damned are within this bottomless pit of hell, as with in
this unfortunate city, where they suffer unspeakable torments in all their
senses, and in all their members: because as they have employed all their
senses and members to commit sin, so shall they suffer in all their senses
and members, the pains and torments due unto sin. There the wanton eyes and
lascivious looks, shall be afflicted with the horrible vision of devils, and
hellish spectacles. The ears for delighting in vicious discouses, detractions,
and slanders, shall hear nothing but lamentable outcries, and desperate
howlinges: and so of others.

2. Consider that over and above all these bitter torments, there is yet
another greater then they all, which is the loss and priuatio^ of the glory
of God, from whose most amiable face and fruition, they are for ever
irreuocably debarred. Now if Absalon found, that the privation of the face of
his father David, was more grievous unto him, then his very exile, o merciful
Lord, what an infinite grief will it be, to be for ever deprived from
behoulding, of thy most delightful and lovely face.

3. Consider withal, the eternity of these pains, which only thing makes
hell intolerable* Alas if a flea in our ear, or if the heat of a little
fever, make one short night so long and tedious, how tedious and terrible shall
the night of eternity be, accompanied with so many unspeakable torments? Of
this eternity grows in the damned, an eternal desperation, infinity rage,
and most abominable blasphemy. etc.

Affections and resolutions.
1. ^ertifie thy soul, and stir thy self up to fear with the words of holy
Job. O my soul, art thou able to live for ever with everlasting flames, and
amidst this devouring fire? Will thou willingly forsake the sight of thy God
for ever?

2. Confess that thou have deserved it. And wretch that I am, how often? O my
dear Lord, from henceforth I will take a new course, and tread a contrary
way, for why should I descend into this bottomless pit of hell? I will therefore
do this or that endeavor to avoid sin, which only can give this immortal
death.

Give thanks, Offer, Pray. Pater. Aue. Creed.

The eight Meditation, of Paradise. CHAPTER 16.
Preparation.
1. Place thy self in the presence of God. 2. Pray him to asist thee with his
grace.
Considerations.
1. CONSIDER a fair and a clear night, and think how pleasant a thing it is
to behold the sky all spangled with an innumerable multitude and variety of
stars. Then again in thy imagination, join all this nights goodly beauty,
with the beauty of a fair sunshine day, such an one, that the brightness of
the sun beams, should not hinder the sight of the goulden stars, nor the
silver rays of the moon: and after all this, say bouldly, that all this is
nothing in regard of the excellent beauty of that great Paradise. O how this
place is to be desired, and to be loved! O how precious is this noble city!

2. Consider the nobility, beauty, and multitude of the inhabitants, and
citizens of this blessed contrie, those millions of millions of Angels, and
Archangells, of Cherubins and Seraphins: those troops of Apostles, Prophets,
Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, and holy Matrons. O how blessed is this blessed
company? The lowest and meanest whereof, is more beautiful to behold, then
all this visible world: what a sight will it then be, to see them altogether?
But o my God, how happy are they? They singe continually melodious songs of
eternal love, they always enjoy, a constant and steadfast estate of gladness,
they enterchange one to another, unspeakable contentments, and live in the
comfort of endless and indissoluble amity.

3. In a word, consider what good they all have to enjoy God, who gratifieth
them forever with his amiable countenance, and by the same, powers into their
hearts an abisse of delights. What a good is it, to be united everlastingly to
their beginning? They are there like happy birds, which fly, chirping and
singing perpetually in the heaven of the divinity, which encompasseth them on
all sides with unspeakable pleasures: there every one strives with an holy
emulation, who may do best, and without any envy, singe the praises of their
Creator. Blessed be thou, o sweet lord and sovereign maker, who art so
bountiful unto us, and do communicate unto us so liberally, the everlasting
treasures of thy glory. And God on the other side, blesses them all with an
eternal benediction. Blessed be you for ever, says he, my beloved creatures
who have so faithfully served me, and who shall laud me everlastingly with so
great love, courage, and contentment.

Affections and resolutions.
1. Admire and praise this heavenly country. O how beautiful art thou, my
dear Jerusalem?

2. Reproache unto thy heart the little courage which it has had unto this
present, for having gone so much awrye from the way of this glorious
habitation. O wherefore have I so much estranged my self from my sovereign
good? Ah wretch that I am, for these pleasures, so displeasant and pight, have
I a thousand, and a thousand times, left the eternal and insinit delights.
Where was my wit and understanding, to despise such goods so desirable, to
desires so vain and contemptible:

3. Aspire notwithstanding with vchement resolution to this delicious and
desired aboade. O my gracious God, since it has pleased thee at the lenght to
recall my wandering steps, and to direct them into the right way, never
hereafter will I turn back to those by-ways, never hereafter will I stray from
the true path. Let us go with courage, my dear soul, let us run toward
this blessed country, which is promised us in the kingdom of heaven: what
make we so long in this beggarly country of Egypt? I will therefore dispatch
my self from all such things as may put me out of the way, or hinder me in so
happy a journey. I will perform such and such things, as may bring me safely
and speedely to my iornyes end. Give thanks. Offer. Pray. Pater. Aue. Credo.

The ninth Meditation; by way of election or choice of Paradise. CHAPTER 17.
Preparation.
1. Place thy self in the presence of God. 2. Humble thy self before his
majesty, praying him to inspire thee with his grace. 3. Imagine thy self to be
in a plain field, all alone in company of thy good Angel, as young Toby
going to Rages: and that he causes thee to see above thee, Paradise open, with
all the pleasures represented in the former meditation of Paradise: and
beneathe, that he makes thee see the pit of hell wide open, with all the
torments described in the meditation of hell. Thou being thus placed upon thy
knees before thy good Angel,
Considerations.
1. CONSIDER that it is most certain, that thou art in very deed in the
midway to Paradise and hell, and that the one, and the other, is open to
receive thee, according to the choice which thou shall make.

2. Consider that the choice which now thou make, of the one, or the other
place in this world, shall last for all eternity in the world to come.

3. Consider that although both the one, and the other, be open to receive
thee, according to thy choice, yet that God who is ready to give thee, either
the one by his justice, or the other by his mercy, desires not with standing,
with an incomperable desire, that thou would make choice of Paradise, and
thy good Angel also, urges and presses thee with all his power, offering thee
on Gods behalf, a thousand succors, and a thousand graces, to help thee to
ascend and mount up thither.

4. Consider that Jesus Christ from heaven above, lovingly behouldeth thee, and
inuiteth thee sweetly, saying. Come o my dear soul to everlasting repose
between the arms of my goodness, where I have prepared immortal delights for
thee, in the multitude of my love. Behold likewise with thy inward eyes, the
holy Virgin, who with a mothers tender love exhorts thee, saying. Take heart
and courage my child, despise not the desires of my Son, nor the manifould
sighs which I have cast forth for thee, earnestly together with my Son,
tendering thy eternal salvation. Behold the Saints also which exhort thee,
and a million of holy souls courteously alluring thee, and wishing nothing
else, but that one day thy heart may be joined with theirs in that happy
company, there to praise God for ever and ever, assuring thee that the way to
heaven, is not so uneasy as the world would make it. Come bouldly dear soul,
say they, forward with courage, for he that shall ponder dilligently the way of
devotion, by which we have ascended hither, shall perceive, that we arrived to
these eternal joys, thorough pleasures, without comparison more pleasant,
then all the delights, and pleasures of the world.

Election.
1. O hell I detest thee now and for evermore, I detest thy torments and
pains, I detest thy unfortunate and accursed eternity, and above all, I detest
those eternal blasphemies and execrations, which thou vomitest out eternally
against my God. And turning my soul to thee, o beautiful paradise,
everlasting glory, and endless felicity, I make choice for ever and
irreuocablely, of my dwelling and habitation within thy fair and beautiful
buyldinges, within thy holy and most lovely tabernacles. I bless thy mercy, o
my God, and accept the offer which it pleases thee to make me O sweet Savior
Jesus, I likewise embrace thy everlasting love, and agree to the purchase which
thou have made for me, of a happy lodging in this blessed Jerusalem; not so
much for any thing else, as to love and bless thee for ever and ever.

2. In like manner accept the favors which the Virgin, and all the B. Saints,
present unto thee. Promise them that thou will walk toward them; and give
thy hand to thy good Angel, that he may guide thee thither, and encourage thy
soul to make this choice. Pater. Aue. Credo.

The tenth Meditation; by way of election and choice which the soul makes of
the devout life. CHAPTER 18.
Preparation.
1. Place thy self before God. 2. Prostrate thy self before him, and crave
the asistance of his grace.
Considerations.
1. IMAGINE thy self once again to be in a plain field, all alone with thy
good Angel, and that thou see on thy left hand, the devil seated upon a great
high throne, with many infernal fiendes by him: and round about him, a great
troop of worldlinges, which all bareheaded, acknowledge him for their Lord, and
do him homage, some by one sin, and some by another. Behold the
countenances of all these unfortunate courtyers of this abominable king
Behold some of them furious, and mad with hatred, envy, and choler: others
killing one another with spite and ra^cour: others withered away, pensive and
busy only to heap up riches: others atte^ding only to vanity, led away with
pleasures, altogether fond and unprofitable: others filthy, ougly, rotten, and
putrified, in their brutish affections. Behold how they are all without any
repose, wihout order, and without co^tentme^t. Behold how they despise one
another, and love but only from the theeth outward. In a word, thou shat see a
pitiful common wealth, miserable tyrannized by this accursed king, which may
justly move thy heart to compassion.

2. On the right side, behold Jesus Christ crucified, who with most hearty
love, prays for these poor people posessed of the devil, that they may be
freed and delivered from that tirannical thraldom, and calling them meekly and
courteously unto him. Behold round about him, a great troop of devout persons,
every one in company of his holy Angel. Behold the beauty of this kingdom of
devotion. O what a goodly sight is it, to see this troop of virgins, of men,
and women, whiter then the lillies, that assembly of widows full of holy
mortification and humility. Behold the rancks of diverse married folk, living
so sweetly together with mutual comfort, which can not proceed but from
heavenly charity. Consider how these devout souls, accommodate the care of
their exterior house, with the care of the interior: and the honest love of
the husband, with that of the celestial bridegroom. Behold them all
universally, and thou shall see in them all, a sweet, holy, and amiable
countenance, all of them reverently giving ear to our blessed Lord, whom every
one would willingly plant in the midst of his heart. They are all full of joy,
but their joy is gracious, charitable, and well ordered: they abound in love
one toward another; but their love is sacred, pure, and unspotted. Such as
suffer afflictions amongst this devout company, nether torment nor trouble them
selves, nor leese their courage. Lastly, behold those lovely eyes of our Lord
and Savior, which sweetly are cast upon them all to comfort them, and how they
altogether aspire unto him.

3. Thou have alredie cast of Satan, with all his woeful and execrable troop,
by the good affections and resolutions which through Gods grace thou have
conceived: notwithstanding thou art not yet arrived to the palace of thy king,
our Lord Jesus, nor joined with his blessed court of devout souls: but
hitherto thou have always remained, between the one and the other.

4 The blessed Virgin, with S. Joseph, S. Lewis, S. Monica, and a hundred
thousand other Saints, which are in the squadron of those that lived devoutly
in the midst of the world, do inuit and encourage thee.

5. The crucified king of glory him self, calls thee courteously by thine
own name: Come my welbeloud, come hither that I may crown thee.

Election.
1. O vain world, o abominable troop, no; you shall never more see me under
your ba^ner. I have for ever left of your fooleries and vanities. O execrable
king of pride, o cursed king, fiend of hell, I renounce thee with all thy
vain pompes, I detest and defy thee, with all thy works.

2. And humbly turning my self unto thee my deer Lord Jesus, king of felicity
and eternal glory, I embrace thee with all the forces of my soul, I adore
thee with all my heart: I choose thee now and ever for my king, and for my only
prince: I offer up unto thee my inviolable fidelity* I do homage irreuocably
unto thy (...) majesty, and submitt my self wholly to the obedience of thy
holy laws, and ordinances.

3. O sacred ^gin my dread and deer lady, I choose thee for my advocate and my
guide: I render my self under thy colors: I offer from henceforth, a
particular respect and reverence unto thy men^rie.

4. O my good Angel, pre^ (...) unto this glorious and sacred asse^ and abando^
me not until I arrive to the society of this blessed company: with whom I
say from my heart, and will say for ever. Live for ever my Lord Jesus, live for
ever my Lord Jesus. Pater. Aue. Credo.

How to make a general Confession. CHAPTER 19.
1. HITHERTO (my deer Philotheus) have I set down the meditatio^s which I
thought requisite for our purpose: and when thou have passed them over with
diligence and devotion, then go with an humble, but yet courageous spirit, to
make thy general Confession. But ^ pray thee suffer not thy self to be
troubled with any kind of apprehension. The Scorpion is venomous in the wound
which arises from his sting* but him self being reduced into (...) becomes a
fingular remedy again (...) own stinging: ^o sin is no (...) full, but when
it is co^m^ed: but (...) converted into confession* penaun^ ^ecometh wholesome
and honorable. (...) and Confession are so precious, (...) sweet a smell, that
(...) filthe, and disperse the (...) of sin. Simon the leaper, judged Mary
Magdalen to be a sinner, and called her so: but our merciful Savior denied
it, and spoke no more of her sins, but of the sweet perfumes which she poured
forth, and of the greatness, and odoriferous sent, of her inflamed charity.

2. O my Philotheus, if we be truly humble in our own eyes and in the sight
of God: our sins will displease us above all things, because God is highly
offended with the^: but the accusation of our sins will be sweet and pleasant
unto us, because God is greatly honored with it. A kind of heart ease, and an
asswaging of pain it is, to have declared plainly and sufficiently, the
disease that torme^teth us, to a skillfull physician, that can cure us.

3 When thou come before thy ghostly father, imagine thy self to be on the
mount of Caluary, kneeling right under the feet of Jesus Christ crucified,
from whom distilleth his most precious blood on al sides, to bathe and wash
thee from thy iniquity. For although it be not the very blood of our Savior,
yet it is the merit and valor of his blood, shed for us upon the cross, which
washes and waters abundantly, the souls of the penitents, in every
confessionarie. Open then thy heart well, to expel thy sins by virtue of
Confession, for according to that measure, in which they go out of thy soul,
will the grace of God enter in their rome, to fill thee brim-full with his
blessing.

4. But be sure to declare the state of thy soul, and all thy sins, simply,
plainly, and fully: satisfy thy conscience in this, once for all thy life
after: and that done, hearken to the aduertisme^ts and ordonances of the
servant of God, to whom thou confessest, and say with holy Samuel in thy heart:
Speak Lord, for thy servant hearkneth unto thee. Yea (my Philotheus) it is God
whose voice thou hear in that place: for so said he unto his vicars, he that
hears you, hears me.

5. After that, take in hand this protestation following, which serves for a
conclusion of all thy Contrition: ponder it well from the beginning to the
ending, and read it attentively, and with the greatest feeling that possible
thou can.

An authentical protestation, serving to engraue in thy soul a firm
resolution to serve God, and to conclude the acts of Penance. CHAP. 20.
1. I wretched sinner here personally appeering and standing in the presence
of God everlasting, and of all the court of heaven; having considered the
exceeding mercy of his divine goodness toward me, most unworthy and miserable
caytife, whom he has created of nothing, preserved, sustained, and delivered
from so many dangers, and endowed with so many benefits. But above all
considering the incomprehensible sweetness and clemency wherewith this most good
God has so bountifully tolerated me in my iniquities, so often, and so
lovingly inspired me inuiting me to amendment, and so patiently expected my
penance and conversion until this N. year of my age: notwithstanding all my
vnthanckfulnes, disloyalty, and infidelity, whereby differring my conversion,
and despising his graces, I have so impudently offended him; Having moreover
considered that at the day of my Christening, I was so happily and holily vowed
and dedicated unto my God to be his child, and that contrary to the
profession, which then was made in my name, I have so many and sundry times,
so execrably and detestably profaned and violated my soul, employing it, and
opposing it against his divine majesty; At length recalling my self, and
prostrating my self in heart and mind before the throne of his divine justice, I
acknowledge, confess, and yeald my self lawfully attached and convicted of
high treason against his divine majesty, and guilty of the death and passion
of Jesus Christ, by reason of the heinous sins which I have committed, for
which he died, and suffered the torment of the cross: so that consequently, I
am worthy to be cast away, and damned for ever.

2. But turning my self toward the throne of the infinite mercy, of the self
same eternal God; having detested from the bottom of my heart, and with all my
force, the iniquities of my life fore-passed, I most humbly require and crane
pardon, grace, and mercy with entire absolution from my crime, through virtue
of the passion and death of the same Saueour and redeemer of my soul, upon
whom relying, as upon the only foundation of my hope, I confirm again,
advowe, and renew, the sacred profession of loyal service and fidelity, made
in my name and behalf, unto my God at my Baptising: renouncing the devil, the
flesh, and the world, abhorring their execrable suggestions, vanities, and
concupiscences for all the time of this present life, and for all eternity;
And converting my self unto my most gracious and merciful God, I desire,
deliberate, purpose, and fully resolve irreuocablie, to honor him, serve him,
and love him, now and for ever: giving him for this end, and dedicating, and
consecrating, my spirit with all his faculties, my soul with all her
functio^s, my heart with all his affections, and my body with all his senses:
protesting never more to abuse any one part of my being or nature, against his
divine will and sovereign majesty: to whom I offer up and sacrifice my self
in spirit, to be to him a loyal, obedient, and faithful creature for ever,
without ever unsaying reuoking or repe^ting me of my promise.

3. But if alas, through suggestion of mine enemy, or through humane frailty,
I chance at any time to transgress in any thing whatsoever, this my purpose
and resolution, I protest and determine from this very hour, through the grace
and aid of the holy Ghost, to arise again so soon as I shall perceive my
fall, and so to return a new to the divine mercy, without any stay or delay
whatsoever. This is my will, intention, and resolution irreuocable and
inviolable, which I aduowe, and confirm without reservation or exception in
the same sacred presence of my God, and in the sight of the triumpha^t church,
and in the face of the church militant my mother, who understands and
registreth this my declaration in person of him, who as her officer hearth me
and takes my confession in this action.

4. Let it please thee o my eternal God, almighty and all good Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, to confirm and strengthen me in this resolution, and to
accept this my cordial and inward sacrifice, in the odor of sweetness. And as
it pleased thee to lighte^ me with thy holy inspiration, and to give me the
will to purpose fully, so grant me also force and grace to perform it
perfectly. O my God, thou art my God: God of my heart, God of my soul, and God
of my spirit: and for such do I reverently, thanckfully, and lovingly
acknowledge, honor, and adore thee, now, and for ever. Live o Jesus.

A devout manner to receive absolution. CHAP. 21.
1. THIS protestation ended, be very attentive, and open the ears of thy
heart, to hear the words of thy absolution, which the Savior of thy soul him
self, sitting upon the throne of his mercy, will pronounce from above in
heaven, before all his Angels and Saints, at the same time, that the priest in
his name does absolve thee here beneath upon earth. So that all that glorious
troop of the blessed citizens of heaven, reioicing at this happy success of
thine, will sing a spiritual canticle with incomparable joy, and all give the
kiss of peace and fellowship unto thy heart, now sanctified and reestablished in
grace.

2. Behold here (my Philotheus) an admirable contract, which passes between
thee and thy God, by which thou make so happy a peace with his divine
majesty, for as much as giving thy self to him, thou gainest him and thy self
also, for life everlasting. It remains only to take pen in hand, and
subscribe with a joyful heart to the act of thy protestation, and afterward,
thou shall go to the sacred Altar, where God on the other side will
reciprocallie, sign and seal thy absolution, and the promise which he makes
unto thee of the kingdom of heaven, putting him self by his venerable
sacrament, as a sacred seal and signet upon thy renewed heart.

3. Thus I trow (Philotheus) thy soul will be wholly purged from sin, and all
sinful affections. Yet because these affections are easily bredd and borne a
new in the soul, through our failtie, and our rebellious co^cupisce^ce, which
may well be mortified, but never wholly exti^guished while we live in this
mortal life: I will give thee some instructions, which being well practiced,
may preserve thee hereafter from mortal sin, and from all inclination or
affection thereof, so that it may never henceforth find place in thy heart. And
for so much as the self same instructions, serve also for a more perfect and
higher purification of the soul, before I deliver them, I will say a word or
two of this absolute and perfect purity of mind, whereunto I would so
willingly conduct thee.

That we must purify our selves from the affections which we have to venial
sins. CHAPTER 22.
1. AS the day light increasing, we see by degrees more clearly in a looking
glass, the spots and blemishes of our countenance: even so as the inward
light of the holy Ghost illustrates our consciences, we see more plainly and
distinctly, the sins, inclinations, and imperfections, which may hinder us to
attain unto true devotion. And the very same light which causes us to
discover those spotts and deformities, enflameth us likewise with desire to
cleanse and purge us from them.

2. Thou shall discover in thy self (my dear Philotheus) that besides mortal
sins and the affection to them, from which by the before mentioned exercises,
thou have been purged, there remain yet in thy soul, diverse inclinations and
affections to venial sins. I do not say thou shall discover venial sins,
but inclinations to them: now the one is far different from the other: for we
can never be altogether free from venial sins in this mortal life, at
least so to continue in that purity for any long time, but we may be well
without all affection unto venial sins: for (to give an example of this
difference) it is one thing to lie once or twice merrily, in things of small
importance, and another thing to take pleasure in lying, and to bear an
affection to this kind of sin.

3. I say then, that one must purge his soul from all the affections and
inclinations that he feels to venial sins, that is to say, that he must not
nourishe, voluntarily a will to continue and persevere, in any kind of venial
sin: for it would be too too great a negligence, to keep wittingly and aware
unto us in our conscience, a thing so displeasing unto God, as is the will to
be willinge to displease him: for a venial sin be it never so little,
displeases almighty God, though not so hainously, that he will damn us, or
cast us away for ever for the same. If then venial sin displease him, the
will and affection which one has to venial sin, is no other thing, but a
resolution and purpose to displease his divine majesty. And how is it
possible, that a generous and noble soul, should endure, not only to
displease his God, but to bear an affection to displease him.

4. Such affections (my Philotheus) are directly contrary to devotion, as
affection and delight in morrall sins, are opposite to charity: They weary
and weaken the forces of the spirit, hinder the course of divine consolations,
open wide a gate to tentations: and all-though they kill not the soul outright,
yet they make it exceeding sick and feeble. Dead flies (says the wiseman)
mar the sweetness of an ointment: but those which eat thereof in passing,
spoil nothing but that which they take, leaving the rest untainted: but when
they linger long and die in the ointment, they mar both the virtue and value
of it, and leave it nothing worth but to be cast away. So venial sins,
chauncing to fall in a devout soul, and not staying there any time, do not
much harm unto it: but if the same sins dwell in the soul, through the
affection and delight wherewith she entertaineth them, they make her without
doubt, to leese the sweetness of the ointment, which is the grace of holy
devotion.

5. Spiders kill not the bees in their hiues, but they spoil and corrupt
their honey, and entangle their honniecombs with their cobwebbes, so that the
bees can not go forward in their work. This is to be understood, when
spiders get into the hiues so that they make their aboade in them. So venial
sins kill not our souls, but yet mar the honnie of our devotion, and
entangle the powers of our soul so strongly with naughty customs and bad
inclinatio^s, that it can no more exercise charity with promptnes and
alacrity, in which devotion consists: but this is to be understood when
venial sins do dwell in our conscience, by the affection and delight which
we bear unto them.

6. It is no heinous sin (my Philotheus) to tell some little lie in pastime,
to exceed somewhat in needless talk, in careless looks, in apparel, in
myrthe, in play, in dancing, and such like toys, so that as soon as we
perceive these ghostly spiders entered into our souls, we chase them and drive
them presently away, as the Bees drive away the corporal spiders: but if we
permit them to stay in our hearts, and not only this, but if we bend our
affections to retain and multiply them, we shall soon find our honnie
destroyed, and made bitter, and the hiue of our conscience pestered and
spoiled. But I say once again: what likely hood is there, that a noble and
virtuous soul, would take pleasure in displeasing God: and delight her self in
beco^ming disagreable unto him, and to retain a desire and will to do that,
which she knows to be grieueous unto him.

That we ought to purify our selves from affection and delight of unprofitable
and dangerous things. CHAPTER 23.
1. GAMING, dancing, feasting, bravery, maskes, comedies and such like
pastimes, of them selves are not hurtful at all, but indifferent, and may be
well and ill used: yet notwithstanding, these things be dangerous: and for one
to bear an affection unto them, is yet more dangerous. I say then Philotheus,
that allthough it be no sin at all, but lawful to play, to dance, to deck
and adorn thy self, according to thy estate and the custom of times, to hear
honest comedies, to banquet with sober company: yet to delight in such things,
is exceeding dangerous, and altogether contrary to the exercise of devotion.
It is no sin to do such things: but it is very ill to set thy affection that
way. It is pity to sow such vain and foolish thoughts in the fertile field of
our heart, which take up the room of virtuous impressions, and hinder the juice
of the soul from nourishing good and wholesome inclinations.

2. The ancient Nazarits abstained not only from all that which might
inebriate or make them dronck, but from grapes also, and the veriuce of
grapes: not that the grape of veriuce makes dru^ke, but because it was to be
feared least tasting the veriuce, they should be tempted to eat the grapes,
and by eating grapes they should stir up an appetite of drincking wine. I
deny not but we may sometimes use these dangerous things, but I avouch
absolutely, that we can never setle our affection and delight on them, without
detriment to devotion. The Stagges when they feel themselves ouerfatt, retire
to the bushes and thickets of the forests, because they perceive that being
laden with their own weight, they should not be able to run, if they should
chance to be hunted. In like manner the heart of man surcharged with these
superfluous, unprofitable, and perilous affections, cannot run after his God
with promptnes, facility, and willingness of mind, which is the true point of
devotion.

3. Little children sweat and tire them selves to catch butterflies, and no
body thincks it ill in them, because they be little children: but is it not a
ridiculous thing, nay rather is at not lamentable, to see men of understanding
and years, to be besotted with the delight of such fond toys, and base
trifles, as these of which we speak? which besides that they be altogether
unprofitable, put us likewise in evident danger of erring, and disordering our
selves, in the pursuit of holiness and piety. For this cause (my deer
Philotheus) I say that we must necessarily purify and cleanse our selves from
these affections: for though the acts them selves be not always contrary to
devotion, the inclination and delight in such actions is always damageable
unto it.

That we must purge our selves, from bad inclinations. CHAP. 24.
1. BESIDES these vicious inclinatio^s, we have (my Philotheus) certain
natural inclinations to some kind of acts: which inclinatio^s, because they
proceed not in us from our particular sins, are not properly sins, neither
mortal nor venial, but are only imperfections, and defects; for example the
holy matron S. Paula, according to the relation of S Hierom, had a great
inclination to grief and sadness, so that at the death of her children and
husband, she was allwaies like to die for sorrow: this was an imperfection in
this blessed woman, but no sin at all, since she had it against her will, for
no doubt she took no pleasure in this kind of sorrow.

2. There be some that naturally are light of behaueour, others stubborn and
sullen, others hard to receive and admit another ma^s counsel, other some
prone to indignation, others to choler, others to love: and to be brief, few
shall thou find, in whom some such imperfection may not be noted. Which
allthough they be as it were proper and natural to every one, yet by a care and
contrary affection, they may be moderated and corrected, yea and be altogether
purged and delivered of them.

3. And I tell thee (o Philothee) that it is necessary that thou endeavor so to
do. Men have found the means to change bitter almond-trees into sweet, only
by percing the^ close by the root, to let out the bitter juice of the^: why
may we not the^, let soorth our perverse inclinations, from the root of our
heart to become better? There is not so good a nature, but may be corrupted by
vicious customs: nor so badd and stubborn a co^ditio^ but may first by the
grace of God and next by good industry and diligence, be corrected, and
surmounted. To this end therefore will I now set thee down some instructions and
exercises, by which thou may purge thy soul from all affections to venial
sins, and from these natural imperfectio^s and withal fortify and arm thy
self against all mortal sin. God give thee grace to practice them well and
effectually.

THE SECOND PART OF THIS INTRODVCTION, Containing diverse aduices for the
lifting up of the soul to God by prayer, and by use of the Sacraments.
Of the necessity of prayer. CHAPTER I.
1. THE exercise of prayer places our understanding in the cleernes of the
divine light, and exposes our cold affection, to be warmed by the heat of
heavenly love; there is nothing that so much purges our understanding from
ignorance, and our will from depraved affections. Prayer is the water of
benedictio^ which being sprinkled upon our soul, makes the plants of our
good desires to flourishe, washes our minds from imperfectio^s, and tempereth
the inflamed alteration, which passions produce in our hearts.

2. All prayer has these good effects, but above all I counsel thee to apply
thy self to mental and cordial prayer, and especially that which has for its
matter or subject, the life and passion of our Lord: for beholding him often by
meditation, thy soul will be filled with him, thou will learn his carriage, as
it were and gestures, and conform all thy actions according to the measure and
model of his. He is the light of the world: it is in him then, by him, and for
him, that we must be cleared and illuminated; he is the lovely tree of life:
under his shadow then, must we refresh our selves; he is the living well of
Jacob, to wash away all the ordure and stains of our soul. To be short, we
see that little children by hearing their mothers speak and prattling often with
them, do come to learn their language: and so we continually conuersing with
our Savior by meditation, observing and pondering reverently, his words, his
works, and his affections, shall soon, by the help of his grace, learn to
speak, to work, to will and desire as he did. We must rest upon this resolution
my Philotheus, and believe me we can not come unto God the father by any other
gate but this: and eue^ as the glass of a mirror cannot stay or retain the
rays of our ey-sight, unless the back be seeled with tin or lead: so the
deity cannot well be co^templated by us in this world, if it were not joined
to the sacred humanity of our Savior, whose life and death is the most
proportionable, delicious, sweet and profitable object, that we can choose for
our ordinary meditation Our Savior, not for nothing caled him self the bread
of heaven: for as bread is to be eaten with all sorts of meats: so our Saviors
life must be meditated, considered, and sought after, in all our prayers and
actions. This life and death, has been disposed and distributed, into diverse
points and passages to serve for meditation, by many authors: those whom I
council thee to use, are S. Bonauenture, Bellitan, Bruno and Capilia.

3. Employ in it every day an hour, and that before dinner, if it may be,
betimes at the beginning of the morning: for then shall thou find thy spirit
less troubled and distracted, and more fresh and disposed after the repose of
the night. But spend no more the^ an hour, unless thy spiritual father
expressly co^ma^d it.

4. If thou can perform this exercise in the church, and find leisure and
tranquillity there, it would be a place most commodious: for no body, nether
father nor mother, nor wife nor husband, nor any other whosoever, can with any
reason hinder thee to stay at the least one hour in the church: whereas being
subject by any obligation ordutie to such parties as I have named in thy own
house, thou will not be able peradventure, to promise thy self an hour so free
and quiet.

5. Begin all thy devotions, be they mental or vocal, with the presence of
God: keep this rule without fail, and without exception: and in short time
thou shall perceive, what inestimable profit thou shall reap by it.

6. If thou will believe my council, accustom thy self to say thy Pater, Aue,
and Creed in Latin: but learn likewise to understand well the words contained
in them, and what they signify in thine own lauguage: to the end that saying
them in the common language of the church, thou may jointly taste and relish,
the admirable and delicious sense of those holy prayers: which thou must use to
say, fixing profoundly thy thoughts upon every word of them, and procuring to
follow the sense of them with an enflamed affection: not making post have, or
striving to say a great many; but rather studying and endeavoring to say those
which thou say, from thy heart: for one only Pater noster, said with feeling
and heedfull attention of mind and desire, is better worth by fair, the^ many
recited hastily and with little ponderation of the meaning of them.

7. The beads or rosary of our lady, is a very profitable kind of prayer, if
it be used as it ought: which that thou may practice, provide thy self of
some little treatise or other, of many which be set forth for that purpose. It
is good also to say the letanies of our Lady, of the Saints, of our Savior,
and other such vocal prayers, as are in approved manualls and primers allowed
of by the church: with this item, that if God have bestowed upon thee the gift
of me^tall prayer, thou reserve alwais the principal place and time for it. So
that if after thy mental exercise, either for multitude of thy affairs, or
for any other respect, thou be not able to say thy accustomed vocal prayers:
be not therefore troubled or disquieted, but rest content to say before, or
after thy meditations, the Pater noster, Aue, and Creed of the Apostles.

8. If in making thy vocal prayers, thou feel thy heart drawn and invited to
inward mental prayer, refuse not to go where this good motion inuiteth thee,
but let thy spirit decline fair and softly on that side: and care not much for
missing thy vocal prayers, which thou did intend; for the mental prayer
which thou have made instead thereof, is much more pleasing to God, and more
profitable for thy soul. I except from this rule, the ecclesiastical office,
for if thou be bound to say it by obligation of order, or state of life, that
duty must first of all be paid and performed.

9. If it should so happen, that all the whole morning should pass away,
without performance of this sacred exercise of mental prayer, either for the
multitude of thy affairs, or any other cause (yet procure by all means
possible that such causes happen but seldom) endeavor to repair this loss
after dinner, in some hour furthest after meat: for doing it presently after
repast, before degestion be well made, thy health would be much impaired, and
thou should find thy self ouercharged with drousines. But if all the day
long, thou can not recover this loss, recompense it at least by multiplying
iaculatorie prayers, and by reading of some book of devotion, with some
penance or other for committing this fault: and therwithall make a strong
resolution, to set thy self in good order all the day following.

A breef method of meditation. And first of the presence of God, which is the
first point of Preparation. CHAPTER 2.
1. BUT perhaps (Philotheus) thou know not, how thou should make this
mental prayer, which we so much commend unto thee: for it is a thing that in
this our unhappy age, very few are acquainted withal. For this cause I
present thee a breef and simple method to that end: until such time as by
reading of many good books that have been composed upon this subject, and
above all by often use and exercise, thou be more amply instructed. And first
I set thee down the Preparation, which consists in two points: whereof the
first is to place thy self in the presence of God; and the second, to inuoke
his aid and assistance. To place thy self in the presence of God, I propound
unto thee the four principal means following, wherewith thou may help thy
self in this thy beginning.

2. The first consists in a lively and feeling apprehension of the
omnipresence of God, that is to say, to conceive and acknowledge, that God is
in all, and every where, and that there is nether place nor thing in the world,
wherein he is not most assuredly and certainly present: so that as the birds,
whersoeuer they fly, encounter always with the air, wherewith they are always
compassed: in like manner, where ever we be, we find God still present. Every
one knows this verity, but every one is not attentive to apprehend, and
ponder it. Blind men that see not a Prince who is present with them, omit not
to respect and honor him, when they are admonished of his presence: but
because they see him not with their eyes, they easily forgett that he is
present, and forgetting him, more easily omit their due respect and reverence.
Alas we see not God (my Philotheus) who is present allway with us, though faith
do advertise us of his presence: yet not seeing him with our eyes, we often
forgett our selves, and therefore comport and carry our selves, as though God
were very far from us. For allthough we know well enough that he is present
in all things; yet not pondering, nor waying this presence, it is even as much
as if we knew it not. Therefore ever before prayer, we must provoke our soul,
to an attentive sight (as it were) and consideration of Gods presence: so did
holy David, when he cried out: If I mount into heaven, O my God, thou art
there: if I descend into hell thou art there present: we must the^ use the
words of Jacob, who after he had seen the mystery of the sacred ladder, he
said: O how holy and dreadful is this place! verily God is in this place, and
I knew it not: that is, he thought not of it: for he was not ignorant, that God
was in all, and every where. When thou come the^ to prayer (Philotheus) say
inwardly to thy own heart: O my heart, my heart, God almighty is here present in
very deed.

3. The second mean to place thy self in this sacred presence is, to thinck,
and consider, that God is not only in the place where thou art: but that he is
by a most particular and peculiar manner in thy heart, and in the very bottom of
thy spirit, which he quickens and animateth with his divine presence, being
there as the heart of thy heart, and the spirit of thy spirit. For as thy soul
is as it were spread through all thy body, and in every part and parcel
thereof, and yet is in a more special and remarkable manner present in the
heart: so likewise God being verily present in all things, assisteth
notwithstanding with a more particular and notable presence in our spirit. For
this cause David calls God, the God of his heart, and S. Paul says, that, we
live, we move, and we are in God. In consideration then of this verity,
stir up in thy heart, a great reverence toward thy God, who is so inwardly
present in thy soul.

4. The third manner of presence is, to consider and behold our blessed
Savior, who in his sacred humanity, beholds from heaven all persons in the
world, but especially all Christians, who are his children, and most
particularly such as be in prayer: whose actions and behavior, he marketh most
lovingly. And this is not a simple imagination of our fantasy, but an
infallible verity: for allthough we see not him, yet he from thence above
co^sidereth and looks upon us. S. Stephen saw him in such sort, viewing and
marking his comportme^t in his martyrdom. So that we may truly say with the
espouse: Behold him there behind the wall, look where he is looking through the
windows, seeing through the lettise.

5. The fourth manner of presence, consists in helping our selves with a
simple imagination, by representing to our thoughts, our Savior in his sacred
humanity, as if he were hard by us, according as we are accustomed to
represent our frinds to our fancy, and to say, me thincks I see such a one
doing this or that, it seems unto me that I behold him thus or thus attired,
and such like. But if the venerable sacrament of the altar were present, then
this presence were real, and not by mere imgination, for the forces and
appeerance of bread should be as a tapistrie, behind which our Lord being
really present, sees and marketh our actions, although we see not him in his
own likeness.

6. Use then, (my Philotheus) these four manners of placing thy soul in the
presence of God before prayer: but they must not be all employed at once, one
only at one time will suffice, and that briefly and simply, not staying long,
or spending much time in calling this presence to thy mind.

Of Invocation, the second point of Preparation. CHAPTER 3.
1. INVOCATION, is made in this manner. Thy soul remembering and conceauing her
self to be in the presence of God, prostrate before his divine majesty with
all reverence, acknowledges her self most unworthy to abide before so
sovereign and glorious an excellency: yet knowing notwithstanding, that his
goodness will have it so, she humbly demands grace of him, to serve him well,
and adore him purely in this her meditation.

2. If thou will, to this end thou may use some short and inflamed words,
such as be these of holy David. Cast me not (o God) from thy face: take not
from me the favor of thy holy spirit. Suffer thy face to shine upon thy
servant; and I will consider thy meruaites. Give me understanding, and I will
ponder thy law: and keep it with all my heart. I am thy servant, give me
understanding: and such like as these.

3. It would be good also to call upon thy good Angel, and upon the sacred
persons which were present at the mystery that thou do meditate on. As for
example; in the meditation of the death of our Lord, thou may invoke our
blessed Lady, S. John, S. Mary Magdalen, the good thieefe: that the inward
feelings, and motions, which they received in their souls at that time, may be
likewise at this instant communicated unto thee. So in the meditation of thine
own death, thou may inuoke thy good Angel guardian, (who will be present at
thy departure) desiring him to inspire thee with convenient considerations. And
the like may be done in other like mysteries.

Of the third point of preparation, consisting in proposing the mystery which
we mean to meditate. CHAPTER 4.
1. AFTER these two ordinary points of preparation, there is a third, which
is not common unto all sorts of meditatio^s which some call, the forming or
figuring of the place, or an interior lecture, or reading of the passage to be
meditated on. And this is nothing else, but to represent unto thy imagination,
the sum and substance of the mystery which thou will meditate, and to paint
it out in thy thoughts so lively, as though it passed reallie and verylie in
thy presence. For example sake: if thou would meditate our Lord upon the
cross, imagine thy self to be present upon the mount of Caluary; and that there
thou beholdest and hear, all that is done or said in the passion of our
Lord; or if thou will (for it comes all to one end) imagine to the self, that
in thy very same place where thou art, they crucify our Savior, in such
manner, as the holy Evangelists do describe.

2. The like may be done, when thou will meditate of death, as I have noted in
the meditation thereof: and likewise in the meditation of hell: and in all such
mysteries, in which visible and sensible things are handled; for as touching
other sorts of mysteries, of the greatness of God; of the excellency of virtue;
of the end for which we were created, and such like, which be invisible things,
and not subject to the apprehension of our senses; in these questionless, we
cannot use this kind of imagination. True it is, that we may use some
similitude or comparison, to help our consideration withal in such invisible
mysteries, but those similitudes are hard to be met with; and my meaning is to
deal with thee but plainly, so that thy spirit be not weeried, and
ouerlaboured in searching out curious inventions.

3. By the means of this imagination, we lock up our spirit as it were, within
the closet of the mystery which we mean to meditate: to the end it range not
idly hither, and thither; even as we shutt up a bird in a cage, that she fly
not away; or as we tie a hawk by her leash, that so she be forced to tarry
quietly upon the hand.

4. Some cunninger masters will perchance council thee, that it is better to
use only a simple thought or act of faith, in believing the mystery, and a
brief apprehension altogether mental and spiritual, thereof; Others that we
frame within our selves the place, and manner, or the history proposed to
meditate, and not considering it as if it passed in some other place without
thee, or far distant from thee: But these ways are to subtle and hard for
young beginners; and therefore until such time as Gods grace do lift thee
higher, I council thee (o Philotheus) to keep thee in this low valley, which I
have showed unto thee.

Of the considerations and discources of our understanding; which are the
second part of meditation. CHAPTER 5.
1. AFTER the acts of imagination, which we have described in the former
chapters, follow the act of our understanding, which we call properly
meditation: and is no other thing, but one, or many considerations made by our
reason, to stir up our affections to God, and Godly things. For in this is
meditation different from study, and discourcing, which are not undertaken to
obtain virtue, or the love of God, but for other respects, and intentions, as
to become learned, to write, dispute, or talk intelligiblie, of such like
matters.

2. Having then shutt up thy mind and thought (as I said before) within the
bounds, and limits of the subject, which thou will meditate on, either by
imaginary representation, if the matter may be subject to the senses; or by a
simple proposing and conceit of it, if it be a matter above sense, and wholly
spiritual: begin to make considerations, and discourses thereof, according to
the examples which thou may see ready made in the meditatio^s above written.

3. And if so be thy soul find taste, fruit, and light enough in any one of
the consideratio^s or points which thou have discourced upon: stay there
without going any further to any other point; doing in this as the thriftie
bees do, which never leave the flower they once light on, so long as they find
any honny to be sucked out of it. But if thou find not taste enough according to
thy desire in any point, after thou have tried a little by discourcing on it,
and like a good merchant, having as it were cheapned a while in that point, for
to gain some swetnes of devotion, then pass on fair and softly to some other
poinct or consideration, and all without forcing thy thoughts to much, making
to speedy have, to run over all the points of thy meditation. For one point
well pondered, is enough for once, and the other points may serve thee for
another time.

Of the affects and resolutions of our will, the third part of meditation.
CHAPTER 6.
1. MEDITATION pours out abundance of good motions in our will, or the
affectiue part of our soul: such as are, the love of God and of our neighbor;
the desire of Paradise, and eternal glory; zeal of the salvation of souls;
imitatio^ of the life of our Lord; co^passio^, joy, fear of judgment, of
hell, of being in the disgrace of God; hatred of sin; confidence in the
goodness, and mercy of God; shame and confusion for our naughty life passed; In
these and such like affections, our spirit must burst out, and extend and
stretche it self, as much as is possible And if thou desire to learn an easy
method how to do so, read the preface of the meditations of Andrew Capillia,
where he shows plainly the manner and trace of dilating and amplifiyng, and
extending these affects of out soul: and more largely does Arias declare the
same in his treatise of prayer.

2. Now thou must not content thy self with these general affections, be they
never so feruourous and holy, nor stand only upon them, but descend to
special and particular resolutions, for thy correction and amendment. For
example; the first word that our Lord spoke upon the cross, will doubtless
stir up in thy soul a good affect of imitation, and a desire to pardon thy
enemies, and to love them for thy Saueours sake and example: but this general
affect and desire is to small purpose, if thou add not to it a particular
resolution, in this manner; Well since my blessed redeemer so lovingly did
pardon these obstinate enemies of his, hanging upon the bitter cross, I will
not hereafter be troubled or vexed when I hear my neighbor, or my servant, or
fellow N. use such or such tanting words against me: I will not be aggrieued at
this or that despite, or contemptuous trick, that he, or she does use against
me: but rather I will endeavor to say and do such and such a thing, to gain
his good will, and to mollify his anger or indignation conceived against me.
And the like descent to particular purposes of amendment, must be made in all
other general affections. By this means (Philotheus) thou shall correct and
amend thy defects in very short time: whereas otherwise, by only general
affects and desires, amendment will be made but hardly and slowly.

Of the conclusion of the exercise, and spiritual posy to be gathered out of
it. CHAPTER 7.
1. LAST of all, we must conclude our meditation by three acts, which must be
done with the greatest humility that we can. The first act is, Thanksgiving
unto God for the holy affections, and resolutions, or purposes, which he has
inspired into us: and for his goodness, and mercy, which we have discovered in
the discourse of our meditation.

2. The second act, is an oblation, wherein we present and offer unto God, the
self same goodness, and mercy of his, which we have tasted in meditating; the
death also, and passion, virtues, and merits of his only Son our redeemer;
and consequently with them, all the affections and resolutions which by his
holy grace, we made in our exercise.

3. The third act, is a petition or supplication; in which we demand of God,
and earnestly conjure him (as it were) to communicate and impart unto us, the
graces, virtues, and merits of his deer Son; and to bless the affections and
resolutions which we have made in his honor, and name, to the end we may
faithfully put them in execution. After these three acts, we must pray for the
whole church of God, for our country, pastors, parents, and frinds:
employing and imploring to that end, the intercession of our blessed Lady, of
the glorious Angels, and holy Saints of heaven. Lastly I have advised that thou
should say a Pater, an Aue, and a Creed; which is the general and necessary
prayer of all the faithful.

4. To all these acts I have added, that thou should gather a little nosegay
of devotion; my meaning in this may be understood by this example. Such as have
delighted them selves walking in a pleasant garden, go not ordinarily from
thence, without taking in their hands, four or five flowers to smell on, and
keep in their hands all the day after. Even so, when our mind has
spirituallie recreated it self, by affectiue discourcing and meditation of some
sacred mystery, we should cull out, one or two points which we have found most
pleasing to our taste, and most agreeable to our understanding, upon which we
might busy our mind, and as it were mentally smell thereon all the rest of the
day. And this must be done immediately in the self same place, where we made
our meditation, walking alone a turn or two, and binding those points in our
memory, as we would do flowers in a little nosegay.

Some profitable instructions and aduices for meditation. CHAPTER 8.
1. ABOVE all things Philotheus, when thou arisest from thy meditation,
remember carefully the resolutions and purposes which thou have deliberated,
and made: endeavoring to put them in practice that very day. This is the
chiefest fruict of meditation, without which often times, it is not only
unprofitable, but hurtful; for virtues meditated, and not practiced, do puff
up the mind, and make us ouerboldlie presume that we be such in deed, as we
resolved, and purposed to be: which doubtless is true, when our resolutions be
lively and solid: but they are not such, but rather they are vain and
dangerous, if they be not brought to practice and exercise. We must therefore
use all means, and search out all occasions of executing our good purposes:
so that, if in my meditation I resolved by Gods grace, to win the minds of
such as have offended me, by fair means, and sweet behaueour: I must cast
this very day how to meet with them, to salute them courteously; or if I
cannot meet with them, to speak well of them, and to pray unto God for them.

2. At the end of thy exercise, take heed thou give not thy heart scope to
raunge and wander; least thou spill the delicious balm of good thoughts, and
holy desires which thou have received by prayer. My meaning is, that for some
time after, thou keep thy self silent and quiet, and not presently with
hastiness, but fair and softly, remove thy heart from thy prayers, to thy
affairs: and in the very entrance into other business, endeavor to keep as
long as is possible, the feeling and taste of those good affects, which thou
have received in meditation. Any man that had received some precious liquor in
a fair porcellan, or china platter, to carry home to his house, would go with
it, fair and softly, never almost looking aside, but always either before him,
for fear that by stumbling he should mar all; or else upon his vessel, to
see that he spill not the liquor which he so much esteems: Even so must thou
do when thou have ended thy meditation; not distract thy self all at once, but
looking simply before thee; as for example. If thou chance to meet with any
whom thou art bound to hear or entertain, so that there is no remedy but
thou must needs accommodate thy self to his conversation, yet look oftentimes
also upon thy heart, that the precious liquor of holy prayer, be not poured
out, but the lest that may be.

3. Accustom thy self to pass with facility and easines, from prayer to all
kind of business, which thy vocation and profession justly and lawfully
requires of thee, be they never so different from the affections which thou
receauest in prayer: So let the advocate learn to pass from prayer to
pleading, the merchant to his traffic, the married woman to her houswifrie, and
care of her family, with that sweetness and tranquillity, that their minds be
never a whit troubled or vexed therewith: for since the one and the other, that
is, prayer and our necessary occupations, are according to the will of God, we
must learn to go from the one to the other, with an humble and devout spirit,
and follow the will, and ordonance of God, both in the one and the other.

4. Many times immediately after preparation, thy affection will be altogether
fired, and inflamed, with devotion to God: and then Philotheus, thou must let
go the bridle to thy affections: that they may run freely after the inuiting
of Gods spirit, without keeping that method which I have set down. For
although ordinarily, considerations ought to go before affections and
resolutions: yet nevertheless, when the holy Ghost pours forth devout
affections, and holy motions in to thy soul without discource and
consideration, thou must not then spend time in discourcing the points of thy
exercise; for those discources serve for no other end, but to sture up good
affections, which in this case the holy Ghost graciously stirs up, and
therefore need no discource at all. In a word, when so ever good affects, and
devout motions offer them selves unto thee, receive them presently, and make
them room in thy heart, whether they come before, or after* all the
considerations proposed in thy exercise. Though I have placed in the
aboue-written examples of meditation, the affections in order after all the
considerations and points of discource: I did it only to distinguish more
plainly and intelligiblie the parts and acts to be used in prayer: so that
notwithstanding that order there set down, take this for a general rule,
never to restrain, or withold thy affections once inflamed with any devout
motion, but let them have their free course: And this is to be understood, not
only of the affections following the considerations, but also of the three acts
of thanks giving, oblation, and petition, which may likewise be used amid the
considerations when they offer them selves fervently: although afterward, for
the conclusion of the meditation, thou must repeat them again.

5. As for resolutions and particular purposes drawn from those general
affections, make them always after the affections them selves, and about the end
of thy exercise, before the conclusion of it: for if we should present unto our
thoughts particular and familiar objects, in the heat of our meditation and
affection, they would put us in danger of cooling our devotion, and to enter
into distractions.

6. Amid these affections and resolutions, it is good to use colloquies, or
familiar talk, as it were sometime with God our Lord, sometime with our blessed
Lady, with the Angels, and persons represented in the mystery which we
meditate, with the Saints of heaven, with our selves, with our own heart, with
sinners, yea and with insensible creatures: as we see that holy David does in
his psalms, and other devout Saints in their prayers and meditations.

Of the dryness of affection, which often happens in meditating. CHAPTER 9.
1. IF it chance thee to find no taste or comfort in thy meditation: I charge
thee Philotheus notwithstanding, to be in no sort troubled or vexed therefore,
but in such occasions sometimes open the door to vocal prayers, and with devout
words in the best manner thou can, complain of thy self unto our Lord,
confess thy unworthiness, desire him to be thy helper; somtme kiss reverently
some image of his, and say unto him these words of Jacob: I will not leave thee
Lord, until thou give me thy blessing. Or those of the Cananaean woman: yes in
deed Lord, I am a dog, but yett dogs eat the crummes that fall from their
masters table. Other times take some spiritual book in thy hand, read it with
heed and attention, until such time as thy spirit be awakned, and
reestablished in it self again; stir up thy heart other times with corporal
gestures of outward devotion, prostrating thy self upon the ground, laying thy
arms a cross before thy breast, embracing a crucifix; which exterior acts are
only to be used when thou art retired alone into some secret closet.

2. But if after all this, thou obtain no comfort, be the dryness and
barennesse never so great, afflict not thy self with it, but persevere
constantly in as devout a manner as thou can, before almighty God. How many
courtyers be there, that go a hundred times in the year into the Princes
chamber, with out hope of once speaking unto him: only to be seen of him, and
that he may take notice of the^, that they endeavor to show their duty to him?
So must we (my dear Philotheus) come to the exercise of prayer, which is as it
were Gods chamber of presence, purely and merely to do our duty, and testify
our fidelity. If it will please his divine majesty to talk with us, to
entertain him self with us by his holy inspirations and interior
consolations, it will be doubtless an inestimable honor to us, and a pleasure
above all pleasures: but if it please him not to do us this favor, leaving us
without once speaking unto us, no otherwise then if he saw us not, or if we
were not in his presence: we must not for all that go our way grumbling, or
melancholy, but continue still patiently and with devout behaueour, in the
presence of his sovereign goodness; And then without fail our perseverance
will be acceptable unto him, he will take notice of our constancy and
diligence, so that another time when we shall come before him, he will favor
us, and pass his time (as we may say) with us in heavenly consolations, and
make us see and taste the beauty and deliciousness of holy prayer. And all
though he should not show us this favor, let us content our selves Philotheus,
it is an ouergreat honor for such silly earthwormes as we are, to be in his
sight and presence.

A morning exercise. CHAPTER 10.
BESIDES this maine exercise of mental prayer and vocal, which thou oughst to
perform once every day, there be five other sorts of shorter prayers, which be
as it were helpps, and branches of the other principal exercise: amongst
which the first is, that which we use to make every morning, as a general
preparation to all the works and actions of the day: which thou must make in
this wise.

1. Give thancks and adore God profoundly from thy heart, for the favor that he
has done thee, in preserving thee the night passed, from all kind of dangers:
and if in that time thou have committed any sin, crave pardon of him humbly
for it.

2. Consider that this present day enswing, is lent unto thee, that in it thou
may by living well, gain the day that is to come, of eternity in heaven:
and make a steadfast purpose to employ every part of this day to this intention.

^nour I consecrate this day following, and all the residue of my life. Then
call upon our blessed Lady, upon thy good Angel, and the Saints thy
protectours, to the end they may all assist thee this day with their
intercession.

5. All these spiritual acts and affections, must be done briefly, and
feelinglie, before thou step out of thy chamber, if it be possible: that by
this holy prevention, all that thou art to do the whole day following, may be
bedewed, and watered with the blessing of God: and I pray thee my Philotheus,
never omit this exercise.

An exercise for Evening. And of the examination of our conscience before bed
time. CHAP. 11.
1. AS before thy corporal dinner in the morning, thou must make a spiritual
dinner for thy soul by meditation: so likewise before thou give thy body his
supper, provide a little supper, or at least wise a spiritual collation for thy
soul. Gain then so much time from other affairs, a little before supper time,
as may suffice to prostrate thy self before God, and to recollect thy spirit,
before thy Lord Jesus Christ crucified (whom thou may represent unto thy
self, by a simple consideration and an inward view of thy mind) kindle again
the fire of thy morning meditation, by a dozen of lively aspirations,
humiliatio^s, and loving glaunces upon this beautiful Lord and Saueour of thy
soul: Or else by repeating the points of thy meditation, in which thou feltest
most savor; or by sturing up thy devotion by some new spiritual object,
according to that which thou best likest.

2. Touching the examination of our conscience, which must allway be done
immediately before thou go to bed: every one knows how it is to be performed.

1. We give thancks to God, for having preserved us the day past.

2. We examine carefully how we have behaved our selfs in every hour of the
day: and to do this more easily, we must consider where, with whom, in what,
and how long we have been employed.

3. If we find by our examination, that we have done any good, we must give God
thancks therefore, by whose grace we did it: and contrariwise, if we find our
selves guilty of any evil, in thoughts words, or deeds; we must ask pardon of
his infinite mercy, with a true resolution and purpose, to confess it at the
first occasion, and to amend it carefully.

4. After this, we commend unto his divine providence, our soul and body, the
holy church, our parents, friends, and country: we pray unto our Lady, our
Angel guardian, the Saints our protectours, that they would watch over us, and
for us: and so with the blessing of God we go to take that corporal rest,
which he has ordained requisite for us.

This exercise must never be forgetten, no more then the other morning exercise
before mentionned: for by that of the morning, thou openest the windows of thy
soul to the sun of justice: and by this of the evening, thou shuttest them
warily, against infernal darkness.

Of the spiritual retyring of the soul. CHAPTER 12.
IT is in this place (my deer Philotheus) that I most affectuously desire thee
to follow my council: for in this article consists one of the most assured
means of thy perpetual profit.

1. As often as thou can in the day time, recall thy soul home to her
withdrawing chamber, there to appeer in the presence of God, by one of those
four means which we set down in the 2. chapter of this 2. part; and consider
what God does, and what thou do: and thou shall find his eyes turned to thee
wards, and perpetually fastened upon thee, by an incomparable love. O my God
(may thou say) wherefore do not I look always upon thee, as thou always
lookeest upon me? wherefore thinckest thou so much upon me, o my Lord? and
wherefore thinck I so little upon thee? where be we, whether wander we o my
soul? Our proper place is God himself, and whether do we straggle, and run
abroad?

2. As birds have their nests upon trees, to retire the^ selves unto, when they
stand in need; and deers have bushes and thickets to hide and shroude the^
selves, and to take the coolenes and shadow in the summers heat: eue^ so, my
Philotheus, should our hearts choose out every day some place, either upon the
mount of Caluary, or in the wounds of our redeemer, there to make our
spiritual retreat at every occasion; there to recreate and refreshe our selves
amidst the turmoile of exterior affairs; there to be as in a fortress, to
defend our selves against the poursuit of ghostly tentatio^s. Blessed is that
soul that can truly and unfeignedly say to God: Thou art my house of refuge, my
secure ramper, my covert against rain and tempests, and my shadow and shelter
against heat.

3. Remember then Philotheus, to make every day sondrie retreats and retirings
into the solitary closet of thy heart whiles thou art outwardly busied in
te^porall affairs and conuersations: for this mental or spiritual
solitariness, cannot be hindered by the company of such as are about thee,
for they are not about thy heart, but about thy body: thy heart for all their
presence, remains alone by it self in the presence of God. This is the
retreat that king David made oftentimes admist so many occupatio^s as the cares
of a kingdom brings with it so he signifies in a thousand places of his
psalms: O lord, for me, I am always with theee. I he hold God always before
me. I have lifted up mine eyes unto thee, o my God that dwell in heave: Mine
eyes be always toward God. And again it is certain, this inward retreat is
not so hard to make many times a day, since our conuersations ordinarily are
not so importa^t, but one may sometimes break the^ of, and with draw his heart to
retire it into this spiritual solitude. When the father and mother of S.
Catherin of Siena, had taken from her all commodity of place, and opportunity
of leisure, to pray and meditate: our Lord inspired her how to make a little
interior oratorie within her heart, within the which retyring her self mentally,
she might amiddes these exterior affairs, atte^d to this holy solitude of
heart: and when the world assaulted her, then received she no hurt nor
inco^uenie^ce, because she had shut up her thoughts and affections in her
interior closet, where she comforted and solaced her self with her heavenly
spouse. From experience of this exercise, she afterward councelled her ghostly
children, to build them a closet and chapel in their heart, and to dwell there
alone in presence of their Lord.

5. Accustom thy self then to withdraw thy self often into thy self, where
sequestered from all men, thou may, heart to heart, deal in thy soul with all
mighty God, and say with David: I have been made like the Pelican in the
wilderness: like the night-rauen or screech-owle within the house: I have
watched, and been like the solitary sparrow in the roof of the house. Which
words (beside their literal sense, which tells us that this great king took
some hours from other affairs, to spend in the solitaire contemplation of
spiritual things,) do moreover show us in their mystical sense, three
excellent retreats, and as it were three devout eremitages, wherein we may
exercise out solitarines; imitating our Lord and Savior, who upon the mount of
Caluary was like a Pelican in the desert, that quickens her dead chickens
with her own blood: In his nativity in the forsaken stable, he was like the
screech-owle in a ruinous house, weeping and bewailing our sins and offenses;
And at the day of his ascension, he was like to the sparrow, retiring him self,
and flying up to heaven, which is as it were the roof of the world. And in all
these three places may we make our spiritual retreat, even amidst the labors
and turmoiles of our exterior occupations.

6. Holy Elzear Count of Arian, in Prouence, having been long absent from his
devout and chaste Delphina: she sent expresselie a messenger unto him, to know
of his health: and the blessed Count made her this answer. I am very well, my
dear wife, but if thou desire to see me, seek me in the wide wound of my
blessed Saueours side, for there dwell I, and there thou shall find me:
otherwise thou will search for me but in vain. This was a right Christian
knight in deed.

Of aspirations, iaculatory prayers, and good thoughts. CHAP. 13.
1. WE retire our selves into God, because we aspire unto him: and we aspire
unto him, to retire us into him; so that the aspiring of the soul unto God,
and the spiritual retreat, do mutuallie entertain one another, and both of
them proceed and issue from holy thoughts.

2. Aspire then very often from the bottom of thy heart unto God (o my
Philotheus) through brief and short, yet burning and inflamed desires, darted
from thy soul: admire his beauty; call upon him for his assistance; cast thy
self in spirit at the foot of the cross; adore his goodness; question with him
often about thy salvation; give thy soul unto him a thousand times a day;
fasten the inward view of thy soul upon his inestimable sweetness; stretch
forth thy band unto him, as a little child does to his Father, that he may
conduct thee: place him in thy bosom like a sweet smelling posie; plant him in
thy soul like an encouraging standart: finally make a thousand sorts and
diversities of motions in thy heart, to enkindle the love of God within thee,
and to engender in thy soul a passionate and tender affection of this divine
spouse. Thus are iaculatory prayers made, which that great S. Austen so
carefully councelled the devout lady Proba to use. O Philotheus, our spirit
once giving it self entirely to the company, hant, and familiarity of his
God, must needs be all perfumed, with the odoriferous air of his perfections.

3. This exercise is nothing hard or uneasy: it may be enterlaced with all our
occupations, without any hindrance of them at all: for whether we retire our
selves spirituallie, or whether we use only these feruorous desires and darts
of devout love; we do no other thing, but make certain short digressions, as it
were stepping a little from our business in hand, to talk aword or two with our
God: which cannot hinder, but rather help forward, the prosequuting and
performance of the affairs which we were about. The weerie Pilgrim that takes
a little wine to comfort his heart, and refreshe his mouth, allthough he make
some little stay in drinking, breaks not off his journey for all that stay,
but gains more force to end it more speedily, he only resting, to travail
afterward so much the better.

4. Many authors have gathered together abundantly, store of vocal
aspirations, which out of all dout are very profitable: but in my judgment, it
is better not to bind thy self to any sort of words, but only pronounce either
in heart, or by mouth, those words that fervent and holy love shall by the way
suggest unto thee, for true love will furnish thee, with as many as thou can
desire. True it is that there are certain words, with have a particular force
and efficacy to content and satisfy the heart in this behalf: such are the
dainty sighs, and passionate complaints, and loving exclamations that are
sowed so thick in the psalms of David; the often invocation of the sweet and
delightful name of JESUS; the lovely passages which be expressed in the
Canticle of Canticles; and spiritual songs also do serve for this end, when
they be song with attention.

5. To conclude, as they that be enamoured with humane and natural love, have
almost always their thoughts fixed upon the parson beloved, their heart full of
affection toward her, their mouth flowing with her praises; when their beloved
is absent they leese no occasion to testify their passions by kind letters,
and not a tree do they meet with all, but in the barck of it, they engraue the
name of their darling: even so such as love God fervently, can never cease
thincking upon him, they draw their breath only for him, they sigh and sorrow
for their absence from him, all their talk is of him: and if it were possible,
they would grave the sacred name of our Lord JESUS, upon the breasts of all the
men in the world.

6. And certainly all creatures do inuit them to this, and not one but in its
kind, declares unto them the praises of their beloved: and as S. Augustine
says (taking it from S. Anthony) all things in this world speak unto us with a
kind of language, which though dumb, in that it is not expressed in words, yet
intelligiblie enough in regard of their love: for all things provoke us and
give us occasion of good and godly thoughts, from whence afterward do arise
many motions and aspirations of our soul to God. Behold a noble example of
this verity. S. Gregory Bishop of Nazia^zen, (as he him self related to this
people,) walking upon the seashore, and considering how the waves floting upon
the sands, left behind them many little cockle-shells, perewinkles, stalks of
herbs, little oysters, and such like stuff which the sea cast up, and spit as
it were upon the shore: and the^ returning with other waves, swept them away
and swallowed the^ up again, while in the mean time the rocks round about him
continued firm and immovable, though the billows never so rudely beat and
battered upon the^: out of this sight and consideration (I say) S. Gregory
deduced this goodly cogitation: that feeble and weak minded men, like cockle
shelles, and stalks of rushes, suffer them selves to be tossed up and down,
and carried sometime by affliction, sometime by consolation, living allways at the
mercy of the unconstant waves of chance and fortune, but that great and well
grounded courages, perseuered stable, and unmoved against all kind of storms
and tempests: And then presently out of this thought, he drew and derived those
aspirations and affections of holy David: Save me o Lord, for the waters have
pierced even to my very soul. O Lord deliver me from the deapth of these
waters. I am plunged in the deapth of the sea, and the tempest has overwhelmed
me. For at that time this glorious Saint was in great trouble, by the wicked
usurpation which Maximus intended over his bishopric. S. Fulge^tius Bishop of
Ruspa, being present at a general assembly of the nobility of Rome, to whom
Theodoricus king of the Goths made an oration, and marking the sple^dour of so
many worthy lords, gathered together, and rancked each one according to their
state and quality. O God (said he) how beautiful and gorgeous is the heavenly
Jerusalem above, since that earthly Rome hear below, is so glorious in her
po^pe and majesty? if in this transitory world the lovers of vanity be
permitted to shine in such prosperity: what glory, what felicity is reserved
and laid up in the world to come for the true lovers of virtue and verity? S.
Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, whose birth has highly honored these
mountains of ours, was admirable in the practice of these good thoughts. A
Leueret, started, and sore pressed by hounds, as this holy prelat went on a
journey, ran under his horse, as to the best place of refuge that the imminent
danger of death suggested; and the hounds barking and baying round about, durst
not presume to violate the sanctuary, to which their prey had taken recourse:
a sight truly very extraordinary; whereat when all the train laughed, great S.
Anselme, answered weeping and sighing: Ah (said he) you laugh at the matter,
but the poor beast laugheth not; the enemies of the soul (combatted and
illhandled on all sides by multitudes of tentations and sins) do expect and
besiege her at the narrow passage of death: and she wholly affrighted, seeks
succor and refuge on every side, which if she find not, then do her ghostly
enemies laugh and mock at her: which when the good bishop had said, he went on
forward in his journey. S. Francis on a time seeing a sheep all alone amidst a
heard of goats: behold (said he to his companions) how meek is this little poor
sheep among those wanton kids: our blessed Lord went in such meek manner among
the proud Phariseys. And at anothet time, seeing a little lamb devoured by a
hog: ah little seely La^bkin (said he weeping for compassion) how lively do
thou express the death of my Saueour? That great and excellent personage of
our days, Francis Borgia, while he was yet duke of Gandia, going a hunting,
made to him self a thousand of these devout conceits. I was wont to admire
(said he, recounting it afterward) how the faulcons come to hand, suffering
their eyes to be hood-winckd, and their talents to be bound to the perch: and
that men are so stubborn and rebellious to the voice and call of almighty God.
S. Basil the great says, that the rose among the thorns and briers, seems
to make this exhortation to men. Whatsoever is most pleasant in this world, o
mortal men, is entermingled with serow: nothing is pure and unmixed: griefs be
always companions of mirth, and widdowhead of marriage, and care of education is
joined with fertilty and ahoundance of children, shame folowes glory, expenses
wait upon honors, disgust is the sauce of delicate dishes, and sickness
pue-felow of health. A fair flower is the rose (says this holy man) but yet it
fills me with sadness, putting me in mind of my sin, for which the earth
has been condemned to bring forth thorns and briars. Adeuout soul beholding
the sky and the stars in a fair moonshine night, represented in a clear
fountain, O my God (said she) these self same stars shall one day be under
my feet, when thou shall vouchsafe to lodge me in thy holy tabernacle, and as
the stars of heaven are represented in this fountain upon earth: Even so all
men of this earth are liuenly represented in heaven in the living well of the
divine charity. A another soul seeing a river swiftly flowing, cried out in
this manner: my soul shall never take rest, until she be swallowed up in the
boundless sea of the deity, from whence she had her beginning. S. Fra^cisca
considering and viewing attentively a pleasant brook, upon the banck whereof
she kneeled to pour forth her prayers, was rapt into an ecstasy, repeating often
times to her self these words: thus sweetly, and plesantly flows the grace of
my God unto our hearts, as this riuerett danceth down his channel. Another
looking upon the fruittrees of an orchard, which were all bedecked with their
timely blossoms, sighed and said, ay me wretch that I am, wherefore am I alone
without blossom or budd in the orchard of holy church? Another seeing little
chickens gathered together under their mothers wings, that sat lovingly couring
over them: O Lord (said he) preserve us under the wings of thy divine
providence. Another looking upon the heliotropium, that opens and shuts
his leaves with the rising and setting of the sun: when shall the time be
(said he) O my God, that my soul in this manner shall wholly follow the
inuitement of thy goodness, and attraction of thy holy spirit? Another seeing
the flowers which we call pansies, fair to the eye, but without any sweet
odor. Ah (said he) such are my thoughts, such are my deeds, fair in conceit
and show, but in effect fruitless, and unprofitable.

See my Philotheus, how easily and redilie a man may draw good thoughts and
holy inspirations, from all things great and small that are presented to our
senses and understanding in the variety of this mortal life. Most unhappy be
they which do turn aside the creatures from their creator, to change and
apply them to sin: And happy are they that turn all the creatures to the
glory of their creator, and do employ their fading vanity, to the honor of
the everlasting verity. My custom (says S. Gregory Nazianzen) has been
allways, to accommodate and apply all things to my spiritual profit. Read the
Epitaphe or funeral sermon, which S. Hierom has made in honor of holy Paula,
for it is worthy the reading to see how it is all as it were poudered with
sacred affects, aspirations, and devout conceits, which that blessed matron
was wont to draw from all occasions and occurrences whatsoever.

Well then, in this exercise of spiritual retyring, iaculatorie prayers,
fervently darted from an enflamed desire, consists the great work of
devotion; this exercise may supply the want of al other prayers: but the want
of it, can not almost be repaired by any other exercise: without it, we cannot
well lead a contemplative life, and but badly perform the active life; without
it, repose is but idleness, and labor is but drudgerie: therefore I charge and
conjure thee of all love, to embrace this exercise from thy heart, and never to
omit it, or leave it of.

How we ought to hear the holy Mass. CHAP. 14.
1. HITHERTO I have not spoken any thing of the bright Sun of all spiritual
exercises, I mean the most holy, dreadful, and sovereign sacrifice and
sacrament of the mass, the very center of Christian religion, the heart of
devotion, and soul of piety, an unspeakable mystery, which comprehends in
it the bottomless depth of Gods charity, and by which God uniting him self
reallie unto us, does most liberally communicate his graces and favors to our
souls.

2. The prayer made in union of this divine sacrifice, has an unspeakable
force and efficacy: so that the soul (my Philotheus) by the aid heerof,
abounds with heavenly favors, as leaning and reposing upon her well-beloved,
who fills her heart brim full of odours and spiritual sweetness; that she may
be rightly resembled to a pillar of smoke proceeding from aromaticall wood,
from myrrh, and incense, and all the pouders of sweetest perfumes; as it is
said in the canticles.

3. Use then all diligence to assist every day at the holy mass, that thou
may jointly with the priest offer up thy Redeemer unto God his Father, for
thy self, and for all the church; The Angels of heaven (as S. John Chrysostom
says) be always present in great number, to honor this sacred mystery: and
we being present with them, and assisting with the same inte^tion, cannot but
receive many excellent influe^ces by such a society, the two quiers of the
triumphant and militant church join the^ selves to our Lord in this divine
actio^, with him, in him, and by him to rauishe the heart of God the father, and
to make us owners of his mercy. O what felicity enjoys that soul that with
so glorious a company contributeth her devout affections, for so precious and
desired a good.

4. If upon some vrge^t necessity thou be forced to be abse^t from the
celebrating of this sovereign sacrifice; at the least, though thou can not
be really present, yet send thy heart and desire thither, to assist there with a
spiritual presence. At some time then of the morning, when thou forseest any
impediment of hearing mass, go in spirit, (if otherwise thou can not) into
the church, and there unite thy intention with the inte^tio^ of all faithful
Christians: and use the same interior actions in the place where thou have
thus retired thy self, which thou would use if thou were really present in
some church at the office of the holy mass.

1. Now to hear either reallie or mentallie the holy mass as we ought: first
from the beginning, until the priest go up to the altar, prepare thy self with
him: which preparation consists in placing thy self reverently in the
presence of God, in acknowledging thine own unworthiness, and craving pardon
for thy sins and offenses.

2. From the time that the priest ascends to the altar, until the gospel:
consider the aduent, or coming of our Saueour into this world, and his life
amongst us, by a simple and general apprehension thereof.

3. From the gospel to the end of the Creed: consider the preaching of our
Lord, and protest that thou do purpose by his good grace, to live and die in
the faith, and obedience of his holy word, and in the unity of his Catholic
church.

4. From the creed unto the Paternoster, apply thy consideration hartelie to
the death and passion of our Redeemer, which are actuallie and essentiallie
represented in this holy sacrifice: which with the priest, and the rest of the
faithful people thou shall offer up unto God the Father, for his eternal
honor, and thine own salvation.

5. From the Pater noster, unto the Communion, endeavor to produce a thousand
fervent desires from thy heart, wishing ardentlie to be for ever joined and
united to thy Saueour, through everlasting love.

6. From the Communion until the end, give thancks unto his divine majesty
for his incarnation, life, death and passion: and for the infinite love which
he abundantly witnesses unto us in this holy sacrifice: suppliantlie
beseeching him, for his own selfs sake, to be merciful unto thee, to thy
parents, and frinds, and to all the whole church: and humbling thy self from
the bottom of thy heart, receive with devotion the heavenly blessing, which our
Lord gives unto thee, by the means of the priest his lieutenant in this
sacrifice.

But if thou purpose during the mass, to make thy meditation upon the
mysteries, which thou prosequutest from day to day: it will not then be
needful that thou divert to make all these particular actions and
considerations; but it will suffice, that at the beginning thou rectify thy
intention, to adore and offer up this heavenly sacrifice, by the exercise of
thy meditation; for in all meditations are found the aforesaid actions, either
expresselie, or else virtuallie and equiualentlie.

Of other public and common exercises. CHAP. 15.
1. BESIDES all these exercises, Philotheus, on holy days and sundays thou
must be present at the ecclesiastical office of the morning hours, and
euensong: so far forth as thy state and opportunity will permit. For these
days be dedicated unto God peculiarly, therefore in them thou must perform
many more acts of his honor and worship, then upon other days. So doing
thou shall feel a thousand diversities of pleasures in thy devotions, as S.
Austen did; who confesses of him self, that when he assisted at the
churche-seruice in the beginning of his conversion, his heart did melt in sweet
content, and his eyes ouer-flowed with tears of devotion. And (to say the
verity once for all) there is ever more comfort and merit to be gained at the
public service of the church, then in our other particular actions. God
having so ordained, that the community be preferred before all kind of
particularitie.

2. Enter thy self willingly into the devout confraternities which are
instituted in the place where thou dwell: principally in those whose
exercises be of most fruict and edification: so thou shall exercise a kind of
obedience, very acceptable unto almighty God. For though these
confraternities be not commanded, yet are they commended by hollie church:
which to witness how much she desires that many should enroll them selves in
such sodalities, gives large indulgences and privileges unto all such as
enter into them. And besides these indulgences of the church which are gained
by them, it is a deed of excellent charity in it self, to concur with many
in welldoing, and to cooperate with others in their good works and
designements. And although it may so happen, that one does as good exercises
alone, as in the confraternitie with others; and perchance feels more
spiritual delight and comfort by performing them alone in particular: yet is
God much more glorified by the union and contribution which we make with our
brethren and neighbors, in good works and devout exercises.

3. The like do I say of all other kind of public prayers, and acts of
religion: which (as much as is possible) we should honor, and grace with our
example, for the edification of our neighbor, and our own soul, and for the
glory of God, and for the common intention, both of the church and all the
faithful.

Of honor and invocation of the Saints. CHAPTER 16.
1. SINCE God does oftentimes send down to us his holy inspirations by
ministry of his Angels: we should likewise be diligent, to send up unto him
our devout aspirations by the self same heavenly messengers. The holy souls
of the dead, which are in Paradise, in company of the blessed Angels, and are
(as our Saueoursayth) equal and fellows of the Angels, do likewise do us the
same good office of inspiring us, and aspiring for us by their sacred
intercessions.

2. My Philotheus, let us join our hearts unto these heavenly spirits and
happy souls: for as the little young nightingales, learn to sing by chirping
in company of the old ones, so by the holy association which we frequent
with the Saints and Angels of heaven, we shall learn far better to pray and
sing Gods divine praises: I will sing to thee o Lord (says David) in the sight
and company of thy Angels.

3. Honor, reverence and respect the sacred and glorious virgin Mary, with an
especial love: she is the mother of our sovereign Father, and consequently
our Grand mother. Let us run then unto her, and like her little nephews, cast
our selves about her, and in her lap with perfect confidence, in all
affairs, and occurrences. Let us call upon this sweet mother of ours, let us
inuoke her motherlie affection toward us: and endeavoring to imitate her
excellent virtues, let us bear a true filial heart and affection toward her.

4. Make thy self very familiar with the holy Angels, behold them often times
in spirit and in thought, as if they were visiblie present with thee: above
all, love and reverence the Angel of the Dioces where thou dwell, and the
Angels of those persons with whom thou live, but especially thy own Angel
guardian: beseech them often, praise them ordinarily, request their assistance
and succor in all thy affairs, spiritual, or temporal, that they may
cooperate with thy intentions.

5. That great personage, Peter Faber, the first priest, first preacher, first
divinity reader of the holy company of the name of JESUS, and first
companion of B. Ignatius, the founder of that institute; coming on a day out of
Germany, where he had done great good service to the glory of our Lord, and
going through this dioces (the place of his nativity) related, that having
passed many heretical places, he had received thousands of consolations by
saluting at the entry of every parish, the Angels protectours of the same;
and that he sensibly perceived them to have been favorable unto him; both by
preserving him from the ambushments of the heretics, as all so in mollifiyng
many souls, and making them supple and docil, to receive from him the doctrine
of salvation. This did he tell with so lively an affection, that a
gentlewoman, then very young, hearing it from his own mouth, told me it but
four years passed, (to wit above threescore years after he had told it him
self) with an extraordinary feeling of devotion. I my self had the comfort
this last year, to consecrate an altar in the place, on which God appointed
this blessed man to be borne, at a little village called Villaret, among these
craggie mountains of our country.

6. Choose some particular Saints among the rest whose lives thou may more
peculiarly read, taste, and imitate: and in whose intercessions thou may
place an especial trust and confidence: the Saint, whose name thou bear,
is alredie assigned to be thy deuote intercessor even from thy Christening.

How we ought to hear and read Gods holy word. CHAP. 17.
1. BEAR always an especial devotion to the word of God: whether thou hear
it in familiar discourse, among thy spiritual frinds, or at a public sermon
in the church: hear it always with attention, and reverence, and make thy
profit and commodity of it, to thy uttermost power: suffer it not to fall upon
the ground, but receive it thanckfullie into thy heart as a sovereign baulme;
imitating in this the blessed Virgin our Lady, who kept carefully in the
treasure house of her heart, all the words which she heard spoken in praise of
her Son. Remember, that our Lord esteems of the words which we speak to him
in our prayers, according as we esteem of those which he speaks unto us in
holy sermons.

2. Have still lying by thee, some good book of devotion, as some work of S.
Bonauenture, of Gerson, of Denis the Charterhouse monk, of Jews Blosius monk
of S. Benet, of Grenada, Stella, Arias, Pinelli, Auila, the spiritual Con^t,
S. Augustins confessions, S. Hieroms epistles, and such like. Read every day a
little, in some one of them, with great devotion, as if it were a letter
missiue, which some Saint in heaven had sent unto thee, to show thee the way
thither, and to encourage thee in thy journey.

3. Reed also the lives of the Saints, in which as in a mirror, thou may
see the pourtraicture of Christian perfection: and accommodate all their
actions, to thy own profit, according to thy vocation. For allthough very many
actions of the Saints be not absolutely imitable by such as live in the world;
yet all of them may be in some degree followed, either near or far of: so the
solitarienesse of S. Paul the first heremite, is imitated in some sort, by the
spiritual retreats of which we have spoken: and the extreme poverty of S.
Francis, may be imitated by these practices or exercises of spiritual poverty
which we will hereafter set down.

4. True it is, that there be some Saints lives, which more directly serve to
guide and order our lives, then other do: as the life of the blessed Mother
Teresa, which is most admirable for that purpose: as also the lives of the
first Jesuits, of the holy cardinal Borromeus, S. Jews, S. Bernard, the
chronicles of S. Francis, of S. Dominck, of S. Benet, and such like. Other
Saints lives there are which contain more matter of admiration, then of
imitation: as the life of S. Mary of Egypt, of S. Simeon Shilites, of the two
Saint Catherines of Siena, and of Genua, of S. Angela, and such like: which
nevertheless, do minister unto us great occasions, to taste the sweetness of the
love of God.

How to receive inspirations. CHAPTER 18.
1. WE call inspiratio^s, all those inward allureme^ts, motions, reproaches,
remorses, lights, and knowledges, which God works in us, preventing our heart
with his blessings, through his fatherly care and love of us, to the end he
might awake us, stir us up, drive and draw us to virtue, to heavenly love,
to good resolutions, and in a word, to all those things which lead and direct
us to our everlasting good. These inspirations in the scripture, the
bridegroom calls, knocking at the gate, and speaking to the heart of his
espouse; to wake her when she sleeps; to cry and call after her, when she
absenteth her self: to inuit her to his honnie, and to gather apples in his
orcharde, and flowers in his garden; to sing, and cause to sound her sweet
voice to delight his ears.

2. I need a comparison to declare my meaning. Three things are required to the
matching, or striking up of a marriage, on the maidens behalf that must be
married. First, the party is propounded unto her: secondly, she likes of the
proposition: thirdly, she gives her consent. Solikewise God, intending to work
in us, by us, and with us, some act of charity, first of all he proposes it
unto us by inspiration; secondly, we accept it with delight; and thirdly, we
give our full consent unto it. For as to descend unto sin, there are three
steps or degrees, tentation, delight, and consent: so there are three other
stairs to ascend unto grace and virtue inspiration, which is opposite to
tentation; the delight felt in the inspiration, contrary to the delight taken
in dallying with the tentation; and consent to the inspiration, contrary to
the consent given to the tentation.

3. For, though the inspiration should endure all our life long, yet should we
not be acceptable unto God, if we took no delight nor contentment in it, nay
contrariwise, his divine majesty would be highly offended with us, as he was
with the Israelits, with whom he had been laboring, forty years (as he says
him self) and soliciting their conversion, in all which time they would not
give ear unto him: whereupon he swear against them in his wrath, that they
should never enter into his rest. So likewise, the gentleman that had long time
served his mistress, should be much disobliged, if after all this she would in no
case hearken to the marriage which he desired.

4. The pleasure which one takes in inspirations, is a great advancement to
the glory of God, and by it one begins already to please his divine
majesty. For although

Consent to the motion which he inspireth and propounds, but with a perfect,
constant, and resolut consent, that admits no wavering or doubting: For so
God almighty, whom thou can not oblige with all thy forces, will not with
standing lovingly hold him self obliged unto thee for thy affection.

7. Before thou give plenarie consent to those inspirations, which propound
unto thee importa^t matters, or extraordinary motions, least thou be deceived,
ask council of thy guide and spiritual master, that he may warily examine,
whether the inspiration be true or false: for oftentimes the enemy perceuing a
soul prompt and willing to consent to good inspirations, proposes
traitorously of his part, as if thy came from God, false inspirations, to
deceive her: but he can never compass his drifte, so long as she with
humility obeys her conductour.

8. Thy consent being given, thou must procure with all good endeavor the
effect, for which thou gave consent, and go about diligently to put the
inspiratio^ in execution: which is the hight and perfection of true virtue: for
to have consented in heart, and not to attain to the effect and fruict thereof,
would be even as if one should plant a vine, and not defire that it should
fructify. To all this the morning exercise and spiritual retreat which I have
described, do serve exceedingly: for by those means as by ordinary
forecasts, and preuentions, we prepare our selves not only in general, but in
particular also, to execute all the good we can.

Of holy Confession. CHAPTER 19.
1. OUR Saueour has left in his church the holy sacrament of Confession, or
Penance, that in it we may wash our selves from all our sins, when soever
we be defiled with them. Suffer not thy heart (my Philotheus) any long time to
continue soiled with the ordure of sin, since thou have so easy a remedy to
cleanse thee with all.

2. The Lioness having layen with the leopard, goes presently to some brook
to wash away the stinche which that disloyal fact of hers leaves in her
body, least her Lion finding it by the smell, should be offended therewith. The
soul which has consented to sin, should feel a horror and abomination of
her self, and procure to wash away that filth, for reverence and respect of
the eyes of Gods divine majesty, which behold her. And what should make us to
die this ghostly death, having so sovereign a remedy to revive us?

3. Confess thy self humbly, and devoutly once every seuenight, and ever
before thou communicatest, if it be possible: allthough thou feel not thy
conscience charged with guilt of any mortal sin. For by confession, thou
do not only receive absolution of thy venial sins, which thou may then
confess: but also jointly great force and vigor to avoid them hereafter, and
a clear light and knowledge to judge and discern them, and abundance of
heavenly grace, to repair all the damage which thou have incurred by them. By
confession thou practizest the noble virtues of humility, obedience,
simplicity, and charity: in a word, in this only act of confession, thou
exercisest more virtues, then in any other whatsoever.

4. Procure always to bring with thee to confession a true sorrow and
abomination of the sins which thou will confess, be they never so little:
and a firm settled resolution to amend them hereafter. Many of custom confess
their venial sins in a kind of bravery, not purposing at all to amend them,
continewing therefore all their life charged with the burden of them, and loose
by that means infinite benefits and graces of the spirit. If then thou confess
to have lied in matter of small importance, without harming any man, to have
spoken some inordinate or idle word, or to have played overmuch: repent thy
self heartily for these sins, and purpose in very deed to amend. For it is a
great abuse of the sacrament, to confess any kind of sin, be it mortal, or
be it venial, without any will or desire to be purged and cleansed from it;
since Confession, was instituted for no other end, but to purify us from sin.

5. Make not those superfluous accusations which many do of custom: I have
not loved God so well as I ought: I have not prayed with so great devotion as I
should. I have not made much of my neighbor as I ought to have done: I have
not received the sacrament with so great reverence as I ought, and such like.
For saying such like accusations, thou bring nothing in particular, that may
make thy confessor understand the estate of thy conscience: for all the men
upon earth, and all the Saints of paradise, may say the self same with all
truth, if they should come to Confession. Consider therefore what particular
subject or cause thou have to accuse thy self in that general manner, and when
thou have discovered it, then accuse thy self of that default simply and
plainly. For example, when thou accusest thy self not to have cherished thy
neighbor as thou ought to have done, peradventure, because having seen
some poor body in great necessity, whom thou might easily have succored
and comforted, thou did neglect that good occasion of doing that work of
mercy. Well then in this case, accuse thy self thus in particular. Having
seen a poor man in necessity, I did not assist him as I could well have
done, through my mere negligence, or hardness of heart, or contempt, or ill will
borne to the party; or according as thou know the occasion of that default.
So likewise accuse not thy self that thou have not prayed unto God with such
devotion, as thou ought; but if thou have admitted any voluntary
distractions, or neglected to take convenient place, due time, and leisure
requisite for attention in prayer, accuse thy self with all plainness and
simplicity of that particular cause of thy default, not alleging those
general terms, which make the confession neither hot nor cold.

6. Thinck it not enough to confess thy venial sins, but accuse thy self
also of the motive which induced thee to commit them. For example, be not
content to say that thou have lied without endamaging any person: but declare
whether it was for vainglorie to praise, or to excuse thy self: or for vain
myrthe, or for wilful stubbornness. If thou have sinned in gaming, express
whether it were for greedines of lucre, or for conversation and company sake:
and so forth of other sins. Manifest likewise how long thou have perseuered
in the sin which thou confessest; for continuance of time, is a circumstance
noteablie increasing and aggravating the guilt of the sin. Because there is
great difference betwixt a light vanity or foolerie, that presently is given
over, and laid a side, or which slippeth into our spirit for some quarter of an
hour: and one wherein our heart has been steeped and souced for two or three
days. We must then confess the particular fact, the motive, and the
continuance of our sins. For though ordinarily we are not bound to be so
punctual in explicating our venial sins, nay we are not absolutely bound
to confess them at all: yet they that desire to cleanse and purify their
souls in good sort, the better to attain to the perfection of true devotion,
must be careful to manifest and lay open to their spiritual Physician, the
disease whereof they wish to be healed, be it never so little.

7. Spare not to tell plainly what soever is requisite to declare purelie the
quality of thy offense, as the cause, subject, or occasion which thou have
taken to be angry, or to support and maintain one in his fault. For example:
A certain personage to whom I bear no liking at all, by chance speaks to
me some merry word in jest, and I construe it in the worsle part, rising into
cholar for it: whereas if an other man that had been more agreeable and
acceptable to me, had spoken a shrodder word, I should have taken it in good
part. In such a case, I will not omit to say: I have used choleric and angry
speeches against a certain parson, taking in ill part at his hands some words
which he spoke to me, not so much for the quality of the words in them
selves, as for the little good will or liking I had of the party that spoke
them. And if it were moreover needful to express the very angry terms,
used against that party, to declare thy self the better, I will thinck it were
good to express them: for accusing thy self so plainly and clearly, thou do
not only discover the fault committed, but with all the naughty inclinations,
customs, and habits and other roots of sin: so that by this means thy
ghostly father comes to have a perfecter knowledge of the conscience which he
deals with, and of the remedies most convenient to be applied unto it. Yet
must thou allways procure to conceal the third persons, who have been
partakers with thee in the offense, as much as is possible.

8. Take diligent heed of many couuert sins which reign so secretly and
insensibly in our consciences, that we scarcely perceive or discover them: And
that thou may find them out, and know them when thou meetest with them, read
attentively the 6. 27. 28. 29. 33. and 36. chapters of the third part, and the
8. th. chapter of the 4. th. part.

9. Change not lightly nor easily thy Confessor, but having made choice of a
sufficient one, continue constantly, rendering him account of thy conscience on
the days and times appointed, opening to him freely and plainly, the sins
thou have committed from time to time: and monthly, or from two months, to two
months, tell him likewise the estate of thy inclinations, though thou have not
sinned by them: as whether thou be tormented with sadness, or with peeuishnes:
whether thou be given to over much myrthe, or desirous of gain, or such like
inclinations.

Of frequenting the holy Communion. CHAPTER 20.
1. IT is said, that Mithridates king of Pontus, having invented the
Mithridate, so strengthened his body by the means of the same, that
endeavoring afterward to poison him self, so to avoid the servitude of the
Romans, he could not possibly do it. Our blessed Savior has instituted the
venerable Sacrament of the Eucharist, which contains really and verily his
flesh and his blood, to the end that he that eats it, should live eternally.
Who so ever then shall use it often with sincere devotion, so confirms his
health, and secureth the life of his soul: that it is all most impossible he
should be empoisoned with any kind of naughty affection. One cannot be
nourished with this flesh of life, and yet live in affections of death. Man
dwelling in the terrestrial paradise, could never have died corporally,
through virtue of the tree of life, which God had planted there: so cannot good
Christians in the church of God die spirituallie, through the efficacy of this
Sacrament of life. If the tendrest fruits that be, and most subject to
corruption, as cherries, strawberries, and apricocks, be preserved easily all
the year long, being confited in sugar or honnie: it is no wonder that our
hearts, though never so frail and feeble, be preserved from the rott of sin,
when they be candied and sugared with the incorruptiblie flesh and blood of the
Son of God. O Philotheus, those Christians that must be damned for their
naughtines, will be without reply, when the just judge shall make them see the
wrong that they did them selves, to incur spiritual death: seeing it was so
facil a thing for them to maintain them selves in life and health, by the
sacramental manducation or eating of his body, which he had left unto them,
for that end. Miserable wretches (will he say) why would you needs dye, having,
the fruit and food of life at your commandment.

2. To receive the communion of the eucharist every day, neither do I commend,
nor discommend: but to communicate every sunday; I would wish it, and would
exhort every one so to do, if his soul be without any affection to sin.
These be the very words of S. Augustine, with whom I likewise, neither blame,
nor praise absolutely those that communicate every day: but I leave that poinct
to the discretion of the ghostly father of him, that would be resolved there
upon. For the disposition requisite for such frequent use of the holy communion
requiring such exactnes; it is not good to council it generally or commonly to
all. And because even this exquisite and exact disposition, may be found in
many good souls, it were not well done to divert or dissuade generally all me^
from it; but this must be handled and ordered by consideration and knowledge of
the inward estate of every one in particular. It were no wisdom to council
every one without any distinction, to frequent the communion every day: and it
were impudency on the other side, to blame any one for it, especially if he
follow therein the advice of any worthy and discreet director. S. Catherin of
Sienes answer was commendable and gracious in this case: when it was objected
against her often communicating, that Saint Austin did neither approve nor
disallowe communicating every day: well (quoth she) since Saint Austin
disalloweth it not, do not you dispraise it, and I am content.

4. But Saint Augustine, as thou have heard (my Philotheus) exhorts and
councelleth very earnestly to communicate, every sunday: follow his council
then, and do so as near as it is possible: for I presuppose thou have no kind
of affection at all to mortal sin, nor any delight or affection to venial
sins, and therefore thou art in the true disposition which S. Austin thincketh
sufficient; yea, and in a more excellent, because thou have not so much as an
affection to sin venially: so that if it please thy ghostly father, thou
may profitably communicate more often then every sunday.

4. Yet many lawful impediments may befall thee not of thine own part, but of
theirs with whom thou live, which may give occasion to a sage and discreet
conductour, to forbid thee to communicate so often. As for example, if thou
live in any kind of subjection, and those to whom thou owe this subjection,
reverence, or obedience, be so ill instructed in affairs of the soul, or so
wayward, that they be troubled, or disquieted to see thee communicate so often:
peradventure, all things well considered, it would be good to condescend to
these men's infirmity, and so to communicate but once every fifteen days;
when thou can by no means overcome this difficulty of these men's opinion.
In a word it is hard to give a general rule in this case: the surest is to
remitt it allways to our ghostly fathers advise; though I thinck I may boldly
say, that the greatest distance between the times of communicating, among such
as desire to serve God devoutly, is from month to month.

5. A discreet and prudent person thould not be hindered, neither by father, nor
mother, husband, nor wife, from often communicating: for since the day of
communion, takes not from thee that care and forecast of affairs which are
convenient to thy calling; nor makes thee less mild, sweet, and amiable toward
them, nor forces thee to deny them any kind of dutiful office or respect;
there is no likelihood, that they should seek to withdraw thee from this
exercise, with any profit or pleasure of their own; unless they be of a
spirit exceeding froward and intractable: for then perhaps thy ghostly father
would council thee, to condescend somewhat to their frailty.

6. A word or two for married folk. In the ancient law, God would not have the
creditours exact that which was owing unto them, upon feasts and holidays, but
he forbad not debtours to pay and restore that which they ought, to such as
demanded it. It is an vndecencie, though no great sin, to solicit the
payment of the marriage due, the day that one has communicated, but it is no
indecency at all, nay it is meritorious, to render it being demanded. Therefore
for rendering this nuptial debt, none should be debarred from the communion, if
on the other side their devotion vigeth the^ to desire it. Certainly in the
primitive church, all Christians did communicate every day, were thy unmarried,
or married, and blessed with many children. For this cause I said right now,
that often communicating, brings not any inconvenience at all, to father or
mother, husband or wife: so that the party communicating be endued with
discretion and wisdom, to know what belongs to his estate and duty.

7. As for bodelie diseases, none are lawful impedime^ts from participation of
this holy Sacrament, save only those which provoke much vomiting.

8. To communicate every eight days, it is requisite, neither to be guilty of
mortal sin, nor of any affection to venial sin, and to have a fervent
desire of coming to this heavenly banquet; But to communicate every day, it
behooves moreover to have surmou^ted and mortified the greatest part of our
naughty inclinations, and to come so often not of our own head, but by leave
and advise of our spiritual father.

How we ought to Communicate. CHAPTER 21.
1. BEGIN to prepare thy self to the Communion, the evening before, by many
aspirations and throws of love: retire thy self from exterior labors somewhat
earlier, that thou may rise sooner in the morning. If thou chance to awake in
the night time, by and by fill thy heart, and thy mouth with some devout words,
which like sweet odours, may perfume thy soul, as it were, to receive thy
spouse: who watching whilst thou sleep, prepares him self, to bring thee a
thousand gracious favors, if on thy part thou dispose thy self to receive them.

2. In the morning get up with great joy, for the happiness which thou hopest
to participate: and being co^fest, go with great confidence, accompanied with
great humility, to receive this heavenly food, which nourishes thee to
immortal life. After thou have recited the sacred words, O Lord I am not
worthy, move not thy head or lips any more, neither to pray, nor yet to
sighe, but opening thy mouth handsomely, and lifting up thy head as much as is
needful, that the priest may see what he does, full of hope, faith, and
charity, receive him, in whom, by whom, and for whom, thou beleeuest,
hopest, and love.

3. O Philotheee, thinck with thy self, that as the Be gathering from flowers
the dew of heaven, and choicest juice upon the earth, conuerteth it into honny,
and carries it into her hiue: just so the priest, taking the Saueour of the
world from the altar, true Son of God, as dew come from heaven, and true
Son of the Virgin, like a flower sprung from the earth of our humanity,
conuerteth him into delightful meat, in thy mouth, and in thy body. Having
thus received him, summon all thy thoughts and desires, to come and do homage
to this king of salvation: treat with him of thy inward affairs and
necessities: confer with him, as a noble guest now lodged within thee for thy
souls good. To conclude, do him all reverence possible, and carry thy self
with such behaueour, that men way judge by thy actions, that God is within thee.

4. When thou can not have the benefit and commodity, of communicating
reallie and indeed at the holy sacrifice of the mass, communicate at least in
heart and spirit: uniting thy self with an ardent desire, to this life-bringing
flesh of our B. Savior.

5. Thy principal intent in communicating must be, to advance, comfort, and
strengthen thy self in the love of God. Thou must receive only for loves sake,
that which only love has caused to be given. Thou can not consider out
Savior in any action more amiable, more tender hearted toward thee, then in
this sacrament: in which he annihilateth him self, in a manner, and turns him
self into meat, that so he might penetrate our souls, and unite him self most
straightly and intrinscicallie, with the hearts and bodies of his faithful
servants.

6. If worldlings demand of thee, why thou communicatest so often? tell the^
thou do it, to learn to love God, to be purified from thy imperfections, to
be delivered from thy miseries, to be comforted in thy afflictions, and to find
rest, repose, and ease in thy weakness. Tell them, that two sorts of persons,
should communicate very often: the perfect, because being well disposed, they
should do the^ selves wrong, in not approaching to the wellspring and source it
self of perfection: the imperfect, that they might with better reason and title
aspire to perfection; the strong least they become feeble, and the feeble to
become strong; the sick to be healed, and the healthie, least they fall into
sickness. Tell them, that for thy own part, as one very imperfect, feeble, and
sick, thou have great need to communicate often with him, who is thy only
perfection, strength, and health. Tell them, such as have not many worldly
affairs, should communicate often, because they have good leisure: and such as
have many temporal occupations, should likewise so do, because they have need:
and that he that labors much and takes great pains, must use often to
eat, and strengthen him self with hearty meat. Tell them, that thou receauest
the blessed Sacrament, to learn to receive it well: for no man can do an
action well, which he has not often practiced.

7. Communicate often Philotheus, and as often as thou can, with counsel and
advice of thy ghostly father; for believe me, the Leuerettes in these
mountains of ours, become all white, because they neither see nor eat any
thing but driven snow: so by adoring and eating beauty, goodness, and purity
it self in this divine sacrament, thou will become altogether, virtuous, pure,
and beautiful.

THE THIRD PART OF THE INTRODVCTION, Containing sundry rules and aduices,
concerning the exercise of virtues.
Of the choice which we must make in the exercise of virtue. CHAPTER I.
1. THE king of the Bees never goes a progress into the fields, but
enuironned with all his little people: and charity never enters into the heart
of man, but she lodges with her, all the whole train of other virtues,
exercising and setting them a work, as a Captain does his soldiers. But she
sets them a work, neither all at once, nor all alike, nor in all seasons,
nor in every place: for the just man is like a tree planted upon the water
side, which brings forth fruit in due season: and charity as it were
watring the soul, brings forth in her the actions and works of virtue,
every one in their proper time. Music, being so pleasant a thing in it self,
is troublesome in time of mourning, says the proverb. It is a great fault in
many, who undertaking the exercise of some particular virtue, enforce them
selves to practice the acts thereof, at every encounter and in all occurences,
imitating the ancient philosophers Democritus and Heraclytus, always laughing,
or always weeping; and (which is yet worse) blaming and censuring such, as do
not always exercise the self same virtues. One must rejoice with the joyful,
and weep with the sorrowful, says the Apostle: and charity is patient,
bountiful, liberal, discreet, and condescending or accommodating it self, to
all occasions, and exigences of our brethren.

2. There are notwithstanding some virtues, whose use is almost universal, and
must not work their actions only severally and a part, but must spread and
extend them amid the qualities and operations of all other virtues. Occasions
are seldom presented to exercise the virtues of fortitude, magnanimity and
magnificence: but meeknes, mildnes, temperance, modesty, and humility, are
virtues, with which all the actions of our life, should be died and colored.
Many virtues may be more excellent then this one, but the use of this one may
be more necessary. Sugar is of more excellence then salt, but salt is more
often and generally used. We must allways therefore have good store, and ready
provision of these general and common virtues, since the use of them is so
ordinary.

3. Among the virtues which we would exercise, we must prefer that, which is
most conformable to our calling, not that which is most agreeable to our own
taste and will. Saint Paula delighted in the exercise of asperities, and
corporal mortifications, that so she might more easily enjoy the sweet
tranquillity of the spirit: but she had more obligation to obey her
superiors, then to seek her own contentment; and therefore S. Hierom amid
her commendations says, that in this she was to be reprehended, that she used
immoderate abstine^ces, against her Bishops advice. The Apostles on the other
side, appointed by God to preach the ghospel, and distribute the bread of
heaven to hungry souls, judged exceeding well, that they should do wrong to
this great function of theirs, if they should employ their time, in serving and
looking to the poor, although to do so, were the act of an excellent virtue.
Every calling and vocation stands in need of the practice of some peculiar
virtue. Difference is there, between the virtue of a Prelat, and of a prince,
or a soldiour: the virtue of a married man, is different from the virtues of a
widow: and although every man should be endowed with all virtues, every one
notwithstanding, is not bound to practice them alike, but each one must give
him self in more particular manner, to those virtues that belong to that kind
of life where unto he is called.

4. Of the virtues which appertain not peculiarly to our particular estate,
and duty, we must prefer those which are most excellent in deed, not those
which excel only in appare^ce. Blazing stars ordinarily, seem greater and
goodlier the^ the very stars of heaven, and occupy much more place, at
least wise in our eyes; whereas in deed they are neither in greatness, not in
quality, and influence, comparable to the stars of the sky; neither seem
they great for any other reason, but because they are nearer unto us, and in a
more gross subject in respect of the stars. There are likewise certain
virtues, which because they are nearer to our senses, and (if I may say so)
somewhat material, are highly esteemed by the vulgar people: for so commonly
they prefer corporal alms, before the spiritual works of mercy: haircloth
fasting, nakedness, disciplins, and other such bodily mortifications, before
meekenes, courtesy, modesty, and other mortifications of the mind, which
notwithstanding in true judgments censure, are much more excellent. Choose
then, Philotheus, those virtues which are best, not those which are only
esteemed so by the unskillful vulgar; those which are more excellent, not those
which are more apparent; the substantial'st, not the brauest.

5. It is exceeding profitable, that every man should make choice of some
particular virtue, not neglecting or abandoning the rest, but procuring to be
most conversant, in the exercise of some one peculiar virtue, to which he
thincks him self most apt, all things well considered.

6. A beautiful damsel shining like the sun, royally adorned, and crowned
with a garland of olives, appeered in a vision to S. John Bishop of Alexandria,
and said unto him: I am the kings eldest daughter, if thou can gain my good
will, I will conduct thee to his presence. He perceived that this was Mercy,
toward the poor, which God commanded unto him by this vision: and therefore
ever after, he gave him self in such sort to the exercise of the works of
mercy, that he is now commonly called amongst all S. John the Almner.

7. Eulogius of Alexandria, desiring to do some peculiar service, to the honor
of God, and being not able to embrace a solitary eremiticall life, or to
resign him self up to the obedience of of an other, took unto him in his house
a miserable person, all infected with leaprosy, to exercise his charity and
mortification upon him; and to perform this with more perfection, he made a
vow to entertain him, honor, and serve him, as any servant does his Lord and
master. Now upon some tentation happening, as well to the lazar, as to
Eulogius, to depart one from the other, they went unto great Saint Anthony for
his council. Who said unto them. Beware my children, that you separate not
your selves one from the other, for both of you, approaching nigh to your end,
if the Angels find you not together, you are in great danger of leesing your
crowns.

8. The holy king Jews, visited the hospitals, and served the sick, with his
own hands, as if he had been a hireling, that for wages and gain had been
induced to that service. S. Francis above all things loved poverty, which he
was wont to term, his lady and mistress: S. Dominick most affectioned to
preaching to the ignorant, whereof his order takes the name. S. Gregory the
great, took pleasure in entertaining pilgrims and strangers, following the
example of Abraham, and had the same grace granted him, that Abraham had, to
receive the king of glory in form of a pilgrim. Tobias exercised his charity
in buriyng the dead: S. Elisabeth, as great a princess as she was, delighted
so much in nothing, as in the abiecting and abasing of her self. S. Catherin
of Genua in her widowhood, dedicated her self to serve an hospital. Cassianus
recounteth, that a devout gentlewoma^ desirous to exercise the virtue of
patience, came to S. Athanasius, who at her request, placed a poor widow with
her, so wayward, choleric, troublesome, and intolerable, that she gave the
devout dame, matter and occasion enough, to practice the virtue of meeknes and
sufferaunce.

9. Finally among the servants of God, some apply them selves principally to
attend and visit the sick; others with alms and favor, succor the needy and
poor; others procure to instruct little children, in the necessary knowledge of
Christian doctrine; others endeavor to recall home to God and his church,
souls that are lost and gone astray; others solace them selves in adorning
churches, and decking the holy altars; others to make peace and agreement,
amongst such as are fallen at strife and variaunce. Wherein they imitate
skillful imbroderers, who upon diverse grounds, with admirable variety,
entermingle silk, silver, and gold twists, whereof they draw sondrie sorts of
flowers: and so these godly souls, undertaking some particular exercise of
devotion, do make it serve them, as a groundwork of their spiritual
imbroyderie, upon which they work the variety of all other virtues: holding by
that means all their actions and affections, better united and ordered, by the
careful application of them to their principal exercise, and in this,
endeavor to show their excellent art, and singular cuning. Her garments
bordered all with flowers of gold.
And curious needle work fair to behold.
Says the psalmist, describing the costly apparel of the spouse of God, which
is the soul exercised in variety of virtues.

6. When we are afflicted and combatted by any kind of vice, it behooves us, as
much as it lies in us, to give our selves wholly to the practice of the
contrary virtue, and to order and apply all other virtues, to the perfecting
of that particular virtue. For so we shall overcome the enemy against which we
fight, and advance our selves likewise in other virtues. If I feel my self
impugned with pride, or choler, in all my actions I will bend my self to the
contrary side, that is to humility, and meeknes: and to obtain that virtue I
will apply all my other exercises of prayer, receiving the sacraments, of
prudence, of constancy, sobriety and the rest. For as the wild Boares to
sharpe^ their tuskes, do scour and whet them with their other teeth, so that
all of them do reciprocallie become sharp, and piercing: so a virtuous man,
propounding to perfect him self in one virtue, of which he finds most need,
does as it were whet it and sharpen it, by the exercise of other virtues, which
confirming and strengthening that one, which he particularly seeks, become
all of them more polished and excellent. So it happned unto holy Job, who
exercising him self peculiarly in patience, against so many vehement
tentations wherewith he was assalted: became perfect in all kind of virtues and
holiness. Yea often times it happens (as S. Gregory Nazianzen says) that by
one only act of some virtue, well and perfectly performed, a man may attain
to the hight of virtue: and he alleges in proof of this saying, the example
of Rahab, who having exactly practiced the virtue of hospitality, attained
unto a glorious sovereignty in holiness. Which is to be understood, when such
acts are practiced, with excellent fervor of charity.

An addition to the former discource, about choice in the exercise of virtues.
CHAPT. 2.
1. SAINT Augustine says excellently well, that young beginners in devotion,
do committ certain faults, which according to the rigor of perfect laws,
are in very deed blame worthy, and yet in these beginners are very commendable,
as tokens and presages of a future excellency in godliness, to which these
petty faults, do serve as a kind of disposition. That base and seruil fear,
which engenders excessive scruples, in the souls of those that are newly
escaped from the custom and thraldom of sin, is a commendable virtue in
beginners, and a sure and certain sign, of a future purity of conscience in
them: but the self same fear would be very reprehensible in those, that have
profited in good life and devotion, in whose hearts that perfect love should
reign and predominate, that by little and little, drives this seruil fear out
of doors.

but I call Jesus to witness, whom she served, and whom I desire to serve,
that I lie not, either on the one side, or on the other: but do set down
clearly what she was, as a Christian, writing of a Christian: that is, that
write an history, and not a panegyricall oration of her life, and that her
vices, be the virtues of others. His meaning is, that the defects and
imperfections of S. Paula, would have borne the name and nature of virtues, in
a soul of less perfection; As in very deed, there are actions which are
deemed imperfections, in such as be perfect, which not with standing, would be
esteemed great perfections, in those which yet are imperfect. It is a good
sign in a sick man, when at the end of his sickness, his legs do swell, for
it shows that nature now strengthened, casts out her superfluous humors:
but the very same sign, is bad and ominous in him, that were not sick at all,
for it betokens the weakness of nature, not having force enough, to dissolve
and dissipate those corrupt and naughty humors.

4. My Philotheus, we must have always a good opinion and estimation of them, in
whom we see the practice of virtues, although exercised with some defects and
imperfections, since the great Saints them selves, have often times exercised
them in such manner. But for our own parts, we must procure to exercise our
selves in them, not only diligently, but discreetly, and for that end, observe
carefully and faithfully the advice and council of wise men, not leaning to
our own prudence, but to the skill and wisdom of such, whom God has given us
for our conductours.

5. There are certain other per^ which many esteem and account virtues,
though in deed they be no virtues at all: of which it is needful to speak a
word or two. I mean those perfections, which are called ecstasies, rauis ments
in spirit, insensibilities, languishments, or impossibility of exterior
actions, deificall unions, eleuations, transformations of the soul, and such
like; of which some books do treat, promising to eleuate and promote the soul
to contemplation, purely intellectual, to the essential application of the
spirit, and of the supereminent life of the soul. Mark me well what I say, my
Philotheus, these perfections, be not virtues, but rather rewards and
recompenses, that God gives his servants in this life for their virtues: or as
it were scantlings, and listes, of the happiness of the life to come, which
sometime are presented unto men, to make them desire to buy the whole pieces
them selves, which are above in Paradise. We must not pretend to come vnto-such
high favors and graces, since they are not any wise necessary to serve and
love God well and truly, which should be our chief and only pretense: Neither
are they graces which may ordinarily be obtained, by our own travel or
industry, since they are rather passions, then actions, which therefore we may
well receive, but work them or produce them in us, we can not. I add more
over that we have not undertook any higher matter, then to make our selves
virtuous, devout, and good men and good women: and therefore it behooves us to
bestow all our endeavor to that end; and if it please God to eleuate and extol
us to these Angelical perfections, we shall be then also good Angels: but in the
mean time, let us exercise our selves simply, humbly, and devoutly in these
lower humane virtues, the conquest and gaining of which, our Saueour has left
to our own power and diligence; such as are the virtues of patience,
courtesy, meeknes, mortification of our hearts, and wills, humility,
obedience, poverty, chastyty, compassion toward our neighbors, and bearing
with their imperfections, diligence, and holy fervor in fulfilling the will of
God. Let us leave these supereminences, for superexcellent souls, we merit not
so high a place in Gods service; it will be happiness for us, to serve our God, in
his kitchen (as they say) or in his pantrie, to be lackies, porters,
torche-bearers, grooms of the chamber, in his house. It is his mercy and
inestimable goodness only, if afterward he please to remove us higher to his
closet, and privy chamber, or to be of his council. Yea, my Philotheus, this
must be the resignation of our heart; for this king of glory, does recompense
his servants, not according to the dignity of the offices which they bear
under him, but according to the measure of the love and humility, with which
they execute them. Saul seeking after his fathers Asses, found the crown and
kingdom of Israel. Rebecca by watring Abraham's Camels, became the espouse of
his son Isaac. Ruth, the Moabitesse, gleaning after the harvest men of Boos,
and lying at his feet, was exalted to lie by his side, and made his wedded
wife. Surely the pretentions and desires of such lofty, extraordinary, and
admirable things, are obnoxious and subject unto illusions, deceipts, and
errors; and it chances often times, that these sublimated persons, that thinck
them selves Angels, are scantly so much as good men, and that there is more
excellence and sublimitie in their words, and rare terms, then feeling, and
substance, in their works and actions. Yet must we not lightly dispraise, or
rashly censure any thing, but blessing God for the supereminence of other men,
rest our selves humbly in this low, plain, and easy way, which is indeed more
plain, but yet more secure; less excellent, but yet more suitable to our
insufficiency and weakness: wherein if we converse humbly and faithfully, God
will lift us up to greatness, great enough for our souls good.

Of Patience. CHAPTER 3.
1. PATIENCE is necessary for you, that performing the will of God, you may
obtain the promise, says the Apostle: yea, for as our Lord him self
pronounced, In your patience you shall possess your souls. It is the happiest
thing that ca^ befall to man (Philotheus) to have his own soul in sure and
secure possession: and the more perfect that our patience is, the more secure
is the possession of our souls: we must endeavor then to perfect this virtue
in us, to the uttermost of our power. Call to mind continually, that our
blessed Redeemer faued us, by suffering and enduring: and that we therefore in
like manner, must work our salvation, by suffering afflictions, and enduring
injuries, and bearing contradictions, and displeasures, with the greatest
meeknes that possible we can.

2. Limit not thy patience, to such and such kind of injuries, and afflictions:
but extend it magnanimously and universally, to all those that God shall send,
and suffer to befall thee. There be some men that will suffer no tribulations,
but such as be honorable: As for example, to be wounded in battle, to be
taken prisoner in war, to be persequuted, and ill handled, for religion sake,
to be impouerished by some suit or process, in which they have got the upper
hand: these men love not tribulation, but the honor which the tribulation
brings. He that is patient in deed, and a true servant of God. Suffers
indifferently those tribulations, that are coupled with infamy and shame, as
well as those that be honorable. To be reprehended, accused, slandered by
naughty and wicked men, is a pleasure to a man of courage: but to suffer these
accusations and persequutions at the hands of our parents and frinds, and of
such as are good and virtuous, and esteemed so, there is the right trial of
true patience, there it is in deed, that we must play the men. I esteem more
of the meeknes, wherewith the blessed Cardinal Borromaeus, suffered a long time
the public reprehensions, which a great preacher of an order, exceedingly
well reformed, thundered against him out of the pulpit: the^ of all the co^bats
which he had with any other. For like as the stinging of a Be, is far sorer
and fulle of ache, then the biting of a fly: so the evil that one receaueth of
good men, and the contradictions that they raise against one, are much more
unsupportable then others; and yet it chances very often, that two good and
virtuous men, having both of them right intentions, through diversity of
opinions, do stir up great persequutions and contradictions, one against the
other.

3. Be patient, not only in the great, and principal afflictions which arrive
unto thee, but also in the accessories and accidents which depend thereon.
Many could be content to have afflictions happen unto them, so that they might
not be hurt, troubled or vexed by them. I am not grieved says one, that I am
fallen into poverty, but that by that means I cannot pleasure my frinds, nor
bring up my children in such honorable education as I desire. I care not (says
another) were it not that the world will thinck, that this is befallen me by
mine own fault. Another would be content some should speak ill of him, and
would suffer it patiently, so that no man would believe the detractour. Others
there are, that could willingly away with some part of the tribulation, as they
suppose, but not with the whole. They are not impatient, or vexed (say they)
that they are sick: but that they want money to cure them selves of their
sickness, or that they that be about them, are too importunat and troublesome to
them. But I say (my Philotheus) that we must have patience, not only to be
sick, but even to be visited with that disease that God will lay upon us, what
ever it be, and in that place whersoeuer he will have it happen to us, and
amongst such persons, and with those wants and incommodities, which he will;
and the like is to be understood of all other tribulatio^s. When any damage or
harm shall chance unto thee, oppose against it a Gods name, those remedies
which thou can apply, for to do otherwise, were to tempt God almighty: but
having done thy diligence in the matter, attend with an entire resignatio^,
that success and event, which it shall please God to send: if he permit the
remedies to overcome thy harms, give him thancks with reverence, if it please
him that thy harms surmount the remedies, bless him with patience.

4. I am of the advice of Saint Gregory. When thou art justly accused for any
fault which thou have committed, humble thy self for it, and confess
unfeignedly, that thou deseruest more then the accusation that is laid against
thee. But if thou be accused falsely, excuse thy self with all meeknes, denying
thy self to be guilty of that which is laid to thy charge, for thou owe that
duty to the truth, and to the edification of thy neighbor; But withal, if
after thy true and lawful discharge, men continue notwithstanding their
accusation against thee, strive not much to make thy excuse be admitted and
believed, for having complied with the duty thou owe unto the truth, thou
must render also the duty thou owe to humility. Thus thou shall neither
offend, against the care that thou ought to have of thy good renown, nor
against the love and affection, which thou should have to tranquillity of
heart, meeknes, and humility.

5. Complain as little as thou can of the wrongs that be done thee; for
ordinarily he that co^plaineth of them, sins: because self love always
makes us believe the injuries offered us, to be worse then indeed they be. But
above all things complain not to such persons, as are apt to take indignation,
and to turn all to the worst. If it be expedient to make thy moan to any,
either to get the offense remedied, or thy mind eased, let it be done to quiet
and peaceable souls, that love God sincerely; for otherwise, instead of
easing and discharging thy griefs, they will provoke thee to greater disquiet:
in steed of pulling out the thorn that pricketh thee, they will fasten and
slick it deeper into thy foot.

6. Many being sick, afflicted, or molested, refrain them selves from
complaining, or showing any delicatenes, judging (and that rightly) that it
would evidently testify want of courage and generositie in them: but for all
that, they desire exceedingly, and by slights and subtilities procure, that
other men bemone them, take compassion of them, and esteem them to be not
only afflicted, but patient, yea, and courageous also in their afflictions.
This is a kind of patience indeed, but a false one, which in effect, is nothing
else but a fine subtle and secret pride and vanity: They have glory (says
the Apostle) but not before God. The true patient man, neither complains of
his griefs and harms, nor desires to be pitied and bemoned: he speaks of
his case clearly, truly, and simply, without lamentations, or aggrauations: if
he be pitied, he thancketh God for the charity and comfort showed him, and
patiently suffers him self to be pitied, unless they bemone the harm or
evil, which he has not: for then will he modestly declare, that he suffers
no such grief, as they imagine; and in this sort continues peaceably, betwixt
truth and patience, confessing, not complaining of his afflictions.

7. In the contradictions which befall thee in the exercise of devotion, (for
they will not be lacking one time or other) remember the words of our Savior
Jesus Christ: A woman when she is in trauail, has anguish because her hour is
come: but when she has brought forth her child, then she remembers not the
anguishe, for joy that a man is borne into the world. Thou conceiuest
spirituallie in thy soul the noblest child in the world, to wit, Jesus Christ;
until he be brought forth altogether, thou can not choose but suffer
excessive pangs: but be of a good heart, these dolours once past, thou shall
find everlasting joy, for having brought forth such a child to the world. And
he shall be wholly brought forth and borne in thee, when thou framest, and
conformest thy heart and thy actions, to the imitation of his life.

8. When thou art sick offer up all thy griefs, pains, aches, and
languishments, to the honor and service of our Lord: and beseech him to join
and unite them with the torments which he suffered for thee. Obey thy
physician, take those medicines, meats and remedies which he prescribes, for
the love of God, calling to mind the gall which he tasted for our sakes: desire
to amend, that thou may serve him; refuse not to la^guishe, that thou may
obey him: and dispose thy self to die (if so it please him) that thou may
praise and enjoy him. Consider that the Bees when they make their hunny, do
live and eat of a bitter provision: and that we in like manner, can never
exercise sweeter acts of patience, nor compose more excellent hunny of true
virtues, the^ when we eat the bread of bitterness, and live in the midst of
afflictions. And as the hunny which is gathered from thyme, a little bitter
herb, is the best that is: so virtue exercised in the bitterness of vile, base,
and most abject tribulations, is the finest and excellentest of all.

9. Reflect often times the inward eyes of thy soul, upon Christ Jesus
crucified, naked, blasphemed, slandred, forsaken for thy love, and in a word,
overwhelmed with all sorts of sorrows, griefs, and persequutions. Consider
that all thy sufferings, neither in quality, nor quantity, are in any sort
comparable unto his: and that thou can never suffer any thing for his sweet
sake, in comparison of that which he has endured for thine.

10. Consider the pangs and torments, which in old time the martyrs suffered;
and the dolours and griefs which at this time many endure, more grievous
without all proportion, then those which thou endurest, and say to thy self:
Alas, my pains be consolations, and my briers be roses in comparison of them,
which without all succor, attendaunce, or relief, do live in a perpetual
death, ouercharged with afflictions infinitlie heavier then mine are.

Of exterior Humility. CHAPTER 4.
1. BORROW and take many empty vessels (said Elizaeus unto the poor Widow)
and power oil into them. To receive abundance of the grace of God into our
hearts, they must be void of self pride and vainglorie. The Kesterell criyng
and looking constantly upon the hawks, and other birds of preye, does terrify
the^ by a secret propretie or virtue which it has by nature, therefore the
fearful Doves, do love it above all other birds, and live in security in
company of it so humility rebutteth the eager onsett of Satan, and conserueth
the graces and guiftes of the holy Ghost in us, and therefore all the Saints of
heaven, but especially Christ the king of Saints and his blessed mother, made
more esteem of this virtue, then of any other amongst all the moral virtues.

2. We call that glory vain, which one takes of him self, either for that
which is not in him, or for that which is in him, but is none of his; or for
that which is in him, and is his own, but deserves not that one should glory
of it. Nobility of race, favor with great potentates, popular honor, be
things that are not in us, but in our progenitors, or in the estimation of
other men. Some men there be, that show them selves fierce and stout, because
they be mounted on a lusty courser, or for a great goodly fether in their cap,
or for their costly and sumptuous apparel: but who sees not this to be folly?
For if there be any glory at all in these cases, it is glory for the horse,
for the bird, and for the tailer: and what great want of wit is it, to borrow
credit and estimation from a horse, from a bird, from a new fashiond ruff?
Others brag, and behold themselves with great satisfaction, for a goodlye
long moustaches, or a trim beard, for their curled locks, and soft hands: or
for skill in dancing, singing, playing: but are not those hartlesse, and base
minded men, who fetch their estimation and reputation, from such frivolous and
fond trifles? Others for a little knowledge and learning, would be honored and
respected in the world, as if euerybody should come to school to learn of
them, and account them their masters, for which cause they are rightly termed
pedantical companions. Others carry the^ selves like peacocks, proud of their
beauty, and thinck all the world is fond of them. All these humors are vain,
foolish, and impertinent: and glory grounded upon such weak and feeble
foundations, is vain and frivolous.

3. A man may know true virtue like true baulme: for baulme is tried by dipping
it into the water; if it sinck to the bottom, it is counted the most excellent
and precious. Even so to know whether a man be in deed wise, learned, generous,
noble, mark whether these good gifts and qualities tend in him to humility,
modesty, and submission, for then they be true in deed: but if they swim
above water, if they strive to appear and show them selves, they are so much
the less substantial, and more superficial, by how much more apparent they
are, or would be. Pearls that be conceived and grow in the wind, or in time of
thunder, have nothing but the bark, or shell of a pearl, and are void of
substance: so these virtues and good qualities bred and nourished in pride,
boasting, and vanity, have nothing but a simple show and appearance of good,
without juice, without marrow, without soliditie and substance. Honors,
estates, and dignities, are like to saffron, which is best, and grows most
plentifully, when it is trodden under feet. It is no honor to be fair in a
man's own eyes: beauty, to have a good grace in deed, should be somewhat
neglected: knowledge dishonours us, when it puffs us up, and degenerateth
then to plain pedanterie.

4. If we stand curiously upon our points, touching precedence and preeminence
in place and titles, besides the exposing of our selves to the danger of having
our qualities too narowly sifted, examined, and contradicted, we make them vile
and contemptible: for honor, which is indeed honorable, when it is freely
given and granted, becomes foul, infamous, and shameful when it is affected,
sought after, and in a manner begged, and wrested, from them in whose company
we are. When the Peacock brustles up his gay starrie wheel, lifting up his
goodly painted feathers to be looked upon, he forgets him self, that in the
mean while he shows other parts, which are most ill favored in him. Flowers
that be beautiful, growing upon the ground, or in the garden-beds, wither away
with much handling. The sweet smell of the Mandragora taken a far of, and but
for a short time, is most pleasant: but they that smell to it very near, and
a long time, become altogether drowsy, faint,

Of Humility more internal then the former. CHAP. 5.
1. BUT thou desire I see Philotheus, to be farther endoctrined in humility:
for that which we have hitherto said, is rather wisdom and good manners, then
humility: let us therefore pass on farther.

2. Many there are, that will not, and dare not ponder and consider, the graces
that God has given them in particular, fearing least they should thereby fall
into vain glory, and self conceipted love, whereas in deed they deceive the^
selves: for since the true direct means to attain to the love of God (as S.
Thomas the Angelical doctor teaches) is the consideration of his benefits,
the more we consider them, the more we shall love him; and as particular
benefits do more efficaciously move and win affection, then such as are
common to other: so ought they to be pondered and wayed more attentively.
Certain it is, that nothing can humble us so much before the mercy of God, as
the knowledge of the infinite multitude of his benefits, neither can any thing
so much humble us before his justice, as the multitude of our offenses. Let us
then consider what he has done for us, and what we have done against him: and
as we consider and way our sins one by one, so let us acknowledge and suruay
his graces one by one. Never fear that the knowledge which he gives us of his
graces, will puff us up in pride, so long as we be attentive to this known
and acknowledged verity, that whatsoever is good in us, is altogether from
God, and not from our selves. Alas, Mules and Camels, cease they to be lumpishe
and brute beasts, though they be never so loaded with the precious and perfumed
moueables of the prince? What have thou which thou have not received? says the
Apostle; and if thou have received it, why do thou glory? Nay contrariwise,
the lively and feeling consideration, of the favors received from Gods hand,
humbles us; because knowledge engeadreth acknowledgement.

3. But if in this reuiew and accounting (as it were) of the graces of God, any
kind of vanity should tickle us: the infallible, and easy remedy is, to
pass by and by, to the consideration of our ingratitude, of our imperfections,
and of our miseries; If we consider what we have done, when God was not with
us, we shall soon acknowledge, that all which we have done, since he has been
with us, is not our handy work, nor is not of our own stock; we shall enjoy
them, and rejoice that we have them, but we shall glorify God alone, for being
the sole auth our and giver of them. So the blessed virgin, confessed and
professed, that God had wrought great and admirable things in her, and for her,
but she confessed it for no other cause, then for to humble her self, and to
glorify God: My soul (says she) does magnify our Lord, because he has done
great things to me.

4. We use to say many times, that we are nothing, that we are misery it
self, that we are the skumme and outcasts of the world: but we would be loath
any man should take us at our word, and publish us abroad to be such as we say
we are: Nay we make as if we would hide our selves, to the end men may run
after us, and search us out; we make show as if we would indeed be the last,
and sit at the love end of the table: but we do so that with more credit we
may be set at the vpperend of all. True humility never shows her self, nor
uses many words of humble sound, because she intends not only to hide other
virtues, but withal and above all, to hide her own self And if it were
lawful for her to lie, to dissemble, or scandalize her neighbor, she would
use many an action of arrogancy, and bravery that under them she might hide
her self, and so be altogether covered and unknown. My advice therefore is
this Philotheus, either let us use no words of humility at all, or let us use
them with an inward feeling, meaning in our heart, as we pronounce with our
mouth. Let us never cast our eyes down to the ground, but humbling our hearts
with all: let us not seem to desire the lowest room, unless we desire it
from our heart. And I hold this rule so general, that I bring no exception only
I add, that courtesy requires, that we present the advantage sometime to
those, whom we know manifestly will refuse it: for this is no double dealing,
nor false humility, for in this case the only proffer of the advantage in
place, or precedence, or such like, is an honoring of them to whom we proffer
it and since then, one cannot give them entirely that which in heart we would,
we do not ill to give it them in part. The like I understand of some terms of
honor, and respect, which (to examine them in rigor) seem not to be true, and
yet are in deed true enough, if the heart of him that pronounces them, have a
true intention, to honor, and respect him, for whose sake he uses those
terms. For although the words do signify with some excess, that which we
would say: yet it is not ill done to use them, when common custom of civility
requires it. I wish that our words, were always joined to our intention and
affection, as near as it is possible, so to follow in all, and through all, the
pure and naked simplicity of a virtuous heart.

5. A man that is truly humble, would rather that another should say of him
that he is a miserable wretch, that he is nothing, nor worth nothing, then to
say so much him self: at least, if he know that any man say so of him, he does
not gainsay it, but agrees to it with all his heart: for since he believes
firmly and unfeignedly, that he is in deed worth nothing, he is right glad to
have others of his mind and opinion.

6. Many say that they leave mental prayer, for those that are perfect, that
they themselves are not worthy to frequent such an exercise. Others protest
they dare not communicate often, because they feel not them selves pure
enough. Others that verily they fear least they should disgrace devotion, if
they should entermedle with it, by reason of their great misery and frailty:
Others refuse to employ their talent in the service of God, and of their
neighbor, because (say they) they know their own weakness, and feeblenes:
and that they fear to become proud, if they should be instruments of any
good: and that in giving light to others, they should consume them selves. All
this is an artificial kind of humility, not only false, but also malignant,
whereby one seeks secretly and subtly, to blame the gifts of God, or at the
least with the cloak of humility, to cover the love of his own humor and
slothfulnes. Demand of God a sign, either, from heaven above, or from the
depth of the sea below: said the prophet to unhappy Achaz, and he answered: I
will demand none, neither will I tempt God. O wicked man, he would seem to
bear great reverence to God, and under color of humility, excuses him self
from aspiring to the grace which Gods goodness offers unto him: but he
understood not, that when our Lord offers us his graces, it is pride to
refuse them; that the gifts of God, oblige us to receive them, and that true
humility, is to obey and follow his will and desire the nearest we can. But
Gods desire is, that we become perfect, uniting our selves unto him, and
imitating him the best we can. The proud man which trusts in him self, has
just occasion (if he knew it) to undertake take nothing: but he that is humble,
is so much more courageous, by how much more unable he acknowledges him self:
and according to the measure that he measures his own frailty, his boldness
in God increases; for all his trust is in God, and God (he knows) delights
to exalt his omnipotency, in our infirmity, and to magnify his mercy, by
our misery. We must then humbly and holily dare and undertake, what soever is
judged fit and convenient to our spiritual advancement, by them that have the
guiding of our souls.

7. To thinck one knows that, which he knows not, is an express folly: to
play the learned man in that, in which it is manifest we have no skill nor
experience, is an intolerable vanity. For my part, I would not take upon me a
learned man's person, even in things which I were certain that I knew well
enough: as co^trariewise, I would not counterfeit my self altogether ignorant.
When charity requires, we must readily and sweetly communicate to our
neighbor, not only that, which is necessary for his instruction, but withal,
that which is profitable for his consolation: for humility, which hides and
concealeth virtues, to conserve them in their purity, does nevertheless
discover them, and make them show them selves, when charity commands, to
increase and perfect them. Wherein she resembles a tree in the Isles of Tylos,
which all night long, locketh and encloseth up her fair carnation flowers, and
does not open them, but at the rising of the sun, so that the inhabitants of
the country do say, that these flowers do sleep by night: for even so
humility, covers and hides all our virtues and humane perfections, and
lets them not be seen abroad, but when charity commands: and charity
being a virtue not humane, but heavenly, not moral but divine, is the very
true sun of all other virtues, upon which she must therefore ever predominate:
so that humility which is preiudicious to charity, is without all doubt false
humility.

8. I would neither cou^terfeit a fool, nor a wiseman: for if humility forbid
me to counterfeit my self wise, simplicity and plainnes forbid me likewise, to
cou^terfeit my self a fool: for as vanity and pride are contrary to
humility; so are affectation and dissembling contrary to simplicity, and
plaine-dealing. And if some great servants of God have made as if they had been
fools, to render them selves more abject in the eyes of the world, we must
admire them, and not imitate them: for they had motives that induced them to
this excess, which were so peculiar unto them, and extraordinary, that no man
ought from thence to infer any consequence for him self. As for David, when
he daunced before the arc of the testament, with some more demonstration of
mirth, then seemed to beseem the majesty of a king, he did it not as
counterfaiting any foolish myrthe, but simply and plainly used he these
exterior motions, conformable to the extraordinary gladness which he felt in
his heart. True it is, that when Michol his wife up braided him for this fact,
as to base and fond for a king, he was never a whit sorry to see himself
despised, but perseuering in the true and sincere representation of the joy
which he had conceived in his soul, he protested that he was likewise glad to
receive a little shame for the love of his God. And consequently I say, that if
for acts of true and profound devotion, thou be esteemed simple, abject, and
base-minded, humility will make thee rejoice at this happy shame, the cause
whereof is not in thee, but in them that lay it upon thee.

That humility makes us love our own debasement and abiection. CHAPTER 6.
1. I PASS farther Philotheae, to tell thee, that above all things thou love
thy own abiection. But thou will ask me, what it is to love our own
abiection. In latin abiection is all one with humility, and humility with
abiection: for so when our Lady in her sacred hymn, says, that all
generations should term her blessed, because God had seen the humility of
his ha^dmaide: her meaning is, that our Lord beheld with great love her
abiection, her baseness, and lowness, to endowe her with favors and
inestimable graces. Yet there is great difference between the virtue of
humility, and abiection: for abiection is the litlenes, baseness, poornes, and
the nothing that is in us of our own selves, we not knowing nor considering
it: but as for the virtue of humility, it is a true feeling knowledge, and
voluntary acknowledgement of our abiection and vileness.

2. But the principal point of humility consists not only in this willing
acknowledgement of our abiection, but to love it, and take a delight and
contentment in it: not for want of courage or magnanimity, but to extol so
much the more the divine majesty, and to esteem much better of our neighbor
in comparison of our selves. This point is that which I exhort thee to insist
in most of al: and that thou may the better understand and conceive it.
Consider that amongst the afflictions and troubles which we suffer in this
life, some of them be base, contemptible, and abject, other be honorable, and
glorious, and many apply them selves willingly to honorable tribulations,
but scarce any at all will abide those that be abject and ignominious. So a
devout hermit all ragged, and shiuering for cold, every body honors his
torn habit, taking compassion of that which he endures: but if a poor
tradeseman, a decayed gentleman, or a poor gentlewoman be in the same case,
men despise and mock them: and so thou see how their poverty is abject, and
ignominious. A religious man receaueth devoutly a rigorous reprehensio^ of his
superior, and a child of his father, and all men count it and call it
mortification, obedience, and good manners: but let a knight, or some great
lady, suffer the like of another, and although they do it for the love of God,
men will call it cowardlinesse, pusillanimitie, and lack of courage: behold
here is another abject evil. One has a cancker on his arm, and another upon
his face: the first has only the disease, which is bad enough; but this other
jointly with the disease, has contempt, shame, and abiection in all company.
What say I then of loving abiection? I say, that we must not only love the
harm it self, which we do by the virtue of patience: but we must also love the
contempt, the shame, the vileness, baseness, and abiection thereof, which we do
by the virtue of humility.

3. Again there be some virtues, that seem abject and contemptible, other
that are honorable and respected by all men. Patience, meeknes, plaindealing,
simplicity, and humility it self, are of the number of those virtues, which
worldly men hold as vile, and abject: contrariwise they make great estimation
of wisdom, fortitude, and liberality. There be also diverse actions of the
self same virtue, whereof some be contemptible, and others honorable; to give
alms, and to pardon injuries and offenses, are both of them acts proceeding
from charity: and the first is honored of all men, the last most base in the
eyes of the blind world. A young gentleman or gentlewoman, that will not
disorder them selves, with a company of dissolute mates in prating, dancing,
drincking, superfluous pomp, and curiosity of apparel, shall be scoffed at and
censured by others, and their laudable modesty, termed hypocrisy or affected
sanctity: To love these censures, to rejoice in that the world has this
opinion of us, is to love our own abiection. Behold again another sort of
abiection which we must love. We go to visit the sick, many of us together: if
I be sent to the most miscrable, that is to me an abiection in the judgment of
the world, and for that cause will I embrace it more willingly: but if I be
sent to visit a person of more quality, it is an abiection according to
judgment of the spirit, for there is not (...) so much virtue nor merit, and
therefore I will love this abiection likewise. One falls in the midst of the
street, and not only receaueth damage thereby, but is also shamfully laughed at:
this is an abiection which we must make much of.

4. There are some defects also, which have no other harm in them, but only
the shame that they bring with them: and humility, though it require not that
one should committ them of set purposes; yet it requires that one disquiet
not him self, for having fallen into some such defect. These defects which I
now speak of, be certain fooleries, inciuilities, inconsiderate acts, or
words, which as we ought to eschew before they be committed, to obey civility
and prudence: so when they are once committed, we must be content with the
reproache that comes thereby, and accept it willingly, that so we may follow
the rule of holy humility. I say yet more: if I chance to disordre my self
through passion, or dissolution, or to speak some indecent words, where with God
and my neighbor are offended: I will repent my self hartelie, with true sorrow
for the sin committed, and procure to repare the harm or offense done to my
neighbor the best that possible I can: but I will be content, and right glad,
with the shame, contempt, and abiection which thereby I have incurred; and if
the one could possibly be separated from the other, I would sincerely cast away
the sin, and earnestly retain the abiection.

5. But though we love the abiection and contempt, which follows some euel or
defect of ours: we must not neglect the redress of the ill (that caused it) by
convenient and lawful means, especially, when the evil is of some consequence
and importance. As if I have some deformed loathsome disease upon my face, I
will procure to have it cured, but not to have men forget the deformity which
it caused. If I have committed some foolery, which is offensive to no man, I
will not excuse my self at all: because although it was a defect, and a fault,
it is not permanent, and therefore it needs no excuse but only for the
abiection, shame, or contempt which befalls me for it, and to excuse that, is
against humility. But if through my unadvisedness and folly, I have
offended, or scandalized any man: I will make amends for the offense by some
probable excuse, because it contains a permanent ill; and that charity
obliges me to blot out and deface if I can.

6. To conclude it happens some times, that charity commands us to remedy
and wipe away, the abiection and contempt which we incur, because our
reputation and good name, is necessary for the edification of our neighbors.
And in that case, though we remove abiection and contempt, from our neighbors
eyes, least he should be scandalized or troubled thereby: yet must we carefully
lock it up like a precious Jewel in our heart, that we our selves may be
edified thereby.

7. Perchance thou would learn of me, Philotheus, which abiections amongst
all are to be esteemed best? and I tell thee plainly in one word, that those
are most profitable to our souls, and most acceptable to God, which happen to
us as it were by chance, or by the course, condition and estate of our life,
because we choose the^ not, but receive them only from the hands of God, that
sends them, whose election and choice we know, is always better for us, then
our own. But if we were to choose them our selves, then the greatest are the
best for us: and those are to be esteemed greatest, which are most contrary to
our inclinations, (so that they be conformable to our vocation) for to speak
the truth once for all, our own choice spoileth in a manner, and brings to
naught all our virtues. O who will give us the grace, to say from our heart in
all sincerity with that great king: I have made choice to be an abject in the
house of God, rather then to dwell in the tabernacles of sinners? None
certainly can give us this grace (dear Philothee) but he that to exalt us,
lived and died for us in such manner, that he was esteemed the outcast of men,
and the most abject of the people.

I have told thee many things Philotheus, which no doubt will seem somewhat
hard unto thee when thou considerest them: but believe me, they will be sweeter
then sugar or hunny to thee, when thou do put them in practice.

How to keep our good renown in the practice of humility. CHAPTER 7.
1. HONOR, praise, and glory are not given to men for every ordinary
virtue, but for some excellent and notable virtue: for by praise we seek to
persuade others to esteem the excellency of some man in whom such a virtue
excels: by honor we protest that we our selves do esteem him therefore: and
glory in my judgment, is nothing else, but a certain luster, splendor, or
shining brightness of reputation, which arises from the concourse of many
praises and honors. So that honors and praises, are as it were precious
stones and pearls, from whence glory produces his luster, and varnish, like
to enamel. Now humility, not being able to endure, that we should have any
opinion, of our own excellence or precedence before others, cannot likewise
suffer, that we should hunt after praise, honor, nor glory, which be due only
to some kind of excellency: but yet she consents to the advertisement of the
wiseman, who admonishes us, to have care of our credit: because good renown
is an estimation, not of any excellency, but absolutely, of an ordinary
prudence, and integrity of a well-gouerned life, which humility forbids
not to acknowledge in our selves, and so consequently wills us to desire this
reputation. True it is that humility would likewise contemn this renown, if
charity stood not in need of it: but because it is one of the foundatio^s of
humane society, and without it, we are not only unprofitable, but also
damageable to the community in which we live, through the scandal which it
receaueth by our ill name, there charity requires, and humility accords,
that we procure and most carefully conserve our good renown.

2. Again, as the leaves of trees, though in them selves of no great value,
yet serve for very much, not only to beautify the trees, but also for the
conservation of their fruicts, whilst they be yet young and tender: so good
renown, of it self not much to be desired, is not with standing exceeding
profitable, both for the ornament of our life, as also for the guard and
conservation of our virtues, especially while they be yet tender and feeble, as
being but newly habituated in us. The obligation of maintaining our
reputation, and of procuring to be such in deed, as men thinck us to be,
forces a noble courage, in a manner, with a sweet king of violence. Let us
conserve our virtues my Philotheus, as jewels very acceptable to God, the chief
and sovereign object of all our actions; But as they that would keep fruict
very long, are not content to stew, confit, and conserve them with sugar, but
with all put them into vessels, fit and commodious for the preservation of
them: so albeit the love of God be the principal preserver of our virtues, yet
may we with all imploye our good name and renown, as a thing most convenient
to keep them in vigor.

3. Yet must we not be ouer-punctuall, nor too curious and exact in
conservation of our reputation: for such as be so tender and ticklish in their
good name, are like unto them, that for every slight infirmity do take
physic. For as these imagining by such extraordinary care, to conserve their
health, do utterly overthrow it: so these jealous defenders of their
reputation, do altogether loose it by standing so much upon it, becoming
therefore fantastical, murmurours, pick-quatrells, and provoke the malice of
bad tongues against them. To dissemble an injury offered, or to contemn it,
is ordinarily a far better remedy, then the revenging or quarrelling upon
it, for contempt of calumniations, makes them vanishe away: whereas if we be
moved and angered with them, we seem to confess and aduow them as deservedly
offered us. Crocodiles hurt none but those that do fear them: nether does
detraction endamage any, but such as are aggrieued therewith. Excessive fear
of loosing our estimation, argues great distrust of the true foundation
thereof, which is the sincerity and unfeigned vprightnes of a virtuous life, and
good conscience. Towns that have wooden bridges over great rivers, do fear
least they should be borne down by every flood, or increase of waters: but
they that have bridges built of stone, do not care but only for extraordinary
inundations: So they that have a soul well grounded in Christian perfection,
do contemn the ordinary excess and ouerflowing of injurious tongues; but
such as know them selves weak in perfection, are disquieted with every blast
of broad-mouthed companions. And indeed (Philotheus) he that will have the good
opinion of all men, loses it with all men, since it is impossible to please
all men with one manner of carriage; and he deserves to loose his reputation,
that seeks to keep it, or have it among the^, whose vices make them infamous.

4. Reputation and good renown, is but a sign whereby we may understand where
virtue is lodged, it is virtue then that must be preferred before all. Wherefore
if any call and count thee an hypocrite, because thou give thy self to
devotion; or hold thee for a coward, and base-minded person, because thou have
put up an injury for Gods sake: laugh at such men's words and opinions; for
beside that such judgments are only made by fools, contemptible idiots, or
vanie braggars, a man must not forsake virtue, nor stir out of the path of
true piety, although he should loose his reputation and fame; we must make
more esteem of fruict, then of leaves, and prefer interior and spiritual
virtues, before external and corporal goods. It is lawful to be zealous, but
not to be idolaters of our credit; as we must not offend the eyes of the good,
so must we not seek to content the opinion of the malicious. The beard is an
ornament to the face of every man, and large tresses of hair grace wemens
heads: if one pull away by the roots (as it vere) the beard from the chinne,
or the hear from the head, it will very hardly grow again: but if it be only
cut and polled, nay though it should be shaued away all together, it would
soon grow again, and wax as copious as it was before. So although our credit
and reputation be cut and shaven, as a man may say, by a detracting tongue
(which David says is like to a sharp razour) we must not therefore be
disquieted, for by and by it will spring forth again, not only as fair as
ever it was, but much more found and beautiful. But if our vices, dissolute
manners, and wicked life, take our reputation from us, it will scarce grow
again, or be restored entirely, because it is so in a manner pulled up by the
root. For the root of true reputation, is virtue and good life, and therefore,
as long as that is alive in us, our fame and credit will allways sprout and
grow, and bring forth fruit of honor and estimation, due to virtue. When
vain conversation, unprofitable familiarity, fond frindship, and haunting of
idle company, hurt our reputation: we must presently renounce and forsake
them, for a good name is of more price and value then all vain contentments
and pass times; But if for the exercise of piety, for profit and increase in
virtue and devotion, for marching cheerfullie toward eternal happiness, men
grumble, repine, murmur, and cavil at us: then suffer these mastiues to bark
against the moon, for though they may be able for a time, or among sone men,
to raise an ill opinion against our good name, and by that means as it were
shave and polle away that ornament of our virtues; they will notwithstanding
spring up again as abundantly as before, and the razour of these malicious
back biting tongues, will be to our credit, as the gardeners hook to the vine;
which by cutting of leaves, and pruning some superfluous branches, makes it
become more fructifull.

5. Let us fix our eyes always upon our Savior Jesus Christ crucified for us,
and march on confidently in his service, simply and plainly, yet prudentlie
and discreetlie: and he will be the protector of our reputation; if he suffer it
to be taken from us; it is either to honor us with a far more glorious
renown, or at least wise to make us profit in the exercise of holy humility,
whereof one only ounce, is better then a thousand pounds of honors and
estimations. If we be unjustly defamed, let us meekly and quietly oppose the
plain truth against false calummation: if then never the less cauills
persevere, let us likewise persevere in humbling our selves, resigning our
reputation, together with our soul into Gods hands, we cannot place it in
better security; Let us setue God in infamy or good fame, according to saint
Paul's example, that we may say to God with David, for thee (o Lord) have I
suffered shame, and confusion has covered my face. I except nevertheless
certain enormious crimes, so infamous, that no man ought to sufferre him self
to be falselie charged with them: when he can lawfully disprooue the defamers;
and certain persons likewise, upon whose reputation and credit the edification
of many souls depends: for in these cases we must with tranquillity and
discreet moderation, stand upon the defense of our honor and good name,
according to the doctrine of al divines.

Of meeknes and gentleness to wards our neighbors; and remedies against anger.
CHAP. 8.
1. THE holy, Chrisme which by apostolical tradition we use in the church of
God for confirmations and consecrations, is composed of oil of Olives, mingled
with Baulme: which beside other things, represents unto us, the two dear and
lovely virtues which shined in the sacred person of our Lord, and which he most
particularly did comme^d unto us, as if by them our heart were especially to be
consecrated to his service, and applied to his imitation: Learn of me (says
he) for I am meek and humble of heart. Humility perfecteth us to Godward, and
mildnes, or meeknes toward our neighbor. The Baulme which (as I said before)
sinketh to the lowest place in all other liquors, represents humility: and
the oil of Olives, which swimmeth always above other liquors, signifies
mildnes and affability, which among all virtues is most excellent and of
delightfullest appeerance, as being the flower of charity: for charity
(according to S. Bernard) is then most perfect, when it is not only patient,
but mild also and courteous.

2. But take heed, Philotheus, that this mystical Chrisme, composed of
meekenes and humility be indeed with in thy heart, for it is one of the
greatest subtilities of the devil, to make many a man very cnriously study,
to make a show of these two virtues in words and exterior complements, who not
examing thoroughly their inward affections esteem them selves humble and meek,
where as in deed they be nothing so; which we may well perceive, because for
all their ceremonious mildnes and humility, at the least cross word given
them, at the very least injury proffered them, they puff and swell like
toades, with marvelous arrogancy and impatience. They say, that those who
have taken the preservative, commonly called, the grace of S. Paul, swell not
at all by the bityng and stinging of vipers, provided that the preservative be
not counterfeit: in like manner, when humility and mildnes are true and
unfeigned, they preserve us from the burning soars and swelling humors, which
injuries are wont to raise in men's hearts. But if being stung and bitt by the
slanderous and malicious tongues of our enemies, we swell with fiercenes,
spite, and rage: it is an evident sign, that our humility and meeknes, is not
franck and free, but artificially counterfetted.

3. That holy and illustrious patriarche Joseph, sending back his brethren
from Egypt to his father, gave them this only advice: Be not angry by the
way. I say the self same to thee, Philotheus, this wretched life, is but a way
to the happy life of heaven: let us not be angry one with another in this
way, but march with the troop of our brethren and companions sweetly,
peaceably, and lovingly: and I mean we should do so roundly without all
exception. Be not angry at all, if it be possible, take no occasion or pretext
what soever be offered, to open the gate of your heart to anger, for. S. James
tells us very briefly, and without any distinction or reservation: the anger
of man works not the justice of God.

4. We must indeed resist the evil, and suppress the vices of them that are
under our charge, constantly and stoutly: but yet mildly, and peaceably.
Nothing so soon tameth the Elephant being angered, then the sight of a little
lamb: nothing breaks so easily the force of canon short, as soft wool: we
esteem not so much the correction that proceeds from passion, though it be
acco^pained with never so much reason, as that which has no other cause or
beginning but reason. For the soul of man being naturally subject to the rule
of reason, is never subject to passion but tyrannically: and therefore when
reason is acco^pained with passion she makes her self odious, her just
government being abased and vilyfied, by the fellowship of the tyra^t passion.
Princes do honor and comfort their people exceedingly when they visit them
with a peaceable train: but when they come guarded with armed troops, though
it be for the good of the commonwealth, their coming is allwaies displeasing
and dammageable; for let them keep military discipline never so rigorously
among their soldiers, yet they can never bring it so to pass, but some
disorder will always chance, whereby the good poor man is iniuried. Even so,
as long as reason rules, and exercises sweetly and mildly the chastissements,
corrections, and reprehensions due to offenses, although they be inflicted
exactly and with rigor, every man loves and likes of it: but when she
brings with her those armed passions of wrath, choler, spite, and rage, taunts,
and frownings (which S. Austin calls the soldiers of reason) she makes her
self more dreaded then loved, and even her own heart becomes thereby afflicted,
and ill handled.

5. Better it is (says the same glorious Saint writing to his frind
Profuturns) to deny the entry to anger, be it never upon so just and
reasonable a cause, then to receive it, be it never so little into our hearts:
for being once admitted, it is hardly got out adores again: for it enters
like a little branch, and in a moment waxes a great tree: and if it can but
gain the night of us, that the sun do but set upon our anger (which the
Apostle forbids) converting it self into hatred and rancour, there is
almost no remedy to be freed from it: for it nourishes it self with ae
thousand surmises and false persuasions: because never was there yet any angry
man, that thought his anger to be causeless, or unjust. It is better then and
easier, to learn and accustom our selves, to live without choler, then to use
our choler and anger moderatly, and discreetly. But if through imperfection and
frailty, we find our selves surprised and overtaken therewith, it is better to
chase it away speedily, then to stand dalliyng and as it were copning with it.
For give it never so little leave, and it will be mistress of the fort, and like
the serpent, which can easily draw in his whole body, where he can once get
in his head.

6. But thou will say, how shall I repress and refrain my anger once heated
and inflamed? Thou must Philotheus, at the first assault of choler, speedily
assemble thy forces together, reflecting upon that which thou have in hand, not
rudely nor violently, but mildly and gently, though seriously and in all
earnest. For as we see in the audiences and assemblies of the senats or
courts, the vshers, with criyng of peace, make more noise a great deal, then
those whom they bid to be silent: so it happens many times, that
endeavoring with impetuositie and many force to assuage our choler, we stir
up more perturbation and trouble in our selves, then the motion it self of
choler had done before, so that the heart being thus troubled, is no more
master of itself.

7. Secondly after this soft and sweet straining of thy powers, to reflect upon
them selves, practice the advice which S. Austin being now old, gave unto the
young bishop Auxilius. Do (says he) that which a man should do. If that cb
chance thee, which the man of God said, in the psalm. My eye is troubled for
anger, have recourse unto God criyng, have mercy upon me o Lord, that he may
stretche forth his right hand to repress thy choler. I mean, that we should
inuoke the assistance of God, when we perceive our selves shaken with choler;
imitating the Apostles, when they were tossed with winds and tempest upon the
waters, for he will co^ma^d our passions to cease, and cause a quiet calm to
ensew. But I admonish thee, that always the prayer which thou make against
this passion of a^ger which the^ possesses and presses thee, be exercised
meeklie, leasurly, and calmely, not violently, hastily, or turbule^tly, and
this self same rule must be observed in all remedies which are applied against
this passion of anger.

8. Thirdly, so soon as thou perceauest, that thou have done some act of
choler, repare and redress the fault immediately, with another contrary act of
mildnes, exercised promptly and sweetly toward the same person, against whom
thou wast angry. For as it is a sovereign remedy against liyng, to unsay it,
and go back from the lie, even in the very place where thou toldest it: so is
it an excellent salve against anger, to apply suddenly, and out of hand, a
contrary act of mildnes and courtesy: for green wounds (they say) are
easiest to be cured.

9. Fourthely, when thou art at repose and tranquillity, and whithout any
occasion or subject of choler, make great store and provision (as they say) of
meeknes, and gentleness, speaking all thy words, and working al thy actions, and
using all thy behaueour, in the sweetest, softest, and mildest manner thou
can: calling to mind that the spouse in the canticles, had hunnie, not only
in her lips, but also under her tongue, that is in her breast: nor hunnie
only, but milk too; for so we must not only have sweet and courteous words to
our neighbor, but they must proceed also from the bottom of our heart. Neither
must we have this (...)-sweet mildnes, which is pleasant and odoriferous, in
our conversation with strangers, and forreners abroad, but with all the milk
sweet behaueour, and fatherly, or brotherly carriage also within doors, amongst
our domestical frinds, and near neighbors: wherein they are greatly to seek,
who in the street be like Angels, and within their house, seem almost devils.

Of sweetness and gentleness toward our selves. CHAPTER 9.
1. ONE of the best exercises of meeknes, is that which we may practice toward
our own selves: never despightfully fretting against our own imperfections.
For though reason command, that we should be displeased and sorry when we
committ any faults, yet we must allway eschew all melancholy, despightfull,
and bitter displeasure: wherein many do egregiously offend, who stirred up a
little to choler and anger, are angry that they be angry, and frett and chafe,
to see themselves chafe; for by this manner of proceeding, their heart is (as a
man may say) soaked in choler; and though it seems to them, that the second
anger, conquers and bannishes away the first, yet notwithstanding it opens an
entrance and a passage, for a new choler at the first occasion that shall be
offered. Besides that these angers, frettings, and bitter chafing against our
selves, tend to pride, and have no other root nor beginning but self love,
which troubles and vnquieteth the soul to see it self imperfect.

2. The dislike then which we must have of our faults, must be a sober, quiet
and settled dislike. For as a judge, punishes much better any malefactor, when
he gives sentence, his reason being untroubled with passion, and his spirit in
calm, then if he should pronounce the sentence with a passionate mind,
because iudginge in passion, he chastises not the faults according as they
are, but according as he himself is: so we correct our selves much better, by
calm and settled repentance, then by sower, fretting, and fuming dislike; for
repentance done with violence of passion, is never according to the heaviness
of our fault, but according to the sway of our inclinations. For example, he
that much affects chastity, will vex himself with an unspeakable
bitterness, for the least fault that he should committ against it: and will
but laugh at a gross sclander and detraction proceeding from him. On the other
side, he that hates the sin of detraction, will afflict his soul for
murmuring a little, and make no reckening of a grievous fault committed against
chastity: and so of others. And this springs from no other fountain, the^
that they judge not their conscience by reason, but by passion.

3. Believe me Philotheus, as the good aduises of a father, given sweetly and
heartily to his child, have far more operation to correct him, the^ choler and
indignation: so when our soul shall have done any fault, if we reprehe^d it
with a quiet and sweet reprehensio^, more by co^passio^, the^ by passion, and
ge^tlie encouraging our selves to amendment, the repentance conceived thereupon,
will penetrate farther, and sinck deeper in us, then a frettfull, angry and
storming repentance.

4. For my part, if (for example) I had a great affection and desire, not to
fall into the sin of vainglory, and yet notwithstanding should have fallen
grievously into the self same vice: I would not reprehend my soul in this
manner: Art thou not a miserable and abominable caytife, that after so many
resolutions, have suffered thy self to be carried after this vanity? fie for
shame, lift not up thy eyes to heaven, blind, impudent, traitorous, and
disloyal to thy God; and such like chafing fumes of reprehension; but I would
reprehend it rather with reason, and compassiuely in this sort. Ah my poor
heart, we are now fallen into the ditche, which we, had so resolutely determined
to escape. Well, let us out again, and forsake it hereafter for ever. Let us
yet again call upon the mercy of God, and trust in it, and hope that he will
lovingly assist us, to make us hence forward more constant, and so let us turn
into the plain way of humility. Courage my soul, from this day we will stand
upon our watch and guard, God will aid us, we shall prosper by his grace. And
upon this gentle reprehension, would I build a sound and firm resolution,
never to fall again into that fault, using to that end, the means convenient,
and especially the advice of my directour.

5. But if notwithstanding; one finds, that his heart is not sufficiently moved
with this sweet manner of reprehensio^: he may reproache the fault to him self,
and check his soul somewhat roughly, to raise a virtuous shame in it: provided
that after he has thus roundely rated and reviled his heart, he end sweetly and
meekly, concluding all his chiding, with a mild quiet confidence in God,
imitating that great penitent, who seeing his soul afflicted, eased it in this
manner: Why art thou sad, o my soul, and why do thou trouble me? Hope in
God, for I will confess unto him, the saueing health of my countenance, and my
God.

6. Raise up again thy heart therefore from his fall, with all reposed quiet,
humble thy self hartelie before God, acknowledginge thine own misery, not
much wondering at thy fall; for it is not strange, that weakness should be
feeble, or misery wretched. Yet for all that, detest from thy heart, that thou
have so often offended God, and with cheerful courage, and humble confidence
in his mercy, return to the path of virtue from which thou have swarued.

That we must handle our affairs with diligence, but not with too much
eagrenes, and solicitude. CHAPTER 10.
1. THE care and diligence which we ought to have in our business, are things
much different from solicitude, carke, and overmuch earnestnes. The Angels
have care of our salvation, and do procure it diligently: but for all that they
take no thought, they are not solicitous therefore, for care and diligence in
our cause belong to their charity: solicitous, and vexing thoughts, be
clean contrary to their felicity: for care and diligence may be accompanied
with tran quillitie and peace of mind, but solicitude is allways joined with
trouble of spirit.

2. Be careful then and diligent in all thy affairs, for since God has
co^me^ded them to thy trust and charge, it is his will that thou take care of
them: but if it be possible, be not solicitous, take no thought for them,
undertake them not with anxietie, and too much fervor: force not thy self in
the matter, for all violent impressions trouble the judgment and blind reason,
and hinder us from doing well, that which we desire to do over earnestly.

3. When our Lord reprehe^ded S. Martha, he said: Martha, Martha, thou art
solicitous, and troublest thy self about, many things. Where thou see, if she
had been only careful, she had not been troubled, but because she was full of
solicitous thoughts, and unquietness, she vexed and troubled her self, and for
that cause did our Lord reprehend her. Rivers which glide smoothely through the
dale, bear great boats, and rich merchandise, and the rain which falls
gently in the champion country, makes the ground to abound in grass and
corn; but brooks and rilles, which run with violent downe-falles, or great
ouerflowings, ruin the bordering villages, and are unprofitable for traffic;
as likewise tempestuous and stormy shewers, spoil both fields and meadows:
Never came work to be well done that was followed with too much earnestnes. We
must dispatche with leisure, and soft fire, makes sweet malt (as the old
proverb says:) he that makes too much have, (says Solomon) is in danger of
stumbling, or hurting his feet: we end our affairs soon enough, when we end
them well enough. Droanes make more hunnie then Bees, and fly much more
hastily, but they make combs only and not honny: so they that take excessive
thought, and go about their business with overmuch solicitude, ordinarily,
neither do much, nor well.

4. Flies disquiet us not by their strength, but by their number: and great
affairs do not vex us so much, as a number of affairs of little valewe; what
soever affairs then befall thee, receive them contentedly, with meekenes, and
repose of spirit, and endeavor to dispatch the^ by due order, one after
another, for if thou strive to do them all at once, the overmuch labor will
tire and werie thee, and make thee groan under the burden, and disable thee
from bringing any thing to good end.

5. In all thy business, repose thy self wholly upon Gods providence, by whose
only means thy designements will grow to a good effect: yet nevertheless
for thine own part be dilligent, and do thy endeavor fair and softly,
cooperating with Gods help: and thus doing, believe what success so ever
folowes thy endeavor, is most profitable for thee (if thou placest thy
confidence in God as thou should) how ever it seem good or bad, according
to thy own particular judgment. Like as little children who with one hand hold
fast by their father, and with the other gather strawberries or primroses alo^g
the hedges: so whilst thou managest the affairs of this world with one hand,
lay hold with the other upon the providence of thy heavenly Father: turning
thy self toward him from time to time, to see if thy husba^drie and labors be
pleasant unto him. And take heed above all things, that thou let not go his
hand, or become unmindful of his protection: for so thou will not be able to
go one only step without falling to ground. My meaning is (my Philotheus) that
amidst thy affairs, and common occupations, which require not so earnest
attentio^, thou thinck upon God more then upon thy affairs: and when thy
affairs be of so great importance, that to be well done, they require thy
whole attention, then also oftentimes thou must reflect upon God; And as they
that sail upon the sea, to arrive at the desired coast, look more often up to
heaven, then down upon the sea where they sail: do thou so, and God will
work with thee, in thee, and for thee, and all thy labors shall be seco^ded with
co^solations.

Of Obedience. CHAPTER 11.
1. CHARITY only places us in the hight of perfection, but obedience,
chastity, and poverty are three excellent instruments to attain unto it.
Obedience consecrateth our soul, chastity dedicateth our body, poverty
applies our goods and substance, to the love, and service of almighty God.
These be the three branches of the spiritual cross, which every man must
bear, all three grounded upon the fourth vnderbraunche, which is humility. I
will not say any thing of these three virtues as they are vowed solemnly,
for so they appertain only to religious persons: nor as they are professed
by a simple vow, for though always a vow gives a peculiar value and metit
unto all virtues, yet for the purpose which here we pretend, it is not
necessary they should be vowed, so that they be well observed. When they are
vowed solemnly, they place a man in state of perfection, but to come to
perfection it self, it suffices that they be well observed: for there is great
difference betwixt the state of perfection, and perfection it self; all bishops
and religious are in the state of perfection, and yet all attain not to
perfection, as we see but too too often. Let us endeavor then, Philotheus, to
practice well these three virtues, every one of us according to our vocation:
for though they promote us not to the state of perfection, they will bring us
to perfection it self, and we all have obligation to practice these virtues,
though not all after one fashion.

2. There are two sorts of obedience the one necessary: the other voluntary.
By necessary obedience, thou must obey thy ecclesiastical superiors, as the
Pope, Archbishops, Bishops, Pastors, and such as are their deputies: thou must
obey thy civil superiors, to wit, thy Prince, and his magistrates, which he
has established over thy country: and finally, thou must obey thy domestical
superiors, father and mother, master and mistress. This obedience is called
necessary, because no man can exempt him self, from the debt and duty of
obeying the aforesaid superiors, whom God has placed in authority, to
command and govern, each one according to the charge appointed unto him over
us. Do then that which they command, and that is necessary obedience: but to
do this more perfectly, their counsels also, must be followed and their
inclinations and desires, so far as charity and prudence will permit thee.
Obey them, when they command such things as are agreeable to thine own will,
as to eat, to recreate thy self: for though it seem no great virtue to obey in
these occasions, yet would it be a great vice to disobey in them. Obey them
when they command things that are indifferent in them selves, or in thy
judgment, as to wear this, or that hab it, to go this way, or that way, to
sing, or to be sile^t: and it will be very commendable obedience. Obey them when
they command hard, displeasaunt, and uneasy things: and it will be perfect
obedience.

3. Obey I say sweetly without reply, promptly without delay, cheerfullie
without repining, and above all, obey lovingly, for love of him, who for our
love made him self obedient, even to the death of the cross, and who (as S.
Bernard says) chose rather to lose his life, then to lose obedience.

4. To learn to obey easily thy superiors, accustom thy self to condescend
and follow the will of thy equals, giving place to their opinions, when they
are nor vicious, or naughty, without all strife wrangling or contention,
accommodate thy self willingly to the desires of thy inferiors, so far as
reason may permit, and never exercise any imperious commands over them, so
long as they be good and virtuous.

5. It is a great deceit and error in us, to imagine that we would obey more
easily, if we were religious, when we find our selves rebellious to such as
God has placed over us.

6. We call that obedience voluntary, where unto we bind and oblige our selves
by our own choice, and election, and which is not imposed upon us by any
other. Men choose not ordinarily their prince, their bishop, their father or
mother, nor many times men their wives, nor women their husbands: but they
choose their ghostly father, and spiritual directour. If then thou choose by
vow to obey, (as we said above, that the holy mother Theresa, besides her
obedience solemnly vowed to the superior of her order, bound her self by a
simple vow to obey father Gratian) or if without a vow thou dedicate thy self
to the obedience of some guide and governor, yet allways is this obedience
termed voluntary, because it is grounded, upon our free will, and depends upon
our own election.

7. We must obey all our superiors, but every one in that, in which he has
charge over us: as in that which belongs to civil policy, and public
affairs, we must obey our prince; our prelates in that which belongs to
ecclesiastical matters; our father, our husband, and our master in domestical
business; and our ghostly father or spiritual directour, in the peculiar
guidance of our conscience, and soul.

8. Cause thy ghostly father, to order dispose, and impose, all the actions of
piety, which thou should exercise, for so they will be more excellent,
clothed with a double beauty and merit; the one taken from them selves,
because they are good of their own nature and substance; the other taken from
thy obedience to thy directour, in virtue whereof thou do perform them.
Happy are the obedient, for God will never suffer them to go astraye.

Of the necessity of Chastity. CHAPTER 12.
1. Chastity is the lilly of virtues; it makes me^ equal to Angels. Nothing
is beautiful but by purity: and the purity of men, is chastity. Chastity
is called honesty, and the profession thereof, honor: it is named, integrity;
and the contrary thereof, corruption. In few words, chastity has this
excellency a part, to be jointly, the beautiful and lovely virtue of soul
and body.

2. It is never lawful to receive any unchaste delight from our bodies in any
sort whatsoever, but only in lawful marriage: for the sanctity of that
sacrement by just recompense, repaireth the loss we receive in that kind of
pleasure. And yet even in marriage, the honesty of the intention must allways
be kept, that though there be some indecencie in the delight taken, yet there
be always purity and cleannes, in the intention and will that receaueth it.
The chaste heart, is like the motherpearle, which receaueth no drop of brackish
water, but only the deaw that falls from heaven: and a chaste heart admits
no pleasure, but only in marriage, which is ordained from heaven: Excepting
only the lawful delight of marriage, it is not lawful so much as in
thought, to entertain voluntarily, and deliberatlie, any voluptuous or
carnal delight.

3. The first degree of this virtue, may be (my Philotheus) to take heed of
intertaining any kind of pleasure, that is prohibited, or forbidden; as all
those, are, which are received out of marriage; and those likewise which are
taken in marriage, but not according to the rule of marriage. For the second
degree, refrain as much as is possible, from all unprofitable and superfluous
delights, although lawful, and permitted. For the third degree, fix not thy
affection upon the pleasures and delights ordained and commanded in marriage it
self, for though it be lawful to use those delights, which are necessary for
the end, and institution of matrimony, yet for all that, we must never fix our
heart thereupon.

4. All persons and estates need this virtue. They that be in widowhood, must
have a courageous and strong chastity, to avoid not only the present or
future objects, and occasions of delights, but to resist the imagination which
lawful pleasures, received in marriage in former times, may breed in their
remembrance, their minds therefore being more subject to unclean allurements,
and unchaste impressions. For which cause S. Augustine admireth the purity of
his dear frind Alypius, who had wholly despised and forgetten the pleasures
of the flesh, though tasted by him sometimes in his youth. And truly we see,
that when fruits are not yet tainted with rottenness, they may be well
preserved, some in straw, some in sand, and some in their own leaves: but
being once tainted with a little rotte, it is almost impossible to preserve them
long, but by confiting or conseruing them in honnie and sugar. Even so
chastity which is not yet violated, may many ways be guarded and kept whole,
and untouched: but being once corrupted, though but a little, can not be
preserved, but by an excellent devotion, which (as I have often repeated) is the
honnie and sugar of the mind.

5. Virgins have need of a merueilous simple and tender chastity, not suffering
the touch of any thing contrary to their cleannes, but to bannisbe without
all delay from their very thoughts, all sorts of curious conceits,
representations, or remembrances of carnal pleasures: which indeed, deserve
not that men should desire them, since Asses, and swine be more capable of
them, then men. Let these pure and louely-cleane souls therefore, never doubt,
but that chastity is incomparably better, more delightful, and more
honorable, then any pleasure contrary thereunto. For, as great Saint Hierom
says, the devil endeavors violently, to force virgins to desire the trial
of these fleshly pleasures, presenting and painting them to their thoughts,
infinitlie more pleasant and delicious, then indeed they are: which many
times troubles them much, esteeming (as this Saint says) that to be more
sweet, which they have not as yet tasted. For as the little Butterfly, seeing
the flame of a candle, honereth curiously about it, to prove whether it be as
sweet, as it is fair; and forced with this fantasy, cease not, till she
burn her self to death

^ching one another, without danger of breaking; and like fruicts, which be
they never so sound and well-seasoned, yet by touching one another, are tainted
with rottenness. Water it self in a vessel, be it never so fresh, being once
touched by any beast, cannot long time be preserved in his freshnes. Never
suffer any man (o Philothee) to touch thee uncivilly, either for myrthe, or for
favor: for though peradventure chastetie may be preserved in those actions,
that are more of lightness then of malice: yet the purity and flower of
chastity, receaueth some detriment and loss by them. But to suffer thy self
to be touched dishonestly by any, is the utter ruin and overthrow of chastity.

3. Chastity depends of the soul as of her original root, and respects
the body, as the matter about which she works. This is the cause that she
may leese her self by all the exterior senses of the body, and by the
temptations and desires of the soul. It is lasciviousness to behold, to
hear, to speak, to smell, or touch any dishonest thing, when the soul
observes it, dallieth in it, and takes delight and pleasure therein. Saint
Paul in one word says: Let not fornication be so much as once named amongst
you. The Bees not only refuse to touch any carrion, but hate extremly, and
therefore fly hastily, from all unsavory smells proceeding from it. The
sacred spouse in the Canticles is said, to have her hands full of myrre that it
droppeth down from her fingers, and myrre preserves from corruption; her
lips are colored with a blushing vermillion, betokening modesty and
shamefastnes in words; Her eyes are of Doves, for their purity; she wears
golden earings, as never daring to hear of any uncleanness; her nose is
compared to the cedars of Libanus, that are incorruptible: such ought to be the
soul of Christ's servant, chaste, honest, clean in hands, lips, eyes, ears,
and all her body.

4. To this purpose will I tell thee what the ancient father John Cassian
reports, as from the mouth of Saint Basil the great: who speaking of him
self, said: I know not what belongs to women, yet am I not a Virgin. For
truly chastity may be lost as many ways, as there be kinds of
lasciviousness, and fleshly delights: which according as they are great or
little, so dee they weaken, wound, or kill it out right. There are certain
particular frindships, and indiscreet, foolish, sensual passions, which to
speak properly, do not violate and corrupt chastity, but yet do greatly
weaken it, and stain the beautiful white of this pure virtue. There are other
familiarities and passionate frindships, not only indiscreet, but vicious;
not only fond, but dishonest with all; not only sensual, but carnal: and by
these chastity is at least sorelie hurt, and wounded: I say at the least
wounded, because it dies and perishes altogether, when these dalliances and
wanton actions, do cause in the flesh the uttermost effect of voluptuous
delight: for then it is lost more vildly, wickedlie, and detestably, then when
it is corrupted by fornication, by adultery, by incest; since these latter
kinds of dishonestie, are only sins; but the former (as Tertuallia^ says
in his book of chastity, or shamfastnesse) are certain monsters of
iniquity. Now neither Cassia^, nor I my self thihck, that S. Basils words are
to be understood of any such filthy disorder, when he said of him self, that
he was no virgin: but he said so only for unchaste and voluptuous thoughts,
which though they defiled not his body, yet did they contaminat his soul, of
the purity and chastnes whereof, all generous and noble spirits are exceeding
jealous.

5. Haunt not the company of unchaste persons, principally, if withal they be
shameless, and impudent, as for the most part they be. For as the he Goats,
licking the sweet Almond trees with their tongues, do make them degenerate
into bitter Almonds: so these wanton souls, infected with the stinche of
fleshly lusts, do scarce speak to any of either sex, but they make them in
some sort, fall from the cleanness of their chastity: they bear poison in
their eyes, and in their breath like Basiliskes. But contrariwise, keep
company with chaste and virtuous people: meditate and read often holy things:
for the word of God is chaste, and makes them chaste, that delight therein: which
made David compare it to the Topace, a precious stone, whose property, is to
assuage the ardour of concupiscence.

6. Keep thy self allways near and close to Jesus Christ crucified:
spirituallie by meditation: and reallie by holy communion: for as they that
lie upon the herb Agnus castus, become them selves chaste: so thou resting and
reposing thy heart in, and upon God, (who is the true chaste and immaculate
lamb) thou shall soon perceive thy soul cleansed from all kind of
lasciviousness.

Of pouertitie of Spirit, to be observed in riches. CHAP. 14.
1. BLESSED are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven:
accursed then be the rich in spirit, for the misery of hell is for them; I
call him rich in spirit, who has riches in his spirit, or rather has his
spirit wholly busied and buried in his riches. The Alcyons make their nests no
bigger then the palm of a hand, and leave but one little hole in them, on the
upper side: then do they place them upon the edge of the seashore, and frame
it so firm and sound in all parts, that when the waves do chance to hoise
them selves up, yet the water can never get in, but they remain floting above
the waves; having allways as it were, the upper hand of the sea, even in the
midst of the sea. Thy heart (dear Philotheus) must be in the self same
manner, open only to heauen-ward, and impenetrable, never giving place to
riches and transitory goods; with which if thou chance to abound, yet keep
thy heart free from doting on them with too much affection: let it in the
midst of great wealth, be always master of thy wealth, above thy riches, not
beneath, franck and free out of them, not entangled in them. No, no, lodge not
this celestial spirit of thine, in these base earthly goods, let it be
always over them, never in them.

2. There is great difference betwixt having poison, and being poisoned. Al
Apothecaries almost, have poison to use at diverse occasions, but they are not
for all that empoisoned; because they have not poison in their bodies, but in
their shoppes. Even so thou may have riches, without being empoisoned at all
with them: if thou keep them in thy bags, or in thy house, and not in thy
heart. To be rich in deed, and poor in thought, and desire, is the greatest
felicity of a Christian: for he has by that means, the commodity of riches
for this world, and the merit of poverty, for the world to come.

3. Ah Philotheus, no man will confess him self to be covetous, every one
contemns in words that baseness and vileness of heart: they lay their excuse
upon the great charge of children which urges them; upon the rule of wisdom,
which requires, that men should diligently lay up means to live; they never
have too much, some necessities are always found out to get more. Nay the most
covetous wretch of all, will not only not confess himself to be such, but
thincketh in his conscience he is not covetous. No, forsooth, is he not; for
covetousness is a monstrous ague, which makes it self so much more insensible,
by how much more violent and burning it is. Moses saw that holy fire, which
burned in the bush, and yet consumed it not at all: but this profane fire,
consumes and deuoureth the covetous person, and yet burns him not; nay in
the midst of his heates, and ardour, he boasts of the coolest refreshing
air that heart could wish, and esteems his insatiable and unquenchable
drought, to be a natural and delectable thirst.

4. If thou desire long, ardentlie, and vnquietlie the riches which thou have
not, it is but a jest to say, that thou desire not to come by them
unlawfully, neither do thou leave to be covetous for all that. He that
desires a long time, with burning thirst, and unquiet wishes, to drinck,
albeit he desire cold water only, yet he gives sufficient witness that he is

content which we show for the loss.

8. Desire not then with a full deliberate, and earnest desire, the wealth and
commodity, which thou have not: and setle not thy heart upon that which
already thou have; discomfort not thy self for the losses which befall thee:
and then thou shall have some reason to say and believe, that being rich in
effect, thou art not withstanding poor in affection; that thou art in deed
poor in spirit, and consequently, that the kingdom of heaven appertains unto
thee.

How to practice true and real poverty, remaining not withstanding reallie
rich. CHAPTER 15.
1. THE painter Parrhasius, represented in his pictures, the people of Athens
by a most witty invention, painting out their diverse and variable humors,
choleric, unjust, unconstant, discourteous, merciful, high-minded, proud,
humble, and cowardly: and all this together. But I (my dear Philotheus, would
do more then all this, for I would put into thy heart riches and poverty both
at once, a great care, and a great contempt, of temporal affairs.

2. Take much more care to make thy temporal goods profitable, and gainful,
then worldly men do. Tell me, the gardiners of great princes, are they not
more curious, and diligent to deck and trim up the gardens they have
commended to them in charge, then if they were their own in propriety? And
what is the reason thereof? because without dout they consider those gardens, as
Kings and Princes gardens, unto whom they desire to make themselves
acceptable, by their good service. My Philotheus, the wealth and possessions
which we have, are none of ours, God has committed them unto our charge to
cultiuate them, and his will is, that we make them profitable and gainful: and
therefore we do him good service when we take care of them. But this care must
be in us greater, and constanter then worldlings have of their riches. For
their labors are for the love of them selves, and ours must be for the love of
God. Now as self-loue is violent, trouble some, and hasty; so the care that we
take to satisfy this self-loue, is full of vexation, of anguishe, and
disquiet; And as the love of God is sweet, peaceable, and quiet: so the care
which proceeds from it, although it be even about worldly goods, is both
amiable, sweet, and gracious. Let us then have this gracious care of
preserving, yea and of increasing our temporal commodities, whenever any
just occasion shall present it self, and so far forth, as our estate and
condition requires: for God will that we do so, for the love of him.

3. But take heed that self love deceive thee not, for some-time it
counterfaiteth so craftily the love of God, that thou would verily thinck
it were the same. Now that it deceive thee not; and that this care of thy
temporal goods, turn not into secret avarice, over and above that which I said
in the chapter going before, we must very often practice, a true, real, and
actual poverty, in the midst of all the riches and wealth, that God has
given us.

4. Always then aba^don some part of thy goods, bestowing it upon the poor
with a willing heart, for to give away that which one has, is to impouerish him
self willing lie, and the more one gives, the more poor he becomes. True it
is that God will pay it and render it all again, not only in the next world,
but even in this present life; (for nothing so much prospers our te^porall
estate, as almesgiuing) but notwithstanding, until such time as God does
restore and repay that which thou have thus given, thou remainest by so much
poorer in deed the^ thou wast. O how holy and rich is that poverty, which
comes by almsdeeds?

5. Love poor folk, and poverty, for so shall thou become poor in deed,
because as the holy scripture teaceth, we are made like the things which we
love. Love makes lovers fellows, and equals; who is weak (says S. Paul) with
whom I am not weak? he might have said likewise: who is poor, with whom I
am not poor? for love made him like those whom he loved. If then thou love
the poor from thy heart, thou shall be truly partaker of their poverty, and
become as poor, as they. But if thou love the poor, witness this thy love,
by going ofte^n among them: be glad to see them in thine own house, and visit
them in theirs; keep them company willingly, rejoice that they approache
nighthee in the church, in the street, and else where. Be poor in talking,
speaking, and conuersing, courteously among them: but be richehanded, giving
them liberally of thy goods, as having more abundance.

6. Will thou go one step farther, my Philotheus, content not thy self to be
poor, but procure to be poorer the^ the poor themselves. And how may that be?
The servant is inferior to his master: be thou then a servant of the poor:
go and attend on them in their beds, when they are sick, I say attend on them,
and serve them with thine own hands: be their cook thy self, and at thine
own expenses, be their landresse, and bleacher of their linen. O Philotheus,
this manner of service, is more glorious then a kingdom. I cannot sufficiently
admire the ardent affection, with which this council was put in practice by S.
Jews, one of the greatest kings under the son, and I mean, one often the
greatest in all kind of greatness and excelle^ce. He waited often times at the
table of the poor, whom he nourished, and caused three poor men almost
every day, to dine at his own table, and eat him self often the relics of
their potage, with such a love as the like has not been seen. When he
visited the hospitalls of sick folk; (which he did very often) he served them
ordinarily, which had the most horrible and loathsome diseases, as lazers,
cankers, and such like: and performed all this service unto them bare-headed,
and kneeling on the ground, considering and respecting in their persons, the
Saueour of the world: and cherrishing them with as tender a love, as any sweet
mother could do her one child. Saint Elisabeth daughter to the king of
Hungary, often times put her self amongst the poor, and for her recreation,
sometimes would apparel her self like a poor woman amongst her ladies, saying
unto them, if I were poor, thus would I attire my self. O good God
(Philotheus) how poor were this Prince and princess, amidst their royal
riches, and how rich were they, in this their admirable poverty! Blessed be
they that be poor in this sort, for unto them belongs the kingdom of
heaven. I was hungry, and you gave me to eat: I was naked and you clothed me;
possess you the kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world:
will the king of the poor, and of kings, say at his great doomes day.

7. There is no man but upon some occasion, one time or other, shall stand in
need of some commodity. Sometimes comes a guest whom we ought, or would
entertain royally, and for the present, we have nothing to receive him in
good sort withal; Sometime our best apparel is in one place, and we our
selves in another, where occasion requires, that we should go better clothed.
It happens another time, that all the wines of our cellars do work, and loose
their taste: so that there remain only low, and green wines, for our own
use. Another time in a long journey, we light upon some cottage to lodge in,
where all things are lacking; where there is nether table, nor chair, nor bed,
nor chamber, nor any to serve us. To be brief, it is a very ordinary thing,
to stand often times in need of some necessary commodity, be we otherwise never
so rich; well, this is to be poor in effect, and in very deed, when we lack
these things. Philotheus, rejoice in such occasions, and accept them with all
thy heart, and suffer them cheerfully, for Gods love.

8. When some inconvenience befalles that empouerisheth thee, either of a great
deal or of a little, as tempest, fire, inundations, dearth, thieves, process,
persecution, or the like, o then Philotheus is the time indeed, to practice
poverty of spirit, receiving with mildnes this loss and diminishing of our
wealth, and accommodating our selves, patiently and constantly, to this
unexpected empouerishement. Esau presented him self to his father, with his
hands all hairie, and so did Jacob likewise: but because the hair that covered
Jacobs hands, stuck not to his own skin, but to his gloves, one might have
taken away the hair from him without hurting him: but because the hair of
Esaus hands, grew upon his own skin, and not upon his gloves, being hairie
by nature, he that would have endeavored to pull of his hair, should have put
him to pain and torment, and he would have striued and sweat to defend him
self from fleaing. When our riches cleave to our very soul, if a tempest, if
thieves, if a catch pole do but snatch any piece from us, what complaints,
what stirs, what impatience presently show we? But when our riches cleave but
only to the care that God would have us take, and do not stick to our heart, if
they fleece us, and despoile us of them, we do not fall beside our selves
therefore, nor loose the quiet and tranquillity of mind. This is the difference
betwixt beasts, and men as touching their clothes: for beasts clothes, stick to
their flesh, and men's apparel, are only cast about them, so that they may be
put of and one at their pleasure, without any pain or inconvenience.

How to practice richnes of Spirit, in real poverty. CHAPTER 16.
1. BUT if thou chance to be verily poor in deed, Philotheus, O God, be then
poor likewise in spirit: make a virtue of necessity, and value this precious
pearl of poverty at the high rate and estimation which it deserves. The
luster thereof is not discovered perfectly in this world, and yet never the
less it is exceeding rich and beautiful.

2. Be patient, because thou art in good company. Our Lord, and our Lady, the
Apostles, so many Saints, both men, and women, have been exceeding poor,
though they had means to be rich, yet they contemned riches. How many great
worldlinges have there been, and are, who even with mighty contradictions and
resistance of their frinds, have endeuoued, and do intend with incomparable
care, to find out holy poverty, and enjoy her company in cloisters and
hospitalls? Witness S. Alexis, holy Paula, holy Paulinus, S. Angela, and a
thousand others; And behold here, Philotheus, holy poverty more favorable
to thee then to them, she presenreth her self unto thee of her own accord;
thou have met with her, without searching painfully after her: embrace her
then as a dear frind of Jesus Christ, who was borne, who lived, and died in
poverty, poverty was his nurse, and his hostess all his life.

3. Thy poverty Philotheus, has two great privileges, by which she can make
thee rich in merits and deserts. The first is, that she came not unto thee at
thy own inuiting, or election, but by the only will and choice of God, who
made thee poor, without any concourse of thy own will. That then, which we
receive purely from Gods holy will, is all way most acceptable unto him,
provided that we receive it cheerfully, and for love and reverence of his holy
will; where there is least of our own will, there is most of Gods pleasure:
the simple and pure acceptance of Gods will, makes patience most excellent,
and meritorious.

4. The second privilege of thy poverty is, that it is a poverty poor in
deed, and in good earnest. Poverty that is commended, cherrished, esteemed,
succored, assisted, and is not altogether poor, it has yet some riches in
it. But poverty which is despised, eschewed, reviled, reproached, and
abandoned of all, is poverty in dead. Well such is ordinarily the poverty of
worldly men, for because they are not poor by their own choice, but by mere
necessity, men make no great account of their poverty, and making no great
account of it, their poverty is poorer then the poverty of religious men:
notwithstanding that religious poverty, has a very great excellency, and
much more recommendab^ by reason of the vow and holy in^ion, for which it was
chosen.

5. Complain not then (my dear Philotheus) of thy poverty. For we complain
not, but of that which displeases us: and if poverty displease thee, thou art
no more poor in spirit, but rich in affection.

6. Be not disco^forted, that then thou art not so well souccoured and
assisted, as is meet and requisite, for in this want consists the excellence
of poverty. To have a desire to be poor indeed, and yet not willinge to have
incommoditie, is an ouer-great ambition: for that were to be willing, to have
the honor of poverty, and the commodity of riches.

7. Be not ashamed to be poor, or to ask alms for Gods sake. Receive with
humility that, which shall be given thee, and take the denially meekly and
quietly. Remember often the voyage, which our Lady made into Egypt, to carry
thither her dear child, and how much contempt, poverty, and misery she was
driven to suffer. If thou live thus, thou shall be most rich amidest thy
poverty.

Of frindship: and first of fond, and fruictlesse frindship. CHAPTER 17.
1. LOVE has the first and chief place among all the passions of the soul:
it is the king of all the motions of the heart, it changes all the other into
it self, and makes us altogether such, as is the thing which we love: take
heed then, O Philotheus, that thou love no bad thing, for then thou thy self
wilt become altogether bad. Now of all love, frindship is the most dangerous,
because other love may be built upon communication, hardly can one have
frindship with another, without participating of his qualities and conditions.

2. All love is not amity or frindship for one may love, and not be beloved,
and the^ is there love, and not frindship: because frindshippe, is a mutual
love, and if the love be not mutual, it is nor, frindshippe. Neither is it
enough that it be mutual, but the parties that love one another, must know and
acknowledge the affection that is between them: for if they know it not, they
have love one to the other, but not frindshippe. There must be also some sort
of communication between them, for that is the ground of amity: and according
to the diversity of communications, frindshippe also is diverse: and
communications are diverse, according to the diversity of goods which they do
mutually communicate: if they be false, vain, and forged goods, then is the
frindshippe false and forged: if they be good indeed, the^ is the frindshippe
true; and the more excellent the goods communicated be, the more excellent is
the frindshippe. The honnie is best, that is gathered from the blossoms of the
sweetest and excellentest flowers: and as there is honey in Heraclea a Province
of Po^tus, which is poisonous, and makes them senseless that taste of it,
because it is gathered from the venomous herb Aconitum; which grows in
great abundance in that country: even so frindshipp grounded upon the
communication of false and vicious things, is altogether false and wicked
frindshippe.

3. The communication of carnal pleasures, is a mutual propension and
inticement to such delights: which can no more bear the name of frindshippe
among men, then the self same co^municatio^ of pleasures among asses and
horses. And if there were no other co^municatio^ in marriage, there were also
no frindshippe at all: but because beside that communication of those delights,
necessary for the procreation of children, there is also in the estate of
marriage, mutual and indivisible co^municatio^ of life, labor, goods,
affections, and of indissoluble faith and loyalty, therefore is the love of
marriage a true and holy frindshippe.

4. Frindshipp grounded upon the communicatio^ of sensual pleasures, is very
gross, and unworthy the name of frindshippe, as also is that which is founded
upon frivolous and vain virtues, which depend only of the judgment of the
sense, I call those pleasures sensual which principally and immediately are
received by the operations and actions of the exterior senses of the body, as
is the beholding of fair beauty, the hearing of sweet voices, touching
dainty bodies, and the like. I call frivolous virtues, certain abilities and
vain qualities, which feeble and ignorant wits call virtues, and perfections.
Harken to the greater part of maidens, women, and young folk, they will not
fail to term such a gentleman wondrons virtuous, and endewed with great
perfections, because he danceth well, he plays well at all games, he goes
decently apparelled, he sings well, he discourses well, he is of a courtely
behaueour. And jesting wits esteem him most virtuous amongst them, that is the
greatest scoffer. But as al other things which depend on the corporal senses
of men, so also these amities, which belong to the^, are rightly termed
sensual, vain, and frivolous, and deserve rather the name of folly, or
fancy, then of frindshipe and amity. Such are ordinarily the amities of
young folk, which respect and affect a trim bearde, fair lock, or goodly
tramells of hair, lovely looks, smiling eyes, gay apparel, idle behaueour,
and fond prattling: frindships only fit for the green age of those lovers,
whose virtue is but yet penn-feathered, and whose judgment is yet in blossom:
and such amities, as they are slightly grounded, so they lightly pass away,
and melt like snow in the sun.

Of love, and love toys. CHAPTER 18.
1. WHEN these foolish amities pass among persons of diverse sex, without
pretense of marriage, they be called rightly loue-toyes: for being but certain
abortiue, or untimely images, or rather shadows of amity, they deserve not
the name of true love or frindshippe, for their incomparable vanity and
imperfection. And yet by them are the hearts of men and women engaged, chained,
and entangled the one with the other in vain, upon foolish affections, founded
upon these frivolous communications, and fond delights, of which but even now I
spoke. And although these foolish loves do ordinarily melt, and turn into
carnal actions, and filthy lasciviousness: yet that is not the first design
and intention of the persons betwixt whom they pass, for then they would no
more be loue-toyes, but manifest and detestable leacherie. Some times many
years pass, ere any such gross wickedness happen between them, that are
infected with this folly: and no action will be committed directly contrary to
bodily chastity: the parties only contenting them selves to steep their
hearts, (as it were) in wishes, desires, sighs, wooing speeches, and such like
vanities, and all this for sondrie motives and pretensions.

2. Some have no other design then only to satisfy their hearts in giving
and taking love, following their amourous desires: and these take not much
consideration in choice of their loves, but only follow the cast of their own
inclination: so that at the first encounter of any object pleasing their
humor, never examining the inward conditions, or qualities, of the party,
they will out of hand begin this frivolous communication of wanton love, and
thrust them selves so far into those miserable snares, from which afterward
they shall have much a do to deliver them selves. Others suffer the^ selves to
walk that trade of vanity, esteeming it no small glory, to take and linck
hearts together by love: and these persons, making election of their love for
glories sake, set up their snares, and spread their sails, in great, eminent,
rare, and illustrious places. Others are carried away both by their amourous
inclination, and vain glory jointly: for though their heart is all together
inclined to love, yet will they not talk of it, without some advantage of
glory. These amities are all naught, foolish, and vain: naught, because they
end and die at length in the sin of the flesh, and steal away the noble
passion of love, and consequently, the heart from God, from the married wife,
and from the husband, to whom it was due; foolish, because they have neither
reason, nor foundation: vain, because they yield no profit, nor honor, nor
contentment: nay contrarily, they loose time, stain honor, and give no other
pleasure, but only a vain desire to hope for they know not what, and pretend,
they understand not wherefore; for it seems still to these base and feeble
spirits, that there is I wot not what, to be desired in the testimonies and
signs which are showed them of mutual love: but they cannot tell what it is:
so that their desire is endless, and has no bound, goinge still onward, and
vexing their hearts with perpetual distasts, iealousies, suspicions, and
disquietnes.

3. S. Gregory Nazianzen, writing against vain women, and loue-wantons, says
merueilous well of this matter; a little parcel of the much, that he directly
speaks against women (but may as directly be applied against men) is this
that follows: Thy natural beauty is sufficient for thy husband: but if it be
for many men, like to a nett spread out for a flock of foolish birds, what will
become of it? he will be pleasing to thee, that has pleased him self in thy
beauty: thou will render him glaunce, for glaunce, one wanton lock for
another: soon after will follow pretty simles, and often times, languishing
loue-tearmes shot forth at random, for an entrance, or first beginning: but
soon after will thou pass to plain and manifestidle talk. Take heed o my
prating tongue, to tell what usually folowes: yet will I say this one truth;
nothing of all those things which young men and maidens, say, and do together
in these foolish passetimes, is exempted from great and stinginge motions of
the slesh; all the tricks of wanton love, are lincked one with another and do
follow one another, even as one piece of iron drawn by the lodestone, draws
diverse other pieces likewise after it. O how well says this great and godly
bishope, what do thou intend to do? to make love? but no body makes love
voluntarily, that does not receive it necessarily. He that catches in this
sport, is likewise caught him self. The herb Aproxis receaueth fire so soon
as it comes near it: our hearts do the like; so soon as they see a heart
inflamed with love for them, they are presently inflamed with love for it.
Well (will another say) I will take but a little of this flame of love. Alas
thou deceauest thy self, this loue-fire is more active then thou imaginest,
when thou make account to have received but one sparckle thereof into thy
heart, thou will be amazed to see that in a moment, it will have seized upon thy
whole heart, and burnt to ashes all thy resolutions, and turned thy reputation
into smoke. The wiseman cries out: who will have compassion upon an enchanter,
stung by a serpeut? I also cry after him: O fools and senseless hearts,
thinck you to charm love, and tame it as you list your selves? you would play
and dally with it, but it will bite and sting you to the heart: and what thinck
you then will bespoken of you? every one will deservedly mock and scoff at
you, that would needs vntertake to enchaunt love, that upon a false assurance,
would put into your bosom so dangerous a snake, which has enuenomed your
soul, and poisoned your honor and estimation.

4. O good God! how miserable a blindness is it, to trifle away in this sort,
upon so frivolous an advantage, the principal jewel of our soul? Philotheus,
God cares not for man, but in regard of his soul: nor for the soul, but in
regard of the will: nor for the will, but in regard of the excellent acts of
love. Alas how much want we of that store of love which we need? the defect of
our love to Godward is infinite, and yet in the mean time, wretches that we
be, we lavish it out and mispend it riotously upon vain and frivolous things,
as if we had enough, and too much to spare. But consider that our great God,
who has reserved to him self the love of the soul, only for an
acknowledgement of our creation, conservation, and redemption: will exact a
very straight account, for all these foolish expenses of so precious riches:
if he make so rigourous an examination of idle words, what will he do of idle,
impertinent, foolish, and pernicious loves?

5. The Walnutte tree endamageth the vines and fields where it is planted: for
being so great a tronk, it draws all the fat and sap of the ground where it
grows, and makes it afterward unable to nourish other pla^ts: the leaves
thereof are so stuffed together, that they make too large and thick a shadow;
and allureth trauailers unto it, who to beat down the nuttes, spoil and tread
down all round about it. These wanton loves do the very same harm to the
soul: for they do wholly possess the soul, and so vehemently draw all the
other motions unto it, that she is not able to employ her powers in any other
good work their entertainments, communicatio^s, parlies, and amourous toys,
are so frequent, that all their golden time, all their good leisure is spent in
them; and finally they draw so many temptations, distractions, suspicions and
other such badde adherents, that the whole heart is tired and trampled therewith.
To be brieffe, these wanton loves do not only thrust out of doors the
heavenly love of God, but with all bannish the fear and reverence of his
majesty, and weaken the spirit, impair their reputation: they are in a word
the may game and pastime of courts, but the mischief, destruction, and
pestilence of hearts.

Of true frindship. CHAP. 19.
1. LOVE every one (Philotheus) according as charity commands, and that
with as fervent a love as thou can: but have frindship only with those, with
whom thou may communicate in good and virtuous things: and the more
exquisite the virtues be, in which this mutual communication is made, the
perfecter will the frindshippe be, that is grounded thereon. If the
communication between you, be in sciences and learning, the frindship grounded
thereon, is indeed very commendable: and more commendable, if the
communication be in virtues, with prudence, justice, and discretion. But if the
mutual communication, be exercised in the acts of charity, devotion, and true
Christian perfection, O God, how precious and excellent will this frindship be?
it will be excellent because it comes from God, excellent because it goes to
God, excellent because it is placed in God, excellent because it shall last
everlastingly with God. How good is it to love upon earth, as they love in
heaven: to learn to cherish one another in this world, as we shall do
eternally in the next. I speak not here of the simple love of charity, for
that must be borne unto all men, but of spiritual frindshippe, by which two,
or three, or many souls, do communicate their devotion, their spiritual
affections, and make the^ selves to be but one spirit in diverse bodies. Such
happy souls may justly sing; Behold how good a thing it is, and how pleasant
for brethren to dwell together. For the delicious balm of devotion,
distilleth from one heart to the other, thorough continual participation: in so
much that it may be said, that God has powered out upon this frindship, his
blessing and life for ever. All other frindships, are but shadows in
comparison of this: their bonds be but chains of glass or iette, in
comparison of this great bond of holy deuoton, whose lincks are all of gold.

2. Make no other frindship but this, I mean of those amities, which thou
make anew hereafter; for thou must not therefore forsake, or despise the
frindship, and amity which either the bond of nature, or the obligation of
fore-passed duties do bind thee unto toward thy parents, knisfolks,
benefactours, neighbors, and others.

3. Many peradventure will say unto thee, that we should have no kind of
particular frindship or affection, because it distracteth the mind, occupies
the heart, engenders envy and emulation: but they are deceived in their
advise, for having seen in the writings of many devout authors, that
particular amities, and excessive affections, do infinite harm unto religious
persons, they imagine therefore, that it is so with the rest of the world. But
there is great difference between both cases. For seeing that in a well ordered
monastery, the common intent and design of all the religious, is to tend to
true devotion: it is not requisite to make any particular and private
communications, of their end, and means to attain unto it: least searching in
particular, for that which is common to them all, they fall from
particularities to partialities. But for those which live in the world, and
desire to embrace true virtue: it is necessary to unite them selves together,
by a holy frindship, to back and encourage one another, to help, and support
them selves naturally, for the obtaining of all piety and goodness. And as
they that go upon plain ground, need not to be ledd by the hand, though they
which go upon craggie rocks, or slipperie ways, do hold one by the other, to
walk more steddilie, and securely: so they that be in religion, stand in no
need of particular frindships, but they that walk in the slipperie paths of
the world, must of necessity have some frind or companion thereby, to succor
and assure one another amongst so many dangerous passages which they are to
go thorough. In the world all aspire not to the same end, all are not of one
mind: one must then doubtless withdraw himself from some, and join him self
to other, and so make frindship according to the pretention of the end which he
intends: This particularitie, makes a partialicie indeed, but a holy
partiality which makes no division, but only betwixt good and bad, sheep and
goats, bees and drones which is a separation that is most necessary for our
souls.

4. No man can deny, but that our blessed Lord with a more sweeter, tender,
and particular amity loved S. John, Lazarus, Martha, and Magdalen, then he did
others of his frinds and acquaintance, for the scripture testifies so much.
All men know that S. Peter tenderly loved S. Mark and S. Petronilla: and S.
Paul his Timothee, and S. Tecla, S. Gregory Nazianzen boasts a hundred times,
of the incomparable frindship which he had with S. Basil the great, and
describes it in this manner: It seemed that in either of us there was but one
soul dwelling in two bodies: for although you must not believe those
philosophers, who said that al things were in every thing: yet of us two you
may believe, that we were both of us in each one of us, and one with in the
other: we had both of us the same prete^sion, to exercise virtue, and to apply
all the enterprises and designs of our life to future hopes, departing in this
manner out of this tra^sitory world, even before we came to die corporally it
S. Augustine testifietht that S. Ambrose loved S Monica exceedingly, for the
rare virtues which he marked in her, and that she likewise esteemed of S.
Ambrose, as of an Angel of God. But I am too blame to hold thee so long in a
matter that is so clear S. Hierom S. Augustine, S. Gregory, S. Bernard, and all
the greatest and deuoutest servants of God, had most particular amities, with
outany breach at al of their perfection. S. Paul reproaching the ill behaueour
of the Ge^tils, accuses the^, that they were people without al affection, to
wit, that they had no true frindship. And S. Tho. with all other good
Philosophers confess, that frindship is an excellent moral virtue: and he and
they speak of particular frindship, since they all say that perfect frindshipp
cannot be extended to many persons: so that perfection does not consist in
having no particular amity, but in having none but good, virtuous, and holy.

The difference betwixt true and vain frindship. CHAPTER 20.
1. BUT now mark an excellent and necessary aduerticement, my Philotheus; The
honny of Heraclea (of which we spoke before) which is so venomous, is like the
other which is wholesome, so that there is danger to take the one for the
other, or to mingle them both together; for the goodness of the one, would not
hinder the harm which might come by the other. He must be upon his guard, that
will not be deceived in these frindships, principally when they are contracted
betwixt persons of diverse sex, under what pretense soever: for the devil
oftentimes changes one frindship into the other. They begin by virtuous
love, but if they be not very wary, fond and idle love will first mingle it
self, then sensual love, and afterward carnal and fleshly love. Nay there is
danger in spiritual love, if one be not very discreet: though in this it be
more difficulty for the devil to cosen us in the change, because the purity
and milk-white cleannes of this love discovers very easily the filth that
satan offers to mingle with it: and therefore when he enterprizeth to deceive
us in this, he does it more craftily, and makes impure affections to slide
into us, almost without our notice or feeling.

2. Thou may discern worldly frindship, from holy and virtuous amity, as
the Heraclaean honnie, is known from the wholesome: the honnie of Heraclaea is
sweeter to taste, then the ordinary honnie is, because of the luscious juice of
the Aconite, for whence it is gathered: and so worldly amity flows with a
stream of honnie words, brings always abundance of passionate speeches, and
affectionate commendations, drawn from beauty, from well fauourednes, from
gracious behaueour, and other sensual qualities: but holy frindship, speaks
simply, plainly, and frankly, and commends nothing but Gods grace and
virtue, the only foundation upon which herself is grounded. The honnie of
Heraclea swallowed down, causes a dizzinesse in the head: and false
frindship breeds a giddines in the mind, making men to stagger in chastity,
to stu^ble in devotion, tra^sporting true and holy affection, to dainty
languishing looks, sensual allurements, disordered sighs, petty complaints
that they are not beloved, to alluring gestures of love terms, poursuite of
kisses, and other too familiar and uncivil favors, which are assured and
undoubted signs of a near overthrow of honesty. But as for holy frindship,
it has no eyes but simple, chaste, and shamefast: no entertaniments or
embracements, but such as be pure and frankly offered in sight of all men; no
sighs, but for heaven; no favors, but spiritual; no complaints, but when God
is not loved; infallible and evident tokens of honest and chaste love. The
honnie of Heraclea troubles the sight, and this worldly frindship blinds
the judgment, so that they which be infected therewith, thinck they do well,
when they do ill, and esteem their excuses and pretexts to be true and
irreprocheable reasons; they fear the light, and love darkness. But holy
frindship has a clear eye sight, and never hides her self, but appears
willingly before honest persons. In fine the honnie of Heraclea, leaves a
bitter relish in the mouth: and so false and wanton frindships, turn to
carnal words, and fleshly requests, and, if they receive the denial, into
injuries, cauilles, slanders, sadness, confusions, iealousies, which often times
provoke wildnes and madness of mind. But chaste and true frindship, is allways
alike honest, mannerly, amiable, and never changes, but into a perfecter and
purer union of spirits, and is a lively image of the blessed frindship used in
heaven.

3. Saint Gregory Nazianzen says that the cry of the Peacock, when he
shows his starrie-wheeled tail, provoke the peahennes to lust: when we see
a man play the peacock, deck, and trim up him self, and then come to parlie
and pratle with a woman without pretense of marriage, without, doubt it is but
to provoke her to dishonestie, and a chaste woman should stop her ears, to
the end she might not hear this peacoks ill favored noise, nor the voice of
this false enchaunter, who would subtillie enchaunt and charm her soul: but
the woman that harkeneth, o God, what an ill sign it is, that the overthrow of
her reputation is at hand?

4. Young folk, which use sweet looks, wanton gestures, secret courtings, or
speak words which they would not have heard or marked by their fathers,
mothers, husbands, wives, or spiritual masters: give sufficient witness,
that they deal about other matters, then of honor and conscience. Our blessed
lady was troubled in thought when she saw an Angel in a man's likeness: because
she was all alone, and he gave her extraordinary, though heavenly praises. O
Saueour of the world, purity fears an Angel in the shape of a man, and why
should not impuritie and frailty, fear a man, though he come in shape of an
Angel, when he praises her with humane and sensual commendations.

Aduices and remedies against naughty frindships. CHAP. 21.
1. BUT what remedy against this wicked seminary of foolish loves, and wanton
impurities? As soon as ever thou feel thy self surprised with this
infection, turn thy self away immediately, and with an absolute detestation of
this vanity, run unto the sacred Cross of our Savior, and take his crown
of thorns to put about thy heart, to the end these little foxes approach no
nigher.

2. Take heed of coming unto any kind of composition with this false enemy;
say not: I will give him the hearing, but will do nothing that he shall will
me; I will lend mine ears unto him, but deny him my heart. O no Philotheus,
for Gods love be rigorous and stiff in these occasions. The heart and the ear
maintain one another: and as it is impossible to stop a strong stream, that
takes his descent from a steep mountain: so it is hard to hinder, that the
love which enters into the ear, make not likewise his entry into the heart.
Alcmaeon said, that Goats do breath by the ears, and not by the nosthrills:
true it is that Aristotle denies it, and for my part I know nothing thereof:
yet this I am assured, that our heart breaths by the ear; and that as it
aspireth, and sends forth his thoughts by the mouth, so it respireth and
takes breath by the ear, by which it receaueth other men's thoughts. Let us
then keep our ears diligently from the air of foolish words, least it infect
our heart. Harken not then to any kind of wanton motion or preposition, under
what pretext so ever it be made, only in this case it makes no matter, to be
discourteous and vnmannerlie.

3. Remember that thou have vowed thy heart to God, and sacrifized all thy love
to him, it should then be sacrilege to take one dram thereof from him: rather
offer it again and again unto him, by a thousand hearty resolutions and
protestations; and keeping thy self close within the^, as Deer within their
thickets, call upon God; he will help thee, his love will take thine into his
protection, that thy love may live for him only.

4. But if thou be already ensnared in the netts of these foolish loves: O God
what difficulty will it be to shift thy self out? Present thy self before the
divine majesty, acknowledge in his presence, the greatness of thy misery,
frailty, and vanity. Then with the greatest force that thy heart is able to
make, detest these loves, which thou have begunn, abjure the vain profession,
which thou have made of them; renounce all the promises made or received: and
with a firm and resolute will, determine in thy heart, and resolve thy self,
never any more, to enter into these fond disportes, and toyish entertainments
of wanton love.

5. If thou could withdraw thy self from the object, it were an excellent
remedy. For as they that have been bitten by serpents, cannot easily be cured
in the presence of them which have been other time hurt with the same biting:
so the person which is bitt with love, shall have much a do to be healed of
this passion, so long as he is nigh the other, which is hurt with the same
sting. Change of place is a sovereign remedy to appease and allay, the
tormenting heats of grief and love. The boy, of whom S. Ambrose, speaks in
his second book of penance, having made a long voyage, returned altogether
freed and delivered from his foolish loves, in which he was before entangled,
and became so changed, that his fond sweet heart meeting him, and saying,
know thou not me? I am the same that I was. I marry answered he, but I am
not the same that I was: his absence had brought him, to this fortunate
mutation. And Saint Augustine witnesses, that to mitigate the grief which he
suffered for the death of his frind, he withdrew him self from Tagasta, where
his frind died, and came to Carthage.

6. But he that cannot withdraw him self, what must he do? he must absolutely
cut off all particular conversation, all secret familiarity, all amiable
glaunces of the eyes, all dalliyng smiles, and generally all sort of
communications, and baytes, or inticements which may nourish this sulphurous
and smokie fire. Or at least, if he be forced to speak and talk with the
party, let him in a round, rough, and resolute protestation, declare the
eternal and irreuocable diuorcement, that is for ever sworn between them: I
cry as loud as I can to every one that is fallen into this miserable
thraldom of wanton love, that he cut, break, and rent them asunder, and not
stand dreaming to vnrippe, or vnsewe these foolish amities: they must cut, and
not stand to unloose the knotts, break them I say, or cut them, because
cords, and strings are nothing worth. One must not be sparing, or courteous,
toward a love, which is so contrary to the love of God.

7. But when I have broken the chain of this infamous bondage, there will yet
remain unto me some scarres some marks, and prints of the slavish chains and
shackles wherewith I was bound; they will stick still emprinted in my feet, that
is in my affections. No my Philotheus, care not, they will not remain long if
thou conceive as great a detestation of thy sin, as it deserves: for so thou
shall never be shaken with any motion, but only this motion of an extreme
horror of this infamous love, and of all things that depend of it: and thou
shall remain free from all other affection to the object which thou had
abandoned, saving only the affection of charity, purely for Gods cause. But if
for the imperfection of thy repentance, there shall yet remain in thy soul
any naughty inclinations: procure for thy soul a solitary ermitage, as
before I have taught thee, and retire thy self thither, the oftenest that thou
can; and by a thousand iterated resolutio^s of spirit, renounce all thy bad
inclinations, reject them with all thy forces; read holy books more then thou
wast wont, go to confession oftener, and communicate more frequentlie:
co^ferre humbly and plainly all thy suggestions and temptations, which arrive
unto thy soul in this behalf, with thy spiritual master, if thou can, or
at least with some faithful and prudent frind. And doubt not, but God will
set thee free from all passions, so that thou persevere faithfully in thy good
exercises.

8. Ah (will thou say unto me) but will it not be ingratitude, to break so
violently an old frindship? O blessed ingratitude which makes us acceptable
unto God! Nay in the name of God, Philothee, this will be no ingratitude, but an
infinite benefit, which thou shall do to the party that loves thee: for in
breaking thine own bonds, thou burstest a sunder also theirs, in as much they
were common to you both: and though at that hour, the other party sees not
the happiness, yet he will acknowledge it soon after, and jointly with thee,
will sing for thankfulness to almighty God: O Lord thou have broken my bonds, I
will sacrifize to thee a sacrifize of praise, and will call upon thy holy name.

Other aduices of the same subject, of fond amities. CHAPTER 22.
1. I HAVE yet a note of imporance to give thee touching this self same matter.
Frindship requires great communication between frinds, otherwise it will
nether grow, nor continue. It happens oftentimes that jointly with this
communication of frindship, other communications do pass unseen, and unfelt
from one heart to another, by a mutual infusion and enterchange of affections,
inclinations and impressions. This happens especially, when we greatly
esteem of the party whom we love: for then we open our heart in such sort to
his amity, that withal, these inclinations and impressions, enter very
easily altogether, be they good, or bad. Verelie the Bees that store up honnie
in Heraclea, do search nothing else but honnie, and yet together with the
honnie, they suck up unawares, the venomous quality of the Aconite, upon which
they make their harvest.

2. O my Philothee, in this case, practice the words which the Saueour of our
souls was wont to say, as the ancient doctors have taught us: be good
bankers, or good exchangers of money: that is to say, receive not false money
with the good, nor base gold with fine: separate the good from the bad, and the
vile from that which is precious. For there is no man almost, but has some
imperfection: and what reason is there, to receive the stains and
imperfections of a frind, together with his frindship? We must love him
indeed, notwithstanding his imperfection, but we must nether love, nor receive
his imperfection, for frindship requires co^municatio^ of good, and not of
ill: wherefore as they that take grauel out of the river Tajo in spain,
separate the golden grains which they find, to carry with them, and leave the
sand upon the shore: so in this communication, even of good and virtuous
frindship, we must separate the gold of virtues, from the sand of
imperfections, and receive those, and reject these, that they enter in no case
into our soul.

3. S. Gregory Nazianzen recounteth, that many loving and admiring S. Basil
the great, suffered them selves so far to be carried away with desire of
imitating him, that they sought to follow even his outward imperfections, as in
his slow manner of speaking, with an abstract and pensive spirit, in the
fashion of his beard, in his strange manner of gate. And we see likewise,
husbands, wives, children, and frinds, who having great estimation of their
frinds, parents, husbands, and wives, do learn either by condescendence, or by
imitation, a thousand such like humors, only by the frequent communication
which they have one with another. Yet ought not this to be done, for every one
has naughty inclinatio^s enough of his own, without surcharging himself with
other men's faults: and frindship does not only, not require any such matter,
but contrariwise, it binds us to help one another mutuallie from these
imperfections. We must indeed meekly suffer our frinds in their imperfectio^s,
but we must not throw them into them, and much less pull them into our selves.
I speak only of imperfections: for as for sins, we must neither bear them
our selves, nor suffer them in our frinds.

4. It is either a naughty, or a feeble frindship, to see our frind ready to
perish, and not succor him: to see him ready to die of an impostume, and not
to dare to lance it with the razor, of correction, so to save his life: true
and lively amity, cannot live amongst sin. They say the Salamandra, puts
out the fire in which she lies: and so does sin destroy that frindship,
wherein it lodges: if it be a sin that quickly passes, frindship will
presently bannish it by correction: but if it be a sin that abides and
soiourneth in our frinds heart, then frindship soon perishes, for it cannot
subsist but upon true virtue: and how much less then ought we to sin our
selves, for frindships sake. Thy frind is a foe, when he would induce thee to
sin and he deservedly loses all the privileges of frindship, that seeks
to destroy and da^ne his frind. Nay it is one of the assured marks of false
frindship, to see

an almond-tree from its kernel, will bring forth all her actions, which are
her fruicts, engraued and superscribed with that same word of salvation. And as
this sweet Jesus will live in thy heart, so will he live in all thy gesture, and
behave our, and will appear in thine eyes, in thy mouth, in thy hands, and
even in thy hair, and thou will be then able to say with Saint Paul: I live
now, not I; but Christ lives in me. To be brief, he that has gained the heart
of a man, has gained the man him self wholly.

2. But the same heart, by which we would begin, requires to be instructed, how
it should behave and govern it self in exterior occasions: to the end men may
not only see devotion, but wisdom also, and discretion in it: for this cause
I will lay down unto thee, a few brief aduices.

3. If thou art able to endure fasting, accustom thy self to fast some times,
beside the fast which holy Church enioineth; for so besides the ordinary
effects of fasting, which are to eleuate the spirit, to tame the flesh, to
practice virtue, to win greater recompense in heaven; it is a sovereign
means, to chain up the devouring monster of gluttonnie: and to bridle the
sensual appetite, and to keep the body subject and pliable to the law of
the spirit. And although one fast not with extraordinary rigor; yet the
enemy fears us, when he perceaueth we can find in our heart to fast
something. Wednesdays, frydays, and saturdays, are the days, in which the
ancient Christians did exercise themselves in abstinence: take some of them
therefore to fast in, as much as thy devotion, and thy ghostly councillors
discretion shall council thee.

4. I would willingly say, as holy S. Hierom said to the devout lady Laeta:
Long and immoderate fastings do much displease me, especially in those that are
yet tender in years. I have learned by experience, that the little Ass being
weary in his journey, seeks to go out of the way: I mean, that young folk
being brought low through excess of fasting, do fall willingly to rest and
delicateness. The Deer run ill in two seasons, when they are charged with
overmuch fat, and when they become ouer-leane. We are likewise most subject to
tentations, when our body is to much pampered with dainty fare: and when it
is over weakened: for the one excess, makes it insolent with ease, and the
other makes it desperate with affliction; And as we can scantly bear it,
when it is unwieldy through fatnes: so can it not bear us, when it is
enfeebled by leanness. The back of this moderation in fasting, in
disciplininge in hairclothes, and other austerities, make the best years of
many to be unprofitable in the chief works of charity; (as it did in S.
Bernard him self, who repented that he had used overmuch austeritie) the more
vnreasonablie they afflicted their bodies in their beginning, the more were
they constrained in the end to spare and favor them. Had they not done better,
to have mortified their body indifferently, and proportionablie to the
offices and labors, whereunto their state obliged them.

5. Fasting and labor both do turn and subdue the flesh. But if the labor
which thou art to do, be necessary, or very profitable to the glory of God,
I had rather thou would suffer the toil of labor, then of fasting. This is
at least the intention of holy church; which for labors that are profitable
to the service of God and our neighbor, discharges such as are busied in
them, from the fastes otherwise enjoined. It is painful indeed to fast, but
bodily labor suffers this pain in serving the sick, in visiting prisoners,
hearing confessions, assisting the desolate, preaching, praying, and in such
like exercises: this painful toil is better then the other; for besides that
it weakeneth the body as much as fasting, it has many more fruicts, and much
more desirable. And therefore speaking generally, it is better to preserve more
bodily forces then are precisely needful, then to weaken them more then one
should: for we may allways abate them and pull them down when we will: but we
cannot repare them allways when we would.

6. Me thinks we should greatly reverence the words which our blessed Saueour
says unto his disciples: Eat that which shall be set before you. It is (as I
imagine) a greater virtue to eat without choice, that which is presented unto
thee, be it for thy taste or no, then to choose allway the worst. For allthough
this later kind of mortification, do seem more austere: the other
notwithstanding has greater resignation; for thereby one renounceth, not only
his own taste, but his own election withal; neither is it a small
mortification, to alter a man's taste at every hand, and to have it in subjection
at all occurrences. Moreover this kind of austeritie, is not so much marked,
nor troubles any man with ceremonious refusals, and exceedingly befitteth a
civil life. To put by one meat, and take another; to scrape and lick every
dishe, to find no mess well enough dressed for us; to use ceremonies at every
morsel: betokens a nice nature, and too attentive to the dishes and
platters. I esteem more that of S. Bernard, who dranck oil in steed of water
or wine, then if he had dronck wormwood of purpose: for it was a plain sign,
that he thought not upon that which he dranck. And in this carelessnesse of
that which one eats or drincketh, consists the perfect practice of this
sacred rule of our Saueour, Eat that which shall be set before you. I except
notwithstanding such meats as endamage our health, or trouble the spirit, as
hot meats do to many men, and such as be spiced, fumie, and windy; and
likewise I except certain occasions, in which nature stands in need to be
recreated, and strengthened, to support some great labor for Gods glory. A
continual and moderate sobriety, is better then violent abstinences, made at
interrupted times, intermingled with many recreations and refreshings.

7. Disciplining the body likewise has a merueilous efficacy, to stir up
in us a desire of devotion, when it is moderatly used. Haire-cloth tameth the
flesh very much, but the ordinary use thereof, is neither for married persons,
nor delicate complexions, nor for such as are exercised with painful labors.
True it is that upon the principal days of penance, one may well use it, with
advice of a discreet confessor.

8. Every one according to his complexion, must spend as much of the night to
sleep in, as is requisite to make all the day after profitable. And because the
holy scripture in a hundred places, the examples of Gods Saints, and natural
reasons, do seriously commend the morning unto us, as the best and most
profitable season of all the day, and our Lord himself is named the
sunne-rising, and our Lady is termed Aurora, or dawning of the day: I thinck
it is a virtuous fore cast, to take our rest somewhat timely ouer-night, to
awake and arise early in the morning; for that time is most favorable, quiet,
and fittest for prayer: the very Birds do then inuit us to our duty, and to
the service of God, to omit, that rising in the morning, is a great help for
health and helthsomnesse.

9. Balaam mounted on his Ass, went to find out Balaac, but because he had no
good intention, the Angel waited for him in the way, with a naked sword in his
hand to kill him. The poor Ass that saw the Angel so dreadfullie expecting,
stood still three sondrie times, as weerie and tired: whereat Balaam in rage
beat her cruelly with his staff, to make her go forward: until the silly
beast, the third time falling down under Balaam of purpose, miraculously spoke
unto him, saying: What have I done to thee, for which thou have beat me now
three several times? and by and by Balaams eyes were opened, and he saw the
Angel, which said unto him: wherefore did thou beat thy Ass? if she had not
turned back before me, I had killed thee, and saved her. Then Balaam said unto
the Angel. Lord I have sinned, for I knew not, that thou had placed thy self
in the way against me. Do thou see Philotheus? Balaam is the cause of all
this harm, and he strikes and beats his poor Ass, that could not do with
all. The very same chances often times

but above all it is necessary well to purify our affections, and refresh our
souls. In all, and over all, keep this rule, never to undertake corporal
austerities, but with advise of our spiritual conductour.

Of company, and solitariness. CHAPTER 24.
1. TO seek company, and utterly to fly from it, are two extremes to be
blamed in civil devotion, which is that whereof I discourse: for shunning all
company, sauoureth of disdain and contempt of our neighbor: and seeking
after it, smells of idleness. We are bound to love our neighbors as our
selves, and to show that we love him, we must not fly from his company: and
to testify that we love our selves, we must take pleasure with our selves when
we are alone. Thinck first of thy self (says S. Bernard) and then of others.
If then no reason or cause urge thee, to enter into any company, stay in thy
self, and converse with thy own heart: But if company chance thee, or any just
cause inuit thee to be present, go thither in Gods name Philotheus, and see
thy neighbor willingly and lovingly.

2. They call that euel conversation, which is kept for some evil intent: or
when they that keep it, are vicious, indiscreet, and dissolute: and such we
must avoid, as the Bees do use to turn away from a swarm of Harnets or
Butterflies. For as they that are bitten by madd Dogs, have their sweat,
breath, and spittle very contagious, but principally dangerous for little
children, and for those of delicate complexion: so vicious, vnmannerlie, and
immodest persons, cannot be frequented, but with hazard, and danger, and in
especial by those, whose devotion is yet but tender and delicate.

3. There be some kind of conuersations, profitable for nothing, but for mere
recreation, which are made by a simple turning or abstracting of our minds from
serious affairs: for such, though a man must not be totallie addicted unto
them, yet we may lend them so much leisure, as is convenient for recreation.

4. Other recreations, have some honesty and good respect for their end: as
are mutual visitations, and certain assemblies, made to do some honor to our
neighbor. Touching these, as one should not be superstitious in practizing
them, so one must not be uncivil in contemning them, but satisfy with
modesty, the obligation, to eschew equally the note of lightness, or
rusticitie.

5. There remain now the profitable recreations, such as are kept with devout,
and virtuous persons: O Philothee, it will always be an exceeding good turn for
thee, to encounter often times such recreations. The vine planted by an
Oliue-tree, bears a fat kind of grape, that sauoureth something like the
olives: and a soul that happens to be in virtuous company, cannot choose
but be partaker of their good qualities. Drones cannot make honnie alone by
them selves, but by the help of the Bees they make it: it is a great help for
weak souls to exercise devotion, to converse and haunt with virtuous persons.

6. In all conversation and company, sincerity, simplicity, sweetness, and
modesty, are still to be preferred. There be some so curious, that no one
motion they use, but is done so artificially, that they make the company
weerie; And as he that would not walk but telling his steps, or never would
speak but singing, would be tedious to other men: so they that ever use an
artificial demeanor, and will do nothing but in print, trouble the company
in which they are, and are always subject to some spice of presumption. Let a
modest myrthe for the most part predominate in our conversation. Saint Romuald,
and Saint Anthony are highly commended and admired, that notwithstanding all
their most rare austerities, they had always their countenance pleasant, and
their words adorned with cheerful alacrity. Rejoice with them that rejoice. I
say, once again with the Apostle: Rejoice in our Lord always, again I say,
rejoice: Let your modesty be known to all men. To rejoice in our Lord, it is
needful the cause of thy joy be not only lawful, but honest also: and this
I say, because there are some things that be lawful, which yet are not honest:
And to the end that thy modesty may appeer, keep thy self from all manner of
insolency, for it is always blame worthy. To give one a fall in sport, to
begrime another face, to pinche one, and such tricks as these, are fond,
foolish and insolent meriments.

7. Besides the mental solitude, or spiritual hermitage whereunto, thou may
withdraw thy self, even amid the greatest conuersations that are (as I have
already declared) thou must love to be locallie, reallie and in very deed
solitary: not to go to the desert or wilderness, as S. Marie of Egypt, Saint
Paul, Saint Anthony, Arsenius, and the other fathers of the desert: but to be
sometime in thy garden, or in thy chamber, or else where, as thou likest best;
where thou may withdraw thy spirit into thy soul, and recreat they self
with good thoughts, and holy considerations, or some spiritual lecture,
according to the example of the great Nazianzen bishop, who speaking of him
self says: I walked my self with my self about sunn-setting, and passed the
time upon the sea shore: for I accustomed to use this recreation, to ease my
mind, and to shake of, at least for a little while, my ordinary troubles. And
upon this point he discourses of the good meditation, which I declared unto
thee in another place; and according to the example of Saint Ambrose, of whom
Saint Augustine recounteth, that him self entering often times into Saint Ambrose
his chamber (for entrance was denied to no man) he beheld him reading in
silence; and expecting sometime, for fear of troubling him, he returned home
without speaking a word: thincking that the little time which remained to this
great Pastor, for refreshing and recreating his spirit, after the multitude of
his affairs, should in no wise be taken from him. So after the Apostles one
day had told our Lord, how they had preached and labored: Come (said our Lord)
into the desert, and repose your selves a little.

Of decency and handsomnes in attire. CHAPTER 25.
1. SAINT Paul admonishes devout women (and the same must be understood of
men) to be attired in decent apparel, clothing them selves with shamefastnes
and sobriety. Now then the decency of apparel, and other ornaments, depend
of their matter, fashion, and cleanlines. Touching cleanlines, it should almost
always be a like in our apparel, upon which as near as may be, we should not
permit any kind of uncomely foulnes, or slouenrie. Exterior neatnes
ordinarily signifies the inward cleanness of the soul. God him self
requires corporal cleanlynesse, in those that approache nigh his altar, and
have the principal charge and care of devotion.

2. As for the stuff, and fashion of attire the comlines, and decency thereof
is to be examined and considered according to many circumstances, of time,
age, estate, company, occasion. Men apparel them selves ordinarily better
upon festival days, according to the solemnity of the feast which is
celebrated. In time of penance as in lent, they rather humble and abase them
selves: at weddings they put on wedding-garments, at burialls, moorning robes;
with princes men set forth them selves according to their estate, at home
they use themselves more homely. The married woman may, and must adorn her
self in her housbands presence, when he desires it: but if she does so in his
absence, one might ask her, whose eyes she meant to please with that
particular care? The manner is to permit more gallant ornaments to young
maidens: because they may lawfully desire to please many, with intent
honestly to win one alone for holy marriage. Neither is it esteemed amiss
that widows, which pretend marriage, deck up themselves handsomely: so that
they show no lightness or fondmes in their attire; for having alredie been
married, and charged with government of a family, and passed the mourning
state of widowhood: they are held to be, and indeed should be, of a more ripe
and settled judgment. But as for those which are widows indeed, not only in
body, but in heart and purpose, no ornament better becomes them then
humility, modesty and devotion: for if they intend to allure men with their
bravery, they are not true widows; and if it be not their intention to allure
men, why do they use such instruments? He that will not receive guests in his
inn, must pull down the sign from his lodging. Old folk be always
ridiculous, when they will play tricks of youth: for these follies are not to
be tolerated, but only in young persons.

3. Be handsome Philotheus, and suffer nothing about thee to traile
vndecentlie, or to sit out of order: we dishonor them with whom we converse,
to come into their company in uncomely apparel. But take heed withal of
wantonness, curiosities, fooleries, and vanities. As far as thou art able,
keep thy self always on plain simplicities side: for modesty without
duplicitie is the greatest ornament of beauty, and the best excuse for
hard-fauour.

4. Saint Peter advertised young women especially, that they should not wear
their tresses of their hair curled, frizled, toured, and tormented, as now is
the ordinary fashion: but if men should affect such fondnes in their own
locks, they should justly be styled effeminate persons. Even vain women,
given to these toys affectionatlie, are counted scant of chastity, or if they
have any, it is not perceived among so many fooleries. They say they have no
ill meaning in it. But I reply (as I have else where said) that the devil has
enough in it always.

5. I would have my frind whom I affect, to be apparelled best of all the
company: but yet with the least pomp and curiosity; and, (as they commonly
say) that he were adorned with good carriage, comelines, and worthiness. Saint
Jews says in one word, that one should be apparelled according to his
calling; so that grave

4. Above all things perform this Angelical office, mildly, and sweetly,
not in manner of correction, but by way of inspirations. For it is wonderful
how powerfullie a lovely and sweet manner of proposing good matters, draws
and allureth the hearts of the hearers.

5. Whenever therefore thou art to speak of God, and of devotion, do it not
slightly, by way of common talk, but with attention, and care: which I say, to
take from thee a notable vanity, that is to be found in many that make
profession of devotion: who at every occasion abound in holy and feruourous
words, upon a kind of bravery, little minding in heart, that which they speak
with their mouths: and after they have spoken such spiritual braueries, they
imagine themselves to be such, as their great words seem to make boast; which
indeed is nothing so.

Of courtesy in talk, and due respect of persons. CHAP. 27.
1. IF any sins not in word (says. S. James) he is a perfect man. Beware
thou let not fall any unseemly word, for although it proceed not from thee with
an ill intention, yet they that hear it, may interpret it far otherwise. An
unseemly word ouerheard by a weak and feeble heart, spreads and enlarges it
self like a drop of oil, falling upon a piece of cloth: and sometime it so
seazeth upon the heart, that it fills it with a thousand, unclean thoughts
and imaginations; For as the poison, which infecteth the body, enters by the
mouth: so the poison which intoxicateth the soul, enters by the ear: and the
tongue which produces this poison is a murderer. For although peradventure
the poison which it has spitte forth, has not wrought his effect, because it
found the hearts of the hearers fortified with some preservative: yet there was
no want of malice on his part, to committ the murder. And let noe man excuse
him self by saying, that he, for his part, thought no harm: for our Lord, who
knows men's thoughts, has said: That out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks. And though we thinck no harm in doing or saying so, yet the
devil thincketh a great deal: and often times does secretly make use of those
wicked words to wound the heart of some feeble hearer. They say, such as have
eaten the herb called Angelica, have allways a sweet pleasant breath: and
they that have honesty and chastity (which is the virtue of Angels) in their
hearts, have their words always pure, civil, and chaste. As for indecencies and
scurrilities, the Apostle will not once have them named among us, assuring us,
that nothing: so much corrupts good manners, as wicked talk.

2. If these unseemly words be uttered cunningly, with willie conceits, or
subtle curiosity, then are they far more venomous. For as a Dart, the
sharper it is, the more easily it pierces our body: so the more sharp and
wittily that a wanton or unseemly word is couched in conversation, the deeper
it penetrateth into our hearts. And they that esteem them selves gallant
fellows, for multiplying such unseemly jests in conversation, know not indeed
wherefore conuersations are ordained; for they should be like swarms of Bees,
gathered together, to make honnie of some pleasant and virtuous entertainment,
and not like a multitude of Waspes, who come together to suck some unsavory
carrion. If any bad companion, speak some misbeseeming words unto thee,
declare that thine ears be offended therewith, either turning thy self to some
other matter, or leaving the company, or by some other means, which thy
prudence and discretion shall dictate unto thee.

3. It is one of the woorst conditions that a man can have, to be a scoffer.
God himself professes extreme hatred against this vice, and has made very
strange punishments alredie thereof. Nothing is so contrary to charity, and
especially to devotion, as the despising and contemning of our neighbor: but
derison and mockery, is never without this contempt, and therefore it is a
grieueous sin: so that the Doctors do say with great reason, that scoffing
and flouting, is one of the greatest offenses that a man can committ against
his neighbor, by words: for other offenses are committed always with some
respect, and interest of the offender, but this is done only of mere
dispight and contempt.

4. As for jesting words, which be spoken one to another, with modest and
cheerful myrthe, they proceed from a virtue called Eutrapelia by the Greeks,
which we may call, good conversation: by which we take an honest and pleasant
recreation, upon frivolous occasions, which humane imperfections do offer:
only this we must beware, least from this honest myrthe, we pass to immodest
scoffing and flouting. For scoffing, provoke to a spightfull kind of
laughter, in contempt and disdainful mockery of our neighbor: but modest
jesting provoke to laughter, by a simple confidence, and franck familiarity,
joined with some witty conceit, without iniuring any man.

S. Lewis, when religious persons offered to talk with him after meals of
great and high matters: It is not now a time to allege textes (would he say)
but to recreat our spirits, with some merry conceit, and quodlibeticall
question: let every man talk decently of what he list. Which this holy king was
wont to say for the nobilities sake, that were then about him, expecting the
favor of his maiefties amiable conuersations. But let us so pass our time my
Philotheus, in recreation, that we keep for all that, a certain perpetuity of
devotion.

Of rash judgment. CHAPTER 28.
1. IVDGE not, that your selves be not judged, says the Saueour of our souls:
condemn not, and you shall not be condemned. No, says the holy Apostle; Judge
not before the time, until our Lord do come, who will light the hidden things
of darkness, and lay open the secrets of hearts. O how displeasing be rash
indgements unto almighty God! Therefore are the judgments of the children of
men rash, and temerarious, because they are not judges one of another, so that
in judging they usurp and arrogate to them selves the office that is proper
and peculiar to our Lord. They be rash likewise, because the principal malice
and wickedness which is in sin, depends of the intentions and counsels of
the heart, which is a dark and unsearchable dungeon for our eyes. They be
rash, because every one has enough to do to judge his own self, he need
not undertake withal to judge his neighbor. Not to judge others, and to judge
our selves, are two things equally necessary for us, not to be judged our
selves: for as our blessed Lord forbids us the one, so his holy Apostle
inioineth us the other, saying that. If we did judge ourselves, we should not
be judged. But o good God, we do quite contrary: that which is forbid us, we
cease not to do, judging our neighbor at every occasion: and that which is
commanded us, to judge our selves, we do not so much as once thinck of.

2. The remedies against this vice of rash judging, must be applied according
to the diversity of causes, from whence rash judgments use to proceed. Some
men there are of so sharp and sower a condition by nature, that whatsoever
they receive, turns bitter in their hearts, changing iugdement (as the prophet
says) into wormwood, never judging their neighbor, but with rigor and
bitterness. Such men have great need of the help of some spiritual
physician, that may teach them how to vanquish this bitterness of heart which
because it is natural unto them, is hardly amended: And though in it self it
be no sin, but only an imperfection, yet is it very dangerous, because it
causes this vice of rash judgment to reign in the heart. Other some judge
rashely not for harshenes of condition, but of mere pride, imagining that by
diminishing and suppressing other men's honor, they advance and increase their
own, arrogant, and presumptuous spirits, which admire themselves, and place
them selves so high in their own estimation, that they hold all men in
comparison of them, to be abject, base, and of no worth at all: so said the
fond pharisey in the gospel, I am not as other men. Some there are that have
not in them this manifest pride, but only of a vain complacence or delight
which they have in their own excellence, consider other men's imperfections, to
taste (as it were) with more content the contrary perfections wherewith they
presume themselves to be endowed. This self-pleasing conceit is so secret, and
so hard to be perceived, that unless one have great insight in diseases of the
soul, he can not discover it: and they themselves that are sick of it, do not
know it, until it be showed unto them. Other there be, that to flatter, and
excuse them selves, and to mitigate the remorse of their own guilty
consciences, gladly judge other men faulty in the same vice, whereunto they
feel themselves to be addicted, as if the multitude of offenders made their
sins less to be blamed. Many give themselves to judge rashly of others,
only of a vain pleasure which they take, to discourse, and prognosticate
other men's humors, and behaueours, exercising their wits, at the cost of
their neighbors credit and good name. And if by mischaunce they chance to
giesse aright in their judgment: they will be bold thereafter in like
judgments, that one shall very hardly draw them from this folly. Others
judge of passion, thincking that best which they love, and that stark naught
which they hate: saving in one case only admirable, yet true, and daily
experienced; whetin the excess of love makes men judge ill of that which thy
love; A monstrous effect, proceeding allwaies from an impure and sensual love,
troubled and sick with jealousy, which as every man knows, upon a bare
look, upon the least smile in the word, condemns the party beloved of
disloyalty, or adultery. To conclude, fear, ambition, and other such like
defective passions, and diseases of the mind do ordinarily contribute toward
the oreeding of suspicions and rash judgments.

3. But what remedies do we prescribe to this disease? There is an herb in
Ethopia, called Ophiusa, the juice whereof being drunck, makes men imagine, that
they see themselves all environed with hotrible serpents: so they that have
swallowed down pride, envy, ambition, and hatred, imagine all things which
they see, to be faulty and defective. These to be healed, must drinck wine
made of palms, and these others must drinck as much as they can of the sacred
wine of charity, and it will purge them of these naughty humors, which cause
them to make such rash and perverse judgments. Charity fears to meet with
evil, so far of is she from seeking after it; when she meets with it, she
turns away her face, and makes as if she saw it not; nay at the first noise
of evil, she shuts her eyes that she may not see it: and afterward with a
holy simplicity believes, that it was not evil, but only the shadow or
likeness of evil. And if by no means she ca^ excuse it, but evidently sees it
to be evil, she turns away her sight, and endeavors presently to forget
the ouglie shape thereof. Charity is the sovereign remedy against al evils
but especially against this. All things seem yealowe to their eyes that are
sick of the iaunders, and they say, to heal them, they must wear the herb
Celydonia under the plants of their feet. The sin of rash judgment, is a
spiritual iaunders, and makes all things appear reprehensible to their eyes
that be infected therewith: he that will be cured of it, must apply the remedies
not to his eyes, nor to his understanding, but to his affections, which are the
feet of the soul. If thy affections be mild, and gentle, such will thy
judgment of things be: if thy affections be charitable, thy judgment will also
be charitable. I present unto thee three admirable examples; Isaac had said
that Rebecca was his sister: Abimelech saw him playing with her, that is making
very much of her, and he judged persently that she was his wife: a naughty
eye would rather have judged her to have been his stroumpet, or if she were his
sister, that he had been incestuous. But Abimelech, followed the most charitable
opinion, that he could gather of such an action. We must always do the like (my
Philotheus) as much as is possible, in censuring our neighbors actions: and if
one action had a hundred faces, we should always cast our sight upon the
fairest. Our Lady was great with child, and S. Joseph perceived it well
enough; but because on the other side he saw her to be pure, holy, and of an
Angelical life, he could not believe that she came to be with child otherwise
then became her sainctitie, in so much that he resolved to forsake her
secretly, and leave the judgment of her innoce^ce to God, though the
appeeraunce of the thing, was a violent argument to make him conceive an ill
opinion of the Virgin, yet would not he judge her, least he should judge
rashely. And why so? because (says the spirit of God) he was just. A just man,
when he can no longer excuse neither the action, nor the intention of him,
whom otherwise he knows to be an honest man: yet will not he judge of the
matter, but wipeth the remembrance of it out of his mind, and leaves it for
God to judge. Nay our blessed Savior upon the cross, though he could not
altogether excuse the sin of them that crucified him: yet did he diminishe
the malice of it, alleging their ignorance. When (...) cannot excuse the sin
it self, let (...) least (according to our Lords example) make it worthy of
compassion, attributing it to the most tolerable cause we may, as to ignorance
or infirmity.

4. But what? may we never judge of our neighbor? no verily: never. It is
only God that judges, even when malefactors are judged in public tribunals
True it is, that he uses the magistrates voice, to make him self the better
understood by us: they be his interpretours, and ought, to pronounce nothing,
but what they have learned of him, as being his oracles: But if they do
otherwise, following their own passions, then it is they indeed that judge, and
consequently shall be judged. For men are forbidden, as they are men, to judge
any man.

5. To see or know a thing, is not to judge or censure it: for judgment, at
least according to the scriptures phrase, presupposes some true or appare^t
controversy to be ended: and this is the reason of that manner of speech, in
which our Savior says, that they which believe not, are allreadie judged;
because there is no doubt of their damnation. Is it not lawful the^ to doubt
of our neighbor? it is not always unlawful, for we are not forbidden to
doubt, but to judge: yet must we neither doubt nor suspect our neighbor, but
when force of reasons, and evident arguments, do constrain: otherwise even
doubts, and suspicions, are rash and temerarious. If some suspicious eye had
seen Iaacob kiss Rachel by the well, or Rebecca receive earings and braceletts
at Eliezers hands, being a man unknown in that country: he would doubtless
have thought ill, of these two rare paternes of chastity; but without
sufficient cause or ground; for when the action is indifferent of it self, it
is rash suspicion to draw badde consequence from it, unless many
circumstances give force to the argument. It is also a rash judgment, to
draw an argument from the action, to blame the person; of which we will by and
by speak more clearly.

6. To be brieffe, all men that have diligent care of their conscience, are not
much subject to make rash judgments of other men's matters. For as Bees in
foggie mistes, or cloudie weather retire to their hiues, to busy them selves
with their honny: so the thoughts of devour souls, never wander abroad to
censure or to mark the doubtful and secret actions or intentions of their
neighbor: but least they should by marking them, fall in danger of censuring
them, they retire them selves by a careful introuersion (as spiritual men
call it) into them selves, there in the closet of their souls, to view and
order the good resolutions of their own amendment.

7. It is the part of an idle and unthrifty soul, to busy her self in
examinge other men's lives: excepted always such as have charge of others, as
well in common wealths, as in private families, and communities: for a great
part of the quiet of their consciences, consists in watchinge diligently over
the consciences of other: Let such men do that careful duty with love and
mildnes: that done, let them keep them selves with in them selves, to be at
more tranquillity, and safer from excess in this matter.

Of slander and back biting. CHAPTER 29.
1. RASH judgment, breeds disquiet, disdain and contempt of our
neighbors, pride and self co^ceipt, and a hundred other pestilent effects:
among which backbiting, and speaking ill of other men, has the first place, as
the very plague of all conuersations. O that I had one of the burning coals
of the holy altar, to touch therewith the lips of men, and take away their
iniquities, and cleanse their sin: imitating the Seraphin, that purified the
mouth of the prophet Esaias, with a coal taken from the altar of God: for he
that could bannishe slanderous lips out of the world, would take away one
of the greatest causes of sin and iniquity.

2. He that unjustly robs his neighbor of his good renown, besides the
sin committed, is bound to repare the damage though differently, according to
the diversity of slanders used: for no man can enter into heaven with other
men's goods: and amongst all exterior goods, a good name is the most precious.
Slander is a kind of wilful and perfidious murder: for we have three lives,
one spiritual which consists in the graces of God: another corporal, which
comes from our soul; the third a civil or moral life, which consists in
our good name; sin robs us of the first, death takes from us the second,
and an ill tongue depriueth us of the third. Nay a slau^derous tongue at one
blow, commits ordinarily three several murders; he kills his own
soul, and his that hearkeneth to him, and takes away the civil life of him
whom he slau^dereth: for as S. Bernard says, he that detracteth, and he that
harkeneth to the detractour, both of them have the devil upon them: but the one
has him in his tongue, and the other in his ear. They have whetted their
tongues like serpents, says David, speaking of detractours: for as the
serpents tongue is forked, and double pointed, as Aristotle says; so is a
detractours tongue, who at one time stingeth and poisoneth the ear of him that
hears him, and the reputation of him whom he back-biteth.

3. I charge thee therefore (most dear Philotheus) that thou never speak ill of
any man, directly or indirectlie: never impose false crimes and fained faults
upon thy neighbor: never discover his secret sins, nor exaggerate those that
are notorious; never interpret in ill part his good work: never deny the
virtue and good parts which thou know to be in him, nor dissemble them
malitiouslie, nor diminish them enuiously: for by all these manner of ways,
thou shall offend God grievously: but most of all by deniyng the truth to the
prejudice of thy neighbor, or by accusing him falselie: for it is a double
sin, of lying, and robbing thy neighbor both at once.

4. They that to speak ill of another, make prefaces of honor, excusing their
intentions; or mingle secret and sly jests, and the praises which they would
seem to recount of another, are the most venomous and mischievous detractours
of all. I protest (say they) I love him with my heart, and as for other matters,
he is a right honest man: but yet one must tell the troth. I must needs say he
did ill to play so treacherons a part. She is a very virtuous maiden (says
another) but she was ouerreached in such an occasion: and such like diminishing
additions, which are most ordinarily used. See thou not this slight of
theirs? The archer drawing his bow, draws likewise the arrow as nigh to him
self as he can: but it is only to shoot it with greater force. It seems
these fellows do draw their tongues to the^ selves, but it is only to let
them ouershoot with greater violence, and pierce more profoundly into the
hearts of the audience, or company where they talk. Detractio^ uttered in a
jesting and scoffing manner, is yet more wicked then the former Seney (they
say) is not a present poison of it self, but slow in working, and easily
remedied, but being taken with wine it is remediless: So speaking ill of our
neighbors, which would otherwise pass lightly in at one ear and out at
another (as they say) sticks firmly in the remembrance of them that hear
it, when it is craftily couched with some subtle and merry quippe: They have
(says David) the venom of aspes under their lips. The stinging of the aspe
is almost without any feeling, and his venim at the first breeds a
delectable kind of itching, through which the entrails and heart open them
selves, and receive the poison, against which afterward there is no remedy.

5. Do not say, such a one is a dronckard, allthough thou have seen him
dronck: nor, he is an adulterer, though thou have seen him taken in that sin;
nor, that such a one is an incestuous person, because he has been once found
in that crime: for one only act gives not name and title to a thing. The
sun stood still once in behalf of Iosuas victory; and lost his light another
time for our Saueours death upon the cross: yet for all that, no man will say
that the sun is immovable, or darksome. Noah was once dronck; and Lot
another time, and withal committed horrible incest with his own daughters;
yet neither the one, nor the other were drunckardes: nor was the latter an
incestuous person. So Saint Peter was not a blood shedder, though once he shed
blood: nor a blasphemer, though once he blasphemed. To bear the name of a vice
or a virtue, one must have frequented the acts thereof, and gotten a habit of
it: so that it is an abuse of terms, to say, one is choleric, because we
have once seen him angry, or a thief, because he has once stolen.

6. Although a man have been a long time vicious, yet we incur danger of
lying, to term him a vicious man. Simon the leaper, called Marie Magdalen a
sinner, because she had been so not long before: yet lied he, for she was then
no longer a sinner, but a most holy and blessed penitent, and therefore our
Lord himself took upon him the defense of her cause. The presumptuous pharisey
held the humble publican for a sinner, peradventure for an unjust oppresser, a
fornicatour, or given to some other heinous vice: but he was foulie deceived,
for when he thought so badlie of him, at that very time was he justified. Alas
saying the goodness of God is so great, that one moment suffizeth to obtain and
receive his holy grace, what assurance can we have, that he, who yesterday was
a sinner, remains a sinner to day? The day past, must not judge the day
present: nor the present, judge the day to come: it is only the last day,
that judges all days. Thus we see, that we can never say a man is naught,
without probable danger of lying: that which we may say, in case that we must
needs speak, is, that he did such a naughty act, he lived ill such a time; he
does ill for the present: but we may draw no consequence from yesterday, to
this day, nor from this day, to the morrow following.

7. Now though we should be wondrous careful, never to speak ill of our
neighbor, yet must we take heed of the other extremity, into which some do
fall, who to avoid ill speaking, commend and speak well of vice. If thou meet
with one that is indeed a slaunderer of his neighbor, do not say, as it were
excusinge his vice, that he speaks his mind frankly, and freely; Of one
that is notoriously vain and arrogante, say not, that he is a gallaunt
courtly gentleman: dangerous familiarities, must not be termed plain and
simple dealings; mask not disobedience, with the name of zeal; nor pride with
the name of magnanimity; style not lasciviousness with the honest title of
frindship; No, my dear Philotheus, thinck not that thou auoidest the vice of
ill-speaking, by favoring, flattering, and cherishing other men in their
vices: but roundly and freely, speak ill of evil, and blame that which is
blame-worthie, for in so doing we glorify God; so it be done with the
conditions following.

7. To reprehend another man's faults and vices lawfully, it is needful, that
it be profitable to him of whom we speak, or to them unto whom we speak.
There be some, that recite before maidens, indiscreet priuities of such and
such, which be manifestly dangerous, others recount, some man's dissolute
gestures, or wanton speeches, tending manifestly to dishonestie; if I should
not freely reprehend this abuse, or that I should excuse it, these tender
young souls who hear it, would take thereby occasion, to give them selves
leave to say, and to do the like. Their profit then requires, that I rebuke
such things freely, before I stir from the place, unless I may prudentlie
defer this good office, to do it with more deliberation, and less interest
of them, of whom those things were recounted, at an other occasion.

8. Moreover it is requisite, that in some sort it belong unto me to speak of
that matter, as when I am one of the principal of the company, and that if I
speak not, it would seem that I approve their vices: But if I be one of the
meaner sort, then I must not undertake to give the sentence.

9. But above all it is requisite, that I be exact, and wary in my words, and
not to use one too much: as for example, if I blame the familiarity of this
young man, and that young maid, and call it indiscreet and dangerous; O God
(my Philotheus) we must hold the balance very even, that we make not things
heavier then they be indeed, allthough it be but the weight of a grain. If in
the fault I am to speak of, there be but only a bare appeeraunce, I will say no
more then so: if but a simple indiscretion, I will give it no worse name; if
neither indiscretion, nor probable appeeraunce of ill be in the matter, saving
only that some malicious spirit may thereby take occasion to speak ill, I will
say nothing at al, or only say the same. My tongue so long as I judge my
neighbor, is like a rasour in a chirurgians hands, that pretends to cut
between the sinews and the veins: so the cut that I make with my tongue in
censuring or reprehending my neighbors actions must be so wary, that I lance
no deeper then needs, that I speak neither more nor less, then that which the
thing it self indeed requires. And in a word, be careful to keep this rule,
that in reprehending the vice as it deserves, thou spare the person, in whom
it is, as much as discretion and civility teaches.

10. True it is, that of infamous and notorious public sinners, we may
speak more freely: so that still we declare in our words, the spirit of
charity and compassion, without all arrogancy or presumption, nor taking
delight in other folks miseries, which is always an affection proceeding from a
base and abject heart. I except allways those that are denounced to be Gods
enemies and desloyall to his holy church: for we may and ought in conscience
disgrace, and debase all heretical and schismatic sects, and the authors
of them: it is charity to cry against the wolf, not only when he is among
the sheep, but whenever we epsy him.

11. Every one is bold to take so much license as to censure princes, and speak
ill of whole nations, according to the diversity of affections that men bear
them: but thou (my Philotheus) must beware also of this defect: for besides
that God is offended therewith, it may raise thee up a thousand quarrels, from
which thou can not deliver thy self, without great unquietness.

12. When thou chauncest to hear any man speak ill of another, procure if thou
can, to make his accusation doubtful: if thou can not do that justly,
endeavor to excuse the intention of the party censured: if that cannot be done
neither; show thy compassion toward his frailty, cut off the discourse
remembering thy self, and bringing the hearers in remembrance, that if they
have not offended in that sort, that they are the more beholding to the grace
of God for the same, and withal recall courteously the detractour to him
self: and lastly if thou know any good of the party detracted, endeavor to
set it forth.

Other aduices and instructions to be observed in talk. CHAPTER 30.
1. LET our talk be courteous, franck, sincere, plain, and faithful: without
double dealing, subtlety, or dissembling; for though it be not good always to
tell the truth in all matters, and in all occasions: yet is it never lawful to
speak against the truth. Accustom thy self never to lie wittinglie, and of set
purpose, neither to excuse thy self, nor for any other cause, calling alwais to
mind, that God is the God of truth. If thou chance to tell a lie, and can
handsomely correct it out of hand, either by recalling it merrily, or by some
good explication, do it: a true excuse, has much more grace and force to give
satisfaction, then a lie never so smoothly told.

2. Though sometime a man may prudently and discreetly disguise and cover the
truth, by some artificial color of speech, yet must that be used only in
matters of importance, when the glory and service of God manifestly requires
it. Excepting only those occasions, such artificial equivocation is
dangerous, for as holy writ says: the holy Ghost dwells not in a
dissembling and double spirit: No cunning is so much to be desired as
simplicity; the wisdom of the world, and subtilitie of the flesh, belong to
the children of this world: but the children of God, walk plainly, without
going awrie, their heart is free from all doublenes. He that walks simply
(says the wiseman) walks confidently. Liyng, double dealing, and
dissembling, are allways signs of a weak, and base spirit S. Austin had said
in the 4. book of his Confessions, that his soul, and his frinds soul, were
but one soul; and that his life was tedious unto him after the death of his
frind, because he would not live by by halfes; and yet that for the self same
cause he feared to die, least his frind should die wholly in him. These words
afterward, seemed unto him too artificial, and affected, in so much that he
corrected them in the books of his Retractations, censuring them with a note
of folly. See thou not Philotheus, what a lively and delicate feeling, this
holy and pure soul had of curious painted speeches? Surely it is a great
ornament of a christian soul to be faithful, plain, and sincere in talk: I
have said, I will observe and keep my ways; that I may not offend in my
tongue. Set (o Lord) a watch before my mouth, and a door of strength and
closenes to shutt my lips, says David.

3. It is an advise of the holy king S. Jews, to contrary or gainsay no man,
unless it were either sin or damage, to let his words pass without
contradicting them: and by this means, a man may be sure to escape all
quarrels and debates. But when necessity constrains to oppose thy opinion
against another man's, use mildnes, warines and dexterity, not seeking to vex
his spirit, whom thou gainsayest, nor to confound him: for nothing is gained
by sharp reprehension, or too much stomach in contradicting.

4. The ancient sages highly commended them that spoke little, which is to be
understood, not of them that speak few words, but of them that use not many
needless, and unprofitable words; for in this matter of talk, we regard not so
much the quantity, as the quality: and in my opinion, we ought for to fly
both extremes. For to show ones self a grave profound doctor, refusing to
condescend to familiar talk, used in honest recreations, argues either some
distrust or disdain. And on the other side, to prate always, and give neither
place nor occasion unto other men to speak their pleasure, smells either of
vainglorie, or of folly and lightness.

5. S. Jews allowed it not for good manners, when one is in company, to talk
to any man in secret, and in counsel, principally at the table: least he
give some cause to suspect, that he speaks ill of others. He that is at table
(says he) in good company, and has any good and merry conceit to say, let
him speak, that all the company may hear him: if it be any thing of
importance, that he would not have all men know, let him conceal it altogether,
and tell it no man while the company is not dissolved.

Of honest and commendable pastimes and recreations. CHAPTER 31.
1. IT is sometimes necessary to ease our spirit, and afford it, and the body
also, some kind of recreation. S. John the Evangelist (as the devout Cassianus
reports) was upon a time found by a huntsman, to have a partrige in his hand,
and to make much of it, and play with it for his passetine: the huntsman
demanded wherefore he, a man of such quality, took delight in so low and base
a recreation; well (said S. John) and wherefore do not thou carry thy bow
allways bent? marry, (quoth the huntsman.) least if it should be always bent,
it would loose his force and strength, when it should be needful. Wonder not
then at me (replied the blessed Apostle) if I cease a little from the rigor and
attention of my spirit, to take a little rest and recreation, that after this
small ease, I may after employ my self more earnestly in contemplation of
higher matters. It is doubtless a great vice to be so rude and savage, as
nether to allow ones self, nor to suffer any other, to enjoy some kind of
lawful passerime, and recreation.

2. To take the air, to walk, and talk merrily and lovingly together, to play
on the lute, and other such instruments, to sing in music, to go a hunting,
are recreations so honest, that to use them well, there needs but ordinary
prudence, which gives every thing, due order, place, season, and measure.

3. Those games in which the gain gotten by them, serves for a price and
recompense of nimblenes of the body or industry of the mind, as tennis,
baloone, stool bale, chesse, tables, running at the ringe, be of them selves
good and lawful: only excess is to be avoided either in the time employed
upon them or in the wager that is playde for: if too much time be spent in
these disports, they are no more recreation, but an occupation, not easing
either body or mind, but weeriyng the one, and dulling the other. After five
or six hours spent at chesse, who is not altogether weeried in spirit with so
much attention? To play a whole afternoon at tennis, is not to recreate the
body, but to tire it: Again if the wager which is played for, be of ouergreat
value, the affections of the gamsters grow out of square: and besides it is an
unjust and unreasonable thing, to lay great wagers upon such slight industries,
so unprofitable, and so little praise-worthie. But above all Philotheus, take
heed thou set not thy affection upon these disports, for how lawful soever any
recreatio^ be, it is a vice to set the heart upon it: not that thou should not
take pleasure in sportinge, for without pleasure there can be no recreation:
but that thou should not so place thy heart upon these passetimes, as to be
allways desirous of the^, and not to be content without them.

Of dancing and some other passetimes which are lawful, but dangerous
withal. CHAPTER 32.
1. DANCES of their own nature be things indifferent, and may be used either
well or ill? but as they are ordinarily used, they incline and lean much to
the worsser side, and consequently are full of danger and peril. They are used
by night, in darkness, and obscurity: and very easy it is for the works of
darkness, to slipp into a subject, so apt of it self to receive evil accidents.
The greatest part of the night is spent in the^, so that by late watching, men
are feign to sleep out the mornings, and by consequence, the means to serve
God. In a word, it is allwais folly to change the day into night, light into
darkness, and good works into fond fooleries; Each one that comes to dance,
brings with him his head brimfull of vanity: and vanity is so great a
disposition to naughty affections, and to dangerous and reprehe^sible loves,
that such badde fruicts with great facility, are enge^dered in these dances.

2. I may say of da^ces (Philotheus,) as the physicia^s do of mushroms, or
toadstooles, though many do eat the^ for dainties, yet (say they) the best of
the^ are worth nothing: and I say likewise, that though dances are much
freque^ted the best of the^ are not very good. They that will needs feed on so
unprofitable a dishe as mushroms are, procure that they be excellent well
dressed; if by no means thou can excuse thy self by reason of the company in
which thou art from dancing, see that thy dance be well ordered. But how must
it be well ordered? with modesty, seemlines, and an honest intention. Eat but
seldom, and in little quantity of mushroms (say the p ysitions) for if they be
oft^mes earen, and in great abundance, be they never so well dressed, the
quantity of them becomes venom in the stomach. Dance little at a time, and
very seldom Philotheus, for otherwise thou put thy self in danger to
affect over much this exercise, so perilous, and apt to bread such badd
fruicts in the soul, as we even now mentioned. Mushroms according to Pliny,
being spongie, and full of wide pores, draw unto them very easily, all
infection near them, in so much that if they be nigh serpents and toades, they
receive venom from them, which is the cause we call them toadstooles: Dancing
sports in night-assemblies, do ordinarily draw with the^ these vices and
sins, which commonly reign in one place, quarrelles, envy, scoffing, and
wanton love; and as these exercises do open the pores of the body that uses
them, so they open the powers of the soul, and if any serpentine companion,
breath into their ears some wanton or lascivious word, or some loue-toy; if
some Basiliske or Cokatrice, cast an amourous eye, an unchaste look, the heart
thus opend, easily entertaineth these poisons. O Philotheus, these impertinent
recreations are ordinarily dangerous; they dissipate the spirit of devotion,
weaken the forces, make charity cold, and stir up in the soul, a thousand
sorts of evil affections: and therefore it is, that they are to be used with
great discretion.

3. Above all, the physicians prescribe, that after mushroms, we should drinck
good wine: and I say, that after dancinge, it is behouefull to use good and
holy considerations, to hinder those dangerous impressions which the vain
delight taken in dancing may have left in our mind. Thinck then; 1. that whist
thou wast busied in this idle exercise, many souls did burn in hell fire for
sins committed in dancinge, and by the occasion of the time and place, and
company, and other circunstances which da^cinge brings with it. 2. Many
religious, and devout persons at that very time in the presence of God, did
sing his heavenly praises, and contemplated his divine goodness. And how much
more happily was their time spent in praying, the^ thine in da^cing. 3. Whilst
thou dancedst merrily, many souls deceased out of this world in great anguish
and dread of conscience; many thousand men and women suffered great dolours,
diseases, and pangs, in their beds, in hospitals, in the streets, the gout,
the gravel, burning fevers, canckers, and infinite sorts of miseries. They
had the^ no rest, and thou had then no compassion of the^. And thinckst thou
not that one day perhaps thou shall sigh while others dance, as thou have now
danced while others sighe? 4. Our Lord, our Lady, the Angels, and Saints,
beheld thee all the while thou dauncedst, how deerlie did they pity thy poor
soul, that was busied in so unprofitable an entertainment!

5. Alas, while thou were thus mispending thy golden leisure, which might have
been far better employed, time passed away, and death drew nigh, and mocking
(as it were) thy indiscreet passetime, inuiteth thee to his dance, in which the
sighs of thy frinds shall serve for well tuned vialles, where thou shall give
but one turn from life to death. This dance is the true passetime of mortal
me^, for in it we pass in a moment, from time to eternity, of unspeakable
joys, or intolerable pains: I have set thee down these few considerations:
God will suggest many other unto thee to the same effect, if thou fear him
truly.

The times to sport and dance. CHAPTER 33.
1. TO sport and da^ce well and lawfully, requires that we use these delights
for recreation of our minds, and not for any affection we bear to the sportes
them selves; that we continewe them but a short time, not till we be weeried
and dulled therewith; that we exercise them but seldom, and not every day, for
otherwise we turn recreation into an occupation. But in what occasions may a
man use dancing and sportings. The just occasions of indifferente disportes are
most frequent: occasions of unlawful are very rare, and such games are much
more blame worthy and dangerous. But in one word, the lawful time and
occasion of dancing and sporting is, when prudence and discretion tells thee,
that thou mst condisce^d to give co^tentme^t to the honest company, in which
thou shall be in conversation. For discreet condescendence is a branch of
charity, and makes indifferent things to be meritorious, and dangerous
things, to be tolerable, and takes many times malice away from things that
otherwise would be badde, which is the reason that games of hazard, which
otherwise would be reprehensible, are not so, when just condescendence does
lead us thereunto.

2. I received great comfort in heart to read in the life of blessed Charles
Boro maeus, the holy bishop of millan, that he co^discended unto the Suissers
in certain things, in which otherwise, he was very severe: and that the blessed
Ignatius de Loyola, being desired to play, accepted of it. S. Elizabeth of
Hungary, was wont to sport her self, and be present at assemblies of
passetime, without hurt of her devotion: which was so deeply rooted in her
soul, that as the rocks about the lake of Rietta, do increase by the washing
and beating of the waves; so her devotion increased among the po^pes and
vanities of the court where unto her high estate exposed her; These were great
fires, and of such property, as to increase with the wind, where as little
flames, be soon blown out, if we carry them not covered.

To be faithful and constant in great and small occasions. CHAPTER 34.
1. THE sacred spouse in the canticles says, that his espouse had ravished his
heart with one of her eyes, and one hair of her head. Among all the exterior
parts of man's body none is more noble, for the artificiallnes of the making,
or the actiuitie, then is the eye; none more base then the hair. The meaning
then of the divine spouse is, to give us to understand, that he accepts not
only the great works of devout persons, but even the smallest and least: and
that to serve him well, and according to his will, is to take great care in
great and little pieces of service, in low and in lofty things: and that
equally in both kinds, we may (as it were) rob him of his heart.

2. Prepare thy self then (my Philotheus) to suffer many great afflictions,
yea and martyrdom it self for our Lord: resolve thy self to give up unto him,
all that which thou esteemest most precious whenever it pleases him to
demand it, father, mother, husband, wife, brother, sister, children, thine
own eyes, and thy life too: thy heart must be ready to yield him up all these
things at a beck. But as long as his divine providence sends thee no
afflictions so sensible and heavy, that they require not thine eyes, at least
give him thy hair: I mean, suffer meekly and lovingly little injuries, small
offenses, and petty domages, which daily happen unto thee. For by such little
occasions employed for his love, thou shall win his heart wholly, and make it
thine own. The headache, the toothache, the rheum, a check of thy husband or
wife, the breaking of a glass, loss of a pair of gloves, of a jewel, of a
handkerchief, a frumpe or mock patiently borne, a little violence offered to thy
self in goinge to bed soon, and risinge early to serve God, and
communicate, a little shame sustained for doing some actions of devotion in
public. To be brieffe, any such slight occasions of patience and suffera^ce
taken and embraced for the love of God, do infinitely please his divine
goodness, who for one glass of water, has promised and prepared heaven to
his servants. And because these occasions offer the^ selves every moment, they
are great instruments to heap up spiritual treasures, if they be well
employed.

3. When I read in the life of S. Catherin of Siena, so many raptes and
eleuations of her spirit, so many wise sayings, and godly sermons made by her:
I nothing doubt, but that with this fair eye of contemplation, she ravished
the heart of her heavenly spouse. And I receive no less comfort, when I find
her in her fathers kitchen making the fire, turning the spitt, dressing meat,
kneading bread, and doing all the low and baser offices of the house, with a
courage full of loving delight in her God. And I esteem no less the lowly
meditatio^s which she made in the midst of thesabiect offices, the^ the
ecstasies and heaue^lie visions which she had so often; which peradventure were
given unto her only for recompense of this humility and abiection. As for her
meditatio^s, they were such as follow, when she prepared meat for her father,
she imagined that she prepared it for our Lord like another martha, and that
her mother was in place of our blessed Lady, and her brethren in steed of the
holy Apostles: in this sort encouraging her mind to serve all the court of
heaven, and employing her self most delightfully in such humiliatio^s, because
she knew it was Gods will. I have set down this example, (my Philotheus) that
thou may know of what importance it is, to direct well all thy actions, be
they never so base, to the service of his divine majesty.

4. Therefore my counsel is, that thou imitate that courageous woman whom the
wise king Solomon so highly commends: she set her hands (as he says) to
great, importa^t, and magnifice^t things: and yet disdained not to lay hold on
the spindle and rock. Put thou thy hands to great things, exercising thy self
in prayer and meditation, in frequenting the Sacraments, to enge^der the love
of God in thy neighbors, and to stir up good inspirations in their souls,
and in a word, to do great and excellent good works according to thy calling,
forgette not for all that the rock, and spindle, that is the practice of lowly
actions, and humble virtues, which like small flowers grow at the foot of the
cross, as, to serve the poor, visit the sick, to have care of thy family,
with the works belonging thereunto, to use all profitable diligence, to avoid
idleness: and amidst all these actions, enterlace such devout considerations, as
S. Catherin of Siena did in her mortifications.

5. Great occasions of serving God, present themselves but seldom, lesser
occasions offer them selves every day: and he that shall be trusty in small
matters, (says our Saueour) shall be established over great things. Do every
thing then on the name of God, and every thing will be well done: whether thou
eatest or drinckest, sleep, or wakest, be it in recreation or business, so
that thou handle thy matters well, and having always an eye to Gods pleasure
and will, thou shall profit much before God, doing all these things, because
that Gods will is that thou do them.

That we must keep our soul just and reasonable, in all her actions. CHAPTER
35.
1. WE are not men, but through the use of reason: and yet is it a rate thing
to find men that are reasonnable indeed: for commonly self love makes us
swerve from reason, conducting us unawares, and almost without our knowledge or
feeling, to a thousand sort of small; yet dangerous, unjust and unreasonable
actions; which like the little foxes in the Canticles, root up the fruictfull
vines; for because they are little, me^ take no great heed of them: and because
they are many in number, they let not to do harm enough.

2. These things which now I will reken are they not unjust, and against true
reason? we accuse our neighbors upon every light occasion, and excuse our
selves in all things; we would sell very deer, and buy very cheap: we
desire that justice should be exequuted in another man's house, but mercy and
clemency in our own. Our words must be taken in good part, and yet we are
captious and cavil precisely at other men's speeches. We would have our
neighbor leave us his goods for our money: but is it not more reasonable, that
he should keep his goods, leaving us our money? we are discontented with him,
because he will not help us to his own in commodity: is it not more reason
we should reprehe^d our selves, for desiring to hinder his commodity?

3. If we affect one kind of exercise, we discommend all other: and controlle
and condemn all that displeases us. If any of our inferiors have no great
good grace in his person or actions, or that we have a tooth against him, do
he what he will, and do he it never so well we take it ill, and never cease to
contristate him, and to be always ready to challenge him. Contrariwise, if any
be acceptable to us, and seem to us of a good grace and carriage, he can do
nothing so disorderly but we will excuse it. There are many virtuous children
whom their father and mother scarce abide to look upon, because of some bodily
imperfection: and many vicious that are their parents minions, and are
cockered up daintelie, only for some corporal well fauourednesse. In all
things we prefer the rich before the poor, allthough they be neither of
better condition, nor more virtuous: nay we prefer him that has the gayest
clothes. We will have our own due exactly, but others must be courteous in
dema^ding their due of us; we keep our rank and place very precisely, but
would have other men humble and condescend; we complain easilye of others, but
will hear no complaints of our selves: That little which we do for other men,
seems in our eye and judgment very much, but whatsoever service or good
turn an other man does to us, it seems to our sight in a manner nothing. In
a word we are much like the partridges of Paphlagonia which are said to have
two hearts, for to our selves and in favor of our own right, we have a heart
that is sweet benign and liberal, but to our neighbor a hard, severe and
rigerous heart. We have tow sorts of balances, the one to weighe our own
commodities with all aduau^tage possible, the other to weighe with all
disadauntage what we deliver to our neighbor. And as the scripture says,
deceiptful lips have spoken in heart and heart, that is to say they have two
hearts, and two weights, to receive a heavy and full weighte, to deliver a
light and skant weighte, is abominable before God.

4. Philotheus observe equallitye and justice in all thy actions; imagine thy
self in thy neighbors place, and him in thine: and so shallt thou judge
arighte. When thou sellest, think thy self the buyer, and buyinge, proceed
as if thou were the seller, for thus thou will be sure to deal justly in all
the bargains and co^tracts. All these inequallityes I confess are light and
bind not to restitution, because we exceed not the limittes of that rigor
which we may lawfully use in favor of our own right: yet notwithstanding
they are great defects of reason, and charity, and consequently bind us to
procure the amendme^te thereof especially since the things which we forsake in
this amendment, are but mere trifles. For what does a man leese by living
gentlemanly, nobly, courteously, with a royal, free and liberal heart.

5. Let this then be thy particular care Philotheus, to examine thy heart, and
see whether it be so affected toward thy neighbor, as thou would have him
affected toward thee, if thou were in his place: for in that stands the trial
of true reason. Traianus the Emperor, being blamed by his faithful frinds,
for making the imperial majesty (as it seemed to the^) too familiar and
common: very well quoth he, and why should not I show in my self being
Emperor, such an affection to every man in particular, as I my self, if I
were a particular and private man, would desire to find in my Emperor.

Of desires. CHAP. 36.
1. EVERY one knows, that he must in no sort desire any thing which is
naughty and vicious: for the desire of evil makes us evil. But I say more
unto thee, Philotheus, desire not in any case those things, which be dangerous
to the soul, as dancing, gaming, and other such pastimes; nor honors and
places of charge; no nor admirable visions, nor heavenly ecstasies, for all these
things are much subject to vain glory, and deceit.

2. Desire not things which are far of from thee, that cannot come to pass
according to thy desire, but after some long time; as many do, who therefore do
weerie and distract their hearts unprofitably, and put the^ selves in danger of
great disquiet. If a young man desire much to be provided of some great office
and charge, before the time be come, to what purpose serves this desire of
his? if a married woman desires to be a nun, to what purpose? If I desire to
buy the goods of my neighbor, before he desire to sell the^, loose I not my
labor in such a fruitless desire? If being sore sick, I desire to preach or
to say mass, or to visit others that be sick, and perform other exercises of
men that be in perfect health: be not these vain desires, since it is not in
my power to bring the^ to effect? And yet besides this vanity of these
unprofitable desires, they occupy the place of other better desires which I
should have, to be patient, resigned, well mortified, very obedient, meek, and
mild in adversities, which is the thing that God wills that I should practice
at that time; but we admit as fond desires as women great with child, that
long for cherries and strawberies in autumn, and for fresh grapes, in the
springtime.

3. I can not approve in any sort, that men addicted to one kind of estate and
vocation, should desire any other kind of life, then that which befitteth their
calling, or busy them selves in exercises, incompatible with their present
condition: for such desires distract the heart, and altogether destroy the
necessary occupations belonging to his estate. If I desire the solitarye life
of a Carthusian, I do but lose my time, for these desires occupy the time and
place of those, which I should have for the well imployinge of my self in
things belonginge to my present office. No surely, I would not that men
should be still desyringe better spiritts, better wits, better judgments, for
these desires are but vain, and only serve to hinder those thoughts and
cares which every one should have of betteringe those parts which God
allmightye has endued allreadye him withal. No I would not that one should
desire better means to serve God almightye, then which allreadie he has, but
that he labor and endeavor to employe these well and profitallie: this in
deed is to be understood of desires that, as it were, still possess the
heart, for simple wishes if they be not too frequent, do no harm or
hinderaunce.

4. Desire not further crosses and afflictions, but according as thou haste
found thy self disposed and able to bear those which God almighty has
allreadye sent thee. If a less injury we can not endure without repininge,
were it not vain and foolish to desire martyrdom? About objects imaginarye
and such things as shall never come to pass, our enemy moves to great and
magnanimious desires, and all to the end of euertinge us from the
consideration of things present, wherein (how mean soever) we might
exercise our selves with great profitte, we imagine combatts with the terrible
monsters of Afrique, and in the mean time for want of care and heed, suffer
our selves, in effect to be vanquishte and slain, by the poor snailes that
lie in our way.

5. Seek not after temptations, for that were temeritye and rashness, but
prepare thy heart to expecte the^ courageously, and to receive them when God
permittes them to come.

6. Varietye of meats (especially if the quantity be great) do always
ouercharge the stomach, yea if it be weakeouerthroweth it. Ouercharge not thou
thy soul with multitude of thoughts: not worldly, for these will be thy utter
overthrow, nor yet spiritual, for they will molest thee.

7. When the soul is purged, and discharged of her ill humors, she feels in
her self, an earnest appetite of spiritual delights, and like a hunger starned
person, sets her desire upon a thousand sorts of exercises of piety, of
mortificatio^, of penance, of humility, of charity and prayer: my
Philotheus, it is a good sign to have so good an appetite, but consider
discreetly whether thou can well digest all that which thou desire to
eat. Then take advise of thy ghostly father, which of all these many holy
desires, may presently be put in execution, and make thy uttermost profit of
them: And that done, God will give thee other good desires, which thou may
exequute in their time and season: and so thou shall not loose thy time in
nourishing impossible, and un profitable desires.

8. Yet my meaning is not, that one should reject all good desires whatsoever:
but that one should endeavor discreetly, to produce and prosequute them, every
one in their due order: so that these good purposes, which cannot presently
have their effect, be (as it were) locked up in a corner of our heart, until
the time come in which they may be brought to issue and practice. In the mean
season, while those desires expect their time, procure to effectuat those which
be already ripe, and in their season. And this advise is not only true in
spiritual desires, but even in wordly purposes, in which likewise if order be
not kept, they them selves can never live in quiet and contentment.

Aduertisments for those which are married. CHAP. 37.
1. MARRIAGE is a great Sacrament, I say in Jesus Christ and in his church; it
is honorable to all, amongst all, and in all: that is, in all the parts and
circumstances thereof; to all, because even the virgins, them selves ought to
reverence it with humility: amongst all, because it is equally holy in rich,
and in poor: in all, because the beginning, the end and intention, the
commodities and profits, the form and matter of it, all are holy. Marriage is
the nurserie of Christianity, which peopleth the earth with faithful souls,
to accomplish the number of the elect in heaven: so that the conversation of
all the rights and laws of the holy estate of wedlock, is most necessary in
the common wealth, as the spring and fountain, of all these rivers.

2. Would to God that his most deer Son were invited to all marriages, as he
was to the marriage in Cana: for then the precious wine of blessing and
consolation, should never want: and if in ordinary weddings we find but a
little of that sweet wine, it is because Adonis is invited to the wedding feast,
in steed of our Saueour, and Venus in steed of our Lady. He that would have
his lambs fair and parti-colored as Jacobs were, must imitate his industry,
and present parti-colored rods to the ewes when they assemble to conceive:
and he that would enjoy a happy success of his marriage, should always place
before his eyes the sanctity, and excellence of this Sacrament. But alas
instead of these, ordinarily we see arrive a thousand disorders in pastimes,
feastinge, and unseemly talking: and therefore no marvel, if the success of
their marriages be disordered.

3. Therefore I exhort all those which are in the holy estate of wedlock, that
they love one another with that mutual love, which the holy Ghost commends so
much in the scripture. It is not enough to say to married folk, that they
should love one another with a natural love, for so do the Turtle doves: not
with a humane love, for the very painims have well practiced that sort of love:
but I say with the great Apostle: You that are married, love your wives, as
Jesus Christ loved his church: and you wives love your housbands, as the church
loves her Savior. It was God that brought Eve to our first father Adam, and
gave him her for his wife: it is also the self same God, who with his invisible
hand, has tied the knot of the holy band of your marriage, and has given you
power one over the other: why then should you not one cherish the other, with a
holy, supernatural, and divine love?

4. The first effect of this love, is the inseparable union of your hearts. Two
pieces of fur tree glewed together, cleave so fast one to the other, that
you may sooner break the whole piece in any other place, then in that part in
which they were glued. But God joined man to woman in his own blood, for which
cause this union is so strong, that rather the soul should forsake the body,
then the husband be separated from his wife: and understand this inseparable
union which I speak of, not only of the body, but principally of the soul,
and sincere affection of the heart.

5. The second effect of this love is inviolable loyalty, of the one party to
the other. In old time men used to engraue their seals upon the rings which
they wore continually, as the holy scripture it self does testify: and from
this custom of antiquity may we draw a fit interpretation of the ceremony
which holy Church uses in the Sacrament of marriage. For the priest halowinge
the wedding ringe, and giving it first to the man, protests that this holy
Sacrament so seals and closes his heart, that never after the name or love of
any other woman, may lawfully enter into it, so long as she lives, whom God
has given unto him. And the husband presently puts the ring upon his wives
finger, that she likewise may understand, that her heart is now sealed and
shutt up, from love or though of any other man, so long as he lives, whom
there our Saueour gives unto her.

6. The third fruit of matrimonial love, is the lawful generation, and the
careful education of children. It is an in explicable honor to you that are
married, that God by his omnipotent power, determining to multiply reasonnable
souls, which might praise him for ever, would make you as it were his feelow
laborers in so worthy a work, giving you the privilege and honor to
engender bodies, into the which he distilles the new created soul, like
celestial dropes into the bodies.

7. Conserve then, you housbands, a tender, constant, and hearty love toward
your wives: for therefore was the woman taken from the side of man, and next
his heart, that she should be beloved of him hartylie and tenderly. The
infirmities of your wives, corporal or spiritual, must not provoke you to any
disdaigne or loathing of them, but rather to a sweet and lovely compassion:
since God therefore created them, that depending always on you, you should
thereby be more honored, and respected; and that you should have them in such
sort for your companions that nevertheless you should be their heads and
superiors. And you, o women, love your husbands tenderly and hartelie, but
let your love befull of respect, and reverence, for therefore did God create
them of a sex more vigourous and predominant; therefore did he ordain that a
woman should be a portion of man, bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh; and
that she should be made of a ribbe of his, and taken from under his arm, to
teach her, that she should be under the hand and guiding of her husband: and
holy scripture very straightly recomme^deth unto you this subjection: which
notwithstanding the self same scripture makes sweet and delectable unto you;
not only aduising you to accept thereof with love and affection, but
prescribing also unto your husbands, how they should exercise their authority
and command over you, with all patience, meeknes, and gentle sufferance:
Housbands (says Saint Peter) behave your selves discreetlie toward your
wives, as weaker vessels, bearing them honor and respect.

8. But while I exhort you more and more to increase this holy mutual love,
which you owe one to another, beware you change it not into jealousy. For as
worms breed ordinarily in the ripest and delicatest apples: so many times it
happiness, that jealousy grows from ardent and excessliue love, between man
and wife, and marreth and corrupts the very pithe and substance of the holy
state of wedlock, breeding by little and little, troublesome braules,
dissentions, and diuorcements. This jealousy has no place where mutual love
is grounded upon true virtue: and therefore it is an infallible mark of a love,
in part at least gross and sensual, which has met with a weak and
inconstante virtue, and subject to mistrust and suspect. And it is a very
vain boastinge of love, to make it seem great, by being jealous: for
jealousy may well be a sign of great and ardent love, but not of pure,
perfect and constant amity: for the perfection of frindship and true love,
presupposes the assured foundation of true virtue, and jealousy presupposes
the uncertainty of the same.

9. If you desire, o husbands, that your wives be faithful unto you, give
them a lesson of this loyalty by your own example. With what face (says
Saint Gregory Naziazen) can you exact chastity of your wives, when you your
selves live uncleanly? how can you require of them, that which you give them
not? Will you have them chaste in deed? behave your selves chastely: And, (as
Saint Paul says) let every man, know how to possess his own vesselin
sanctification. For if contrary to this doctrine of the Apostle, you your
selves teach them loose behaueour, and wanton tricks, no meruall if you
receive dishonor by loss of their honesty: But you (o women) whose honor and
reputation is inseparably joined with your honesty and chastity, be tealouse
(in a manner) of this your glory, and suffer no kind of wantonness, to
blemish your credit and estimation.

10. You that desire to have the name and merit of chaste and worthy matrons,
fly all kind of assaults, all manner of courting, be it never so little:
suffer not any wanton gestures nigh you: suspect him, whosoever he be, that
commends your beauty, and good grace: for he that earnestly praises
merchandise which he is not able to buy, gives a shrewd suspicion, that he
means to steal it. But if jointly with praises of your beauty, any man
discommend your husbands, detest him as one that offers you heinous injury;
for it is evident, that such a one not only seeks your ruin and overthrow,
but accounts you alredie half overcome: because we see ordinarily, that the
bargain is half made with the second chap man, when the first displeases the
merchant. Gentlewomen, as well in time past, as now a days, wear many
pearls in their ears, delighted (as Pliny thought) with the pretty rattling
noise which they make, in touching one another. Why they wore them I care not,
I thinck verelie Isaac, that great servant and frind of God, sent precious
earings as the first pledge of his love, to the fair and chaste Rebecca, as a
mystical ornament betokening, that the first part which a husband should take
possession of in his wife, must be her ears, which his wife should loyally
keep only for her housbands use: to the end that no speech or rumor should
enter therein, but only the sweet amiable sound of honest and chaste words,
which are the orient pearls of the holy gospel; for we must allways remember
that which before I have said, that our souls are empoisoned by the ear, as
the body by the mouth.

11. Love and loyalty joined together, cause a constant and fearlesse
assurance; and therefore the Saints of God presupposing this fidelity, have
used alwais most kind signs and tokens of their mutual love: sweet, and
loving favors, but yet chaste and honest; tender, and kind hearted, but yet
sincere, plain, and beseeming their grave simplicity. So Isaac and Rebecca,
the chastest married couple of old time, were seen so lovingly entertaining
one another by a windeowe, that albeit no offensive thing passed between
them, yet Abimelech well judged thereby, that they could not be other then man
and wife. The great Saint Jews, as rigourous to his own flesh, as tender in
love to his wife, was almost blamed for too much kindness; though in deed he
rather deserved exceeding praise, for knowing how to apply his warlik and
courageous mind, to these small duties, requisite to the conservation of
conjugal love, for although these petty demonstrations, of pure and unfeigned
affection, bind not the hearts of these that love, yet they approache them one
to another, and serve for a kind of art, to keep mutual love in perfection.

12. Saint Monica being with child of great Saint Augustine, dedicated him
oftentimes to Christian religion, and to the true service of Gods glory: as he
himself witnesses, saying that he had already tasted the salt of God in his
mothere womb. This is a notable lesson for Christian women, to offer up to God
the fruicts of their wombes, even before they be delivered of them, for God
accepts the offerings of a loving and humble soul; and commonly gives good
success to those holy motions and affections of good mothers at that time:
witness Saint Thomas of Aquin, Saint Andrew of Fesula, and diverse others. The
mother of S. Bernard (a worthy mother of so worthy a child so soon as her
children were borne* took them in her arms, and offered them up to our Lord
Jesus Christ and from thence forth, she loved them with such reverence, as
holy vessels committed unto her by God; which fell out so happily unto her,
that in the end they became Saints all seven.

13. The children being once borne into the world, and beginning to have the
use of reason, then ought their parents to have an especial care, to emprint
the fear and love of God in their tender hearts. The good Queen Blaunche,
performed this office excellently well in her son king Jews the Saint; for
she would often times say unto him, my dear child, I had rather far thou
should dye before mine eyes, then see thee committ one only mortal sin.
Which notable saying remained so engraued in the soul of her royal child,
that, (as he himself was wont to tell) not one day in all his life past over
his head, wherein he did not call it to remembrance, taking all pains possible
to put this divine doctrine in practice. Races, and generations in our tongue
are called houses, and the Hebrews call generation of children the bwilding up
of a house; for in that sense the scripture says, that God builded houses for
the midwines of egypt: whereby we learn, that to make a good house, is not to
fill it with worldly treasures, but to bring up children in the fear of God,
and exercise of virtues, wherein no pains nor travail is to be spared, for
children are the father and mothers glory. So Saint Monica with great
constancy and perseverance, straue against the badde inclinations of her son
Saint Augustine: for having followed him by sea and by land, she made him more
happily, the child of tears by conversion of his soul, then he had been the
child of her blood, by generation of his body.

14. Saint Paul leaves to women the care of their household, as their duty and
office: for which cause many are of this opinion, that the devotion of the
wife, is much more profitable to her family, then the virtue of her husband;
because he, being not so ordinarily within doors, cannot so easily and
continually instruct his folk in virtue: and therefore Solomon in his
proverbs, makes the happiness of the whole household; to depend of the
industry and care of that valourous and courageous woman, whom there he
describes.

15. It is written in Genesis, that Isaac seeing his wise Rebecca barren,
prayed to God for her, or according to the Hebrew text, prayed our Lord over
against her; because he prayed on one side of their oratorie, and she on the
other: and the prayer of her housband made in this manner, was heard. The
greatest and fruictfullest union between man and wife, is that which is made in
devotion, to which one should exhort the other most earnestly. Some fruicts
for their sowernesse are not much worth, unless they be conserved as quinces;
others because of their tenderness cannot be long be kept, unless they be
preserved, as cherries and apriecocks: So women should wish that their
husbands were preserved and comfited with the sugar of devotion; without which
man is sower, bittter, and intolerable; And the husbands should procure that
their wives did excel in devotion, because without it the woman is frail, and
subject to fall and wither away in virtue. Saint Paul says: that the
unbelieving man is sanctified by the faithful woman, and the unbelieving woman
by the faithful man: because in this straight bond of wedlock, the one may
easily draw the other to virtue; but what a blessing is it, when the faithful
man and wife, do sanctify one another in the true fear of God.

16. To conclude the mutual supporting of one another ought to be so great,
that they should never be both at once angry, or moved on the sudden. Bees
cannot rest in places where echoes or redoublings of voices are heard: nor can
the holy Ghost certainly remain in that house, in which strife, and debate,
chiding and scolding, and redoubled braulings use to be. Saint Gregory
Nazianzen witnesses, that in his time married persons, kept the anniuersarie
day of their matrimony holy and festival: and I could wish that good custom
were put in practice in these days, so that it were not with worldly and
sensual demonstratio^s of exterior mirth, but that the housband and wife
confessinge and communicatinge that day, should reco^mend unto God with more
then ordinary fervor, the constant quiet of their marriage, renewing their
good purposes to sanctify their state by mutual love and loyalty, taking
breath in our Lord, to support the better the charge of their vocation.

Of the honesty and chastity of the marriage bed. CHAP. 38.
THE marriage bed, ought to be immaculate as the Apostle says, that is to say,
exempt from all vncleanlinesse and profane filthiness: therefore was marriage
first instituted and ordained in the earthly paradise, where until that time
had never been felt any extraordinary concupiscence. There is some likeness
between dishonest pleasure, and vnmannerlie eating: for both of them regard the
flesh, though the first for the brutall heat thereof, is simply called
carnal. I will declare by the one, that which I would have understood of the
other.

1. Eating is ordained, for the conservation of them that eat: as then to
eat, preserve, and nourish the body, is absolutely good, and commendable: so
also that which is requisite in marriage for generation of children, and
multiplication, is good and holy, being one of the cheifest ends of marriage.

2. To eat, not for conservation of life, but for mainteining of mutual love
and amity which we owe one to another, is a thing very just and honest: and
in the same sort, the mutual and lawful satisfaction of the parties joined in
holy marriage, is called by Saint Paul, debt, and duty; but so great a debt
and duty, that he permits neither party to exempt them selves from it,
without free and voluntary consent of the other; no not for the exercises of
devotion (which is the cause of that which has been said in the chapter of
holy communion) how much less then may either party exempt them selves from
this debt, for anger, disdain, or fantastical pretenses.

3. As they that eat for mutual conversation, do it freely, and not as it
were by force, but rather in outward appeeraunce, at least wise give show of an
appetite to their meat: so the marriage debt should always be paid and
performed franckly, faithfully, as it were with hope and desire of children,
albeit for some occasion there were no subject of such hope.

4. To eat, not for the two former reasons, but only to content the appetite,
is tolerable, but not commendable: because the only pleasure of the sensual
appetite, cannot be a sufficient object, to make an action worthy of
commendation: yt is enough that it be tolerable. To eat not only for our
appetite, but with excess also and disorderly, deserves blame more, or
less, according as the excess is great or little.

5. The excess in eating consists not in the quantity only, but in the
manner also of eatinge. It is strange (my Philotheus) that honnie being so
wholesome, and so proper a food to the Bees, that yet sometimes they become sick
by it, as when in the spring time they eat to much of it, it ingendreth in the^
the flux of the belly, and sometimes it killes them with out remedy, as when
they are behonnied with it about their head and wings. Certainly the act of
marriage, is holy, just, commendable, and profitable to common weal: yet
notwithstanding in some case it is dangerous; for sometimes it infecteth the
foul with venial sin, as it chances by a mere and simple excess; and
sometime it kills the soul by mortal sin, as it falls out, when the
natural order appointed for generation of children is perverted; in which as
one swarueth more or less from the order of nature, so are the sins more or
less execrable, but always mortal. For because procreation of children is the
principal end of marriage, one many never lawfully depart from the order
which it requires, though for some accident, it cannot at that time be
performed; as it falls out, when barrenness, or being great which child
already, do hinder the generation. For in these accidents the act of marriage
does not cease to be holy and just, so that the rules of generation be kept:
no accident whatsoever being able to prejudice the law, that the principal end
of marriage prescribes. The execrable act committed by Onan in his marriage,
was detestable before God, as the holy text of the 38. chapter of Genesis does
testify: although certain heretics of our days, a hundred times more
worthy to be condemned, then the ancient Cynicks (of whom Saint Hierom
speaks upon the epistle to the Hebres) made God to say, that it was the
perverse intention of that naughty man which displeased God: whereas the
scripture says otherwise, and assures us in particular, that the thing or
act it self, was abominable in the sight of God.

6. It is a true mark of a scadle, greedy, and beastly mind, to thinck
earnestly of meat, before the time of repast: much more when after meals one
pawseth and delights in the pleasure he took in eatinge, entertaining it in
thought and word, and reuoluing in his mind the remembrance of the sensual
delight he received in swallowing down his morsells; as they do, who before
dinner have their mind on the spitte, and after dinner in the dishes; men
worthy to be the skullions of a kitchen, who make a God of their belly, as
Saint Paul says. Those which be well and mannerly brought up, thinck of the
table, but even when they are ready to sit down; and after dinner wash their
hands and mouth, to loose both savor and smell of that which they have eaten.
The Elephant is but a gross beast, yet most worthy of all the rest, and which
abounds most in sense: I will tell you a point of his honesty: he never
changes his mate, and loves her tenderly whom he has chosen, with whom
notwithstanding he coupleth not, but from three years to three years, and that
only for five days, and so secretly, that he is never seen in the act: but
the sixth day he shows him self abroad again, and the first thing he does,
is to go directly to some river and wash his body, not willing to return
to his troop of companions, till he be purified. Be not these goodly and
honest qualities in a beast? by which he teaches married folk not to be given
to much to sensual and carnal pleasures, which according to their vocation
they have exercised: but the use being passed, to wash their heart and
affection from it, and purge them selves of it, that afterward with all
liberty, and freedom of mind, they may exercise other actions more pure and
of greater value. In this advise consists the perfect practice of that
excellent doctrine of Saint Paul, given unto the Corinthians: The time is short
(says he) it remains that they who have wives, be as though they had them
not. For according to Saint Gregory, he has a wife as though he had her not,
who in taking corporal pleasure with her, is not for all that, hindered and
disturbed from spiritual exercises, and what is said of the man, is to be
understood of the woman: that they that use this world (says the same Apostle)
be as though they used it not. Let every one then use this world according to
his calling, but yet in such sort, that he engage not his affection too deeply
therein: but remain still as free and as ready to serve God, as if they used
not the world at all. It is great hurt to a man (says Saint Austin) to desire
the enjoying of those things, which he should only use, and to use those
things which he should only enjoy: we should enjoy spiritual things, and
only use corporal things: for when their use is turned into enjoying, our
reasonable soul is converted into a savage and beastly soul. I thinck I have
said all that I would say, without speaking of that, of which I would not say.

Instructions for widows. CHAPTER 39.
SAINT Paul instructs all prelates in the person of his dear scholar
Timothy, saying: Honor those widows which are widows indeed. To be a widow
indeed, these things are required.

1. That not only she be a widow in body, but in heart also; that she be
resolved with an inviolable purpose, to keep her self in the estate of chaste
widowhood. For those which are widows but only while they expect marriage,
are not separated from husbands but only in respect of bodily pleasure, for
they be already joined to them in heart and will. But if the true widow, to
confirm her self in the state of widowhood, will offer unto God her body,
and chastity by vow, she shall add a great ornament to her widowhood, and
make her resolution secure. for since that after her vow she is no more in her
own power, and cannot leave her chastity without forgoing her part in
paradise; she will be more zealous of her designement, and suffer not so much as
one little thought of marriage to stay in her heart, no not the space of one
only moment: So that this sacred vow, will put a strong bulwarck between her
soul, and all manner of thoughts, that are contrary to her holy resolution.
Saint Austin counsels this vow very earnestly to a Christian widow, and
the ancient and learned Origin goes much farther: for he exhorts married
women to propose and vow chastity of widowhood, in case their housbands should
die before them: that among the sensual pleasures which they may have in their
wedlock; they may enjoy the merit of chaste widowhood, by this promise and vow
made before hand. The vow makes the work more acceptable unto God, fortifieth
the will to do it more courageously, and gives to God, not only the good
works, which are the fruicts of our will, but dedicateth likewise unto him our
will it self, as the root and tree of all our actions. By simple chastity we
lend our body to God, retaining notwithstanding our liberty, to subject it
when we list to sensual pleasure: but by the vow of chastity we make him an
absolute and irreuocable present of our body, without reserving to our self
any possibility to go back from our word; rendering our selves happy slaves
unto him, whose bondage is better then all royalties. As I approve the advice
of these two great personages, so could I wish, that those souls which are so
happy, as to follow them, would do it prudently, holily and soundly, having
well examined their forces, and inuoked the grace of God, and taking the
counsel of some wise and devout directour: for so all will prosper the better.

2. Besides it is necessary that the abrenunciation of second marriage, be
made purely and simply, to convert all our affections unto God more loyally,
and to make our heart cleave unto Gods heart on every side: for if the desire to
leave her children rich, or any other worldly respect, do keep the widow in
widowhood, she may deserve praise and commendation perhaps, but not before God:
since in Gods sight nothing is truly praiseworthy, but that which is done for
honor and reverence of his divine majesty.

3. Likewise a true widow must be voluntarily abstracted from all profane
contentments: for the widow which lives deliciously, says S. Paul, is dead
in her life time. She that will be a widow, and yet delights to be courted,
embraced, made much of, and takes pleasure in dancing, and feasting, desiring
perfumes, tricking and trimming her self, is a widow alive in body, but dead
in soul. What avails it whether the image of Adonis, or profane love, which
hangs for a sign before the door of fleshly delight, be painted with goodly
flowers and plumes round about it, or the face thereof be covered with a nett,
or a cypres? For so doubtless not without much vanity some times, black
morning apparel serves, to make her beauty more apparent: the widow having
made trial of that wherein women do please men most, casts more dangerous
baits into their minds. The widow then which lives in these fond delights, is
dead being alive, and is nothing else, to speak properly, but an idol of
widowhood.

4. The time of pruning is at hand, the voice of the turtle dove has been
heard in our land, says the holy Ghost in the Canticles. All men that will
live devoutly, must prune and shave away all worldly superfluities: but
especially is this needful to true widows, who like Turtle doves, come
freshelie from bewailing and lamenting the loss of their deer husbands. When
Noemy returned from Moab to Bethlehem, the women of the town, who had known
her when she was first married, said one to another, is not this Noemy? but she
answered: call me not Noemy, I pray you (for Noemy signifies comely and
wel-fauoured) but call me Mara, for our Lord has filled my soul with
bitterness; which she said because her husband was dead. Even so the devout
widow will never be termed or esteemed fair and beautiful, contenting her
self to be such as it pleases God she be.

5. Lamps that are fedwith sweet oil, cast a sweeter smell when they are
blown out: and widows, whose lives were pure and laudable during their
wedlock, power out a sweeter odor and virtue of chastirie, when their light
(that is their husbands) is put out and extinguished by death. To love their
husbands being alive is an ordinary thing amongst women: but to love them so
well, as to take no other after their death and departure, is a love which
pertains only to true widows. To hope in God, so long as the husband is a
live, and setueth for a pillar to support his wife, is not a thing so rare to
be seen: but to hope in God when she is destitute of so great a proppe and
stay of her life, is indeed worthy of commendations. This is the reason that
one may with greater facility know in widowhood the perfection of virtues,
then one could have done in the state of marriage.

6. The widow that has children which stand in need of her assistance and
bringing up, principally in matters belonging to their souls health, and
establishing of their course of life; cannot, nor ought in any wise abandon
them: for the Apostle S. Paul says clearlie, that they are obliged to take
that care of them, which they them selves had before experienced in their
fathers and mothers: and that if any have not care of his own family, he is
worse then an infidel. But if her children be in state, that they stand no more
in need of her guiding, then should she gather to geather all her thoughts, and
employ them wholly to enrich her heart with the pure and holy love of God.

7. If mere constraint bind not the conscience of the widow to outward,
affairs, as processes, and such like, I counsel her to avoid them altogether,
and to to use that order in menaging her affairs, which is most peaceable, and
recollected, although it seem not so gainful. For the profits gotten by
contentions and troublesome labor, must be very great indeed, to recompense
the benefit of a quiet life: besides that wrangling pleas and process do
distract the heart, and often times open a gate to the enemies of chastity: while
to please them, whose favor they need, they are feign many times to use
demeanure and behaueour displeasing to God.

8. Prayer must be the widows continual exercise: for she must now love
nothing but God: she must use almost no words but for Gods sake. And as the
iron which by the presence of the Diamant was hindered from following the
Loadstone, leapes after it so soon as the Diamant is removed away: so the
chaste widows heart which could not easily give it self wholly to follow Gods
holy inspirations, during the life of her husband, should immediately after his
death, run with ardent affection after the sweet odours, and celestial
perfumes of her Lord, saying with the sacred spouse, O Lord, now that I am all
mine own, receive me altogether, draw me after thee, and I will run after
the sweet smell of thy ointments.

9. Virtues peculiar to Christian widows are, perfect modesty, neglect of
honors, ranckes, places, titles, and such like vanities; to serve the poor,
visit the sick, comfort the afflicted, instruct young maidens, and incline them
to affect piety and devotion, and in a word to yeald them selves a perfect
pattern all virtues: to the younger women, cleanlines, and honest
simplicity, must be the two ornaments of their habits, humilite and charity,
must adorn their actions, honesty and courtesy, must grace their speech,
modesty and shamfastnes, must beautify their eyes, and Christ Jesus
crucified, must be the only love of their hearts. In sum, the true widdowe,
is in the Catholic Church, as it were a fresh sweet violet in the month of
March, which sendes abroad from the flagrant odor of her devotion, an
incomparable suauitie, and yet almost couers and hides her self, with the
great leaves of her humility and voluntary abiection, betokning by her dark
pale color, her exercises of mortification: she is usually found in fresh
cool places, and unmanured plots of ground, and will not be blasted with the
hott noisome air of the worlds conversation, the better to conserve the
pleasant freshnes of her soul, against all inordinat heates, which the desire
of riches, of honor, and dangerous loves, might breed in her heart. She shall
be blessed, says the holy Apostle, if she persevere in this sort.

10. I have many other things to say of this matter, but I have said enough,
and all, when I said, that the widow zealous of the honor of her estate, read
attentively the excellent Epistles, which great Saint Hierom wrote to Furia,
Saluia, and all those other Dames, which were so happy, as to be the ghostly
children of that holy Father; for nothing can be added unto that which he
says, but only this admonition; that a true widow, should never blame those
that marry the second time, nay though they marry, the third, and fourth
time; for in some cases, God almighty so disposes it for his greater glory.
One must always have his eyes upon this doctrine of our holy forefathers, that
nether widdowhood, nor virginity, have any other place in heaven, but that
which true humility does allot and assign them.

A word or two to Virgins. CHAPTER 40.
1. OVIRGINS, I have only these three words to say unto you, for the rest that
is requisite, you shall find else where. If you intend, and think upon
temporal marriage, be sure to keep your first love, inuiolably for your first
husband. In my judgment, it is egregious cosenage and deceit, to present in
steed of an entyre, and sound heart, a worn, bruised, and love vanquished heart.
But if thy happy lot have ordained thee, for thy chaste spiritual Spouse, for
whom thou meanest to preserve perpetually thy virginity, good God, how
preciselie, carefully, and tenderly, ought thou to preserve thy first love
for him, who being purity it self, is delighted with nothing so much as with
purity, to whom are due the first fruits of all things, but principally of
our love? Read Saint Hieroms Epistles, there thou shall find sufficient
precepts and rules, touching this matter. And seeing that thine estate and
condition of life, has made thee subject to obedience, choose a guide and
master, under whose conduct and direction, thou may with greatest sanctity
and integrity, dedicate thy body and soul, to the worship and service of
almighty God.

THE FOVRTH PART OF THE INTRODVCTION, Containing necessary instructions,
against those tentations which are most ordinarily incident, to those that
endeavor to live spiritually.
That we must not regard the scoffs and mocking taunts of the children of this
world. CHAPTER. I.
1. SO soon as the children of this world shall perceive that thou resoluest
to lead a spiritual life, they will discharge upon thee as thick as hayle, all
their vain babbling and false surmises. Those that are most malicious among
them, will calumniat and misconstrue thy change attributing it to dissembling
policy, or hypocrisy; the world frowns upon him say they, and because he
cannot thrive that way, he betakes him self to God; thy frinds will even break
their heads and weery their tongues to make thee a world of exhortations, and
wise and charitable aduices as they imagine: Thou will fale into some
melancholy humor (will they say) by this new course of life; thou will leese
thy credit and estimation in the world, and make thy self intolerable and
distastful to all thy acquaintance; thou will wax old before thy time, thy
domestical affairs will go to wrack: a man must live in the world, as one in
the world: our salvation may be obtained, and heaven gained without these
mysteries and secrets; and a thousand such like inventions as these shall thou
hear.

2 My Philotheus, all this council of these, is but a fond and vain prattling.
These men tender neither thy health, nor wealth, nor honor. If you were of the
world (says our blessed Savior) the world would love that which were his: but
because you are not of the world, therefore the world hates you. We have seen
often enough, gentlemen and gay ladies, pass many a whole night, nay many
nights together, at cards, and chesse: and is there any attention more
melancholy, sullen, and troublesome then that? and yet worldlings that mark it,
say never a word of it, and their frinds never trouble them selves therefore;
and for meditating but one short hour, or rising in the morning a little
earlier then ordinary, to prepare our selves to communion: every one runs
to the physician, as if it were needful we should be purged from hypochondriac
humors, or the iaunders. They will make no difficulty to spend thirty or
forty nights in dancing, and no man of them will complain of it as of loss
of time: yet only for watching devoutly on Christmas night, every one coffeth
next morning, and complains of the rheum. Who sees not here that the
world is an unjust judge, favorable and partial to his own children, sharp
and rigourous to the children of God?

2. We shall never be well in peace with the world, unless, we cast our
selves away with it for company: it is impossible for us to content it, it is
too much out of square; For John came neither eating, nor drinking (says our
redeemer) and they say, the diued is in him: The Son of man came eating and
drincking, and they say, behold a glutton and a wine-bibber. Most true it is,
Philotheus, if we should condescend with the world, and give our selves a
little, to jest, to laugh, to dance, and disport, it would be scandalized at
us: if we do not so, it will accuse us of hypocrisy or melancholy. Let us make
our selves brave, and the world will constre it to some bad end: go
negligently and carelessly attired, and the world will count us base minded; our
mirth in the worlds eye is dissolution, our mortification sullennes: and
looking thus upon us with an angry eye, we can never be acceptable to it. It
aggrauateth our imperfections, publishing them for sins; of our venial
sins it makes mortal: those which we committ through frailty,, it says we
do them for malice. Where as charity is benign (as S. Paul says) the world
is malicious; where charity thinks not ill of any, the world on the other
side thinks no good, but always ill: and not being able to calu^niat our
actions, it will accuse our intentions: so that have the poor sheep horns or
no, be they white or black, the wolf for all that refuses not to devour
them, if he can.

3. Do what we can, the world will still wage war against us: if we be long
at Confession, it will wonder what we are so long about: if we stay but a
while, it will say we have not told all, we have concealed the worst. It will
warily spy and pry into our gestures and behaueour, and if it find out but
one little word of choler, cast out at unawares, it will protest solemnly, that
we are altogether insufferable. If we be diligent in looking to our affairs,
it terms us covetous: if mild and patient, it calls it mere simplicity: But
as for the children of the world, their choler is generositie, their avarice is
good husbandry, their conspiracies are honorable courtesies: thus still the
Spiders mar the poor Bees labors.

4. Let us therefore give this blind buzzard leave (Philotheus) to cry as long
as he list, and screech like a nightowle to disquiet the birds of the day: but
let us in our selves be constant in our purposes, and no changelings in our
dissignes: our perseverance will clearly demonstrate, whether in sooth and in
good earnest, we have sacrificed our selves to God, and settled our selves in
the rank of those, that mean to live devoutly. Comets, and Planets are almost
of an equal brightness in appearaunce; but comets, or blazing stars do
quickly vanish away, being only certain fiery vapors, which are in short time
consumed; whereas planets, or true stars, have a perpetual and everlasting
brightness. So hypocrisy and true virtue have great resembla^ce in outward
show, but one may know the one from the other: because hypocrisy lasts not
long, but vanishelh soon like smoke, ascending up a little way into the air;
but true virtu is allway constant and durable. It is no small commodity, no
little scouritie, and fortifiyng of the beginning of our devotion, to suffer
reproaches, and calumniations: for by those means we avoid the danger of
pride, and vain glory, which are like the cruel midwiues of Egypt, appointed
by the infernal Pharao, to kill the children of the Israelits, the very day of
their birth, We are crucified in opinion of the world, let the world
becrucified in ours: it accounts us for fools, let us esteem the world for
mad and senseless.

That we must have continually a good and manfull courage. CHAPITRE 2.
1. THIS light of the day though it be most beautiful and delectable to our
eyes, does dazel them not withstanding, after they have been shutt up in long
darkness. Before we be accustomed and familiar with the inhabitants of any
strange country. let them be never so courteous and frindlie, yet we find our
selves amongst them as half amazed. It may be my Philotheus, that after this
change of life, diverse alterations will arise in thy heart: and that this great
and general farewell which thou have bidden to the follies and vanities of the
world, will stir in thee some sadness and discouragement. If it happen so, let
me win^ so much at thy hands, as to have a little patience: for it will come to
nothing, it is but a little astonishement which the novelty of another life
brings unto thee; let that pass over, and thou shall receive millions of
consolations.

2. It will trouble thee in thy beginning (it may be) to forsake that pomp and
glory, which fools and mockers give thee, accou^ting thee happy in thy
vanities: but would thou for that vain estimation, loose the everlasting
glory, which God infalliblie will give thee? The fond trifles and pastimes in
which thou have employed thy fore-passed years, will represent them selves
again to thy heart, to allure it, and to cause it to come unto their side: but
caust thou have the heart, to hazard the loss of blessed eternity, for such
transitory toys and pleasures? Believe me, Philotheus, if thou persevere
constantly, ere long thou will feel such cordial sweetness, so pleasant and
delicious, that thou will confess, that the world affoordeth nothing else but
bitter gaulle, in comparison of that most sweet and delectable hunny; and that
one only day of devotion, is better worth, then a thousand years of worldly
delights.

3. I but thou see, that the mountain of Christian perfection is exceeding
high; and o my God (say thou) how shall I be able to clime up so high?
Courage Philotheus, when the little young bees be ginne to take shape and form,
we call them grubbes, and at that time they cannot fly up and down upon the
sweet flowers, nor on the thymie mountains, nor little bushie hills, to
gather honny, but by little and litlte, feeding upon the honny which their
dammes prepare for them, these little grubbes or impes, beginn to have wings,
and to strengthen them selves, so that after they fly up and down all the
country in their honnie-quest. True it is, that as yet we be but little
grubbes in devotion and that we are not able, to soar up so high, as our
desire would have us, which is even no higher, then to the highest top of
Christian perfection; yet notwithstanding we begin to grow into form and
fashion, to take some spiritual shape upon us, by good desires and constant
resolutions followed and seco^ded by diligent performance, our wings begin to
grow: so that we may well hope one day to be spiritual Bees, and that we shall
fly freely in search of the honniesweet pleasures of God: in the mean time,
let us live upon the honny of so many godly instructions, as ancient devout
persons have left unto us: and let us pray unto God to give us the wings of a
dove, that we may not only fly for the time of this present life, but
especially repose our selves in the eternity of the life to come.

The nature of tentations, and the difference between feeling them, and
consenting to them. CHAPTER 3.
1. IMAGINE a young princess (my Philotheus) greatly beloved of her husband:
and that some traitrous vilaine to win her, and defile her marriage bed,
sends to her some infamous pandar, with a loue-message, to treat with her
about his disloyal intent, first this noughtie pandar, proposes unto the
princess, the intent of his master: secondly the princes takes the embassage
in good, or evil part: thirdly she either consents, or refuses. Even so the
devil, the world, and the flesh, perceauing the soul of man espoused to the
Son of God, do send their temptations and suggestions unto her, by the which
first, sin is propounded unto her: secondly, she either is delighted, or
displeased with the sinful motion: and thirdly, she either admits it by
consent, or rejects and casts it away from her: which are in sum, the
three steps or stairs by which we descend to wickedness, suggestion, or
temptation, delight, and consent. And though these three acts, are not so
manifestly known and discerned in other kinds of sins, yet are they
palpablie seen, in all great and enormous sins.

2. Though the tentation of any sin that is, should endure all our life long,
it would not make us ungrateful to his divine majesty, so that it please us
not, so that we take no delight in it, nor give any consent unto it. And the
reason is, because in the tentation there passes no moral action of ours, but
we only suffer it: and so taking no pleasure in it, we ca^ be in no fault for
it. S. Paul a long time suffered the tentations of the flesh, and yet was so
far from displeasing God therefore, that contrary wise God esteemed him self
glorified thereby. The B. S. Angela de Fulgino, felt such vehement tentations
of the flesh, that she moves to compassion when she recounteth them; great
likewise were the temptations which S. Francis, and S. Benet suffered, when the
one cast him self naked into the thorns, and the other into the snow, to
mitigate them: yet lost they not for all that, any whit of the grace of God,
but rather augmented it.

3. Thou must be valiant then and courageous (my Philotheus, (amid tentations,
and never hold thy self for vanquished, so long as thou find that the
te^tation displeases thee Observe well the difference, between having, and
consenting to tentation; which is, that we may have, or feel them, though they
utterly dislike and displease us; but we can never consent unto them, unless
they please us, since pleasure ordinarily serves as a step to consent. Let
then the enemies of our salvation, present unto us as many bittes and baits as
ever they will; let them always stand watching at the door of our heart to get
in; let them make us as many offers, and proffers, as they list: but yet so
long as we have a true purpose and strong resolution, to take no manner of
pleasure in them, it is not possible that we should offend God, no more then
the Prince, husband to the princess before mentioned, can bear her any ill
will or displeasure, for the noughtie message sent unto her, if she have taken
no delight or pleasure in it. Yet there is a difference between the soul and
this princess, that the princess having once understood this dishonest
errand, may if she list, drive away the messe^ger and hear him no more: which
is not always in the power of the soul, for she cannot choose but feel the
tentation, though it be always in her power not to consent to it; for which
cause, although the tentation should persevere never so long time, yet can it
not hurt or defile us, so long as it disliketh and displeases us.

4. But as for the delight which may follow the temptation, because there are
two parts or portions of our soul, the one inferior, and the other superior;
and the inferior or sensuality follows not always the superior, or
reasonable portion, but keeps house apart (as it were:) it falls out often
times that the inferior part takes delight in the tentation whout the
consent; nay against the will of the superior. This is the quarrel, and
battle which the Apostle S. Paul describes, when he says, that his flesh
rebelled against his spirit, that there is one law of the members, or body,
and another of the spirit, and such other things.

5. Have thou not seen (Philotheus) a great burning firebrand, covered with
ashes and imbers? when one comes ten or twelve hours after to seek for fire,
he finds but a little in the midst of the hearth, and some times has much a
do to find any. Yet there was fire there all the while, for other wise he
could now have found none at all: and with that little that he found, he may
kindle all the other dead coals and bra^d-ends; The self same passes in
charity, (which is the spiritual fire of our soul) amid many great and
violent tentations. For tentation darting her delight into the lower portion,
covers all the soul (as it seems) with ashes, and brings the love of God
to such a straight, as if it had rome only (as men say) to stand a tiptoe: for
it appears not at all any where, saving only in the midst of the heart, in
the very bottom and center of the spirit; and yet seems scarce to be there,
and we have much a do to find and perceive it. Notwithstanding without all
doubt it remains there, since how so ever we feel our selves troubled in
soul and body, yet we find in our heart, a settled resolution not to consent to
sin, not tentation; and the delight which pleases our outward man, or
sensuality, displeases and disliketh the inward, or reasonable will, so that
though it be round about it, like the cenders about the coal, yet is it not
within it; whereby we may plainly see, that such delight is involuntary, and
altogether contrary, to our will, and can therefore be no sin at all.

Two firt examples of the foresaid matter. CHAPTER. 4.
1. IT concerns thee so near to understand this difference well, that I will
not spare to spend a little more time and discource to declare it more at large.
That young man (of whom S. Hierom speaks in tho life of S. Paul the first
hermit) being bound with delicat scarfes of silk, and lodged in a soft bed, and
provoked by all sorts of lascivious touches and wanton allurements, by a
beautiful harlot, that lay with him of set purpose, to overthrow his constant
chastity: what strange motions of his flesh did he feel? needs must it be,
that his senses were affaulted with excessive delight, and his imagination
extremly battailled with the presence of these voluptuous objects. Yet not
withstading amongst so many troubles, in the midst of such a terrible storm
of te^ptatio^s: he testified sufficiently, that his heart was not overcome, that
his will (though round about besett with such pleasures) consented not at all
unto the^, since his spirit perceauing so general a rebellion against it, and
having no other part of the body at commandment but the tongue, he bitt it
off with his teeth, and spirt it in the face of that naughtiepack, which more
cruelly tormented him with unlawful pleasures, the^ the hangman could ever
have done with most horrible tourments: for therefore the tyrant, mistrusting to
overcome him by pangs, thought to surmount his constancy by pleasures.

2. The history of the battle which S. Catherin of Siena in like manner
suffered, is most admirable, the sum whereof follows. The devil had
permission from God almighty, to assault the chastity of this virgin, with
the greatest rage that he could, with this exception, that he should not touch
her. Then did the fiend erect a battery of all kind of unchaste suggestio^s
against her heart; and to move her the more, coming with his damnable companio^s
in form of men and women, made a thousand forms of carnal inticements in her
sight, adioining words and gestures most dishonest and filthy. And allthough
all these fleshly engines, were only exteriourly presented, nevertheless by
ministry of the senses, they pierced to the very heart of the distressed
virgin: which (as she her self confessed) was even brimfull of these dangerous
suggestions, nothing else in her remaining free, but only her superior will,
which was not shaken with all these thunderinge ordenance of lascivious, and
carnal tentations: which lasted very long, till on a day our Lord appeared
unto her, and she said unto him: where were thou, my sweet Lord, when my heart
was full of so great darkness, and uncleanness? whereto he answered. I was, my
deer daughter, in thy heart. In my heart (replied she) and how could thou
dwell in a heart where there was so much uncleanness? or can thou that art
cleanness it self, abide in place of dishonestie? And our Lord answered. Tell
me, when these unclean thoughts troubled thee, did they make thee merry, or
sorry? did they produce in thy heart sweetness, or bitterness? most extreme
bitterness and sorrow, said she. who was it then (said our Lord) that put this
exceeding bitterness and sorrow in thy heart, but I, that lay there covertly and
hidden in thy soul? Believe me (my daughter) had I not been there present,
these hellishe engines that were planted round about thy heart, and with all
their battery could not make one breach into it, would doubtless have
surprised it and entered at their pleasure, they would have been admitted, and
received with delight, by consent of thy free will, and so have given the
deaths wound to thy soul. But because I was within, I armed thy heart with a
bitter dislike of these dishonest imaginations, and placed that strong
resistance in thy soul, by which she refused the te^tation, as much as she
could; and not being able as much as she would, conceived a vehement
displeasure and hatred against the tentation, and against her self; and so
these pangs and aflictions, were very meritorious, and a great gain for thee,
and an exceeding increase of thy virtue.

3. See thou Philotheus, how this fire was covered with ashes in this holy
soul? and that the tentation and delight was already entered into the heart,
and had compassed and besieged the will? which only asisted by her Saviors
grace, resisted by a bitter detestation of these wicked and lawless pleasures,
all the battery that was presented unto it, refusing always to give consent to
the sinful suggestions, with which it was so da^gerously and universally
enuironned. O what distress is it to a soul that loves God, not so much as
to know whether he be in her or no? or wether the heavenly fore of charity
for which she fights, be altogether extinguished in her or no? but this is
the flower and perfection of the heavenly love, to make the lover to suffer and
to fight for love, not knowing whether he have within him that love, for which
and by which, he continues valiantly fighting.

An encouragement to the soul vexed with temptation. CHAPTER 5.
1. MY Philotheus, God never permits these vehement te^tations to arise, but
only against such souls, which he means to extol, and promote to the
dignity of his pure and excellent love. But it follows not therefore, that,
after these tentations, they shall be sure to attain to this diuiue love: for it
happens often times, that souls which have been constant in such violent
combats, afterward not corresponding with the heavenly favors of God, have
been vanquished and overthrown with very small tentations. This I say, to the
end that if ever it chance to thee to be afflicted with such dreadful and
horrible tentatations, that thou understand thereby, that God favors thee
with an extraordinary sign of his love, by which he designeth to exalt thee
in his presence, and make thee great in his familiarity and frindship. Yet
nevertheless, be thou always humble and fearful to offend, not assuring thy
self that thou art able to overcome the least te^tatio^s that are, after thou
have prevailed against great ones, saving only by continual fidelity and
loyalty toward his majesty.

2. What temptations so ever then do arrive unto thee, and what delight so
ever ensew of that temptation: so long as thy will refuses to give her consent,
both to the tentation, and to the delight following it, trouble not thy self,
God is not offended with thee. When one falls into asound, so that there
appeer no more signs of life in him, men usually lay their hands on his heart,
and at the least motion that they feel in his heart, they judge him yet to
retain life, and by some precious liquour or restoratiue, make him come again
to him self, and recall him to his sense and feeling. So does it chance when
through the violence of tentations, our soul seems as it were fallen into a
sound, and into an utter decay of all her spiritual forces, life and motion:
but if we will know in what state she is, let us lay our hand on our heart; let
us consider if the heart and will do yet retain their spiritual motion: that
is, if they do their endeour to refuse all consent to the tentation and delight
thereof: for so long as this motion of refusal is with in our heart, we may be
assured, that charity, the life of our soul, remains yet in us, and that
Jesus Christ our Savior is there present, though hidden, and secretly: so that
by virtue of continual prayer, and use of the sacraments and of confidence in
Gods grace, we shall recover our forces, and live a sound, healthie, and
delectable life.

How tentation and delectation may be sin. CHAPTER 6.
1. THE princess of whom we spoke right now, could not hinder the dishonest
demand made unto her, because, as we presupposed it came to her unawares, and
against her will: but if on the other side, she should by some wanton glaunces
give occasion to be requested, by those secret or careless tokens, declaring
her self not unwilling, of rendering love to him that should court her: then
doubtless were she culpable of the message it self: and though she show her
self never so quaint and coy, she should for all that, deserve blame and
punishment. So chances it many times, that the very tentation it self is a
sin in us, because we our selves willingly are the cause of it, for example.
I know that in gaming I fall easily to rage and blasphemy, and that gaming is
to me, as it were a tentation to those sins: I sin therefore as often, and
as many times as I play at that game, and am guilty of the tentation which
thence arises. Again, if I know certainly that such a conversation, is
ordinary a cause of tentation and fall unto me, and yet notwithstanding do
willingly go to it, I am accessarie to all the tentations which do ensew from
thence.

2. When the delight which proceeds from the tentation may be avoided, it is
always sin to receive it: according as the pleasure which we receive, and as
the consent which we give unto it, is great or little, long or short in durance:
So it is always reprehensible in the young princess of whom we spoke, if she
do not only harken unto the lascivious and dishonest demand, which is made
unto her: but withal, after that she has heard it, takes pleasure in it,
entertaining her thought with some delight about this object. For although she
will not consent to the real execution of the disloyalty motioned to her: she
consents not withstanding to the mental appliyng of her heart, to the
contentment which she takes in the naughty suggestion; And it is allway a
dishonest act, to apply either mind or body, unto any dishonest object: nay
dishonestie consists in such sort in the application of the mind, that
without it, the appliyng of the body, were no sin at all.

3. So then, when thou shall be tempted in any sin, consider whether thou
have willingly given occasion to be so tempted: for then the very tentation it
self, puts thee in state of sin, by reason of the hazard wherein thou have
wittingly cast thy self, which is to be understood, when thou might
commodiouslie have avoided the occasion; and that thou did foresee, or were
bound to forsee, that in such an occasion, such a temptation would arise. But
if thou have given no occasion at all to the tentation which impugneth thee: it
cannot in any sort be imputed unto thee for a sin.

4. When the delight following the te^tation might baue been shunned, and yet we
eschew it not, there is allwaye some kind of sin, according to the little or
long continuance in it, and according to the cause of delight taken in it. A
woman that has given no occasion to be courted, but yet takes pleasure
therein, lets not to be blameworthie, though the pleasure which she affected,
have no other cause or motive, but only the courting. For example, if her
gallant play excellent well on the lute, and she delights, not in that he
seeks her love, but in the harmony and sweetness of his lute; there is no
sin in that delight: yet must she not continue long in it, least she easily
pass from it, to delight in being wooed. So if any body prepou^d to me some
stratageme full of inue^tion and cunning, to make me compass a full revenge
upon mine enemy: if I take no delight, nor give any consent to the desire or
purpose of revenge which is motioned unto me, but only in the slight and subtle
art of the engine, or invention, without doubt I sin not at all: though it be
not expedient to stay long in this delight, for fear least by little, and
little, it carry to some delectation of the revenge proposed.

5. We find our selves sometimes overtaken and surprised with some tickling of
delight, immediately after the tentation is presented unto us, before we have
well considered the quality and danger thereof: and this delight is but a small
venial sin, though it wax greater and greater, if after we perceive the
danger we are in, we stay, negligently dalliyng, and as it were coping and
cheapning with the delight, whether we should admit it, or reject it; and yet
more, if we negligently stay in it, after we perceive the peril, without any
purpose at all little or great to cast it away out of our heart: but when as
voluntarily, and of full purpose we resolve to take contentment in that
delight, that deliberat purpose is a great sin, if the object of the delight
be very naught. It is a great vice in a woman, if she be willing in her heart
to entertain naughty dishonest loves, allthough she do not in effect abandon
her self to her lovers.

Remedies against great and vehement tentations. CHAPTER 7.
1. AS soon as thou find thy self in any tentation, do as little children
are wont when they see a wolf or a bear in the field: for presently they
run and throw themselves into their father or mothers arms, or at least
wise call upon them for help and succor. Run thou in like manner unto God,
cry upon his mercy, crave his assistance, it is the remedy which our Saueour
him self taught us saying, pray, least you enter into tentation.

2. If nevertheless the tentation continue, or increase, then hastily run in
spirit to the cross of our blessed faueour Jesus imagining thou see him
hanging thereon before thy face, and embrace the foot of the cross upon thy
knees laying fast hold upon it, as upon an assured sanctuary, and protest that
thou will never consent to the temptation, ask our Saueour aid against it,
and continue always this protesting, that thou will never give consent, so long
as the temptation lasts. But while thou make these earnest and hearty
prorestations, and refusalls of consent, look not the te^ptatio^ in the face,
thinck not on it as nigh as thou can: but look only upon our blessed Lord on
the roode: for if thou behold and consider the temptation, principally when it
is vehement, or carnal, it may shake and undermine thy courage, and weaken thy
constancy before thou art aware. Divert thy thoughts with some good and
commendable exercises, for such occupations, entering, and taking place in thy
heart, will chase away the tentations, and malicious suggestions, and leave no
room in thy heart to belodged in.

3. The sound and soueraigue remedy against all tentations, be they never so
great, is to unfold our conscience, display and lay open the suggestio^s,
feelings, and affects which arise in our minds, to manifest the^ and their
occasions to our spiritual directour. For note this well, that the first
co^ditio^ that the devil would make with a soul whom he would inveigle and
deceive, is to co^ceale the te^tatio^: as they which would allure any maids or
weme^ to their unlawful desires, at the very first abourding, warn them to
say nothing of their motions and desires to their parents or housba^ds; where
as God on the other side in his inspiratio^s above and before althings wills,
that we procure them to be examined by our superiors, and conductours of our
souls.

4. If after all this, the tentation obstinately vex and persequute us, we must
do nothing else, but show our selves constant, and persevere in protesting from
our hearts, that we do not, and will not consent; for as maids can never be
married, so long as they say no: so the soul, be she never so much tormented
with tentation, can never be hurt or defiled, so long as unfeignedly she says
no.

5. Dispute not with thy enemy, discourse not with his suggestions, answer him
not one only word, unless it be sometimes that, which our blessed Lord
answered him, and wherewith he confounded him: Go thy way Satan, for it is
written, The Lord thy God shall thou adore, and him only shall thou serve. As a
chaste matron should nor answer on word, nor look once on the face of that
naughty person that should solicit her to dishonestie, but cutting of short
from his loue-retorick, should presently, and at the same instant, turn her
thoughts and affections toward her housband, and protest a new the loyalty
which she owes unto him, and never stay one iont to dally or parlie, or
enterchaunge langaage with the lascivious suitor: so the devour soul assaulted
with any tentation, should by no means busy her self in discourcing, or
considering, or answering it, but sincerely and that instantly, turn her
thoughts to her Lord Jesus Christ, her dear spouse, and make a new
protestation and promise of loyalty to him, that she will be his only and wholly
for ever.

That we must diligently resist, even the least tentations that are. CHAPTER 8.
1. ALLTHOVGH we must fight most carefully against great and violent tentations
with an invincible courage, and the victory gained against them be exceeding
profitable unto us: yet peradventure we may profit more in resisting te^tations
of leslesser moment: for as great temptations exceed in quality, so the lesser
infinitely exceed in number, in so much that the conquest of them, may be
compared to the victory over the greater and violenter tentations. Wolves and
Bears be without all question, more dangerous then flies and gnattes: yet do
they not vex and disquiet us so importunly, nor exercise our patience so often.
It is an easy thing to abstain from murder, but hard to avoid small
choleric passions, and the ordinary occasions of anger which are presented
to us almost every moment. It is easy for a man or a woman to refrain from
committing actual adultery, but not so easy to abstain from wa^ton looks,
from giving or receiving love toys, from procuring fond favors, from speaking
and hearing words, of vanity. It is not very hard, not to admit a corriual
or companion in love between housband and wife, and to refuse, consent of
bodily disloyalty in that kind, but not so easy to keep this disloyalty from
entry to the heart, and desire. Very easy is it for a man to co^teine himself
from stealing other men's goods but hard, not so much as to covet or wish them.
Easy is it not to bear false witness in judgment, but not so easy to
refrain from lies in conversation; very easy not to be drunk, but hard to be
virtuously sober and temperate; very easy not to desire another death, but
hard not to desire at least some harm and disco^moditie to him. It is no great
difficulty to withhold our selves from defaming our adversary, but hard to
withhold dispraising him. In a word these little temptations of choler, of
suspicions, of jealousy, of envy, of louetricks, of jests and vanities, of
crafty and double dealing, of wanton and unchaste thoughts, are things in which
the patience and constancy of those that are most devout and resolute in gods
service, is most co^tinuallie tried and exercised. We must therefore prepare
our selves (my deer Philotheus) with as great diligence as may be, to this
spiritual co^bat: and assure our selves, that as many victories as we shall
win over these petie enemies and slight tentatio^s, so many precious gemmes
shall be placed in the crown of glory, which God prepares for us in paradise.
Therefore if we mean to fight valia^tly against greater te^tatio^s that besige
us, we must practice every day to resist and rebutt, these weaker assaults of
ordinary temptations when they come upon us.

Remedies against these lesser temptations. CHAP. 9.
1. WELL then, concerning these small te^tations of vainglorie, suspicion,
fretting, jealousy, envy, loue-fancies, and such like trashe, which like
flies and gnattes do trouble our eyes, and sometimes bite and sting us by the
face; because it is impossible to be altogether exempted and freed from their
importunity: the best resistance that we can make them, is not to vex our
selves for them: for they cannot hurt us, though they trouble us a little: so
that we be thoroughly resolved to serve God entirely.

2. Despise then these petty assaults, and vouchsafe not so much as to thinck
upon that which they propose, or would incline thee unto: let them buzze about
thine ears as much as they will, and run round about thee here and there as
flies use to do, but when they begin to sting, and make some abode in thy
heart, the^ do nothing else but quietly remove the^ and brush them from thence,
not fighting against the^, nor parlying with them, but producing some contrary
acts whatsoever; but especially acts of the love of God.

3. For if thou will believe me, strive not to eagrelie to oppose many acts of
the contrary virtue, to the importunity of any tentation which thou feel
(for that were to parlie and dispute with it, which before we forbad thee to
do) but having made an act of the virtue directly contrary to the tentation
which impugneth thee (if thou have had leisure to suruay the quality of the
temptation) take thy recourse presently unto the heart of Jesus Christ
crucified, and with an act of fervent love to him, kiss his blessed feet. This
is the best means to conquer and tame our enemy as well in little as in great
tentations; for the love of God contains in it self the perfectio^s of all
other virtues, and that far more excellently, then the virtues them selves do
contain them: and therefore is a more sovereign counter-poison against all
vices; And thy soul accustoming in all tentations, to have recourse unto this
universal remedy, need not examine what particular tentations it suffers,
but simply feeling her self troubled with any, will find quiet and ease in
this general refuge: which besides is so dreadful and terrible to our ghostly
enemy, that when he once has experience, that all his tentations provoke us
to this divine love of our redeemer, he will cease from battering us with them.
And thus much concerning lesser temptations: for he that should endeavor to
fight with them one by one, shoud put him self to much care, with no profit.

How to strengthen our heart against temptations. CHAP. 10.
1. CONSIDER from time to time what passions do reign in thy soul, and having
discovered them, begin a manner and course of life clean opposite and
contrary unto them in thought, word, and deed. For example, if thou find thy
self inclined to the passion of self love and vainglorie: thinck often upon the
misery of this mortal life of ours; how bitter these vanities will be to our
conscience at the hour of our death; how uncomely they be for a noble and
generous heart; that they are but trifles, and babies for little children to play
withal, and such other considerations as these. Speak also earnestly and often
against vainglorie, allthough it seem thou speak against thy will,
dispraise it to the uttermost of thy power: for so thou shall in a manner
engage thy own reputation to fly from that in deed, which thou so much
condemnest in words: and many times by much speaking against a thing, we move
our selves to hate and despise it, though at the first we bare it affection.
Exercise works of humility and abiectio^ as much as thou can, even against
thy own inclination, for so thou shall quickly get a habit of humility, and
weaken the vice of vainglorie in such sort, that when the temptation assaileth
thee, thy inclination will be now no more able to take part with the temptation,
and thy soul will have more strength to resist it.

2. If thou art inclined to covetousness, thinck often upon the extreme
folly, and madness of this vice, which renders us slaves to that dross which
was created to serve us; thinck how at our death we must leave all, and that
perhaps in the hands of them, that will scatter it as carelessely, as we had
carefully scraped it together; and perchance in their hands, to whom it will be
cause of their utter ruin and damnation. Speak much against avarice, and
praise the contempt of worldly pelf. Enforce thy self often times to give
alms, and to put in ure the acts of charity, and works of mercy, and
accustom some times to omit some occasions of gain and commodity.

3. So if thou be subject to the passion of idle and carnal love, thinck how
dangerous a folly it is, as well to thy self, as to others whom thy fancy
may bring to be companions of thy perils. Consider what an unseemly thing it
is, to abuse and (as a man may say) profane the noblest affection of our
soul, in such vain employments; how subject this passion is to blame of the
wiser sort, and how pregnant a token of extreme lightness of understanding. Talk
often in praise of chaste behaueour, let thy discources be still in commendation
of clean and pure souls: and as much as is possible, endeavor to avoid all
light behaueour and all tricks and toys of fond love.

4. To be breef, in time of peace and rest, that is when the temptations of
those sins to which thou art most subject, do not trouble thee, then exercise
all the acts of the contrary virtues thou can, and if occasions of doing
them, present not them selves, find means to meet with the occasions, for so
will thy heart be strengthened and armed against future temptations.

Of unquietness of mind. CHAPTER 11.
1. VNQVIETNES is not a simple and single temptation, but a source and spring
from whence many other temptations take their beginning: I will speak a word or
two thereof. Sadness is nothing else but a grief and sorrow of mind, conceived for
some ill or damage, which is in us against our will: whether this evil be
outward, as poverty, sickness, contempt: or inward, as ignorance, lack of
devotion, repugnance, temptation. For when the soul feels her self charged
and burdened with any evil, she is aggreeued thereat, and there enters sadness
into her: and presently she desires to be delivered and freed from it: and not
with out good reason: for every thing naturally desires that which is good,
and flies from that which is known or supposed to be evil. If the soul seek
out means to be freed from the evil which oppresses her, and to be rid from
the burden of it for Gods love, she will seek those means with patience,
sweetness, humility, and repose of mind, expecting her delivery more from the
providence and goodness of God, then from her own industry, labor, and
diligence. But if she desire to be eased from her vexation for self love, then
will she torment and weerie, and trouble her self in seeking the means of her
ease: as though it depended more of her self, then of God. I say not that she
thincketh or judges so, but that she behaueth her self so carefully, so
hastily, and so earnestly, as if indeed she thought so. So that if she meet
not with that which she desires, presently and out of hand, then falls she
into great unquietness, and impatience; by which the former vexation or evil,
not departing from her, but rather waxing far worse, she enters into
anguish, distress, faintnes of heart, and loss of all courage: so that she
judges and deemeth her misery to be past all remedy. Where thou see, that
sadness, which had a just and lawful beginning grounded upon reasonable
considerations, afterward engenders unquietness, and unquietness again,
adds an increase of sadness, which is exceeding perilous.

2. This unquietness of mind, is the greatest ill that can come to the soul,
excepting sin. For as the seditions and civil discords of a common wealth, is
the utter ruin and overthrow thereof, and makes it altogether unable to resist
the foreign inuader: so our heart troubled and disquieted in it self, loses
all force and ability, to defend the virtues which it had purchased, and all
means to resist the tentations of the ghostly enemy; who at that time uses
all kind of diuices and inventions, knowing that according to the proverb it
is, good fishing in troubled water.

3. Unquietness proceeds of a inordinate desire to be delivered from the evil
that one feels, or to obtain the good that one desires: and yet nothing
makes the evil worse, nor remoueth the good farther from us, then does
unquietness and unreasonable hastines. Birds do remain fast in the nets and
lime-twigges, because finding them selves but a little caught hold of, they beat
and flutter up and down so eagrely, that they are more and more entangled in
the snare. When thou desire earnestly to be freed from any evil, or to
obtain any good; the first thing thou must do, is to repose thy mind, and
quiet thy thoughts and affects from ouer-hastie poursuite of thy desire: and
then fair and softly begin to pourchase thy wish, taking by order, and one
after another, the means which thou iudgest convenient to the attaining
thereof. And when I say fair and softly, I do not mean slowly and
neglige^tly, but without post-hast, without trouble and unquietness: otherwise
instead of attaining to the effect of thy desire, thou will be more entangled
in this labyrinthe of troublsom thoughts, then before.

4. My soul is allway in my hands o Lord: and I have not forgotten thy law;
said David. Examine often every day, at least morning and evening, whether thy
soul be in thy hands, or some passion of unquietness has robbed thee of it.
Consider whether thou have thy heart at commandment, whether it be not escaped
and fled away from thee, to some unruly affection of love, hatred, envy,
covetousness, fear, joy, sadness: and if it be wandered astray, seek it out
presently, and bring it back again gently to the presence of God, resigning it
with all thy affections and desires unto the obedience and direction of his
divine pleasure. For as they that fear least they lose a thing which they love
well, keep it fast clasped in their hands: so in imitation of this great king
we should always say from our hearts: O my God my soul is in continual danger
of being lost, and therefore I carry it always in my hand, and for this
diligent care of my soul, I have not forgotten thy holy law.

5. Permit not thy desires, be they never so little, and of never so small
importance, to disquiet thy mind: for after little desires, come great ones, and
find thy heart more ready and disposed to be troubled and put out of order.
When thou perceauest unquietness to enter, commend thy self to God, and resolve
thy self to do nothing at all, that thy vehement desire exhorts, until that
disquiet be ouerpassed: unless it be some thing that cannot be differred: and
then thou must with a gentle an quiet endeavor, withhold the current of thy
affection, tempering and moderating it as much as is possible: and after this
repose, do that which is requisite to be done, not as thy desire commands,
but as reason prescribes.

9. If thou can discover the unquietness of thy mind to him that governs thy
soul, or at the least to some trusty and devout frind: doubt not but
presently thou shall find it appeased. For communicating of griefs of our heart,
works the same effect in the troubled soul, that letting of blood does in
the body of him that is in a continual ague: and this is the remedy of
remedies. So holy king Lewis gave this council to his son: If thou feel
in thy heart any thing that troubles thee, tell it presently unto thy
confessor, or unto some good frind, and thou shall bear thy greef very
easily, through the comfort that he will give thee.

Of sadness. CHAP. 12.
1. SADNESS that is according to God (says S. Paul) works penance unto
salvation: but sadness of the world works death. Sorrow then and sadness, may be
good or bad, according to the sundry effects which it works in us. True it
is, that it produces more naught then good: for it has but only two that are
commendable, mercy, and penance; and six bad ones: anxietie, sloth,
indignation, iealosie, envy, and impatience: which caused the wiseman to say.
Sorrow kills many, and there is no proffit in it: because for two profitable
streams which flow from the spring of sadness, there are six other stark
naught, that run from the same head.

2. The enemy uses sadness as a fit disposition to exercise his temptations
against the just; for as he endeavors to make the wicked joyous and glad in
their sins; so does he go about, to make devout persons, sad and heavy in
their good actions. And as he can by no means procure evil to be committed,
but by making it seem pleasant and delectable, so he cannot withdraw men from
doing that which is good, but by making it appeer distasteful, sad, and
displeasing. He takes delight in sadness, because he him self is sad and
melancholic, and so shall be eternally: therefore would he have every one be like
him self in sorrow.

3. This preposterous sadness, troubles the mind, puts it into disquiet,
assaulteth it with unreasonable fears, gives a bitter taste to the sweetest
devotions, dulleth and overthrows the brain, depriueth the soul of
resolution, judgment, and courage. To be short, it is like a hard winter, that
cutteth away all the beauty of the field, and swalloweth all living creatures:
for (...) bannisheth all sweetness from the soul, and lameth her in the use of
her powers and faculties. If thou chance to be assailed with this dangerous
heaviness, Philotheus, practice the remedies ensewing.

4. Is any body sad (says S. James) let him pray. Prayer is a sovereign
remedy: for it lifts up the soul unto God, who is our only joy and
consolation: but when thou prayest in sadness and sorrow, use affections and
words which tend to confidence and love of God, as: O merciful father, most
bountiful and pitiful God, my sweet Saueour; O God of my heart, my joy, my
hope, my deer spouse, the welbe-loued of my soul, and such like.

5. Strive manfully against the inclinations of sorrow: allthough all thy
actions and exercises, during the time of this sad passion, seem unto thee to
be performed coldlie, heavily, and slacklie: omit them not for all that: for
the enemy who pretends to weary us from doing well by sadness, seeing that
notwithstanding this device of his, yet we follow our woonted exercises, and
that being performed against all this repugnance of heavy passions, our works
are of greater value and merit: he leaves to afflict us any more therewith.

6. Sing spiritual songs sometimes; for the devil has often times left of his
troublesome operation by such means: witness the bad spirit that obsessed
Saul, whose violence was repressed by David's melodious and sacred Psalmodie.

7. It is also good to divert our thoughts by external occupations; varied and
changed as much as we can: that so our mind may be withdrawn from the sad
object, and the spirits be heated and purified, sadness being a passion of a
cold and dry complexion.

8. Exercise many external actions with fervor, although it be without gust
or spiritual feeling: embracing a crucifix, and appliyng it straightly to thy
breast, kissing the feet and hands of it with reverence, stretching thy eyes and
hands unto heaven, lifting up thy voice unto God by words of love and
confidence, such as follow: My well-beloved is mine, and I am his: My well-beloved
is unto me a posy of myrrh, he shall remain betwixt my breasts. Mine eyes do
melt into tears unto thee O my God saying, when will thou comfort me? O Jesus,
be Jesus to me: live sweet Jesus in my soul, and my soul will live in thee.
Who can separate me from the love of God? and such like.

9. Moderate disciplines are not amiss. Because this volu^tary affliction
applied outwardly, obtains inward consolation from God: and the soul feeling
pain without, diuerteth her self from thincking of those which molest her
within. Freque^ting also of the holy communion is an excellent cordial: for
that heavenly bread stre^gtheneth the heart, and reioiceth the spirit.

10. Discover all feelings, affects and suggestio^s which proceed from this
spirit of sadness, manifest them sincerely and faithfully to thy guide and
confessor: seek the company of spiritual persons, and be with the^ as much
as thou can, during the time of thy sadness. And last of all, resign thy self
up to the hands of God, preparing thy self to suffer this heaviness and sorrow
patiently, as a just punishment of thy vain myrrh and passetimes: and doubt
not at all, but that God, after he has tried thee, will deliver thee from this
evil.

Of spiritual and sensible consolations, and how one must behave him self in
them. CHAP. 13.
1. GOD continues and governs this great world in a perpetual vicissitude
or enterchaunge of night into day, spring into summer, summer into autumn,
autumn into winter, and winter into the springtime again: and one day is
never in all things and points like to another: some are clowdie, some
bright-shining, some raynie, some dry, some windy, some still and lovely. A
variety is this, which gives exceeding beauty to the whole world. The like
is with man, who, according to the saying of the ancient sages, is an
abridgme^t of the world, or another little world: for he also is never in the
same estate, his life passes like waters ebbing and flowing in a perpetual
diversity of motions, which some time lift him up by hope, some time bear him
down with fear: some time carry him to the right hand with co^solations, some
time wafte him to the left hand with afflictions: and not one day, no not so
much as one only hour of all his life, is in all points like another.

2. This is a necessary advertisement which I set thee down: we must do our
best to have a continual and invincible indifferency and equality of heart,
amid this wonderful inequality of occurrences. And albeit all things do
change and turn giddilie round about us, yet must we stand steadfastly and
vnmoueablie, always looking and aspiring toward our God. Let the ship take
what route it list, let it single toward east, or weast, north, or south, what
wind soever drives it, never will the compass look any other way, but toward
the fair pole-starre. Let all turn vpside down, not only round about us,
but even within us, let our soul be sorrowful, or joyful, let it be in peace,
or trouble, in sweetness or bitterness, in light, or in darkness, in tentation,
or in repose, in taste, or out of taste, devout, or undevout, let the sun burn
and scorche it, or the deaw moisten and refresh it: yet always must the point
of our heart, our spirit, our superior will, which is our card or compass,
look incessauntly, and tend continually, toward the love of God her Creator,
her Savior, and her only happiness and sovereign good. Whether we live or dye
(says the Apostle) we belong to God. And who shall be able to separate us from
the love of God? nothing shall be able to dissolve and undo this love, neither
tribulation, not distress, nor anguish, nor death, nor life; nor present, nor
future dolours, nor the fear of imminent dangers, nor the subtlety of
malicious spirits, nor the sublimitie of consolations, nor the depth or
profunditie of afflictions, nor the tenderness, nor dryness of heart, nor any
other thing shall separate us from this holy charity, founded and grounded in
our Saueour Christ Jesus.

3. This absolute and perfect resolution, never to forsake God, or abandon his
sweet love, serves for a counterpoise to our souls, to keep them in holy
indifferency, amidst the in equality and diversity of motions and chaunges
which the co^ditio^ of this life brings. For as the little Bees overtaken with
a storm in the fields, charge them selves with little grauel stones, to
ballau^ce the^ selves in the air, that they may not so easily be carried away
by the wind: so our soul by a lively resolution embracing the precious love of
God, continues constant in the midst of the inconstancy and mutabilitie of
consolations and afflictions, spiritual and temporal, interior and
exterior. But besides this general doctrine, we stand in need of some
particular documents.

4. First then, I say that devotion consists not in that same sweetness,
softnes, comfort, or sensible tenderness of heart, which moves us to tears and
sighs, and gives us a certain delicious taste, and a kind of content and
satisfaction in our spiritual exercises. No (my deer Philotheus) devotion, and
that manner of tenderness of heart, is not al one thing. For many souls have
this supple quality, and those sensible consolations, which for all that let
not to be very vicious, and consequently want the true love of God, and have
no true devotion at all. Saul persequuting poor David to the death, who fled
from him into the wilderness of Engaddi, entered all alone into a vast cave,
where David and his people lay hidden. David who at this occasion might have
killed him a thousand times, spared his life, and would not so much as put him
in fear: but suffered him to go forth quietly at his pleasure, called after
him, to declare unto him his innocence, and to give him to understand, that he
had been at his mercy. Well here upon what did not Saul to show that his heart
was mollified toward David? he called him his child, fell into plain
weeping, to praise him, to confess his meeknes, to pray unto God for him, to
presage and foretell his future greatness, and to commend his own posterity
unto him. What greater sweetness, and tenderness of heart could he make show of?
and yet for all that, he had not changed his canckred mind, nor left of his
rancorous intention, but continued persecuting David as cruelly as before.
Even so there may be found many persons, that considering the goodness of God,
and the doleful passion of our Saueour, do feel great tenderness of heart,
which forces them to sigh, to weep, to bless, and praise God, and give him
thancks very feelingly, at least very sensibly; in so much that one would
judge their heart to be seized and possessed with a mighty deal of devotion:
But when the matter comes to the proof, we shall find, that like as short
sudden shewers of a hot summer, falling in great big drops upon the earth
and not pearcing it, serve for nothing else but to produce todestooles and
mushroms: Even so the tears and tenderness of these men, falling upon a vicious
heart, and not penetrating it, be altogether unprofitable. For notwithstanding
all these great dropps of sensible devotion, they will not part from one dodkin
of their euel gotten goods, nor renounce one of all their crooked and perverse
affections, nor suffer the least incommoditie of the world for the service of
our Saueour, for whose sake they wept so earnestly. So that the good motions
which these poor souls felt, are nothing but spiritual mushrums; and are not
only no true devotion, but oftentimes great slights of the devil, who
nousling them up in these false consolations, makes them remain contented and
satisfied therewith: that so they should search no farther for true and sound
devotion, which consists in a prompt, resolute, active, and constant will, of
putting in execution that which they know to be agreeable to Gods pleasure. A
little child will weep tenderly if he see his mother launced when she is let
blood: but if his mother at the same time demand an apple, or a paper of
comfits which he has in his hands, he will by no means let it go from him,
demand it she never so sweetly. Such for the more part are these tender
devotions, considering the stroke of the spear, which pierced the heart of our
Saueour, we weep bitterly therefore: And alas (my Philotheus) it is right well
done to bewail the sorrowful death and woeful passion of our father and
redeemer, but why then do we not give him the apple which we have in our hands,
seeing he asks it us so earnestly, to wit, our heart, the only fruict of love,
which our dear Saueour requesteth of us? Wherefore resign we not unto him so
many petty affections, delights, and self, pleasures, which he would pull out
of our hands and cannot, because they be our babies, they be our comfits of
which we be more fond, then desirous of his heavenly grace? Ah Philotheus,
these be babie-loues, little childrens frindships, tender indeed, but feeble,
but fantastical, but fruictlesse, and without effect. Devotion then,
consists not in such tender and sensible affections, which sometimes proceed
of a nature or complexion in it self soft, supple, apt and easy to receive
any impression: but sometimes of the craft of the deuel, who to busy us
unprofitably about such trash and droguerie, stirs up our fantasy to the
appresion fit for to receive such motions.

5. Yet these self same tender and sweet affections are many times good and
profitable, for they provoke the appetite of the soul, comfort the spirit, and
add to the promptitude of our devotion, a kind of iollitie and cheerfullnes,
which makes our actions comely and delightful, even in outward show and
appeerance. Which is the gust or taste that one feels in divine and heavenly
matters, of which David exclaimeth: O Lor how sweet are thy words to my taste?
they are sweeter then honny to my mouth. And indeed the least and meanest
co^tentment of devotion which we receive in holy exercises, is better in all
respects, then the most excellent recreations and pleasures of the world. The
breasts, and milk, that is, the favors of the heavenly spouse, are sweeter
and pleasaunter to the soul, then the daintiest and most precious wine of
earthly delights. He that once has tasted them, esteems all other comforts,
but gaulle and wormwood. As they that hold the herb Scitique in their mouth,
taste so pleasant a sweetness, that they feel neither hunger nor thirst for the
while: so they, to whom God has imparted this celestial Manna of internal
consolations, can neither desire nor receive the contentments of the world, at
least to take any pleasure in them, or to set their affections upon them.
They be tastes given before hand, of the immortal delights which God has laid
up in heaven for the souls that search after him: they be the sugared comfits
and carowayes which he gives unto us as his little children to allure us: they
be the cordial waters which he presents to strengthen them; and many times
they be handsels, or pledges of everlasting felicity. They say that Alexander
the great, sailing in the many sea, discovered before the rest of his
companions, the land of the happy Arabia, by the smell of the sweet odours
which the wind brought with it, and thereupon received him self, and gave
great encouragement, to his felow-soldiours: so often times in this mortal life,
we receive these delights and pleasures of devotion, which no doubt present
unto our memory, the joys and delights of the happy land of heaven, whereunto
we do all sail and aspire.

6. But thou will say, since there are some sensible consolations that be good,
and come from God, and other some that be unprofitable, and pernicious,
proceeding either from nature, or from the enemy, how shall I distinguishe the
one from the other, and discern the unprofitable from those that be good. It
is a general rule (my Philotheus) for all the passions and affections of our
soul, that we must know them by their fruicts: our souls be as it were trees;
affections and passions be the bows and branches; works and actions be the
fruicts. It is a good soul, that feels good affections, and the affections
are good which bring forth in us great effects of holy actions. If the
delights, the tenderness, the consolations which we feel in spiritual
exercises, do make us more humble, more patient, tractable, charitable, fuller
of compassion toward our neighbor; more fervent in mortifying our
concupiscence and naughty inclinations; more constant in our good exercises
and resolutions, more meek and supple, and pliable to those whom we ought to
obey; more simple and sincere in our lives: then without all doubt Philotheus,
they are from God. But if these delights have no sweetness, saving only for our
own selves, if they make us curious, peevish, sower, sullen, impatient,
stubborn, fierce, presumptuous, hard hearted toward our neighbors, if
therefore esteeming our selves allredie petty Saints, we will no more be
subject to correction nor direction, then dear Philotheus, beware of them,
then doubtless they be false and pernicious consolations. A good tree cannot
bring forth any other but good fruicts.

7. When we receive these delights and comforts in our exercises we must. 1.
First of all humble our selves profoundly before almighty God: and take heed
of saying to our selves by reason of these sweet comforts: how perfect, how
good am I become! No Philotheus, not so, these be good things in deed, but they
make us never the better for having them: for, as I have said, devotion
consists not in them, but let us say and thinck from our hearts: O how good
is God to such as hope in him, to the soul that seeks after him! He that
has sugar melting in his mouth, cannot properly say that his mouth is sweet,
but that the sugar, which is in his mouth, is sweet to his mouth: So though
these spiritual delights be very good, and that God who impatteth them to us,
is exceeding good, yet follows it not, that he which receaueth them, is good.
2. Let us acknowledge our selves as yet to be little children, and that we stand
in need of milk: that these sugared confits be given us, because as yet our
spirit is tender and delicate, and therefore needs allurements and baytes, to
be drawn with all to the love of God. 3. But after that, speaking generally,
and ordinarily, let us receive these graces and favors humbly, and reverently,
esteeming them exceeding precious, not so much for that they are in them
selves, as that it is the hand of God which powers them into our heart. As a
loving mother to allure her child, puts her own self the sugared confits
into his mouth one by one, sweetly smiling, and tenderly parliyng with him the
while: for if the child had wit and use of his reason, he would much more
esteem, his mothers cherishing embraces, then the sweetness of the confits, be
they never so dainty. So it is much Philotheus to receive and feel in our
souls this sweetness of devotion: but it is the sweet of all sweetness to
consider that God, with his loving and fatherly hand, puts them as it were
into our mouth, to our heart, and soul. 4. Having received them thus in humble
and reverent wise, let us employ them wholly according to the intention of the
giver. And wherefore think ye, does God bestow these sweet comforts upon us?
to make us sweet toward every body, and amourous toward him. The mother
gives comfits to her little child, to make him kiss her: let us likewise kiss
our blessed Saueour, who makes much of us by these consolations: to kiss our
Saueour, is to obey him, to fulfill his will, to follow his rules and
counsels: in a word, to embrace him tenderly and lovingly with obedience and
loyalty. The day therefore in which we shall receive any spiritual
consolation, we must employ most carefully, and endeavor to spend it
diligently in Gods service and honor. 5. Beyond all this, we must from time to
time renounce in our heart all this sweetness, tenderness, and consolation,
separating our affection from it as much as we can: protesting, that albeit we
receive these favors humbly, and love and esteem them, because God sends
them to us, as it were dishes and dainties from his own table, to provoke us
the more to his love: yet it is not those delights that we seek and desire, but
God him self and his perfect love, not the comforts but the comforter; not the
sweetness, but the sweet Saueour that gives them; not that tenderness of delight,
but him that is the delight of heaven and earth. And in this affectuous
abrenunciation of these delights, we must dispose our selves, to persevere
constant and firm in the holy love of God, though in all our life long we
should not taste one dram of consolation: and procure unfeignedly, to say as
well upon the mount of Caluary, as on the mount of Tabor, O Lord it is good for
me to be with thee, be thou in torments upon thy cross, or be thou in glory
in heaven. 6. To conclude I aduertize thee that if thou should chance to
feel any extraordinary abounda^ce of such consolations, tenderness, sweetness,
devout tears, or some unwonted thing: that then thou confer it faithfully
with thy spiritual conductour, that be may teach thee how to moderate and
behave thy self therein. For it is written. Have thou found honny? eat of it
but as much as is sufficient.

Of dryness and barrenness in our spiritual exercises. CHAPTER 14.
1. THVS then must thou behave thy self, as I have now described in time of
spiritual comfort: but alas (Philotheus,) this fair weather will not last
always: and the time will come, when thou shall be so destitute, and deprived
of all feeling of this devotion, that thy soul will seem unto thee a
fruictlesse and barren field, or a desert wilderness, in which there appeers
neither cawsee, nor pathway to find God, nor any dew of grace to moisten and
water it, through excessive drienes, which threatens to reduce her altogether
to dust. Alas the poor soul in this case deserves compassion, and especially
when this desolation is vehement: for at that time like holy David, she feeds
her self with sad tears night and day: mean while the enemy by a thousand
suggestions endeavors to drive her to despair, and mocketh her bitterly,
saying in derision, wretch, where is thy God now in thy distress? by what
means will thou find him out? Who shall ever be able to restore thee the joy
of his grace?

2. And what will thou do at that time Philotheus, consider from what cause so
great a misery proceeds: for often times, we our selves are the cause of our
own driennes and desolation, in the exercises of the spirit. 1. As a careful
mother denies to give sugar to her child, when she sees him troubled with the
worms: so God takes away his consolations from us, when we take some vain
self-pleasing in them, and are subject to the worm of ouer-weaning, to
self-conceipt, and opinion of our own good progress in devotion. O my God
(says the psalmist) It is good for me that thou have humbled me. Yes in deed,
it is very profitable for me, for before I was humbled, I did offend thee. 2.
When we neglect to gather the sweetness and deliciousness of the love of God in
due time: then in punishment of our slothfullnesse, he absenteth his delights
from us. The Israelites in the desert that gathered not Manna early in the
morning, could not find any after the sunne-rising, for then was it all melted
with the heat of the sun. 3. We are also sometimes laid in the bed of
sensual contentment, and transitory comforts, as the sacred spouse was in the
Canticles, comes me the bridegroom, and knocks at the door of our heart, and
inspireth us to return to our spiritual exercises: but we play the niggardly
chapmen with him, for it angereth us to leave of our toys, and to separate our
selves from our false delights. For this cause the true lover of our souls
goes his way from us, and lets us lie as we list: but afterward when we
would feign find him out, we have much a do to meet with him; and deservedly,
because we were so discourteous and faithless unto his love, as to refuse to
follow our exercise for his love, and to choose to follow worldly vanities. Ah:
then as yet thou have some of the branne of Egypt remaining: thou shall then
have not a jot of the heavenly Manna. Bees detest all kind of artificial
odours: and the sweetness of the holy Ghost, cannot agree with the sophisticated
delights of the world. 4. The double dealing, and slights which thou use in
confessions, and spiritual communications with the conductour and master of
thy soul, many times is the cause of this drougth and barrenness: for if thou
lie to the holy Ghost, no marvel if he withdraw his consolations from thee.
Thou will not be simple, plain, and without guile, as a little child is: thou
shall not then enjoy these spiritnall comfits, given only to Gods little
children. 5. Thou art filled and glutted with worldly contentments: no wonder
then if spiritual delights come not to thy table, or have no good taste in thy
mouth: Doves allreadie filled (says the ancient proverb) do thinck cherries
bitter. He which filled the hungry with good things (says our blessed Lady)
and sent the rich away empty. They that be rich of wordly vanities, are not
capable of spiritual treasures. 6. Have thou conserved well and carefully the
fruicts of consolations allreadie received? then shall thou receive more store
again: for to him that has, more shaloe given: and he that has not
(negligently leesing that which he received) even that he has shall be taken
away from him, he shall be deprived of the favors and graces, which were
prepared for him, if he had used well the former. The rain quickens them
pla^ts that be green, but from them that be not green, it takes away
altogether all likely hood of life and growth, for it rotteth them wholly.

3. For many such causes do we loose comfort in devotion, and fall into
barrennes and drienes of spirit. Let us then examine our conscience, and see
whether we can find in us such faulty causes as these. But note, Philotheus,
that this examination is not to be made with unquietness of mind; or overmuch
curiosity, but after thou have faithfully considered thy going awrie in this
respect, if thou find the cause of the evil in thy self, give God thancks, for
the harm is half healed, whose cause is discovered. If on the other side, thou
find our no cause in particular, which may seem unto thee to have occasioned
this desolation, busy not thy self about any more curious search for it, but
with all simplicity, without examining any more particularities, do this
which I will tell thee.

4. First of all humble thy self reverently before the eyes of God,
acknowledging thy misery, thy frailty, the nothing that thou art in thy self.
Alas what am I, when I am left alone to mine own providence? nothing else, O
Lord, but a dry barren ground, that full of gappes and riftes, witnesses the
drought it suffers, for want of heavenly dew: and the wind of tentation in
the mean time does dissipate it converted into fruictlesse dust. 2. Call upon
God and demand of him his spiritual joy. Render unto me, O Lord, the joy of
thy saluatiou, My father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.
Get thee away o thou vnfruictfull Northewind, which driest up the sap and
juice of my soul: and come o prosperous winds of consolations, and breath
gently over my poor garden, and then these good affections will spread abroad
the odor of their sweetness 3. Go to thy Confessor, open thy heart unto him,
make him see clearly all the plights and corners of thy soul: take his advice
simply and humbly: for God that infinitely loves obedience, makes often times
counsels taken from other men, prove very profitable, especially given by
conductours of souls, albeit otherwise there be no great likelihood, that they
should prevail: as he made the waters of Jordan healthful to Naaman, which
Elizeus, without any appeerance at all of humane reason, ordained him as a bath
for his leprosy.

4. All this being done, nothing is so profitable, nothing so fruitful in
time of these spiritual desolations, and barrenesse, as not to be overmuch
desirous of being delivered from this aggreeuance or calamity. I say not but
that we may simply and quietly wish to be eased of so great aburden: but my
meaning is, that we should not too earnestly affect this ease, and freedom from
this desolate state of mind: but heartily resign our soul to the providence of
God; that so long as it pleases him, he may use our poor service, amid these
troublesome thornie-brakes, and comfortless deserts. Let us say to God at
these times. O father, if it be possible, let this cup pass away from me: but
let us with all from our very hearts, adioine the words folowinge of our
blessed Saueour: Yet not my will be done, but thine: upon this good resolution
let us rest, and repose. For God seeing us constantly persevere in this holy in
differency, will comfort us with many graces, and favors: as when he saw
Abraham resolved to deprive him self of his son Isaac, he was contented with
this his indifferency, and pure resignation, co^forting him with a heavenly
vision, and with most admirable benedictions. We must then in all kind of
afflictions, as well corporal as spiritual, in what soever distractions, or
subtractio^s of sensible devotion happening to us, with great courage, and
resignation always say: Our Lord gave me consolations, and our Lord has taken
them from me; his holy name be blessed. For persisting in this humility and
submission, he will restore unto us his delicious favors, as he did unto Job,
who used the aforesaid words constantly and unfeignedly in all his desolations.

5. Finally my Philotheus, amidst all these sterilities and desolations, let
us not loose courage, but expecting patie^tly the return of spiritual
delights, keep on our journey, follow our exercises of devotion, multiply good
works and holy actions: and not being able to present to our spouse, liquid
conserues, present him dry confitures: for all is one to him, provided that
the heart which offers them, be perfectly resolved to persevere loyally in his
love. When the spring time is fair and pleasant, then do the Bees make more
honnie, and fewer young impes: for the good wether favoring them, they are so
busy in gathering the sap of sweet flowers, that they forgett the generation
of their young ones. But when the springtime is troublesome with gloomie
clouds and windy storms, they get more impes, and less honnie for being
not able to fly abroad to their gathering of honnie, they employ them selves
to multiply their race, and people their common wealth. So chances it often
times, my Philotheus, that the soul in the fair weather of spiritual
comforts, busieth her self so much in gathering them together, and sucking that
heavenly juice out of them, that in the abundance of these dainty delights,
she produces fewer good works: and contrariwise amid the bitterness of
clowdie desolations, seeing her self destituted of those spiritual delights of
devotion, she multiplieth solid works of edification so much more seriously,
and abounds in fructifiyng of true virtues of patience, humility, abiection,
resignation, and abnegation, of all self-will and self love.

6. It is then a great abuse and error of many, especially of women, to
believe that the service which we do to God whithout this pleasant taste, and
sensible delight, and tenderness of heart, is less agreeable to his divine
majesty: for clean contrarylie, our actions are like unto roses, which though
being fresh and flourie they have a better grace and show, yet when they are
dry they have a sweeter odor: so though our works done with tenderness of
devotion be more acceptable to us our selves, to us I say, that consider only
our own delight: yet when they are exercised by us in time of dryness and
barrenesse of spirit, then have they a goodlier estimation, and a better odor
in the presence of God. In time of desolation, our will carries us (as it were
by mere force) to the service of God, and consequently that will must needs be
more vigorous and constant, then the will which we have of serving God in time
of comfort. It is no such great matter to serve a prince in time of peace, and
in the pomp and pleasures of the court, but to serve him constantly in time
of trouble and persecution, and in war, that is a true mark of constancy and
loyalty. Saint Angela de Fulgino says, that of all prayers, that is most
acceptable to God, which is made by force and mere constraint, that is,
whereunto we apply our selves willingly, not for any taste or delight which we
feel in it, nor by our own inclination, but merely, purely and only to
please God: whereto our will drives us, as it were against our will, forcing
and violently repelling the drienesse, and contradictions, which oppose
themselves against it. The same say I of all sorts of good works, that the
more contradiction we find in exercising them, be it exterior, or interior,
the more are they prized and esteemed in the court of heaven. The less of our
own particular interest that there is in the poursnite of virtues, the more
does the purity of the love of God shine in it. A little child will easily
kiss his mother, when she gives him honnie and sugar, but it is a sign of
greater love, if he kiss her after she has given him wormeseed, or bitter
potions.

The former discourse is explained and confirmed by a notable example. CHAPTER
15.
1. TO make this instruction more evident and intelligible, I will recite an
excellent piece of the history of S. Bernard, in such manner as I find it set
down in the learned and judicious writer thereof. He says then in this wise.
It is an ordinary thing, almost unto all them that begin to serve God, and
are not yet experienced in the subtractio^ of grace, nor in spiritual
vicissitudes or entercha^ges of co^solatio^s and desolatio^s; that the taste of
sensible devotion and that sweet acceptable light of mind, (which makes them
haste^ them selves in the way of God) being withdrawn from them: they
presently grow out of breath, and fall into pusillanimitie and sadness of heart.
They that be of judgment and understanding do render this reason thereof: that
nature according to reason cannot long endure (as a man might say) fasting, and
without any kind of delight or entertainment at all, but needs must have some
contentment, either terrestrial or celestial. But as souls lifted up above
them selves by taste and trial of heavenly pleasures, do easily renounce the
delights of all sensible objects: so when by Gods disposition and ordinance
that spiritual joy is taken from them, finding them selves also on the other
side deprived of corporal solace, and being not yet accustomed to expect with
patience, the return and rising of the true sun of grace, it seems unto
them that they are no more in heaven or in earth, but that they be buried in
perpetual darkness: So that as little children newly weaned, having lost their
mothers dugges they do languishe, and sigh, and grow froward and troublesome,
principally to their own selves. This then happened in the voyage whereof we
speak, unto one of the troop, called Geoffrie of Peronne, but newly
dedicated to the service of God. He being suddenly become dry in his
devotions, destituted of his woonted consolations, and possessed with a kind of
inward darkness: began to call to memory the world, his frinds, his parents,
and the great means that but lately he had left behind him. By which memory,
he was assaulted with so cruel a temptation, that not being able to hide it in
his behaueour, one of his trusty frinds perceived it, and having found
opportunity, joined himself to him, and asked him sweetly in secret: what
means this change Geoffrie? How comes it to pass, that contrary to thy
wont, thou art become so pensive and afflicted. Ah my brother (answered
Geoffrie with a deep sigh) I shall never more be merry so long as I live. The
other moved with compassion at these words, with a fraternall zeal, went and
told all this to their common father Saint Bernard: who perceauing the danger,
went into a church there by, to pray to God for him, and Geoffrie in the mean
while overwhelmed with sadness, reposing his head upon a stone, fell fast a
sleep. But after a little while, both of them arose, the one from prayer with
his request dispatched in the high court of heaven, the other from sleep with
so pleasant and smiling a countenance, that his deer frind meruailing at so
great and sudden a change, could not refrain from obiecting unto him
lovingly that which a little before he had answered him. Then Geoffrie replied:
if I told thee before that I should never in my life be joyful, now I assure
thee, that I shall never in my life be sorrowful.

2. This was the success of the temptation of that devout personage, and mark
in it (my deer Philotheus) 1. First that God ordinarily gives some fore-tasts
of heavenly joy, to such as newly enter into his service: so to draw them
from earthly pleasures, and encourage the^ in the poursuite of the love of
God: just as a mother to entice and allure her little child to her breasts,
lays honnie upon her teats. 2. That notwithstanding the same good God, which
according to the disposition of his wisdom, takes from us this milk and honny
of consolations: to the end that weaning his children in this manner, they
might learn to eat the dry, but more substantial bread of lively and sound
devotion, exercised by the trial of distaste and desolation. 3. That sometimes
very vehement temptations arise amidst these desolate and dry discontentments
of sterilitie of spirit: and then it behooves us to resist these temptations
constantly, for they come not from God; but withal we must patie^tly suffer
this desolate estate, of want of spiritual feeling in our devotions, for God
has ordained and disposed it for our exercise and merit. 4. That we must not
leese heart and courage among these inward griefs, nor say as this good Geoffrie
did, I shall never be joyful hereafter: for in the night season, we must
expect the daylights approache; Again in the fairest weather of the spirit,
that we ca^ have we must not say now shall I never be sad hereafter; No; for as
the wise man says, in time of prosperity, we must be mindful of adversity,
and in our travails, hope for rest: and as well in the one occasion as in the
other, we must always humble our selves. 5. That it is a sovereign remedy to
discover our euel unto some spiritual frind, that may be able to comfort us.

3. In fine for conclusion of this so necessary aduertisment, I note, that as
in all other things, so in these dry sterilities of our spirit, God and the
devil have contrary pretentions. For God would thereby bring us to purity of
heart, to a general renunciatio^ of our proper interest in his service, and to
a perfect deposing of our own wills. But the devil goes about by the same
way to lead us to pusillanimitie, to abate our courage, to make us step a
side to sensible passetimes, and at length to render us yrksome and loathsome
to our selves, and others that live with us; that so devotion may be
diminished, and defamed. But if thou observe diligently these lessons which I
have given thee, thou shall augment thy perfection in those exercises, which
thou performest in time of these interior afflictions: whereof one word more
before I make an end.

4. Sometimes these distasts, this drouth and barrennes of spirit, do proceed
from the indispositio of our body: as when through too much watching,
laboring, fasting, one finds him self ouerloaden with weariness, drousines,
heaviness, and such like infirmities; which although they depend of the body,
yet let they not to hinder and trouble the spirit, by reason of the straight
bond with which they are tied one to another. In these occasions, we must
always be mindful, to produce many acts of virtue, with our spirit, or
superior will: for although all our soul seem to be ouer-layd with sleep
and drousines: yet the actions of our spirit eue^ in that state, are exceeding
acceptable to God. And we may say in this case with the sacred spouse, I sleep,
but my heart watches. And as I said before, though there be less delight in
this labor of spirit, yet is there more virtue and merit. The remedy in such
occurrences is, to ease the body with some kind of lawful delight and
recreation. So Saint Francis ordained that his religious should use such
moderation in their labor, that the burden of them, should not depresse and
overthrow the spirit. And since we have mentioned S. Francis, let us remember
his example, who was on a time him self so vexed and tormented with a profound
melancholy, that he could not choose but declare it in his behaueour. For if
he would converse with his religious he knew not how; if he withdrew him self,
from their conversation, it went worse with him; abstinence and mortification
of his flesh, overwhelmed him: and prayer eased him not at all. And in this
sort remained this glorious father, the space of two years, so that it seemed
unto him, that in a manner, God had forsaken him. But at length after he had so
long and patiently suffered this rude and vehement tentation, our Saueour in a
moment restored to him the happy tranquillity and repose of his spirit. This
have I said, to show that the greatest and faithfullest servants of God, are
subject unto these adversities and afflictions of mind: and that therefore those
that are lesser in Gods books, be not dismayed if some times they happen unto
them.

THE FIFTH PART OF THE INTRODVCTION: Containing exercises and instructions to
renew the soul, and confirm devotion.
That we renew every year our good purposes by the exercises following. CHAPTER
I.
THE first and principal poinct of these exercises, consists in knowing the
importance of them. Our weak and frail nature, falls very easily from her
good affections and resolutio^s, through the bad inclinations of our flesh,
which lie heavy upon the soul it self, and draw her still downwards, if she
strive not often times to lift up her self by maine force of resolution as birds
fall suddenly to ground, if they multiply not the spreading and wauing of
their wings to maintenine their flight aloft in the air. For this cause, dear
Philotheus, thou must very often repeat the good purposes which thou have made
to serve God, for fear least neglecting to do so, thou tu^ble down to thy
first estate, or rather into a far worse estate. For spiritual falls have
this property, that they cast us always lower, then was the estate from which
we ascended up to devotion.

2. There is no clock, be it never so good, or so well set, but it must be
wound up twice a day at least, morning and evening, and moreover at least once
a year, be taken all in pieces, to scour away the rust which it has
gathered, to mend broken pieces, and repair such as be worn. Even so he that
has a true care of his soul, should wind it up to God evening and morning by
the foresaid exercises, and besides at diverse times, make a reuiew of his
estate, and at least once a year, take it down and consider precisely all the
pieces thereof, that is, all his passions, affections and motions, that all
faults and defects found out, may out of hand be redressed. And as the clockman
with some delicate oil, annointeth the wheels, iunctures and ginnes of his
clock, that the motions may be more easy, and the whole be less subject to
rust; so the devout person, after he has in this sort taken down his heart to
reuiew and renew it, should anoint it with the sacraments of Confession, and
the holy Eucharist. This exercise will repair thy weather-beaten forces,
inflame thy heart, make thy good purposes sprout out a fresh, and thy virtues
flourish anew. The ancient Christians diligently practiced it upon the
anniuersarie feast of our Saueours Baptism, or Twelf-daye: on which (as
witnesses Saint Gregory Nazianzen) they renewed those professions and
protestations, which they made in their christening. Let us do the like, (my
dear Philotheus) disposing our selves most willingly, and employing our time
seriously therein. And having chosen a fit time, according to the advice of
thy ghostly father, retiring thy self into thy spiritual and real solitude,
or wilderness of devotion: make two or three of these ensewing meditations,
after the order and method, which I set down unto thee in the second part.

Considerations upon the benefit which God does unto us, by calling us to his
service, according to the protestation mentioned before. CHAPTER 2.
1. RVNNE over the poincts of thy protestation. The first is, to reject and
cast away, detest, and defy for ever, all kind of mortal sin. The second,
to have dedicated, and consecrated thy soul, thy heart, and thy body, with all
that thou have, to the love and service of God: The third; that if it should
happen unto thee to fall into some naughty action, that thou will procure
immediately to rise again by Gods grace. Are not these goodly, worthy,
reasonable, and noble resolutions? Way well in thy soul, how conformable to
the rule of reason this thy protestation is, how just, and how much to be
desired, that thou should fulfill and accomplish every poinct of it.

2. Consider to whom thou have made this protestation: even to God him self.
If according to reason, our word given to a man, do straightly oblige and bind
us, how much more our word and promise given and passed to almighty God? Ah
Lord (said David) it is to thee that my heart has pronounced this good word,
and I will not forgett it.

3. Consider in whose presence thou made this protestation and thou shall
find, that it was in sight of the whole court of heaven. The holy Virgin,
blessed Saint Joseph, thy good Angel, Saint Lewis, all this blessed company
beheld thee, and sighed with sighs of joy and contentment at thy words, and
looked upon thee with eyes of unspeakable love, when thy heart prostrated at
the feet of our Saueour, consecrated it self wholly to his service. They made
a peculiar feast and triumph that day of thy entry into Gods service, and
they will now make a commemoration of that joyful feast, if with a devout heart
and good courage, thou renewest thy resolutions.

4. Consider by what means thou wast brought to make this protestation, and to
offer up these great resolutions. Ha my Philotheus, how amiable and favorable
did God show him self unto thee at that time? Tell me, wast thou not then
drawn unto it, by the sweet inspirations of the holy Ghost? the cords
wherewith God drew thy little bark unto this secure haven, were they not all of
love and charity? How deerlie and daintelie did he allure and entice thee with
his sugared sacraments, with holy lecture, and devout prayer? Ah Philotheus,
thou wast a sleep, and God watched over thee, and had care of thy soul, and
had thoughts of peace, and meditations of love concerning thee.

5. Consider at what time God drew thee thus happily unto him by these holy
purposes. It was in the flower of thine age. Ah what a felicity is it to
learn quickly, that which we cannot know but ouer-late. Saint Augustine, having
been called to God at thirty years of his age, cried out: O ancient beauty,
how is it, that I knew thee so late? Alas I saw thee before, but I did not
consider thee till now. And thou may well say: O ancient sweetness, why did
not I taste thee sooner? And yet alas, thou deseruedst it not at that time in
which it was given thee: therefore acknowledging the great bounty and grace of
God, for calling thee to him in thy youth, say unto him with David: Thou have
lightened me, o God, and touched me from my youth, and I will for ever
pronounce thy mercy. But if this thy vocation was in thy older days, o then,
Philotheus, how inestimable a benefit was it, after thou had in such sort
abused the years of thy life past, that God of his goodness should call thee
before thy death, and stay the courrent of thy misery, even at that time, in
which if it had been continewed, thou had been miserable for ever and ever!

6. Consider the effects which this vocation has wrought in thee, and I
suppose thou shall find change and alteration enough in thy soul, co^paring
that which now thou art, with that which thou have been. Do thou not
account it a singular felicity, to know how to talk familiarlie with God by
prayer? to have an enflamed affection and burning desire of the love of God to
have appeased, and pacified many a troublesome passion, which before did vex,
and torment thee? to have avoided many sins and scruples of conscience? And
in a word to have so often frequented the holy Communion (more then thou
would once have done) so uniting thy self to this sovereign wellspring of
euer-during graces? Ah, these be great and inestimable favors. We must way and
ponder them with the waightes of the sanctuary: it is Gods right hand that
has done all this. The right hand of God (says David) has done powerfully,
his right hand has extolled me: I will not die, but live; and will make known
with heart, word, and deed, the wonders of his goodness.

7. After all these considerations, which as thou see may plentifully
furnish thee with holy and fervent affections: thou must simply conclude with
thancks-geuing, and pray affectionatly for thy good progress in virtue. And so
retire from prayer with great humility and confidence in God: reserving the
enforcing of the resolutio^s, till after the second poinct of this exercise.

The examination of our soul touching her proffiting in devotion. CHAPTER 3.
1. THE second poinct of this exercise, is somewhat long, and therefore to
practice it, it is not requisite to perform it all at once, but at diverse
times: as to take that which concerns thy misdemeanour toward God for once,
that which apperteineth to thy self for another time, that which touches thy
neighbor for an other, and the examining of thy passions for another. Neither
is it requisite or necessary, to do it all upon thy knees, but only the
beginning and ending, which co^prehendeth the affections. The other poincts of
the examination, thou must perform profitablie walking, or sitting, or best of
all in bed, if thou can so remain without drowsines, or well awake: but thou
must well have read them before. Yet it is necessary to make an end of all
this second poinct in three days, and two nights, at the farthest: taking
each day and night, some hour or season according as thou best may: for if
it should be done at times far distant one from another, it would loose his
force, and would work but very weak and kay-cold impressions and resolutions.

2. After every point of the examination, note carefully in what thou find
thy self amended, and in what thou art defective, and what principal errors
or abuses thou have committed, that so thou may declare thy self the better
to take good council, and resolution, to comfort thy mind. And although in
these days of examination, it be not necessary to retire thy self totallie
from company and conversation: yet thou must be somewhat more retired the^
ordinary, and principally toward the evening, that thou may go to bed
early, and take that rest of body and repose of mind which is necessary for
these exercises. And in the day time, thou must use very frequent aspirations
to God, to our Lady, to the Angels, to all the celestial Jerusalem: And all
this must be done with a loving heart toward God, and desirous of perfection.
So begin then this examination well and happily.

1. First place thy self in the presence of God.

2. Inuoke the aid of the holy Ghost, demand of him light and cleernes, to
see and know well, with S. Augustine, who cried out before God in an humble
spirit: O lord let me know thee, and let me know my self: and S. Francis, who
sweetly asked God saying. Who art thou, and who am I? Protest that thou do
not purpose to mark and note thy advancement and progress in piety and
virtue, to rejoice therefore in thy self, but to rejoice in God, nor to glorify
thy self, but to glorify God, and to give him thancks for it. Protest likewise
that if thou find that thou have not profited nor gone forward at all in
devotion nay though thou have recoyled and gone backward: yet for all that thou will not leese thy courage, nor become any whit the colder in thy good
purposes, through faintnes of heart; but that rather thou will more stir up
thy courage, and animate thy self to go more cheerfully forward in the journey
of devotion happily enterprized, and that thou will the more profoundly humble
thy self, and amend thy defaults by the assistance of Gods grace.

This done, consider leasurely and quietly how thou have behaved thy self even
till that present power, toward God, toward thy neighbor, and toward thy
self.

An examination of the estate of our soul toward God. CHAP. 4.
1. HOW is thy heart affected toward mortal sin? have thou a firm resolution
never to committ any, whatsoever should happen unto thee therefore? Has this
resolution and full purpose, endured continually in thy soul, since thy last
protestation unto this time? In this resolution consists the foundation of
spiritual life.

2. How find thou thy heart affected toward the commandments of God. Do
thou find the^ delightful, sweet acceptable. Ah my deer child, he that has his
mouth in taste, and a good stomak, loves wholesome meats, and rejects the
contrary.

3. How does thy heart bear it self toward venial sins? we cannot keep our
selves so pure, but we shall commit some now and then: but is there any, to
which thou have any especial inclination? or which were worse, is there any
kind of venial sin, to which thou bear a peculiar affection and delight?

4. How is thy heart affected toward spiritual exercises? do thou love
them, and esteem them? do they not trouble thee? art thou not out of content
and taste with them? To which of them do thou find thy self most inclined? To
hear the word of God, to read it, to talk of it, to meditate it, to aspire
daily to God, to go often to confession, to receive spiritual instructions,
to prepare thy self duly to the holy Communion, to Communicate freque^tly, to
bridle thy affections: in these and such like acts and exercises, what is there
contrary or repugning to thy mind? And if thou find any such holy exercise, to
which this heart of thine has less inclination then it should, examine the
cause from whence that disgust arises.

5. How does thy heart remain affected toward God him self? Takes it pleasure
in the remembrance of God? feels it not a sweet delight in calling him to
mind? Ah said David, I have thought upon God, and taken delight therein. Do
thou find a certain promptnes, readiness, and facility in thy heart to love
God, and a particular savor in tasting this his love? Thy heart, does it not
recreat it self to think upon the immensitie, bounty, and marvelous swetnes
of almighty God? If thou chance to thinck upon God amidst thy worldly
affairs, and vanities, does this thought make place, and win rome, and seize
upon thy heart? Does it seem to thee that in such cases thy heart takes Gods
part, and turns to his side, and as it were goes before him, to lead him
reverently into the chamber of thy heart? for there are many souls of this
metal in the world.

6. A loving wife, when her housband comes home from some far journey, so
soon as she perceaueth any sign of his return, or hears his voice: what
business of ever she has in hand, though she be constrained by some forcible
consideration to stay her self, yet her heart cannot be held from looking for
her husband, but abandoneth all other cogitations, to thinck upon his joyful
return. Souls that love God, do the very same; howsoever they be employed,
when the remembrance of God presents it self unto the^, they neglect all
things else, for joy that their beloved is returned unto them; and this is a
very good sign.

7. How is thy heart affected toward Jesus Christ, God and man. Take thou
pleasure in thincking on his life and death? The Bees delight in their
delicious honnie: Waspes and beetles, in illfauoured savors: so holy souls
have all their co^tentme^t, placed in our sweet redeemer Jesus Christ, with an
exceeding tenderness of ardent love to him: but such as be vain, and wicked,
plant their affections altogether upon unprofitable vanities.

8. How is thy heart affected toward our blessed Lady, thy good Angel, the
Saints of heaven? Do thou love, honor and reverence them: have thou a
special trust in their intercession, a respect and worship to their images,
delight in their lives: take thou pleasure to hear them praised?

9. Concerning thy tongue. How speak thou of God: is it a delight unto thee
to talk and discource in his honor, according to thy condition and ability:
Do thou love to sing hymns to his praise and glory?

10. Concerning works. Thinck whether thou have a true hearty desire of the
outward glotie of God, and to do somewhat for his honor and worship: for such
as love God, do according to David, love the ornament of his house.

11. Consider whether thou have left any affection, or renounced any delight,
or forsook any thing for Gods cause? for it is a great sign of true love, for
his sake whom we love, to deprive our selves of any thing. What then have thou
in all this time (since thy protestation) forsaken for the love of God?

An examination of our estate touching our selves. CHAP. 5.
1. HOW do thou love thy self, love thou thy self overmuch for the
vanities of this world? For if it be so, thou will desire to dwell always in
the world, with an extraordinary care to establishe thy self here upon earth.
But if thou love thy self for heavens sake then will thou desire, at least wise
thou will easily consent, to depart from hence at the time and hour, that it
shall please our Lord to call thee.

2. Do thou keep due order in the love of thy self? for there is nothing
that marreth us, but only the inordinate love of our selves. As for well
ordered love, it requires that we love the soul bitter then the body; that we
take more pains to get virtues then any thing else; that we make more account
of heavenly glory, then of base and transitory honor? A well ordered heart,
will more often say in it self: What will the angels say if I thinck, or do
such a thing? the^, what will men say?

3. What love bear thou to thy soul? art thou unwilling and loath to help
it when it is spirituallie distempered and diseased? alas thou owe this care
and attendance unto it, to help it thy self, and procure it to be helped by
other, when passions do torment it: and to set a side all other cares, when
thy soul stands in need of thy care.

4. How do thou esteem of thy self before the eyes of God almighty? to be
nothing at all, doubtless. But it is noe great humility in a fly, to thinck
her self nothing in regard of a mountain; or for a drop of water, to esteem
it self nothing in comparison of the maine sea: nor for a sparkle of fire, to
hold it self nothing in respect of the sun: It is humility indeed, not to
prefer our selves before others, nor to affect, or desire to be esteemed of,
and well liked by others: How do thou feel thy self, affected in this point?

5. Touching thy tongue: do thou not brag and vaunt of thy self one way or
other? do thou not flatter thy self, when thou speak of thine own self?

6. For works and actions. Do thou use to take any pleasure or passetime,
contrary to thy bodily or spiritual health? I mean vain pleasure,
unprofitable recreations, ouer-watching, too much disordely labor, and such
like.

An examination of the estate of our soul toward our neighbor. CHAPTER 6.
1. THE love between husband, and wife, ought io be sweet, quiet, earnest, and
constant, and grounded principally upon the ordinance of God, who commands
it to be so. And the self same is to be understood, of love between parents and
their children, between us and our neighbors, and our frinds, every one in
his rank and degree.

2. But to speak in general. How is thy heart affected toward thy neighbor?
Do thou love him from thy heart, and for Gods sake? To discern well, whether
it be so or no, thou must prepose and represent unto thy self, certain persons
that be troublesome, and intractable, for there it is, and toward such kind of
men, where we exercise the virtue of true charity toward our neighbors: and
much more toward such as have iniuried us either in work or in word. Examine
well if thy heart be free from passion in this behalf, and whether thou feel
not a contradiction within thee, to love any body.

3. Art thou proane to speak ill of thy neighbor? and especially of such as
love thee not? Do thou any harm to thy neighbor directly, or indirectly?
Though thou have never so little reason or discourse, thou will easily find out
thy defects in this point.

An examination of the affections of our soul. CHAP. 7.
1. I HAVE extended these poincts at large, because in the examination of them,
consists the knowledge of our spiritual advancement, or progress which we
have made, for as for examining our sins, that's for confessions, and for such
as never thinck upon going forward in piety and devotion.

2. Yet nevertheless, we must not labor to exactlie and curiously in
examining every one of these articles or interrogatories: but fair and
softly, considering with quiet and repose of mind, in what estate our heart
has been in every one of them since our resolution and protestation, and
what notable defects we have committed therein.

3. But to make a shorter abridgement of all, we may reduce the whole
examination, to the search and suruay of our passions: and if it be tedious
and troublesome, to consider so exactlie what we have been: we may in this
manner following examine our selves how we have behaved our selves.

In our love toward God, our neighbor, and our selves. In hatred toward sin
in our selves, and sin in others: for we must desire the extirpation of the
one, and the other: In desires of riches, honor, estimation, passetimes. In
fear of danger to fall into sin, and of loss of goods of this world, for we
may fear the one and the other too much. In hope placed more then needs in the
world, in fading creatures: or to little in God, and godly things. In sadness,
if it were to excessive, and for transitory vanities. In joy and gladness, if
overmuch and for unworthy matters.
To conclude in a word: what affection does predominate thy heart? what passion
does most of all possess it? in what do thou principally go awrie? for by
passions of our soul, we may judge of our estate, examining them, and as it
were feeling and tasting them, one after another. As he that is skillfull on
the lute, by touching the diverse strains of his instrument, finds which
string is out of tune, and tunes it by stretching it up, or letting it down:
so after we have as it were touched, and examined the tune of our passions, of
the love, hatred, desire, fear, hope, sadness, or joy that is in our soul, if
we find them discording from the tune which we would strike, and from the
proportionable harmony of our soul, which is to be set to the glory of God,
we may make them accord, by bringing them to their due tune and proportion
with Gods grace, and by council and advice of our ghostly father.

Affections to be exercised after this examination. CHAP. 8.
AFTER thou have duly pondered every poinct of the examination, and considered
at what stay thou art, and to what thou art come: then exercise the affects of
thy soul as follows.

1. Give God thancks for that amendment, be it but little, which thou have found
in thy life, since thy general resolution last made: and acknowledge that it
was his only mercy, that caused it in thee, and and for thee.

2. Humble thy self reverently before his maistie, acknowledging unfeignedly,
that if thou have not much profited in piety, it has been through thine own
default, because thou have not faithfully, courageously, and constantly
answered the inspirations, illustrations, and motions, which he has often
imparted unto thee in prayer, and by many other ways.

3. Promise him sincerely, that thou will for ever praise him, for the
inestimable favors bestowed upon thee, and especially for drawing thee from
thy bad inclinatio^s by this present amendment.

4. Demand pardon of him for thy unfaithfulness and disloyalty, for not
corresponding with his inspirations and graces.

5. Offer him up thy heart, to the end he may be the sole master and Lord of it.

6. Beseech him to make thee faithfully accomplish his will hereafter.

6. Inuoke the Saints of heaven, our B. Lady, thy good Angel, thy patron,
Joseph, and the rest to whom thou have an especial devotion, to help thee
with their intercession.

Considerations proper to renew our good purposes. CHAP. 9.
1. THIS examination being made, and diligently conferred with some worthy,
expert, and skillfull guide, to learn the quality of thy faults, and the fit
remedies for them: begin those meditations following, making one of them every
day, and in it spend the ordinary time which other days thou appointedst to
pass in thy meditation; with the self same method, preparation, and affections
which thou have used heertofore in the meditations set down in the first part:
placing thy self first of all in the presence of God, and then imploring his
grace, to establish thee in his holy love and service.

The first consideration, of the excellency of our soul. CHAP. 10.
1. CONSIDER the nobility and excelle^ce of thy soul, endewed with an
understanding, which knows not only all this visible world, but moreover
understands, that there are invisible Angels, and a happy Paradise, that
there is a sovereign God, unspeakable, most good, most mighty; that there is
an eternity of immortal spirits: and withal knows the means how to live
well in this visible world, and to associate her self with the angels in
heaven, and to attain to the familiarity and frindship of God him self for
ever.

2. Thy soul has also a free will, of a most noble excellency, which is able
to love God, and cannot hate him, considered in him self. Lo what an
excellent soul thou have. As no corruptible or ill-sauouring thing can stay
the little Bees, but only flowers are their rest, only upon them do they setle
their flight: so thy heart can find no repose, but in God alone, no creature
else ca^ fill or satisfy it. Remember hardly and recount with thy self, all the
dearest and greatest entertainments, wherewith thou have ever occupied thy heart,
and judge in good sadness, whether they were not all full of unquiet, of
molestations, of restless and stinging thoughts, importunate cares, with which
thy poor heart was most miserably distract and afflicted.

3. Alas thy heart runs hastily and headlong, after the creatures of this
world, thincking it possible to appease its desites in them: but so soon as
thou meetest with them and tastest them, thou art as ready to beginn again as
before: for nothing is able to content thy heart, God would not permit that it
should find rest in any place, no more then the Dove that Noah sent out of the
Arc, that so it might allways earne to return to God, from whence it came. Ah
how admirable is this natural beauty of thy soul! and why then do thou
endeavor to withhold her against her will, to serve these fading creatures?

4. Oh my fair and lovely soul (may thou say) thou can understand and
love God him self: and wherefore do thou entertain thy self in things
inferior to God? thou may if thou will, pretend eternity, wherefore do
thou hunt after moments? This was one of the chiefest complaints of the
prodigal child, that whereas he might have feasted deliciously at his fathers
table, he was forced through his own wilfulness, to feed at the troughs of
his swine. O my soul, thou art capable of God him self: woe be to thee, if
thou rest contented with any thing less then God.

Lift up thy soul earnestly with this consideration: show her that she is
immortal, and an heir of eternity, and therefore that she direct her course
and courage thereto.

The second consideration of the excellency of virtues. CHAP. 11.
1. CONSIDER that only virtue and devotion, can make thy soul to rest content
in this world. O what excellent beauty is in them! make a comparison betwixt
the lovely virtues, and the hideous vices that be contrary unto the^: what
sweetness is there in patience compared to revenge? in meeknes in respect of
anger and frowardnes? in humility in regard of pride and ambition? In
liberality compared to covetousness and nigardize? in charity compared with
envy? in sobriety, in respect of intemperancie? virtues have this
excellency, that they fill the soul with an incomparable sweetness and
delight, after she has practiced them: whereas vices leave the soul
exceedingly weeried, tired, and molested. And why endeavor we not then to
obtain these pleasures, that have no gall nor bitterness mingled with them?

2. He that has but a few vices, is not content with the delights which they
bring him: and he that has many, is malconte^t with the cumber of them. He
that has but a few virtues, has a great deal of content in them: and the
more his contentment is, the more his virtues increase.

3. O devout life how lovely art thou, how honorable, how delectable! thou do
diminish tribulations, and augmentest consolation: without thee, even good is
evil, honnie pleasures are full of bitter unquietness, peace it self is war,
and trouble, and contradiction. Ah he that would be acquainted familiarlie with
thee, must still say with the Samaritan, O Lord give me some of this water to
drinck: an aspiration much frequented by the holy mother Teresa, and Saint
Catherin of Genua, although upon other occasions.

The third consideration of the examples of Saints. CHAPTER 12.
1. CONSIDER the examples of the saints of all sorts and orders: what is it
that they have not done and suffered, to love God, and be wholly devoted and
addicted to his service? Look upon the invincible martyrs in their constant
resolutions, what torments have they not suffered for the maintenance and
performance of their holy purposes? But above all those fair and flourishing
ladies whiter then lillies, in purity, more blushing then roses in charity,
some at twelve, others at thirteen, fifteen, twenty, five and twenty years
of age: consider how they endured a thousand sorts of martyrdoms, rather then
to renounce their sacred resolutions, not only in profession of faith, but
also in exercise of devotion and piety: some choosing to die rather then lose
their virginity: others rather then they would leave off serving the tormented
prisoners, comfort the afflicted, bury the dead, and such like holy works of
Gods service. O good Lord what constancy has that frail sex showed in these
occasions!

2. Consider so many holy confessors, with what valor and magnanimity did
they contemn the world? How immovable and unconquered were they in their
resolutions? nothing in this universal world could make them forgo them, they
embraced their purposes of sanctity without exceptions or reseruations, and
went forward with them, without any tediousness or faintnes. Good God, what
excellent things does. S. Austin write of his holy mother Monica? with what
courage did the follow her enterprise of serving God, in her marriage, and her
widow-head? And Saint Hierom, what rare constancy does he point out in his
devout Paula, amidst so great varieties of combrous occurrences.

3. And what is there that we may not do, having such excellent paternes to
follow? They were frail mortal men, as we are; they did all for the same God,
by the same virtues: why should not we do the like in our estate and
condition, and according to our vocation, for the accomplishment of our good
purpose and holy protestation?

The fourth consideration: of the love that Jesus Christ bears unto us.
CHAPTER 13.
1. ^ (...) unspeakable (...) Jesus Christ our Lord suffered so much in this
world, and especially in the garden of mount Oliuet, and the bitter place of
mount Caluarie. All that love of his was for thy sake: By so many pangs and
torments, he obtained of God the father good purposes and holy resolutions for
thee: by the same afflictions did he moreover purchase all things else
necessary for thie soul, to maintain, nourish, strengthen, and bring to full
growthe and perfection, all thy resolutions. O holy resolution, how precious
and nobly borne art thou, being daughter to such a mother as is the passion of
our Saueour! O how carefully should my soul cherrishe thee, since thou have
been so dear unto my sweet Jesus! Alas, o Saueour of my soul, thou diedst
upon the Cross, to gain me my virtuous resolution! ah do me the favor, that
I also choose rather to die, then to forget or forgo them.

2. Thou see then (my Philotheus) it is certain, that the dear heart of our
Lord Jesus, beheld thy heart from the tree of the cross, and there (in a
manner) fell (...) and for love of it, of (...) thee all the good that ever
(...), or ever shall have; and (...) these good resolutions. (...) Philotheus)
we may all say wi^ (...) ^ophet Jeremy: O my Lord, (...) my being thou
beheldest me, and calledst me by my name: for in (...), his divine goodness in
his (...) love, prepared all the general, and particular means of our
sal^tion, and consequently all our holy (...). Yea without doubt: As a woman,
so soon as she is with child prepares her cradle, linen, swathing-ba^ds, and
withal bethincketh of a nurse for her child, which she hops to bring forth,
although it be not yet come into the world: even so our Lord, having his
goodness pregnant, and as it were great with child of thee, pretending to bring
thee forth to salvation, and to make thee his daughter and heir, prepared
upon the holy roode, all that which was necessary for thee, thy spiritual
cradle, thy linen and swathing bands, thy nurse, and all other means
necessary for thy salvation: that is, all the ways, all the graces, all the
(...), by which he conducteth thy soul, and will bring it at length to
perfection.

3. Ah my God, how deeply ought we to imprint this in our memory! Is it
possible, that I have been loved, and so sweetly beloved by my Saueour, that
every step of his life, and even every stepp that he went to mount Caluarie,
sweating and fainting under his heavy cross, even then he went bethincking
him self of my good, and of every one of these little occasions, by which he
has drawn me unto him! And how much then ought we esteem, how carefully
should we employe all this to our commodity! Ah how sweet a remembrance is
this? This loving heart of my God, thought upon Philotheus, loved him, procured
him a thousand means to salvation: as though there had been no other soul in
the world, to take care of; As the sun, shining upon one side of the earth,
shines so much there, as if it gave no light to any other place: in the very
same manner, did our Lord take thought and care of all his children, providing
for each one of us, as though he had not thought upon the rest. He has loved
me (says S. Paul) and has given him self for me. As if he had said: for me
only, altogether as much as if he had done nothing for any else. O
Philotheus, this should be engraued in thy soul, to cherrish and nourish thy
good resolutions, which have been so precious and dear to the heart blood of
our blessed Saueour.

The fifte consideration, of the eternal love of God toward us. CHAPTER 14.
1. CONSIDER the eternal love which almighty God bare unto thee: for long
before our Lord Jesus Christ as man suffered for thee upon the cross: his
divine majesty did forecast thee in his sovereign goodness, and loved thee
infinitely. But when began he to bear thee this love? even when he began to be
God. And when began he to be God? sure he never began to be God, for he has
always been God, without beginning and without ending, and so likewise from all
eternity did he love thee: his love to thee never had beginning, and therefore
did he from all eternity prepare the graces benefits and favors bestowed upon
thee. So says he him self by his prophet: I have loved thee with a perpetual
charity, therefore have I drawn thee unto me, taking pity of thee. Amongst
other benefits then which he thought upon from all eternity to give thee,
needs must thou account thy purposes and resolutions to serve him.

2. And o good God, what excellent, how dear ought these resolutio^s to be
unto thee, since God has fore thought, premeditated and forecast the^ from all
eternity? what should we not suffer rather then to suffer one only iott or
title of them to be taken away or diminished. All the world together must not
make us forgo the least of our good purposes: for all the word together is not
worth one soul: and a soul is worth nothing, withour good resolutions.

General affections upon the precedent poincts, or considerations, with the
conclusion of this exercise. CHAPTER 15.
1. O AMIABLE resolutions! you are to me the beautiful tree of life, which my
God has planted with his own hand, in the midst of my heart: and my redeemer
has watered with his life dropping blood to make it fructify; rather will I
suffer a thousand deaths the^ endure that one of you should be hindered. No,
neither vanity, nor delights, nor riches, nor sorrows, nor tribulations, shall
ever be able to pull me from my holy designs and purposes.

2. Alas o my Lord, it is thou that have planted this tree of good resolutions,
and from eternity kept it in the bosom of thy fatherly providence, to place
it in the garden of my soul: O how many souls are there, which have not
been favored in so high a degree: and how then shall I be able to humble my
self prefoundly enough under thy mercy?

3. O beautiful and holy resolutions? If I keep your charity, you will save
me eternally: if you live still in my soul, my soul will live in you; live
then for ever o my good resolutions, as you were eternally and for ever in the
mercy of my God, live and remain eternally in me, for I will never abandon
or forsake you.

4. After these affections, thou must particularize, and forecast in especial,
the means necessary to maintain these good purposes: and protest to use
these means faithfully, and diligently, as are, frequent prayer, often use
of the Sacraments, good works of mercy, amendment of the faults, which in the
second point of this exercise thou shall have discovered, cutting off ill
customs, and following the counsels and aduices, which thy spiritual guide
shall prescribe thee.

5. This done, as if thou had taken breath a while, and rested thy self well,
protest again a thousand times, that thou meanest unfeignedly to continue in
thy resolutions: And as if thou had thy heart, thy soul, thy will in thy
hands, dedicate them, consecrate them, sacrifice them to God, with protestation
that thou will never ask them again, never redemaund them, but leave them
alwais entirely in the hands of his divine majesty, to follow in all things his
holy ordenance.

6. Pray unto God that he would wholly renew thee, and bless this renouation
of thy protestation and firm resolution: that he would fortify thee and
strengthen thee therein: inuoke the blessed Virgin, thy Angel, the Saints, and
especially those to whom thou bear particular devotion.

7. Being thus moved and inflamed by Gods grace in thy heart, go to the feet of
thy confessor, accuse thy self of the principal faults committed since thy
last general confession: and receive the absolution with the self same trace
and effect with which then thou did: and pronounce thy protestation before
him, seal and sign it: and so go again to unite thy heart now renewed and
reformed, to thy Saueour and Lord, in the holy sacrament of the Eucharist.

Feeling thoughts to be kept in mind after this exercise. CHAPTER 16.
1. THE day following this renouation of thy heart, and some days after, it
will be profitable to repeat often times in thy heart to thy self and by mouth
likewise, those ardent speeches which S. Paul, S. Augustine, S. Catherin of
Genua, and other saints used: I am now no more mine own man: whether I live or
die, I am my Saueours altogether: I have no more in me these cold words, of me,
and mine: my me, is Jesus, and my mine, is to be wholly Christ's: O world thou
art all ways thy self: and I likewise he that have been always my self, but
from hence forth I will be my self no longer. No my soul, we will be no longer
our selves, as we have been: we will have another heart, another affection, and
the world that has so often deceived us, shall now be deceived in us: for not
marking our change but by little and little, he will think us always to be Esau,
and we will prove Jacob.

2. All these exercises must repose, and settle in our hearts: and when we lay a
side for the time consideration and meditation, we must enter by little and by
little, and not all at a clap into our ordinary affairs, for fear least the
precious liquour of our good resolutions, distilled so diligently out of these
considerations, be not suddenly ouerturned, and spilt: it must soke first as
it were, and sinck well into all the parts of our soul, yet without too much
application of spirit or body.

An answer to two objections, which may be made against this Introduction.
CHAP. 17.
1. THE world may chance to tell thee, my Philotheus, that these exercises and
aduices are so many in number, that he that would practice the^, had need to
apply him self to nothing else, but let all other affairs alone. Ah
Philotheus, if in deed we did nothing else, we should do well enough, since, so
we should do that, which to do, we were placed in this world. But do thou
not see the decept? No doubt if all these exercises were to be performed every
day, they would busy us enough, and take up most of our time. But it is only
required to practice them every one in their time and place, as they come in
their turn. How many laws are there in the Digestes, and Code which must be
kept and observed? but all men know and understand that their obserua^ce is
required, according to the occurrences of occasions and actions, not that one
should practice them all every day. Otherwise, the holy king David, practiced
many more spiritual exercises in a day, amidst his weighty affairs, then I
have here prescribed. S. Jews an admirable king both in peace and in war,
and that with a wonderful care, administered justice, and managed affairs of
state: was wont to hear two masses every day, to say euensong, and complin
with his chaplain, had every day set time to meditate; and visited hospitalls
very often: every wednesday confessed and disiplined him self very often;
heard holy sermons, and used spiritual conferences: and for all this, never
omitted one the least occasion of the public weal exteriourly offered, which
he did not most diligently put in execution: and his Court was more gallant,
more frequented, more flourishing, then ever it had been in time of his
predecessors. Practice then these exercises cheerfully, as I have prescribed
them: and God will allott unto you time, leisure, and strength enough to do
your other affairs: though he should make the sun for that end to stay his
course, as he did for his servant Joshua. We work enough always, when God works
with us.

2. The world will say again, that almost throughout all this book I
presuppose, that my Philotheus, has received of God the guifte of mental
prayer, and yet every man has it not: so that, this introduction will not
serve for every body. It Is true, without all doubt, I presuppose it: and it is
true too, that every man has not the guifte of mental prayer; but it is
likewise true that almost every man may obtain that precious guifte, even the
most rude and unlearned: so that they have good spiritual masters and guides,
and that they themselves would vouchsafe to take as much pains in the search
of it, as in it self it requires. And if there be any, that in no sort nor
degree has this precious gift (which I thinck can happen but very seldom) a
sage conductour and master, will easily supply that want, by making them to
read, or hear read, these meditatio^s and considerations, with good heed and
attention.

Three pricipall aduices for this introduction. CHAPTER 18.
1. THE first day of every mouth, repeat and renew the protestation set down
in the first part at the end of the meditations: and protest at all times to
have a will and purpose to keep every point of it, saying with David: No my
God, never will I forget thy justification, for in them thou have given me
life. And when thou findst any spiritual battle in thy soul, take in hand
the self same protestation, and prostrate in spirit with all humility,
pronounce it all from thy heart, and thou shall find great ease in thy conflict.

2. Profess to all the world, that thou desire to be devout, be not ashamed
of that holy desire and profession. I say, make profession of a true desire of
devotion, and not, make profession of devotion: blush not to use those common
and ordinary actions, which help us to obtain the love of God: aduow and
admit hardyly, that thou do thy endeavor to meditate, and thou had rather
dye then sin mortally. That thou will by Gods grace, frequent the sacraments,
and follow the counsels of thy ghostly father (though for good considerations it
be not expedient to name him). For this franck and free confession of Gods
service, that we are with a special affection consecrated and addicted to his
love: is most acceptable to the divine majesty, who by no means allows his
servants, to be ashamed of his cross. Besides, this open profession, cuts of
many a summon, many an inticement, which the world would make to the
contrary: and bidds us to stand upon our reputation, in the constant poursuite
of devotion. The philosophers, openly professed them selves to be philosophers,
that so me^ might permit them to live Philosophicallie: and we must make our
selves known to be lovers of devotion and holy exercises, that men may let us
live devoutly. If any man tell thee, that one may live devoutly without the
practice of these exercises and aduices: deny it him not, but answer him
lovingly, that thy weakness is so great, that thou stand in much more need of
help, then other men do.

3. Last of all, I conjure and entreat thee, my dear Philotheus, by all that
which is holy in heaven and earth, by the baptism which thou have received,
by the sweet milk of mercy which thou have sucked from the breasts of our Lord
Jesus, by the most loving heart, in which thou placest all thy hope and
confidence: Continue and persevere in this happy enterprise of spiritual life.
Our days runn on a pace, death is hand at our gate, The trompett sounds the
retreat (says Saint Gregory Nazianzen) let every man be read, for the judge
is at hand. Saint Symphorians mother seeing him ledd to martyrdom, cried after
him: my son, my son, remember everlasting life, look up to heaven, and
thinck upon him that reigns there, a short end will quickly end the course of
this life. I say the same to thee (my Philotheus) look up to heaven, and leave
it not for this base earth; thinck upon hell, and cast not thy self into that
dreadful gulf for moments of pleasures; remember Jesus Christ, deny him not
for the world: and though the labor of a devout life, seem hard unto thee,
sing merrily with Saint Frauncis: Since heaven is for my pains assignd'
Pains are sweet passetimes to my mind.
Live for ever sweet Jesus, to whom wtih the Father, and holy Ghost, be all
honor and glory, now and always, and for ever and ever. Amen.

THE ERRATA.
Page 14 line 13. Picaustes, read, Piraustes. p 17. l. 24. many souls, read,
of many souls. p. 37. l. 23. of riches, read, of the rich. p. 39. l. 26.
fowls, read, souls. p. 68. l. 3. were created, read, we were created. p. 91
l. 17. infinitle, read, infinite, p 91, l. 19 Certefie, read, Terrefie. p.
95. l. 11. pight, read, right. p. 120 l. 18. of, read, or. p. 135 l. 22.
forces, read, species. p. 139. l. 2. thy, read, the. p. 141. l. 20. of,
read, or. p. 172. l. 12. this, read, his. p. 191. l. 22. Consiliat, read,
Conflict. p. 235. l. 19. perfections, read, things. p. 277. l. 20. king,
read, kind. p. 337. l. 12. and, read, it. and l. 13. it, and. p. 344. trade,
read, trace. p. 365. l. 22. cords, read, the cords. l. 376. l. 16. back,
read, lack. p 377. l. 4. turn, read, tame. p. 405. l. 26. word, read,
world. p. 21. l. 6. part the fourth, fore, read, fire.

If there be any other faults escaped, I pray the gentle reader of his
courtesy to correct them.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
THE FIRST PART OF THE INTRODVCTION: Containing aduices and exercises requisite
for the conduct of a soul from her very first desire of a devout life, until
she be brought to a full resolution to embrace it steadfastly in all her actions.
WHAT a devout life is. Chap. 1. page 28 The property and excellency of
Devotion. Chap. 2. 35 That devotion is an instrument, and an ornament befitting
all vocations and professions. Chap. 3. page 40 The necessity of a guide to
enter and go forward in exercises of devotion. Chap. 4. 44 That the beginning of
a devout life, must be taken from the purgation of the soul. Chapter 5. 50 Of the
first Purgation: which is, from mortal sins. Chap. 6. 54 The second
Purgation: which is from the affections of sin. Chap. 7. 57 Of the means of
applying this second Purgation. Chap. 8. 61 The 1. Meditation; of our Creation.
Cha. 9. 64 The second Meditation; of the end, for the which we were created.
Chap. 10. 68 The third Meditation; of the Benefits of God. Chap. 11. 71 The
fourth Meditation: of sin. Cha. 12. 76 The fifte Meditation: of Death. Cha.
13. 80 The sixth Meditation: of Judgment. Chapter 14. 85 The seventh Meditation: of
Hell. Cha. 15. 89 The eight Meditation: of Paradise. Chapter 16. 92 The ninth
Meditation; by way of election or choice of Paradise. Chap. 17. 96 The tenth
Meditation; by way of election and choice which the soul makes of the devout
life. Chap. 18. page 100 How to make a general Confession. Chapter 19. 105 An
authentical protestation, serving to engraue in thy soul a firm resolution
to serve God, and to conclude the acts of Penance. Chap. 20. p. 108 A devout
manner to receive absolution. Chap. 21. p. 112 That we must purify our selves
from the affections which we have to venial sins. Chapter 22. 114 That we ought
to purify our selves from affection and delight of unprofitable and dangerous
things. Chap. 23. 119 That we must purge our selves, from bad inclinations.
Chap. 24. 122
THE SECOND PART OF THIS INTRODVCTION: Containing diverse aduices for the
lifting up of the soul to God by prayer, and by use of the Sacraments.
OF the necessity of prayer. Chap. 1. 124 A breef method of meditation. And
first of the presence of God, which is the first point of Preparation. Chap. 2.
131 Of Invocation, the second point of Preparation. Chap. 3. 136 Of the third
point of preparation, consisting in proposing the mystery which we mean to
meditate. Chap. 4. 138 Of the considerations and discources of our
understanding; which are the second part of meditation. Chap. 5. 141 Of the
affects and resolutions of our will, the third part of meditation. Chap. 6. 143
Of the conclusion of the exercise, and spiritual posy to be gathered out of
it. Chap. 7. 145 Some profitable instructions and aduices for meditation. Chap.
8. 148 Of the dryness of affection, which often happens in meditating. Chap.
9. 154 A morning exercise. Chap. 10. 157 An exercise for Evening. And of the
examination of our co^sciece before bed time. Chapter 11. 160 Of the spiritual
retyring of the soul C. 12 163 Of aspirations, iaculatory prayers, and good
thoughts. Chap. 13. 168 How we ought to hear the holy Mass. c. 14. 179 Of
other public and common exercises. C. 15. 184 Of honor and invocation of the
Saints. c. 16. 187 How we ought to hear and read Gods holy word. Chap. 17.
190 How to receive inspirations. Chap. 18. 193 Of holy Confession. Chap 19. 199
Of freque^ting the holy Communion. Chapter 20 208 How we ought to Communicate. Chapter
21. 215
THE THIRD PART OF THE INTRODVCTION: Containing sundry rules and aduices,
concerning the exercise of virtues.
OF the choice which we must make in the exercise of virtue. Chap. 1. page 220
An addition to the former discource, about choice in the exercise of virtues.
Chapter 2. 231 Of Patience. Chap. 3. 239 Of exterior Humility. Chap. 4. 249 Of
humility more internal then the former. Chap. 5. page 256 That humility
makes us love our own debasement and abiection. Chap. 6. 266 How to keep our
good renown in the practice of humility. Chap. 7. 275 Of meeknes and gentleness
toward our neighbors; and remedy against anger. Chapter 8 284 Of sweetness and
gentleness toward our selves. Chap 9. 293 That we must handle our affairs
with diligence, but not with to much eagrenes, and solicitude. Chap. 10. 298 Of
Obedience. Chap. 11. 302 Of the necessity of Chastity. Chap. 12. 307 Aduices
how to preserve chastity. Chapter 13. 315 Of poverty of spirit, to be observed in
riches. Chap. 14. p. 320 How to practice true and real poverty, remaining
notwithstanding reallie rich. Chap. 15. page 326 How to practice richnes of
spirit, in real poverty. Chap. 16. 335 Of frindship: and first of fond, and
fruictlesse frindship. Chap. 17. 339 Of love, and love to yes. Chap. 18. 343 Of
true frindship. Chap. 19. 350 The difference betwixt true and vain frindship.
Chap. 20. 356 Aduices and remedies against naughty frindships. Chap. 21. 361
Other aduices of the same subject, of fond amities. Chap. 22. 368 Of the
exercises of exterior mortification. Chap. 23. p. 372 Of company, and
solitariness. Cha. 24 384 Of dece^cy and ha^dsomnes in attire. Ch 25. 390 Of
talk. And first how to speak of God. Chap. 26. page 394 Of courtesy in talk,
and due respect of persons. Chap. 27. 397 Of rash judgment. Chap. 28. 401 Of
slander and backbiting. Cha. 29. 412 Other aduices and instructions to be
observed in talk. Chap. 30. 424 Of honest and commendable pastimes and
recreations. Chap. 31. 428 Of dancing and some other passetimes which are
lawful, but dangerous withal. Chapter 32 430 The times to sport and dance. Chap.
33. 435 To be faithful and constant in great and small occasions. Chap. 34.
437 That we must keep our soul just and reasonable, in all her actions. Chap.
35. 442 Of desires. Chap. 36. 447 Aduertisments for those which are married.
Chap. 37. 452 Of the honesty and chastity of the marriagebed. Chap. 38. 468
Instructions for widows. Chap. 39. 476 A word or two to Virgins. Chap. 40.
486
THE FOVRTH PART OF THE INTRODVCTION: Containing necessary instructions,
against those tentations which are most ordinarily incident, to those that
endeavor to live spiritually.
THAT we must not regard the scoffs and mocking taunts of the children of this
world. Chap. 1. 1 That we must have continually a good and manfull courage.
Chap. 2. 7 The nature of te^tatio^s, and the difference between feeling them,
and consenting to them. C. 3. 11 Two fit examples of the for said matter. C.
4. 16 An encouragement to the soul vexed with temptation. Chap. 5. 21 How
tentation and delectation may be sin. Chap. 6. 24 Remedies against great and
vehement tentations. Chap. 7. 29 That we must diligently resist, even the least
tentations that are. Chap 8. 33 Remedies against these lesser te^ptatio^s. C.
9. 35 How to strengthen our heart against temptations. Chap. 10. 38 Of
unquietness of mind. Chap. 11. 41 Of sadness. Chap. 12. 47 Of spiritual and
sensible consolatio^s, and how one must behave him self in them. Chapter 13. 48 Of
dryness and barrenness in our spiritual exercises. Chap. 14. 67 The former
discourse is explained and confirmed by a notable example. Chap. 15. 79
THE FIFTH PART OF THE INTRODVCTION: Co^taining exercises and instructions to
renew the soul, and confirm devotion.
THAT we renew every year our good purposes by the exercises following. C. 1.
87 Consideratio^s upon the benefits which God does unto us, by calling us to
his service, according to the protestation mentioned before. C. 2. 90 The
examination of our soul touching her proffiting in devotion. Chap. 3. 95 An
examination of the estate of our soul toward God. Chap. 4. 98 An examination
of our estate touching our selves. Chap. 5. 103 An examination of the estate of
our soul toward our neighbor. Chap. 6. 105 An examination of the affections
of our soul. Chap. 7. 107 Affections to be exercised after this examination.
Chap. 8. 109 Considerations proper to renew our good purposes. Chap. 9. 111 The
first consideration, of the excellency of our soul. Chap. 10. 112 The second
consideration of the excellency of virtues. Chap. 11. 114 The third
consideration of the examples of Saints. Chap. 12. 116 The fourth
consideration: of the love the Jesus Christ bears unto us. Cha. 13. 11^ The
fifte consideration, of the eternal love (...) God toword us. Chap. 14. 122
General affections upon the precedent poincts, or considerations, with the
conclusion of this exercise. Chap. 15. 124 Feeling thoughts to be kept in mind
after this exercise. Chap. 16. 127 An answer to two objections, which may be
made against this Introduction. Chapter 17. 128 Three principal aduices for this
Introduction. Chap. 18. 131
FINIS.
THE COMMVNICATION OF DOCTOVR THAVLERVS with a poor beggar, wherein is
comprehended the example of a perfect man, and how we should resign our selves
in all things unto the good pleasure of God.
THERE was on a time a great divine, who prayed unto God the space of 8.
years, that it might be his good pleasure, to direct him to a man, that might
instruct and teach him the true way of virtue. And it happened being in this
desyer, that he heard a voice from heaven, which said unto him, go unto such a
Church portch, and there thou shall find a man that will instruct thee in the
spiritual life. He walking then toward the said Church, found a poor beggar,
who had his feet filthye and foul, and al naked, whose clothes were not worth
a half penny; and he saluted him in this sort: God give you good morrow, my
frind. The poor man answered him, Sir, I do not remember that ever I had an
evil morrow. The Doctor said unto him; God give you a good and happy life:
wherefore say you that? quothe the beggar unto him; for I was never unhappy.
Which the Doctor not understanding, said unto him again; God bless you my
frinde, I pray you speak a littel more clearlye, for I know not what you
mean. Then the poor beggar answered him; Good master Doctor, I shall do it
willinglye: you know you badde me good morrow, where unto I replied, that I had
never any ill morrow, for when I have hunger, I praise God: if it freese,
hail, snow, rain, be it fair or foul, I give praise to God; though I be
poor, miserable, and despised of each on, I give thanks unto God. And
therefore I never had any evil morrow: you did wish unto me also, a good and
happy life; where unto I made you answer, that I was never unfortunate, because
I have learnt always to resign my self unto the will of God being certain
that al his works cannot be but very good: by (...) whereof, all that happens
unto me by his permission, be it pr^ritye or aduersitye, sweet or sower, I
receive it as from his own hand with great joy and comfort, and therefore I
was never unfortunate, for I never desired any thing but the good pleasure of
God; which the poor man having said: the Doctor answered: but what would you
say, my frinde, if God would damn you? If God would damn me, said the poor
man, verily if he would use me so hardlye, I have two arms to embrace him;
the one whereof is a profounde humilitye, by the which I am united unto his
holy humanitye: the other is love, and charity, which joins me unto his
(...), by which I would embrace (...) in such sort, that he should be
conitrayned to descend with me into hell. And I had rather without comparison,
be in hell with God, then to be without him in paradise. The Doctor learnt in
this communication, that a true resignation, accompanied with profounde
humilitye of heart, is the shortest (...) to attain unto the love of God. (...)
that he asked of him again, from (...) he came? Unto whom he made (...) (...)
Doctor in^ (...) he had found (...) and him, quoth he, so soon (...) and
forsaken all (...) where did thou leave (...)? replied the Doctor. I left
him, (...) ^ed the beggar, with the pure and (...) hattes, and amongst men of
(...) will. But who art thou, my frind, (...) the divine unto him: The poor
man made him answer, that he was a King. And he askinge him where his ^ingdom
was; It is, quoth he, in my (...); for I can so well rule, and go^ my senses;
as well outward, as in^rd* that al my affections, and pas^ (...) unto reason;
which king^ is (...) doubt, more excellent, (...) all the kingdoms of this
world. Moreover the forsayde Doctor de^ded of him, who it was that had (...)
him unto so great perfection? (...) silence answered the poor man, (...) high
and loftye meditations, and (...) I had with God. I could (...) nor comfort in
any crea^ of the world, by means whereof, I (...) God, who will comfort, (...)
without end. Amen.


