OF THE PREPARATION TO THE CROSS, and to Death, and of the comfort under the
cross and death, two books very fruictefull for devout people to read,
translated from latin to english, by Richard Tracy.

1534

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND HIS syngular good lord and master, Lord Thomas
Crumwel, Lord Privy seal, Richard Tracy desires and wysheth bodily
prosperous health, and to the soul eternal life and felycitie.
WHEN I consider the weak frailty of man, and how naturallye we be subject
to many troubles, adversities, and temptations, as well of the body as of the
soul, and also when I call to my remembrance the words of Christ, spoken to
his elect, Ioh. 16.
That in this world they should suffer persecution and oppression, and likewise
the saying of the apostel Paul, 2. Tim. 3.
That al they which will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution:
I think surely, that every christen man does expect Christ's promises, and
constantly believes, that the scriptures shall be fulfilled and found true.
Wherefore seeing there is no evasion nor mean, to escape the adversities,
temptations, and cross, which god shall lay on the shulders of his elect,
and nature is so inconstant, frayl, and weak, that of our own might and power
we are not able to resyste, nor can not wyllyngely and patiently sustain and
bear such adversities, and cross, it behooves every christen man, to search
out and provide some godly consolation and remedy to comfort and make strong
his mind, that he may patiently suffer all tribulation, all temptation, al
adversity, which god shall send to him, always reknowlegynge, that there is no
power but of god, and that god will not send to his elect any such cross, but
therewith he will also give grace and mean patiently to suffer the same, so
that he shall not be found disobedient to the good will of god. Of the co^fortes
against the cross of tribulation, one in especial of late I found. Not a
year paste it pleased God to send me some adverse tribulations, which were to
strong for Nature to suffer and bear pacientely: but my chance was so good,
through the merciful prouydence of god, that in my troubles this lyttel book
was sent me from a friend: which when I had red over, and delyberately
perused, it animated and made me strong not only pacie^tly to suffer al mine
adversities, but also for them to give god right hartye thanks, that it
would please him of his abundante mercy and goodness to remember me, his
miserable creature with his so ernest a token and most sure pledge of his
godly favor and love, according to his promise, Hebr. 12.
which is, whom the lord loves, him he chasteneth, yea and he scourges every
son that he receives. For in the reading of this book, I received such
consolation and comfort, that I thought it most necessary, yea and expedient
(saying I have by experyence felt, what good fruit comes thereof) to
translate the same in to english, and so to put it forth in printe, that it
might be the more common, and that many chaunsynge to fall into like cross of
adversity, may be partakers and optein like consolation, as I have received
thereby. And I have dedicated this book to you my synguler good lord and
master, for as much as I euydently perceive, that you are endewed not only
with godly knowledge and doctrine, but also have a right fervent zeal, good
mind, and desire to set forth all such thing as may be for the utility help
and comfort of the hole congregation and church of this realm. Therefore with all humility I desire your accustomed benignity to accept this the first
fruit and labor of me your pore servant, which am, and shall be ever ready and
glad with all diligence, to do you the service that I can, and daily pray
almighty god, to preserve you in long life, wealth, honor, and prosperity.
Amen.

THE PREPARATION TO THE cross, and how it must be patiently borne.
FOR as much as Christ commands us to deny ourselves, and to follow him,
and suffer the cross, he commands us also, to prepare us to suffer the
cross patiently, saying: Matthew. 16.
If any man will come after me, let him deny him self, and take up my cross,
and follow me. And who so ever does not bear my cross, and follow me, can not
be my discyple. So councelleth the wise man, saying: Eccle. 2.
Son, when thou do come to the service of god, stand in righteousenes and
fear, and prepare thy soul to suffer temptation. but because there be diverse
crosses, ne lest a man paraduenture should take a strange cross, which
perteyneth not to him, that is to say, should feine to him self new
turmentes, as prescript days of fasting, vowed chastity, shurtes of hear,
disgysed garments, and such other trifles, which god has not commanded:
therefore Christ has put to this term, sciliceth (his own) which is as much
to say, that every man study to mortify his own flesh, and the sin,
which reygneth in him, being ever ready to suffer what so ever god does
send him.

What the cross is. Cap. i.
A CROSS is every affliction and tribulation, or every adversity and heuines
sent by god, to every kind of living, through faith, and the word of god:
when that every thing does not prospere, even as a man would have it: which in
some place is called learning, or correction, and temptation, a rod, and a
staff. Wherefore it is a folishe and an heavy cross, which we by our own
presumption do take upon us not commanded of god, as the priests of Ball, and
all hypocrites do take upon them. But that is the true cross, which god
does lay upon us, which when it is laid upon us, we suffer patiently, every
body in his vocation and kind of lyuinge, as to get our bread with the
sweat of our countenance, and women to bring forth their children in peynes,
to suffer patiently the good will of the lord, to mortify our mortal members
upon the earth, to be ever busily occupied in the commandments of the lord,
and for the word of god, to suffer al scorns, and mockes, lies, persecutions,
and not to fear the most cruel, ye even the most shameful death. Therefore to
suffer a cross, is nothing else, then to suffer pacientely, what so ever come
to us, by the godly and beneuolent will of the lord.

Two kinds of crosses. Cap. ii.
THERE BE two kinds of crosses, the oone a strange cross, the other our
own, the one of the faythefull, the other of the wicked. for the vnfeythful be
punished, that they may be an example of their own iniquytie, and that they be
perpetually condemned: but the feythful be punished, that they may be made
strong, and that the lord be gloryfied in them. So strange punishementes be a
warninge to put the faithful in mind of the good will of the lord. For the
lord does punyshe some in this life, that he may provoke such as may be made
hole to repentance, as the scripture says: Prou. 19.
When the mocker or scorner is punyshed, the unlearned is made wyser. Genesis 8.
So the angel did show Abraham, what should become of the Sodomites, that
he might teach his children the judgment of god. Also Christ says, Luc. 13.
that all shall peryshe, as they were killed of Pylate, if that they do not
repent.

How the feythfull be tempted. Capi. iii.
THe faithful be tempted with a natural and spiritual temtation, an outward and
an inward, that is of the flesh, of the world, and of the dyuell. For the
cross signifies as well the inward temtation as the outward. Of the first
speaks the apostell, 1. Cor. 10.
Let no temptation take you, except the natural temptation, that is every
persecution, which may happen in this world, which does not hurt the
life, but rather provoke to the blessed life: but the spiritual or inward
temptation, is the inward fear of sin and death, it is the afflyction or
temptation of the conscience, such temtations be most greuouse, and where god
is not, they bring the tempted to death eternal. Of the which Paul to the
Hebrews says: It is impossible that they, Hebre. 6.
which ones be enlyghtened, and have tasted the good word of god and the
virtue of the world to come, if they slide and fall again, to be renewed by
repentance: as Demas, Hymeneus, and Philetus, professynge the faith, did fall
from it. and that is sin to death, sin in the holy gooste, sin of
unbelief, sin of spiritual pride. Wherefore Christ did command us to pray,
Luc. 11.
Let us not be led into temptation. They that believe, do sin, but they fall
not utterly away: so that they consent not to the flesh, the world, and the
devil, but by the grace of god they be preserved and go away, having victory
and triumph.

The cross is of god only. Cap. iiii.
FIRST, we must consider, that in all our afflictions, no calamity or
pensiuenes falls on us by fortune or chance, but by the appointed council
of god, by his will and sufferaunce, as witnesses holy scripture. Exodus 20.
Fear not, for god comes not, but for to try us. Deuteronomy. 13.
The lord your god tries you, to make it known, whether ye love or not. Job.
9.
The lord has given, the lord has taken away. The lord kylleth, 1. Samu.
2.
and gives life again, he brings even to hell, and back again. Prouer. 3.
Refuse not the chastising of god, neither grudge thou when he corrects the.
For whom god loves, he corrects: and yet delyteth no less then the father
in the child. Psalm. 65.
for thou have proved us o god, and haste tried us, as the silver is tried by
fire. Thou have led us into a snare, thou have laden our backs full of
troubles, thou haste appointed me^ to be heads over us, we have passed through
fire and water, and yet have thou refreshed us. Psalm. 118.
It is for my welthe, that thou haste brought me under, to learn thy
righteousness. Psalm. 20.
Blessed is that man, which is under the love and nurture of the lord. Hiere.
31.
Thou haste stryken me, and I have repented, thou have chastened me lord, and
I am taught as one under age, wild, and untamed. Threno. 3
Whoo can say, that any thing, can be done, without the lords commandment?
From the mouth of the highest gothe there not good and ill? By which saying
the prophet rebukes the wicked, which deny, that afflictions happen by the
council and prouydence of god. Such also rebukes Sophon, Sopho. 1.
I shall viset men drowned in their dregs, which say in their hearts, The
lord will not do both good and ill. Matthew. 10.
Are not two sparowes sold for a farthynge, and yet not one of them falls on
the earth, without the will of your father? Roma. 11.
Al things are of him, by him, and in him. 1. Cor. 11.
While we judged, we are punished of the lord, lest we should with the world be
condemned.

It is undoubtedly no small comfort, to be assured, that the cross is of
god, and that we are chastened of god, and not of the dyuell, or else of any
wicked man: which utterly can have no power upon us, not so much as to move one
hear of our head, beside the will of the lord, without the sufferaunce of god,
as Christ him self comfort us, saying, Matthew. 10.
Even the hears of your headde are all nombred. As though he should say, if
god be careful for the sparowes, how much more shall he be careful for you?
which are his people and sheep of his pasture, that nothing happen rashely
unto you, without his beneuolente will. Saying also that the dyuell had no
power upon swyne, much less upon them that are godly, whom he can not hurt at
al. Matthew. 9.
for so the eua^gelistes write, that the diuelles prayed Christ, and said, If
thou cast us forth, Marc. 5.
suffer us to enter into the herd of swyne. And he said unto them, Goo ye.
They have then no power upon the holy, no trewely not on the swyne, except
that god shall suffer them, no they dare not, nor can not any thing against
them, but by the sufferaunce of god. for god alone binds this dragon, and he
alone louseth him, as Christ says, No man can enter into the house of a
strong man, Marc. 3.
and spoil him of his vessel and treasure, oneles he first bind the strong
man. For the dyuel is chayned and bound so strayghtly, that he may do nothing,
before that god appoint him, Job. 1.
as it is written in Job. The lord said to Satan, Lo, all that he has, are in
thy hand, but extend not thy hand upon him. Satan does nothing, but that,
that god suffers and will. Also all the godly (as the sons of god) are ever
in gods presence. For whom the lord ever cares for, tenderynge them,
nuryshyng them, keeping and defending them, from all ill. what greatter
comfort then can there be of faith, as a sure rock, then that the godly ar
well assured and know, them selves evermore set before the lords eyes, and to
be kept under his hand? Can mysery oppress the? can the cross? can sin?
can death? can hell? Be assured, that thou art in the presence of god. they
shall not prevail, the lord cares for the, the lords eye is dyrected
toward the. whom then shall thou fear, if by faith thou be made the son of
god? God cares for the, yea and sends his aungelles to keep and defend the,
according to the wytnes of David, Psalm. 90.
He has command his angels of the, to keep the in all thy ways. The
angel of the lord shall be sent abroad, among al them that fear him, and
shall deliver them. And if god give liberty to the devil, to tempte us, let us
surely believe, that with that temptation god shall give increase: that is,
that the temptation shall be for our welthe and profytte, and that we shall be
able to suffer. 1. Cor. 10.
He shall strike and his hands shall make hole. Temptations also have their
lymittes, Job. 5.
another can they ouerpasse their end appointed. And as the sea is compassed
round with borders, even so have al crosses their borders and ends, beyond
the which they may not ouerpasse. Let every one therefore, which is of god,
and believes in god, keep him self: and the wicked or ill shall not touch him.
1. Ioh. 5.
For that thousand wily craftesman gothe forth and tempts the godly, as he
temted David, Ada^, and Peter, with a thousand snares: but he has never the
victory. In the cross or temptation, god has one purpose, and the dyuel an
other. Wherefore there are two kinds of temptation, both common to the godly
and ungodly, although dyuersly. The one kind is, when god tries men with much
adversity, that as well the mekenes, as the faith of the godly, may shine
forth, and be made more open, not to other only, but to them selves also:
and contrary wise, that the wyckednes of the wicked, (which they without shame
deny, or else under some false color of religion cloak) may openly apere, and
also be punished. The other kind is, when we are tempted by suggestions of the
dyuell, and affections of the flesh, and oftentimes under such temptations
they fall and lie under, where some so fall to everlasting death, that they
never arise again, other after their fall ar made more low and more ware. God
therefore corrects, to make hole, and not to dystroye: he punyssheth the
godly, for that they should not be condemned with this froward world, to prove
and exercise their faith, to mortify their flesh, and to kendell in them a
more fervent desire of the everlasting life to come: last of all, lest they
should by reason of great gifts, be blown up with pride: and thereby they are
proved also, to be the very true sons of god, and not unlawful and
bastardes. But the dyuel tempts to distroy, and to draw into desperation and
unbelief. Luc. 22. Act. 5.
He roted in the heart of Judas, to deliver up Christ. He temted Ananias and
Saphira, and had the mastry. He tempted Job, Job. 1.2.
and was ready to destroy him, if he had been so suffered. Matthew. 4.
He tempted Christ, but he prevailed nothing. He was busy with the apostels, to
syfte them as wheat, but the lord prayed, and he wanne nothing. He styrred up
David to number Israel, he obeyed the temtation, Para. 22.
and brake the precept of god. So Peter forsware Christ, and yet they obtained
mercy. Thus he runs about, seeking whom he may devour. So the godly over
come in temptation, although sometime through the good council and prouydence
of god, they be overcome: but al things works with them to their wealth, and
for the best. Wherefore we pray our father, that he lead us not in to
temptation, that he will not tempt us above that we shall be able to bear, but
to make with the temptation increase, and deliver us from ill. Satan therefore
nor dares nor can do any thing against the holy, but by gods sufferance. Al
things are done after gods arbitrye or will, without whose beck or grant,
no adversity can happen. God sends afflictions, sometime by him self through
his own will only, sometime by his minysters, for he both dystroyeth the
wicked with the countenance of his wroth, and also by contrary angels and
persecutours he suffers his sons to be exercysed. For god gives power
sometime to the dyuell, to assaute the ryghtuouse man: but because his
cursednes is insaciable, till he devour a man all together, there is a law
prescribed unto him, beyond the which he may not tempt. For god is faythefull,
and measures our fight or battle according to our strengthes. wherefore let
no man's heart fail him, god knows, how far it is expedyente, that our
meekness be exercysed, that from henseforth, we may be mete to do greatter
things. For undoubtedly if god had not known the strength and constancy of
Job his soldier, he would not have given so much liberty to Satan, against
him, suddenly and at ones to despoyle, one so rich, so blessed of al his
substance, and to pluck him from all his felycitie. After we are well taught
these things of gods prudencie, we shall the easier bear the cross.

Cross is the work of the good will and mercy of god. Cap. v.
IT IS not inoughe, to feel and consider, that we are afflycted through the
council and will of god, but we must moreover mark the cause and intent of
his godly will, for reason judges, that we are punished, to the end to be hurt
or dystroyed: and examples likewise move us, of them that have be^ punished and
cast of from god, as of Pharao, Saul, and other like, but we must forsake
reason, and fle such examples, and cleave to the word of god. The word of god
teaches, that we suffer affliction, to our health and salvation. For
afflictions are not signs of wrath and displeasure, but of grace and favor.
God calls to repentance, and by affliction he in a manner speaks and
declares, that he will forgive. For as baptism, or eating of the lords
body, do witness unto us, that we are forgyuen: even so nerehande affliction
may be called a certain sacrament. For it sygnifieth, that god will forgive.
And why does it so signify? for even as other sacraments have the word of
the element: so to affliction is the word annexed, whereby is promised grace,
for so says Paul. 1. Cor. 11.
while we are punished, we are corrected of the lord, least we should with
this world be condemned. Afflition calls to repentance, that we peryshe
not. And he corrects the son, Psalm. 50.
whom he loves. It is good for me, that thou haste brought me under, that I
may learn thy rightuousenes. Esai. 26.
Lord in tribulation have they visited the: it is thy lerning to them, that
they should cry to the in anguishe and sorrow. Esai. 28.
Trouble gives understanding again. To the end to do his own work, he
does an other work. that is, to the intent to make safe, he chasteneth and
scourges. Psalm. 50.
A troubled spirit is a sacrifice to god. A sacrifice is that that pleases
god. Wherefore for so much as affliction pleases god it signifies not those
which are afflicted, to be reproved, and cast of from god, for he will not the
death of a sinner, Ezech. 33.
but that he convert and live. We must therefore in affliction steadfastly
believe, that our trouble comes not by chance, but that it is governed of
god. Moreover, that god will not us therefore to be troubled, to hurt and
dystroy us, but to call us to repentance, to exercise us and save us, as holy
scripture every where declares. Psalm. 102.
He will not still be angry, he will not continually threten us. He has
begone, Hosie. 6.
and will make us safe, he shall stryke and make us hole. Hos. 144.
The lord lyfteth up al them that fall, and plucketh up all those which are
broised. Esai. 49.
Can the woman forgette her babe, that she have not compassion of the child of
her womb? And if she be forgetful, yet will not I forget the. Matt. 16.
So Christ comfort his. The womanne, when she brings forth: Esai. 46.
which are borne of my womb, which are borne of my bealy, even to the old
age I my self will carry, even to the hoore hears, I have done it, and I will
bear, I will carry and make safe. Mich. 4.
Morn and be busy o daughter of Sion, as a woman traueylinge, for now thou
shalt go forth from the city, and shall dwell in a region, and shalt come
even to Babylon, there shall thou be delivered, there shall the lord redeem
the. Job. 33.
Teaching them, he instructs with lernyng, to pluck a man from those
things, which he has done, and to deliver him from pride. Genesis 22.
So Abraham was tempted to be tried, that his faith might be made noble and
manifest, he tempted him, and sets forth before us such example to follow,
when he tempts and tries our faith. Job. 1.2.
So Job was temted of the lord, that his faith might be made more clear. So
David, 2. Par. 13. Tobi. 2.
so Manasses on every side vexed, repented. Also Tobias was therefore made
blind, to give example of patience, to his after co^mers. Likewise Judith. we
ought to be myndfull, how our fathers were tempted, to be tried. Matthew. 15.
So it happened in the woman of Chanaan. Matthew. 9.
And to the womanne laboring with the issue of blood. by which examples we
are taught and confirmed, to be plucked from god by no temptations, by no
oppressions, by no chastisynges, be they never so great: but the more that god
tempts us, chasteneth, and repelleth, so much the more let us cry to him,
till he gracyously here us. It is therefore no (...)

The godly are the first that are afflicted, and they are afflicted of god, to
their good and welthe. Cap. vi.
Hiere. 25. et. 49.
LO IN the city, in which my name is called upon, begin I to punisshe, and
shall ye be as innocents, and without punyshemente? Ezechi. 9.
The lord commanded them that distroyed Jerusalem, to begin at his
sainctuarye. 1. Pet. 4.
The time is now, that judgment must begin at the house of god. If the
judgment of god begin at the godly, what end taryeth them, which believe
not the gospel of god? but the godly, when they are punished, they are punished
of god to their welthe and good, as the epistell written to the Hebrews, does
clearly testify. Hebre. 12.
Whom the lord loves, him he corrects. and he beats every child whom he
receives. if ye suffer chastisynge, god offers him self unto you, as to his
sons. What son is he, whom the father chasteth not? If ye be without
chastesynge, whose partakers ar all the sons, then are ye servants, and no
sons at al. So Solomon: Prou. 3.
The chasteninge of god thou shall not refuse, and neither grudge thou, when he
shall correct the, for whom the lord loves, him he corrects, and delyteth him
self, as the father in the son. Apoc. 3.
Whom so ever I love, I rebuke, and chaste. The godly therefore ar chastened of
the merciful god, to their wealth and good, and those which are most
corrected, are most loved of god. As Tobias was chastned for his profit.
Tobi. 2. Genesis 37.
Joseph through the oppression of his brethern, was made ruler of Egypt. Exodus
1.
By reason of the tyranny of Pharao, the children of Israel increased, and
were made innumerable. Number. 21.
The people hurt of serpents cried. So he afflicts the holy because they
should not be in securite without al fear but that their repentance shall
increase, and their faith be confyrmed, when they feel them selves to be help:
Although we know, that no man is scourged of god, without his deseruyng. Roma.
3.
For every man is a lier and a sinner, and no flesh shall be justified before
the face of god. Genesis 6.
For all flesh has corrupted his way. Wherefore al flesh is punished, and yet
we know that not always the godly are punished for sins, but sometime to prove
the faith of the afflicted. As Job, David, and many other, or to declare and
make manifest the majesty of his name. So he punysshed the Israelites in
Egypt by Pharao, that he might be glorified in Pharao, and make his name clear
in all the world. Ioh. 9.
So of the manne borne blind from his natiuytie, another this man has sinned
nor his parents, but that the works of god moughte be manyfeste in him. And
when god does afflicte his people for their sins, he does not therefore
afflycte them, that by their afflictions, they should satisfy for their sins.
For the passion and sufferynge of Jesus Christ only, is the ransom and
expiation of our sins. But therefore he afflicts, that by affliction he may
drive sinners to repentance. For repentance or penance comes first by the
knowledge of sin: and then by faith, that our sin is forgyuen us for gods
promise sake: and of faith burgeth forth the calling on the name of god.

In tribulation we must pray. Cap. vii.
HERE are we taught, what a christen man must do in temptation, whenne he
sees him self forsaken of al men, that is, to pray, and not to cease to
pray, but to pray in feyth, mystrusting nothing, Ia. 1.
for he that mystrusteth, is like the raige of the sea, which is carried with
the wind, and tossed and driven with vyolence. Which thing also Christ
warned us of, Matt. 16.
saying. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation. So like wise
Solomon: Son, Eccle. 38.
in thy syckenesse despise not thy self, but pray to the lord, and he shall
heal the. Thereto god has also commanded, that we should in tribulation call
on him: yea and calls that invocation or crying on him, a sacrifice, the true
and most accepted honor. For so says the psalm. Psalm. 49.
Call to me in the day of thy trouble. And he adds promyses, And I will
deliver the, and thou shall honor me And he said before in the psalm, that he
regarded not the oblatio^s of beasts and such other works, but that he
delyteth in this sacrifice. if that we call on him in trouble, and believe, that
he will help us: and when we are helped, to give thanks, and preach his
benefyte. And so like wise he calls the hope, Psalm. 4.
whereby we tarry his help in affliction, sacrifice. Sacrifice you the sacrifice
of justice, and hope ye in the lord. as though he should say, that hope is a
sacrifice, whereby we yield justice to god, that (saying he has so promised)
he will pluck us out, and deliver us: for so much he is ryghtuouse and true.
Thou see then, that christian patience has ever hope annexed: but that hope
beholds no creatures, but only the word and promise of god, and holds hope
against hope, as says Paul: that is when al creatures fail, and show no
help at all, yet is there hope, that god will help. And though he give us
not those things, which we would, or by that way or means that we will, yet
governs he so the end, through his wisdom and goodness, that we perysshe
not, and that our prayers be not spente in vain. Paul teaches the same in
this gradation. Tribulation brings patience, when he comes thither, and
teaches us, that we ought to hold a sure hope in time of trouble, and adds
a promise. Roma. 4.
Hope makes us never a shamed. We must therefore believe, that we are hard of
god, that god will help us, and that we are defended of god. For so the
psalms command us to believe and pray. Psalm. 17.
And in my trouble have I cried to the lord, and to my god have I called, and
he has graciousely from his holy temple hard my voice. Psalm. 80.
In trouble thou have called on me, and I have delivered the, I have graciously
herd the, in the darkness of trouble. He has cried to me, Psalm. 9^.
and I will here him. I am with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and he
shall glorify me. Of this matter we have no few exexamples. Children prayed
in the mids of the furnace, and they were hard and delivered. Danie. 3.
Daniel in the mids of captivity, prayed, and in the den of lions, and he
was preserved. Daniel. 9.
Susan forsaken of all men, prayed, and she was hard. Jonas. 2. Esai. 38.
Jonas in the bealy of the fyshe, prayed. Hezechias syckened even to the
death, he turned his face to the wall, and prayed to the lord, and the lord
hard him, and was made hole. 4. Re. 20. Luc. 22.
Christ in the time of his tribulation and passion prayed, sheding forth dropes
of blood. Stephan in the mids of them that stoned him, Act. 7.
prayed. While Peter was kept in prison, Act. 12.
there was prayer made of the congregation for him. Such examples ought to
stir up our minds and our faith, to pray more dyligently, and with a more
feruentnes. For affliction, and the great waylynges and sorrow of the
afflycted, are regarded of god, so much, that no more acceptable sacrifice
can be offered to god, the^ if ye offer a contrite and an humble heart, which
god never refuses, as says the prophet. Psalm. 112.
Who is like the lord our god, which dwells in the high, and yet regards
and beholds low things? Whom shall I look on, Esai. 66.
but on the poor and co^trite in spirit, and him that fears my word. The
lord is nyghe them, Psalm. 36.
which have a troubled heart. We are taught also, that the lord beholds and
hereth the prayers and cry of sinners, of those sinners, which although they
have committed never so filthy offenses, yet believe that the lord god is their
god, for his promise made to Abraham: that is, which believe, that they have
god the father pacified in heaven for Jesus Christ's sake. and through this
faith call to god, and are hard: through this faith, their sins committed,
ar washed away. And the prayer of the afflycted gothe through to the trone of
the grace of god. This faith is much worth, to persuade the heart of the
afflycted in temptation, that his prayer is hard. And for as much as god is
more redier to here, then we to pray, we ought surely to believe, that our
prayers are not ydel, but that they please god, and are undoubtedly hard, as
Sirach also does warn us: Eccle. 18.
Before thy prayer, prepare thy soul, and be not, as a man that tempts god,
that is, lift up thy mind with a sure confidence, that god will here the, but
not for thy worthynesse: But first, because thou art sure, that god has
commanded us to pray, and for because god has promised graciously to here us.
Secondly, for because thou haste a form and manner of prayer assygned of him.
Wherefore we need not to fear, that our prayer should offend him, for god
casts of no man that comes unto him, yea he calls all men unto him,
which are troubled in heart: Matthew. 11.
Come to me all ye that labor and are laden, and I shall refresshe you. Mary
Magdalyn was a sinner, which afterward she began to wash Christ's fete
with her tears, she hard of Christ. Luc. 7.
Thy sins are forgiven the. Also the thief, in his extreme sufferynge, went
to joy. Like wise of zach. Matthew. Peter. Matthew. 9.
For he came not to call the ryghtuouse, but sinners. He came to seek the
lost sheep, and lost dram or grote. Luc. 18.
He has promised to them that repent, remission of sins, and receives them
in to his favor, as the prodigal son. If we confess our sins, he is
feythefull and ryghtuouse to forgive us our sins, 1. Ioh. 1.
and to cleanse us from al iniquity. Psalm. 31.
I have said, I will confess against my self, my vnryghtuousenes, and thou
haste forgyuen the wyckednes of my sin. Also if the wicked shall repent from
all his sins, Ezech. 18.
which he has done, and shall keep al my precepts, and will keep judgment
and justice, he shall live, and shall not dye.

Of prayer and the manner of prayer in tribulation.
PRAYER is the desire of the heart for any thing, to be required of god, it is
the pensyfe syghe of godly minds, which call on the name of the lord. We
are commanded to pray: Matt. 16. 1. Tes. 5. Colo. 4.
watch and pray. Also, Ask and ye shall have. Ask and it shall be given you.
also, Pray contynually. Again: Be busy in prayer, and watch in it. Luc. 18.
For god does not only suffer us to pray, but also commands, as he has
commanded us, not to kill, not to commit adultery. Wherefore like as they
sin, that kill, or rob, even so do they that never pray.

Whose preyars are hard of god.
Eccle. 9.
THE desire of the pore, god hereth. The prayer of him that meke neth him
self, penetrateth and goth through the clouds. Psalm. 101.
He has regarded the prayer of the meke, and has not despised their prayers.
The lord is nyghe all them, Psalm. 144. Ioh. 4.
that cry unto him in truth. Such worshyppers god requires, which worship
him in spirit. Psalm. 33.
The ryghtuouse have cried, and the lord has hard them, and he has delivered
them from al their truble. Psalm. 60.
From the ends of the world have I called to the, when my heart was dysmaied,
and in a rock have thou exalted me. Psalm. 119.
To the lord have I cried in my trouble, and he has graciousey hard me. Esai.
66.
He beholds the lowly and broken in spirit, and such as fear his word.
Parts of true prayer, are the promise, faith, the affecte, to desire in the
name of Christ, and thanks gyuynge.

The promise of god.
WHAT so ever ye ask the father in my name, Ioh. 14.
he shall give it you. Psalm. 49.
Cry on me in the day of thy trybulation, and I will deliver the, and thou
shalt gloryfie me. He shall give good things to them that ask him. Matthew.
11. Marc. 11.
I say unto you, what so ever things ye ask in your prayer, believe that ye
shall receive, and they shall happen unto you. Ask, and it shall be given you.
Matt. 18.
If that two of you agree of any thing upon the earth, what so ever thing
they shall require, it shall be given them of my father, which is in heaven.
Hiere. 33.
Call to me, and I will gracyousely here the. In prayer, gods promise must
be considered, how god has promised, that he will here us. For he which has
commanded to pray, has promised that he will both here us and help us.

Faith.
Ia. 1. 1. Ioh. 5.
WE must pray with a confidence, doubtyng nothing. This is the confidence,
which we have toward him, that what so ever we desire, according to his
will, he hereth us. A prayer without faith obteyneth nothing at gods hand.
We must therefore pray in faith. And if we ask in faith, he hereth us. Faith
is assuredlye to believe, that god forgyueth us our sins, for Christ's sake,
and not only forgiueth our sins, but also is present with us, rules and
governs us, that he may make us safe. In this faith if we ask any thing,
god does graciousely here us. For god will give all things to the^ that
believe in him.

To ask in the name of Jesus,
IS to have a respect, to the glory and will of god, that the name of god may
be glorified. For the end of every prayer, is the glory of god. To ask
therefore in the name of Jesus, is to ask and desire the glory of Christ, and
the spredynge abroad of his name.

The affecte to desire any thing.
THE lords prayer teaches plainly, what thing we should pray for. More
over, faith, hope, love, patience. We must also pray, that we be not tempted,
for prayer only obteyneth the victory of all temptations. Also for public and
common necessities, for officers, for peace.

Thanks gyuyng.
Psalm. 49. Psalm. 115.
OFFER TO god, praise. To the shall I sacrifice the host or oblation of praise,
and I shall call on the name of the lord. Psalm. 33.
I will bless the lord at all times, his praise shall ever be in my mouth.
None turned again, Luc. 11.
to give glory to god, but the stranger. The faithful give thanks, that they are delivered of their trouble, they magnify god, and preach forth, his
gyuynge of benefy^^es: but god oftentimes deferreth to here, to exercise the
faith of the godly, as it apereth in Syrophenisse, also Luc. 18. and yet
stynte not they to pray, Luc. 18.
nor mystruste god, although they obtain not straight ways, that which they
ask and desire, but continue still in prayer. For continuance in prayer has
the reward. Daniel. 9.
He continued in prayer, he prayed the hole day through even to euentyde, and
was visited of Gabriell. We must prescrybe or appoynte no time to god. Judith.
9.
He that continues knocking, to him it shall be opened. God gave not to
Abraham streyghte ways, that which he promised. Therefore must we say, If thou
will lord, Marc. 1. Job. 13.
thy will be fulfilled. Although he shall kill me, yet shall I trust in him.

We ought to be pacient in affliction, not to be angry, nor to speak yuell of
god. Cap. viii.
PATIENCE, is to feel and consider, that god does scorge us, to call us to
repentance, and therefore gladly to suffer the hand of god, and to have a
confidence, that god will forgive us, and that he will deliver us. Of this
patience to godward, spryngeth forth patience toward men. For when the heart
is at peace with god, it tarieth help of him, and utterly sets aside lust
to avenge. Thus patience can never be, but when by faith we are assured, that
we please god, and that at length it shall come to pass, that we shall be
saved. Christen patience therefore, is the comfort and joy of the heart in
afflyctions, to whom there is annexed hope. For faith presently receives
reconciliation and forgyuenes of sin, and a promise of the end. Hope taryeth
and looks for the end to come, as says Esai In silence and hope shall be
your strength. Esai. 20.
For Hope has his eye to the will of god, and knows, that god has care on
him. And it shall come to pass, that god will govern the ends according to
his promise, although there appear no help at all, in any creatures, as it is
spoken of Abraham. Against all hope, he believed in hope. that is, although in
the hole compass of nature, there be no hope at al, yet beholdynge the word
of god, felt inwardly, that that which god had promised, should come to
pass. Who (as says Paul) calls those things which are not, as though
they were? Therefore the mind is quiet in christen patience. For it
consydereth, that afflyctions are not ill, nor are laid on us of god to our
destruction. For he is well assured, that he is temted through the good will of
god, and exercysed to repentance for his health. And for as much as the mind
is fyxed toward this will of god, he is not angrye with god. For he knows,
how this calamity or trouble comes not by chance or fortune without a
cause, but rather reioyseth in affliction. that is it that Esai speaks. In
silence and hope shall be your strength. that is, be ye not angry in god or
with god. Psalm. 5.
Be ye angry, but sin not, that is. Be ye not angry with god, because he
suffers you to be punyshed, and does not by and by help you, be ye not for
that moved, to exercise vengaunce, or to forsake god: but speak closely within
your hearts, that is, consider the word, and according thereunto suffer
affliction. Such patience is steadfast and sure, yea even when al man's
comfort and council forsake us. which thing holy scripture evidently proves
every where. for he will not be forgetful of the poor continually. The
patience of the poor shall not peryshe at length. Tarry the lord, Psalm. 26.
do manfully, comfort thy heart, and suffer the lord. Esai. 30.
In silence and hope, shall be thy strength. Thren. 3.
It is good to look for the health of the lord in silence. Eccle. 2.
What so ever is laid on the, receive it, and when thou art brought low,
have patience. He that is pacient, Prou. 14.
is ruled with much wisdom. He that is impatient, shows forth his
folyshenes. In your patience shall ye pocesse your souls. Matt. 10. Roma. 5.
Afflyction brings forth patience, patience probation or trial, probatio^
hope, and hope shall never be a shamed. So David, 2. Re. 16.
patiently suffered the persecution of his son, and the curse of Semei. Job
is a notable example of patience. The lord gave the lord has taken away.
Abraham was pacient, Genesis 12.
when his wife was taken away, and set in Pharaos house. Christ is the only
captain and most perfect example of patience. So far is it of, that
adversities should noy or hurt us, that they are very profitable unto us. For
the good, the more they are afflycted, the more pacient they are, knowing that
through much trouble, is the way of heaven. for they know, that by much
patience, they are tried and proved as Peter says. 1. Pet. 1.
whereby the trial of our faith, may be more preciouse then gold, which
perysheth and is tried by fire. wherefore a proffe or trial helps to the
increase of hope. For when we consider, that in no such so great afflitions,
we are not forsaken, we gather confidently, that never after this shall we be
forsaken. we ought therefore pacientely to suffer those ylles, which happen on
us in this world. for if we be impacient, we be not christians. For as many as
have been sythen the beginning of the world hitherto, godly and christian men,
they have al ben afflycted with manyfolde troubles. But forbycause, they have
overcome the^ with patience, their hope set and fyxed in god, therefore they are
made safe, as witnesses the examples of the holy, from the first Abel, unto
those ryghtuouse which in these days ar on live. Wherefore it behooved even
Christ him self, by the cross, to enter into life. And this in all
adversities is great comfort, and of great strength, to know, that god
requires patience, and that myngled with joy. But man's reason perceyueth not
that, Colo. 1.
but god teaches it. For our reason is therefore troubled and vexed in
persecution, because it thinks, that we are afflycted, because god other
hates us, or does not regard us, another will help us. These false opinions
god plucketh from us, and teaches us, that we are afflycted, not because he
hates us, but because he will other amend us, or when we be amended, so to
continue, according to that saying: He corrects the son whom he loves.
Again: I will not the death of a sinner. Ezech. 18.
Again, He has concluded all under sin, not to dystroye all, but to have
mercy on all. And this thing engendereth gladness in our minds, to know and
feel, that it pleases god, to have us afflycted. For we must be like the image
of his son. More over, that in our affliction he will help us, and keep us,
and also comfort us with the holy ghost, and set our conscience at peace, and
make us be glad in god, so that we desire help of him. For he commands,
that we should look for help at his hand, according to this: All they that
tarry the, Esai. 49.
shall not be confounded. And god commands likewise, that we should ask help
of him. Call on me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver the, and thou
shalt gloryfie me. Of this patience and comfort god alonely is the auctour,
which also gives patience. Psalm. 70. Psalm. 61. Hiere. 29.
For thou art my patience o lord. yet o my soul be under and subject to god.
for of him is my patience. Think the thoughts of peace, that I may give you
the end and patience. Romans 15.
The god of patience and comfort. etc. This christian patience has certain
condycions, whereby it is known, to be the true patience. First it grudgeth
not, another excuses it self, as though it should suffer unworthily for his
sins. wherefore he sits down and holds his peace, as Hieremie says.
Thren. 3.
He sytteth alone, and speaks no word, for he has laid a yocke upon him.
Secondely it casts all carefulnes on god, 1. Pet. 5.
and commits it self al hole to god, that gods will be done, and not his.
Thyrdely, it humbles him self, and casts of ryotte, and the pleasure of the
world. Fourthly, he is merry and redye to suffer yet more heuyer and more
greuouse ylles.

Socour in affliction must be asked of god. Capi. ix.
WE MVSTE look for help in all afflyctions, for god promyseth his help,
saying. I am with you, fear ye not, I will strength you. Again, Ioh. 15.
Without me, ye are able to do nothing. But when he is present, we are able
to do all things through him. And if he be with us, Roma. 8.
who shall be against us? Of what danger shall we be aferde of? he has
promised trewely to be with us, until the end of the world, and undoubtedly
he will be. Let us call therefore on his help, he is true, and is ready to al
them that call on him in truth. Iudit. 6.
Judith desiring help of god, said: Help me thy handemaiden, Hest. 14.
which have none other help but the lord. Give us help from the holy place
or else, Psalm. 19.
he sends help from his holy place. and from Sion will he defend the. Psalm.
69.
O god give head toward my help, and have to help me o lord. Blessed is
that man, whose help is of the. Psalm. 83. Psalm. 107.
Help us from tribulation. For vayn is the health of man. Psalm. 120.
My help is of the lord, which made heaven and earth. In time of tribulation
we ought from above to look for the help of god: but the manner, time, and
kind of help is unknown unto us, that faith and hope may have place, which
sticks to those things, which are not seen nor hard. Do not therefore in
time of trouble run without thy self, but tarry within thy self, and tarry
the strength of the lord: He will come, if thou depart not: he will strength
the, if thou seek none other strength. For he comes not to them that flee,
but to them that tarry boldelye. Tribulation must not be overcome with flight,
but with constancye, and stycking in the faith of the name of god. Also the
help of the lord is over them, that only put their confydence and trust in
god: he is ready with all his angels, when al other things forsake them: he
has a respect to his in afflyction continually. He keeps them, and comfort
them. 3. Re. 17.
To Helias when he was fled and was hungry, he sent a raue^ which brought him
bread. Again, 2. Re. 19.
he sent him bread and water by his angel. He was with the elder Tobie,
Tobi. 5. Hest. 9.
and at length heled him of his blyndenes. He turned the waylinge of the Jews
in to joy. Iudit. 10.
He wrought meruaylously with the Betulians, which cried upon him. Daniel. 5.
He was with Daniel and the children in the furnace of fire, that the fire
should not hurt them. Dani. 14.
When Daniell was in the den of lions in Chaldee, the lord sent him his dynner
from Ieury. Susan was left comfortles and in desperation, and yet in extreme
danger, god delivered her, and considered her anguyshe. Jonas. 2.
He preserved Jonas in the bealy of the fyshe, that he should not peryshe,
which yet had deserved death. He was with Peter in prison, and delivered him.
Act. 12.23
He brought Paul forth of prison, to whom god spoke by a visyon in the
night. Fear not, but speak, and hold not thy peace. And for as much as I
am with the, no man shall draw nyghe to hurt the. Wherefore Paul cries on
this manner: As the passions and sufferynges of Christ do habounde in us, 2.
Cor. 1.
even so do consolations and comfort by Christ. We must therefore ask help
in time of trouble, of god only: which of him self, and by him self,
defends every man, that is his, and not by the help of man. Of which thing
there be examples, how often times he help the people of Israel, when none of
all the people about them were with them, but all against them, alonely with
his presence, through his true worship in Jerusalem and Sion. Psalm. 19.
He will send help unto the from his holy place, and out of Sion shall he
defend the. And as often as they looked not for help out of Sion, but out of
Egypt, or from the Assirians, so oftentimes they fell, and were worse hurt, as
men which claue to a staff of a read. For help or socour required of
creatures, is not only vain, but is also to our hurt and loss, as Luke
tells, of the woman, which had the course of blood, which bestowed in
vain all the substance she had on physicians, and received health by faith
only in Christ. For god delivers when most need is, that his glory may
shine the bryghter. Therefore the will of god must be looked on, and our help and
hope may be affyxed in nothing else, then in god, which is an helper in time
convenient: Which has fyxed his eyes upon the. Psalm. 31.
For the eyes of the lord are on the ryghtuouse, and his ears ready to their
prayers. Psalm. 33.
We may put no affiance nor trust in man, nor in man's help, but in god
only. Psalm. 59.
Vain is the health of men. Cursed is he that trusts in man, Hiere. 17.
and makes flesh his defense, and his heart departed from god. Deuteronomy. 17.
Esai. 31.
Thy king shall not increase his horses. Woe to them which go down into
Egypt, hoping in the help of horses. Some in horses, Psalm. 19.
and some in chariottes, but we in the name of the lord. Psalm. 146.
Nor has he delight in the strength of the horse, another yet pleasure in the
legs of men. The lord delyteth in them that fear him, and in them that
put their hope in him.

Yet in afflyction or syckenes, medicyne and council are not to be despised.
Cap. x.
FOR GOD by instruments performs his will, and does and works all things
in their order by means, as clearly testifies holy scripture. Esai. 38.
Esai commanded to take a cluster of fygges, and to plaster them upon
Ezechias wound, and so to be made hole. This is certaynely a great praise and
defense to physic. 4. Re. 20. 2. Par. 32.
For god will not the use of his creatures to be neglected or despised. He
condemns only the faith and confidence in creatures. And although he might
easyly have healed Ezechias, with one word: yet would he do it by medycine.
So he might bring forth and increace children of man's body, otherwise or
by some other manner, but yet he will do it by the womanne. Wherefore let us use
things, as god has created them, with thanks gyuyng, and let us only put no
confidence in them: as we read that Asa did, 2. Co. 15.
which in his syckenes sought not the lord, but physicians. Hope must
chiefly be put in the lord, and afterward let us use the help of
physicians, as the benefytte of god. Moreover, we must consider, that god has
created medycine, as witnesses Jesus Syrach: Sirach. 3^
Honor the physician for necessyties sake, for the highest has created him.
For of god is al remedy. etc. Beside that, among the people of god, there were
ever physicians, and Luke him self the euangeliste was also a physician. Colo.
4.
But yet (as I said) we must put no confidence in the physician, but rather in
god. For phisike without the workynge of god, helps nothing, as witnesses
the history of the woman, Matthew. 9.
which twelve years suffered the flux. For the outward phisike is
deceytfull, and nothing at all, except health be inwardely given of god. The
woman is not reproved, because she spente much on physicians, but rather is
priuyly showed, that physycke is vain, when it is attemted without god. So
may we not despise physic, whom the highest has created of the earth: so
that we renounce our will into the hand of god, which is the chief point,
that is by physic, other to heal us, or to kill us. This is the strong
faith in god, through which, no sickness is so grievous and incurable, which
is not made hole. This faith I say, is nothing else, but the most lively
opinion and undoubted trust in the mercy of god, whereby a man undoubtedly
persuades him self, that he is in the favor of god, and that god is
courteyse and forgyuynge him al things, that he has other done or said.
Courteyse, in good things: forgiuynge, in ill things. Romans 10.
This faith comes by herynge, and hering by the word of god. Physic
therefore may not be despised. For god is the aucthor and creator of things, in
which also he works as by a mean. So Helizeus took salt and cast it into
the fountain of waters, which were very ill, and unwholesome, and made the
waters hole. Again. He purged and ryd the lepre of Naaman, 4. Re. 2.
captain under the king of Syria, in the water of Jordan. 4. Re. 5.
Water without the word and promise of god, is nothing. as if any other had
washed him self a hundred times in Jordan, he should not have been cleansed.
Naaman is cleansed, for he had a promise. Be thou washed, and thou shall be
hole. When he regards not this promise, but only the water, he erreth, and
taryeth in leprosye, and so should have perished, and have be^ a blasphemer
against god, onelesse he had been warned of his servants. He came therefore
with faith, and was made hole. Ioh. 9.
So Christ to make the blind man hole, made clay with spyttell. Again.
Matthew. 9.
The hem of christ's garment touched, delivered the woman from the flux of
blood. The voice of Christ called forth Lazarus. The voice of Christ called
forth unclean spirits from men. The shadow of Peter expels syckenes. So
much can the creature do, taken into the hands of the almighty, which has
not this strength of nature, but of the everlasting word of god. of whom it
receives the strength of doing, that it rests not, but is ever workynge and
mighty. For there is nothing made of god in vain, although it be never so
vile. For therefore god created those vile things, to signify, that he him
self works in those abiecte and vile things: but the wicked do attrybute
the strength of curing, healynge, multiplieng, and bringyng forth, to the
earth, nature, and herbs: but the faythefull attribute it, to the living
word of god, and to the present power of god. For god works all things, by
the earth, herbs, and other his creatures, as by instruments: but yet we
ought not to attribute those things to trees and herbs, although god use
those things for our sake, but to god, which works al things, in all
things, that all things may be referred to their first well spring.
Wherefore it is sure, that god by instruments does work, cleanse, heal, and
make safe. So god only fedeth us, Matt. 6.
your heavenly father fedeth them, yet uses he bread as an instrument to feed
by. Psalm. 104.
Bread confyrmeth the heart of man. Again. God alone keeps us and defends
us, according to this. Psalm. 227.
Except the lord do keep the city, he that keeps it, watches in vain, and
yet he keeps it, with the mynistery of angels and governors. Finally, god
is the auctour and lord of al things, he has his organes and instruments,
with the which, as with means he does what he will.

In afflyction no time may be appointed to god, another yet manner whereby we
would be delivered. Ca. xi.
THERE IS no time nor measure of afflyction, to be prescrybed or lymytted to
the lord, although he deffer the matter a long season, as it apereth in the.v.
chapter of John, Ioh. 5.
that the infirmity of the sick was prolonged until the.xxxviii. year, by the
will of god, until Christ should come and be glorified. So let us believe
certainly, all our afflictions to endure the longer, through the mighty will
and work of god, that at the last the lord be glorified in us. Ioh. 9.
A certain manne was borne blind, and did continue so blind until he came
to the perfect aege of a man. but wherefore? Verily, that the work of the lord
might be showed in him. In like wise the Israelytes were not only greuouselye
punysshed under Pharao in Egypt, but also a long season, not that they should
be destroyed, but rather that the name of the lord should be glorified in
them. Job also was cast into greuouse hell pains many months, that by the
continuance of his peynes, it might be made manyfeste, that all men were
liars, and god only true. that is, that the name of god by him might be
glorified. In like manner Joseph, having knowledge by his dreme, yt he should be
a governor, was kept long time, partly under greuouse servitude and
bondage, and partly in prison. but for none other cause, but that the name of
god, by him delivered from so low humility, and brought to so great honor,
might be gloryfied. God will therefore help when need shall require, whenne we
be compelled to despeyre in all humayne help, and when all carnal council
shall deceive us, for god only will be gloryfied. Ioh. 2.
Christ did not change water into wine at the beginning, but did tarry
until it appeared manyfestly to all the gestes, that there lacked wine. that the
glory only to god and to none other might be given. It seems oftentimes, that
god does leave his elect in the middel of all ill, but sodeynely he helps and
gives socour, specially when all thing is brought to desperation: and beside
al hope, with some rare and seldom shown miracle he helps, although
natural remedy do lack, and trouble abou^d on every side, so that it seems,
that the lord has forgotten his elect: but afterward he fails not to
deliver them out of the mids of al their troubles more gloriousely. He might
have let Pharao, that he should not have punished the children of Israel, but
when all man's help was past, he delivered his people from Pharao in the red
see. The lord does prolong help for our utility and profit, that he might
exercise and prove faith by temptation: so that he only might possess the
title and name of a helper, that we might learn the better to trust in god,
and to have compassion upon other that be tempted. as in the psalm. Psalm, 17.
And thy learning has corrected me for ever, and thy disciplyne shall teach
me. Hebre. 2.
So Paul speaks of Christ: It behooves that Christ, in all things should
be made like his brethern, that he might be merciful over them. We ought not
therefore to despeire in the time of afflyction, specially when we know
certaynely, that the term and end of punishment and pain, is to be
prescribed, lymitted, and appointed of god, as the prophets bear witness. When
the years begin to be fullfylled, Hiere. 29.
I will viset you, and raise upon you a good word. Hiere. 30.
Also, and the day shall be, that I will break his yoke from thy neck, and
strangers shall bear no more rule over it. Esai. 28. Abac. 2.
He which shall believe, shall make no haste. He which yet seemed a far of,
shall appear at the end, and shall not lie, although he tarry, yet look for
him, for he is coming, and at the last he shall come, and shall not be slow.
wherefore we must say: Matt. 6. Marc. 1.
The will of the lord be fulfilled. Also, Lord, if thou will, thou may
make me clean. Also Paul says. 1. Cor. 10.
The lord is faythefull, which will not suffer you to be temted above your
might, but shall give with temptation power to resyste, that you may be able
to suffer. Job. 13.
Although he kyl me, yet I will trust in him. Psalm. 22.
If I shall walk in the myddell of the shadow of death, I will not fear evil
things, because thou art with me. Judith in the.vii. and.viii. chapter, is a
good exaumple. The people of Israel were forty years in desert. God did not
give to Abraham shortly that which he promised. So Christ said his hour
was not yet come. Ioh. 2. Matt. 14. Matthew. 4.
The womanne of Chananie is a good example. Also Christ was tempted of the
dyuell in wyldernes forty days.

It is a great comfort to them that be in affliction, to remember, that Christ
was also tempted and exercised with ill as we be wont to be exercised. Cap. xii.
FIRST WE se Christ tempted: in whom we have an example of patience and long
sufferynge. This is our captain, whom we ought to follow in sufferynge, ne
lest it should be heavy to us, when we be tempted and punished in this world,
other of the dyuell or of his members. For as the apostell says. Hebre. 5.
We have a bishop tempted in all things like to us, without sin. And for as
much it choseth him so to be temted, he might the better help the^ that be
tempted, Therefore Christ was delivered to the dyuell to be tempted, as he was
after betrayed to the Jews to be crucyfyed: that we, which be tempted, by him
and in him might live. And furthermore, that by his temptation he should
overcome, lest we should obey and be overcome in temptation: and by that his
death he might redeem us from perpetual death. Therefore let us not be angry,
nor take it grievously, when we be let flyp by god our father in to diverse
temptations, tribulatio^s and afflyctions: Because no man is te^ted, except
the lord will. nor the dyuel has no power to hurt any man, except the lord
will permytte and suffer him. And when so ever he shall suffer him to te^pt,
yet he will not suffer us to be temted above our power. We have not only Christ
for our example, but also the godly both prophets and apostelles, which in
like wise be tempted, persecuted, stoned, 2. Cor. 11.12.
killed, and crucified. as Paul of him self witnesses. It is a great comfort
to the godly, when for the name of Christ and his holy gospel, they suffer
persecution, imprisonment, and at the last death, in which troubles yet joy
and afflyction have place and be mixed to gether. If they be punisshed, it is
joy and comfort to them, to have Christ and al good and holy men fellows
with them in their afflictions. 1. Tes. 1.
as Paul says. Receyuynge the word with greatte afflyction, and joy of the
holy ghost. So Christ does comfort his elect, Ioh. 16.
saying: In the world you shall have afflyction, but be of good comfort, I
have overcome the world. You shall weep and lament, and the world shall
rejoice: you shall mourn, but your mourning shall be turned in to joy. Ioh.
15. Matt. 16.
The servant is not better then the master. He that will follow me, let him
deny him self. etc. He which does not take up his cross and follow. etc.
Matt. 16. Marc. 8.
He that will save his soul, shall lose it. etc. and he which will lose his
soul for my sake, shall find it euerlastyngely. For the gospel is the word
of the cross, who so ever preaches it trewely, and confess it, must needs
suffer afflyction. For the gospel does reprove the world, and condemns
those things, which be in the world, but the world can not suffer that.
Therefore he punysheth, persecuteth, and kylleth the godly. We have examples
inowe. Cayn killed Abell, Esau persecuted Jacob, Saul David, Pharao Moysen, the
Phariseis Christ, the Jews the Apostelles, Herod John the baptist. If
therefore we be likewise punyshed, and tempted, there cha^seth no new things
to us. But let us remember Christ and his apostels our examples, which
admonished and warned us of such things, which were in like wise punished, and
did teach us, that al such as would live godly and mekely in Christ, 2. Tim.
3. Acto. 14.
should suffer persecution. And by many troubles we must enter into the
kyngedome of god.

It is great comfort in affliction that no man can hurt the faithful, except
Christ will. Cap. xiii.
ALTHOVGHE the world and the dyuel be never so furiouse and mad, yet the
faythefull can not be hurt. Psalm, 3.
I will not fear a thousand people, compassyng me about, because they stand
under the wynge of god. Also all the creatures can not hurt the faythefull,
except god will. The water did not hurt the Israelites: the fire did not hurt
the three children, being in the furnace: the lions did nothing hurt Daniel:
David plucked a bear out of the mouth of a lion, as the epystel to the
Hebrews written, clearly witnesses. If the faythefull perysshe in battle,
it is the good will of god. whitout whose will and sufferaunce, no aduersytie
can come unto them. And he that hurts one faithful, does not hurt him but
god. For god does revenge the wrong done to the faithful, as it were done to
him self. And if any aduersite or heaviness, hang over the people of god, god
regards and takes that even as he him self were punished, and grieved: but
the reuengynge thereof, is to be left to god. For god makes him self defender
of all beleuers: Deuteronomy. 32.
he does take them, and caryeth them upon his shulders. Therefore god has
charge over the godly, whether they live or die. nor he does not leave them in
the middel of their trouble and cross, but then he is more nere the^, and can
not forget his elect. He is the god of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Matthew. 10.
where so ever they be. So Christ, The hears of your heads be nombred. Ioh.
7.
The Jews did seek to kill Christ, but his time was not then comen. Ioh. 8.
No man did set hands upon him, because his hour was not yet comme. Ioh. 10.
They went about to take him, but he did escape from the myddell of their
hands. Notwithstanding the wicked do often overcome the godly, and god does
suffer the wicked to prevail against the good: but through that rod, the
lord does call his to repentance, and teaches them in fear. So Cayn
prevailed against Abell, the Sodomites against Loath, Esau against Jacob. The
Philistians often did overcome the Israelytes, Abymelech overcame Sichimites,
Saul against David, Herod against John, the Jews against Christ, Acab and
Iesabel against Helia^, the Jews against Stephin, the turk often ouercometh
the christians. In these examples it is great comfort to the godly, which
suffer wrong: to whom the lord says, Psalm. 31.
I will fix mine eyes steadfastly upon the. That which was done in the
beginning of the world, is done also even unto the end of the world. The
wicked think, that they overcome, when that they kyl, and cast other into
exyle, and think that the lord does forsake them, when he does not deliver
them from death and persecution, by some vysible miracle. Surely, Christ
was so delivered from death: and so all they, which do believe in Christ, by
Christ be delivered from death. God would not grant (if he did not certainly
know) that of persecution, and such other ylles, which be wont to chance to
his elect, greattest profyt to come unto them. He suffers them to be cast
into prison, into ylles, and into death, that he may declare thereby, that he
has both power and will to save them. Such diligent care has the lord over
the godly. God with all his angels is redye, when all other things do
forsake. Whereof the psalm says, Because my father and mother have forsaken
me, the lord has taken me. Forther, it is a great comfort to the godly, that
the wicked (whom god does use as a rod, to scourge the godly people) go not
clear away without punishment, whom he makes other shamefullye ashamed, or
through their own council, he does take them, and brings them into the
same dystruction, which they their selfs have studied and found out for
other. As it is right before god, that he should reward every man according to
his works. What is so just before god? as that they which do oppress the
godly in this world, and through persecution make them exiles, in the world
to come shall suffer the same persecution, which they have done to other: The
godly, that they may be in rest with other saynctes, which coming from
greatte trouble, shall now receive the kingdom eternal. For when we be gone
here hence, all labor and sorrow shall cease, and rest and joy shall
follow: and to the wicked shall follow clean contrary, like as (we read in the
gospel) did follow to the rich glotten. Son remember. Esai. 10.
etc. Woe be to the Assure, the rod of my anger and fury, I will tear ye, and
break the, as the bough of a tree. Also Paul, It is right (says he) before
god, to give afflyction to them, which do punyshe you, and to you which be
punished, release and delyueraunce thereof. Romans 9. Exodus 9. Daniel. 5. Esai.
10. Micha. 5.
Examples hereof be Pharao, Balthazar, Daniel, Sennacherib, Saul, Absalom, the
Phariseis, Caiphas and Pilate. The cause is, for he that hurts one
faythefull, hurts not only him but god: the which does revenge the iniurye
and wrong done to the faithful, as injury done to him self. as the lord
said to Samuel: 1. Re. 8.
They have not cast the away but me. He forbids to touch his faithful,
saying, Psalm. 104.
Do not touch mine anointed, and say not ill of my prophets. Hiere. 2.
They which devour Jacob, do sin, and ill shall come upon them. Zacha. 2.
He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. They that spoil the,
Hiere. 10.
shall be spoiled. Also Christ, He that hereth you, hereth me: and he that
despises you, despises me. And so god did speak from heaven to Paul,
Acto. 9.
saying, Saul Saul, why doste thou persecute me?

The goodness of god is not to be despised, or lightly regarded before
afflyctions. whirby god will punish and give warning. Capi. xiiii.
GOD THEREFORE gives warning and monition before, that men should repent, and
so repenting, should believe and receive grace: and they which will not
believe, should be without excuse, and suffer punisshemente justly. Genesis 6.
So Noe in his time did admonish men an hundredth years. And Loathe did warn
the Sodomites. 2. Pet. 2. Genesis 19.
Also Egypt was in peril to peryshe, the^ Moses was sent. It was showed
before by the prophets, that the.x. trybes should be carried to Babylon,
Jerusalem should be overthrown by the Chaldees, and the people brought to
captivity. Hieremie was sent, which preached forty years. Daniel. 3.
Nabugodonosor was made a frayde in his dream. So Christ did bewail and
show before the destruction of Jerusalem. The place of repentance with god
is before the sentence given: but not so, if it be written: the folyshe virgins
did ask oil in vain, when the yates were shut up. Esau murned to late,
when Jacob had gotten the blessing. So the psalm, Seek the lord while he may
be found. King Balthazar did not seek the lord, nor did not find him: but
Nabugodonosor did seek him, and did find him. Also the unfaithful ministers
bounden both hand and foot, were cast out into outward darkness. When the
wroth of the lord is consummate or at the full, the godly be punysshed with
the wicked. The judgment of god, when he is angry, is given upon all, as well
good as ill, Esai 64. Psalm. 43.
as Esai teaches. Also the psalm, The godly conceive a hope of felycitie and
grace, as they do confess: We have not forgotten the. Psalm. 76.
The lord shall not cut away his mercy for ever. And they which be chastened
do suffer judgment, and at length do obtain mercy. He will not be angry for
ever. Psalm. 67.
Therefore the lord does punyshe all the godly, which do repent, with peynes
in this world, as he punysshed David, that he might make them more lowlyer: he
does instruct them with learning, and makes them more circumspecte and ware.
God does ever send before both messengers and tokens, that men might repent:
and to them, which will not repent, no excuse shall be left: as the
prophets, Christ, and his apostelles did warn men in their time, as it is
written: Prouer. 1.
Wisdom sits without the doors, and preaches in the streets, and cries
aloude. etc. He councelleth and stirs his to repentance, that they may
fear, ne lest he cast them among the blasphemers. But they be not cast
away, the which made aferde by gods word, do believe Christ: but rather
Christ draws them to him self, saying, Come to me all you which labor and
be burdened and lade^, and I will refreshe you. But thou wylt say: The proper
work of god is to favor and to have mercy, and therefore he will revoke his
sentence. It is true. for it is a strange work to him to be angry: for
verily, he would not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be
converted and live. But under this condition, he will revoke his sentence, if we
knowledge our sins: Ezech. 18.
whereby we have provoked god to wroth, and do repent. If the wicked do repent.
etc. But Repentance is conuertion and turnynge of the wicked man, whose two
parts be contricion and faith. Contrition, is to knowledge the sin, and by
the judgment and sentence of god, truly to be made afraid, saying, We have
sinned only to the: behold, Psalm. ^0.
thou art angrye. Also, I am he which have sinned. But Faith is a constante
trust of mercy, by the which we decree and reckon surely, that our sins be
forgyuen us for Christ's sake: Then shall god revoke his sentence, when there
is yet time to pacyfie god. as we read in Jonas of the drownynge of the
Ninevites. And the word of god was spoken to Esai: Go and say to Ezechias, This
says the lord god of David thy father, I have hard thy prayer, and seen thy
tears and wepynges, behold, I will add and put to thy days fyftene years
etc. So Christ did set forth the faith of the woman of Chananie, which
before he seemed to put away. Is god therefore to be esteemed mutable? no: for
although he reuoketh the sentence, which he wylleth to be secret and hid
from us, yet he does not change his eternal council: but for this cause
those things be done by the godly prouydence of god, that the feyth of the
ryghtuouse might be proved. Therefore the decreed purposes of god be
irreuocable, and can not be called again. nor any man living can break or
disapointe the decree and purpose of god, as Esai witnesses, saying. The lord
of hosts has decreed it, Esai. 14.
who ca^ break or make it void? he has put forth his hand, who can turn
him again? So Naum. Naum. 1.
Who can stand before the face of his wroth and indignation? And, who is
able to resyste in the wroth of his fury? Surely, no man nor creature can
break the decreed appoyntement of god, or resist his wroth. The decree of
god may be broken by repentance: that is, by sorrow, that the sin is done:
and by faith, which does certaynely believe and feel, that al our sins be
forgiven us for Christ's sake. This faith does overcome the judgment of the
law. (which is the decree of god) which is his wroth. Ezec. 22.
Whereof Ezechiel speaks: The lord says, I have serched for a man, the
which would make up the hedge, and set up him self in the gap before me in the
lands behalf. It is said to Moses, Let me destroy this people. He which
says, let me, does sygnifie and declare, that he may be let, which by no
carnal armure, no walls of defense, nor by no man's wisdom, is or can be
brought to pass, but by the only faith in the word of god, which is Jesus
Christ.

There be diverse crafts of the dyuell, whereby he tempts, and where one
craft profyteth nothing, he adds many other. Ca. xv.
THE devil has not one grin, snare, or deceyte, but diverse. For he gothe
about to deceive fasters and solitary people or cloysterers, by one polycie,
and other which be conuersante in the multitude and common people, by an other
craft: but against all the assautes of the devil, there is none so sure and
ready a remedy at hand, as the continual medytation of scripture: Matthew. 4.
as Christ did overcome all the assautes of the dyuell by the only
meditation and recitell of the scriptures. For that is the only commodity and
profit, the continual meditation of scripture both by day and night. and so
Paul says, Ephe. 6.
Take you the hattes of health, the sword of the spirit, which is the word
of god, whereby we defend all his fyrye darts and weapons, and utterly
extinguyshe them. Wherefore it is best remedy in the beginning of all
temptation, to check the devil in the mouth, that it becomes not us to do
that, which he styrreth and suggesteth us to do, specially, because god
prohybiteth and forbyddeth it to be done. that, he can not by any means
suffer: nor he will not be smytten down nor driven away with one stroke or
twain, but he will come again as often. 1. Pet. 5.
For he walks about as a rorynge lion, seeking whom he may devour. Whom you
must resyst with steadfast faith, says Peter. For the dyuell knows how to
bring forth the witnesses of scriptures, but falsely of his spirit of error.

1 If thou be tempted in pride or vain glory, answer him again.
1. Pet. 5.
IT IS written, God resysteth the proud, but to the lowely he gives grace.
Eccle. 11. Matthew. 16.
Ashes and yerthe, why art thou proud? He which exalts him self, shall be
made low. and he that lowely meketh and submytteth him self, shall be
exalted. So Moses and Aaron in the beginning were lowelye, but at the last
they were great. So Joseph was lowely in Egypt, Daniel in Babylon was lowely,
the apostelles were fyshers. Pride did overthrow Lucifer out of heaven. So
Pharao, Nabugodonosor, Balthazar, Holofernes, and other proud kings: pride
has cast them down into extreme mysery. Luc. 2.
The lord has put down the mighty from their seat, and has exalted the
lowely.

2 If thou be tempted in wroth or anger.
SAy, It is written, Ia. 1.
The wroth of a man does not work the justice of god. Ephe. 4. Psalm. 9.
Leuiti. 19.
Let not the son go down upon your wroth. Be ye angry, and do not sin.
Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart, but shalt tell thy neighbor
his fault, that thou bear not sin for his sake: nor thou shalt not have in
remembrance the wrong of thy citizens. For wroth ingendreth hatred, and
hatred manslaughter: and Cayn by hatred killed his brother. 1. Ioh. 4.
And every one, which hates his brother, is a mankyller. To hate a man is not
only to be of a strange mind toward him, but to deny your neighbor such
works, as brotherly love does require.

3 If thou be tempted in feastynge, or glotony and drounkennesse.
Luc. 21.
SAy, It is written, Take heed to your selves, ne lest your hearts be overcome
with feastynge and dronkennes. Prove. 23.
Whoo is accursed? be not they which delight in much drynking of wine, and
study how to drink of cupfulles? Woe be to you, Esai. 5.
which be strong to drink wine, and expert to set up drounkennes. Also, Woe
be to you, that rise up earelye, to use your selves in drounkennes, and yet at
night are more superfluous with wine. Prouer. 2.
Wine makes scorners, and drounkennes prepares brawling or chiding. Ose. 4.
Fornication, wine, and dronkennes take away the heart. Also dronkardes shall
not possede the kingdom of god. Be you not drounken with wine, in the which
is lechery. It is not unlawful to drink wine, the scripture would that the
body should be chastised, that he be obedient and submyt him self to the
spirit, as Paul says. Be you fulfilled with the holy ghost, as he would
say: Be you sober: for so you shall be apt to the mocions of the holy ghost.
Empty fasters al so wax mad, nor be not mete nor apt for godly things.

4 If thou be tempted in auaryce or couetousenes,
Matt. 10.
SAy, It is written. What preuayleth it to a man, if he win all the world, and
yet lose his soul? Take heed and beware of couetousenes. Luc. 12. Hebr. 13.
Let your manners be far from couetousenes, and be ye contented with the things
which ye have. Who yt desires to be made rich, Eccle. 11.
shall not be without sin. Of this thing are examples. Giesi Helizeus
seruante, 2. Re. 5.
was stryken with the leprosy. Again, Acham was stoned. Iudic. 7.
The end or intent of couetousenes, is to live long, to lack nothing, that
he be not in danger or loss of any thing. It is the fountain and root of
unbelief. The lord therefore will, that we put our confidence in him, that we
cast al our carefulnes and hope in him: and then shall it come to pass, that he
shall provide al things mete and necessary for us. Infidelytie then alonely in
all matters makes us so careful and pensyfe, for because we trust not God,
nor believe steadfastly in him.

5 If thou be tempted with hungre, poverty, or carefulnes of living,
SAy, It is written: Man shall not live in bread only, but in every word that
proceeds from the mouth of god. Psalm. 33.
They which seek the lord, shall want no goodness. I have been young, Psalm. 36.
and am waxen old, and I have not seen the ryghtuouse forsaken. Psalm. 54.
Lay thy care on the lord, and he shall norishe the. Psalm. 44.
Thou openest thy hand, and fillest every creature with thy blessing. Psalm.
146.
Which gives meat to the hungry. Be ye not careful. Christ fed with five
barley loves and two fysshes, Matt. 6.
five thousand men. Marc. 6. 3. Re. 17.
The ravens brought meat to Helias. Also, the angel brought meat from heaven
to Helias. Therefore the care of temporalle things must be left to god: For
fode is given, and is not gotten with labor, yet god wylleth us to labor.
Genesis 3. Psalm. 127.
In the sweat of thy face. etc. For thou shalt eat the labors of thy hands.
We must therefore labor, for because we are made for that purpose: and
for-bycause so is the will of god, to whose deuyne will we must obey. Also he
has enjoined us to labor, to macerate and mortify the flesh, to profit our
neighbor, and to provide for our necessity.

6 If thou be tempted of ydelnes,
SAy thou: Genesis 3.
In the sweat of thy face, shall thou eat thy bread. For the lord has
appointed the children of Adam to labor, Prouer. 6.
At the example of the Pismyre. And Christ was a carpentar, Matthew. 13.
and wrought with his hands till the time of his preaching. Again, Noe
planted a vineyard. Genesis 9.
He which tylleth the land, shall be satisfied. Prove. 12.
Consider thou godly chrystian, how god curses ydelnes, and how much he
abhors it. For experience teaches, that from thens spryngethe forth all
kind of vice. Ezechiell says, The sin of Sodom was pride, plenty of bread,
habundance, and ydelnes. Wherefore god has commanded us to labor, and has
blessed the^ that labor. for without the blessinge of god all labor is in
vain.

7 If thou be tempted of securytie to be without fear.
Matt. 25.
SAy thou, Watch ye, for ye know not the hour. He that studyeth, let him take heed he fall not. Adam stood not in paradise. The people of Israel, as
oftentimes as they were made fat, and increased to a multitude, so oftentimes
fell they backewarde, and forgatte their lord god. David, when he was at
rest, and sittyng at home without resiste^ce, he was made an adulterer and a
murderer, and nombred the people in his great fury. Daniel. 4.
So Nabugodonosor counts him self happy. The rich man in the gospel
promising him self ease and rest, did here. O fool. etc. Luc. 12.
Ezechias in trybulation continued ryghtuouse. in prosperity he was overcome
of vain glory. For the lord forsook him, and his heart was auanced. and
therefore is security reproved. for through it, is neglected the commandment
of god. Christ said before, that the householder being absent, and al were
aslepe, came the ennemie and sowed cokell.

8 If thou be tempted of fornication and adultery,
Say thou, It is written: 1. Cor. 6.
He which cleaves to an harlot, is made one body with her. 1. Tes. 9.
This is the will of god, your sanctification, that ye absteyne from
fornication. Another horemaysters, 1. Co. 6.
nor adulterers shall inherit the kingdom of god. Sodom and Gomer show
manyfestly, how much god punishes that sin. Also of the same sin, there
are other peynes, execution, induration, and the contempt of god. Also Dina
the daughter of Lya, for whose whoredom were the Sichimites killed. Again,
the commandment is, thou shall not commytte adultery. Let there be no
harlotte of the daughters of Israel: another horemaisters of the sons of
Israel. but thou wylt say, How can I avoid this ill? with prayer to god, to
give the continency. Also by the word of god and auoydyng it, as says Paul.
Flee fornication. Joseph is an example, which fled because he would not be
kendelyd with the filthy love of the wife of a another.

9 If thou be tempted with lyinge or light words,
SAy thou: That lyenge is forbeden in the law: that we should not speak false
things. Thou shalt fle lyenge. Ye shall not lie. Exodus 23. Leuiti. 19. Psalm.
5. Ephe. 4.
Thou shall dystroy all them that speak lies. but lyenge set aside, let every
man speak the truth to his neighbor, for as much as we be members to
gether. Peter killed Ananias and Saphira, because they lied. I say unto you,
Matt. 10.
that of every ydel word that man shall speak, they shall give account in
the day of judgment. Again, Let no fylthy communication go forth of your
mouth.

10 If thou be tempted of confessing the gospel, or sufferynge persecution
for the gospel,
Matt. 10.
HE THAT receives not my cross, and follows not me, is not worthy of me.
Matt. 16.
If any will come after me, let him forsake him self, and take his cross, and
follow me. For he that will save his soul, shall lose it. Contrarywyse, he that
leseth his soul for my sake shall find it. He that will confess me before
men, I will confess him before my father. 2. Tim. 2.
I am afflycted and persecuted for the gospel, as a wicked dooer. John bare
the cross for the truth sake. So the Apostelles reioysed, because they were
counted worthy. So Daniel. For chrystian men are hated of the world, and
despised in this world. Therefore this world knows not 1. Ioh. 2.
you, for because it knew not him: which speak ill of you. 1. Pet. 4. Io.
15.16. 1. Tim. 3.
The servant is not above his lord: All they which will live godly.

11 If thou be tempted of the faith of thy parents: as wherefore beleuest thou
not that, which thy forefathers have believed,
BE YE not made like to your fathers. and I have said, 2. Para. 3.
These ever err in heart. Psalm. 94. Zacha. 2.
Be ye not as your fathers were. We must not consider our parents, nor
kindred, nor long custom, but only the will of god: the will of god is to
believe. This is the will of god, Ioh. 6.
that ye believe in him, whom he has sent.

12 If thou be tempted of strange relygion or of worshyppynge of saynctes,
pyctures, images, or men,
SAy thou, It is written, Deuteronomy. 6.
Thou shalt worship thy lord god, and him only shalt thou serve. Wherefore I
will give godly honor to no creature under heaven, but to the living god
only. Philipp. 2.
For to me (says he) shall every knee bow, of all in heaven, in earth, and in
hell. Exodus 41.
Again, I will not give my glory to any other. Here if thou be tempted of
blasphemy, thou may suffer it in no case. and when the name of god is
blasphemed, we must cry, and also set our life in ieoperdy, if need so be. For
no temtation does so separate us from god, as does blasphemye.

13 If thou must dye, and lean wife, children, and thy dear friends,
SAy, The lord shall be their defender. for god both will and is able to
cherysshe mine, to nouryshe and defend them. Exodus 22. Psalm. 36.
For he is the father of the fatherles and widows. I forget things behind my
back, Philipp. 3.
and endeavor my self to those things, that are before my face. Again, 1.
Cor. 7.
They which have wives, let them be as though they had none. and they that
weep as though they wept not. We must be dylygente, that we leave our wife
and children well instruct and taught in the fear of god. For the fear of god
is better and more preciouse, then a chest full of gold and silver.

14 If thou be tempted of condemnation, that thou art condemned of god.
SAy thou, Roma. 3.
That is no condemnation to them which are graffed in Christ. that is, sin
can not dampne them, be it never so much in them: for they are made one
body through faith. For the sin, which they have, is forgiven them, and is
not imputed unto them for Christ's sake, in who^ we are graffed, which is the
head, and we the members. Ioh. 3.
He that believes in the son, has everlasting life. Romans 10. Psalm. 36.
Al they which believe in him, shall not be confounded. When the rightuouse
falls, he shall not be broysed, for the lord sets his hand underneath him.
Prou. 24.
The rightuouse falls seven times in a day.

15 If the dyuell say, thou art a sinner, and art not graffed in Christ.
CHRIST CAME into the world to make safe sinners. For the death of Christ
has satisfied for all sins, 1. Tim. 1.
through his strokes, Esai. 53.
are we all made safe. For he has borne our sins in his body. 1. Pet. 2.
Ephe. 1.
by whom we have redemption through his blood. I came not to call the
ryghtuouse, but sinners. They which are hole, 1. Joan. 2.
need not the physician. And if any do sin, we have an advocate and
spokesman to the father, Jesus Christ. The godly have sin also, but god
imputes it not. Psalm. 31.
The saints do ever pray, Forgive us our trespaces. If we confess, 1. Ioh. 1.
that we have sins, he is faithful and ryghtuouse to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all iniquytie. We have many exaumples. Marye Magdalyn,
also Paul was a blasphemor, of the thief which went from extreme
punishment to joy, of zachary. Matthew. and Peter.

16 If he continue and say, but thy sins pass the sonde of the sea.
AS FAR as the east differs from the west, Psalm. 104.
so far of has he made, that our sins are from us. Esai. 1.
If thy sins be as red as scarlet, yet shall they be as white as snow: and
if they be as red as purple, yet shall they be as white as woll. Psalm. 31.
I have said, I will confess my unrighteousness against me, and thou haste
forgyuen the wickedness of my sin. 2. Re. 12.
I have sinned lord. Esai. 38.
etc. And the lord has taken thy sin from the. Thou haste cast all my
sins behind thy back. Miche. 7.
And he has thrown al our sins in the bottom of the sees, Ezech. 18.
If the wicked shall repent. etc. For god has promised remission of sins to
them that repent.

17 If he say, such promyses are made to the godly, thou art an apostata and
a lost man.
Luc. 15.
AND the prodigal son was lost, and an apostata, yet he found grace* so
great is the love of god toward us, he will save al them that will knowledge
them selves. He has so great care even for the least, that are lost, in the
sight of the world. Examples ar David, Peter, and the thief, and also Paul:
God sometime suffers his saints to err for a season, but he calls again
at length He brings them in to diverse troubles, that they may know him.
He yeldeth them up sometimes into the hands of Satan, and his members, that
they may know how much easyer it is to serve him, then the prince of this
world. The confession of the prodigal child is great: Luc. 15.
Father I have sinned against heaven and against the. So David, Psalm. 50.
Esai. 64.
I have done ill against the. Lo all our righteousness are as a blody cloth of
a woman. Luc. 1.
This meekness god beholds, he is moved with mercy, as the father of the
prodygall child. Romans 5.
We are therefore received without all our merit or deseruynge, for we are yet
ennemies.

18 But god hereth no sinners nor strayers away,
SAy thou, It is truth, god hereth not sinners, which repent not, which
sorrow not, nor are borne again by faith: those are the ungodly and
hypocrites, which pray not to god: and if they pray, yet pray they not in
faith. Then shall they call on me, Prouer. 1.
and I will not here them. So in the psalm, Zacha. 7.
They shall cry, and I will not here them. But he graciously hereth the
contrite, and them that repent, and are borne again by faith in Christ.
Psalm. 50.
A contryte and humble heart o god, thou wylt not despise. Iaco. 5.
The busye prayer of the ryghtuous is much worth.

19 But thou come very late with thy contricion.
CONTRARY wise answer thou, Luce. 23.
None comes to late into the vyneyarde of the lord, as witnesses the
hystory of the thief, which was full of wicked deeds, and yet said to Jesus,
Remember me lord, when thou shall come into thy kyngedome. And Jesus said unto
him, Trewelye I say unto the, this day. etc.

20 But he had a strong faith in god, which thou lackest,
ANSWER, Therefore pray I with the apostels, Luc. 17.
O lord increase faith within us, help our unbelief.

21 What if all holy scripture be false, for they were men, which spoke it and
wrote it?
SAy thou contrary, Moses, the prophets, and apostelles were truly men, but
yet they neither spoke nor wrote with the spirit of man, but with the spyrite
of god, they set not forth their own doings, but those things which either
they saw with their eyes, or received of the lord. So said the lord to
Moses: Exodus 4.
Who has made the mouth of man? Or who has made the dome and the deffe? the
saying and the blind? not I? Goo forth then, and I will be in thy mouth, and
will teach the what thou shall speak. Say not, I am a child, Hiere. 1.
for thou shalt go to all those, to women I will send the to, and thou shall
speak all that, that I shall commaundethe. Luce. 21.
He gives the apostelles both mouth and wisdom. Again, Ye are not which
speak, but the spirit of your father. So Paul: Romans 15.
I dare not speak any thing, which Christ has not wroughte by me. 1. Pet. 4.
1. Ioh. 1.
If any man speak, let him speak as the words of god. that we have hard, that
we have seen with our eyes. Luc. 1.
as they have delivered us, which from the beginning have seen it with their
eyes. 2. Pet. 1.
But those things which we have seen with our eyes. Al scripture heavenly
inspired. 2. Tim. 3. 2. Pet. 1.
The prophecy in old time, was not given by the will of man, but the holy men
of god spoke, driven with the holy ghost. Ephe. 5.
As it is now reveled to his holy apostelles and prophets by spirit: Matt.
22.
So Christ confirms Dauides wrytynges. How does David the^ in spirit call
him lord? Certaynely I am fully persuaded, and doubt nothing at al, that the
holy scriptures are inspired from heaven.

22 If the temptator say, thou haste not kept the law of god, wherefore thou
art accursed.
SAy thou: Christ, which was made a curse for us, Galath. 3.
has redeemed us from the curse of the law. Again, Ephe. 2.
Euacuatyng, and taking awey the law of commaundmentes set in decrees. Colo. 2.
Taking away the handewrytynge against us, which is in decrees, and is
contrary to us. Roma. 6.
For ye are not under the law, but under favor, delivered from sin. For the
death of Christ has delivered us from the law. For truly by Christ's death,
we are now in conscience fre from the law, that is, from the wroth of god,
and everlasting death. For the law can not be fulfilled of nature, for it is
spirytuall, as undoubtedly the apostels decreed. The yocke that neither. etc.
Again, Acto. 15. Deuter. 5. Luc. 18.
who can give them such a mind? Which is impossible to men.

23 If he say, thou must forsake the world.
What then? Answer thou contrary wise. I shall obtain heaven. For blessed ar
the dead, Apoc. 14. 1. Ioh. 5. Ibidem.
which dye in the lord. Again: All the world lies in wickedness. Again, All
thing which is borne of god, ouercometh the world: and this is the victory,
which ouercometh the world, our faith. Who is he, which ouercometh the world,
but he that believes, that Jesus is the son of god? I am sure therefore in
Christ. All the world shall peryshe with his lusts and desires. Again. 1.
Joan. 3.
Love not the world, another those things which are in the world. We are
strangers in this world, and citizens of heaven. Ye sons of men, how long
are ye hard hearted? Psalm. 4.
Why love ye vanyties and seek lies? Again: How long love you infancy or
childhode, and foles desire those things, which are hurtful? Again: Vanity
of all vanities, Eccles. 1.
and all things ar vanity. 1. Ioh. 2.
The cause is this: for all things which are in the world, as lust of the
flesh, concupisce^ce of the eyes, and pride of life, are not of the father,
but of the world, and the world passes, and his lust also, but he that does
the will of god, taryeth for ever.

The end.
THE PREPARATION TO DEATH, AND how they which be in point of death, should
be comforted, the.ii. book.
What is death. Cap. i.
DEATH IS Nothing else but a separation or division of the soul from the
body. It is a quiet rest from the afflyctions and troubles of this world, in
the which they that be dead, be so refreshed and newely made, that from
thense they shall rise far above all other most happy, not into a life which
shall dye again, as it is in a sleep, but into an everlasting life.

What is the cause of death. Cap. ii.
THE CAUSE of death is sin: For out of sin death flowed, and is the
punishment, or pain, or reward of sin, or the reuengeaunce of ill things,
as the holy scripture bears witness, Fire, Eccle. 39.
hayle, hunger, and death, be created for punishment, as witnesses the
psalm. For anger and death be in his indignation, Psalm. 29.
and life in his will: Roma. 6. Hiere. 3.
The wages or reward of sin is death. In what day so ever thou shalt eat
of it (that is, thou shalt sin) thereof thou shall dye. God did not make
death, Sap. 1.
nor does not rejoice in the destruction of the living. Also, Through the
malice and envy of the dyuell, Sap. 2.
death has entered. And Paul says. Romans 5.
By one man sin entered into the world, and through sin death. Ezech. 33
And in Ezech. I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he convert
and turn from his sin and live: Also, The soul which shall sin, shall
dye. Therefore where death is, there necessaryly sin did go before, which
dwells in us, which we have by inheritance, which is spronge forth into
us all: of the which sin the first father to us was Adam, from whom we have
by inherytaunce origynall sin, which is a natural dysposytion and
inclination, to sin, which has with him in fellowship blindness of heart,
dullness toward virtue, the love of him self, the hatred of god, fleing
from the cross, hatred of the law, and disdaynynge of his neighbor. For by
Adams disobedience our flesh is become disobediente to god, so long as it is
not enspyred with the holy ghost: and for the said sin of Adam, al we be
called sinners: And so in him we be all dead: for we be his flesh and his
children of his own substance: He is the grain and sede, of whom all we be
spronge out. As he is dead, so shall we dye: and from Adam is spronge into
us, both orygynall sin, and death, the pain of sin, is come forth: And
the tyranny of the dyuell, to whom our nature is subject, and in whom the
dyuell uses cruelty, and does exercise it with fear and all kinds of
myserye, and also does kyl: And moreover enforces to al manner of unhappiness,
to blasphemy, murder, and hatred.

Two manner of deaths. Cap. ii.
THE ONE is of the body or of nature, to whom all men be subject: for all have
sinned, and have broken the law of god: that is, when this bodyely life is
broken aweye, when we give up the ghost, and do not occupy this mortal life:
As it is written to the Hebrews: Hebre. 9.
It is ordained and decreed, that all men shall dye ones: and after that
judgment. By Adams sin nature is subject of necessity to dye, as Jesus
Sirach writes. Eccle. 40.
There is a heavy yocke upon the children of Adam, from the day of the
coming out of their mothers womb, until the day of their burial, into the
mother of all. The other death is of the soul, or of faith, or of health. When
the unbelievers, drowned in their wyckednes, not carynge for god, nor desiring
god, nor askyng forgyuenes of god, be made bondemen to eternal darkness,
which is called everlasting death: Which is a perpetual fear of conscience
through the wroth of god, Sap. 5.
which Satan does encrece. Exaumple of these two manner of deaths is the rich
gloton, Luc. 16.
which being dead, was buried in hell, and Lazarus the beggar being dead,
and carried of angels into the bosom of Habram. This man has comfort: and
contrary wise, the rich man was punyshed and buried in hell: that is, he died
with an ill conscience: he saw in his death his own wickedness and
damnation, as al wicked men do. This is the worm, Esai. 66.
which does not dye. Even then the folishe virgins do first see, Matt. 25.
that the wise have oil. Then it comes to remembrance, to whom they have
done both good and evil: There the law does first show him self (the
gospel being taken away) then they seek for grace, but all to late and in
vain. Prouer. 1
There god does cut of all hope of recouerye of health or favor: the
sentence of the cruel judgment of god is then, as says saint James: Iaco. 2.
Judgment without mercy shall be to them, which have not done mercy. I have
hu^gered, Matt. 25.
and you have not given me. etc. Therefore the word of god does teach us, how
we should avoyde eternal punishment, and how we shall be saved: which if we
neglect, and set naught by, there is no cause why we should have any further
hope. Of these two kinds of dethes the psalms make mention: Psalm. 33.
The death of sinners is ill. And contrarywyse, The death of saynctes is
preciouse in the sight of god. Psalm. 113. Psalm. 6. Matt. 7. Matt. 11.
Also, Go from me all you workers of iniquity: I know you not: Come to me
all you that do labor and be burdened, and I will refreshe you: Also In their
sin they shall dye. And Paul says: Philipp. 3.
Whose end is death Also of the feythefull is written: They shall not fault,
al they which trust in him, Psalm. 33.
The Lord does keep their bones, and one of them shall not perysshe, or be
broken. Romans 8.
There is no damnation to them which be in Christ Jesus. Apoc. 14.
Blessed be the dead, which die in the lord. As there is two lives, a
yerthely and an eternal life: so there is two deaths, the one a temporal,
the other an everlasting death. The erthly life has a beginning and a
ending, and is subject to many miseries: and this life no christen man does
greatly esteem, but says daily with Paul Christ is my life, Philipp. 1.
and death is lucre. And if it fortune me to live in the flesh, then it is
profitable to me to work: and what I shall chose, I know not, I am constrained
of these twain, desiring to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: which
thing is much better for me, but to live in the flesh, is more needful for
you. Galath. 6.
So in an other place, God forbeade, that I should rejoice in any thing, but
in the cross of our lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucyfyed unto
me, and I unto the world. I live, but not I only: Gala. 2.
but Christ lives in me. for in that that I live in the flesh, I live in the
faith of the son of god, which loved me, and gave him self for me.
Therefore he that knows not Christ, nor does not trust in him, fears
death, as that which threteneth and brings eternal ruin and destruction:
but he which knows Christ, and has him does not fear death: whom Christ
being victor, has overcome and overthrown.

To the efecte and faithful, eternal death by Christ is overcome. Cap. iii.
THIS is the great comfort of them, that be in the painges of death; which
comfort and lyfteth up the fearful minds: that is, that Christ has
utterly abolysshed death, takyn away sin, and that surely through
Christ, they shall obtain remyssion of sin, be reputed ryghtuouse, and have
everlasting life. Therefore Christ, ye promised sede, the son of god, came
down from heaven, and became manne: by his cross, death, and resorrection,
has saved us, and delivered us from eternal death: and he paid for us all
our debt, as it is written in the epistle to the Hebrews: Ones he is offered,
Hebre. 9.
that he should take away the sins of many. Also, 1. Pet. 3.
He has ones suffered for our sins. And, 1. Ioh. 1.
The blood of Jesus Christ has made us clean from all our sin. And, Matthew.
1.
Thou shalt call his name Jesus. for he shall save his people from their
sins. Also, Hebr. 2.
That through death he should put away him, which had rule over death, that
is the devil, that he might deliver them, which all their life were brougte
in bondage, through fear of death. For verylye he has delivered us from the
power of Sin, that it should not kill us: from the power of death, that it
should not condemn us: from the power of affliction, that it should not grieve
us: from the power of the dyuell, that he should not destroy us: and has
restored us to justice, joy, life, and to the best and most mighty god, that
is, he has made us fre men and partakers of god, which before were captyues
and bondmen to the devil. So our iniquities did cast us hedlynge into the
depenesse of hell, and there did drown and bury us: but god moved with mercy,
has cast all our iniquities upon the shulders of his son, delyuerynge us
all from sin death and hell, has satisfied for us, which of god is made
to us wisdom, justice, holiness, 1. Cor. 1.
and redemption. Which has given him self for our sins, that he might
deliver us from this present ill world: And under such form by Christ we be
delivered from death sin and hell, that they utterly have no manner of
right in us, nor can not destroy and damn us, As Osee says: Osee. 13.
I will deliver them from the hand, that is, from the power of hell, from death
I will redeem them: O death, I will be thy death. O hell, I will be thy
bytte. Death, 1. Cor. 15.
where is thy stynge? Hell, where is thy victory? Thanks be to god which has
given us vyctorye through our lord Jesus Christ. So great is the power of
faith, and we be brought into so great liberty: through faith. We feel
punishemente in this world, but through faith we peryshe not. We be killed,
but we shall not dye: We bren in hell fire, but we be not consumed in deed: and
so of all the rest, which be not taken away from the beleuer. Ioh. 16.
In the world says he, ye shall have affliction. etc. Nor the beleuers be not
delivered from the feeling of them in this world, but they be delivered from
the power and rule of them, and the stynge is taken from them, whereby all men
did peryshe. The christen man is therefore sure, that as death eternal could
not prevail against Christ, so likewise against him it has no power. For
Christ has taken away sin, bringynge in justice: he has strangeled death,
gyuynge life: He has obtained victory over hell, administringe eternal glory.
For as in Adam all dyed: so in Christ all shall be reuyued. For by Adams
disobedience sin death punishment, and that most cruel tirant Satan did
challenge both right and rule over all, how many so ever were borne of him.
The law of sin is to kill: the wages of sin is death: the right of death
is to damn, the right of afflyctions is to grieve and make heuye: the right of
the dyuell is to destroy: Into al these rightes and powers Adam by his
disobedyence, has cast us. And Adam then had been utterly extinct and undone,
if that he had not be comforted again and reuyued with the word of grace.
But he was received unto grace, and the father did take from him fear of
death and anguyshe: for he did feel and perceive the wroth of god, and god to
be his ennemy, and also all creatures, so that he could not tell, which wey to
turn him: This fear I say, the father has taken away from him through the
most sweet absolution and promise of grace, when he said unto the serpent:
Genesis 3.
I will put enmite betwyxte the and the womanne, and that sede shall al to break
thy head. This word when Adam did here and believe, he was helped and delivered,
and came from hell, and now believed the word of god: thinkyng under this
form: This god has spoken, which can not lie or deceive. In this faith Adam
dyed, and after Adam all the faithful unto Aabraham, which did also cleave
fast to this word, thinking thus: he will come, yea suerly at the last he will
come: because the lord has so promised, which can not lie: and in this
faith they were saved.

Although the godly dye, yet they shall live. Cap. iiii,
THE godly and just people have most comfort, although in this life they be
put to death, and seem to be forsaken of god, cast into hell, and as sheep
ordained to be slain: Roma. 8.
As scripture witnesses of them. For thy sake we be iuged as sheep ordained to
be slain. Also, I think verily, 1. Cor. 14.
that god has showed, that we which be the last apostelles, are as it were
appointed to suffer death: For we, 2. Cor. 4.
which live, be always delivered to death for Jesus sake: yet they do not
dispeyre, no not in death, but as they which be sure, that they shall pass
through death to life eternal, and cry to god, and suffer the hand of the
lord, and be pacient, and put their hope in god. Also they have this comfort,
that their death is good and precyouse. They also know, that through
Christ's death, death is overcome and abolyshed. 1. Cor. 14. Osee. 3. Genesis 3.
Death is supped of in victory. O Death, I will be thy death: The sede has
broken the head of the serpente. Therefore if any man taken in the panges of
death, do hold fast and believe this word: in the myddel of death he shall
have life. for verylye the christyans do live, when they be esteemed and
thought to dye. Sap. 5. 2. Cor. 6. Ioh. 16.
The rightuouse shall live for ever. And so Paul says: Behold we be ever as
dyenge, and yet we live: Also Christ says. Ioh. 16.
In me you shall have peace, but in the world, you shall suffer oppression.
And, Sap. 3.
The tourment of death shall not touch them. Also, Esai. 26.
Thy dead persons shall live, they shall rise with their bodies. He shall not
taste death. Io. 5. et. 11
And he which believes in me, although he were dead, yet he shall live. They
shall not taste death. Marc. 9. Sap. 2.
The just man, although he be prevented with death, yet he shall be
refreshed. Also, Psalm. 15.
Thou shall not suffer thy holyon to se corruption. Also, Psalm. 32. Ioh. 5. et.
11. et. 3.
That he may pulle out from death the souls of them. He shall pass over from
death to life. He shall not see eternal death. He shall not dye for ever: He
does not peryshe, but has eternal life: Seek god, Psalm. 68.
and your soul shall live: Esai. 55.
Bow your ears, and come to me: here you, and your soul shall live.

These places ought to be well noted, for the comfort of them, before whose
eyes death is present: which if they believe in Christ, they be not lost,
but have eternal life. Therefore they be not called only dead, but the dead
of god, as such as dye in the lord: for such do rise again in glory, and
none other, Danie. 12.
as it apereth i^ Daniel.

The death of the godly, is a sleep. Ca. v.
CHRIST calls the death of the godly, a sleep. Lazarus our friend slepeth.
Ioh. 11.
For by the benefyte and goodness of Christ, death is made a sleep, which by his
death, has changed death into a sleep. So Paul does call the feythful, 1.
These. 4.
which be dead, slepers, saying. I will not you to be ignorante of them,
that sleep. So Steue^ slept. Acto. 7.
And so the godly to the outward sight, and perceuera^ce, dies. But without
doubt that death is but a sleep. For how many so ever dye in Christ, all
sleep in him, and he shall reyse them in the last day. I have slept, and do
slumber, Psalm. 3.
and I have risen. Here sleep betokens death of the body, as in Genesis,
Abram slepte with his father. Psalm. 4. Psalm. 15.
I will sleep and rest in peace to god with other. Also, My flesh shall rest in
hope. Therefore in death not so much the death it self, as suer life and
resurrection, is to be considered to them, which be in Christ, according to
Christis saying. He that shall keep my word, Ioh. 8.
shall not see death everlasting. How shall he not see death? shall he not
feel it? Shall he not dye? no verily, but he shall se only a sleep, and
beholding steadfastly with the eyes of faith in the resurrection, by death he
shall so pass away, that surely he shall not see death? And death verily to
him shall not be death.

All these things be begone in baptism, and be fynysshed in the end of
life. Romans 6.
For we be buried with him through baptism in to death. Therefore faith
exercised with diverse passions, causes, that natural death to the
faythefull, is but a sleep. For the faithful die suerly in hope, and look after
the last day and the coming of Christ: This security they get in this
life by the spirit of faith, that they may say with Paul: By hope we be
made safe? Roma. 8. Romans 5.
And again. Hope does not confound. That is to dwell in the Paradyse of god,
the kyngedome of heaven in the church of the lyuinge god: And the lord says,
Leuit. 26. Esai. 31.
To sleep with out fear. To sit in the beauty of peace, in the tabernacles of
faith, and trust, and in a rich rest.

Baptism is a comfort in the point of death. Cap. vi.
SVCHE as be at the point of death, ought to take comfort and be strong, in
that they know, they carye with them both letter and token, which is baptime:
where by their death is incorporate with the death of Christ, and that it is
not their death, but the death of Christ. Wherefore let them suerly trust,
that they shall overcome, as the death of Christ has overcome. For baptime is
a sure token of the passing over from death to life. And as we know suerlie,
that Christ passed through death to life: So let us not doubt, but that we
shall suerly pass through death to life. Christ has overcome sin and
death: Let us nothing doubt, but that we shall overcome sin and death.
Sin shall not bear rule over you. Romans 6.
a Figure of this thing was the passing over the sea, which was the passing
over from death to life. So in baptime we receive a token of death: that by
death of the body, we might trust suerly to come to the true life. In baptime
Pharao, with all his host, did lie under foot to us, that is, through faith
in the word of promise: we have escaped the tyranny of the prince of
darkness, with all vices: so that the lord will not impute them to us, nor
they can not take away from us the entree or goinge in to the kingdom of
heaven. But yet not withstanding, sin dwelling in our flesh, does not rest
in the mean time, to assault us, that is, unclean affections, which must
be put away with daily mortifieng of the fleshly desires, until our baptime
be fully co^plete and finished in death. So greatly the hope of all christen
men does stand in baptime, and so begins from death: that death to us is
wynnyng, that is, an entrance to life. Roma. 6.
Be you ignorant, that all we, which be baptized into Christ Jesus, are
baptized into his death? For we be buried together with him by baptime in to
death, that as Christ was reised up from the dead, by the glory of his
father: even so we also should walk in a new life. Colo. 2.
You be buried to geder with him through baptime, in whom you are also risen
again with him. Gala. 3.
Who so ever of you be baptized in Christ, have put upon you Christ. 1. Pet.
3.
Baptime is the promise of a good conscience toward god, whereby we be sure,
that god is pleased with us. It is therefore a token, that we be delivered from
the dyuel, and a sign of our translation from the kingdom of Satan, in to the
king- of Christ, that we be reconsyled unto god, it is a token which bears
witness of the good will of god toward us. Therefore remember, that thou art
baptized, that is, that thou have received remission of sins: that thou haste
made a covenant with god, that thou art delivered from the dyuell, death,
and sin, reconsiled to god. This is a great comfort against death, the
dyuell, and sin. So the promise made to Abraham, of the sede to come, had been
sufficient: yet god did put thereto circumcision, that Abraham might have a
sure token of gods goodness toward him, that he was accepted of god. So
baptime is a token of gods favor and good will toward us, through the
word of promise, whereunto is knyt an ernest bargain of a good conscience
with god. For first god makes promise with us, that he will forgive us that
fault and blemyshe, which we have drawn by original sin, from our
forefathers, that he will receive us into his favor, and that he will not only
forgive us our sins, but also not ley or inpute them to our charge. We again
do bind our selves to god by like reason, that we shall mortify our flesh
all our life time, and purge out our old leven, our concupiscence, desires,
and dispositions to do sin, and utterly to cast out all the dregs: and to
wrestel against and utterly forsake the world, the dyuell, and al their
pompes: Therefore if thy conscience be troubled and vexed with the borden of
sin, thou may pray on this manner. O lord god, remember thy promise, that
thou haste made to us: thou haste promised to us in baptime, remissyon of
sins and eternal life, when thou dyddeste say: Marc. 16.
He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved: nor do not make void thy
covenant, nor let not thy words be in vain, which have passed thy mouth.
Psalm. 89.
Thou shall perform that thou have promised, thou can not deny thy self,
neither our infirmity, or infidelitfe, or any other thing can make void thy
feythfull promise.

The godly know the time of dyinge to be determined of god. Cap. vii.
UNTO the godly this is a great comfort, that they know that death is not in
the power of tyrants, nor put in the hand of any creature, lest they should
be troubled, over much careful for death: but that they may dye as
children, when pleases the lord. For so writes Ecclesiastes: Eccle. 3.
All thing has time: and al things under heaven, have their convenient
season: A time is of birth, and a time of death. Job. 14.
and so Job. Thou haste appointed to him a a time, which he shall not pass.
Also the psalm: Psalm. 103.
Thou have lymitted a time, which they shall not over pass. Psalm. 38.
Behold, thou have put my days to a certain nombre. And so Christ does
comfort his. One hear shall not fall from your head without the will of your
father. Matt. 10.
Also, My hour is not yet come. Ioh. 2. 1. Reg. 2. Esai. 38.
So the mother of Samuel, God does kill and revive again. And, The years of
life, be of the lord. As he promised to Ezechias: 4. Re. 20. 2. Re. 7.
Behold, I will add unto thy days.xv. years. So. When thy days shall be
ended. For the corporal life is determined of god with certain lymyttes: and
with god is a certain point and measure set to every man's life: and also to
the same, the years, months, ours, and also the mynutes of hours: And also
the hears of your hedde be nombred. Therefore if our hears be noumbred in the
sight of god, how much more ar the mynutes and artycles of our life nombred
before him? We can not therefore live any longer then the lord has appointed:
We shall not dye, although we be in the greattest peril and extreme ieoperdye,
before our hour. Therefore it skylleth not what manner of death, or with what
instrument, sword, fire, water, sodeyne death, or that thou be taken away by
chance, before the course of nature requires it. For god has given the
hour, the mean, and that kind of death: Which does not force, whether thou
dye of this death or that death, of a little wound or a great: of whom the
time, both of our life and death is determined and set. Also many dye by
tempests or hayle. And yet do not thou condemn, as wicked, such as be
smytten with lightning. For the iugeme^tes of god be rare and unknown in
private persons: which for as much as pertains to him, cares not,
whether oone dye of this death or that. Many times innocents and baabis do
dye. But thou wylt say, that many dye wylfullye, through their own rashenes,
the which might have lived longer. Sum have cast away them selfs hedlong.
etc. Could they not have preserved their life? I answer no. God gave that
hour, that mean, and that kind of death. which thing experyence does
teach. Some deadely wounded, are lightly healed, and do live: Some other are
scarselye hurt, and yet they die. Some Astronomers ascrybe this to the
sterres, and some to fortune: but holy scripture attributes it to god, with
whom the time both of our life and death is lymytted, who also cares not,
whether thou dye of a great or small wound: that he may confound all wisdom
and man's imagination. So that it is a thing most like madness, vain, and
frustrate, to be afraid or curiouse of any manner of death. For there is no
cause why it should make any man aferd. For other the appointed time of death
is not yet come, or else if it be come, he, over whom it ha^geth, would not
prefer any pleasure before death. For death (as I have said) has his
appointed time, like as Christ says: Luce. 21.
The hears of your head do not fall. If che hears of your head do not
fall without the appointed will of god, by what mean may the hole body dye
without the fire will of god? So great is the care of god over the godly, whose
life, death, years, days, hours, and mynutes of hours, he has in his hand,
which can not die but at the hour appointed of god.

Notwithstanding the ungodly shall not live out half their days. Cap. viii.
AS holy scripture witnesses in all places. In the psalm. The deceytefull
shall not live out half their days. Also Job, Psalm. 54. Job. 16.
In the time which is not his, he shall make an end. And, The fear of the
lord, prolongeth the life. the years of the wicked be short. For ye godly be
ever ready, watchyng when the lord shall come, whether it be in the first
watch, or in the fourth, they in the mean time, follow their calling, as
long as the lord will, nothing determyninge for them self, nothing carynge
for their life, whether it shall end on the morrow, or.x. years after: for
they have lived all their time, although they dye young: Sap. 4.
As the wise manne says, Though the rightuouse be ouertake^ with death, yet
shall he be in rest. The ungodly do appoynte unto them selves long time, as he
which said in Luke: Luce. 12.
My soul, thou have much goods laid up in store for many years. They do so,
and live so, as they should live a long season: but in the myddel of their life,
being void of faith, they be taken away, in the day which they did not
look for, and the hour which they did not know. Matt. 25.
So the foolyshe virgins, being vnredye, in the myddell of their days, were
called away. So for the most part always, the judgment of god does catch
the ungodly, careless, negligent, and not watching. So in Daniel, Daniel. 5.
Balthazar the king was slain in the night of his ennemies. Also in the
gospel, The tumultuous servants, the Sodomytes, and they which were in the
time of the flodde. the ungodly death does always find unready: but all the
godly tarry until their full time, that is, they be ever ready.

The godly also in the time of hunger, pestilence, and war, be punyshed, and
dye with the wicked. Cap. ix.
IT IS true, that the godly be punysshed with the ungodly, where the wroth
of god is consu^mate. For the judgment of god, when he is angrye, is given
upon all, both good and bad: but the godly conceive a hope of felycitie and
favor. Psalm. 76.
He shall not withdraw his mercy for ever. And so they, that be punished,
suffer judgment, and at the last shall opteyne mercy. For the godly do know,
that god does punish sinners, which do repent in this life, as he punished
David, that he might humble them, enstructe them in learning, and make them
more ware and circumspecte. And although they dye in the time of hunger,
pestilence, or war with the wicked, yet they know it to be done by the good
will of god. And because they know that they ones shall die: Therefore they offer
them selves to the good will of god, which does al things after the council
of his will. Ephe. 1.
And they know, that they have a time appointed to dye, and they desire to be
dyssoluyd in the time of dienge appointed by god, and to be with Christ.
Otherwise, Another pestylence, hunger, nor war can hurt the godly, except the
appointed time of death, ordained of god, be present. For god can well deliver
his, as he did in times paste deliver Loathe, Noe, Daniel, Jeremy, and other: as
Jacob being carried with his children in to Egipte: And like wise the Israelytes
in Egypt. 2. Pet. 2.
For these could not dye, but in their hour: So all the feythful can not dye,
although they be in the greattest peril, and in extreme desperation, but in
their hour. Then wherefore shall they fear death? They can not live longer
then the lord has appointed, nor die any sooner.

To whom they that dye ought to commytte their spirit. Cap. x.
STEVEN did yield up his spirit into the hands of Christ For it is he that
has overcome death, Acto. 7.
and in death he does quicken us. This is he, which said: Matt. 12.
Come unto me al you that labor and be burdened, and I will refreshe you. And
farther, this is he, which ought to be called upon, that he deliver us in
afflyction, and receive our spirit in the hour of death. Luc. 23.
So did Christ, Father I commend my spirit in to thy hands. Psalm. 30.
So David: Lord, I commend my spirit into thy hands. There it shall be suer,
under the shadow of thy wings, thou shall keep it unhurt: and that which is
taken away, thou shalt restore. Let the spirit return to the lord which
did give it. Eccle. 12.
Also Christ to the thief. Luc. 23.
This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise. This Paradise is a true and
perfyte quietness in Christ, amiable, joyful, and most sweet: And so Lazarus
rested in the bosom of Abraham, to whom Lazarus soul was carried by angels,
that is, he is contained in the hands of our god and of the lord Jesus
Christ, and leads the most pleasante life. For the bosom of Abraham, is
the promise made to Abraham of the sede which is Christ, in whom all the
godly from Abraham unto Christ, were kept: and as many as did believe, were
preserved. Philipp. 1.
So Paul desires to be loused, and to be with Christ. And in an other place
Whether we live or dye, we be the lords. Therefore the hand of the lord
receives the souls of such as be faithful, and they rest quietly in the
hand and word of god, until the day of judgment come. For they be in peace,
and entered in to rest. Turn my soul in to thy rest. For they be in pleasure,
in joy, Sap. 3. Hebre. 4. Psalm. 114.
in blessedness, in suertie, in Christ, and with Christ in comfort.

The body is buried, but it shall rise again in the last day. Cap. xi.
IT IS the only comfort of the godly, to hold suerly in all adversity this
article of our faith, that is to say, the resurrection of the flesh, the
which ought to comfort the ryghtuouse: because through the grace of god they
shall be revived, and raised up, as well the body as the soul, the souls to
justice, the bodies to glory. This hope the wicked have not. For their bodies
shall be the more punished and overthrown down to the ground, although they
have seemed here to be mighty: but their bodies shall be raised up and quickened
by the word of god, to who^ all things obey. Of whose promise the very
emptye and dry bones shall be partakers. Ezec. 37.
This says the ruler, the lord of these bones: Behold, I do bring into you
a spirit, and you shall be quickened, and I will put upon you sinnowes, and I
will reyse up flesh upon you, and I will cover you with a skin, and I will
put in you a spirit, and you shall live, and you shall well know, that I am
the lord. Job. 19.
Thou shalt reyse up my skin, which this flesh bears. And I do know,
that my redemer does live, and at the last he shall reyse me up of dust, and
shall compass my body about with skin, and in my flesh I shall se god.

Verily the holy scripture declares, that the resurrection of the dead shall
be, for that the body, for his nature and power, shall be made perfyte in the
knowledge of the lord. The glory of the soul redoundeth into the reformed
body. In the mean time, the soul lacks not the knowledge of god and of his
Christ. For he is with Christ, and has in him eternal life, and most
lively and blessed knowledge, Ioh. 17.
But the perfyt blessedness is not, until the bodies be borne again. Danie. 12.
Many, which sleep in the duste of the earth, shall rise again, some into
eternal life, and some into shame. The dead shall rise again, and they shall
be raised up, Esai. 26.
that be in graves. Thy dead shall live lord, and they which dye in me, shall
rise again. Your bones shall blossom as the grass. Esai. 66.
Therefore we believe, that there shall be a resurrection of this flesh by
gods power, and that the dead shall be quickened ageyn by the spirit of
Christ. Which shall quicken your mortal bodies through his spirit, Romans 6.
dwelling in you. The first ground of this article is, that Christ is risen.
If Christ be preached, 1. Cor. 15.
that he has risen from death, how can some of you say, that there shall be
no resurrection? If Christ has risen, we shall also rise. Christ, the first
begotten of the dead, has sufficiently declared his resurrection. What so
ever was in Christ the head, the same shall be in his members: and we ought
to believe, that we shall suerly atteyne that, which our head now does
obtain, according to the measure of our faith. The fruits of Christ's
resurrection, is our resurrection, and waking. for if god has raised up our
lord Jesus, he shall also reyse up us through him. So Paul. 1. Cor. 15.
through the hole chapter. 1. These. 4. And the dead in Christ shall rise. Ioh.
5.
Do not meruel, for because the hour shall come, that all such as be in their
graves shall here his voice, and shall come forth. etc. Also thy brother shall
rise. Cap. 11.
Martha answered: I know that he shall rise in the last day.

In the panges of death, and in all temtations, the remedies be to be learned
of the sufferaunce of Christ. Ca. xii.
THE example of living and dienge is set forth before our eyes in Christ's
life and passion: for so says Peter. 1. Pet. 2.
Christ is afflicted for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his
steps. But how can we follow his steps? Here thou: If thou receive thy
cross on the, as Christ techeth the. How can that be, Matt. 10.
say thou: Behold, take an example. If thou be punished with sickness reken
with thy self, how it is not to be compared with Christ's crown of thorn
and his nails. If thou be restrained of thy desires and lusts, remember
Christ led hither and thither. If pride stir thy mind, remember Christ
nailed on the cross between two thieves. Whereof Esai says. Esai. 53.
And we have seen him, and there was no fayernesse in him, and we have desired
the despysynge of all men. If thou brenne in lechery, or any other ill desire,
remember how Christ's tender flesh was all to torn with strypes, thrist
through, and al to broken. Whereof the scripture says, Psalm. 21.
They have nombered all my bones. If thou be vexed with envy or desyer of
revenging, think with thy self, that Christ did preye to his father for
them, which crucified and scorned him. Which when he was reuyled, did not
reuyle again. 1. Pet. 2. Esai. 53.
As a sheep led to be slain. If sin troubles the, cast thy self upon
Christ, believe all his to be thine, and that by his work thou art saved. If
thou look so only in Christ, thou shall have peace, and thou shall rejoice
that god is thy god. And although thy sin be great, yet the grace of god is
much greatter. Therefore say: Although I alone had committed all the sins
of the world, they were utterly none, if I may obtain the grace of god
through Christ. God suffers his to fall, yea and that sometimes greuousely,
as David and Peter: that they might rise and thank god more fervently.
Therefore no sinner should despeire, saying that so great men have sinned so
grievously, and by the grace of god have repented and amended their living. If
Satan do tempte the of predestination, whether thou be amongst them, which
be ordained to the kyngedome of heaven, be deaf, taking example of Christ,
which hanging on the cross said nothing at all to this, when they said: He
has trusted in god, let him deliver him if he will. So Daniel, Danie. 3,
When the king of Babylon said: And what god is he, that may deliver you out
of my hands? They answered: we ought not of this matter to answer the.
Behold, our god, whom we worship, may deliver us from this furnace of hot
burning fire, and out of thy hands O king. So thou must commytte all the
matter to god, whether thou be predestinate or no, do not curiously search out
the majesty of god, Prou. 25.
lest thou be oppressed of his glory. In trouble and death it seems to many,
that god is a sleep, and utterly forsakes them, as Christ cries. God, yea my
god, why haste thou forsaken me. So the gospel sets forth to us an example
of them, to whom it seemed, Marc. 5.
that Christ slepte in the ship. But now Christ (death being overcome)
has promised, he will be to us a savior, as it is in Mat. xi. Come to me al
you that labor and be bordened, Matthew. 11.
and I will refreshe you. Luce. 12.
Again, Fear not little flock, for it has pleased your father, to give to
you a kingdom. Therefore by such examples of the gospel, weak men ought to
be encouraged, to who^ it seems, that Christ is a sleep: that be of
inconstante and wauerynge minds, which doubt, whether god be merciful to
them, and whether god be in them. They ought to be monished, that they trust
constantly to Christ, that although Christ seem to them to be a sleep, yet
let them continewe, and the lord will revenge and deliver them out of all
their euylles, sooner than it can be spoken. Esai says: Esai. 54.
for a lyttel season at a pynche, I have forsaken the, and in greatte mercies I
will gather the together. 1. Reg Job. 13 cap. 5.
The lord leads down to hell, and brings from thense again. yea although
he kyl, yet I will trust in him. He does wound, and gives remedy: he
smyteth, and his hands shall make hole.

They that be dienge, must be exhorted. to forgive. Cap. xiii.
Matthew. 6.
BICAVSE god commands, Forgive, and it shall be forgiven you. and puts
thereunto a condition, He that does not forgive his brother, to him god does
forgive nothing: and if god do not forgive sins, we can not be saved. Luc.
16. Marc. 11.
Forgive, and it shall be forgyuen you. And when you shall stand prayinge,
forgive, if you have any thing agenst any man, that your father also may
forgive you. Matt. 5.
When thou offrest thy gift at the aultare, first reconsile thy self to thy
brother. Matt. 18.
If you will not forgive each of you, your brothers fautes, and that with all
your hearts: your father will not forgive you. Colo. 3.
If any man have a quarrel against his brother, as Christ has forgyuen you, so
do you forgive. So in the prayer of the lord, we desire forgyuenesse to be
done to us, as we forgive them, which be our detters: that is, that we forgive
them, of whom in any thing we have been hurt, either in deed, to be
wrongefully handeled, or else in word to be shamefully entreated. And to
them that be at the point of death, this should be minded, If they at any
time have hurt or endamaged their neighbor, or taken any thing from him by
extortion or robberye, or have defamed any man. Here also they must do as
Christ did on the cross, let them pray for all their ennemies, and forgive
them their wrongs with all their hearts. And if any thing of theyrs be taken
away by theft, let them not requier it again with violence. If they have
taken away any thing of a another man's, let them yield it again, if they may:
or let them labor, that it may be restored: nor let the^ keep secret any
thing, but confess their fault, be sorye that they have offended, and desire
forgyuenesse. If for lack of riches they be not able to make satisfaction: it
shall be suffycyente, that they forgive other, which have harmed them, other
in body or goods. If they forgive them with all their heart, god will forgive
them the wrong done to other: As Christ teaches. Matthew. 6.
If you forgive men their offenses, your heavenly father shall forgive you.

Such as be diynge should be admonished, that they receive the Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood. Ca. xiiii.
IT IS a great token of the inestimable love of god and of his abundant mercy
toward us, that in his supper he would should be wytnessed, that Christ
does deliver and give him self to us, and does join us to him as his
me^bres: that we may know, that the lord loves us, has respect to us, and
saves us. Forthermore in this supper, we here Christ speaking to us, fedynge
us with his body, proferyng us, that we should drink his blood for eternal
life: where he says, Take, eat you, Matt. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
this is my body, which for you is given. Do you this in my remembrance.
Likewise after he had supped, taking the cup, he said: This cup is the
new testament in my blood, which is shed for the remission of your sins.
Do you this as often as you shall drink it in the remembrance of me. Good
brother, think that these words be spoken to the. prynte them most depely in
thy mind. for when he speaks to all, he speaks also to the, to the, to the
I say, they profit All things, which Christ has suffered, shall profit the
no less, then they do help Peter and Paul. This sacrament is verily both
commanded and instituted of Christ him self, for the remyssion of our sins
and eternal life. For the promise sounds so, the which he that receives
by faith, and believes that which he says (Given for you, and Shed out for
you) has and obteyneth without doubt remission of his sins.

Diverse consolations, that the life and time of affliction is short. Cap. xv.
IT IS a great comfort, that affliction shall not endure continually. Roma. 8.
The afflictions of this time, are not worthy of the glory, which shall be
showed upon us. The eye has not seen, Esai. 64.
nor the ear has not hard. etc. the joys that god has prepared for his
elect. 1. Cor. 2.
Through many troubles we must enter into the kyngedome of god. Acto. 14.
Our trouble, which is but temporal and light, works an exceeding, and an
eternal weight of glory unto us which look not on the things that are seen,
but on them, which are not seen. The souls of them, Apoc. 6.
which were killed, cried out under the altar. to whom it was answered, that
they should rest yet a little time. As a little mynute of an hour until the
wroth be passed by. Esai. 26.
Also Christ in the gospel calls the time of afflyction, Ioh. 16. Esai. 54,
A little time. A little while you shall not seem. In dystresse for a little
season I have forsaken the: but in eternal mercies I have gathered the togeder.

The comfort of wydowes and Orphans.
THOU will say, I am now a wydowe, and have no man, which cares for me, here
David, which says. Psalm. 145.
To the fatherless and wydowe thou shalt be a helper. Psalm. 9.
Also, The poor is left to the, and also to the fatherless thou shalt be a
helper. And Christ says. I will not leave you fatherless: Ioh. 14.
that is, without help. So great care has god over the fatherless and
wydowes, that he will comfort them in their trouble. Hereof we learn, that we
also should be moved with pity toward the wydowes and fatherless, and that
we should aid and succor them: For this is a pure and an undefiled religion
before god the father, Iaco. 1.
to vysete the fatherless and wydowes in their trouble. God does diligently
commend to us this sort of men, both in the law and in all the prophets,
thretenynge grievous punyshemente to them, which either do oppress them, or
else do not soccour and deliver them, when they be oppressed. Exody.xxii.
Esai. i. and.x. Iere. v. and.xii. Zacha. vii. So Paul commands Timo. to
honor the widows.

The comfort of women trauelynge with child.
THE child is in the hand of god, and is not borne, before the time
appointed, which is not in our power, but in the will of god, at whose hand
we must look and seek for favor and help. And suerlye the lord is nyghe to
them, which call upon him in truth. He will fulfill the will of them, Psalm.
144.
which fear him, and will here their prayer, and save them. But we must
consider, that all things have their time, and that all things under heaven,
pass forth by certain lymyttes and spaces. There is a time of birth, Eccle.
3.
and a time of dyeng. The time that god has ordained, must be looked for in
the faith of gods promise. The promise is this, Thou shall bring forth thy
children, although with pain, but he promyseth the delyuerance and birth. This
promise requires feythe. For he that promyseth, is able to perform. And more
over, it requires obedience, that the woman be obediente to the will of god:
upon whom this cross is laid by god the merciful father. For it is a great
mercy of god, that god delivers the soul from misery, and vexes the body
with mysery, the soul I say, is delivered, and is the daughter of god by
faith: as Paul witnesses, saying. 1. Tim. 2.
The woman shall be saved through bearyng of children, if she continue in faith,
love, and sanctification, with sobernes. And Christ says: The woman, Ioh. 16.
when she trauayleth, is in sorrow, because her hour is come: But when she has
brought forth her child, she remembers not her trybulation, for joy that a
man is borne in to the world.

A comfort for them that lamente the dead.
COMEN honesty and charity of our neighbor requires, that we adorn and
worship the burialles of our friends, which sleep in the lord, with
convenient morning. But we must not lamente and mourn of ungodliness and
supersticion, as the vnfeythefull heathen do, which believe not the
resurrection of the ded, which know not, that god lives, and cares for us,
although our friends dye. For of them Paul says: 1. These. 4.
We will not brethren that ye should be ignorant of them that sleep, that ye
sorrow not, as other do, which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died,
and rose again: even so them also, which sleep by Jesus, shall god bring
with him. Here humanite and the works of mercy are not condemned. Genesis 23. et
50. 2. Re. 1.
For Joseph mourned his father, Abraham lamented his wife Sara: David bewailed
Saul. and also certain relygyous persons buried Steven, Acto. 8. Ioh. 19.
and made great lamentation upon him. Nichodemus and Iosephe of Aramathie, are
praised, because they buried Christ. Therefore Paul condemns not moderate
mourning and sorrow, which spryngeth of faythefull charity: but he conde^neth
the immoderate heathenyshe sorrow and mourning, as ungodly and superstitious.
For the hope of Christen men is perfytely assured, that the dead peryshe not,
but sleep: Ioh. 11.
as Christ says, Lazarus our frynde slepeth. Therefore to lament the dead by
affection of love, is the duty of charytie, but it is hethnishe and ungodly,
to lament the dead of infidelytie. For it is given us naturally, to bewail
the death of them, which in their lives were derelye beloved of us, but we
must remember the saying of holy Job, The lord has given, Job. 1.
and the lord has taken away. Some time our parents, our dear friends, our
wife, and our children be taken away from us, that we may learn the will of
god, and have a respect only to god the gyuer, and not to the gifts.

A consolation for them, which suffer for their offenses.
OF THEM which suffer for their evil deeds, 1. Pet. 2.
Peter speaks, saying: what praise is it, if when ye be buffeted for your
fautes, ye take it pacientely? And again. 1. Pet. 4.
Se that none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an yuell doer,
or a busy body in other men's matters. But if it chance so, that we must
suffer for an evil deed done of us, the deserved punishemente may be an holy
sufferynge, no less pleasant to god, than the sufferynge of the innocent
martyrs. For if the evil doer confess his sin before god, and believe that
his sin is forgiven, through Jesus Christ: then by Jesus Christ it is
brought to pass, that the deserved punysshement is sanctified, to obtain the
crown of everlasting glory: was not the thief, ha^ging on the cross upon the
one side of Chrst, sanctified in his punishment, Luce. 22.
as soon as he aknowleged his sin, and through faith commended his health
to Christ? Was it not said also to him, This day thou shall be with me in
Paradise? Neither is it marvel, that evil dooers through faith, can in
their deserved punishementes, be sanctified as innocent martyrs. For as the
martyrs in their sufferynge do testify and witness Christ and the gospel, so
evil doers in their punishment, do testify and witness the law of god, and
be examples to other, that they avoid evil deeds, lest they be punished in
like manner. To be an example, that mischeuouse deeds be avoided, is it not a
work of holiness? Therefore whether a man do suffer justly or unjustly, let
him believe in Jesus Christ, and his sufferynge shall cause him to opteyne of the
lord a garland that never shall wyther away. Therefore no man ought to dispeire.
1. Tim. 2.
For Christ has given him self a rede^tion for all. There is one god, and
oone mediator of god and man, namely the manne Christ Jesus, which gave him
self a ransom for all men. Behold, he says for all. Therefore also, He will,
2. Pet. 3.
that all return to repentance. And he says, Luc. 5.
I came not to call the just, but sinners, of who^ he would be borne. Judah,
David, Matthew. 1.
Manasse, Thamar, Rachab, and Batseba be examples. Therefore he commands the
gospel to be preached to every creature. Ezec. 18.
He will not the death of a sinner, but the health of al men. So he calls al to
him which be burdened. Matt. 11. Luc. 19.
So he received to him zache. Maudelyn, Peter, Matthei, the woman of Cananee.
Matthew. 5. Matt. 27.
So he received to favor the thief. Also he apered after his resurrection to
Mary Maudelyne, out of whom he had expelled seven dyuelles. Matthew. 16.
He admytteth and receives Thomas the hard beleuer. He conuerteth Saul being
a persecutour most greuouse. Acto. 9.
Brefely he refuses no man, he receives all that repent, with a fatherlye
mind. He shows mercy, he takes the repentaunte to his son. Therefore he
commands to pray, Matthew. 6.
Let thy kingdom come, forgive us our trespases. Ioh. 16.
Also, what so ever ye pray the father in my name, it shall be given you. Ask,
Matthew. 7.
and it shall be given you: knock: and it shall be opened unto you.

Sentences out of holy scripture, to styrce up a desire to dye.
WE are strangers before the, 1. Par. 30.
as were all our fathers. Our days be as it were a shadow upon the earth, and
here is none abiding. The life of man is a warfare upon the earth: and his
days, Job. 7.
as the days of a hired servant.

A man borne of a woman, Job. 14.
living a short time, is replenished with much mysery. He comes forth like
a flower, and goth away like a shadow, and never remains in one estate.

What man is he that lives, Psalm. 88.
and shall not se death?

Psalm. 89.
Our years passen away as a cop web, the days of our age be three score and
ten, or in the chefest four score years, and the most part of these, is
labor and pain.

Psalm. 101.
My days be wasted as a shadow, and I am dried up as the grass.

Psalm. 144.
A man is made like to vanity, his days pass away as a shadow.

Eccle. 7.
The day of death is better then the day of life.

Heb. 13.
We have not here a dwelling city, but we seek for one to come.

Iaco. 4.
What is our lif? it is a vapor, aperynge a little while, and afterward
vanishes away.

1. Pet. 1.
All flesh is as hey, and all the glory of man as the flower of hey, the hey is
dried up, and the flower falls.

FINIS.
THE TABLE OF THE first book.
THE preparation to the Cross, and how it must be pacie^tly borne. What the
Cross is Cap. 1. Two kinds of crosses. Ca. 2. How the faithful be temted. 3.
The Cross is of God only. Cap. 4. Cross is the work of the good will of god.
5. The godly are the first that are afflycted of God, to their good and
welthe. Cap. 6. In tribulation we must pray. Cap. 7. Of prayer, and the manner
thereof in tribulation. Whose prayers are hard of god. The promise of god.
Faith. To ask in the name of Jesus. The affecte to desire any thing. Thanks
gyuynge.
We ought to be patient in affliction, not to be angry, not to speak evil of
god. Cap. 8. Soccur in affliction must be asked of god. 9. Yet in affliction or
syckenesse, medycine and council are not to be despised. Ca. 10. In affliction
no time may be appointed to god, nor way whereby we would be delivered. ca. 11.
It is great comfort to them that be in affliction, to remember, that Christ was
also temted, and exercysed with ill, as we be wont. 12. It is great comfort in
affliction, that no man ca^ hurt the faithful, except Christ will. Ca. 13 The
goodness of god is not to be despised, or lightly regarded before afflictions,
whereby god will punish and give warning. Ca. 14. There be diverse crafts of
the dyuel, whereby he tempts, and where one craft profyteth nothing, he
adds many other. Ca. 15. not graffed in Christ. If he continue and say, but
thy sins pass If he say, such promyses are made to the But god hereth no
sinners nor straiers away. But thou come very late with thy contricion. But
he had a strong faith in god, which What if all holy scripture be false, for
they If the temptator say, thou have not kept the If he say thou must forsake
the world.
The table of the second book.
WHAT is death. Cap. 1. What is the cause of death. Ca. 2. Two manner of
deaths. Cap. 2. To the elect and faithful, eternal death by Christ is
overcome. Cap. 3. Although the godly die, yet they shall live. 4. The death of
the godly is a sleep. Cap. 5. Baptism is a comfort in the point of death. 6.
The godly know the time of dyinge to be determined of god. Cap. 7. The ungodly
live not out half their days. 8. The godly also in the time of hunger,
pestilence, and war, be punished, and dye with the wicked. ca. 9. To whom
they that dye ought to commyt their spirit. cap. 10. The body is buried, but
it shall rise again in the last day. ca. 11. In the panges of death, and in
all temptations, the remedies be to be learned of the sufferaunce of Christ,
cap. 12. The dieng, must be exhorted to forgive. 13. Such as be dienge should
be admonysshed, that they receive the sacrament of Christ's body and blood.
ca. 14. Diverse consolations, that the life and time of affliction is but
short. ca. 15. The comfort of wydowes and Orphans. The comfort of women
travailing with child A comfort for them that lament the dead. A consolation
for them, which suffer for their offenses. Sentences out of holy scripture to
stir up a desire to dye.
FINIS.
LONDINI in aedibus Thomae Bertheleti typis impress. Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum.

ANNO. M.D.XL.


