ARTICLES Agreed upon and concluded between the victorious, excellent, high
and mighty Prince and Lord, FREDERICK HENRY, Prince of Orange, Count of Nassaw,
etc. on the one part, and the vanquished Town of S' hertogenbosh on the other
side.

And also, How the Town, and the Pettler-Sconce was delivered, on the fourth
of September, into the hands of His said Excellence: and how his Garrison
entered into the said Town, there to keep the Walls and Gates. Worthy of
reading.

LONDON, Printed for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
South entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1629.

Articles agreed upon, between His Excellence the Prinee of Orange, and the
vanquished Town of S'Hertogenbosh.
SInce that by the Command of the Excellent, high, and mighty Prince of Orange,
the Town of S'hertogenbosh has been this great while besieged, and daily
furiously assaulted and battered; chiefly since that the Gallery by the
Vucthter gate has been brought over the Ditch, whereby his Excellence
endeavored by all means to get the Halfe-moone without the Vncthter gate,
wherein they of the Town had all their trust and confidence; To which end, his
Excellency had already blown up a Mine. And although the Frenchmen having
given an Assault, and attempted upon the Town, they within had beaten them
back, and forced them to retire, yet the next day after, being betwixt Sunday
and Monday, the English and Dutch having the Watch there, have also given an
assault upon the said Halfe-moone, and have taken the same by force of Arms;
so that they within had no more Trenches or outworkes, but only the Walls,
into which, by the continual battering of the Ordnance, was made so great a
breach, that two Wagons together might well have passed through it. And whereas
his Princely Excellence did for the last time summon them to yield themselves
and warned the Governor, that if he would not in good time hearken to a
Composition, that he should take heed to himself, and to all them that were
in the Town, lest they might come in danger of their lives, because his
Excellence was resolved to assault and take the Town by force, and way of
Arms. The said summons caused not little alteration and troubles among the
Burgers and Women, so that they ran with great fury to the Commanders House:
But because the Governor would not hearken unto their complaints, whereby the
sedition of the people did continually increase, Therefore the Clergy with the
Bishop, were forced to come forth themselves, both to appease the people, and
to move the Governor by their persuasions, telling him, that there rested no
hope for them, of any help or relief from abroad, and that within the Town
there was an infinite number of sick and hurt persons, and besides also, that
they were altogether unprovided of warlike Ammunition, to make sufficient
resistance against the Forces of the Prince: so that they thought it more
necessary to parley, and make a Composition with the Prince, then to hazard
and endanger all their lives.

By this persuasion and request the Governor was induced and content to demand
of His Excellence a cessation of Arms for three days, that in the mean while,
there might be made some good agreement and composition on both sides.
Therefore on the 11. stilo nouo, and the 1. stilo veteri, of September, being
Tuesday, there came out of the Town into the Princes Quarter, the Deputies,
namely, 2. of the Councillors of the Town, the Brother-in-law of the
Governor, and two Monks, the one a blacke-Frier, and the other a white-Frier,
which did treat, Covenant* agree and conclude with the Prince of Orange, and
some of the Lords States, on the 13. of September at night, being Thursday
last; these Articles as here do follow.

1. First, the spiritual or Ecclestasticall persons, as Friars, Priests,
Monks, shall depart out of the Town within 6. weeks.

2. Other religious persons as Nuns, and such Women, shall keep their
Cloisters, and there be maintained and well entertained during their lives.

3. The Town and the Burgers are to keep and be maintained in their
Privileges: But as for such as will depart, they shall have liberty for two
whole years next ensuing, to sell their Houses and goods at their profit,
according to the agreement of Bread.

4. The Papists are to have liberty of conscience, but no public exercise of
their religion.

5. The Soldiers shall on Monday next (being the 7. of September) depart out
of the Town, with their full Arms, burning Matches, Bullets in the mouth, and
with 4. Pieces of Ordnance.

6. Upon Friday last, the 4 of September, the Town was delivered into the
hands and power of his Excellence, wherefore our Garrison was received into the
Town, and do now keep watch and guard upon the Walls, and of the Gates of the
Town: And on the same day there has also been delivered into the hands of
his Excellence the Pettler Sconce, and received and kept with his Garrison.

7. The Governor shall be conuoyed to Breda.

8. Those of the Town have required, that they may have a Governor of the
House of Nassaw, which has been granted unto them.

Loving Reader, this is that which in the Treaty, (so much as is delivered
unto us) has been agreed upon. Wherefore we can not enough praise and thank
the good Almighty God, for the great and worthy Victory, which he has given us
in despite of all our Enemies.

The Lord God bless and preserve with all happiness, the Excellent, high and
mighty Prince, the Prince of Orange, His Excellency, Count Ernest, and the
high and mighty Lords, the States, and all true maintainers of his holy Word.
Amen.

These former Articles are printed according to the Dutch Copy, printed at
Delfe.

This following Copy is translated out of the Original.

Articles, granted by His Excellence the Prince of Orange, unto the Governor
of the Town of the Busse, and unto the Captains and Soldiers being in the
same.
1.
THe Governor of the Busse, with all the Officers of War, and Soldiers, of
what quality and condition soever they are, both the Horse and foot, none
excepted, yea even those that have forsaken the Service of the Lords the
States, and accepted the service of the King of Spain, are to march out of the
Town without any let, trouble, or hinderance, with their Arms, Bag and
Baggage; the Horse with the sound of Trumpet, flying Colors, armed in their
full Armor, and their Weapons in their hands: The Foot, Drum beating,
Colors displaid, Matches kindled on both ends, Bullets in their mouths, in
such sort, form and order, as they were wont to march in Battell-aray, having
all their goods and lives safe, from thence unto the Town of Die.

2.
They are to carry with them Six Pieces of Ordnance, and two Morters, or
Murthering-peeces, the which the Governor has to make choice of; and withal,
such appurtenance and Ammunition of War, as may suffice to shoot off every
Piece twelve times.

3.
They shall be furnished and provided with Horses and Wagons, with their
Waggonmen and conductors, sufficient to carry away the said Pieces of Ordnance,
and Murderers, with the said appurtenances, to the Town of Die.

4
All the Ammunition of War and victuals, belonging to the King of Spain, are
to be delivered without any fraud or deceit whatsoever, into the hands of such
as His Excellency shall appoint to that end, except only such victuals as have
been sold before the 2. of this present month when this Treaty was first
begun* for the same shall so remain sold, and those that have bought the
same, are not to be searched or troubled for it.

5
All Officers and Soldiers, both sick and hurt, being in the Hospital, or
elsewhere, may stay and remain in the Town, until their health shall give
them leave to travel* and then they are to have a safe conduct and means to
carry away their arms and baggage, either to Die or to Breda.

6
There is also to be granted asufficient number of Wagons, Carts and Horses,
which the Governor shall ask for, both for his service, and all other
Officers, and Soldiers to carry away his stuff, and all sorts of bag and
baggage to Die, there being comprehended all Arms, yea even of those
Soldiers of the Garrison, as are either absent, dead, sick, hurt, fled, or
run away; and the said Wagons are not to be visited or searched in any
manner.

7
To those that shall desire to carry their stuff and baggage to Antwerpe,
shall be furnished without their pay or charges, some Boats to carry the same
thither by Holland, freed from all taxes, impositions or customs, with
permission to appoint to the same persons to take care of their said goods: the
which are not to be searched or stayed in any place or under any color
whatsoever, but are to pass freely to Antwerpe, without stay or vnlading.

8
The Governor, Officers, Inginers of War, Soldiers, and other persons,
enjoying wages of the King of Spain, being Ecclesiastical, or seculars, none
excepted; as likewise the widows and children of such Officers, that have in
the said Town any houses, inheritances, revenues, rents, be it upon the States
of Braband in this Quarter, or upon particular houses and grounds, or any other
goods, moveable and immovable, that they are to hauc the space and term of
two years from the signature of this present Treaty, according to their own
will, either to transport, sell, engage, or otherwise dispose of the said
goods: and during the said time, they are to enjoy the said revenues, rents,
fruits, and goods, gotten, or to be gotten, in such nature and condition as
they ever can be.

9
The Officers and Soldiers, of what charge or condition soever they are, may
leave their wives and children within the town; and during the said term of
two years, they may dispose of their goods, moueables, and immoueables,
situated in the said town, or elsewhere, none excepted, and there shall no
confiscation, or prize, be used against them.

10
The said Officers and Soldiers, if they forsake and give over their Office,
charge, or service, within the said space of two years, they may freely
return into the said town, and enjoy this Treaty, as other Burghers of
Inhabitants: But so rhat first they do signify it, and declare themselves
either to his Excellence, or to the Governor that shall be in this town.

11
No Officer or Soldier, nor their baggage can be stayed or arested for any
debts, whether he now march out with the Garrison, or being sick or hurt, stay
and come after when he shall be well again.

12
All prisoners on both sides, of what condition soever, are to be put into
liberty without any ransom, save only they are to pay the expenses for their
meat and drink according to ^he tax and order of the Quarter.

13
All booties that have been taken by those of the town, both before and
during this siege, are not to be taken from them, but remain to those that
have them.

14
The Articles of this composition being signed, the Governor of the Busse is
to have liberty, and leisure, to send an express Messenger toward the most
Excellent Infanta of Spain, with a safe conduct and assurance, to give her
notice of what has been done: But it is understood, that the Governor shall
send him away on the same day when the Treaty shall be signed.

15
The said conditions being resolved upon, and concluded, there shall be granted
unto the said Governor and all his men of war, and Soldiers, at the least
two days, to make themselves ready for their departure: The which term being
expired, the said Governor and Officers of the said garrison do promise to be
gone, to wit, upon Monday next very early, which shall be the 7/17. of this
month of September.

16
It is to be understood, that during the said space of two days, no body at
all of the town may come into the army, nor those of the army into the said
town, and the same to hinder and prevent all disorder: But every one is to
remain in the mean time within his trenches, or forts; And there shall also
be made no approaches, nor done any act of hostility: for the better assurance
whereof, there are to be given Hostages on the one and the other part.

17
Before the Garrison does march out, there are to be given two sufficient
Hostages on his Excellence's part, the which are to march with the said
Garrison, arms and baggage, from hence to Die: As likewise on the other
side, the Governor also is to give two Hostages, which are to remain until
the said Hostages of his Excellence, and the Wagons are come back: And then
presently his Excellence is to send away the said Hostages with a safe conduct
and security unto the town of Die.

18
The Officers, Captains, and other persons, comprehended in the first Article
of this present Treaty, having any arms, barges, or boats, or other stuff of
war belonging particularly unto them, may sell, or transport the same, and
those that shall buy or transport them, are not to be searched or troubled for
it.

19
There is no restitution to be made of horses, arms, marchandizes, goods, or
other stuffes, that have been fold, or taken as booties, and no body is to be
molested for the same.

20
Those that are of the Garrison of Breda, being now in this said town, both
Officers and particular Soldiers, they may now return with their goods and
lives safe, unto Breda; And there shall be also granted unto them a sufficient
number of wagons and horses for the carriage of bag and baggage, and an Hostage
and Conuoy to conduct them thither with all safety, in the like manner as is
expressed in the first Article, as being comprehended therein.

Given in the Camp before Boisteduke, or the Busse, this 4/14. of September,
1629. Signed. F. Henry de Nassaw. A. Grobendonke.


And beneath it was written, By order of his Excellence. And signed I. Iunius.
And confirmed by the seal of his Excellence. This agrees with the Original.
Corn. Musch.

FINIS.

