THE FORBIDDEN FRVIT. OR A TREATISE Of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and
Evil, of which Adam at the first, and as yet all Mankind do eat death.

Moreover, How at this day it is forbidden to every one as well as to Adam; And
how this Tree, that is the wisdom of the Serpent planted in Ada is that great
Image, and that many headed Beast; mentioned in Daniel and the Apocalypse, whom
the whole world does worship.

LASTLY, Here is showed what is the Tree of Life, contrary to the wisdom,
righteousness, and knowledge of all mankind: With a description of the
Majesty and nature of Gods Word.

By AUGUST: ELUTHENIUS. Translated out of Latin into English.

Printed in the year, 1640.

CHAPTER I. What is the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil.
I Will not much contend with them that would have the Tree of Knowledge of
Good and Evil, acco^ding as it is in the Scriptures to be a Natural Tree,
which being planted in Paradise, had that nature devinely given unto it, that
who should eat thereof, their eyes should be opened to view themselves, and
they be made Gods, and so know both Good and Evil: perhaps God would teach
Adam both inwardly and outwardly, and what he forbad or taught him inwardly in
his heart, that he would propose outwardly to his eyes for greater testimony:
but yet I desire of them, that they would grant this unto me, that as the thing
was done outwardly, so the same to have happened inwardly in the heart of Adam,
that there he was tempted by the seed of the Serpent to have the guiding of
his own will and nature, not to be so void of knowledge and action, as to be
subordinate unto God. That I should so think, two reasons or causes do
especially move me.

The 1. is, that the Seed of the Woman was to break the head of the seed of
the Serpent; but as a natural and living Serpent, whose head was broken, of
that Seed we do not read of any: but as even then the Seed of the woman was
spiritually in the heart of Adam, so in the same manner was the seed of the
Serpent, for man at the first was created good, not of God but of nothing, and
for that cause does he turn himself always from God, and bend downwards to
his own nothing and vanity again; which nothing I with the ancient Fathers,
but especially Taulerus, do judge to be sin, Satan, death, and hell; and
this perhaps was that devil, inhabiting in Adam, as also in Lucifer.

The other reason is this, which the scripture does testify of the City of
God and the Heavenly Jerusalem, that Paradise to be in us: but God alone and
his omnipotent Word is our Paradise, the Tree of Life, and the Temple wherein
we inhabit, walk, serve, pray, etc. as we are on the other part the Temple of
God and his Paradise. In like man^er the Beast (which even now the whole world
both great and small) do worshipp in their hearts, of which the scriptures
make mention in the Apocalips, as also the Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil
is in us, for the exterior world, and whatsoever outwardly is to be seen or is
done, is only an accident and a certain signifying figure of the true and
interior nature: and there is nothing true in all those things which are seen
with the eye, that is substantial; for it behooves that the form of this
World perish, because it is nothing else but an imaginary world, and a figure
of the right true eternal and by it self the constant world; therefore it is
expedient that all these things in their course be done over again, which
throughout all the Bible are related outwardly and significantly to have been
done, and yet to this day after their manner, the History of the Bible,
Moses, and the Prophets, are spiritually and truly of force, but all things
are brought into the truth by Christ, and it it is expedient, that all the
prophecies, which have been from the beginning of the world, which God has
spoken by the mouth of his Saints, be again reiterated: Therefore that Tree
was nothing else then the nature, will, knowledge, and life of Adam, whereof he
ought not to eat. That is not to attribute any part of it to himself: But
freely and willingly submitt himself to God; and know nothing but what God
would know in him; do nothing but what God would do in him; speak nothing
but what God would speak in him, etc. Whereby without any impediment God might
exercise his Kingdom, will, nature, and power in him, that being void of will,
wisdom, and knowledge, he might have nothing of his own, or arrogate any
thing to himself, this God would, this was pleasing to him, and thus he
commanded. To this opinion the German Divinity ascents: Theologia Germanica,
3470. cap. Which says that this tree is nothing else but our own will and
knowledge, of which alone in the Earthly Paradise of the world of our hearts,
we are not to eat, but acount it is forbidden, unless we desire to dye, or
eat death from it. And now when Adam was fallen, and had eaten of this tree,
then was it planted in his heart, and the same was derived into all his boughts
and fruit, so that the same case, word, precept, and interdict, is common to
all his posterity, we all have eaten death, whosoever are in Adam, and this
uncorrected poison have we received from the Serpent, being evil Eggs of an
evil Bird.

Hence may every man easily perceive, how each man is the greatest enemy to
himself, and what he ought to esteem of himself, his will and
understanding, vvisdome and knowledge, since it is the Counsel, seed,
wisdom, knowledge and head of the Serpent, which by Christ is to be broken in
our hearts: it behooves that all things (which Circumcision in the old, and
Baptism in the new Covenant does signify) which are hereditary and natural
from Adam should dye in us: that we should labor to unlearne, and put of all
things, as if they were death and the devil; that is our will, wisdom, and
righteousness, etc. with which as with figleaves Adam strove to cover
himself: for this is sin, and the stinge of sin and death, that is to eat
of this forbidden Tree, and to arrogate any thing to a man's self, as his will,
nature, and understanding, or himself; But alas, alas who knows this, or
believes this, who abandons or is weary of his own will, understanding, or
knowledge, when will men give a farewell to them: Give a Farewll say J, why
every one delights himself in his own imaginations, and sweetly slumbring
recreats his soul in his own wisdom, knowledge, works, etc. the Tree is fair
to the eye, and pleasant to the taste: Here all mankind as Adam himself do
taste death; But yet no man knows, no man thinks of this, but every man
judges it to be right, and the flesh esteems it to be the Tree of Life. That
is to follow its own pleasure and opinion of Good, which is false: To know
much, to find out much, to learn many sciences, and finally to become a God;
Neither do any consider, that this was Adams estate and morsel, that bitter
morsel of death.

How do we speak and talk of Adams misery, and yet not mark that the same
is fresh in us; We can talk of his eating, and wonderfully detest it, when
notwithstanding we do the same that he did.

O man, who art thou that thus preparest a staff for thine own shoulders, and
pronouncest a Sentence against thy self, while thou condemnest thy Father
Adam, and yet considerest not that thou thy self art ensnared in his Nett.

Here propound and consider what our will is, our knowledge is, our wisdom is,
etc. in which we so insolently boast our selves, yea and by which we imagine
and suppose that we can come unto God, when notwithstanding it is nothing,
nothing else but death it self, and the bitter Fruit of the forbidden Tree.

Is there any amongst all men who understand this? Who can away with this? To
deny, put off, fearful to rest in their own will, wisdom, knowledge, etc.
No: do not most choose and extol them as true gold and Eternal Life, when
notwithstanding they are nothing but Eternal death.

CHAP. II. Why the Tree of knowledge of good and Evil is mortal and
forbidden.
THIS may be easily answered by that which has been before related. God (as
right it is) would be in us both Lord and Master; and in the same, will work,
do love, omit, think, etc. therefore should we be free from al these things
of this kind: so that we should know, or do nothing, but what God himself
would know and do in us. Which reason even against its will, does confess to
be equity to him that concludes and proves it by truth; for what is more
equal then that the Potter have so full a Dominion over his pots, that none of
them challenge any the least authority to themselves, since they were not their
own makers; the same is our condition: God alone is called the God of
understanding, knowledge, wisdom, etc. wherefore he alone will know all
things in us, and by consequence nothing but himself; if therefore any man
will taste of the Forbidden Fruit, and so know himself, be made a God, be of
himself, stand upon his own bottom, and so be his own God; it is necessary
that together with Lucifer, he fall into the hell of death, and like the Dragon
be cast down from Heaven, because the Fruit of that Forbidden Tree is death.
Wherefore God would know only himself in us, and for that cause would have
one to know no other science, esteeming this only necessary to life: and will
teach the same to us, it so be we will obediently attend him: That is know
only God, praise him, pray to, and hear him, which things I say he himself
would work in the obedient: For this cause the Wise Man says: (Wisdom 5.)
Lord to know thee and understand thee is all righteousness. In which he
justifies many, and by consequence much more his own: Let not the Wise Man
boast himself in his wisdom, nor the strong Man in his strength, but in this
let every man boast that he knows me, Isay. 53. Ier. 9. Which thing God by the
mouth of his own Christ, Ioh. 17. calls Eternal Life; For from this
knowledge, root, and Tree of Life, proceeds all whatsoever can be called good
or is truly good; This is the only and true Key of David, which so opens
that no man shuts, etc.

CHAP. III. Of the abuse of all things, how all things are unclean to the
unclean flesh: yea those things which in themselves are clean; and wherefore
that curious flesh desires to know much; and on the contrary, how men ought to
know nothing but God, and for God, and use all things in God.
THAT lost nature of man, who in the Scripture is called the Flesh, is an
instrument so impotent to al things, so vile, and obscure, that it knows
neither to have, speak or do any thing, but abuses and defiles it by
touching, because he converts all things (which are from God, in whom truly
they are) to himself as his proper own: although he ought never to be his
own. No not in that which is his own, but therein to be subject to God.
Neither ought he to challenge to himself that wisdom and knowledge that is in
him; but to have all things ^^se in his God, as if he himself had them ^^^t.
But this he does not; but arrogates ^^mselfe to himself, and will needs be,
^^ve, and know himself, and this is the fall and degeneration of Adam, and his
posteri^^, in, and with all things with them.

Again, the true and only use with, and ^n all things, is thus: God would
that Adam should know nothing but what he would ^now in him, should be nothing
but what ^e would be in him; should do nothing but what he would do in him;
should have nothing but what he would have in him; This would not Adam, but
all those things ^e arrogated to himself, as his own, or ^ather he himself
would be all these things; This is the fall of Adam, and the abuse of all
things in all things, by all mankind, to the and of the World.

The abuse is, I say, to arrogate any thing to man's self, as his own, and not
to possess ^he same freely, as though he had them not; but to steal and use
them from God, in and ^o himself. As for Example: if having Money, Wife,
Children, knowledge, life ^t self, yea my self, I challenge these to my self
as my own.

But since God exacts them, if follows the I would therefore detain them, and
as mu^^ as in me is, not yield them unto God, b^ knitt my mind unto them, that
I may keep defend, and never loss or forsake them (when notwithstanding they
are Gods an^ not mine) this is the Fall of Adam and b^ theift, being the abuse
of al things inbred i^ the flesh: until man be translated into ^ new kind of
estate or condition, wherefore it is behoovefull that we be borne a new^ do
vomitt up the Fruit of the Tree o^ Knowledge of Good and Evil: And al^ these
things which we having stolen from God as thieves, do challenge to our selves
and so forgetting them restore them again^ to God; this truly is the
resurrection and conversion of Adam; and by this means alone shall the Fall of
Adam be repaired and amended.

Therefore the true and only use of all things, known alone to the regenerate
and new man is this: That I be altogether free from all things, and alone
subject to God: and being void of name, will, and knowledge, etc, remain
nothing in my self, no^ vindicate, deliver, or claim any thing to my self
(because whatsoever I have, am, know, do, etc. all are of God,) no more then
the Cow does for her milk, the Tree for it fruit, the Bird for its long; but
wholly referring all things to God, and have know, do love, and be nothing but
in him; Thus the redeemed, free, and perfect Christians, have, know, do, etc.
all things they possess, wife, children, life, knowledge, wisdom, substance,
etc. yea and themselves altogether freely in the Lord: neither do they
attribute any thing to themselves; even as if they were nothing, had nothing,
knew nothing; for they know that God it is, who is, has, knows, and does all
those things which they are, know, or do; so the Christian has his wife in
the Lord, that is does not challenge her to himself as his own, but freely
designeth her to God, whose she is, and from whom she is lent unto him, whom he
is willing to restore whenever it shall please God to requir her, and as he
never challenges her to himself as his own, even so he ever enjoyes her in
God, and in, and for God, loves her; This Paul and David calls it, to sing,
rejoice, marie, and have in the Lord: that is to reduce all things unto God, in
him, know, love, have, be, do all things, neither detract any thing from God
as my proper own and right.

And whosoever have not thus their knowledge, Wife, Children, and themselves in
the Lord, they offend in this: because they love them, it being a carnal Love
out of God; And so far are all things unclean to the unclean, that even his
prayers are sin unto him, yea his praises of God, Fasts, Orations,
Supplications, God despises according to the Prophet: And although he be
bountiful to the poor, yet he does it in vain. Breefly, what he does, he
does it in vain, it is not pleasing but displeasing unto God: Whether he love
or hate his Wife, Children, and Neighbors, whether he chyde or pray, all
things are unclean unto him, Wife, Children, Feilds, Lands, Money, poverty,
riches, fame, infamy, life, deathknowledge, learning, yea God himself. And
lastly, he is unfitt for any thing that is good. By himself, he is evil,
sinful, and nothing. And what show of goodness soever is in him, it is
stained by an hypocritical eye and affection; Therefore its no matter what he
has, knows, or does, he is a Vessel of no price, an evil Tree;
unprofitable for any good work, since both his mind and conscience is depraved.

Therefore before al things it is necessary, that with Nicodemus they be born
again, that al things with them may be ^n new unto them, the flesh must be
changed into the spirit, and so cease to be flesh. For it is so impure and
every way desirous of its own gain, and so infected and depraved with the
poison of sin, that it draws all things to it self, seeks it self in
all things, and arrogateth that to it self as its own, which it knows,
loves, or does, and has all things under a false pretense, and out of a love
to it self. Neither does it love any thing but what is pleasant and profitable
for it self. But a Christian loves an unprofitable, sick, and loathsome Wife
for God, and has her not for his pleasure or profit only, but for Gods will
and pleasure.

The natural and fleshly man does nothing but out of a love to himself, and
whatsoever he does, he has an eye and reflecteth upon himself, and in what he
sees, he can find to delight himself in, he is willing to meddle with that.

Hence it is that the house of sorrow, poverty, banishment, troubles,
sicknesses and reprehensions, and whatsoever he sees harsh unto him, he hates
no less then the Devil does the cross of Christ Jesus; But whatsoever is
excellent, great, pleasant, bewtifull, etc. to this he cleaves as fast as the
clay to the wheel; Whereby he may enjoy what he saw and desired in them.

Breefly, he does nothing but out of a love to himself, and in what he does
he challenges the chief part to himself; I say, that in all his actions
both with God and Man, he respects nothing but his own profitt and pleasure,
which if he be deprived off, he loses his cheerfulness and alacrity of
spirit, and becoms sorrowful and desists to work any further, what therefore
can be done by such a man as this but what is unclean.

But the regenerate man being borne of God* does quite contrary in all his
actions, he is desirous of the common profitt, being altogether so affected and
disposed as God his Father; He does nothing but most freely subjected unto God,
suffieth him to do and care for all things in him; so that it follows that in
this man is the mere nature and work of God; and he or rather God in him
repaires to the humble poor, sick, and to to those that are in the house of
sorrow, to help and comfort them: by whatsoever God has either given him, or
does work in him as his substance, milk, and consolation, and in all those
things he looks upon no other thing but only God; who rather in him only
looks upon himself; Neither is it the Man, but God in the Man, who
communicates to other necessities, loves, prays, hears, worshipps, honors,
wills, and possesses.

Thirdly, Adam would know, and therefore labors for much knowledge, and so
Eats of the forbidden Fruit, that he may live and become a great one, even
God; and for this only end the whole World now a days applies it self to all
studies; because it desires not to dye in obscurity and oblivion, but to live
and flourish, not in the lower degrees of estimation, but in the chiefest seat
of reputation and honor, and with all to know all things that possible it can,
that so it may be made famous, and thereby be glorified and delighted therein;
wherefore every day he works more and more to increase his knowledge, by which
he may be more and more emminent, greater, and more like unto God; that if it
were possible to know more then God, that with Lucifer be might be equal with
him; But that this ambition was the fall of Lucifer no man will consider; but
every man in those prosecutions, disputations and studies for knowledge seeks
for life, when indeed there is in them nothing but bitter death; which both in
Lucifer, as also in Adam most manifestly does appear.

Truly it is a wonder that of this forbidden Tree of Death; every man should
be so much desirous to eat; Gods will is that we know nothing, but what he
will know, write, and teach in us; and that being void of all knowledge,
prudence and wisdom in our selves, we become fools, we remain under him as
fools and babes; but we busy our selves about the obtaining of many thousands
of Sciences, and treasure them up unto our selves, as if in them our life
consisted, that like to God we are ignorant of nothing, and all flesh desires
rather to be like unto God then to Christ.

But on the contrary, Gods will it is, that before this be, we as Christ was,
be deprived of every thing that is our own, and be wholly subject unto him:
Have, know, do, love, be nothing, but what God has, knows, does, loves, is
in us; For by this privation and denial, will God draw us unto himself, make
us like God, and teach all men wisdom in him, and not out of themselves.

Therefore the knowledge of Christ in Men is quite contrary unto this; For he
has known nothing, does, or wills to know nothing, but only God, this is his
rejoicing, for this only cause does he learn sciences, or rather does God in
him; And to this with all his endeavoure and strength does he apply himself:
that as in Adam he was made something, even so in Christ and with Christ he
may be brought to nothing again; and all his knowledge and sciences, even as
it were foolishnes and deadly poison, he may vomit up again, and esteem as
nothing; that he may wipe out of the tables of his heart all human arrogancy,
having action, knowledge and science: to the end that nothing may remain
there, but only that which God teaches and by his own finger writes.

Breefly, a true Christian is a certain bare naked thing, who with Socrates
knows nothing but this, that he knows nothing; In these blessed and unknowing
fools, God will know all things, if so it be, man know how to empty himself,
and to cast away the baseness of his old rags; But the fl^s^ for this only
cause does learn that it may be something, or rather be all things, know,
have, and do all things; whereas the spiritual man learnes only for this cause,
that before God he maj be made nothing to himself* and all other creatures
whatsoever, that thereby God may be all things in him: know, have, do, love,
and live in him; this is behoovefull to be known; this is the true use of all
things, and for this only end ought we to labor to know any thing.

But every fleshly minded man, who belongs to the Kingdom of Satan, and lies
captrivated under his power, thinks far otherwise; and defends quite
contrary; and therefore is in the sight of God foolishnes, wickedness, sin,
and Satan; From whence it is that he esteems their wisdom to be foolishnes,
their life to be death, and righteousness sin, accounting their love no
better then hatred.

Fourthly, the natural man has many goods, wife, Children, life, riches,
knowledge, wisdom, will, glory, honor, name, and all things as his own
proper, these he arrogates to himself; to these he applies his mind; these
are pleasant, profitable, and dear unto him. But if they be taken from him,
and God exact his own, then the thief appears, neither will he willingly
send them again: he turns himself, and seeks for all safegards and ways
of escape, and means whereby he may retain them still, and award God the
proper owner of them, who now exacts them of him: the whole World lies sick in
this misery, and those things that are Gods, are abused by men. And what is
common to all, or rather accommodated from God, he labors as much as in him
lies to make it his own, and whenever he is to restore it again, he does
it very unwillingly.

But if it be so, that that which he has stolen from God, is now no longer
profitable or delitefull unto him, he then surrenders it of his own accord.
And if it so be, God gives it again into his own bosom, and if it be Gods
will, he shall retain it longer, yet will he not retain it, if he be able to
resist it, by compulsion; if he have it, it is with great resistance, so that
before God he rather wilful casts them away, then retains them.

So is it that the flesh, which has all things out of God, offends in all; and
because it apprehends al things out of God, it necessarily follows, that
although it have all things, yet has it nothing. For what can it have who
wants God, the essence of all things, and in whom all things subsist: Surely
they can be no other then like Tantilus Sicicus, and Medeas. Again, what can he
want who has God, and in him all things, since that God is all in all.

Hence it is, that often times those that seem to have all things, have truly
nothing, and those that have nothing, may truly be said to have all things.

On the contrary, the new Man has nothing but only God, wherein he can glory;
neither does he any way claim any thing to himself but God; As for that which
God gives him, he uses it for Gods sake as his gift and reward, ready to
render it every moment, as it shall please God to exact it; For he can
willingly restore that which he did never claim as his own, but as God did
give, or rather lend it unto him; so that he willingly permits God at his
pleasure to assume it from him. Breefly, he uses all things as the traveller
does his Inn, or a friend money, committed to his custody, ready every hour
to restore it back.

This Paul terms so to have any thing as not to have it, or as though thou
had it not: (which in the eyes of the World is accounted mere folly) that is
that thou arrogate nothing unto thy self; offend in nothing willingly, forsake
all things and with God (as a true wife with her husband have all things
common) Wife, Children, Money, life, and all things else he loves in God, and
for God; and therefore keeps them, loves them, has them, and takes them as lent
from God; ready to yield them to God again, whenever he requires them; all
the gifts of God, as Wife, Children, and all other things he loves only for
the givers sake, and the giver above all his gifts; and although some things
are contrary to his nature, as the Cross, death, exyle, etc. yet he loves
all things alike, and this it is to have, know, love, and marie in the Lord.

But the world and worldly minded men, are carried headlong unto the gifts of
God, as the Sow unto the Dunghill; Never do they any whitt respect the giver
but the gift; with the which they committ adultery, challenging by right unto
themselves; and so long as it is either pleasant or profitable unto them, so
long they dearly esteem it: and willingly will not permit God to have it
again; whatsoever is contrary unto them therein, that they unwillingly suffer,
though it come by divine providence; unto them; for incontinently they look
about them which way they may pull their necks out of the yoke: and therefore
whatsoever they undertake, do, speak, etc. that they altogether abuse; and in
the abuse it is altogether unfitt for any good: until they cease to be that
which they are, and being translated into Christ, become in him new creatures.

Here it will avail nothing to patch up with God, for if thou stopp one hole,
or fill up one crevist, an other will presently be made; therefore it is
necessary that men be borne again, and altogether forgett this Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil. And breefly, be quit contrary to what he is or
has been. He is flesh born of flesh unto death, and therefore it is
behovefull, that he be made spirit borne of spirit unto life. Which before he
be all things are unclean unto him; as he is himself, although all things in
themselves are very good; yet are they perverse and evil unto him, as all
things seem blew to him that looks upon them through a blew perspective: all
things degenerats into the nature of the possessor, and therefore all things by
Adam are made vanity, although by themselves (as ever they have been) they are
good: For all food is savory according to the pallet and temperature that
receivs it: even so is every thing according as he that possesses and has it,
is clean to the clean, unclean to the unclean; it cannot be otherwise but
that all things be unjustly done, loved, prayed for, known, and retained;
which an unjust man does love, pray for, know, and retain, as the very words
themselves declare; For how can it be that a wicked man can do any thing
justly, a foolish man speak any thing wisely, an unclean man do any thing
purely, a lying man speak any thing truly.

Fifthly, the natural man, as before has been said, is Flesh, borne of the
flesh, altogether of an unclean nature, perverse, and adulterous, the servant
of Satan sprung of the Seed of the Serpent, seduced and turned away by his
word, and the tree of knowledge; and so infected with poison, that betwixt
Lucifer and Adam there is no difference: for as al true Christians are of
Christ the sons of God, gods and God himself, so are all the Sons of the
Devil, the Devil, being of the same kindred and offspring, appertaining to the
same Kingdom and covenant, as Princes and Subjects to the same, being al in
the same estate of condemnation, neither is there any remedy to preve^t this
jayle; but that a man put of the old man, so as he be no longer man, but a new
offspring and creature born of God. Hence we may easily gather what is the
natural prudence, justice and knowledge of man, to wit, foolishnes, sin and
enmity unto God; because that all flesh is an enemy unto God, friends unto
Satan, and altogether of the same wit, nature, will, and birth, and as it were
his flesh and blood; In so much as he is nothing but an enemy unto God; can
perceive nothing that is divine; would be nothing but with out God, or rather
his own God.

Attributing all that is good to himself, as Adam and Lucifer did, the Father
of the flesh; these are the Fruits of the forbidden Tree.

But the Christian is borne of God, is a spirit and life, altogether of divine
nature, and nothing else but the Jmage of God; or if you will a visible and
corporal God; who being made one with God, is of the same nature: rich in love,
desirous of the common profitt; attributing nothing to himself; like to God;
free, strong, void of propriety, ambition, and anger.

Breefly, or in a word, whatsoever can be said or may be said of God, may in
its kind be said of the true Christian, since now it is not, he that lives but
Christ lives in him: Not now he is any thing, but God is all things in him:
that is, whatsoever he speaks, teaches, has, wills, etc. and although they
unwillingly carry the old man about them, yet never do they live unto him, but
always contrary, earnestly endeavoring themselves against him, until they
have quit put him out.

Therefore to conclude this chapter, the true use of all things is known only
to the sincere Christians, and the abuse to the natural man: Not yet
justified, living in himself: who can neither use, speak, teach, do, love,
know, have, or not have any thing truly; But with all has a defiled, both
conscience and mind.

Hence it is that he is altogether unfitt for any good work, like a black
Collier; and in all his actions like a stage player, foolish, blind, dumb,
deaf, abscene, and wicked. In a word, whatsoever evil man has, or title can
be invented, it is proper unto him, until he return from the Tree of Knowledge
of Good and Evil; unto the Tree of Life, and eating thereof, and he be
delivered from the Kingdom of Darkness into the Kingdom of Light: Otherwise
the flesh does always retain its proper nature, and has in all things a
false and ungodly cause and end, for which it does every thing that it does. In
a word, he altogether aims at himself, yea under a pretense of God; although
he think himself to know, love, and desire God only for God, without any
respect had to himself. No man has yet truly learned to know himself, the
flesh being so cunning and crafty to excuse it self, no man knows whether or
no he sins in all his works, so unsearchable is the craftines of the heart;
yea no man truly understands, that in all his works, as in his loving, doing,
speaking, knowing, praying, giving, willing, having, possessing, etc. he
mortally sins, until he be redeemed and pulled out of the dregs of Adam, and
translated into Christ, he become a new Creature; Of which things read Paul
and Boch^us, de consolalatione Philosophiae, the third Book and the tenth
Proof: How we must live unto God, and so be made blessed in him.

CHAP. IV. How Man being of God could sin; and what it was that moved him to
sin.
ADAM was not taken out of God, or made of a Spirit, but of nothing of the
Earth; if he had been taken out of God, he could never have fallen by sin; as
those that are borne of God cannot sin, Jo. 3. but God created him of
nothing, and then left him to himself and his own arbitrament whether he
could return to his own nothing again, or according to the order of his
kind be drawn unto God. Sin in Man and in the Devil is nothing else but
that they do avert themselves from the condition of their creation, and that
which they are unto their vanity and nothing again; the essence of Man and
Satan is very good, put this is their nature acquired in their fall, that they
strive to be not that which they are, to wit, nothing, but that which ^hey are
not, and so do turn themselv; from As if it so were, that that nothing of
theirs were something in it self.

This is sin, this is that devil in all our hearts, which stirs up all
sin in us: For as soon as Adam by the instinct of the Serpent fell away from
God, and returned unto his nothing again, he was indeed made nothing: which
thing Satan, who before had fallen into his nothing, did spinne and weave into
the heart of Adam, by the external object of the tree; and he made the Fruit
of the Tree so pleasant to behold, that no sooner they beheld it, but they
were inflamed with a desire to eat of that Fruit; For which cause it is
written (Ier. 9.) that death enters in by the windows, that is by the sight of
the eyes.

And this moved the Schoolmen to define sin to be nothing, that is, no
Creature of God: Neither that death which it produced: both which came into the
world by the malice of Satan; and for the same cause sin brought man back
again into his first nothing; wherefore the Devil and Adam are run out of the
sight of God; He not acknowledging them for his own: neither having any
commerce or society with them: So long as they do not acknowledge their
vanity; therefore since man by sin is made nothing before God; and yet will not
acknowledge himself to be nothing, but even then esteem himself to be
something, it is necessary that so long he be expelled out of the presence of
God, till he be made nothing in his own heart: then does God love his hand,
and creates him again of nothing: For God knows not how to create any thing of
something, but of nothing, for that is his nature: He that yet is not nothing,
he cannot hope that he shall be something; wherefore behave thy self to
Godward quietly, like a livelesse trunk, as thou did in thy creation: Suffer
God to do; Fast, Feast, and Rest, and do thou nothing at all; least it happen
that thou be taken with a desire of the forbidden tree, or any other thing; or
esteem thy self to be something according as the Law commands, yet does it
not cease to curse and condemn us, until it has brought us unto that
spiritual Sabbath; that so forsaken in our selves, we do no more work to our
new birth then we did to our first creation, but only suffer; So that our
actions are only to do nothing, and be like a stone or trunk; For this
desire to be something is always that which brings to nothing.

CHAPTER V. Wherefore the Tree of the Knowledge of good and evil was created,
then forbidden to Adam, and now to us, since God knew that both he and we
should eat death from the same, and what is that tree.
Wherefore was Adam and Eve forbidden this Tree, seeing to know Evil^ is not
Evil, but to do Evil. If Adam had not known good in himself, God had been
alone good in him, and he had not arrogated any thing to himself, but had
been as free from pride therein, as a bird is in her song, a horse in his
strength, a Cow in her milk, and a Tree in its fruit; but as soon as he knew
good, and considered it what it was; as a bewtifull woman does her beauty, he
arrogated it to himself, and therein became a thief unto God.

This God foreknew, and therefore was unwilling that Adam should know good,
that so he might walk in his innocence, and be ignorant both of Good and
Evil: For this cause God said unto him, thou shall not eat of it, as if he
had said beware, least thou thy self desire to know what is Good or Evil; but
suffer me to be all things, and be thou quiet in all things, that that good
which I am, and desire to work alone, I may work it in thee, to my own
praise in thee, according as I do it in the rest of the Creatures; And thus
he was forbidden to know Evil, for God knew, that as soon as Adam had smelt
what Evil was, it being of its own nature, like to him nothing, would be
pleasing to him, and so it would come to pass that he would desire and affect
the same.

Besides this another evil has rises from hence, that that evil which man
according to his nature delighted to do he denies that he has done it. Thus
pulling his own neck out of the yoke* he accuses the Serpent that it was
done by it.

Again, the good which God does in him, and which is not his own, he falsely
contendeth that he has done it himself being deceived with a presumptious
opinion of his own power and strength* this being the perverse estate and
condition into which Adam did fall willingly; therefore after that Adam was
fallen into this perverse wisdom, by eating of the forbidden Fruit, and his
own arrogancy, he was so depraved, that whatsoever he thinks, speaks, or
does, is displeasing unto God; and we all in him have eaten death, and fallen
into the same estate and condition; but after we are raised from death, and
redeemed from it again, by means of Christ, there is the same reason that the
Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil, should be also forbidden us, least
afterward we fall into the same estate again: wherefore the next way of
coming unto God is this: that now Adam with all his Children abstain from
this tree, that is, deny it, vomitt up the Forbidden Fruit, and repent himself
of his wit, as if it were foolishnes.

But when we eat of the Forbidden Fruit or Tree, God forgives us, but upon
this condition, that for ever afterward we fast, and always repent our selves
of our first eating.

This tree is planted in every one of our hearts, and is nothing else but our
own wit, reason, flesh, knowledge, and will, to which as long as we adhere,
and are not made foolish in our selves, and as little Children, we can have no
pardon from God; wherefore we must either abstain from this wisdom, and
become little Children again, or else want God; and that prohibition of God,
eat not of the tree: if thou do thou shall dye; is the same with that saying
of Christ, except ye renounce your selves, and hate your own life, ye cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God; For what was spoken unto Adam, the same also
was said unto us; neither is our estate to be amended any other ways then that
of Adams; the hearts of all are like to a vessel which smells of that matter and
meat which Adam did first power into it.

Therefore as Adam declined from God and inclined toward himself, and made
himself as it were a wise deaster, and admired himself like a little God, the
same is also fresh in every carnal heart.

Now therefore, we must labor as it were to go backward, and that inbred wit
of Adams is to be rejected and esteemed of us no otherwise then foolishnes.

Here many things are to be unlearned, and this we are to learn and know, that
all our conceit and opinion of wit is foolishnes, and that which seperates us
from God, and hinders us so that we cannot attain the true wisdom indeed; and
we must labor to be freed from the bondage of our selves. And to this work we
should all apply our selves; to wit, quietly to rest our selves, not in
knowledge, but in God known; and so affect knowledge only as an Index, which
only shows and paints out God unto us, and is of God; That is the Fruit of the
Tree of Life, and not of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; to wit, that
we permit God to be, know, love, and have all things in us, so that he speak,
work, know, and love in us nothing but himself, when, where, and wherefore he
will.

Julian the Apostate ignorant of this secret, against whom Civil writes, was
greatly offended at this: that God would have man to know neither good nor
evil, or rather that he would have Man to have, teach, be; and will nothing at
al, etc. He (I say) was offended at this.

But if the matter be brought unto the light of truth, we shall find that all
this happened because of us: even as a Father forbids and detaines a Sword from
his Son, knowing that if he had it, he would hurt himself upon it, or
otherwise abuse it; In the same manner God denied unto Adam, and also unto us,
that Tree of Knowledge, for our profit and good; Neither did he envy us
therein, but only did it to prevent the future evil, into which he foresaw we
should fall; For he knew that as soon as Adam, like God should know Good and
Evil, he would challenge the same to himself, and desire to be his own God;
otherwise God had not cared though Adam had eaten of that tree for satiety. For
as soon as Adam had eaten of it, there followed thereupon self-love, and
arrogating all things to himself, praise, and all other vices.

So God in all his commandments has respect not so much to himself as to us
and our salvation, which not he but we enjoy: as Job himself does manifestly
confess, that God is neither hurt by our sins, nor profited by our
righteousness, but still remains an eternal, perfect, and impassible God,
to whom nothing can be added or any thing detracted; though we try, yet can we
not make a Heaven, neither put the Sun out of them; nor dry up a Fountain;
but all these things remain in the same estate and condition wherein God has
placed them: He that assumes to throw a stone against Heaven, it will fall upon
his own head,

Therefore we can make God neither richer nor poorer, greater nor lesser, no he
is no way advantaged by us, though we all adhere unto him; only he has a care
on us to help us; we never deserve to be what we are, therefore we ought to
attribute the cause of all our good to him only, and give him the glory: he
has an open hand more ready to give then we are to receive; rich to all those
that call upon him; Neither does he desire any thing at our hands but only
this: that we quietly receive of him that which he is willingly pleased to
give, for he that with quietness does not receive, can have no h^pe that he
shall receive; all our wit we ought only to employ to this end, to the denying
of our selves.

This should make us nothing, children, Fools, and prostrate low at the feet
of God.

And to the effecting of this denying of our selves, all our knowledge ought to
be directed; but that knowledge only which proceeds from God, can effect it; it
can make a man nothing, a Child, a Fool, and casts him down at the feet of
God; But that knowledge that puffs up a Man, making him great and wise in his
own conceit, such being the wisdom of the World, comes not from God, but is
rather the Serpents Seed and forbidden fruit. Now every one that eats of the
forbidden Tree, for no other cause eats he thereof, but only that he may
obtain a great name, honor, titles, and glory, that he may have pre-eminence
to be counted the light of the World. And by this means he eats death in
stead of life. This the holy Scriptures testify unto us, for whereas we ought
to know and learn nothing, every man learnes to know and be wise in all things.

Now here some man might enquire, why therefore did God create the Tree, if he
foreknew that both Adam and we would eat death thereof, and not rather hinder
our sin?

I answer, that God at the first made us of earth, and assuredly did know that
we would not constantly abide in the estate of our creation, and yet he suffered
Adam to take his course, and make trial of misery; that forced through sorrow
and death he might have to God again; for so it was to be that God would create
him again out of sorrow, and make him again a new, not as before of nothing,
but with grace of himself; this God foresaw from all eternity, and therefore
suffered his fall, and gave way that man should first taste of the bitterness of
death, before that he would give him the sweetness of eternal life, by which
he might know the better what he has in God, and what that life is compared
with death, which before he tasted.

Besides it was meet that God suffered the freedom of sin, rather then
restrained it, as well for many other causes as more special for this, that
otherwise it had been coaction and force, and not liberty, and also the
goodness of God and his mercy, having no other object, could never have been
manifested in his Creature: Therefore it behoved that things should come thus to
pass by the providence of God, and yield without necessity or any fault in
God; Read Brentius lib. 4. and Ambros. in Romans 9.

CHAP. VI. Of the 2 kinds of knowledge, and Will, and how the one always
resists the other.
THere is nothing under the Sun but it may be said to be twofould, that is
Just and wicked, Good and Evil. Now just, and also that which is evil and
wicked, may in like manner be said to the twofould, the one according to the
judgment of God, and the other according to the estimation and opinion of men.

And now seeing God is a spirit, and Men flesh, contrary to the spirit, it
follows, that all their judgments, wills, knowledges, and actions, be
contrary and repugnant one to the other. Whence it is, what man calls good,
right, sweet, light, life, knowledge, wisdom, justice, etc. God esteems that
to be evil, wicked, bitter, darkness, death, foolishnes, and sin, according
as the Scriptures testify of God and of the World.

Therefore there is nothing in the world but it may be called good or evil,
according as the judgment of men are disposed, to whom it is proposed. What
God is unto the world, the same is the Devil unto God; and so on the contrary;
So that nothing can be called Evil, but all things are in their order right
and good, and evil and wicked, according as the Touchstone is, by which they
are examined.

If I say, that the Word of God is false, foolishnes and Heresy, the same is
true in the judgment and opinion of the world; and thus all things are
twofould, either good or evil; and good is twofould, as also evil: the one
truly good or evil in the sight of God, the other apparently good or evil in
the sight of Men or their opinion; so that there is a two-fould fasting,
praying, willing, etc. to wit, one that is really good in the sight of God, so
as is God himself, the author and teacher of all goodness; the other in the
sight of the World good, but in truth evil and wicked; for what seems holy in
the opinion of Men, is profane in the sight of God.

So there is a twofould knowledge and wit, the one divine of the Tree of Life,
the other humane of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. Humane wisdom is
a Fruit of the Forbidden Tree, and the root thereof is the Seed of the
Serpent, and so is mortal.

These are all the arts which Natural Men have found out, if no: without God,
yet surely not in God.

Breefly, all wit and arts, which God himself does not plant in the hearts of
Men, by the power of his spirit and Word, but acquired and gotten outwardly by
the industry and help of men are death it self, or rather a deaster; if man
do any manner of way, trust or hope in them, for they do make man no more
acceptable to God, or any way more righteous before him, then do his meat,
drink, or clothes, for all these things are out of man; and a certain
superstition and worshipping of a false God, if thou restest thy self in them;
thou may seem to thy self to be nearer unto God, because thou knows and
understands many things, being more wise and accute then some simple good man,
who cares only to know God; But in very truth, thou art no better then a fool,
who art ignorant of these; For by how much thou art wiser then others hereby,
by so much thou art worse; For since it is so, that all the knowledge of this
World, and all the righteousness of the flesh is Devilish, according as Saint
James gives this and other more opprobrious names unto it.

It follows, that by how much a man offends and grows higher, and increases
in this wit, by so much is he the worse and more Devilish, so that a good and
simple man, who cares and desires to know nothing but God, if he be compared
with him in respect of him, he may seem to be a Saint or God, and one of
those is worth a thousand of others, as holy Scriptures do testify, one
rightous man is more worth then a thousand wicked men.

The other wisdom, which in the eyes of the world is foolishnes, is that
denying wisdom, the fruit of the Tree of Life, which whosoever has, he shall
never die.

This springs up in man out of the seed of the Woman, and is given and taught
of God alone, being in its own nature, full of love, working divine solace and
is called in the holy Scriptures the Knowledge of God; because it knows nor
acknowledges nothing but God; This teaches and professes only God in the
hearts of his servants; it arrogateth nothing to it self, but as it merely
knows God; So it renders all it receives, to him again; This renewes man,
justifies him, enlives him, and makes him like unto God, but it is to be found
in no man's heart, but only in his who has given a farewell to all Earthly
pleasures, arts, will, and wit, because that since it is so that these two
knowledges are so contrary one to another, as fire is to water, it cannot be
that they should live together in one heart, but the one will expel the other,
as the day the night, and the night the day; wherefore all fleshly knowledge,
will, and wit, must be quite unlearned, and we must become little Children and
Fools again, according as the holy Scriptures testify unto us, if we would
have the true knowledge and wisdom of God to dwell in our hearts; For God
requires a free and empty soul, which he would fill with his knowledge and
goodness, and embrace as a pure and unspotted spouse, possessed with no other
love but his: He would be the only Father of the Family, and cannot endure
Satan in his Kingdom to be near unto him, who is altogether light and void of
all darkness.

Now this wisdom being humane, and a Fruit of the forbidden Tree, so is it
fleshly puffing up the possessor of it, so as it makes him provide
selfe-loving, desirous of his own profitt, bold and wicked.

In a word, it makes a man a Lucifer, and so contrary and abominable to God,
that he cannot or will not flow into his soul.

And indeed nothing so much hurts man as his own knowledge, wit, and
righteousness, etc. which makes the word of the everliving God to appear
foolishnes, and God himself, to seem Satan unto him.

Therefore as it has already been said of wit and knowledge, the same may be
said of the will of God and man.

The one cannot endure the other; No more then the spirit can endure the flesh,
life death, fire water; Therefore the wisdom of God aims at the utter
destruction of Adams life, nature, will, and wisdom, laboring to pluck us
from the duggs of humane wit, by which we are nourished.

We must therefore learn to forgett, and unlearne whatsoever Adam knew, or
does know, wills, loves, etc. and all things must be made a new in Christ, this
is the wisdom of God.

Now let us see how far we are from this, if a man have but only a thought
to learn his way presently, he thinks it is well with him, and without any
repentance he does sweetly delight himself in his own knowledge, art, and
will, and all men will be good Christians, and if God will, will compose whole
books and volumes of Christ, which they neither do nor have known; and by
this means they do so wearily employ and vex their minds through Satan's
motion, with so many questions, arts, and idle disputations, that scarcely can
they have so much time as to think of the knowledge of God; Whereas the true
knowledge of God is not learned by prying into, running over, reading, or
hearing a company of doubtful questions; as the 1. Chapt. of the German
Theology and Taulerus in many places elegantly does teach; but by patient and
obedient remaining, hearkening and attending to that which God does work in us;
For he that would be divinely wise, and learn the knowledge of God, its
needful that he hear and learn the same from God himself, he having
detained it to himself, so that it can by no means be taught of man; For as
humane arts and sciences proceed from men, and is their work; so divine
science is from God, and is the work of his only word.

For as John Stapitius says in a little book of the love of God: that those
things that cannot be known but by sense and experience, neither can they be
taught by, or learned from others. As for Example:

No man can teach another to see, hear, taste, and touch; in like manner, and
much less can any man teach another, to believe, love, hope, repent, so that
divine truth and Theology may rather be said to be experience then Arts: no
man can learn of himself the knowledge of God, love of God, Faith, and such
like, because the natural man cannot perceive things divine; nay the Letter of
the Scriptures is not able to do this: it does not begett in man any new
nature, it but shows unto him what a one he ought to be, and what he ought to
do; But yet he is, not such, neither can they make him such, but rather kill
him and slay him by showing unto him his want and misery.

Therefore is the position true, that faith and love cannot be conceived in the
heart of man by the Letter of the word; Otherwise it would be that none should
be more faithful then the Learned; and yet for the most part none are more
perverse.

The letter of the word indeed proposes faith unto us, but cannot write it in
our hearts, that being the work of the holy Ghost. Therefore that of Saint
John is always true: as the anointing teaches you; As also this, he that has
heard and learned of the Father comes unto me; For faith and love comes
into no man's heart but his who is endued with the Holy Ghost. From whose
inhabiting in our hearts, the light of faith and the knowledge of God deduce
their original; yea love it self is not begott or infused in us, but by the
holy Ghost and an affect of the love of God toward us. Wherefore the
conclusion is this: that whom the Holy Ghost does not comfort, teach and
direct, he cannot be comforted, taught, and directed to the obtaining of Life.

Now all men will say and confess, that the world is darkness, man's wisdom
is foolishnes: yet if so be you will indulge nothing unto him, but will tax his
will, wit, and designs, and say they are all foolishnes and darkness, there
is no man will confess it of himself, or that it is earthly, but every man
will egerly and earnestly contend, that his wit is heavenly and divine,
especially if it be any way exercised about Religion, when in very deed it is
nothing else but the wisdom of the flesh; Yea even that use of the holy
Scriptures, which is in the world, which are wrested and turned as every man
likes to either hand; neither can these bare words, these words of God,
containing in them the knowledge of God, which are common in every man's mouth,
profitt him any whitt: these must be tried according to the will of God, and
accordingly used. Otherwise these very words will become a very snare of Satan,
and in stead of the word of God the word of Satan to him. It is not to say how
well the wisdom of the flesh knows how to change it self into each shape,
and to flatter it self with a form of the word of God; what cannot men
pretend and undertake, to say in the name of God: pretending indeed nothing
less then the mere honor, praise and righteousness of God.

CHAP. VII. The Testimony of the Scripture, how we ought to evacuate the Seed
of the Serpent his counsel and word, and so vomitt up the Fruit of the
forbidden Tree, and purge the same away as deadly poison by the Fruit of the
Tree of Life.
THis we oftentimes read, that our wisdom is foolishnes with God. Which form
of speech we steal from Paul, and babble of it, when indeed we neither know our
own nor Paul's meaning touching it. No man remembers to renounce and give a
farewell to his own wisdom. This forsooth every man thinks is spoken of the
wisdom of Turks and infidels; As for his own wisdom, his reason being
corrupted and houlding some tenants, gathered from the holy Scriptures (though
he miserably wrest them to his own turn) yet he thinks his wisdom to be the
wisdom of God, and divine.

This every man witnesses in his own writings, in which for the most part he
goes on securely, without any doubting upon the seeming approbation of the
Scriptures, to his tenants and opinions; Not considering that this is the very
presumption of the Turks and infidels, with all Sects of false Christians,
whom I have known every one has, or would seem to have the Word of God to be
the foundation of their tenets, as the Turks and Jews think at this day,
their faith is grounded upon the Word of God.

Hence it comes to pass that every man is deceived in himself, and shutt up
to himself, from the knowledge of himself. This being it which God foresaw,
when he said that the serpent should bite the heel of the woman, that is
secretly and craftily lay snares, and deceitful ginns in the hearts of men.

Therefore know whatsoever natural man, though wise man in the judgment of
the World, yea Adam with all his offspring the whole nature of men unregenerate
knows, speaks, does, thinks, lives, etc. all this is human, the wisdom of
reason, and the counsel of the flesh, and the knowledge of that deadly and
forbidden Tree: only that rare Phoenix, which the Scriptures call the new man,
or the regenerate that has the knowledge and wisdom of God, being taught it
from above; All other things are the inventions of men, the wisdom of the
Serpent and Fruit of the forbidden Tree.

Now we have said before that the wisdom of man must be forgotten, and we must
learn to unlearne it: For as the flesh, even so the wit of the flesh, and the
righteousness thereof is nothing but foolishnes and wickedness in the sight
of God. And on the contrary, the wisdom of God, and his righteousness, is
foolishnes and wickedness in the sight of the world and to the flesh. So that
all arts and sciences, being only fleshly, are altogether vanity, filthiness,
and a Fruit of the forbidden Tree, from the which all men eat death.

It is no purpose for a man in word to deny his own wit, and yet in his heart
to extol the same as the wisdom of God; Or, secretly to be elevated
therefrom, these are but the findings out of the deceived heart of man;
outwardly sugared over by Satan with fair words; And whosoever rests and
depends upon these fair pretenses, he builds upon hell, which will all damn.
For as meat, clothes, time, place, person, and such like do make men neither
less or more acceptable to God; So all humane arts and sciences do not make
the possessour thereof one jot the better in the sight of God, if he look at
them, and (as Adam did) arrogate them to himself.

Therefore the most learned and wise of this world are in this respect in no
better a condition then the foolish Idiot that is.

It is necessary therefore that those wise men go out of themselves, and
learn to become fools, by going out of their wit, will, knowledge, etc. if
they desire to be endued with divine knowledge from above:

Therefore even as the natural man voluntarily for his own bellies sake does
torture himself day and night, in the finding out of so many covetous,
curious, and with God unprofitable arts; Even so it is necessary that with the
same pain and labor he learn to forgett and forgo the same, and become a
Child and Fool again; For it is a greater difficulty, and more labor by
many degrees to unlearne his fleshly wisdom, and forsake that good he has
got already, then from the beginning to learn it for his profitt.

In so much that this is true, who once has played the Ass, will scarcely
learn to leave those doultish tricks.

O how difficult is it for them to become Fools, who have grounded themselves
in a presumption of their own wit.

And yet it is necessary that this they must be, or otherwise they shall be
nothing less then that which they desire to be.

Therefore so requisite is this denial, hatred and forgetfulness of himself,
that without it no man can be the disciple of Christ; that is, no man can be
endued with divine wisdom, unless in his affections he has excluded, and
given a farewell and adewe to his own.

Wherefore what wonder is it if the worldly Man, who is busied about the things
of this life, be altogether ignorant of the knowledge of God; For since he is
not obedient to that wisdom that is sp^rituall, neither can perceive any
divine thing, nor receive the spirit of truth; nor for the wisdom of God
exchange his own; For he neither cares to nourish that wisdom in his heart,
neither desires to learn it, and because he desires it not, he cannot learn
it.

And now it is requisite, that as Saint Paul says, if any man will be wise,
with God he must be a fool in the World, that thereby he may become truly
wise: That is; he must cease to think, as the world does labor to get a new
mind, and deliver over his senses and thoughts to be renewd by God.

The cause of which Paul immediately annexeth to the same: For the wisdom of
the World (says he) is foolishnes to God.

And in his Epistle to the Romans he calls it death and enmity to God. And
the same Paul bids adieu to all his own wit which he had learned at the feet
of Gamaliell, above all his equals and accounts, all his own righteousness and
knowledge as dung and dross, in respect of the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ.

And elsewhere he glories in this that he had learned to unlearne and forget
all things, and now desired to know nothing but Christ and him crucified.

In the same manner all the Apostles become little Children again.

Besides, Nichodemus, and all other whosoever, (as Christ had said unto them)
unless they be changed, and become as little Children, they cannot see the
Kingdom of God.

And a little after, Christ says, that the Kingdom of God is of such little
Children.

This is the reason why the Scriptures admonish us so often to beware of our
own wit, least we do any thing that seems good in our own eyes; As also
that we resist our own wills, neither that we suffer our selves to be led, and
guided by our own affections and desires; and also those that trust in their
own hearts and obey their own cogitations, are foolish and wicked, also that
we seem not wise in our own conceits, nor magnify our selves but fear, and
in fear and trembling work out our own salvation.

And lastly, that we trust not, nor lean not to our own wit; For what is or
can be more wicked then what flesh and blood has found out.

Truly the flesh cannot of its own nature seek God, and have him in
estimation, unless it renounce it self, and hate its own life and soul;
that is all its own works; though it gloze them over with a pretense of the
word, honor and glory of God; for he cannot be believed, loved, prayed unto,
or found but only in God.

Therefore all the endeavor, study, art, and diligence of is altogether void
of God, and want his grace and spirit. For the word of God requires an humble,
submissive trembling, and abiected mind; and a soul poor in spirit, and free
from the bondag of the creatures; and like to tender wax or clay, pliable in
the finger of God to receive the figure and stamp of his image imprinted upon
it.

To these Fools and Children, such as fear God, and are separated from the
Dugges of the World, does he open his secrets, and teach his divine wisdom and
knowledge; if there be any man that fears God, to him the Lord will show the way
that he may choose, and he walk in the truth, and his posterity shall inhabit
the Land: He says not to the Learned, and to the wise of the World; as also in
an other place; the Lord reveals his secrets to the righteous. For this cause
Christ the Son of God gives thanks to his Father, that he had hidden his
secrets from the prudent and wise of the World, and had revealed unto Children
and Babes; That as we have already spoken out of the mouths of sucking Babes;
Such as were Moses, Ieremias, Amos, and the Apostles, etc. he might speak
his praise, and extol his Kingdom and Glory.

Again, the rich and proud he sends away empty, and fills only the hungry
with good things.

Now, no Money-master nor rich covetous Churl is more swollen up with the
vain confidence of his riches; nor any woman more proud of her beauty, then
these wise men pride and boast themselves of their wisdom and knowledge;
persuading themselves that this is the divine wisdom and riches of the soul,
which neither thieves can steal, nor rust canker it, nor moath corrupt it, when
notwithstanding it is nothing but mere death, foolishnes, and enmity against
God, and in a word the knowledge of the forbidden Tree.

Therefore the holy Scriptures speak expressly of the wise of the world, these
righteous men, famous for their arts, priding themselves in their own hearts,
who are arrogant and proud, and are endued with nothing less then the spirit
of God, who abides only in simple Doves.

By this it appears that no kind of men are farther from the Kingdom of God,
and do less square and agree with his word, and more disagree from his will,
then those who lean and trust to their own wisdom, knowledge, reason, and
will.

Christ in the holy Scriptures speaks not so much against Publicans and
common sinners as these, who being puffed up with a conceit of their own
righteousness, reflect upon themselves with a self pleasingnes; with these can
Christ least accord, and unto them does so often threaten woes in the
Scripture, and says that adulterers and Publicans shall enter before them into
the Kingdom of Heaven.

These are those wicked men against whom David so fervently and often prays,
and of whom Christ has so little hope, and unto whom he with his Apostles and
Steven give so cutting language; who being men of a wicked mind, would seem
nothing less; But those things which are written concerning wicked men, they
ignorantly interpret of others, these are such whom the whole world esteem and
accounts to be the shining lights thereof; Such were Nichodemus and Paul before
his conversion; these are those who in David, Moses, Christ's, and all other
times of the church have been the righteous Scribes and Pharisees with the
people; who having a show of piety, have so lived, as that they were esteemed
Patrons and Examples for others to imitate; These righteous men of the world,
the Scriptures call wicked; who want nothing but only this that they have
wicked minds, void of Faith and grace; yet they so cloak their wickedness
with a form of godliness, that they seem nothing less.

Neither think we that the times of Christ and David were only pestered with
these kind of people; But we may rather conceive, that if those goulden days
of theirs were full of such, these Iron ages of ours are much more abundant.

All times and ages have had their Dissemblers, Pharisees and Scribes, these our
last ages since are the worst, for seldom comes best things last; For the
world as it grows more aged, so it grows more wicked, as both the Scripture
and experience do testify.

Wherefore it is behovefull that every man endeavor that he be not of the
number of those men, who wresting the word of the Scriptures apply and
interpret them on others, as most men do; but in them behold himself as in a
glass, if he desire to see a wicked man, and one that is a capital enemy
against God; And let him but question with his own conscience, it is as good
as ten thousand witnesses, and then he shall easily know what a one he is.

For this cause the Scriptures are so fyerie against these Godly Wise Men of
the World; Yea denying all good to them, God in his just judgment striking
them with blindness; So that they err in their own way, hiding himself and
his word from their understanding.

Besides, the Scriptures do brand them with a thousand infamous names; Calling
them Wolvs, a generation of vipers, Bears, Bulls, Sons of Beliall, painted
Sepulchers, who are glorious in show in the sight of men, and set forth
themselves as righteous before men by their sage manners, modest habits, and
grave gestures, when in the sight of God they have their hearts full of nothing
but filthiness and sin. Of whom Christ says, that unless we be more
righteous then they, and exceed them, we shall never enter into the Kingdom
of God. Nevertheless they would not seem to be what they are indeed, but
cover themselves with a show of Sanctity. Wherefore it pleases the spirit of
God to check and rebuke them to the discovering of their secret houlds, and
vizards of their faces; But he who accuses himself, and denies himself
before God, and in his presence, shall obtain pardon, as the Scriptures
testify; which reprehend those carnal spiritual spirits, or men, who place
their state with God, and will be ignorant of nothing, and they are admonished
by God in Solomon's Proverbs, that they would desist from this their arrogancy;
Otherwise they shall be so oppressed with the glory and Majesty of God, that
they shall not be able to endure and stand; But those who humbly submitt
themselves, and creep unto God, and willingly know nothing, nor are nothing
but what God knows and is in them, they in not seeking find that which the
other seeking with great auxiety of mind shall never obtain; For all things
are theirs, and they know what God is, has or knows, because they in God and
God in them inhabits and dwells:

Hence it is that Paul says, the spiritual man searches all things, yea the
secret things of God; which is denied to the foolish flesh, according as we may
read in the Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes, for in counsel of the wicked there is
no health, no word of God, knowledge, or love.

To the same purpose is that saying of Solomon, God made man at the first
upright, but he found out to himself many inventions, many difficults, many
labors, with which he does weary and vex himself; God that is good, simple,
and just, commands him that he should know nothing but him, and follow and be
obedient to him as all the rest of the Creatures; He should (I say) be so
obedient to him, as to do, know, will, love, omit, and speak nothing but
only what God does know, will, love, omit, and speak in him, by which as in
all other Creaturs so in the heart of man he might enjoy a plenary Kingdom,
and ruling and governing him according to his own will, neither should man have
any title, claim, power, or privilege over himself.

Satan suggestion it was that man found out so many ambushes and curious
questions, with frivilous difficulties, by which he is degenerated from that
simplicity wherein God created him, and subordinated him, being transported
with an ambitious desire, to become a Lord and God to himself; and so remained
in the power of his own will; but how just this is, let man that has reason
judge, that the clay should desire to know or be any thing contrary or besides
that which the maker thereof would have it, know, or be; such similitudes does
not yet fully express the matter.

Therefore it happens deservedly unto us, that our wisdom, knowledge, and
will, should bring upon us all punishment due unto sin, and also make us
utterly disquieted, bringing unto us nothing but torture and vexation, since
besides and contrary to the will of God we have deserved them.

Hence it necessarily follows, that sin is the punishment of it self, and
Fools are destroyed by their own wisdom and knowledge.

This is that which Solomon experimently complains off, when he says: where
there is much knowledge, there is much vexation; And he that increases
learning sorrows. And these wise men are Fools, for whosoever endeavors to
be wise above measure, this man shall endure greiffes and sorrows; and by how
much they become more wise, by so much they are more disquieted: For God will
have us to find rest in him only.

Neither must we rise, come, go, or do any thing before him; For whosoever
comes before him is a thief, and whosoever speaks or does any thing of his
own accord, without him, is a Devil.

Therefore it is that all men are deluded, deceived, and fooled by their own
wit; yea even because they profess themselves to be wise, therefore they are
foolish.

And as God did the Caldean, Philosophers, and wise men, so he suffers those to
be seduced by their own knowledge, and to be wearied with their own
inventions, actions, and arts.

Hence it is that Christ would not have his disciples desire to be esteemed
some bodies, or couett that men should call them Masters, Lords, Doctors, or
Rabbis, but only Ministers, Brethren, and witnesses of him, Ioh. 15. Ye are
my witnesses.

CHAP. VIII. Of the great Deaster of humane wisdom and knowledge; and how all
men do kiss their own hand, and all the World adores it self, and its own
work; that is, inventions, actions, and deliberations of Fleshly reason and
wisdom.
What other thing is the worshipping of Images, Superstition, and the
Institutions of men, then the reason, wit, art, invention, and prudence of man.

Therefore the worshipping of Deasters is nothing but the adoring of the images
of God, not according to his Word as he does teach, figure and form it to us,
but according to our own opinion and self conceit.

Again, what other thing is sin then our own will, wit, and counsel,
sown unto us with the Seeds of the Serpent. Consider the institutions,
practice, and Life of all Mankind, when and how you will, you shall find it
nothing else then humane wisdom; here every man would be his own God, guide,
govern, teach move, revenge, defend, excuse, and enrich himself; and every
man sets his own brain, will, and reason in the place of his God, so that
sin and the fall of Adam is nothing else but the humane affectation of the
art, reason, and knowledge of the flesh; and therefore deservedly is termed
foolishness and enmity, deadly and Devilish.

All men ought with Christ to become nothing, and with a continual decrease
and depression of soul, become asses, fools and children; but now it is quite
contrary: every man labors that he may be wise, great, illustrious and
mighty; so many arts and sciences are learned of men, that they may be great,
famous, and excellent in the eyes of the world; and may obtain titles of
honor, and names of respect.

Hence it is that young men are inflamed with a desire of glory, and labor not
only to be famous in Schools, but to be admired in the pulpitt also; and for
that end they seek out learned Tutors, who may make them expert, quick, and
acute in all kind of Literal deceits and exercises of arts. By which it is as
clear as the Sun that the whole world is contrary and enmity to God. Here
every man kissing his own hand and adoring his own wit, esteeming it to be
his light and his God; Even it that was the only sin of Adam; and it from
whence other sins came and have their original, as Job confesses; (Job. 33.
31.) For to admire and worship himself, and to be led by his own will; In a
word, to stand on his own bottom, and to desire to be something of himself
without God, is that one mortal sin, which is the fountain of al other; for
the lusts of the flesh, and the wit thereof is very dead.

And man like a Logg, is no better then dead; but while he does nothing, knows
and desires nothing, but keeping a holy Sabbath or rest; dies wholly unto
himself; and being void of will or wit, resignes himself over unto God, and
permits him to know and do in him, what, when, and how he will.

And now the whole world lies overwhelmed with this sin; in so much that it
does no other but adore the work of its own hand, that is its own invention,
counsels, comments, and wisdom. To this purpose all things are directed,
intented, and wrested; yea the very Scriptures themselves, the word of God;
that it may be agreeable to our corrupt reason, and not hinder the course of our
carnal and fleshly wit, and knowledge, but all these things must be
unlearned and cast away if we will see God. And therefore the Scriptures urge
so often times, that we should become Fools, little Children, and purge
ourselves with the Fruit of the Tree of Life, that we may vomit up that
poysonfull wit and knowledge of the Forbidden Fruit.

CHAPTER IX. That the Tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil, planted in the
heart of Adam, is the Seed, word, and spirit of the Serpent and that great
D^^aster, Antichrist, sin, death, the Devil, and that Beast, which is
mentioned in Daniell, and the Apocalips, which is the greatest and commonest
Idolatry.
1. What is that Beast of which Daniell writes, which speaks against the
highest, and slays the Saints of God?

2. What is that Serpent who deceived Adam and Eva?

3. What is the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil?

4. What is that impudent King and Antichrist, of whom Daniell and Paul
speaks, 1 These. 2?

5. What is that many headed Monster, mentioned in the Apocalypse, whom the
whole World does worship?

6. What is sin? What death? What the Devil?

I answer: it is every man's own carnal wit and reason, righteousness, and
the like; For which cause Paul calls it death, enmity, and foolishness unto
God; and Saint James calls it earthly, humane, and devilish, because these
three are one; For whatsoever is humane, is worldly, and Devilish; and
whatsoever is Devilish, is Earthly. For the Devil and Man, Adam and the
Serpent, are sworn Brethren, yea both one; For the Serpent has so shed his
wisdom, and fained righteousness into the heart of Adam, that the Seed of the
Serpent and his word are incorporated and made man, so that now the same thing
may be said of both.

And even as those that are borne of God, and in whom the Word of God is
incorporated, are called God, or one spirit with God: So all men borne of flesh
and blood, before they be regenerate and planted into Christ, may be called
Devils; and so whatsoever is Earthly, may be said to be Devilish, and
whatsoever is Devilish, may be said to be Earthly.

Again, what is the Fall of Adam but only the wisdom of the Serpent and Fruit
of the forbidden Tree? What is that old Dragon, who ascends out of hell? and
with his tail draws a great part of the Stars of Heaven after him? But
only the wisdom of the Flesh, which does extol it self against God, and
desires to become a God unto it self?

What are the thoughts of the Flesh? What is sin? what pride? But the wisdom
and Fruit of the Forbidden Tree.

What are the Decrees of Men? The works of reason against God? Men's
inventions, knowledge, and books? But only the are of the Devil, Eaten of
the Tree.

What is all the worship of Images and all false Religions? as of Jews,
Turks, infidels, and all false Christians. What are all Sacraments,
Assemblies, and Ceremonies? But an apple of this Forbidden Tree: which bearing
a show to be of the Tree of Life, offers unto Men, pleasant Fruit to his eye,
that is, reason which whosoever eats, he shall find to be deadly.

No man can fully express that idolatry, with which all the corners of the
world and hearts of men are stuffed up; and who is it that does not adore
himself, and says to his hand, wisdom, and reason, his art and his
knowledge, thou art my God, in thee I trust, in thee J hope.

Indeed men say not this with their mouth, but surely in their lives, works,
and hearts, they plainly testify as much.

Hence all men deny that there is a God, and testify the same by their works;
For if they think there is a God, wherefore do they not resign vengeance unto
him? Wherefore are they so doubtfully distracted? Wherefore do they forge such
wicked deceits, to deceive one another? Wherefore do they so war upon one
another (whether with right or injustice it matters not) and contend together
for mine and thine? Why do they lie, cogg, and flatter one another? Wherefore
do they labor night and day to get and heap up riches? Wherefore are they so
forgetful of the word of God, and so little esteem his precepts and
commandments? But that they think God cares not for them, or that he cannot
or will not revenge them; therefore it is necessary that they help and revenge
themselves; or that they think that while to long to wait and expect the help
of God, before that he take vengeance and punishment they themselves shall be
overthrowen; And because they think that nothing but poverty comes upon them,
if they have any commerce and communion with the truth of God; therefore it is
necessary that they help themselves, and labor for their living, by lying,
cogging, deceiving, and usury, and the like; this makes a man rich and
honorable. As for the word of God that is but a late help, and deficient in
adversity; it stands us in hand, therefore to adore our selves, speak big
and swelling words; elevate our selves as much as we can. Who but my self is
God? says the world in the course of her Life.

CHAPTER X. An answer to certain objections, that we ought to be wise, and
not fools; and how we ought to be wise, and how foolish.
But you will say, that the learned shall shine as the Stars or Sun in
Heaven, and in a thousand places we are commanded to apply our hearts unto
wisdom, as in the Proverbs and Eccles. wise men are commended?

To which I answer, that it is rightly spoken, if it be rightly understood, to
wit, of the tree divine and heavenly knowledge, which God himself does work
and teach in those that are poor in spirit; I say, it is understood of the
wisdom of the tree of life; and not of the deadly and foolish wisdom of the
Flesh, which is the knowledge of good and evil; and the Scriptures will have
us to acknowledge our folly, and to be made fools in our own judgment, (and
indeed we are so, but we would not be accounted so) and forget all things
whereby we may become truly wise, and receive the influence of divine knowledge
into our souls; For we are all foolish and wicked, and we will not see and
perceive it, nor believe it; and therefore God would have us by confessing our
folly in true simplicity, to give a farewell unto it, and by submitting our
selves over unto God, be made truly wise and learned by him.

Hereupon it is that Solomon calls them fools, whom Paul calls wise and
prudent; Solomon calls them what they are indeed in the sight of God; but Paul
calls them what they seem to be in their own eyes, and in the sight of men: We
must unlearne, and therein strive to be fools in that wherein we learn and
strive to be wise in; But as it is given us of God, so it can be learned from
none but God; and as the love of God shed abroad in our hearts, begets a
mutual love of him again; Even so Gods knowing of us, begets in us a
knowledge of him, as Paul witnesses to the Gal: after that ye knew God, or
rather are known of him.

As also to the Phill. I desire to know* as I am known. And also 1. Ioh. 3. He
first loved us. Also in another place: if any man love God, he is borne of God.
Out of all these places I gather, that God is never known, loved, sought, or
found of us, until we be known, loved, sought and found of God; as Christ
says to the Pharisees: the Kingdom of God is in you; and Paul to the
Athenians: He is not far off from every one of us; for in him we live, move,
and have our being. But this is most miserable and lamentable, that those who
profess themselves to know God, know him not as they ought; as Paul testifies
of the world: If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.
And again: if any man seem to know any thing, he knows nothing as he ought.

We should know this, that by nature we know nothing, but are altogether
blind, dead, and foolish in spiritual things; and th^s knowledge should make
us nothing, foolish and Children in our own eyes; But we desire to know, and
seem wise, whereby it comes to pass that we know not how, or for what end we
ought to learn knowledge, for wisdom is not given unto us for this purpose,
that thereby being puffed with pride, we extol our selves, and become
something in the eyes of the world, but on the contrary to make us nothing.
This is the knowledge of God, that makes us Fools and Children to our selves
and the world: it does not puff us up, making us seem wise in our own
opinion; Noe, for that is the knowledge of the Serpent, both most devilish and
deadly.

Thus you see that the whole world knows not what, how, and for what end they
should desire to know, but always strives against God in their knowledge; and
know not of what things they ought to be ignorant off, but chiefly are desirous
to know those things they ought to be ignorant off; and so by their own art
and knowledge make themselves Fools.

Breefly, that which they do know and do desire to know, that they should
learn to unknow; and what they resist to know that they should learn to know,
otherwise God will never acknowledge them for his own, because God has
determined never to acknowledge, crown or reward any thing in us, but his owns
gifts and works, that is never to love or accept any thing in us but
himself: For he alone is the Light, Life, the way, and the truth, so that
whosoever is not in him, or he in them, they always wander in the paths of
error and shadow of death. Now every man knows what it is to walk in darkness.
The walls of Jerusalem were not to be opened before the Sun did rise; even so
should no man intend to go forth before the Son of righteousness arose in
his heart; since all things depends upon him, and be should be our Teacher and
Example, by whose instruction we should learn, and by whose Example we should
walk, as the Scriptures testify.

It is an easy thing to say, that the world is in darkness, and incapable of
the spirit of truth: but no man will either acknowledge or believe himself to
be the world, or that the whole world to God is all Flesh as the Sons of
Adam all were natural men, with the universal righteousness, reason, and
wisdom therein; but by the world men think to be understood, the Turks,
Gentles, and Heathens; and I know not what people of the farthest parts of the
world, attributing so much to arts, tongues and Scriptures, which they almost
prefer above the spirit; and if a man do read and have a Bible, they think
it enough, and that by which they may easily obtain the Holy Ghost; not
considering that either the Holy Ghost must be their guide, and enlighten them
in the knowledge of the word, or otherwise it is but a dead Letter; and is so
far from bringing Life with it, that it mortifies and kills the Reader: as
Paul implies, where he says, the spirit quickens and not the Letter.

The Jews in ancient times, and so men in these days do boast themselves of
the word of God, and are strongly persuaded, that out of it they are able to
gather Life to their souls; but they are far deceived.

Wherefore Christ says: In whom think ye to have Life. As for the Scriptures
his testimony of them is this, that they are them which testify of him.

Therefore all arts and knowledges are no ways the cause of Life; but the
knowledge of Life to know him in and with God; wicked nature has always a
perverse end, proposed to it self, and therefore it desires to know all
things, not for God but for its own sake; therefore all things are to the
flesh (as it is its self) vain and perverse, if the learning of so many arts
had been necessary to salvation, God had created and taught them in the
beginning; Neither would be have suffered that men should so long have wanted
that, without which they were not able to attain to Life; but because they
were formed out by men, and still are found out by them, though no man be any
whitt the more unhappie, if so be he never know any thing of them; Yea he were
more happy if he could unlearne them, though with greater difficulty then he
learned them; you may by the Tree conjecture what the Fruit is, what humane
arts and sciences are: to wit, the Fruit of the forbidden Tree; How then can
they conduce any thing unto Life, being the only precepts and in, ventions of
men.

Therefore very well in praise of that word of God does Cornelius Agrippa call
all arts and actions of men mere ignorant fables and foolishnes, in his Book
de vanitate Scientiarum. The beginning and end whereof we have putt in this
Book, that we may not seem alone with Ernestinus to contemn arts and praise
folly.

Wherefore if thou lean unto arts, please and boast thy self in them, having
any hope or accounting thy self any thing better for them, they will prove
death unto thee, for they do no more conduce to thy happiness then garments,
time, place, or such like circumstances: But as they are the inventions of the
flesh, so do they produce no other thing in thee then the works and Fruits of
the flesh, to wit, self-love, pride of spirit, contempt, disdain, security,
and such like; And this is verified by experience, for no men are more
perverse, crafty, and covetous, then these wordly wise and learned men be,
being men drowned in their own self-love, esteemed of themselves worthy to be
beloved and reverenced of all; full of rash judgment, lovers of all pleasures,
and so full of all vices: that the whole world gives creditt to no men less,
speaks worse of no men more: being full of taunting and reproaching proverbs
against them; such as these, the better learned, the worser mannered, the
better Scoller the worser Christian. No man scapes scotfree out of the claws
of a priest. He that will have an honest house, must keep it free from Priests,
Apes, and Doves. A monk dare do as much as he dare think. These and such like
proverbs are common in every man's mouth; which arise from this that they are so
swollen with the poison of the fruit of the forbidden tree, so puffed up with the
false opinion of their own wisdom and righteousness, that no rich man is
more insolent by reason of his riches, then these perverse wise men are by
reason of their arts and knowledge; So that it is as easy to remove Cyrus out
of his Kingdom, as one of these wise men out of his opinion and tenent; And
truly it cannot be but by how much a man is more wise in the art of the
forbidden tree, by so much he is more miserable, as Christ witnesses in the
gospel: that the multitude of their arts and knowledge is an impediment why
they come not into the Kingdom of God, and publicans and harlots enter in
before them.

Therefore these men are to perish with their arts, and to depart empty, and so
far is any of them from leaving his art, wisdom, knowledge, and
righteousness, that he esteems these to be the good and riches of the soul,
which neither thieves can steal, nor moathes corrupt, when in very deed they
are nothing but the inventions of Satan, fruits of the forbidden tree, and the
death of the soul; For the life of the soul is the true knowledge of God,
which himself does work and teach in us, to wit, the fruit of the Tree of
life, whose fruit is that it makes a man gentle, loving, humble, lowly, meek,
etc. By this let a man examine himself, with what wit and righteouseesse he
is endued; For if day by day, he be less in his own eyes and in the judgment
of the world; if he seem still more foolish in himself, and a Child in his
own thoughts, his knowledge is divine the Seed of the Woman, a Fruit of the
Tree of Life; but if he find contrary effects in himself, then is all his
wisdom Devilish, the Seed of the Serpent and Fruit of the Forbidden Tree, and
so the death of the soul.

CHAP. XI. Of the Tree of Life, what it is? why Adam was excluded from it, and
not permitted to eat thereof.
I also grant thus much, that this Tree was visible in Paradise, and had this
divine virtue bestowed upon it, that whosoever eat thereof, should live for
ever; But whereas Adam before had eaten of the Forbidden Tree, and had incurred
death, therefore he should not eat of this Tree of Life, least otherwise he
should have lived for ever; and in a word, God should have been false in his
word, which was that he should dye the death, but God who is Life it self,
would not for ever be angry with his Creature, but was unwilling that man
should for ever live in that misery, into which he had cast himself, and
therefore drove him out of Paradise, and afterward showed him the way by which
he should return into Paradise again, and eating of this Tree live for ever;
and then gaurded the Tree of Life with a Cherub and a flamming sword, least man
in his exile should have presumed to have come to this Tree, and have eaten
thereof.

The will and counsel of God was that it was better that man should dye in the
flesh, and so putt of this miserable life, and change it for a better, then
live in it for ever.

Therefore God who cannot nor will not hate us, dealt every way most merciful
with us, if so be we would truly consider of it.

Now do J think that the same also happened in the true Paradise of Ada^s
heart, the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, is the Seed, Knowledge, and
wisdom of the Serpent: And the tree of Life, is the Seed of the Woman, and the
wisdom of God; and these two Trees are, as God and Satan; so contrary one to
another, that the one brings Life unto us, and the other death.

Therefore he that eats of the one, its impossible he should eat of the
other, because they are divided by a flying Cherub and a flaming sword; which I
interpret, sin and disobedience, which sometimes in the Scriptures is called
a partition wall.

For he that eats of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, that is he
that is possessed with a Diabolical wisdom of the Flesh, he cannot eat the
Tree of Life; that is, he is departed from divine knowledge and wisdom that
proceeds from God: For these two wisdoms are incompitable, they cannot be in
one and the selfsame heart, being as contrary one to the other, as heaven to
hell; He that eats of the Tree of Life, and is pertaker of divine knowledge,
he cannot dye, neither sin; For this Fruit eats the eater of it, and
changes him into its own nature, into Life, as the Scriptures do testify of
those that do eat the flesh of Christ.

For it is one and the same thing, to eat Christ, to live in his word, to eat
of the Tree of Life, to believe in God, etc. as it is also the same thing to be
in Adam, to live in Adam, to eat of the Tree of Knowledge, of Good and Evil,
to obey the word of Satan, and be God.

Therefore those that eat of this deadly Tree, and adhere to the word and
wisdom of the Serpent, and are borne of Satan, these cannot do any thing that
is pleasing unto God. As on the contrary the other does not any thing that is
displeasing unto him.

Therefore he that would be the one, must bidd adieu to the other: He must putt
off the wisdom of the Serpent, and vomitt up the Fruit of the Forbidden Tree,
who would eat of the Tree of Life.

Adam must dye in us, and the wit of the Flesh must be unlearned of us, if we
would have Jesus Christ to live in us, and obtain the direction of the holy
spirit; For the death of the one is the life of the other; the infirmity of the
one is the strength of the other.

No man can serve two Masters, neither is it possible to unite Adam, God, and
the Devil together.

CHAP. XII. The praise of the Word of God, on which alone man ought to build,
rest, reside, and it only know, if he will remain unshaken in adversity, have
his Faith manifest and approved, and find quietness to his Soul.
INdeed there be many arts profitable to the body, which God the belly has
created, and yet does daily find out, which truly bring much profit to the
kitchen; and only serve, worship, and obey their God the belly most zealously,
as it is expedient they should. But as the common proverb is, that which is
profitable to the body: does often hurt the soul, and that which is the
bellies and flesh, as life, food, and plenty, is often times the death of the
soul, and a mere poison unto it, because the spirit is contrary to the flesh.

Hence it comes to pass that table or belly arts, because they be the Fruit,
offspring, and wit of the flesh, are altogether vain, famine, and death unto
the soul. And on the contrary, that only art, the end whereof, was not for
God bellies advantage; which the whole world does so much slight and little
regard, that only true wisdom and Theology, to wit, God and the knowledge
of his Word in him; together with the knowledge of him divinely infused into
our souls, is the sole art only necessary to man's salvation.

Therefore the true, heavenly, and divine art, the true tree of Life, of which
whosoever eats has everlasting life.

Furthermore I say, this art is the Food, Wine, Milk, excellency, defense
and all whether the profitt, pleasure or advancement of Souls; All other arts
being vain, doubtful, and the poison of the Soul, hurtful and deadly to the
Spirit of Man, if he lean upon them, rest in them, glory in them, or build
his happiness upon their sandy foundation. In a word, they are the fruit of
the Tree of Knowledge of Good and evil, of which whosoever eats, as J have
amply proved, he shall dye the death.

Therefore I desire that we would not be to righteous nor wise in our own
eyes; As Solomon (Eccles. 8. as also Proverbs 3.) does faithfully instruct us:
that we should esteem nothing to be our wisdom, righteousness, or any other
virtue in us, but only to know God in and with himself, and love, praise,
worshipp, fear, honor, and understand him as we ought. Which thing must
necessarily proceed from God himself, being the work of his eternal, and
in it self everlasting and immutable word, which without spokesman from him
proceeds out of his mouth: that he speaks in our hearts, teaches himself in
our souls, imprinting and engraving his Image in us, thereby enlightening so
our understanding, that to speak in a word, he so teach, love, know,
understand, pray unto, hear, guide, govern and worshipp himself in us.

All other things whatsoever are to dull, and all the virtue of things are to
base, that they should be able to teach us God, and give us everlasting
felicity; or that God by them should give it unto us.

God will be himself, teach himself, give, and convay himself into our
hearts: Neither will he suffer his honor to be given to any Creature, that
by it we should be saved or sanctified; but he that hears and learneth it
of the Father comes unto him.

He will himself be the Master of spirits; and so a spirit shall be taught of
a spirit. And all those that are divinely instructed of the all-knowing and
understanding God, shall be said truly to be learned and wise.

The flesh has teachers, who belonging to the old covenant, have commerce
with the flesh. The new covenant, because it is spirit and Life, and in like
manner has a spiritual and new birth of God to be instructed, has also a
spiritual word and Master to instruct it, which is the word and spirit of Life.

Therefore if any man would know himself, submitt himself quietly to the
direction, and permit himself to be spoken too, sought and found in him; He
surely should be elevated to a wonderful Light; if any man I say does follow
the instruction and Doctrine of the Father in himself, he verily should find
God in God and with God. But the world busied and accupied in the Creatures
passes away in a confusion, and not considering the hidden and secret treasure
that is closed in his heart; Neither seeks for this precious Pearl, but
covered all over with the earth of the Creatures, remains in darkness with
the multitude of his arts and sciences; weary, ignorant, and void of all true
arts and sciences; yet does he in the mean space learn art after art, further
and further searches into the my fiery of knowledge.

And to use the words of Saint Paul, is always learning, and never able to
come to the knowledge of the truth; but the more he learneth, the more perverse
he is; and to such a madness does he come at last, through his overmuch
wisdom, that he quite forgets what to say, babble, determine, believe, and what
opinion to hold; and so he together with his frail foundation and fickle
arts, staggers here and there, slides out of one error into another, until
he become vain in all his imaginations, and like to Foxes, caught with all
their tricks and turnings; is thereby miserably ensnared in the Netts and
snares of his own arts and sciences. But the Christian like to the Catt, has
but one way, knows but one art, whereby he is able to save himself, yea that
a chief one, viz. his God, in whom he has all things, knows, loves, and
comprehends all things; And therefore he scapeth, when the Fox though he know
many sleights, and those crafty ones indeed; yet often together with his
sleights, he falls into the power of the Gods and the hands of the hunter.

Therefore thou can boast of nothing, nor build upon any other thing
whatsoever, but only that sure foundation and art, which is God himself, and
his holy word: For all other things forsake man in adversity, except the hope
and confession of God; this is the true preacher in our hearts, if any man will
attend and hearken to what he shall speak in him, he has planted in us the
Seed of the woman near unto the Seed of the Serpent, for opposition unto the
same; yea he has confirmed his Spirit, finger, word, and Image in us; His
Spirit he has clothed in us with Flesh, and has placed it captive in the
midst of its enemies in the Tabernacle of the Flesh, that it may prevail and
overcome, and subduing the Flesh may with it self carry it unto God, deify it,
engraffe it, and unite it unto God; For this is the fight between the Flesh
and the Spirit in us, of which Paul speaks off.

Therefore if any will yield himself over in the midst of his enemies to the
holy Spirit, and glory in God, as in a most fortified Camp in him: God would
(without doubt) once come and vanquish his enemies, and so he should know all
things to eternal Life.

But the World does not attend unto God in himself, always occupied with the
sound or noise of the Creatures, passes on with tumult and confusion, and so
knows nothing, hears nothing, learnes nothing, though in the mean time it
compasses, searches, and inquireth out a thousand unprofitable arts, and
continually learnes, and the longer it learnes, it is the more unlearned,
until sliding into error at last, it falls quite down.

But if men as Christians do, would abide with God privately in the School of
their hearts; and with Marie would sit attentively at the feet of their Lord,
Luke 10.
and would both hear and learn what God would be pleased to speak, Deuteronomy. 11.
teach, and interprise in them, verily they divinely instructed, would at last
vomitt up all their arts, as ignorant and folly. And with Paul would forgett
them, deny them, and account them as dross and dung.

Standing water is easily made bright with the beams of the Sun; and a
rolling stone gathers no moss; but the roaring Rivers of this world must
necessarily be either lukewarm or cold.

Therefore it is behovefull, that before al things we turn unto God in our
souls, and compose our selves with him in quietness; daily talking with him,
hear him, and learn of him. Which thing the whole world is ignorant off; it
knows not how to hear the word, the Master, the teacher, and how to learn
of him in himself; but always it flies out of its own heart into the mouth
of man; who when they be altogether liars, filthy, vain, it comes to pass
that they are always deceived; are always learning, and heaping many arts;
when notwithstanding with all their arts they are ignorant and foolish, because
that which they know, is but merely surreptions, theevish, untried, taken upon
trust from others, of which they themselves never had experience; but if any to
please the people have profunctorily believed, yet together with the people
they believe some other thing.

Then truly like Bees they fly out in swarming sometimes, prosecuting a poor
Wesell, making dear enquiry into a matter of little moment, and fall into some
matter of dispute, upon whose, foundation and ground they are altogether
ignorant off, until they be satiated with it, then they fall upon some other
thing.

So in times past all Israel (in whom all the whole world is figured) together
with their Kings and Priests did fall, until they wholly erred from the Faith,
and once taken were led away captive.

Read the people painted in my book of the World.

Now J call with Paul the word of God: that foolish and offensive speech, which
to weet does bring with it the cross, grief, and death of the flesh, and
makes all things which seem something to be nothing, and only looks upon and
regards those men who are nothing in themselves, which in the eyes of the
world seem the greatest folly that can be. Neither can it be persuaded, that
letting pass that which it sees, it should embrace that which it neither has
not sees; for it would rather have one bird in hand then two in a bush. Neither
does it doubt so it might keep it to prefer a temporary life before a
thousand eternal lives.

And therefore the Word and the preachers of the word have been persecuted for
fools.

Now the word of God is of such a nature and force, that though it has a
vulgar style so simple in the language of truth, yet it overthrows all things
whatsoever rise against it, it dulleth the edge of all wit, and these entysing
and corrupt contemplations, together with the more eloquent kind of lying, it
does bring into such straight, that it makes them to blush for shame; although
(as it is always the properties of lies and ungodliness) they will not
confess themselves to be overcome; For the word of God does say such strait
seege to the heart of Man, that every one, if he do not speak against his
own conscience, is forced thus to think, and so to determine as the word does
speak, that so it is, and otherwise it cannot be but a lie.

On the contrary bursts in with a long Circumlocution, and one lie does almost
weigh ten lies, that it may seem to be true and have a shadow thereof.

But the word of God, as I have already said, does proceed after a most simple
manner, but it does so gird a man, that will he or not, he becomes, amazed,
and with admiration astonished and affrighted, does say, this is the finger of
God.

No man ever spoke thus; for this word has such a sharpnes, sting, and
strength, that it pearseth even into the heart, and seperateth the flesh from
the spirit, so as the mind being captivated without all controversy, assents
to the same, and confirms the truth thereof with all assurance; not so crafty
subtlety can be objected against the truth, but that may be battered,
weakened, and refuted with one word; neither can any thing so accute be
produced, which weakened with the like accute, may not be overthrown, only
the word of God overcommeth with such force, that even the mind of the enemy
is overcome and taken with it; the outward man alone, and the face of the
flesh, which would not be bridled, seeks out all kind of ambushes, tricks
and turnings, to escape this thunderclapp. And falsehood, for shame covers its
face with its hands, and thereby thinks that the whole body is covered, that it
cannot be seen.

Moreover, it is behovefull, that all other traditions of arts, words, and
spirits, be examined by the word of God, as by an index, golden rule, and
touchstone.

I call that the word of God, which is the Spirit and Life, (not the Letter)
written without Ink and paper in the hearts of believers, which speaks unto
the souls of all those that are obedient unto it. This J call the Word of God;
Not the Scriptures. For if we speak properly, the Scriptures or Letters are
not the word of God, but the mind, spirit, and that true divine meaning, which
Paul calls the sense of Christ and mind of the Spirit, and Christ the Word of
God.

This I say is the word of God, as saint Paul does testify: The Letter (says
he) does kill, but the Spirit, that is the true and spiritual meaning thereof,
which only spiritual men are endued with, which does quicken.

These alone have the Key of David, for the opening of all the Seals of this
closed book; to all other the book is Sealed with seven Seals; Of which
mention is made in Dan. 7. Apoc. 5. and Mat. 13. by way of parable; and the
veil of the Letter does hang before their eyes, until they turn unto God,
and seriously will obey his will.

The spirit of understanding enters into no froward scorner, who in the letter
only desires to show his nicitie and Clarkeship. For the truth is, that word
of God, and his secrets, are made manifest to them that fear him.

Therefore many in our times are snared, who betwixt the writings and the word
of God do know no difference, and so do they esteem the Scriptures for the
word of God, so as beside it they know no other.

But it appears by the Testimony of many divinely taught, that the scriptures
are nothing but the husks, the shell, the sheath, the Lantern, the shrine,
the letter, the cave, the veil of the word of God. From whence it arises that
they appear so sinister, and in show often repugnant, and are hidden from
wicked men.

But the Word of God placed in and under them, is the kernel, the life,
fulness, and thing it self, or substance: For otherwise those learned men the
Scribes and Pharisees had been blessed and happy, if the Letter had been the
word of God, viz. the light, etc. because they had so well conned the
Scriptures, that most part of them they could say by heart, yet were they for
all that most miserably to perish with this Art; and so death is eaten by the
Tree of good and evil, while yet men think thereby to have Life.

But Christ does more ingenuously testify, that they know not the Scriptures,
that is what in the Scriptures is the word of God; for what otherwise belonged
to the Letter and grammatical sense they writ, but knew not the mind of
Christ, which was the force and meaning of the Letters; and the Letters in my
judgment are of set purpose, so sinister and darkly dictated by the Holy
Ghost, comprehended and declared, that those impious Swine and Dogs may not
understand them, according as Christ out of Esaias does allege them, and gives
this reason, why he speaks so obscurely by similitudes, and demonstrateth the
same thing more significantly in John, least we should make an idol of the
Letter; And that we should think some other thing more necessary to
salvation then Bibles: to weet, that of God we should desire the Light of his
word, which is hidden in this Lanthorn; and also that true teacher the Holy
Spirit, which may direct, lead, and instruct us in the holy Scriptures, and may
open the Seals thereof, declaring unto us the mystery of this shrine, that is
his divine word, Law pleasure, will, and meaning, hidden under the dead Letter.

Many think it enough that they have Bibles, and know how to read; Here
forsooth they find the Holy Ghost, the word of God, that double Sword of the
Spirit; yet wrapped up, and closed in the sheath.

But who can understand, gain, find, and brandish the same? He answers by the
Prophet Esaias: Young Children, who will be affrayd at this killing Letter, they
are sore out of heart, tremble and dye for fear.

Therefore it is not enough, although it is good, to have Bibles. What to have
Bibles? All the Pharisees had the same, could say them by heart, and yet they
lived no less blind and dead.

These very Bibles are the Tree of Good and Evil, of which they did eat
death, although to the godly who consult with God about the meaning of them,
and renouncing themselves, pray unto him for the obtaining of his Spirit, they
be the Tree of Life; God will give his glory to none other, no not to the
Scriptures, but has made them dark unto us, and has reserved the
interpretation to himself, that he may teach, enlighten, rule, and guide, how,
when, and as he will; and his will is, that we always wax stronger, and by
degrees come nearer to the knowledge of the truth, if so be we would do the
same by his help; but he has not sown his word by the way side for dogs
and swines, but has covered it, the same being hiding in the Letter, that we
may not rest our selves contented in the Letter, but digg up the hidden
treasure; and with all Religion pray for grace and understanding, and consult
with his Holy Spirit, that he may take us into his tuition, guide us, teach us,
lead us unto the Tree of Life, the Fruit whereof may feed us up unto eternal
Life.

And this is the trial of all Arts, Doctrines, and Spirits, that they be
compared and agree with the word of God, that that which is divinely unto us,
we find to be true by his word in our hearts. In a word, that our spirits may
confirm the same so to be by its testimony, as we have divinely learned the
same, and that we sustain for the defense thereof to dye.

Therefore it is likely and so it shall be indeed, what Doctrine soever comes
from god, the same is not repugnant to the word, which divinely taught, we have
in our hearts, but agreeable, thereunto gives testimony that we know his
word, as we are known of God, and comprehended as we are comprehended of him,
otherwise how could we say Amen, and assent if the contrary should be fall in
us.

Therefore they are much deceived who think that nothing is the word of God,
but what altogether differs from our minds; and therefore compel themselves
only to believe those things which in their inward man they can perceive, feel,
and comprehend to be far wanting in them, and contrary to them.

Indeed the word of God invadeth our hearts with an exceeding force, because it
is spirit, our hearts are flesh; but where the believing heart addicts it self
to the worship of God, the word is soon incorporated in us, and our heart made
one with it, is converted into spirit; so as now the truth it feels, yea and
what more it witnesses that to be true, which the spirit does speak unto it;
and is so bound that it necessarily must assent unto it; Neither does it so
compel or force it self to believe, but it is so compelled, that it cannot
but believe, and would a thousand times make a loss of its body rather then
believe otherwise.

So again the mind cannot be believed, and as long as the mind does not
assent, it is a sure argument, that as yet is has not comprehended, nor as yet
is the word incorporated in thee, nor the Son of God borne.

For he who comprehends the word as he is comprehended, feels the same, yea
testifies, and knows that the same is true.

Wherefore compare, or examine all learning with the testimony of the spirit.
For if thou art a believer, God dwells in thee, and thou art sealed with his
word and Spirit, but if thou do not believe, this examination nothing
belongs unto thee; For it is spoken to the believing Thessalonians, try the
Spirits.

If in a wicked man the spirit were to be compared with his heart and with the
letters, he could never rightly judge how he does understand them, because he
takes that to be the word of God whatsoever pleases his wicked and perverse
heart and eyes.

On the contrary, it is commanded to the Saints, that they try and prove all
Spirits and Doctrines by the word of God, which divinely taught, they have
approved in their souls; not to the wicked who are unfitt to every good work,
and whose judgment God does not approve off.

But if they say, they are to be brought to the touchstone of the word the
holy Scriptures. J willingly grant the same, so that you understand that of the
mind of the Scriptures, which is the only word of God; which also only those
who are of God do understand, but if the Doctrine and Spirit be compared with
the Letter of the Scriptures, it will be compared diversely, every one according
to his own understanding, in which they are deceived; neither is this the true
trial, as more clear then Light we may see it; Since all desire the Letter to
be this judge, and think them of themselves to be the same.

Therefore that which has not the examination I speak off, which I but now
spoke off, is as easily confuted as it is admitted, as Gregory says.

Here are casheered all the arts, explanations, orations, and comments of men,
which are boughs and fruits of the forbidden Tree, in the Paradise of this
World, from which as yet all men do eat death, and yet nevertheless with
Adam and Eva think themselves to eat life, and hope to be Gods. Therefore all
men's arts are no other then a plant of the Devil, who thinks by this means
to change men into Gods, and from hence promises life and immortality, when
nevertheless death is before their eyes, so soon as they have eaten of this
fruit.

Now that Sentence stands firm: Every plant that my Heavenly Father has not
planted shall be cut down.

Therefore all those Arts must again in their original be brought to nothing.

That J confess is the only Scope of the holy scripturs, which is the word of
God, known of them who are of God; But that the literal and grammatical
sense is, this I do not think, which wicked men do understand, and also
follow, and yet by Christ are denied to understand the Scriptures, but as they
expound themselves in the Godly, out of the Doctrine of the Holy Ghost; And
this meaning cannot be comprehended in open Commentaries and rules, but the
Holy Ghost will have this book and mystery reserved to himself, neither will he
have it imprinted but will show, teach, and open to all, according to the
measure of every man's faith, as much as is necessary, neither will he have it
so committed, that one may teach another, and so incroch upon the privilege of
God, but will teach it himself, that all and every one of us may be divinely
taught, and may glory that we have learned the Word of God from God, and not
from men, with pleasant docility, yet so as men ought, and every one may one to
another give that testimony which he has learned from God.

So it comes to pass, that with Christ and his Apostles we are witnesses of
the Word, not Ministers of the Spirit; For who has commanded the Wind but
only the Master of the Wind.

To this belongs that which Job, Jeremie, and Esayas say, that we shall all be
taught of God, so as it shall not be necessary for us to be taught of any
other, but that so its true as the holy unction shall teach us.

And whereas God is only true, and all men are liars, it cannot be but it must
be a lie and error whatsoever comes not from God; and that cannot come from
God which all wicked know and understand. Since they are not of God, but are
separated from him by the partition wall of sin.

Now what comes not from God is sin, and not good; and what shines not
from his Light, is altogether darkness, although it seem to be Light and
wisdom, as Esaias upbraideth the Caldean Philosophers, their own wit has
deceived them, and they were wearied with the multitude of their own
inventions, etc.

God speaks this against all arts, except the art of God, formed in us by his
word; which exhibits unto us nothing to be meditated upon, and vewed in the
Light but only God, to know and understand God, because that word is verily
God, without any distinction of nature; there as God cannot be defined,
described, or divided; but if we speak properly, God is all in all things, and
yet nothing of all these things which can be felt, conceived, or comprehended
by sense, reason, or understanding, spoken, written, or heard; so is the Word
of God infinite, infallible, incomprehensible, eternal, by it self existing,
and far exceeding all the writings and words of men, because it, as God
cannot properly be written, read, or spoken. Since it is God, and was before
writing or man was, and shall be when man is deceased and writing are ceased.

Therefore all things are subject unto vanity; For which cause the nature of
all things are called vain and vast, by reason of the accident of vanity,
although in it self it be good; only the word of God, which in it self is
perpetual and semperternall, can neither be written in Letters, nor expressed
in word, endures for ever.

Hence it comes to pass, that whatsoever is spoken or written of it, as that
which is not of God himself, remains but as a shadow, a figure, and testimony
thereof, and is not properly God and his word.

Now no man can speak or utter this word, therefore it is necessary that it
speak it self, in an obedient and willing heart; and for this cause it is
required of every man, that he submitt himself under the potent hand of God,
void of his own will, free and clear from his own heart, and subordinate to
the will of God, that God or his word may speak, teach, seek, love, find,
acknowledge, beseech, hear, praise, honor, fear, and adore it self.

This alone is the art of God, which he himself does teach in us, without this
all other arts are nothing; For besides this to know all things, is to be
ignorant of all things. All arts without this art is vanity, which yet is
better conceived in hearr then it can be uttered in word; yea it cannot be
expressed or declared in word, therefore no man can teach the same to an
other, but it is to be taught and manifested by God, to the teaching of which
whosoever are sent, they are not Doctors or Masters, but only witnesses of
that word, which by the virtue of God is before in our hearts.

Therefore it has many names, which oftentimes are used one for an other; so
that as sometimes the Father, sometime the Son, and sometimes the Holy Ghost
is called the Fountain of Life or Truth; So the word of God is sometimes
called the Seed of God, sometimes his soul, sometimes his soonn, sometime his
arm, sometimes his hand, sometime his right hand, sometime his Law, sometime
his will, sometime his image, sometime his inspiration.

And hither may be referred all the names which the Scriptures give to the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and the word of God, which are all one, and
referred unto one, serve to the signification of the same thing.

And this Word which in the New Covenant is called Christ, is the essence of
all things which are, and all things are created by it, and also are preserved,
nourished, and sustained by it, and in it.

So that all things have their being rather in the Word then in themselves.

And if God should withdraw this word to himself, as was the estate of them
before the beginning of the world, while yet the world was not made of him, so
should all things necessarily in the same moment be turned to nothing again.

Therefore does God even to this day preach this word unto us, and yet it is
ineffable, as Taulerus says, though in him all things have their essence and
being in and from God.

Wherefore to committ and consecrate a man's self to this living word of God,
is the only life eternal; and that true one art and part of Mary which cannot
be taken from her; all other arts are vain and must perish with the inventors
and professors, only to know God, and obey his word, which the Scriptures calls
to eat Christ, to believe in him, to putt on the new man, to adhere unto God,
to be born a new, to live to the spirit, to hear and receive the word of God,
to be baptized, to be ingrafted into Christ, to receive Christ, and many other
terms: is not only of it self immortal, but preserves all from death, who
are endued with the same. No man can consume this bread, but it preserves him
the eater thereof, from eternal death, and hunger unto eternal life.

This treasure can no thief take away, no rust or moath corrupt. In a word,
this eternal word is to a Christian all things* in adversity a Sword and
Weapon against all dangers, meat to him that starves, clothing to the cold,
for want of divine grace, and a sure sanctuary to every fugitive.

But he that knows all things, and is ignorant of this, knows nothing; even
as he who knows and has all things, and wants God, possesses nothing;
and if it could be, that any man could know all arts, which all men at any time
have known and understood; if he were a Pandora, or a Hippias, knowing all
things, yet were he not therefore any whitt better in the sight of God; yea J
dare say, he should be so much the worse, by how much he had glutted himself
of the tree of knowledge and eaten death; for the more poison is received, the
speedier will the destruction be.

And even as this was the fall and death of Ada^, viz. to become a god, and to
arrogate to be something in himself, and to know, J will not say to be
ignorant of nothing. That fall cannot be forgiven, or repaired, unless thou
vomitt up all that Diabolical art and curious knowledge; and besides eat of
the Tree of Life, which shall work in thee an utter forgetfulness of all
those arts, and make thee a Child, a Fool, and reduce thee to innocence
under God, that at length thou may know that which God would know in thee; so
he himself should teach and suggest in thee by his word, according as it is
said; otherwise all things are unprofitable, yea though a man know all things,
they are not only unprofitable, but also a hinderance to this art of God. He
that is ignorant of this, in vain has he learned and known all things else
besides.

In the word of God alone, which proceeds out of the mouth of god, is seated
the rule of all things, the Scope, Doctrine, art, life, and truth, teaching
what is to be done, what not to be done, what to be spoken, what not to be
spoken, whether to enter, from whence to depart and come out.

All other arts they be variable whatsoever they be to time, fortune, vanity,
death, and oblivion; and not only these arts, but also the Letters, books,
forms, masters, tongues, which we use, do perish, and others after them,
which succeed in their places, so that nothing is constant and of long
continuance in the earth, but all things according to their visible nature, are
frail, mutable, and momentary. How often are the tongues themselves changed;
how often the forms being removed, do new succeed in their place* (as I have
said before) Orthography is not ever like it self, and the same with all
people in all times; yea the true pronounciation of the Latin tongue (as
Cornelius Agrippa in his book, called De vanitate scientiarum, formerly
alleged by us) is perished, and no where extant. Moreover, the ancient
Letters of the Hebrews are gone, so that there is no memory left thereof, but
only those which Esdras in their place invented.

Add moreover, that the tongue is made very lame by the Caldeans, which also
has been incident to perish of other tongues; So that no man there is who can
find out their ancient form and dialects; Besides this new words do
always creep in the old word, being grown out of use. And again, the old
words are received, the new being thrust out; so far forth, that nothing is
durable or constant in this life. And if any man would observe, he shall find
that our mother Tongue in England is daily changed: that at this day they
speak otherwise then they did a few years since; yea and such a curiosity
and nicenesses there is in the word and tongues, that what men have a while
made use off, suddenly they cast away, as disdaining the same; Every man
endeavoring to bring out some new and rare thing, that he seem not to imitate
the words of any other: insomuch that the chief inventour of words do now
obtain the chief praise and estimation of Art. And by this means all things
are confounded in the earth; and what now is new, is presently grown old, and
anon become new again; and the hearts of men, the Kingdoms, peoples, and
Languages of the World, like to the course of the year.

In times past France spoke the Dutch language (as Beatus Rhenamis writing of
the German affairs, most elegantly proves) but now it has gathered a proper
speech to it self out of Italy, German, and Spain, but most specially from
Italy; which thing of the tongue was caused, perhaps by their war, because
diverse people being mixed together, they made and used a mixed kind of Speech.

Hence it came to pass, that as yet they retain some of the Germain words: as
Suppen Sacken kushen, which they almost according to the Nether Germains
pronounce, after the bastard German Souper, Sacen, Cuysten.

This I speak that we may see, that nothing is constant or new in the earth,
and that is true which Terence writ: Nothing is spoke now which was not spoke
before; So nothing is done which was not done before. So that Cornelius Agrippa
thinks the invention of Gunpowder, and ^uns was no new invention; of which
opinion in the Historian Volatiramis; and this may be gathered out of the sixth
of Virgils Eneads, where thus he writes of Salmon:

I Salmon saw with pain and torment late Who would loves flame and thunder
imitate, For carried by four steeds, with torch in hand Through Elis City and
all Grecian Land Did ride in triumph, and command that all Should give him
honor and a dietie call; O mad man, he who with his Chariots noyce Would
imitate the mighty thunders voice,

And Solomon shows the same all along in the 3. chapt. of Eccles. as also to
the first: that what has been that shall be, what has been done, the same
shall be done, neither is there any thing new under the Sun.

There is something which is as if it were new, yet was that in ancient times
which has been before us. There is no memory of former ages, neither shall
there be of those that are to come; amongst who are to be; and a little after
things past, and things to come, are all forgotten, and the wise together with
the fool do dye. In which words what other thing would the preacher show then
that all arts are subject to oblivion and death; Neither can they always
remain in the soul, but together with the body departs or perishes by death.
For nothing (I say) can adhere unto the Image of God, (I mean the Soul which
is like unto God) and consist in death and fire; but what is only God and his
word, this is the only endure able creature, and the meat of Eternal Life:
Not that opinion and Art of Philosophers, but the true good of the mind and
Soul, which can happen to no other thing but the word; although I do not
deny but that word appeared to some of the Gentiles, and taught them; because
God is no respector of Persons, but as a common Light of souls, as the Sun
is the Light of the whole world; neither is the hand of God shortened, nor his
eye envyous, that he should not look upon the whole World. With the same
love, eye, and grace since we are all alike the same workmanshipp of God, all
of the same love, estimation, and authority with him.

Hence thou may collect, that all arts (invented by men) are death, and
fruits of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. For as soon as Adam had
eaten of that Tree, the same day he dyed in the eyes of God; as the history
declares; although afterward according to the flesh he lived many years; as
from heavenly matters the same day was his eyes shutt up, and he eat death,
although in his own judgment his eyes were opened, and he seemed to himself
to be a living God, knowing Good and Evil: Then began he to exercise his art,
his cunning to expound, dispute and seek out a malicious sutle and captious
meaning in all things, and also to deal deceitfully with God, and in all
things to hide himself, to cover himself with Fig leaves, to kiss his own
hand; in a word, to worship himself, by inventing many arts amongst his
posterity.

And out of this Root spring up all the precepts of men, their expositions,
their arts; and so excellent a foundation have they, as both the inventour and
the author of them was the Devil; and the first Scoller that learned them,
did eat death therefrom.

And this Science and Art is utterly to be abhorred, being no other then a
Diabolical persuasion, conceived in Adam, formed and hid in the Seed of the
Serpent; And yet all the World, as Adam did, thinks that Life is placed in it;
neither does it receive any instruction from Adam* neither indeed understand
the history of Adams fall, or his rising again; and that whole matter at this
day does live yet, accounting it but a History long since acted and done, and
afterward dare say the word of God endures for ever.

Therefore we must needs confess that nothing is past which in its kind is
not yet extant.

Whole Moses is urged upon Christians, neither is one jott of the word of God
lost, which shall not be fulfilled in every moment in spirit and truth.

Therefore the fall of Adam happens daily; daily does Adam in his posterity
eat of the forbidden fruit; And therefore his Sons in Adam, as in the root,
are damned and dead.

Now this our fall as Adams, is amended and repaired, if we spirt out and
vomitt up this knowledge of good and Evil as poison, and become as Adam was
before his fall, Children, Fools, and innocent Turttles, that we may eat of
the Tree of Life, and suffer the Seed of the woman to be ingrafted in us. This
is not the Seed, the art, wit, and counsel of the Serpent; but the Seed,
word, will, the mind of God, the Tree of Life, which whosoever eats, and
suffers himself to be fedd therewith, is endowed with Eternal Life.

Now in us there is a Medicine with poison; For as by sin the Tree of
knowledge of good and Evil was planted into the heart of Adam, so by his
conversion, rising again, and Seed of the Woman, the Tree of Life is planted
by the Tree of death in the heart of Adam. From these two Seeds and trees so
different, do spring different Fruits, so as one is poison and death, the
other is Medicine and Life; and if any man would know that plant, which is
called Man, he may easily know what he ought to think of his own art,
knowledge, wisdom, and righteousness, how that this pleases all men, and is
of great respect with them; For what is current with the world but its own
coin? What but the wisdom, art, and righteousness of the Flesh, seems
holy in the sight of men: only the Holy Ghost can reprehend the world of
sin, righteousness, and judgment.

It is wonderful to behold how the world does daily yet eat death of the
forbidden Tree; which tree you may call (as the German Theology does) our
own will; and although God do daily cry aloud in them, and moreover provideth
by the witnesses whom he sends to teach them externally, that they abstain
therefrom, or otherwise they shall reap death therefrom, yet none believes
but all follow that Serpent, which secretly in our heart does speak thus: Not
death shall you reap by any means, but if you know many arts, you shall be
like unto God, and live for ever; (this the whole history of the Bible
remains in force at this day;) and from hence arises a certain art and
curiosity, enquiring and searching out; Neither will any submitt himself
docibly and simply unto God, and obey his word.

But every man will be his own, yea Gods Master too, and teach both himself
and God, bring him into the School, and there prescribe unto him, with whom,
where, what, wherefore he shall do, speak, permit, or omit.

Hence it comes to pass that wisdom is justified always of her Children;
and those men skilled in a thousand arts, and above measure crafty, God cannot
satisfy, neither can he obtain his Kingdom, or get any love or right at
their hands. Since they will be altogether Gods, and kiss their own hands,
will, wisdom, prudence, and reason.

The art of the Devil, which is sucked out of the Duggs of the Serpent,
hereupon we compose many books, desiring to teach the whole world, not knowing
how to teach our selves.

From hence it comes that the proud Devil, alas! is buried deep in Learned
men, whom their deadly knowledge does so dangerously puff up, that they think
themselves worthy all honor, both from God and men, and oftentimes if not in
word, yet indeed they make their estate as Lucifer and Adam did.

No man understands how we daily become Lucifers and Adams, but think that
to be the relation of a thing long since done in Adam, and condemn his wicked
pride and fall, when nevertheless we all stick fast over head and ears in the
same, and yet deride others who in this kind are foolish.

Divines preach much the word and his precepts, but when they are to be kept,
indeed they are wanting in this; yea what themselves do sometimes teach they
will not suffer others to practice, but contented merely in the bare words, so
making the word of God nothing but a mere Art, a matter of talk and
disputation, and had rather be called knowers and fearers of God, then lovers
of him, that not in vain is the proverb, which is verified by experience,
teaching and confirming the same: The greater Scoller the worser Christian.

The Gramarian is careful that he err not in his speaking, but little
regards the error of his life.

In like manner the Poets had rather be lame in their lives then halting in
their Verses. Philosophers would know all things, but not themselves. The
Historian describes all peoples, but neglects himself. The Orator is more
sollicitous that he speak not rudely, then that he believe not, or live
wickedly. The Logitian will sooner forsake the truth, then leave his opinion
and conclusion. They that have any thing to do with Geometry, do sooner
measure the Earth then their ways. The Musician takes more care that his Song
be not dissonant then that his carriage be consonant. Astrologers travel over
the whole Heavens, and foretell things to come, but see not the ditch under
their feet.

The Cosmographer relates of all Mountains, Valleys, Woods, and Rivers, but
that makes him not one hair better in the sight of God. The Phisician heals
sick men's bodies, but neglects the healing of his own soul. Lawers are
alone expert in the precepts of men, but negligently violate the Laws of God,
so as the proverb from hence has risen. Neither does the Phisician live, nor
the Civillian dye well, because Physicians of all men are most intemperate, and
Civillians the worst Christians; and for that cause (as Baldus being an
expounder of the Law himself does say) the most part of them are taken away by
sudden death.

Other Arts-men J will not here mention, but refer you to Cornelius Agrippa,
chap. 100.

So the Devil does compass us about with the rope of folly; insomuch that
sometime with one question, sometime with another art, we be so amazed; in the
mean time we neglect the only science of God, in which all things consist,
even as the Adulteress Medea* when her husband Jason pursued her, cut her
Children in pieces, and dispersed their members in the way, that Jason might
be busied in the gathering of them up, while she escaped out of the Country.

Alas, shall death, sin, and the Devil thus please us? shall we always
thus seek God in hell with the Devil? Light with darkness? The living among
the dead?

One thing is necessary, and this no man will desire; many things are
unprofitable and unhealthfull, yea deadly; yet these are greedily desired off,
and devoured by all men.

In the word of God alone, and no other thing, are all things placed, neither
therefore will it profitt thee to have all things, to know, will, speak,
surpass in measure, dispute off, number, paint, adorn, judge, teach al things,
etc. To know all things, is nothing else then to know the arts of the Devil,
eaten by his counsel of the forbidden tree; Only to know the word and will of
God, and to live according unto it; to be fruitful in good works, is the true
art and eternal Life, eaten of the tree of Life; in vain, it is to know all
things, yea rather it is bitter death, as has been sufficiently spoken off
before.

Since therefore all the arts, wit, and righteousness of men, springs from
the tree of knowledge of good and evil, or rather from the Devil; and
therefore is the fall and death of Adam; it necessarily follows, that the
more any man is learned therein, and experienced* the higher he has ascended,
the worse and more perverse he is; as he who has made the greatest
proficiencie in the wisdom and knowledge of the Devil.

And again, the more foolish a man is in this art, and in the wisdom of the
flesh and the Serpent, and the more be has unlearned, forgotten, and emptied
himself thereof, the more righteous he is, and wise before God: For we must
altogether forget and unlearne this fleshly art, this curious sagacitie, this
Devilish righteousness; And in steed thereof must learn the only new,
contrary, and divine art, wisdom, and righteousness, by the eternal word,
by the Seed of the woman of the Tree of Life, of which whosoever eats, shall
have eternal Life. For this cause the Scriptures do so vehemently urge new
birth, Childishnes, Foolishnes, hate of a man's Life, deny all of himself;
which would not be, if there were any thing that is good or acceptable to God
in man before.

No man thinks of this, but all men being puffed up with their own arts,
wit, righteousness, goodness, etc. being secure and without conscience or
Religion, and yet do eat death of this forbidden tree, that is of their own
will, wit, reason, knowledge, goodness, and art, by that Seed of the Serpent,
implanted in them. But God does exact nothing but the knowledge of himself,
and that we would be obedient to his word, and submitt our selves to be taught
by him, which the Scriptures do sometimes call faith, which brings us unto
God, begets us anew, and regenerates us, that thence do flow the waters of
Life, the fruits of the spirit, love, peace, joy, a guiltless mind, and all
other good things, which the Scriptures do sometimes call faith, which
brings us unto God, begets us a new, and regenerates us, that then do flow
the waters of Life, the Fruits of the Spirit, love, peace, joy, a guiltless
mind, and all other good things, which the Spirit of God effects and powers
into us.

Therefore Theology is the true Magic, the worship, and science of God, which
God does equally exact from us all. And this is the same which God does exact,
teach, and effect by his Word in them, who offer and submitt themselves to that
his word and clemency to be taught.

Therefore does he so frequently and often admonish us, that he might make it
known, that in him alone is Life and all other things to be found, and that
he threatens and inflicteth great punishment on them that despise him, as
many places of the Scriptures do witness, though the word of God is not tied
or bound unto them, as we will prove anon; yet they give good direction and
testimony to the mind, if any man can have the same and use it aright; and yet
do much more, abuse the Scriptures then rightly use them. Nevertheless they
are not to be forsaken any more then a man's wife, Children, meat, drink, etc.
all which may be abused, but yet we must learn to use them rightly.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Majesty, of the free, constant and eternal Word of God,
how it can be bound to nothing, included in nothing, nor buried in the Letter;
and also the difference betwixt the internal and the external Word.
THE word of God is as God, infinite, invisible, ineffiable, a Spirit and Life,
which no mortal man can speak, see, or hear, but as far as is Lawful to
speak of it after the manner of men, and by similitude.

The word of God is nothing else then the glistering, the essence, the Image,
the form and splendour, as well imprinted like a Seal into all Creatures, as
more specially into the hearts of the faithful, which in all things is the
cause of their being, in all believers teaches, in all wicked men reproves,
exhorts, and contendeth and reprehendeth the world of sin, and which in the
beginning did enlighte^ and inform the hearts of Adam, Abell, Noah, Loath,
Abraham, Job, Mercury, Termigestus, Plotimus, Cornelius, and all other
upright-hearted Gentiles.

For though God gives being, in, above, below, without, and beyond all
Creatures, and is the essence of all things that be; yet in nothing is he so
clearly to be seen as in Man, whom therefore he created after his own image,
and perfected in Christ.

Therefore as brightness does so proceed from the Light of the Sun, as yet
it is not separated from the Sun, but for all that remains in the Sun,
though it fill the whole world, and enlighten the same; So is the Son in like
manner whole in the Father, and in all the Creatures, as the Light is in the
Sun and in the whole World:

Therefore it is called the brightness of his Majesty, and the image or
figure of his divine essence; Of the same nature, substance, and essence with
God; So as nothing can be spoken of the Father, which may not also be verified
of the word: God is no where and every where, in all places, in all things, and
yet incomprehensible above and beyond all things; Limited to nothing, so far
forth that the heavens and earth are not able to contain him, nor all the
Creatures. So is the word.

Even as the Light of the Sun has an original, from whence it proceeds,
and a force and action into which it tends, which original is the Sun it
self, and which external active force is the heating or enlightening of the
whole world, or as the word of every man has original force and spirit, which
original is man, whose expression and image the word is, and of the same
essence with him.

And thirdly, it has an active force or spirit, which qualifieth this word,
and makes it either cheerful, or angry, or sorrowful or displeased. So the
original of this divine word is the Father, or the action, or active force, or
virtue of it is called the Holy Ghost.

As therefore the Sun, is light, and that active force of that Light, is the
same; and as man his word, and the active force of that word, is the same; So
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, are one God. Wherefore nothing that
appertains to their essence can be spoken of one, which cannot also be
verified of all, that is all three; and as they are of the same essence, so of
the same condition, disposition, and nature.

As therefore God is in nothing, and yet in all things; so also is his
almighty word, which is the same: as God is so in all things, yet that he can
be included in nothing, and so above all Creatures, as the Earth, Heaven, or
any other Creature is not able to conceive or circumscribe him. And so in all
Creatures, as nothing is without him, or rather nothing there is that is not
full of him. So is also his Word.

As God can neither be spoken or written, nor any man is able to declare what
God is, but all things which are said of him, are but Images and shadows. J
will not say as Taulerus and Dr. Eickarius say, seeing if we speak truly and
properly, the whole nature of God is far otherwise then man does or is able
to speak of him.

Lastly, as God is a thing opposite, and contrary to humane cogitation, and
far otherwise then he is conceived to be in the thoughts of man; So also is
the divine word of God.

As there is nothing so little in which there is not God; and again, nothing
so great that can receive or circumscribe God. As nothing is so little but God
is less, and nothing so great but God is greater, beyond, without, below, and
above all Creatures; So also is his divine word.

As the free, almighty, eternal, immutable, omniscient, incomprehensible,
invisible, and unconceivable God is the being of all things; So as as all
things consist rather in him then in, and by themselves (as Taulerus and the
Germain Theology in a 1000 places do avouch) and is none of these things
which can be seen or comprehended by sense or expressed by word; So his divine
word is free in all, and beyond all, bound unto nothing, neither tied to the
prison, or letters, or cover of the Letter, concluded, included, and so tied
unto it, that otherwise it is no where; even as the following Position and
Sentence of a Learned man divinely instructed do show.

As the word is covered and hidden by the Letter, so it is opened and revealed
by the spirit.

Hence it comes to pass that the Letters be as a closed or sealed Book; so
as the dark Letter, except it be opened, does slay; but the Spirit does
quicken, and the Letters are as a certain Image, void of Life and Spirit: that
is a printed and dead expression of the Spirit; therefore they want Life,
(except the soul of the spirit be present) and do err.

Therefore the Letters cannot be the word of God. Since the word is far
otherwise an other thing then the letters; For it is a spirit, truth, and life;
but the letters are contrary: flesh the letter and death; yea the letters if
they want the Light of the word, are an offense; and if they want the soul of
the spirit, are a stumbling block.

Therefore the Letters are an otherwise thing then the word; that is, they are
not the Sword of the Spirit, but a sheath; For as the womb of the virgin
conceived the word, so the Letters.

For the word is clothed both with flesh and with the Letters, that Seed of
Abrahem lays hold of the Scriptures or Letters, (for they are both one,) and
again is apprehended by them; but the spirit is not apprehended in the flesh
or Letter of the Scriptures.

The cause thereof is this: the flesh or Letter cannot contain, conceive, or
comprehend the Majesty of the word; yet even as it was so in the flesh, that
the Majesty thereof did not appear; so it is in the Letter, that true neither
to all, or to any one that reads, is it obvious and apparent.

This is witnessed by all Learned men in the mere Letter, since the world
began, who neither could know, find, or comprehend Christ in the flesh, nor
the word in the Letter; which they should have done, if Christ in the flesh, or
under the misery of the flesh had been known unto all, not hidden but
manifested; and the Letter had been not the covering mystery, but the true
living and enlightening word of God it self.

As therefore the flesh was not the word, but the cover thereof, and a certain
great mystery; So the Letters are not the word properly, but the shell, the
bark and cover thereof.

The word was made fleshly assumption, not mixture, and so the same word is
made Letters, yet not so as the same can be said of the Letters, as of the
word, but as in a certain Seal.

Therefore so far are the Letters from being the word of God, that they only
be the figure and bark thereof.

For the word is not that which is spoken by the Letter, but that which is
expounded by the Holy Ghost, and understood only of the Faithful.

Therefore the Letters do paint out, and shadow out; and after a certain
manner set forth unto us the word, and express something, but are not the
word, although they be spoken and expressed.

For the word did not assume the flesh that it is not out of the flesh. So it
did not so fall into the Letter, that it is not out of the Letter; For there
was the word when there was no Letters; and the same will remain after the
Letters are perished.

Therefore as the word was never included and circumscribed in the flesh,
neither is it in the Letters.

For so it was in the body, as it never yet left heaven, and in the same
manner it is so in the Letter as yet it is every where.

Therefore the word is in the Letter altogether, but not all. Hereupon we see
that the letters have been exercised with a continual increase and addition.

Therefore the Letters are the Image of the word, and not the word it self;
And if they be, they are altogether a written, and a dead, and not a living
word; For there is a twofould word, one that quickneth, viz. the Spirit,
another the Letter, which is said to kill and slay.

The living word is that which inwardly teaches, and makes us to fructify;
the dead word is that which in the Flesh and Letter is proposed unto us.

The living word is a true Light, which enlightneth all men, and therefore a
regenerating spirit, because it renews all things. In a word, it is the power
and might of God, which gives unto us that knowledge, sense, soul, and Life,
which is from God. A certain brightness of the face of God, which enlightneth
us from above, and imprints in us the unction of the Holy Ghost, by which it
teaches and instructs us in all things; But the dead word are the Letters,
that sealed book, and dead Letter, sense, and will, which is the word of the
flesh, not of the Spirit of God.

The true and living word is that which God begets in us, and the spirit of
God effects in us; But the dead and Litterall word is that which the Letters
show unto us and men propound.

Therefore he does not always want the word who has not the Letters: For he
may have the interior who wants the exterior word, to wit, the Law of God
written in our hearts.

Hence it comes to pass, that no man has absolute need to be taught of an
other, or to admonish his brother concerning the knowledge of God.

For all these shall know, from the least to the greatest, and are all the
Disciples of Christ divinely taught.

This writing is not printed with ink and paper, but written with the finger
of God in the tables of our hearts.

This is the Doctrine of the truth, and the inspiration of the Spirit, to wit,
the prophetical breathing, the inspiration of the Spirit, and the true art of
God.

Moreover, he may have the living word of God who wants the dead of the
Letter; and the thing it self who wants the sign, that is the Life of the
word, though he wants the dead Letter; For two things are chiefly to be
considered in the word.

The first is the disposition and nature of the word, which is a certain Light
intended for the enlightening of men.

The other is the action of it, that is the spirit, which gives action and
operation to the word. For the word has not only a knowledge, but also a
certain action, it is not only a Light and splendour in us given from above
but also Life.

The interior word contains both of these which sometimes is called the
Kingdom of God, sometimes the Spirit, sometimes Christ dwelling in us. For it
is not only a Light, way, and guide, but also Spirit, truth, and Life; that
is, which not only teaches man that he may understand, but also moves him
that he works.

But the exterior word is far from this privilege, and has far a different
nature; For it is nothing else but a certain form and figure of the interior,
J will not say a shadow. Therefore the interior words, as it is the only
lively, so it is the only true word, as being the truth and life.

But on the contrary the exterior is nothing but a killing Letter, and a
deceitful figure of the word.

Hence it arises, the Letter, (as Christ) becomes a certain snare to wicked
men, a stone of offense, darkness, not Light, death, and not Life.

Therefore it is necessary, that beside the exterior word, the interior be
sought after and known: Since the exterior deceives a man with its shape, is
death and darkness, unless the Light and Life of the spirit be together
present with it.

Moreover, the exterior suffers a man to be sluggously and idle, except the
power of the interior be present with it. Therefore the interior word may be
without the exterior, as the exterior without the interior.

Therefore it does not necessarily follow that a man has the word of God,
because he pretends and has the letter; as on the other side it follows not,
that eh who wa^teth the exterior word or letter, wa^teth also the interior,
true, and heavenly word, which is God himself. For he does not always want
the word who has not the Letter; For the Letters does only give a testimony
of the word, so far are they from being the word it self; yea they are
scarce the Image of the living word; Much less are they it, which neither can
be written nor expressed by words both which is incident to the Letters.

Therefore the Letters are far from being the word of God, yea all the word,
though sometimes they be called the word of God; as the image and picture of a
man is called sometimes by his name, even as God is sometimes called man, and
the word flesh: not that God is man, or the word or spirit is made flesh, by
imitation, appellattion, and permixion; So as what is said of one, may be
verified of the other, or so as God cease to be God, and to be truly changed
into man, as that water in Cana Galilee was changed into wine.

Or so as the word is so flesh, as not now it is not the spirit, or the word
but flesh, in no wise.

The word is not so in the Letter, that they be one and the self same thing,
or so as the word should have changed it self into the Letter; and yet well
and rightly the Letters are called the Word of God; so as God is called Man,
and the Word flesh; although to speak properly, neither is the word of God
changed into Letters, nor God into Man, nor the word into flesh.

Therefore both these may be true, the Letters are the word of God, and the
Letters are not the word of God.

Now although the Letters are sometimes in some respect the word of God, yet
truly are they not the sole, nor altogether, nor all the Word of God; yea if
we speak properly, they are not the word of God, which either can be spoken or
written; and that the Letters are not the sole word of God, may be made known
by this: That many things besides the Scriptures are revealed and inspired unto
many, and many things are spoken and written by them which are not contained
openly in the letters, yea which sometimes are contrary to the dead Letters.

The Prophets, and Moses, and Christ, and his Appostles, whose words seem to
be contrary to the Prophets, what they have written of the Temple, the
Sacrifice, Circumcision, and of the vision of God.

Moreover, the true word of God has been from all eternity; yea even before
any scripture was, (as I have said before) and it will be hereafter when the
scriptures are perished. Therefore the word is improperly in the Letter and
flesh, and therefore it is improperly called flesh or the Letter; For my word
(says Christ) is Spirit and Life.

Therefore the word cannot be that word which is flesh or dead letter; wherefore
though the word truly and indeed is only in spirit, as in which it only
lives, yet it is also in the flesh, but yet weak if there it be alone
without the Spirit and Life.

It is also in the Letter, but altogether dead, unless the Spirit do quicken
it, as the soul does the body; and it is in both, and yet not truly, and if
truly, yet not all, and only, and lively.

Now, although the word is in the Spirit lively and true, yet after a more
peculiar and excellent manner it is in the flesh then in the Letter, although
the Spirit be present with the Letter, and lend a hand, it teaches nothing,
but when the spirit dwells with the flesh, it not only teaches, but also
makes alive, and bursteth out into works.

So the letter of the Law brings men to no perfection, although it be the word
of God, as also the Scriptures spoken by the mouth of God, and written by his
finger; For the word of the Law did teach the knowledge of the precept, but did
not give man a will and strength to fulfill the same, but the word which is
made flesh gives life to believers.

Hence it comes to pass, that the flesh inspired with the word and spirit of
God, wills and does keep the Commandment of God.

Therefore the word in the flesh does only give an Example of life, when on
the contrary it leaves in the letter all things idle and sleepie.

But in the Spirit it truly stirrs up the heart and affections toward the
Law, for the Spirit is the life and soul of the word, and therefore the word
it self; but the flesh is a certain imitation of the word, the letters a
certain printed picture and Copy of the word. Wherefore the written word is
not the true word, but a certain image thereof; yea the Scriptures pronounced
in words are not the true word of God, but only a testimony thereof: For the
Scriptures had beginning in time by occasion, but the word was from all
eternity. Add to which the Scriptures do lead men into error, except the
interpreter, viz. the Spirit be present.

And they are a sealed book, and a perplexed Laborinth, unless the Spirit be
present, as the Treede of Thesius, to to guide us, and as the Key of David to
open unto us.

Hence it comes to pass, that many men seeing see not, and hearing hear not,
and as who know the Scriptures, and yet neither know nor understand.

Therefore we confess that the letters are a certain image and figure of the
word, yet they are not truly the very word, because they are but only an
image and figure thereof.

This is the reason wherefore we admit no other word but what is answerable to
this Image or Example of the Scriptures, and to the true and spiritual sense.

Therefore the Scriptures are as the Index or golden Scales of the word, so
they be understood not according to the dead letter, but according to the mind
of Christ and will of the Spirit.

Therefore we reject not what is agreeable to the true meaning of the
Scriptures, so we do not deny what is not contrary unto them; For whosoever is
not against us is of us.

Therefore we deny not the exterior word, written or spoken, so do we confirm
the interior or living, so it is we grant the maistery and unction of the
Spirit, and do not deny the gift of Prophecye and interpretation of the
Scriptures.

For the word has something to come and something obscure and difficult to the
flesh. That which is to come, the Spirit takes it of the word, and declares
it unto us, that which is obscure and hard to be understood, it daily teaches
unto us, and leads us into all truth. Therefore under the name of the word of
God, the Letters are not only understood, but all prophecies, visions,
dreams, unctions, inward speakings, Doctrins of the Spirit and revelations if
they be from God; also whatsoever holy men by the instinct of the spirit have
either spoken or done.

Therefore no man must adhere peremptorily to the only letter; where the Holy
Ghost is, there is liberty, and the free word is bound to none. Moreover, the
Holy Ghost suffers no rule or limit to be prefixed to it in its own;
therefore to nothing it is tied but to it self, that is, be not contrary and
disagreeing to it self, as therefore many things come and are spoken from God;
al which (nay not the thousand part) are written in the scripturs; So many
things at this day happen and are spoken by God, which are not written; And yet
nevertheless they are the word of God, and wrought by him.

Add to which that many things there are not written, nor expressed in words,
which we yet receive for the word of God, and only by hand as it were, have
received them from our Forefathers, of which kind are the abrogation of the
precepts of the first counsel, renewed after by the Holy Ghost to the Church;
So as the Church was freed from the same; Of which things we notwithstanding
have no written or express word.

Christ himself taught all in word, and writ nothing, and commanded his
Apostles to preach, not to write.

And the Church is begotten rather by word then by writing.

Moreover, the Doctors and preachers of the new Covenant were called and indeed
are the Ministers of the Spirit, not of the Letter.

By all these it is manifest, that the free and swift Spirit is not tied unto
letters, nor the Doctrine of the Spirit can be included into the Jayle, prison
and corner of the Scriptures.

Therefore although there be many books of the Law, something sometimes may
change to come in handling of which there is no express Canon or Law to be
found, but it is to be excogitated and ruled by reason.

So oftentimes such a rare thing happens, the letters do universal forsake
a man, that they cannot teach, comfort, guide, or appease him; but a man must
necessarily repair unto God, and consult with the peculiar word of the Spirit
by prayer, to comfort and strengthen his weakened conscience; For it is not
sufficient to have the common call and word, except a man have special,
proper, and inward call, which yet is not contrary unto the common.

And although the word of God is altogether one, and undivided, yet how much
thereof a man has received by faith, so much of it is his; and this is his
word; His issue the Word of God is, as God himself, must be made every ones by
faith.

No otherwise then whereas the Light of the Sun is common; yet as much as
every one is enlightened thereby, so much is the Sun his, and no more; So as
much as every one has of God and his word, so far is he his God, and so
far has he God and his word, which are common to all, peculiar to himself.

Therefore the letters are far weaker then to satisfy a troubled conscience
in the offenses thereof, and to make quiet again; the lively word of God must
do this, and this honor has God reserved only to himself, neither will he
permit it to the letters, or any Creatures whatsoever. Moreover, the Holy
Ghost will not be bound or captivated in those that are his, nor be subject to
the masterie of any one, nor suffer that it should be taught by any writing or
mouth of man, but will it self be the light, the Doctor, master, captain, and
in a word all in all things.

Moreover, he who uses the Scriptures for a testimony of that work and
spirit, so he do it according to the mind of Christ; not interpreting them
according to the interpretation of the Scribes and Puarisees, does only use
the Scriptures aright, according to the will of God, according as he ought; all
others are mere abuses, and the worship of images, as the whole world busies
it self in the Scriptures, and esteem them to be their Apollo, as if the Holy
Ghost and God were no longer to be consulted with, concerning any affairs, but
only the letters.

In a word, here they enquire and have all things; here with the Pharisees they
think to have life; neither will they grow by an others man's harm, nor will
they see how blind, impious, ignorant, and dead they ever have been in all
ages, in divine things, and in the word of God, who have been the most
Learned, and could all the Bible at their fingers ends, having for all that
need to hear and learn the truth from Christ; So dark and deadly are the
Letters, which they make their Idols.

Paul calls the Letters death, but they life; but indeed they are eternal
darkness, death, aenigma, allegory, and a sealed book.

Unless thou have the living word of God unto the Light, and in them rely
upon the Holy Ghost; For thy teacher, inspirer, interpreter, guide, and master;
and yet many of them dare make the book to be open when as yet they cannot
agree in the exposition of it. And from thence do as many Sects and Heresies
arise, as Readers and Heads do attempt to read it.

But know thou, and have it as a thing most true, that they are clean only to
the clean, Spiritual to the Spiritual, the Word of God to them who are of
God, and Religiously study them by the direction and guidance of the Holy
Ghost, whom they carry always with them, and put as a Light into this,
otherwise dark Lantern; so as by the the doctrine of the Spirit and
direction of it they bring more light unto them; then they receive therfrom;
what they receive therefrom is nothing else or no other but a certain
Testimony of the Spirit of them and all Doctrine.

The Bereans used the Scriptures as Christ would have them to be used: (Acts
17.) Search the Scriptures, (says he,) in which ye think ye have Eternal
life, Ioh. 5. But he thinks otherwise; For it follows, they are they which
testify of me, that I am the Life and Word which speaks unto you, John 8.

As therefore we grant that the Scriptures are the rule of the word and judge
of spiritual things; So in no wise will we remove out of the Church, the word
of God, and unction of the Spirit.

For even as we defend the Majesty and authority of the word of God against
the dead Letter, so will we maintain the masterie of the Spirit against the
executioner of the Letter.

And so do we grant the fulfilling of the swift and short word, as in the
only precept of love all is contained, both the Law and Prophets be
comprehended therein, we ingenuously confess.

Wherefore as we do not take away the word of the Law, but confirm it: So we
do think that something is yet daily to be opened in the Church, by the
unction of the Doctors thereof; the sign and earnest not of that which is
necessary to salvation, but to the gift of Prophesying, and the hidden
interpretation of the Scriptures.

Since Christ never forsakes his Spouse, but is always present with her unto
the end, Math. 28. and being ever in the midst of her, does guide and direct
her, 2 Cor. 9.

This is the reason wherefore we do not force or include the Majesty of the
word of God within the narrow prison of the Letters.

FINIS.

