The Copy of the Articles of Agreement betwixt His Highness Henry of Nassaw
Prince of Orange, and the Governor, Burgers, Captains, and Soldiers of the
City of Breda, about the surrendering of the said City.

Made the 26. of Septem. 6. October.

Faithfully Translated out of the Dutch Copy.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Nathaniel Butter, and Nicholas Bourne. 1637.

The Copy of the Articles agreed upon, betwixt his Highness the Prince of
Orange, and the Governor, Captains and Soldiers within the City of Breda,
about the surrendering of the said City.
1 THat the Governor of Breda, and all his military Officers, and Soldiers, of
what condition or quality soever, none exempted, although they had forsaken the
Service of the Lords, the States general, and betaken themselves to the
Cardinal Infants side, shall march thence without any let or hinderance, with
their high and low Arms, bag and baggage, beating of drums, displayed Colors,
with their Matches lighted, Bullets in the mouth, as they use to march in war,
together with all their Goods, and shall safely be co^ducted as far as the city
of Mechelen

II The Governor shall have leave to choose immediately 4. pieces of Ordnance,
and 2. Mortering pieces, with all their Equipage and Ammunition of war
according to his own pleasure and mind, proportioning only to 12. charges for
every Canon.

III That there shall be Horses and Wagons with their drivers left unto him,
sufficient to draw the aforesaid Artillery with their train, to the aforenamed
City of Mechlen.

IIII That all Munition of war and provision therein, late belonging to the
King of Spain, shall be delivered without any fraud or deceit, into the hands
of such as are deputed thereunto by his Highness; except such which was sold
before the 26. of September. the 6. of October. when the Parley was begun: But
that which was sold before, shall remain to the buyer without enquiry after
those that have bought it.

V That all Officers and Soldiers as are sick and wounded, shall stay in the
Hospital or Elder-house so long till they recover again their former health
to go to Mechlen, and that then a free Convoy shall be given unto them to carry
their Armor and Baggage.

VI. That his Highness shall furnish them with Wagons and Horses, as many as
the Governor shall desire and need, both for his particular service, as also
for all other Officers and Soldiers to carry their Baggage and other Goods as
far as Mechlen; amongst which are comprehended all manner of Weapons, both of
the garrison Soldiers, absent, dead, sick, wounded, and of those that ran
away; and that the aforenamed Wagons shall not be searched in any wise.

VII That such as desire to have their Baggage and Goods carried by water to
Mechlen, shall be provided with fitting Bottoms for their conveyance thither
through Holland, unless it be any manner of Wares. And that there shall
likewise be granted unto them, to send along certain men that may look to
the Goods and Baggage, which shall not be searched nor arrested in any places
under what pretense soever it may be, but shall pass safely as far as
Mechlen.

VIII That the Governor, Captains, Officers, Counselors of war, and
Soldiers taking pay of the King of Spain (as well Temporal as Spiritual
persons, none excepted) as also the widows with their children, which in the
before said city have any Houses, Inheritance or Rents, whether it lie under the
States of Brabant in this quarter, or under this city, houses or inheritances
of particular Goods, moveable or immovable, shall enjoy the time of 2 years
after the sealing of this Accord, to transport, sell, remove, or dispose
otherwise of their Goods, according to their will and pleasure; and during the
time, they shall enjoy their Rents, and the benefits of the hire of their
houses, and have the fruits of their Goods, which they expect, or may expect,
upon the Conditions agreed of, whatever they be.

IX. That the Officers and Soldiers, of what condition or state soever they
be, shall have license to leave their Wives and Children in the City, and that
they may, during the time of 2. years, dispose of their Goods moveable or
immovable, whether they lie within or without the said City, nothing excepted,
and that they shall neither be confiscated nor detained from them.

X. None of the Officers or Soldiers in person shall be arrested or stayed,
whether present or coming for the Rents of their houses where they dwelled,
neither their Baggage stayed for any debts, if they depart with the garrison.

XI That all the Soldiers which are taken prisoners, as well by one as byth'
other side, of what quality or dignity soever they be, shall be set at liberty
without paying of any ransom, but shall ohely pay for their diet according to
the taxation of the Quarter: As also Preachers and other prisoners shall go
out paying only for their diets.

XII That all the Booty which they have gotten before and during the siege,
shall not be demanded of them, but be left to them.

XIII That after the subscription, and sealing of the Articles of this
agreement, the Governor of Breda shall have license to send un Express to His
Highness the Cardinal Infant, with a safe conduct and assecuration to certify
him of it, what has passed during the time of the siege, which the Governor
may do the same day when the Accord is subscribed.

XIIII The said Conditions being subscribed and sealed, at least a days respit
shall be granted unto the Governor and Soldiers to make themselves ready
against their departure; which time being expired, the Governor and Officers
of the said garrison shall promise to depart, namely, upon Saturday following,
being the 30. of Septem. no of Oct. 1637.

XV. The meaning of the former Article is; that none before the 2. days are
expired, shall come out of the City into our Camp, neither that those of our
army shall come into the city; and to prevent all disorders, every one shall
keep in his trenches and for tisications, except perhaps one side or other
should offer to make any approaches, or do any hostility, for the assecuration
whereof Hostages shall be given of both sides.

XVI. That before the garrison departs two sufficient Hostages shall be
delivered, as pledges for his Highness, the Prince of Orange, who shall march
along with the garrison as far as Mechelen, and that on the other side, two
Hostages shall be left by the Governor, so long till the aforesaid Hostages of
the Prince of Orange are returned back again with the weapons, and that then
his Highness the Prince shall likewise send again the two aforesaid Hostages of
the Governor with a safe conduct or convoy, as far as Mechelen.

XVII. That the Officers and Soldiers, and others comprehended in the first
article of the aforesaid accord, having any Armor, boats, Shaloopes or other
materials of war belonging to particular persons, may sell or transport them,
and that they shall not be stayed or any wares or goods, that are bought or are
transported upon them.

XVIII. And that there shall be no restitution of horses, amongst merchants
wares, moveable goods or other wares, which are sold and held for a booty,
and that because of them none shall be stayed or detained.

Actum in the Camp before Breda, the 27 of September, the 7 of October, 1637.
A Copy of the Articles propounded by the Clergy and the Burgermasters,
Sheriffs and Senate of the City of Breda, to His Highness the Prince of Orange,
Lord and Baron of Breda.
His Highness having seen and examined the Articles, here standing by has
declared himself upon it in this manner.
I THat all faults, Hostilities and misdeeds, how great and of what quality
soever they may be (without exception of any person, Churchman, or Layman; of
the aforesaid City, committed by them either present or absent; whether it be
in general or particular) shall fully be forgotten and pardoned, as if they
never had been done or committed.

I THis Article is agreed upon, if so be that all the persons mentioned in it
do behave themselves hereafter, as they ought to do.

II That in the aforesaid City of Breda, now and ever hereafter be granted free
and open exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion in the great Church, in the
Cloisters and Nunneries; as it has been those 12. years last past in that
manner: That no man of what quality soever he be, whether Civil or Military,
shall undertake to offer or do any hinderance, obstacle or scandal in the
Church or in the street; whether in words or deeds upon pain of arbitrary
correction.

II That two Cloisters of Nuns and Bagynes shall be maintained in the same
manner, as they have been before the year 1625. in the time of the government
of the Lords States General.

III That the Magistrate shall be chosen out of all persons, indifferently as
well of the Roman Catholic, as reformed Religion.

III That the Magistrate shall be chosen of the best qualified persons of the
City according to the privileges and Laws of Brabant, and of the aforesaid
City of Breda.

IIII That the Lords of the Chapter with their Subprovosts, Provost and
Nunnery of Saint Catharine Dale, the Pastor, the College of the Society of
JESUS, the Convents of the Patres Capucyns, and Minorites, and all other
spiritual persons, of what state or order soever they be; which before the date
of those Articles have been accepted and placed, shall continue in a peaceable
possession of all manner of goods, Rents, gifts, Tithes, privileges and
Revenewes whatsoever they be; as well within as without the aforsaid City
without exception to place new ones, or surrogate others: but possess them in
the same manner as they all and every one keep, possess and use them now
without any let, hinderance, or harm: and if any Canons, places or Benefices
shall come to be void, they shall be given to the Roman Catholics, according
to the foundations and ancient Statutes.

IIII That all Spiritual persons may have the benefit and use of their goods,
and administrate them, in the same manner as they have done before the year
1625. Those that depart out of the City shall freely take along with them their
goods and movables, as also, if they be houses or lands, they may sell them
like the Citizens.

V The yearly revenewes of the goods and lands of the Orphane-house in the
aforesaid City, Whether it be by inheritance or donation; which it has already
attained, or shall attain unto hereafter, whether it be by service, gift,
purchase, or any otherwise, shall be divided prorato and proportionally, that
the poor children, of what Religion soever they be found; shall likewise have
their Masters and dwellings apart: And goods, alms and collections from the
Hospital or Almes-house called the Holy Ghost, shall be administered and
divided by persons amongst the poor, without regard of what Religion they are,
as it has bin done hitherto.

V That the goods, Collections, Alms of the respective poor houses nominated
in this Article, shall be used and administered, as they have been before the
year 1625. without regard to the Religion of the persons, which are employed
in that behalf.

VI That the City of Breda and all its Inhabitants shall continue all their
privileges and liberties, and that no further burdens shall be laid upon
them, then there have been from the year 1590. till unto the year 1625. so
long as the City was under the government of the united Nether-lands: and being
their City by this siege is exceedingly ruinated, they desire, that they might
be free of the Licents for 3. years to recover themselves again.

VI His Highness grants this Article, but what concerns the point of the
Licents, He will recommend it in the best manner to the Lords States General.

VII That all the Citizens and Inhabitants of the aforesaid City, whether
present or absent, of what quality soever they be, whether they have been in
service of the King of Spain or no, may freely according to this treaty depart
and go wheresoever they please with their whole family and moveable goods, and
papers; or that they may continue in their dwelling places in the aforesaid
City, during the space of a set time, that within that space they may resolve,
whether they will stay and dwell there longer or no; and that during the said
time they may safely and freely travail up and down in the Country, as well
to provide where to pitch their dwelling places, as for their particular
affairs and business for the space of 4. years, and if in the end of the set
time they intend to depart, they may likewise do it freely with their Wives,
Children and goods according as they please by water or land without paying of
customs, Licents or searching of the Ships; although one or other had done any
public service in the aforenamed 4. years; and they shall have leave to
dispose of all their goods, sell them, transport them, or appoint others to
receive and administer them, as they think fittest: and if it come to pass
that they die, whether it be within or without the City, whether He make his
last will or no, the said goods are to belong to the lawful heirs, or their
next friends ab intestato respective and they may carry away all their moveable
goods, merchants wares and other goods, as they think best without requiring
any other Pass then this present treaty: and those that go into Neutral
Countries, if they please, they may return back again into the City to dwell
there without desiring of any further consent.

VII His Highness grants this Petition for the space of three years in
particular, also for the fugitives, with condition; that those which intend to
go into Neutral places, or into the flat Country, and afterward will return
again into the City, they shall be bound to do it with a precedent knowledge
of His Highness or of the Governor.

VIII That those, which for their particular affairs will go into the
Countries and Cities under the King of Spain, may have leave to do it during
the time of the aforesaid 4. years, as often as they please, and may always
return again into the said City to stay and to dwell there, or to depart as
aforesaid.

VIII They may depart, during the time of three years into the enemies
Countries or Cities; and may return again into Breda, yet not without a
precedent consent of the Governor.

IX In the aforesaid contract shall be comprehended all Citizens and
Inhabitants of the aforesaid City, which are absent, as also all Pastors and
spiritual persons, which are fled into the City; as also the Inhabitants which
are fled from the Country into the City, which by virtue of this Contract may
freely return to their Villages and dwellings, or stay in the City the
aforesaid 4. years, according as they please: and the Pastors of the Baronie
of Breda present or absent, and their successors may exercise again in their
Parish Churches their pastoral services, and keep the revenewes, as they had
before the Retorsion.

IX This Article is granted so far, what concerns the Citizens, but the
Pastors and other Spiritual persons mentioned in this Article, may well depart
out of the City, but regulate themselves according to the Patents of Retorsion
published by the Lords States.

X That all the Sentences given by the Magistrate of the aforesaid City, and by
the Head-Bench, whereof nothing was yet reformed, shall remain in their full
force; as also all contracts made before and in the time of the siege howsoever
they be.

X This Article is granted as it stands.

XI That all the perfected accounts of the City, as also all others that are
done by the Magistrate, shall remain entire and stand in force.

XI This Article is likewise granted as it stands, if so be that all Charters,
Registers and Papers, Feods, Dominions, as also others, whether they be
spiritual or temporal goods, concerning His Highness, be put into the hands of
those, that His Highness shall appoint.

XII That those which have Rents or debts depending upon the City, shall
yearly be paid without abatement, or otherwise avoiding them.

XII This in like manner.

XIII That the City of Breda shall not be bound to make, repair and support
the Walls, Forts, Gates, Bridges, Corpse de guards, and other Fortifications and
Works; they having been freed of it these last 12. years under the King of
Spain.

XIII Those of the City of Breda shall behave themselves in this as they have
before the year 1625.

XIIII That the Soldier and Garrison, which shall be laid into the said City;
as well foot as horse, or shall be lodged into the Baruques, or in any other
manner, shall not be burdensome to the City or the Citizens: and if so be that
any Soldier should be Billited in the Citizens houses, they shall be paid for
their services.

XIIII The Soldiers shall be Billited like as in other Cities of the united
Provinces is done.

Actum in the Camp before Breda, the 7. of October, 1637.
FINIS.
Hampt. court 15. of October. 1637.
These Articles of Breda may be Printed.

R. WECHERLIN.


