To The Right Worshipful, Sir John Cleypoole Knight, saving health.

WOrthy Sir, I have ventrously traffiqued with my poor talent in public,
whiles I behold richer graces buried in silence: judging it better, to husband
a little to the common good, then to hurd much wealth in a sullen niggardize. I
censure none: if al were Writers, who should be Readers? if none, idle
Pamphlets would present themselves to the general eye, and be entertained for
defect of more sober matter. If the grain be good, it does better in the
market then in the garner. All I can say for my self is; I desire to (...)
whereof if I fail, yet my endeou^ (...) not my conscience without some ioifull
content. To your Patronage this flies, to whom the Author is greatly bounden,
and shall yet be indebted further for your acceptance. Your love to general
learning, singular encouragement to Students, (opposed to the common
dishartnings, which poverty, contempt, ignorance assaults us with) your actual
beneficence to many, especially to Katherine Hall in Cambridge, worthy of
death-lesse memory, lastly, your real kindness to my self, have prompted
me to seal this Book, with the signet of your name, and send it to the
world. Which in humble submission I commend to your kind acceptance, and your
self, with it, to the blessing of our gracious God.

Your Worships in all duty devoted Tho. Adams.

ENGLANDES SICKNESS.
THE First Lecture.
Ierem. Chap. 8. Ver. 22. Is there no balm at Gilead? is there no Physician
there? why then is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered?


Sick is the daughter of Sion; and the complexion of England gives her not to
be sound. If she feel her own pulse, and examine the Symptoms of her ilnes,
her works of disobedience; she must confess that her health is empaired, or
if she feel it not, she is obstupe^ied.

The Coast I am bound for, is Israel: but (like faithful Merchants) if I can
traffic or transport thence any good commodity into our own country, I will
venture the welcome of it. Israel and England, though they lie in a diverse
climat, may be said right Paralels; not so unfit in Cosmographicall as fit in
Theological comparison. And saving Isreal's Apostacy, and punishment for it,
we need not think it harsh to be sampled. They could plead much of Gods
mercy; if we can speak of more, let us thankefully embrace our transcendent
happiness.

Two maine passages are directed my discourse to sail through; which shall
limit my speech, and your attentions for this time. 1. The Patient. 2. The
Passion. The Sick, and the disease. The Person laboring of grief, is the
daughter of Israel: her Passion or grief is sickness: Why is not the health of
the daughter of my people recovered? These two coasts will affoorde us many
subordinate observations, worthy both our travels.

The Patient, whom we must visit, is described, 1. Qu^ sit, 2. Cuiui sit. God
speaks of her, 1. Positiuely, 2. Possessiuely. Positiuely, what she is of
her self. The daughter of the people. Possessiuely, what she is by relation,
in regard of her owner, populi mei, Gods people.

Daughter. This title is usual according to Hebraisme, Daughter of Israel, for
Israel. Daughter of Sion, for Slon Esa 62.11.
Say ye to the daughter of Sion, Behold thy salvation comes etc. Daughter of
Judah, for Judah Lament. 1.15.2.13.
The Lord has trodden the daughter of Judah, as a Wine Press. Daughter of
Jerusalem, for Jerusalem, Lament, 2. Of Babylon, for Babylon, Psalm. 137.8. Esa.
21.10. Aug in Psalm. 72. ver. 4.
Oh daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed, etc. So Christ calls himself
the Son of man, because he took on him man's nature, Esaias 2 1. Oh my
threshing, and the son of my floor, for the floor it self, or the corn of
it. And Augustine observes on the 72. Psalm, that by the children of the
poor, is meant the poor themselves. This is an abstractiue Phrase, and vox
indulgentis; implying propense favor in the speaker, and tenderness in the
person spoken of; filia populi. It is a word of relation, simply taken: for
daughter depends on the respect of Parent. Here it is Phrasicall, and therefore
not to be forced. Yet because ( cunctae apices) every letter and accent in holy
West is divinely significant; let us not neglectfully pass it over, without
some useful observation.

There is somewhat in it, Obseru. 1.
that Filia non Filius dicitur, the name of Daughter, not of Son is here
given to Israel. Iaraels offspring, must be a Daughter, that she may be married
to the God of Isreal's Son. Christ is the beloved: the Church is his Spouse.
Cant. 2.16.
My beloved is mine, and I am his: he feeds among the Lillies. Betroathed to
him in this life. ( Hos. 2.19.
I will betroth thee unto me for ever: yea I will betroth thee unto me in
righteousness etc.) Solemnly married in the next: at what time the Saints shall
sing: Revel. 19 7.
Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him: for the marriage of the
Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready: and verse 9. Blessed are
they that are called to the marriage Supper of the Lamb. Thus God the Father,
that had a Son by eternal generation, has now a Daughter also by adoption.
Hence the Church is called the Kings daughter, Ps. 45. ( Psalm. 45.13.
The kings daughter is all glorious within, her clothing is of wrought gold. ^)
because she is wedded to the Kings son. God is a Father in many respects.

1 In Creation, Deuteronomy. 32.6.
Deuteronomy. 32. Is not he thy father, that has bought thee? Has he not made thee,
and established thee? He gave us all essentiam and formam, subsistence and
form. 2 In Education, Esa. 1.2.
Esa 1. I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled
against me. We are brought up in this House of this world, and fed from the
table of his blessings. 3 In compassion, Psalm. 103.13.
Psalm. 103, Like as a Father pittieth his children, so the Lord pittieth them
that fear him. Yield, that a mother (which is rare and unnatural) can forget
the Son of her womb; yet God cannot forget the children of his Election. 3
In Correction, Heb. 12.6.
Heb. 12, Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom
he receives. Qui excipitur a numero flagellatorum, excipitur a numero
siliorum: He that scapes affliction, may suspect his adoption. We are not
exempted from misery, that we may not be excepted from mercy. The rod walks
over us, left we should grow wanton with his blessings. Romans 8.15.16
5 In Adoption, and that most principally, Romans 8. We have received the spirit
of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father: Gal. 4.4.5.
God sent his son made of a woman, that we redeemed by him, might receive
the adoption of sons.
Singulari^er. Generali^er. Speciali^er.
All these may be reduced to three, God is a Father singularly, generally,
specially. 1. singularly, the Father of Christ, by nature, 2, generally, the
Father of all men, and al things by creation. 3. specially, the Father of the
Elect by adoption. The first privilege belongs only to Christ. The second to
many, who have made themselves by Apostacy the children of Beliall. The third
is blessed, and never to be forfeited.

This is a happy advancement, that the daughter of Sion is made the daughter of
God; whom his equal and eternal son has vouchsafed to marry. It was no small
preferment in David's o^pinion, by wedding Saules daughter, to be made son in
Law to a King: how far higher does the Churches honor transcend, that by
marrying the son of God, is made daughter in Law to the King of Kings?
Specially, when this bond is indissoluble by the hand of death; vncancellable
by the sentence of man, vndiuorceable by any defect or default in the Spouse:
for he that chose her to himself, will preserve her from all cause, why he
may not take pleasure in her beauty. And as Christ now in heaven, dwells with
his Church on earth by grace: so she, though partly now on earth, dwells with
him in heaven; all her members being Burgesses of that celestial Corporation.
Since animus est, vb^amat, non vb^animat. Philip. 3.20. Aug
Our conversation is in heaven, whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord
Jesus Christ. Thus Augustine, Et ille adhuc deorsum est, and no^ iam s^^sum.
His mercies are still descending to us, our affections ascending to him. The
desires of the faithful Spouse are with her Beloved. Such is the insolubility
of that mystical union, which no eloquence of man can express, no violence of
devils shall suppress. Therefore ascendamus interim cord, vt sequamur corpore:
let us send up our affections before, that our persons may follow after. As
Christ has sent thee down his spirit, as a pawn and pledge of this
assurance: so do thou send him up thy heart, for a token of thy acceptance:
yea of thy hopeful expectation and desire to be with him: Minus anima
promisit se Christo, quae non praemisit se Christo: that soul has nothing
less then vowed it self to Christ, that houers and hankers about the world,
and is loath to come at him.

This is ineffable, inestimable happiness. Hence the daughter of Israel
(understand me not topically, but typically; not Israel in the flesh, but the
Galat. 6.16.
Israel of God: children of that Jerusalem, 4.26.
which is above, or (at least from above,) does apportion all the riches of her
Husband. If it be ( vox amici, Tuus sum totus) the voice of a friend, I am
wholly thine: it is more liuingly, more lovingly ( vox mariti) the speech of a
husband. The Bride (among the heathen) on the first day of her marriage,
challenged of the Bridegroom, vbi tu Caius, ego C^^^, where you are Master, I
must be mistress. Marriage is a strong bond by Gods ordinance, and knows no
other method but composition. God, that increation made two of one, by
marriage made one of two. Hence the Daughter of Israel is made one with the
son of God; by an union, which the heart may feel, but no art describe.
Those gracious and glorious riches, which the master of all the world, is
proprietarie of, are in some sort communicate toys. His righteousness,
holiness, obedience, satisfaction, expiation, inheritance is made ours: as our
sin, sorrow, sufferings, death and damnation were made his not by transfusion,
but by imputation. 2. Cor. 5.21.
His sorrow, pain, passion, for us, was so heavy, so grievous, so pearcing
such a Sic that all the world could not match it with a Sic^t Our joy by him is
so gracious, shall be so glorious, that pro qualitate, pro aequalitate nihil in
comparationem adm^titur: for quality, for quantity it refuses all comparison.
Oh blessed mutation, blessed mutuation ^ what we had ill, (and what had we
but ill?) we changed it away for his good: what he has good, (and what other
nature can come from goodness it self?) we happily enjoy, vel in esse, vel in
posse, either in possession or assurance. Our Savior died our death, that we
might live his life. He suffered our hell, to bring us to his heaven.

Obseru. 2.
It is somewhat, not unworthy the noting, that Filia dicitur, non filiae, Israel
is called by the name of daughter, not of daughters. Sion has but one
daughter. The whole people is vnica, quia vnita: As she is one, she must be at
one, not ^arring, not repugnant to her self. Confusion belongs to Babel: Let
peace dwell in the Palaces of Jerusalem. They are refractary spirits, unworthy
to dwell in the Daughter of Sions house, that are ever in preparation, for
separation from her. The Church consists of a Communion of Saints, an united
Flock under 1. Pet. 5.4.
one shepherd, not a company of straggling sheep, getting schism, and
forgetting their chrisme: the unity of the spirit, that makes men be of one
mind in one house, But as the spirits in man cease to quicken any member
sundred from the body, and the scattered bones in Ezech. 37.7,
Ezechiels vision received no life, till they were incorporate into a body. So
the spirit of God, which is anima corporis, the soul of his mystical body,
forbeares the derivation of grace and comfort, to those that cut off themselves
from it.

She is one, vna vnica, that is mother of us all. Though there be Can. 6.8.9.
threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and virgins without number:
yet my dove my undefiled is but one, she is the only one of her mother, the
choice one of her that bare her. There is one body, many members, 1. Cor. 12. 1
Cor. 12.20
The eye must not quarrel with the hand, nor the head with the foot, If we be
one against another, let us beware, least God be against all. We have one Lord,
whose Livery is Love, John 15.35. Ephesians. 2.17.
John 15. ( By this shall all men know that you are my Disciples, if ye have
love one to another:) whose doctrine is peace, Ephesians. 2. ( He preached peace to
you that were far off, and to them that were nigh:) Let us then serve him,
professing one truth, with one heart. It is wretched, when sects vie number
with Cities; and there are so many creedes as heads; Qui cona^tur vel
corrumpere fidem, vel disrumpere charitatem, who strive either to corrupt faith
or dissolve charity; none performing his function without faction. It is
testified of those pure and primitive times, that Act. 4.32.
the multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and of one soul. Psalm.
133.1. Aug in psalm. illum.
One mind in many bodies? Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is for
brethren to dwell together in unity, says the Psalmist, when inter multa
corpora, non multa corda, as August-sweetly; when among diverse men there are
not diverse minds: Sic viuentes in vnum, vt vnum bominem faciant, so loving and
living together in one, that they all make but (as it were) one man.

There is no knot of love so sure, as that which Religion ties: It is able to
draw together East and West, sea and land, and make one of two, of ten, of
thousands, of all. This is that, which gathers the saints together, not to a
local, but mystical union; whereby they are compacted under the government
of one Lord, tied by the bonds of one faith, washed from their sinsin one
lauer, assigned, assured, assumed by one spirit, to the inheritance of one
kingdom: but the unity of brethren agreeing, is not more entire, Prou. 18.19.
then their dissension, falling out is violent. Pro. 18. A brother offended is
harder to be won, then a strong City: and their contentions are like the
bars of a Castle: but their own loss is the enemies gain. It is usually
seen, that ( amicorum dispen^^a, hostium compendia) dissension is a Lent to
friends, a Christmas to foes. They that so labor to untie unity, that
true-louers knot, which every christian heart should wear, and never be weary
of; find at last by miserable experience, that destruction does strive to
follow, where distraction went before. When in stead of Galat. 2.9.
the right hands of fellowship, struck for consent, they like the Atheni^ns
will sacrifice for none but themselves, and their neighbors of Chios. Needs
must the Daughter of Israel be disquieted, when such opposites, like Rebeccas
twins, struggle in her womb. If the distraction of voices hindered the
building of Babel: needs must the distraction of hearts hinder the building of
Jerusalem.

Behold ye working spirits that must be doing, though you have no thanks for
your labor; behold the daughter of Sion,-opposed on both sides, as Christ was
crucified betwixt two malefactors; straytened as the 2. Sam 10.11
Host of Israel, once betwixt the Aramites and the Syrians (when Ioab and
Abishai disposed themselves to mutual help, as need required.) Atheists on
one side, Papists on the other. Bend all your forces against them, that make
breaches in the walls of Sion; and seek, ensue, procure the Peace of
Jerusalem, who is the only Daughter of her Mother, and Spouse of her Savior.

Obseru. 3.
I might here infer to your observation (without any non-residence from the
Text) that the Church is called Filia Jerusalem, the daughter of the people,
for her beauty, for her purity; I desire you to interpret by Church, not only
that Church, then visible in the Jews, but the Catholic Church also, whereof
theirs was but a part; many things being figuratively spoken of the particular,
which properly belong to the universal. The Church of God (then and ever) may
be called the daughter of Sion, for her virgin fairness, matchless by all
the daughters of women. The Prophet in those solemn lamentations of Isreal's
ruin, gives her the title of Virgin, with this of daughter, Chap. 1. The Lord
has trodden the virgin, the daughter of Judah, as in a Winepresse, and Chapter
2. What shall I equal to thee, that I may comfort thee, oh Virgin daughter of
Sion? Lam, 1.15.2.13.
The holy promise of God for her restoration is recorded by the same Prophet.
to her under this unstained title. Ier. 31.4.
Again I will build thee Oh Virgin of Israel; thou shall again be adorned with
thy tabrets and shall go forth in the dances of them that make merry.

This may insinuate ( intemeratam pulchritudinem Ecclesiae) the unpolluted
beauty of the Church. So Christ testifies of his elected Spouse, Cant. 4.7.
Cant. 4. Tota pulchra es amica mea, Thou art all fair, my love, and there is
no spot in thee. Now beauty consists in a sweet variety of colors and in a
concinne disposition of different parts. So the foreign congregations call
her, the fairest among women: Cant. 6,1.
Whither is thy Beloved gone, oh thou fairest among women, that we may seek
him with thee? For her simplicity she is called a Dove, for her fruitfulnes a
vine: Mount Sion for her steadfastness: for her royalty, she is called a
Queen, for her brightness and eminence, an Iuory Tower: for her beauty, the
fairest among women. As the Cedar in the for rest. the lilly among the flowers
of the valleys, Sion among the mountains, Jerusalem among the Cities; as Di^a
among all the daughtees of the land, so the daughter of Judah among her
sisters. None so fair as the Shunamite to content king David, none else can
plead that the Son of David takes delight in her beauty. But Psalm. 45.13.
the kings daughter is all glorious within, Omnis decor ab intus. It consists
not in outward face, but in inward grace. How comes she thus fair? Here her
speak of her self? Cant. 1.5.
I am black O ye daughters of Jerusalem, but comely as the tents of Kedar, as
the curtains of Solomon. Black indeed by her own misery, white and fair by
her Saviors mercy. Every soul is black by nature: originally soilde,
actually spoiled. We have all primitiuam and priuatinum corruptionem, a
pennary corruption, that depriues us of all habitual goodness. We are borne
Moors, and have increased this swarthinesse, by the continual tanning of
vnceased sins. We have no nitre of our own virtuall, enough to whiten us.
Job had no water of snow, nor David of Hysope, nor had the poole of Bethesda,
though stirred with a thousand Angels, power to cleanse us. Let Nature do her
best, we dwelt at the Sign of the Labour-in-vaine. Only Christ has washed
(...), that we might have part with him. A medicine of Ioh. 19.34.
Water and blood, let out of the side of Jesus by a murdering spear has made
the daughter of Sion fair. In this sacred fountain has Christ bathed her
crimson sins and vlcerated sores; till she is become whiter then wool, or the
driven snow. He made her fair, whom he found foul, that Ephesians. 5.27
he might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot or
wrinckle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish.
She must be pulchra, or not sponsa, to him that is higher then the heavens,
and holier then the Angels. His Spouse must be no blowse: She is adorned by
him, let him be adorned by her.

The useful benefit of this Observation teaches us, to make way through our
own natural wretchedness, to the admiration of our Saviors gracious
goodness. He loved us tantillos and tales, paruos and prauos, so small in
deserts, so vile in defects; without any precedent congruity, or subsequent
cond^gnity, in nobis, quod a nobis, in our selves, that was or is of our
selves: For all the beauty of S^ons daughter, is derived from Gods son. Ezekiel.
16.14.
Thy renown went forth among the Heathen for thy beauty: for it was perfect
through my comeliness, which I had put upon thee, says the Lord God. God
said once to Jerusalem, Ver. 3.
Thy birth and thy Nati^ity is of the land of Canaean, Thy Father was an
Amorite, and thy mother as i Iustite. None eye pitied thee, but thou wast cast
out in the open field, to the loathing of thy person. But when Ver. 5.6, etc.
I passed by thee, and ^wor^ thee polluted in thine own blo^d, I had compassion
on thee: I washed thee with water, clothed thee with broydered wo^k, decked
thee also with ornaments, put a Jewel on thy forehead, and a beautiful crown
on thy head. We have all an Amorite to our Father, an H^^ne to our mother; I
mean, are concei^ed and borne in sin; to ^o^le, and full of corruption, that
there could no temptation be shot from us, to wound the breast of Christ with
love. Sported we were, and nothing but nakedness was left to cover us: sick,
but without care of our own cure: deformed and luxate with the persecution of
vanities; quadrupedated with an earthly, stooping, groping, groucling,
covetousness: not only spotted and speckled ( in concret^) but spots and
blemishes, (in abstracto) pollution it self. As Micah calls Jerusalem and
Samaria, not pec^antes, but peccata: Mic. 1.5.
What is the transgression of Jacob? Is it not Samaria and what are the high
places of Judah? are they not Jerusalem? Or as Lucan speaks of the wounded
body. Totum est pro vulnere corpus. The whole body is as one wound. Blood
touched blood, and sore broke out into sore: all vleers were coagulated into
one by a general rupture; that even Esa. 64.6.
our righteousness was as filthy rags. Oh then how ugly were our sins! If
old iniquities could provoke, or new ones revoke his favor, we had store to
tempt him. If the raw and bleeding wounds of voluntary sins: if the halting
foot of neuterality, the bleare eye of ignorance, the ear deaf to his word,
the tongue dumb in his praise: if the sullen brow of auersenesse, or the
stinking breath of hypocrisy, (if these) could inflame his love, ^oe our
beauty.

What moved thee then. Oh Savior to love us? besides the incomprehensible
delight, and infinite content, which God has in himself; thousands of Angels
stand about him, and ten thousands of those glorious spirits minister unto him,
Psalm. 144.3.
What then is man, Lord, that thou take knowledge of him? or the son of
man, that thou make account of him? the meditation of Saint Augustine is
pertinent to this consideration, Con^ess. 1. 13 cap. 1.
and what son of man may not confess it with him? Neque enim equistime, aut
egotale bonumsum, quo tu adi^veris: nec minor sit potestas tun carens obsequio
men. Neither did thou lack me, Oh Lord: nor was there that good in me,
whereby thou might be helped: neither is thy power lessened through the
want of my service. If we had been good yet God needed us not: being bad,
whence arises his love? what a roughness of soul find thou, Oh Christ,
when tho^ embracest us? what deformity when thou beholdest us? B^rn. in Cant.
what stinch of sin when thou ku^est? when thou discoursest, what rotten
speeches drop from us? when thou take us into thy garden, what contrariety of
affection to thy expectation? our embraces have been rougher then thy crosses,
our persecutions like vinegar, hidden in the sponge of our sacrifices; our
words swords, our oaths as bitter as crucifige, our kisses have been
treasonable to thee; as Judas his: our contempts thy thorns: our oppressions a
spear to gore thy side, and wound thy bowels.

Such was our kindness to thee, Oh blessed Redeemer when thou offeredst thy
self to us, and to the Father for us The best thing in us, yea in the best man
of us, had nothing of merit, nothing near it. Our Romans 6. vlt.
wages is death; thy gift is life, bona naturae, melior gratiae, optima
gloriae. Thou gave us a good life of nature, thou gave us a better of
grace, thou will give us the best of glory. Whether it be pro via, or pro
vita, for the way or the end, it is thy gratuitall goodness, who have promised
of thy mercy, both donaere bonatua and condonare mala nostra, both to give us
thy good things, and to forgive us our evil things, We had misery from our
parents, and have been parents of our own greater misery, (...) medit. cap. 2.
Miseri miserum in hanc lucis miseriam (...): Miserable parents have brought
sorth a miserable offspring into the misery of this world. And for our selves,
even when we were young in years, we had an (...) about us, Colos. 3.9.
Tantillus p^er, tantus pec^^tor. A little child a great sinner. A^g. Co^^.
lib. 1. cap. 12.
Sic generant pater (...) regenera^^nt p^ter ca^sstis, So wretched our
generation left us, so blessed our regeneration has mad us. So beggarly were
we, till Christ enriched us.

If you ask still, what moved Christ? I answer his own free mercy, working
on our great misery. A fit object for so infinite a goodness to work on. He
was not now to part a sea, or bring water out of a Rock, or rain Bread from
heaven, but to conquer Death by death, to break the head of the Leuiathan, to
ransom captives from the power of hell to satisfy his own justice for sin;
and all this by giving his own Son to die for us; by making him man, who was
the maker of man. This was dignus vindice nodus, a work worth the greatness
and goodness of God. Them. in Math. 8.
Decet en^m magnum magna facere. For it becomes him that is Allmighty, to do
mighty works. Thus to make the Daughter of Jerusalem fair, cost the Son of
God the effusion of his blood.

This gives us strong consolation. Qui dilexit pollutos, non deseret politos.
He that loved us when we were not, when we were naught, will not now loose us,
whom he has bought with his death, interessed to his life Ioh. 13.1.
Having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end.
vsque ad finem, L^k. 19.
nay absque fine, unto the end, in the end, without end. He will not neglect
David in the Throne, that did protect him in the fold. He that visited Zacheus
a sinner will not forsake him a Saint. If he bore affection to us in our
rags, his love will not leave us, when highted with his righteousness, and
shining with his rewels. If Ruth were lovely in the eyes of Bo^z, gleaning
after the Reapers, what is she, made Mistress of the Harvest? He never meant
to loose us, that laid out his blood to purchase us. Satan has no trick to
deceive him of us, us of him. As he had no power, to prevent the first, so
none against the second Redemption. Ephesians. 4 30. Ioh. 1.29.
Christ was Agnus in passione, but R^u 5.5.
Leo in R^surrectione: a lamb suffering death, but a Lion rising from death.
If he could save us being a Lamb, he will not suffer us to be lost, being a
Lion. Fear not thou daughter of Sion; he that chose thee sick, sinful,
rebellious, will preserve thee sound, holy, his friend, his Spouse. Romans 5 8.
There is neither death, nor life, nor principal^itie: nor power, nor h^^ght,
nor depth that shall be able to separate us from his love, or pluck us out of
the arms of his mercy. But tremble ye wicked; if ye have not fought in his
Camp, you shall never shine in his Court.

To press this point too far, 1. were but to write Iliades after the Homers
of our Church, 2. Besides there are many that offer to sit down in this chair
before they come at it, and presume of God, that they shall not be forsaken,
when they are not yet taken into his favor. Enough would be saved by this
privilege, if there were no more matter in it, then the pleading of it. But in
vain does the beggars son boast himself of the blood royal, or the wicked
soul of 2. Pet. 1.4.
partaking the divine nature, when he cannot demonstrate his adoption, by his
sanctification So that as we give comfort to them that except themselves; so
terror to them that accept themselves, when God does not, make sure to thy
soul, that thou art once Gods; and my life for thine, thou shall ever be his.

Obseru 4.
Lastly, from this titular phrase observe, that the daughter of Jerusalem, is
our mother Gal. 4.26.
Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all: (...). The
holy Church is our mother, if the most holy God be our Father. She feeds us
with sincere milk from her two breasts, the scriptures of both the
Testaments; 1. Tim. 3.15.
those Oracles which God has committed to her keeping. God does beget us 1
Pet. 1.23.
of unmortallseed, by the word which lives and abides for ever; but not
without the womb of the Church Ierom.
. Non enim nascimur, ^edrenascimur Christian^: we are not Christians by our
first, but by our second birth. Neither is she the mother of all, but us all,
whom God has chosen before all time, and called in time to himself, Aug.
Qui sic sunt in dom^ Dei, vt ipsi sint dom^s Dei, who are so in the House of
God, that themselves are the house of God. Revel. 3.12.
He that overcomes I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of
the City of my God, which is now Jerusalem, that comes out of heaven from my
God.

So that a quo dominatio, ab ^o denominatio, our name is given us, according to
her name that cherishes, and is Mother unto us. Hence every believing soul is
a daughter of Jerusalem, and a spouse of Christ. Anima credentis est
sponsaredimentis. The soul of him that believes, is the spouse of him that
saues. As a multitude is but a heap of unites; so the Church is a congregation
of Saints. And as that which belongs to the body, belongs to every member: so
the privileges of our mother Jerusalem, are the prerogatives of all her
children: not only the daughter of Sion her self, but every daughter of hers,
every faithful soul, 'is a pure virgin, and so to be presented to Jesus
Christ. As Paul to his particular Church of Corinth 2. Cor. 11.2.
: I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy: for I have espoused you to one
husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ. Man's soul is of
an excellent nature, and like a beauteous damsel has many Sutours.

1. First, the Devil, who comes like an old dotard, neatly tricked and licked
up: his wrinckled hide smoothed and sleeked with tentations; he comes ever
masqu'd, and dares not show his face. Take away his vizour, and the soul is
worse then a witch that can affect him. And as when he temptes wretched
Sorceresses to some real covenant with him, he assumes the form of familiar
and vnfeared creatures; left in a horrid and strange shape they should not
endure him. So in his spiritual circumuentions, for the more facile, fly and
suspect^esse insinuation into mortal hearts; He Cor. 11.14
transformes himself into an Angel of light.

The promises of this Sutour are large and fair; he offers the soul, if it
will be his spouse, a greater Ioynture. Judas shall have money, Esau
pleasures, Naball plenty. Math. 4.9.
Christ himself shall be ioyntu^'d in many kingdoms, but ever he indents,
that we must love him, and join with him in marriage. Doeg shall have a place
in the court so he will malign Gods Priests. Pilate shall be Judge, so he will
ply his usury hard. The Proctor shall be made an Eccle^asticall Judge. if he
will promise more conuiuence, then conscience, and suffer Master bribery to
give the censure. Every Bal^am shall be promoted, that is readier to curse,
then bless the people.

These things to the wicked does Satan form in speculation, though not
perform in action. He is an ill wooer that wants words. Hear his voice,
and see not his face; believe his promises, and consider him not as a liar, as
a murderer, and he will go near to carry thy heart from all. But he that has
two infirmities, nay enormities that betray him: a stinking breath, and a
halting foot.

1 For his breath, though it smell of sulphur, and the hot steame of sin
and hell, yet he has art to sweeten it. So he can relish couetice with
thrift^nes, voluptuousnes with good diet, idleness with good quiet, drunkenness,
because it is very sour, fulsome, and odious ^u^n to nature and reason, shall
be seasoned, sweetened with good fellowship. Malice is the argument of a noble
Spirit, and murder the maintenance of reputation. Lust is the direction of
nature, and swearing a graceful testimony to the truth of our speeches. With
such luscious confections he labors to conserve his lungs from stinking If it
were not for those mists and shadows, sin would want both fautors and
factors.

2 But his lame foot cannot be hidden (as they once foolishly fabled among the
vulgar, that his cloven foot could not be changed) for his disobedience is
manifest. If he says, Steal, and God says, Thou shall not steal: Swear,
when God says, Swear not, dissemble, when he cries, Woe against hypocrites:
be an usurer, when God says, thou shall not then dwell in my glory: what
pretenses soever gloss his Text, his lamenesse cannot be hidden. All his
policy cannot devise a boot to keep him from this halting. This is the first
and worst Sutour.

2 The World comes in like a blustering Captain, with more nations on his
back, then crowns in his purse, or (at least) virtues in his conscience. This
wooer is handsomely breasted, Eccles. 1.
but ill backed: better to meet, then to follow: for he is all vanity before,
all vexation behind, by the witness of him that tried and knew him. Sometimes
trouble follows him, but surely follows him. 1. Tim. 6.10
The desire of money is the root of all evil, which while sons coueted after,
they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows. He is like a Be or an Epigram, all his sting is in his tail. He
is troubled with a thousand diseases, and is attended on with more plagues,
then ever was Galens study. He is now grown exceeding old, and has but a few
minutes to live. He is decayed both in stature and nature: especially he is
troubled with a stooping, and a stopping, a stooping in his joints, a stopping
in his lungs. He neither has an upright face, nor a light heart.

1 For the former, he is ever poring on the earth, as if he had no other
heaven, or were set to dig there for Paradise. His eye never looks up to
heaven, but to observe what weather it will be. This is his curuitie, he is a
warped, aged and decrepite Sutour. There is no straightnes in him.

2 For the other, he cannot be lightsome, because he never did give good
conscience one nights lodging which only, truly, can make the Pro. 15.15.
heart merry. He strives to be merry, but his mirth is madness. He cannot
dance unless vanity be his mate, and iniquity his Minstrell. All his joy is
vel in vitys, vel in diuiti^s, either in his wealth, or his wickedness. He
cannot be merry, if God be in the company. For the good only keep Christmas
all the year in their conscience, though not at their table. He has three
inducements to persuade, and three defects to dissuade the soul from accepting
his love. If the former induce any to him, let the latter reduce them from him.

1. His first allurement is a mellifluous language, able to blanch mischief.
His words drop Nectar, as if he had been brought up at Court. And by his
Logic he can make quidlibit ex quolibet, anything of every thing: so by his
Rhetoric he can make (stones) hard hearted worldlings dance to his pipe, as
it is fabled of Orpheus, Cusus ex ore non tam ver^a, quam mella fluunt, as I
have read of Origem. Every syllable is like a drop of honey from his lips.
Magicis verborum viribus, quasi transformat homines. There lies a magic in
his tempt^ng speech, able to inchant, and transform men's hearts, making a
voluptuous man a hog, an oppressor, a Wolf, the lustful a Goat, the
Drunkard a Devil. His arguments are not empty, but carry the weight of golden
eloquence, the musical sound of profit and pleasure.

2 Besides his captiuing elocution, he mends the ill fabric of his person
with rich acoutrements. He wears all his clothes, Romans 12.
as Saint Paul says, in the fashion. He has change of suites. He puts on
pride, when he goes to the Court: Bribery, when he goes to the Hall: Ebriety,
when to a Tavern: Prodigality, when he shufles in among Gallants: Usury, when
he would walk in the Exchange: and Oppression, when he would ride down into
the Country. Only, Avarice is the girdle of his loins, he is never without
it. It is fashion, to be of any fashion, and to apply himself to thy humor,
whom he courts. He has a suit to speed of his suite, to please thy affection.

3 This is not all, he tenders thee a fair and large iointure. Give him but
marriage, and he will give thee maintenance. Iura, periura, Defraude,
dissemble, swear, for swear, bribe, flatter, temporize; make use of all men,
love only thy self; and riches (with preferment in his company) shall seek
thee out. Thou shall hazard no Straights, climb no Alps, prison not thy self
in a study, nor apprentice thy life to the wars: entertain but the world
for thy husband, and thou art out of all hunger and cold: wealth shall come
trolling in eue^ whiles thou sleep. (But happy is he, that can be rich
with honesty, or poor with content.) These are the glories, whereof he would
enamour thee: thus would he possess thee with his possessions. But he has
three deterringes: hear them.

1 He has sore eyes, bleare and raw with cares: for he is ever in
expectation, either of remedy to griefs, or supply to wants. What opulency can
boast immunity from sorrow, exemption from crosses? And such is the secure
worldlings impatience, when once angered with afflictions, that a little misery
makes him greatly miserable He makes his yoke the more troublous to him,
because he has not learned to draw quietly in it. Though he has already
more then enough, he keeps his eyes sore, with seeking for addition. In the
quest of wealth he denies himself rest. Needs must his eyes be sore that
sleeps not. This is one disease incident to the world. 2 He has swollen
legs, diseased with surfets. For the world comprehends more then
covetousness, by the testimony of S. John: 1. Ioh. 2.15
The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, the pride of life is of the
world. We renounced in our Baptism with the world, pompes and vanities Riot,
lust, intemperance, Epicurisme, dissolutenes are members of the world as well
as avarice. Tam I say, if not tantum. And therefore our Savior by that terrible
sentence against rich men intends not covetousness for a sole and singular
obstacle, (yield it a principal) but pride, ambition, lust, vaineglory,
luxury, the effects of an opulent state, as well as couetice. There are more
burdens to load the Cammell when he should pass through the small posterne of
Grace, (that needless eye) then only auarous affections. What lesson of vice
is not the rich man apt to learn? Therefore this makes the world have swollen
legs, as the other sore eyes. He is blind, he is lame, both ill qualities
in a Sutour. 3 He has a very weak tenur of al he possesses, he is Gods tenant
at will, and has leasse of nothing, but durante Domini been placito, during
the great Landlord of heaven and earth his favor. At utmost, his hold is but
for term of life; and that a warish, short, and transient life, scarce so long
as the first line of an indenture. Nay, he, has right to nothing; for he
holds not in Capite, from the Lord of all, Jesus Christ. Therefore every
wordling shall be accountant, for each crumme of bread, and drop of water,
which they have received. For the right of the creatures lost in the first
Adam, cannot be recovered, but by the second. So that he enters on them as an
Intruder, and possesses them as an Usurper his title being so bad, his tenure
is certain in nothing, but in being uncertain. Sic transit gloria mundi 1.
Cor. 7.30.
: So the fashion of this world passes away. What soul soever marries him,
either he leaves his wife, or his wife must leave him, without ever being
satisfied.
You see then the fraudulent proffers of your personable wooer, the world. What
is there in him, that any daughter of Jerusalem should affect him? Only be you
simple as Doves, in not loving him, but wi^e as Serpents, in living by him. 1.
John 2.15.
Love not the world, says Saint John: yet make 1. Cor. 7 31
use of it says Saint Paul, Vtere mundo, fruero Deo: Use the world, but enjoy
God: for the Heb. 1.19.
world, wax^th old as a garment, and fades away; but 13.8.
Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. The world, like
fire, may be a good servant, will be an ill Master. Make it thy slave, it is
not good enough to be thy husband. How base is it, for a freewoman to marry her
servant.

3 The third is the Flesh. This Sutour comes boldly in, like a home-borne
child, and hopes to speed for old acquaintance. He can plead more then
familiarity. even inherence, inheritance of what nature has left us. He is
not only collateral, but connaturall to us. One house has held us, one breath
served us, one nutriment fed us, ever since one conception bred us. Like
Hippocrates twins we should have inseparably lived together, and loved
together, if the prerogative Court of grace and mercy had not divorced us. And
even in the sanctified, this impudent, wooer cannot be quite shaken off, till
death shall at once deliver that to death, us to life. For though Romans 7.23 24.
with the mind, I delight in the law of God; yet I see another law in my
members rebelling against the law of my mind, and bringing me unto captivity
to the law of sin. His company is wearisom, his sollicitings tedious, to the
virgine-daughter of Sion. Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
the body of this death? Ver. 25.
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then with the mind we serve
the Law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin.

He will perpetually urge his suit; and not after many reiections be said nay.
Thy soul cannot be rid of him, so long as thou hold him in any hope of
success. And so long he will hope, as thou give him a cold and timorous
denial. Sutours are drawn on with an easy repulse, and take that as half
granted, that is but faintly opposed. In whom this wooer preuailes least, he
wearles him with importunity, till a peremptory answer has put him out of
heart. The wavering and weakely-resisting spirit cannot sleep in the Chamber of
quiet: whiles innumerable lusts (which are the sollicitors and spokesmen of the
flesh) beat at the door with their early knockes: pressing more impudently
for audience, then instruments of villainy to Machianell, or wronged Clients to
an Advocate. Remiss answers provoke his fiercer attempts. He is shameless,
when he meets not with a bold heart. He thinks that though Pugnabit primo
fortassis, Amor. lib. 1.
and improbe dicet,
Pugnando vinci se tamen illa volet.
Though at the first the Soul refuse to yield,
She means on further strife to loose the field.
Only resolution can make him give back, give over.

His insinuations are many, 1. by promises. Pollicitis dives. He is neither a
beggar, nor a niggard in promising They are the cheapest chaffer, a man can
part withal, 2. By tedious and stintlesse solicitations, as if time could win
thee. Quid magis est durum saxo: quid mollius vnda?
Dura tamen teneris saxa cauantur aquis.
The stone is very hard, the water soft,
Yet does this hollow that, by dropping often.
As if the strongest sort were not long able to hold out, 3. By shadow (by
real proffers) of friendship, Tut a frequensque via est, per amici fallere
nomen, It is a safe and common way: by name of friendship to show false play.
It was not mine enemy (says David) but my familiar friend, that did me the
mischief. 4. By tendering to the soul, pleasing and contentfull objects, as if
-- non vincere possit
Flumina, si contra quam rapit vnda, na^et.
The floods would easily master him,
If he against the stream should swim.
Therefore he forms his insidious baits to our inclinations, diuersifieth his
lusts according to the variety of our humors. Hic Procus innumeris moribus
aptus crit. This Wooer can vary his Protean forms, observe all strains,
reserve and conceal his own, till he be sure, that the pill he gives will
work.

This Sutour is dangerous, and preuailes much with the soul: a handsome fellow
if you pluck off his skin: for this says Saint Jude, is spotted all over. A
virgin well natured, well nurtured, that sets ought by herself, will not
fasten her love on a lazar, leper, or vlcerous Moore. Why then. Oh why should
the soul, so heavenly generate thus become degenerate, as to wed her
affections to the polluted flesh. God, indeed, once married the soul to the
body, the Celestial to a terrene nature, but to the lusts of the body, which
Paul calls the flesh, he never gave his consent. This clandestine match was made
without the consent of Parents, of God our Father, of the church our mother;
therefore most sinful, most intolerable. Cashier then this sawey Sutour, who
(like some riotous younger brother, with some great heir) promises much, both
of estate and love; but once married, and made Lord of all, soon consumes all
to our final undoing. He breaks open the Cabinet of our heart, and takes out
all the Jewels of our graces; and stintes not his lauisning, till he has
beggerd us. This is the third Sutour.

4 The last and best, and only worthy to speed is Jesus Christ. Cant. 5.9.
What is thy beloved more then another beloved, O thou fairest among women: Say
foreign Congregations to the Church. Ver. 10.
To whom she answers: My beloved is white and ruddy (he has an exact mixture
of the best colors, arguments of the purest and healthfullest complexion.) The
chiefest among ten thousand; (Infinitely fayrer then all the sons of men;
Ver. 11.
who, alone may bear the standerd of comely grace, and personal goodlinesse
among all.) His head is as the most fine gold; (the Deity which dwells in
him, is most pure and glorious,) His locks are curled, and black as a Raven,
(his godhead deriuing to his humane nature such wondrous beauty, as the black
curled locks become a fresh and well favored countenance) His eyes are like
doves, etc. who will, let him there read and regard his graces: Chap. 1.3.
His name is as ointment powered forth, therefore do the Virgins love him.

He has 1 a rich Wardrobe of righteousness to apparel us, Revel 21.
2. a glorious house, a City of gold to entertain us; whose foundation is
Jasper and Sapphire, and such precious stone; the least of them richer then ten
Escurials, 3. His Ioynture is Glory, Ioynture I may call it, for so we are with
him ioin'd heirs, though not joined purchasers. If the house of this World be
so esteemed, Romans 8.17.
wherein God lets his enemies dwell; what is the mansion he has provided for
himself, and his Spouse, the daughter of Sion ^ 4. His fruition is sweet and
blessed, ob eminentiam, ob permanentiam, for perfection, for perpetuity, a
Kingdom, and such a one, as cannot be shaken, which no sin, like a
polliticke Papist shall blow up, Heb. 12.
no sorrow like a turbulent Atheist shall invade.

This Sutour is only beautiful, only bountiful: let him possess your
souls, which with his blood he bought out, and with his power brought out from
Captivity, for him am I deputed wooer at this time, (for as 2. Cor. 5.20.
though God did beseech you through us we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled to God,) who would feign ^ Chap. 11.2.
present your souls pure Virgins to Jesus Christ Forbear the prostitution: of
them to any rauisher, to any sin: For peccare to sin, in the literal word,
is to commit adultery: quasipellicare, id est cum pellice c^ire. Christ lays
just Title to you: give your selves from your selves to him: you are not your
own, unless you be his.

We have heard the Daughter of Sion described, qua sit: let us now hear cu^us
sit, the daughter of my people says the Lord. God was pleased with that Title,
the God of Israel His own Scriptures frequently give it him, Ier. 32.36.
Ierem. 32. Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel, etc. The children are
usually called after the name of then Father: here the Father is content to be
called after the name of his children. Dan. 6.26.
The God of Abraham, the God of Isaacke, etc. So Darius proclaims in his
decree: Esa. 44.5.
The God of Daniel, Esa. 44 One shall say, I am the Lords, and another shall
call himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand
unto the Lord, Chap. 45.4.
and surname himself by the name of Israel. Thus says the King of Israel,
etc. And Esa. 45. For Jacob my servants sake, and Israel mine Elect, I have
even called thee by thy name: I have surnamed thee, though thou have not known
me. Here might be inferred the inutterable compassion of God to Israel. It is
my people, that is thus sick. But I have not scanted this observation before.
Obseru.


That which I would now direct my speech, and your attention to, is the
strangeness of this complaint; agrotat Israel. Others to have been sick, not
so rare. It had been no wonder in Egypt, Ammon, Edom, Babylon, Israel has
the best means for health, therefore the more inexcusable her sickness. They
should have been so maner'd, as they were manured; and brought forth grapes
according to their dressing: Sidon shall judge Chorazin; Niniuch Jerusalem; In
Sidon where was no Prophet, was less wickedness: in Nineveh, where less
prophesying, greater repentance. This conviction was demonstrated in many
particulars. The praise of the Centurion, is the shame of Israel. The mercy of
the Samaritan, the Priests and Leuits condemnation. The very dogs licking
Lazarus fores, confute the stony bowels of Dives. The returning of the strange
Leper, with a song of thanksgiving in his mouth, was an exprobration to all the
nine; when Christ had the tithe of a person, he least expected.

God reproacheth this daughter of Sion, Ezekiel. 16.46.
Ezekiel. 16: that Samaria and Sodo^^e were of her Sisterhood, yea, as if their
abominations were a very little thing, thou wast corrupted more then they in
all thy ways. Ver. 47.
Nay; thou have justified thy sisters, in that their abominations came short of
thine, Ver. 51.
by the one half? Esa. 63.18.
The people of thy holiness, as the Prophet Esaias calls them, are become by the
same Prophets testimony, Chap. 1.4.
a sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity. Chap. 63.19
They that were not called by thy name, are not so rebellious. E^ sunt
deteriores, quo meliores Deus reddere conatus est. It is grievous, that Gods
goodness should make men worse; and the more kind God has been to them, the
more unkind they should be to themselves, the more unthankful to him. Christ
for the Jews turned their John 2.
water into wine: the Jews for Christ, turned their wine into Math. 27.34.
vinegar, and offered it him to drink. They that were the richest of Gods own
making, became the most bankroute sin religion. They changed Cathedra^
magistery, wherein God placed their Doctors, in sodem pestilentiae, into the
scorners chair, contemning his benefits: they had a Vineyard at an easy rate,
yet paid no fruits of obedience. It is hard to say, whether God was more
gracious to them, or they more grievous to him. This boldly, never was more
piery required with less piety. God sowed mercy, and reaped a crop of iniquity.

God can brook this in none, but as he forsook his Temple in Sion, when it
became a den of thieves, so he will take out his ornaments where with he
graced the temple of the soul, when we set up the Dagon of this world in it;
and withdraw his riches, as from a divorced Spouse, running after other lovers.
Whiles Adam served God, God served him; he prouides for him a (...) a
companion, and sustentation. We read of nothing, that God did six days
together (and his works were not small nor few) but work for Adam; as if he
had been hired to labor for him: Is it not strange that such a child should
rebel to such a father? Let none think, his fault was small, in eating an
apple, or that his punishment waighed heavier then his trespass. His sin was
so much the greater, because against a God(and) so good unto him. The more
gloriously the Sun and Summer have apparrelled a tree, the more we admire
the blazing; when God has planted a soul in his own holy ground, watered it
with those sacred, purifying dewes of his graces, shone on it with the radiant
beams of his soul reviving mercies, spent much ( and opera and olei) both of
care and cost upon it; and has his expectation required, abused with a mere
flourish of seaues; with either ( anequam, ornequic quam fructus) none or evil
fruits; there goes out a curse, Never fruit grow on thee more. When God has
put his grace into our unworthy vessels, how abusiue is it, to empty our selves
of that precious liquor, and swell our spirits with the poison of hell? How
just is it with him to take away, what he gave, Luke 8. Luke. 8.18.
and to put a consumption into our vital parts? Hence (without wonder) our
judgment rusts, like a never drawn sword: our knowledge loses the relish,
like the Jews putrified Manna. Our faith dissolues as a cloud, our zeal
trembles, as if held with a palsy; our love freezeth the harder, as water that
once was warm. Our repentance turns to ice, and our hope to snow: which the
heat of affliction melts to water, not to be gathered up; the image of death is
upon all our religion.

Was this strange in Israel; and is it nothing in England: Look upon the
inhabitants of the earth, somewhat remote from us, to whose face the Sun of
the Gospel has not yet sent his rays; people blinded with ignorance, blended
with lusts. What were our desires or deserts, former matter or latter merit,
congruity before conversion, or condignity after, more then they might show;
that God should put us into the Horizon of his Grace? whiles they sit in
darkness and shade of death? Want they nature, or the strength of flesh? are
they not temperd of the same mortar? are not their heads upward toward heaven?
have they not reasonable souls, able for comprehension, apt for impression,
Ephesians. 4.230.
if God would set his Seal on them, as well as we? Are they not as likely for
flesh and blood, provident to forecast, ingenuous to invent, active to
execute, if not more then we? Why have we that star of the gospel, to light
us to Christ Jesus, standing over our Country, whiles they neither see it, nor
seek it: It is clearly, merely Gods mercy. Now why are our lives worse, our
knowledge is better? Why devour we their venom, refusing our own healthful
food; whiles they would feed on our crumbs, and have it not. Woe unto us, if we
scant God of our fruits, that has not scanted us of his blessings.

Bring presents to the King of glory; ye childrn of his holiness, and worship
before him. Endanger not your selves to the greater misery, by abusing his
great mercy. He has loved us much and long in our election, Tantum, tamdiu,
dilexit indignos, etc.
when we could not love him: in our redemption, when we would not love him.
His love was not merited by ours: let our love be deserved, inflamed by his.
If God prevent us with love, we can do no less then answer him in the same
nature, though not (it is impossible) in the same measure. Math. 5.46.
Publicans will love those, that love Publicans. The Poet could say, Martial.
lib 6 Epigr. 11
Ut prastem Pyladen, aliquis mihi praestet Oreslen,
Hoc non sit verbis: Marce, vt ameris (...).
Give me Orestes, I shall Pylades prove,
Then truly, that thou may be loved, love.
But God loved us, even being his enemies, Bern. Ep. 11.
Eitu charitas est substantia, nostra accidextalis. His love is a substance,
ours only accidental. His, ignis accendens, ours ignis accensu^. His love is
that holy fire, that inkindles ours. If we return not our little mite of love
for his great treasures, his great love shall turn to great anger; and we
shall fare the worse that ever, we fared sowel. God (as he has advanced us
into his favor) so has he set us as a light on a hill; among the Nations: if
darkness be on the hill, what light can be in the valley? A small scar on
the face is eminent. If one eye-brow be shaued, August.
how little is taken from the body, how much from the beauty? We are now the
worlds envy; oh let us not become their declamation.

Is the daughter of Gods people sick? it may then be in ferred, Obser^.
that the Church may be sick, though not die and perish; die it cannot. The
blood of an eternal king bought it, the power of an Heb. 9.14.
eternal spirit, preserues it; the mercy of an eternal God shall crown it.
The heathens have imagined to vaunt themselves and daunt us, with the downfall
of our Church. Aug. in Psalm. 70.
Ad certum tempus sunt Christiani, postea perihunt, r^dibunt Idola, and quod
fuit antea. These Christians are but for a time, then they shall perish, and
our Idols shall be returned to their former adoration. To whom that father
replies: Verum in cum expectas, miser Infidelis, vt transeunt Christiani,
tra^sis ipse sine Christianis. But whilst thou O wretched Insulei, exp^^test
the Christians to perish, thou do perish thy self, and leave them safe
behind thee. Whiles they boast in their self flatteries, that we had a time
to begin, and shall have a time to continue, themselves vanish and we remain
to praise the Lord our God from generation to generation. Indeed, Matthew. 15.
Math. 15.13.
Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up:
But Ioh. 13.1.
whom he loves, for ever he loves. Yet may his Church whiles it is not freed
from militancy be very sick in the visible body of it. Aegrotat Israel, yet
in Israel was the true Church of God. It was so sick in Elias time, that Romans
11. he complayneth, Romans 11.3.
Lord they have killed thy Prophets, and dug down thine altars, and I am
left alone, and they seek my life. The Church was sick you see; yet the next
verse of Gods answer frees it from being dead, I have reserved to my self
seven thousand men, that never bowed the knee to the Image of Baal.

What Church since has been so happy, as to joy in her freedom from this
cause of complaint? The Church was from the beginning, shall be to the end
without limitation of time, Cant. 4.12.
of place. Yet she is a Garden, (Cant 4. A garden enclosed is my sister, my
spouse) sometime by diligence kept neat and clean, sometimes by negligence
ouer-run with weeds. She is a Moon, est clear and beautiful, est waning and
waxing dark esome. Chap 6.10.
Die then it cannot, be sick it may. Time was, In 1. Cor.
says Chrysostom, that Ecclesiacalum fuit, spiritu cuncta administrante etc.
Hou^. 36.
The Church was a heaven, the holy Spirit governing all things etc. Now the
very steps and tokens thereof do but scarcely remain. Mali prosiciunt, boni
deficiunt: Bern.
Wickedness grows strong, goodness faints. The lambs are few, the goats
swarm, Little faith shall be found,
When the last trumpe shall sound.


We have read often the Church compared to a body, Ephesians. 4 13
Cuius caput Christus, whose head is Jesus Christ. In the 4. 10 the Ephesians,
we have it likened to a man, Cuius anima Christus, whose soul is Christ. Till
we all come to a perfect man etc. Now the soul increases in a man, not
augmentatiuely, but secundum vigorem; transfusing into the body her virtuall
powers and operations more strongly. Heb. 13.8.
Christ is ( semper Idem obiectiue, subiectiue, effectiue, ever the same in
himself, and to us: but this body grows up with the head, this man with the
soul, this Church Coloss. 2.19.
increases with the increasing of God. Sickness then to the Church cannot be
mortal, yet may the body be distempered: her doctrine may be sound, her
members want health. Why is not the health of the daughter etc.

But to descend from the universal to a particular, from the invisible to a
visible Church; this may be sick, 1. Either by some inbred distemperature, 2.
or by the accession of some outward malady. There may be grieuances in either
respect, to afflict the daughter of Israel.

1 Inwardly, Corruption may gather on it by degrees, and put it in need of
physic. For as the natural body of man, when it is over charged in the
veins and parts with rank and rotten humors, which it has gathered by
misdiet, surfeiting, or infest airs; the man grows dangerously sick, til by
some fit euacuation he can be discharged of that burden. So the body of a
Church being infected with humors, and swollen with tumors of unsound
doctrine, of vnsounder life, superstitious ceremonies, corrupting the vital
pores and powers thereof: troubled with the cold shakings of indeuotion, or
taken with the numnesse of induration, or terrified with windy passions of
turbulent spirits. cannot be at ease, till due reformation has cured it. Now
such a Church sometimes is more swelling in bigness, and oftents a more bulky
show; but once truly purged of such crude superfluities, it becomes less great
and numerous, but withal more sound, apt and fit for spiritual promotions.

Our particular Church of England, now fined from the dross of Rome, had a
true substantial being before, but has gotten a better being, by the
repurgation wrought by the Gospel, maintained of our Christian Princes, the
true defenders of the faith of Christ. God had doubtless his Church among us
before; for it is Catholic and universal: but his floor was full of chafe.
The Papists demand where our Church was before Luthers time. We answer, it lay
hid under a great bulk of chafe: and Mat. 3. since Christ vouchsafed to come
with his fan to purge it of the chafe, it now shows it self with greater
eminence, and is clearer both in show and substance. It was before a wedge of
pure gold, but coming into the hands of impostors, was by their mixtures and
sophistications, for gain and such sinister respects, augmented into a huge
body and mass, retaining still an outward fair show and tincture of gold.
They demand, where was the gold? demonstrate the place. I answer in that
Mass. But for the extracting thereof, and purifying it from dross, God has
given us the true touchstone, his sacred Word, which can only manifest the
true Church: and withal reverend Bishops, and worthy Ministers, that have
been instruments to refine and purge it from the dross of superstitions,
foul ceremonies, and iugling inventions.

The Papists brag themselves the true ancient Church, and tax ours of nouelty,
of heresy. But we justly tell them, that Leo ad Palest.
Eccles^^enomen tenent, and contra Ecclesiam dimicant; that they usurp the
name of the Church, yet persecute it. For the truth of our Church, we appeal
to the Scriptures. Aug. de unit. Eccl.
Nolo humanis documentis, sed diuinis oraculis sanctam Ecclesiam demonstrari:
It is fit the holy Church should be proved rather by divine oracles, then
humane precepts or traditions. We stand not upon numbers (which yet, we bless
God, are not small) but upon truth. You see, as the Church of the Jews, so any
particular Church may be sick inwardly. To describe these internal diseases,
I will limite them into 4.

1 Error, August.
indeed Heresy cannot possess a Church, but it gives a subversion to it.
Errare possum, Hereticus esse non Possum, says that Father, I may err, an
heretic I cannot be. Now, Quic quid contra veritatem sapit, heresis est, etiam
vetus consuctudo. What is diametrally opposed against the Truth, Tertul.
is heresy, yea though it be an ancient and long received custom. But
Logic, which is a reasonable discourse of things, shows a great difference
between diuersae and contraria. A Church may be sick of error, and yet
live: but heresy (a wilful error against the fundamental truth, violently
prosecuted and persisted in, kills it. Therefore Haeresis potius mors, quam
morbus: Heresy is rather death then sickness. When the truth of doctrine or
rather doctrine of truth, has been turned to the falsehood of Heresy. God
has removed their Candlestick, and turned their light into darkness. Error
may make it sick, but so that it may be cured. The Churches of Corinth,
Galatia, Pergamus had these sicknesses: the holy Ghost by Paul and John
prescribes their cures. If they had been dead, what needed any direction of
Physic? If they had not been sick, to what tended the prescription of their
remedy. To God alone, and to his maiesticall word, be the impossibility of
erring. Quisquis cogitando se errar^ non posse, in hoc maxim errat.
That Church that man shall in this err palpably, that will challenge an
immunity: whosoever thinks, he cannot err, does in this very persuasion err
extremely. I know there is a man on earth, a man of earth, (to say no more)
that challenges this privilege. Let him prove it. Give him a term ad
exhibendum, and then for want of witness ho may write, Test meipso, as Kings
do, Witness our self, etc. Nay ask his Cardinals, Friars, Jesuits. This is
somewhat to the Proverb, Ask the son^ if the Father be a thief. But he
cannot err in his definitive sentence of Religion. Then belike he has one
spirit in his consistory, and another at home: and it may in some sort be said
of him, as Salust of Cicero. Al^^d stan^, aliud sedens de Republica loquitur.
He is of one opinion sitting, of another standing. Romans 3.4.
Let God be true, but every man a lier. One of their own said; Omnis homo
errare potest in side, etiamsi Papa sit: Any man may err in faith, yea though
he were the Pope. If they will have Rome a sanctuary, let them take along with
them Petrarcha's catachresicall speech, Asylum errorum.
calling it a Sanctuary of Errors. What particular Church then may not err?
now can it err, and be sound? Be the error small, yet the ache of a finger
keeps the body from perfect health. The greater it is the more dangerous.
Especially, 1. either when it possesses a vital part, and affects,
infecteth the Rulers, of the Church. It is ill for the feet, when the The Pope
calls himself the head of the Church.
Head is giddy, 2. or when it is infectious and spreading, violently
communicated from one to another, 3. or when it carries a color of truth. The
most dangerous vice, is that which bears the countenance, and wears the
cloak of virtue, 4. or when it is fitted to the humor, and seasoned to the
relish of the people. Sedition, affectation, popularity, covetousness, are
enough to drive an error to an heresy. So the disease may prove a Gangrene,
and then enserecidendum, ne pars sinceratrabatur: no means can save the whole,
but cutting off the incurable part: Pereat vnus potius quam vnitas.

2 Ignorance is a sore sickness in a Church, whether it be in the superior
or subordinate members. Especially when the Priests lips preserve not
knowledge. Ill goes is with the body when the (...) are blind. Devotion without
instruction often winds it self into superstition. When learnings head is
kept under Auarices girdle, the land grows sick. Experience has made this
conclusion too manifest. Our forefathers felt the terror and tyranny of this
affliction; who had golden Challices, and wodden Priests, that had either no
Art, or no heart to teach the people. Sing not, thou Roman Syr^n, that
Ignorance is the damme of devotion, to breed it: it is rather a damme to
stifle, restrain and choke it up. Blindness is plausible to please men, not
possible to please God. Grant that our faults in the light, are more heinous
then theirs who wanted true knowledge. Chrysest, in Psalm. 9
Ex furibus enim leges eos grauius puniunt, qui interdiu furantur: For the
laws do punish those thieves most severely, that fear not even by day to
commit outrages. Yet in all reason, their sins did exceed in number, who
knew not when they went awry or what was amisle. Rome has (by a strange and
incredible kind of doctrine) gone about to prove that the health, which is
indeed the sickness, of a Church, Ignorance. Their Cardinal Cusaen faith,
that Obedientia irrationalis est consummata obedientia and perfectissima, etc.
Ignorant obedience, wanting reason, is the most absolute and perfect obedience.
Chrysostom gives the reason, why they so oppose themselves against reason, In
opere imperf. Hom. 44. Sciunt enim, si manifestata essis veritas, quod ipsorum
Ecclesia relinquenda esset.
Haeretici sacerdotes Claudunt ianuas veritatis, etc. Heretical Priests shut
up the gates of Truth: For they know that upon the manifestation of the Truth,
their Church would be soon forsaken. If the light which makes all things
plain, should shine out, Hierom. in Esa.
Tunc hi qui prius decipiebant: nequaqua^ ad populum accodere valebunt, post
quam se senserint intellectos: then they who before cosoned the people, could
preserve their credits no longer, being now smelt out and espied. Hence the
people aim at Christ, but either short or gone, and not with a just Ieuell.
But Aug. de tem. Sermon. 145.
Nemo de Christo credat nisi quod Chr^stus de se credi voluit. Let no man
believe other thing of Christ then what Christ would have believed of himself.
Non minus est Deum fingere, quam negare, says Hylary. It is no less sin to
feign a new God, then to deny the true God. The Priests call the people Swine,
and therefore must not have those precious pearls. And so the people ( Tertul.
in Apologes.
Amant ignorare, malunt nescire, quod iam oderunt,) had rather continue
ignorant, as not loving to know those things, which they cannot love, because
they know not.

But alas, Ignorance is so far from sanity and sanctity, that it is a
spilling and killing sickness. Men are urged to read the Scriptures, that
never emptied Treasur-house of knowledge: they answer, Chysost in Math. Hom. 2.
Non sum. Monachus, vxorem habeo, and curam domus, I am no Priest, I have a
wife, and a domestical charge to look to. This is that Pestilence (no
ordinary sickness) that infects to death many souls; to think that knowledge
belongs only to Priests. Ho^ Diabolicae inspiration is opus. st, non sinentu
no^ aspicere Thesaurum, ne' diuitias acquitamus. Chrys^st, ad Hebraos. Hom. ^
17.
This is a work of the Devils inspiration, not suffering us to behold the
treasure, least we grow rich by it. Dices non legi, non est haec excusario,
sed crimen: Thou say I have not read: this is no excuse but a sin. The
Romists stick not, as once the Valentinian heretics ( veritatis ignorantiam,
cognitionem vocare) by a Paradoxe, Pseudodoxe, to call the ignorance of the
truth, the true knowledge thereof. Like those, Wisd. 14. that living in a war
of ignorance, those so great plagues they called peace. But Greg. 1 Cor. 8.1.
Quiea quae sunt Domini nesciunt, a Domino nesciuntur: They that will not know
the Lord, shall not be known of the Lord. It is objected, 1. Cor. 8, Knowledge
puffs up. Let Iraeneus expound it. Non quod veram scientiam de Deo culparet,
alioquin seipsum primum accusaret, Not that he blamed the true knowledge of
God, for then he should first have excused himself.

Beloved, Coloss. 3.16
Let the word of God dwell in you plenteously. Do not give it a cold
intertainement, as you would do to a stranger, and so take your leave of it;
but esteem it as your best familiar, and domestical friend: making it (as our
Postill sweetly) your chamber fellow, study-fellow, bedfellow. Let it have the
best room, and the best bed, the parlour of our conscience, the resting place
in our heart. Neglected things are without the doer, less respected with in,
but near the door; Sed quae pretiosae sunt, non vno seruantur ostio: the more
worthy things are not trusted to the safety of one door, but kept under many
locks and keys. Give terrene things not only regard, preserve them with a
more removed care. Math 13.40 Psalm. 119.127.
But this pearl of inestimable value, this Jewel purer then the gold of
Ophir; lay it not up in the Porters lodge, the outward ear, but in the
Cabinet, and most inward closure of thy heart, Deuteronomy. 11. Therefore shall ye
lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul Mary thought that place
the fittest receptacle for such Oracles. Deuteronomy. 11.28 Luke 2.51.
This is that Physic, which can only cure the sickness of Ignoranc^s Chry^
in Math. 22.
Vbi ignorans in^: nit quod (...), contum^x quid timeat, laborans quo
praemiaetur, (...) quo nutri^tur, famelicus conuiuium, vulneraetus remidium:
where the ignorant may find what to learn the refractary what to fear, the
labourer wherewith to be rewarded the weak nourishment, the guest a banker,
the wounded a remedy to cure him. Be not ignorant be not sick: Search the
Scriptures, read, observe. This is not all. Non prodest Cibus, qui statim
sumptus emittitur, the meat nourishes not, which tarrieth not in the stomach,
It must be digested by meditation and prayer. Bern.
Meditatio docet quid desit, oration obtinet ne desit. Meditation shows our
want; prayer procures supply. Let it not be said of our perfunctory reading,
as it was of the Delphian Oracle, Quoties legitur, toties negligitur, that we
disregarde what we read; Read to learn, learn to practice, practice to live
and live to praise God for ever.

3 A third sickness, which may inwardly afflict a Church is Dissension: a sore
shaking to the joints, an eueruating the strength, and a dangerous degree to
dissolution. The world being but one, teaches that there is but one God, that
gouernes it, one God; that there is but one Church, one truth. 1 Timothy-3.15.
Cant. 6.10.
The Church is not only ( Columna veritatis, sed columba vnitatis) the pillar
of truth, 1. Tim. 3.15. but also the Dove of Unity. Cant. 6. My Dove, my
undefiled is al^ne. Dissentions like secret and close Iudasses have given
aduantagious means to our common enemies, both to scorn and scourgethe
Church. Clemens Alexand^^^ brings in the Heathen, exprobrating our Religion for
untrue, unwarrantable, ^ Quia omnis Secta Christianismit^tulum sibi vendicat,
1. S^roma^ 1.7
tameu aliae aliam execratur and condemnat. Because every sect challenges to
it self the city and right of true Christianity, yet one curses and
condemns another. Within how much the narrower limits this distraction is
pent, it so much the more violently bursteth forth and strives to rend the
bowels of a Church. Like some angry and furious vapor, or exhalation
restrained. that shakes the very earth for vent and passage. Such has been the
distractednesse of some times, that men have labored to be newters, and
studied more to be indifferently disposed to either side, then to be religious
at all. Such a time does Erasmus mention, In praesat. in Tom. 2. Ieron.
Quando ingeniosares fuit esse Christianum, when it was a point of policy, and
wit to be a Christian. I confess indeed, that Unity is no inseparable and
undoubted mark of the Church, for there was an unity in those murdering
voices, Crucify him, Crucify him, The Kings of the earth have banded
themselves together against the Lord. Psalm. 2.2.
Those favorers and factors of Antichrist, Reu. 17. Ren. 17.13.
that make war against the Lamb, are all said to have one mind. Nay
Chrysostomo says, that In Math. Hom 23.
Expedit ipsis Daemonibus obaudire sibi inuicem in Schismate. It is necessary
for the very Devils to hearken one to another, and to have some mutuallity in
their very mutiny, an union in their distraction; yet cannot it not be denied,
but that dissension in a Church, is a sickness to it. It goes ill with the
body when the members agree not. Those that dwell in one house should be of one
mind. It indangers the whole building to ruin, when the stones square and
(...) one with another. What detriment this has been to whole Christendom,
he has no mind, that considers not no heart that condoles not, we may say
with the Athenians, Auximus Philippum nos ipsi Athenienses. We have strengthened
King Philip against us by our own contentions. Christian Nation fighting with
Christian, has laid more to the possession of the Turk, then his own sword.
Where is the Greek Church once so famous? i Graeciam in Graecia quaerimus,
says Aeneas Syluitu, We seek for Greece in Greece, and scarce find the
remaining ruins. Behold we have laid wast our selves, who shall pity us?
our own seditions have betrayed the peace of our Jerusalem. He has no tears
of Christian compassion in his eyes, that will not shed them at this loss. If
you ask the reason, why the wild Bore has spoiled the Vineyard: why the Iim
and Zym, filthy and unclean Birds roost themselves in those sanctified
dominions; Why Mahomet is set up like Dagon, where the Arc once stood, and
Paganism has thrust Christianity out of her seat, it is answered; Israel is
not true to Judah, the renting of the ten Tribes, from the two, has made both
the two, and the ten miserable.

It is one of the forest plagues, (oh rather let it fall on the enemies of God
and his Church; let his own never feel it) when men shall be Esa. 49.26.
fed with their own flesh, and shall be drunk with their own blood, as with
sweet wine. frighting and fighting one against another, till an utter
extirpation devour and swallow all. The malignity of this sickness has been
terrible to particular Churches. They that have been least endamaged, have
little cause to joy in it. Our own homebred iarres, have lately more
prejudiced our peace then foreign wars. The Spanish blades have done less
hurt to us, then English tongues. Our contentions have labored about trifles,
our damage has been no trifle, but (I know not whether more) to our loss, or
our enemies gain. Look but one the effects, and you will confess this a
dangerous sickenesses. Rome laughes, Amsterdam insults, whiles the brethren
scufle in the Vineyard, Atheists and persecutors shuffle in to spoil it. Gods
Sabbath, his worship, his Gospel is neglected. Some will hear none but the
refractary, and refusers of conformity: others take advantage of their
disobedience, to contemn their Ministry. Witched hearts are hardened. good ones
greieued, weak offended. Is this no sickness? is it unworthy our deploring,
our imploring redresses.

We are all brethen, both by fathers and mothers side. It is more then enough,
that our fallings out have been a grief to both our parents. If we proceed,
the brethren shall smart for all. Whither we be victour or vanquished, we may
beshrew our selves. Let us think, we behold our Mother calling to us, to stay
our quarrels, and to lay down the cause at her feet. Otherwise, as Iocasta
told her two sons, Bella geri placuit, nullo; habitura triumphos.


We undertake a war, whose victory shall have a sorry triumph. Let every
Star in our Orb know his station and run his course without erring: the
inferior subieting themselves to the higher powers; whiles the courses of
Superiors be wisely tempered whith moderation and clemency. For Calvin.
Et si omnibus verbis ministris commune idemque sit officium, sunt tansen
honoris gradus. Though the office of all Gods ministers be common, and the
same, yet they have different degrees and places.

We have adversaries enough at home, to move our tongs and pens against. (Oh that
arguments of steel and iron might supply the weakness of the other.) We
have the Edomites with their no god, and the Babilonians with their new god;
dissolute Atheists, resolute Papists: the former scoffing us for believing at
all; the latter, for believing as we do, as we ought. These oppose (with us
though under the pent-house of night) Mass against Service, Sacrament against
Sacrament, Prayer against Prayer; confounding the language of England, as the
Jews once of Israel. Whiles we are praying in one place, Oh Lord God of
Abraham, etc. they are mumbling in another place, Oh Baal hear us. Whiles we
pray for fire to consume the sacrifice, they for water to consume the fire: we
for the propagation, they for the extirpation of the Gospel; hating us, and
our Christian Princes more mortally, then if we were Saracens. For as no bond
is so strong, as that of Religion: so no hostility is so cruel and outrageous,
as that which difference in Religion occasioneth. Hence they cross, they
curse, they persecute, they excommunicate. Nothing but our blood can stay their
stomachs.

We know, they hate us: let us the more dearly love one another. The
manifestation of enemies should confirm the mutual league and amity of
Brethren. Oh pray for the peace of Jerusalem. Pray we that the deceived may
find their error, correct their opinions, and submit their judgments and
affections to the rule of truth. Yea, that the wandering sheep; yea that those,
who are yet goats may become sheep, and brought into one fold, under one
Shepherd, whiles they continue cokle, there is small hope. Yet Paul was once a
rare, who after proved good wheat, and is now in the Garner of heaven: Recte
dicitur glacialem niue calidam esse non posse: nullo enim pacto quamdiu nix
est, calida esse pot^st: August.
It is truly said: that the frozen snow can by no means be made hot^: for so
long as it is snow, and frozen it admits not to be cal^fied: Yet if that snow
be melted, the liquidity thereof may be made hot. God that is able to turn a
stony heart into a heart of flesh, work this change upon them; unite all our
heats to himself; ^o one another and heal our souls of this sickness.

4 To omit many; (for sins as they are innumerab^e for multitude so diverse
for quality; and many ^^an def^ne sin, but few decline sin.) The last of
these in^ard sicknesses is irreligious Profaneness: a grief of all time, a
disease of all Church. Other time have been notable for this, our^ notorious.
Not that I praise the former, which doubtless were conscious of evils enough.
They know theirs, we our own. The deeds of the flesh (if ever) are now Gal.
5.19.
manifest, not only to God, Heb. 4.13.
b^f^re whom all things lie naked, a^ a dissected Anatomy: b^t even to the
observing e^e of man. Oppression the^ (...) self in open field, depopulating,
ruining City, Country Church, Drunkenne re^les in the street; and Gluttony
desire, not to be housed. Malice not only discouers, but Et ostendis, and
ostentat.
oftenteth her deuillish effects. Briberie opens his hand to receive in in the
very Courts. Robbery and murder swagger in the high ways. There is emulation
in open school: Superstition in open Temple: Sects in open Pulpit. Brokerie
stands, like a sign, at the usurers door, and invites foolish want to turn
in thither, for a (miserable) supply. Whoredom begins to neglect curtains,
and grows proud of an impudent prostitution. Pride holds the restraint of
concealment a plague; and rather would not be, then be unnoted. Oaths are
louder then prayers; men scarce spend two hours of seven days at their
supplications, whiles they swear away the whole week. If profanenes be not
our sickness. I will almost say, we are sound. -- Niger omnibus aris, Sta ^
Theb. 5.

Ignis and in nullis spirat deus integer extis.

If this sickness be not lamentable, rejoice triumph, and say, you have no
need to mourn. If a temporal loss salure us, we intertaine it with
vlulations and tears. Let Pirates and rocks spoil us at sea, the oppressing
Sabeans in the field, the fire at home: see we our houses and towns (...), our
gold and goods (worldlings gods) transporting our wives, children, friends
shrieking under the hand of slaughter, we need not Ier. 9.17.
call for mourning women, Ier. 9. to wail for us, Ve^. 18.
our own eyes would run down with tears, and our eye lids gush out with
waters. Let profaneness lift up his wicked hand against God, to blaspheme his
name, despise his truth, disallow his Saboaths, abuse his patience, deride his
treatinges, his threatenings, his judgments; this we see and suffer without
compassion, without opposition But Romans 1.32.
knowing the judgment of God (that they which commit such things are worthy of
death) not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them.

These Sicknesses may afflict a Church inwardly. She may be sick outwardly.
1. by the persecution of man. 2. by the affliction of God.

By persecution of man, I need not call your thoughts back to elder times, and
weary you with antiquities, to justify this assertion. This Church of ours so
well remembers this sickness in Q. Mary's days, as if she were but newly
recovered; whence descended those evils, but a culmine Pontifieio, as one calls
it, from the top tower of the Pope: yet the Romists stick not to answer this
laid to their charge, by auerring paradoxically, that their persecution was in
love, as Sara to Hagar. In love they tyranized, slandered, beat, imprisoned,
manacled, massacred, burned us; all in love. As Philippides cudgelled his
father, and pleaded it was in love. If this were charity, then sure the very
mercies of the wicked are cruel: their love is worse then others hatred,
Chry^. in Math. Hom. 19.
Nunquid ouis lupum persequitur aliqnando? non, sed lupus oue^. Quem videris in
sanguine persecutionis gaudente^, lupus est, says Chrysostom. does the sheep
ever persecute the wolf? no, but the wolf the sheep? whom thou see
delighting in the blood of persecution, let him plead what he will, he is a
very wolf We tell the Papists, as Augustine told the Donatists,
notwithstanding their distinguishing by tenses and pretenses, that their
persecution exceeded in cruelty the very Jews. For the Jews persecuted (
Christicarnem ambulantis interra: these Christi evangelium sedentis in caelo.
Aug.
) the flesh of Christ walking on earth; the Papists the Gospel of Christ
sitting in heaven. But their cruelty is our glory, we have sprung up the
thicker; for their cutting us down, Tertul.
Plures efficimur, quoties matimur: Contrary to the rules of Arithmeticke, our
substraction has been our multiplication: The Church of God ( (...).
morte vinit, vulnere nascitur) receives birth by wounding, life by dying,
Cyp^.
Occidi possumus, vinci non possumus; as the inevitable invincible truth has
manifested. We may be killed, we cannot be conquered, Rom 8.36.
For thy sake we are killed all the day long, as Paul says from the Psalmist
(to show that both the Church of the old Testament, and of the new give
experimental testimony of the truth) yet Psalm. 44 22
in althese thing we are more then conquerours, Ver 37.
through him that loved us If our plant had not been set up by the
all-prospering hand of God, the malignancie of these enemies would have soon
rooted it up. They have verefied in their persecutions against us, Cusan.
what one of their own writes of the Turkish Alcoran. Omnium, quae in Alchorano
continentur, vltima resolutio est gladius. The last resolution, propagation,
propugnation of althings contained in the Alchora^, (in the Popes decretals) is
(not the word, but) the sword. But blessed be our God, that has limited this
rage, and sealed us our Quietus est. Though they will have no peace with us,
we have peace with him, that can overrule them.

But have we no persecutors still? Oh that no Israelite would ever strike his
brother. There are two sorts of Porsecutors remaining, Esau's and Ismaels;
nourished with the same air, borne on the same earth, and carried in the
indulgent bosom of the same Church. But Cypr. lib. 1. op. 3.
nobis ignominia non sit, patia fratibus, quod. passius est Christus; neque
illis gloria, facere quod fecit Judas. Let it be no more shame for us, to
suffer of our brethren, what our Savior suffered of his; then it is glory for
them, to do the works of Judas. Some persecute with the hand, others with the
tongue. Exercent hi sapientiam, illi patientiam Ecclesiae. The latter exercise
the wisdom, the former the patience of the Church. We are secured from Ahabs,
and Herod's, and Neroes; the teeth of the dogs be broken, and the jaws of the
wolves pulled out: the Bonners and butchers of the Church are hushed in their
graves. Oh that the Serpents also, which hiss and spet their venime at our
peace, when all the birds of our air sing acclamations to it, were at quiet.
Gal. 4.29.
But as then be that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne
after the spirit, even so it is now. Now so, and will be so. We cannot see an
end of these things, without the end of all things. Our turn is still to
suffer, we return not blow for blow; but in stead of sounding a point of
war, we cry one to another, patiamur potius, Let us rather suffer. Let the
Roman affections, like so many pestilent rivers, run all ( in mare rubrum,
or rather in mare mortuum,) into the red Sea, into the dead sea, and snatching
the Romans 1^.19.
sword of vengeance out of his hand that owes it, quit themselves on their
(imagined) enemies, with ^loud and death. Let him that is styled the Servant of
servants, show himself the Tyrant of tyrants. Philosophy teaches, that
external accidents change inward quality ^s. but without an absolute mutation
ipsius speciei, they change no substances. A Church may indeed at one time be
better or worse disposed, then at another; more hot or more cold; more sick
or more whole. But as it were a strange fit, that should transform Apuleius
into an Alie: so it were a strange variation of accidents in a Church, that
should turn patience into cruelty, humili^y into pride, a Tutour into a
tormentour. Let their motto be ferio; (the term whereon all their arguments
r^lf) let ours be fero. It is far better to suffer, then to offer wrong. Let
savage persecution sit under the Ensigns of wolves; meekenes and patience be
our arms and armours.

This outward malady of a Church, Persecution discouers the malignity of it
self in many extentions. Especially, 1. in martyring her professors 2. in
treason against her Sovereigns, 3. in seducing her Seers.

1 Martyrdom, God has in all ages of his Church suffered some witnesses of his
holy truth to be purified like gold in the fire. Though they are blessed that
have so suffered, and the Church has in conclusion gained by this loss. yet
during the turbulent working of these thunder exhalations in our air, we have
lamented miseram regionis f^ciem, the miserable state of our country, whose
face has bin scratcht and torn by the bloody nails of these persecuting
bears, Needs must the land be sick, where the Governors, like ill Physicians
have purged away the good humor, and left the bad behind them. When they have
imprisoned stripped, scourged, famished, drowned, burnt the innocent, and
rewarded the wretched instruments of such deces. When the poor infant falling
out (by the midwifery of fire) from the mothers womb. has been call back
again into the ^others flames. When the bodies and bones of the dead, which by
the law of nature should rest in quiet have been dug out of their
Sepulchers, Molli^ressa cubent.
violated, curled, burnt, as if (says their Proverb) they would kill
god-haue-mercie on's soul. When women have been dragged out of their ^ous^s
sick men from their beds: and the woods have abounded with saints, whiles the
temples with their persecutors Heb. 11.38.
wild desar^s have been frequented with true worshippers, and the consecrated
Churches with Idolaters. When the hoy boo^ was either not had or must be hid.
It is no impeachment of a churches health to have these assaults go^ing her
sides? Such a time will give cause to complain with Israel, Lamen. 1. 120
I ^m in distress, my bowels are troubled: mine heart is turned with in me, for
I have grievously rebelled. Abroad the sword bereaueth, at home there is death.
This is the main blow of persecution

2 Treason is a fearful and prodigious evil. Needs must the body of that
Realm be in hazard, whose head is broken. They mean Israel no good that
strike at the life of David. I confess that this evil is not so properly (in
strict terms) a sickness as a danger. Yet as a man that has ill humors in
him, though by good diet and strength of nature they are kept from uniting
their forces, and casting him down cannot be said in health, whiles those
enemies ^emaine within him, watching their time of mischief. So the Church,
though it be not s^nsit us of the sever, which (such raw and undigested
crudities as) traitors can put her into, til it be upon her, vet can the nor be
perfectly well, till purged of such pernicious and malignant adversaries: were
not the Faeux^s of that horrid treason a disease and burden to the stomach of
the land, till it had spewed them ^ut? did not those pray against her and prey
^^other? Would they not as willingly have (...), through the fire to than
Moloe^ of Rome the whole church, as those principal ^llars of it, they plotted
to blow vp^t ^y wanted not will but power They would have swelled their
vengeance, till it had run over the verges, and comprised in one work (
Mill actus vetitos, and milie piacula) innumerrble stratagems, the easiest
whereof was the intention of murder; till they had made a Catholic end with
an heretic church, as they call it: But the God of Jerusalem prevented the
children of Edom: who is blessed for ever. It appears then Regicides are no
less then Regnicides; for the Lamen. 4.20
life of a king contains a thousand thousand lives) and traitors make the land
sick which they live in. This is the second dangerous blow of persecution.

3 The third is, Seducing a Churches Seers, and perverting the children of the
Prophets, which is most commonly done, rather with error then with terror; by
beguiling, then affrighting them, I have read, that Iulians cruellest
persecution was with rewards. How many have been wasted over the seas with
golden hands? Promotion rather then devotion has cast many on the shores of
Rome. There lies an exorcisme, an enchanting power in gold, that coniures many
weak spirits into that superstitious circle. Then at last home they come, and
prove calthropes to wound the Countries sides, that breed and feed them.
Antichrists spel is gold; and they that will worship a piece of red earth,
will not stick to adore that glorious Beast. Selfe-conceite blows them up
with a swelling imagination of their own worth and if our church does not (
and numerare and munerare inter dignissimos) give regard and reward, estimation
and recompense according to their proud desires, they will shift Realm and
Religion too, for a hoped guerdon. You will say, there is little loss to the
body, in dropping off of such rotten members. It is true, that the damage is
principally their own: yet what mother does not grieve at the Apostasy of her
children? There is some hope, whiles they are at home; little, when revolted to
the enemy. Meanetime, let it not be denied, but the seducers are persecutors,
and great enemies to the Churches health.

Thus may a Church be outwardly sick by man's Persecution; she may be sick
also by Gods affliction. This is diverse, accordingly as our sins deserve,
and his judgment thinks fit to punish us; 1. By war, 2. by famine, 3. by
pestilence; the easiest of them heavy enough, and able to deprive a Church of
health. Though the first might seem to be man's weapon, and so fitter to have
been inserted among the former persecutions; as Israel termed her enemies,
Lam. 4.19
Our persecutors are swifter then the Eagles of the heaven, they pursued us
upon the mountains; they laid wait for us in the wilderness: yet because
God calls Ashur his rod: and it is He that sends either peace or war; and no
adversary sword can be lifted up against us; but by (more the^) his permission;
for he has a punishing hand in it. Let us see how he can make his Church of
Israel sick.

1 War is that miserable desolation, which finds a land before it like Eden,
and leaves it behind like Sodom, and Gomorrah, a desolate and forsaken
wilderness. Happy are we that cannot judge the terrors of war, but by report
and hearsay. That never saw our towns and Cities burning, whiles the flame
gave light to the Soldiers to carry away our goods. That never saw our houses
rifled, our temples spoiled, our wives ravished, our children bleeding dead on
the pauements, or sprawling on the merciless pikes. We never heard the groans
of our own dying and the clamors of our enemles insulting, confusedly sounding
in our didistracted ears: the wife breathing out her life in the arms of her
husband, the children snatched from the breasts of their mothers, as by the
terror of their ^laughters to aggrauate the ensuing torments of their own.
We have been strangers to this misery in passion; let us not be so in
compassion. Think you have seen these miseries with your neighbors eyes, and
felt them through their sides. Let it somewhat touch us, that we have been
threatened: Octog^simus octanus mirabilis annus, Have we forgotten the
wonderful year of 88? an enemy of a savage face and truculent spirit; whose
arms were bent to harms, to ruin, to blood, to vastation: whose numbers were
like locusts, able to lick up a country, as the ox grass: the Ensigns of
whose ships were Assurance and Victory: whiles they cast lottes upon our
nation, and easily swallowed the hope of our destruction: a mortal enemy, an
implacable fury, an invincible navy. Lo in the heat and height of all, our
God laughed them to scorn, sunk them, drunk them up with his waves;
tottered, sca^tered them on the waters, like chafe on the face of the earth,
before the wind and tempest of his indignation. All their intentions, their
contentions, their presumption of conquest were disappointed, dissolved,
discomfited. These things, though they have not seen, let our childrens
children to the last generation, that shall inhabit this land, never forget:
that we and they may praise God, who Psalm. 147.13
has made fast the bars of our gates, and has settled peace in our borders.

2. Famine is a sore outward sickness; an affliction sent by the immediate
hand of God. For it is he that withholdeth the influence of heaven, and the
kindly heat of the Sun, and the nourishing sap of the earth. Amos 4.6.
I have given you cleanness of teeth in all your cities, and want of bread in
all your places, says the Lord. As it is his blessing, that Psalm. 65.13.
our valleies are covered over with corn: so it is his plague, that Hag. 1.6.
we have sown much, and bring in little; that Psalm. 129.7
the mower fills not his hand, nor he that binds sheaues, his bosom. When
he is pleased, Hos. 2.21.
he will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth, and the earth shall
hear the corn and wine and oil, and they shall hear us. England has felt
the smart of this sickness; and she that out of her abundance has been able to
lend others, has also been glad to borrow of her neighbors. The Amos 6.
satte kin^ of Bashan, rich gormondizers have not been acquainted indeed with
this misery; and therefore have not sorrowed for the affliction of Joseph. But
the poor, the poor have grieved, groned under this burden: whiles cleanness
of teeth, and swarthinesse of look were perceived in the common face. Whiles
these Ezec 5 16.
arrows of famine wounded our sides, and our staff of bread, whereon our very
life leanes, was broken, we could then cry, hic digitus dei: here is the finger
of God. In our plenty, saturity, satietie of these earthly blessings, we
acknowledge not ( manum expansam) his whole hand of bounty opened to us;
though then we confessed ( digitum extensum) his finger striking us, and
bewailed the smart. Famine is terrible enough of it self; more dire and
tetricall in regard of the company she bringes along with her. For Saua farms
semper magnorum prima malorum
Est comes. Lucan. 1.4.

Raging famine is the prime companion of many fellowmischiefes. Ex vno grano
oritur aceruus: of one grain of this staruing misery, arises a whole heap of
lamentable woes. The attendants of famine are murders, robberies, rapes,
killing of children, that the same vessels become the wombes and toombs of
little ones; and innumerable stretchings of conscience, to the reuoking of
former, and provoking of future judgments. No marvel if hunger disregard the
mounds and fences of Gods laws and man's, when it breaks through stone walls.
The Poet, somewhat morally describes Famine. Qu^esit am que famem lapidoso vidit
in antro, Metam. lib 8.
etc.


Behold hunger in her stony den, tearing up the grass with her long nails
and sharp teeth, her neglected hairs grown rough and tangled, her eyes
hollow, her cheeks pale, her skin rugged and swarthy, left only as a thin
scarce to hide her lanke entrals; nothing clean about her but her teeth, her
dry bones starting up, her breasts hangi^g over in the air, her joints swollen
big and huge, her sinews shrunk, as unwilling to hold her limbs together.
This is that monster, that turns men into Canibals, unnaturally to devour one
another flesh. I have read, that at Turwyn in France, the famine was so
deadly, that man's flesh was sold for food. This sickness is worse then death.
Happy are we, that Gods mercy has banished this plague from our land, Oh let
not our iniquities revoke it.

3 The Pestilence we better know, as one that has but a little while bin kept
out of our doors; and watches when our iniquities shall again let him in. He
sculkes about, and will not be rid away, till repentance has made our coast
clear. This is Gods Purseuant, that has rode circuit in our land, and to
whomesoeuer God has sent him, he never returned with a non est muentus, but
always brought ( Si non corpus taemen animam sum causa) if not the body, yet
the soul with the cause before his judgment seat. This is he that rides on
the pale horse, Reu. 6. and catches men as with a snare, perhaps when they
have most hasted from him. How has this plague left the very streets of our
Cities empty, when they seemed to have been sowed with the seed of man; how
astonished the living, frighted the dying; disioyned the mutual society and
succor of friend to friend, and that in a time, when comfort would have been
most seasonably welcome, trembling hands, pulling dead bodies into the graves
with hooks, or rolling them into pits.
Turn back your eyes, that now live in the Appeniue height of peace and
health, and think you see the lamentable state of your Country, as few years
past discovered it. Imagine you behold the hand-wringing widows, beating
their bosoms over their departing husbands: the distracted mothers falling
into swounes, whiles they kiss the insensible cold lips of their
breathless Infants: poor desolate Orphans, that now mourn the untimely
loss of their parents, as being made by years more sensible, of their want,
then when deaths pestilentiall hand took them away: the loud groans and
struggling pangs of souls departing: servants crying out for Masters, Wives for
Husbands, parents for children, children for mothers; grief in every house,
striking up alarums; belles heavily tolling in one place, ringing out in
another: Numbers of people, that not many hours before had their several
Chambers delicatelie highted, now confusedly thrust together into one close
room, a little noisome hole, not twelve foot square. They have marble bosoms
that will not be shaken with these terrors, and have sucked Tygresses in the
wilderness that cannot compassionate these calamities. How did they grieve a
Church to feel them, when they affect, afflict, and make us Sick to hear
them?

I know you have long looked for an end. I never delighted in prolixity of
speech. What remains? but the more terrible we conceive these sicknesses of a
Church, the more we bless GOD for the present health of ours. Let not our
sins call back these plagues: let us not provoke our GOD, least earth, air,
heaven renew their strokes upon us. Wars and famines from the earth, plagues
from the air, judgments from the Clouds; they are all restrained at our
repentance, let loose at at our rebellions. Oh serve we the Lord our God with
fear and obedidience; that he may delight to do us good, and we to praise
his name. That we our selves, and our Children after us, and the generations
yet unborn, may see the Peace of Jerusalem all their days. That the golden
Belles of Aaron may be freely rung; and the Trophies of Victory over all
Antichristian enemies may still be seen amongst us. Even till this Easter and
Feast of the Resurrection of our Savior Jesus, overtake take the Resurrection
of all his Saints.

Grant this O Father for thy mercies, Oh Christ for thy merits; Oh blessed
Spirit for thy holy names sake: To whom, three persons in glorious Trinity,
one only true and immortal God in unity be all power, praise, majesty and
mercy acknowledged for ever, Amen.

ENGLANDES SICKNESS. THE Second Lecture.
IEREM. CHAP. 8. VER. 22. Why is not the health of the daughter of my people
recovered?


WE have described the Person, the Church of Israel, as she is her own, as she
is her owners: what in regard of her self, what in respect of her God. It
remains now only to enquire, how she is affected. She is Sick; which is
necessarily implied from Gods complaint. Why is not the health of my daughter
recovered? She was sick, and so sick, that the Prophet complains, Micah. 1.9.
Her wound is incurable, for it is come (even to the heart) unto Judah.
Incurable, in regard of her own misery, not of her Saviors mercy. She was low
brought in the Babilonish Captivity. Esaias. 1.9.
Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we should
have been as Sodom, Lam. 3.22.
and like unto Gomorrah? It is of the Lords mercies, that we are not consumed,
because his compassions (though our obedience) fail not. But her honor lay in
the dust, when her Apostacy had forfeited her happiness: Superstition taking
the upper hand of Devotion, and the traditions of man getting the start and
ascendency of Gods precepts; When her disease grew too frenzy, and her
sickness so excluding from it self all recouerable hope, that she had slain
her Physician, and killed him that should have carried her.

Whence it appears, that a particular visible Church might and may fall away
from grace, and have the Revel. 2.5.
Candlestick removed. The Papists brag of their numerous multitude, and
promontorious celsitude. Rome boasts that their Church stands upon an Nath. 5,
14
hill. So it does on Revel. 17.9
six hills too many. She is mounted high enough, if this could iustif^e her.
She had better bate of her height, and ^ise in her goodness. There may be a
local succession, but if not in faith and doctrine, mole ruit sua, her
toppe-heauy weight overthrows her. May it not be said of her, as Jeremy of
Egypt? Ier. 46.11.
Go up into Gilead and take balms, Oh virgin the daughter of Egypt: in vain
shall thou use many medicines, for thou shall not be cured. It is no wonder
then, no wrong, if we depart from her, that has departed from the truth of the
Gospel, and faith of Christ.

I will not descend into the view of her apostacy, though just occasion may
seem here offered; but turn my self and speech to our selves, who are sound
in doctrine, sick in conversation; but (I trust) not without good hope of
recovery.

But so soon as the Romish malignancie hears me say, we are sick; they
instantly insult, reproching our doctrine. But do Tertul.
men try the faith by the persons, or the persons by the faith? It is a silly
argument (a moribus ad doctrinam) from the life to the doctrine. Yet (though we
desire and strive to have our own lives better) we fear not to match them
with theirs. Our sickness would be esteemed less, if we would go to Rome for
a medicine. (For the Papist may better steal the horse, than the Protestant
look on.) But so long as we have approved Physicians at home, what need we
walk so far to a Mountebanke? It is a false rumor, there is no sound air
but the Romish. Is it not rather true, that thence comes all infection? And
that they who have forsaken us to seek health there, have gone out of Gods
blessing into the warm Sun?

Our lives trouble them: this they object, this they exprobrate ad nauseam
vsque. But do they not stumble at our strawes, and leap over their own
blocks? cavil at our motes, and forget (or justify) their own beams? The
swelling on the Foxes head shall be a horn, if the Pope will so judge it: a
Catiline, Lopus, Garnet, Faulx, an honest man, a Catholic, a Saint, if he
will so interpret, so canonize him. If I should but prick this rank vein, how
would Rome bleed? i Ia vita Aug.
Would not ( haec prodidisse, be vicisse, as Erasmus said of Augustines dealing
against the Maniches) the very demonstration of these things, be a sufficient
conviction? Unnatural and hideous treasons, conspiracies against whole
kingdoms, deposing, dethroning, touching with a murderous hand ( Christos Dei)
the Anointed of God; oaths, uncleannesses, periuries from whom are they
produced, by whom practiced, if not mostly, if not only by Papists? They pry,
search, deride, censure the forepart of their Wallet, wherein they put our
iniquities: whiles their own sins are ready to break their necks behind
them. The greatest evils we have are theirs; fathered by those that will not
be mother'd of our Church: Aug. d. vn^t Eccles. cap. 16
Haec non ad frument a Christi, sed ad eorum paleam pertinent: These belong not
to Christ's wheat, but to the ch^ffe of Antichrist. These are ^onsters bred of
that viperous dam, that have shook hands with huma^ity, with ciuility, though
they reserve the form of Religion.

Si quid in his possem, facerem sterilescere matrem; as one of their own said.
It were well, if either the children would forsake their kind or the mother
become barren: Yet must these men be Saints, and stand named with red letters,
in the Popes Calendar; red indeed, so dyed with the Martyred blood of Gods
servants.

But I am not delighted to stand upon comparisons, if their exclamations had
not put me to them, that like blown Pharisees, they cry out with ostentation of
sanctity, Luke 18.11
God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, or as this Publican, What
age, people, Church were ever yet so holy, that the Preachers found no cause of
reproof, of complaint against it? Chrysostom speaks of his times: In oper.
imp.
Christians now are become like Pagans or worse: Yet who will say that the
Religion of Pagans was better then the Christians. The Priest and Leuite had no
mercy, the Samaritane had: yet their Religion was the true, and not the
Samaritans. If some Papists amongst us (and those very few) live in more
formal and moral honesty; et this commends not their whole Church. They are
now in the time of their persecution as they take it, (though their prosperity
and numbers euince the contrary) we are in our peace, and who knows not that,
an easy occasion of wantonness.

I deny not, that we have grievous offenders: we mourn and pray for them.
Do the Papists rejoice at this? Woe to him that is glad of Gods dishonor. Let
them brag their peruersion of some which were ours, but such and so affected to
viciousness. If we had lost more of Atheists, sacrileg^ous Adulterers,
l^centious hypocrites we had as little reason to complain, as they to be
proud. We are the fewer, they not the better. We desire, endeavor reprove,
exhort, instruct all, with purpose of heart to save them in the day of the Lord
Ie^u^; if they wish not the same. We are content to differ as far from them in
our desires, as we do in our doctrines. If there were none sick, we might
lay aside our Physic, Iam 3 2.
but there are many, too many, all in some measure, some in all measure, beyond
measure, therefore we must proceed.

Sickness is the Subject, and the observations that shall limite my short
ensuing speech, are quadruple. 1. The precious benefit of spiritual health,
which we shall the better discern, if we compare it with corporal, 2. What
sickness is incident to man, 3. That the Sickness of the Soul is most
dangerous, 4. Lastly, who are the sick?

1 Health is precious, S^neca.
Cara est cuique salus, Every man's health is dear to him. Exclude from this
comparison the gifts of the mind, which are truly of a more pure and
changelesse condition, and then what earthly benefit will not give place to
health? It is one of the positive virtues, grafted in man's nature with the
creation. Weigh it in the balance with some riuals.

1 Riches are the desire of many hearts, the special fruit which their hands
reach to gather (passing by all the better trees in Gods orchard) the object of
most endeavors: How vain, how tedious, how odious are they without health? Let
them bind gold to their a king head, drink Cleopatras draught, (precious
stones dissolved) to ease their rasping stomach, inuolue and wrappe their
conu^lsed joints in furs and silks, empty their coffers in the Physicians
study; if (nature and her Ordinatour) God deny health, how invaluable are their
riches, how unavailable their proiects! How complain they (after all
experimented succors) their vnabated anguish! Therefore the son of Sirach
truly says; o Eccles. 30 14.15 16.
Better is the poor being sound and strong of constitution, then a rich man
that is afflicted in his body. Health and good state of body are above all
gold, a strong body above infinite wealth. There is no riches above a sound
body, and no joy above the joy of the heart. The poor man well, only admireth
wealth,
The rich man sick, only commends health.
Health gives means to be rich, riches give no means to be healthful. Nay,
they are rather traitors and adversaries to it: Not scaffols whereby health is
built up, but stairs to descend by to the grave. The Rich man's quotidian
dilicacies rotted him for death. Where there is a full purse, and an esurient
ambitious appetite, there is a close and unsuspected conspiracy against the
health. Thus we do not more eagerly pursue opulency in our soundnes then in
our sickness we contemptibly despise, loathingly dislike it.

2 Is there any ascendency in Pleasure above health? will not that carry up a
brave forehead without being beholding to it? Sen.
Alas! cold is the entertainment of delight to a warish and sickly carcass.
Misera est voluptas, vbi periculi memoria adest: Pleasure is unpleasant to the
memory guilty of instant danger. It is Epicurean, profane, and idle physic to
sorrow. The l^ying wine on ears to make them sincke,
Who fears the threats of fortune, let him drink.
Why does not, then that Chaldean Monarch continue his carowsings, and wash
away the Characters of that fatal Dan. 5.5
hand from his heart, with floods of wine? alas! sorrow will keep a man sober,
and restrain him from any drunkenness but it own. To omit, that mortem dabit
ipsa voluptas, and the end of mirth is heaviness, what pleasure can fasten her
slippery hold on the afflicted heart E^stidit obiect^, quo auidius haust a
^st, ^o c^tius in contrarium recidit. Sen. de benef. lib 7. cap. 2.
It is loathed while it objects and prostitutes it self to our sight, courting
and wooing our affections: the more greedily we draw on Pleasure, the sooner it
loses the nature, and is turned into the contrary. Miserable Comforter; as
Jobs friend were justly called) whose requested mitigation turns to
aggrauation of our misery. When Pleasure opens the shop of all her delectable
wares, and prays the sick hand to choose what best affects it, shows
perfumes, colors, wine, iunkets, sports, company, music, she is answered
with nothing, but Away with them, away with them; they are no medicines for the
headache, one dram of health is worth a talent of pleasure.

How dotingly do men (in their wanton days) take it up? nay how does it take
up them? as the Philosopher truly. Sen. de beat. vit. l. 1. c. 14.
Non nos voluptaetem, sed voluptas nos habet; cuius aut inopia torquemur, aut
copia strangulamur: miseri, side serimur ab illa, miseriores, si obruimur: We
possess not pleasure, but pleasure us; whereof we are either perplexed with
the want; or strangled with the abundance, we are wretched if it leave us, more
wretched if it ouerwhelme us. But sickness when it comes, marres the relish
of it to the mind, as of meats to the palate, and sends it away without a
welcome, not without a check and defiance. Sickness a stronger power (if
weakness may be called strength) then pleasure has gotten possession of a
man and laughes at the vain endeavor of vanity to remove it. This is the time
to say to Laughter, thou art mad, and to esteem mirth a tedious, odious,
irksome guest. They that ( non voluptates sibi emunt, sedse voluptatibus
vendunt) buy not pleasure to themselves, but sell themselves to pleasure, as
Esau did his birthright for it, find in sickness the memory of what they do
love and must leave, an addition to their present malady. So ( foelicitas has
no more left but the first syllable, fell gall, and) pleasure has no pleasure
but this, that it is short during the sweetness, long in the bitterness
necessarily following it. Sine qua aut non d^lectat voluptas, aut non est.
Health then is beyond pleasure also, without which, it is either not
delightful, or is not at all.

3 Both these have lost the prize, let us see if Honor can win it, Alassed
what is it to sit groaning in a Chair of State? or to lie panting on a bed of
down? It is little content to have many knees bow to thee, whiles thine bow to
sickness, to have many uncovered heads attend thee, and thine own (though
covered) find no ease. How would thou be glad to change places with thy
meanest servant, on condition thou might change bodies with him. How much of
thine honor would thou lay out, for a little of his health? He that lives
in the height of honor and wealth, repines at nothing more, then to see the
hungry labourer feed on a crust, whiles his own nice and queasie stomach
(still weary of his last meal) puts him into a study, whether he should eat
of his best dish or nothing.

How poor, how weak, how nothing besides, a name is honor, when sickness
has dismounted it? when the Coach is turned to a littour, the feather to a
kercheffe, public and popular magnificence, to the close limits of a Chamber,
whether sickness (like a great commander) has confined him, the imperious
tongue fainting and failing in the wonted tunes, of go, come, do, etc. as the
Math. 8.9
Centurion spoke: the curious attire thrown by with neglect: alas, now what is
honor? but a mere property, a Pageant, which health like the day sets out,
and the night of sickness takes in again? Job. 33.17.
Sickness hides pride from a man, says Elihu,

What inferior benefit shall we then match with health that it may glory of
the priority or equality, in comparison This is precious and desirable, whether
to body or soul. To the S^ule simply, to the body (but secundum quid in
respect) if it may not prejudice the health of the soul. For though corporal
health be so good, that all other worldly good things are but troublesome
without it; yet it is often seen, that the worse part draws away the better,
and a vigorous strong able body, without any difficulty makes a wanton and
diseased soul.

Corporal.
1 Bodily health is generally desired; (far more then endeavored) it being an
action of that natural propensenesse, ingraffed in all men, to their own
good. Parents are provident to the bodies of their children, even those who set
to slight a thought on their souls (showing herein plainly that they brought
forth their bodies, not their souls). Large and lavish is our indulgence, at
all parts to this frail Tabernacle; yea so profuse, and not withholding, that
whiles we seek more health, we loose that we had. Quaerendo perdimus, we
seek it in full dishes, and behold there we lose it. For prohibent grandes
patinae. Would we know how to preserve health? I am no Physician, nor will I
wade further in this argument, then divinity and reason leads me Let us
observe moderation, labor in our calling, abstinence.

1 Moderation, as the Philosopher said, that he never corrected himself with
repentance for his silence, but often for his speech: so our forbearing of
iunkets should not grieve us, but our immoderate devouring them, Sen. Ep 8, ad
Lucil.
Haec est sana and salubris forma vitae, vt corpori tantum indulgeas, quantum
bonae valetudini satis est. This is a wholesome form of living that the body be
so far pleased, as the health be not displeased. It is certain, that surfeit
kills more then famine. It was one of Hippocrates Aphorisines; Allimmoderations
are enemies to health. It was one of Platoes monsters of nature that he found
in Sicilia; a man eating twice a day. A thing of so little admiration with us,
that it is wonderful in him that does not. Perhaps a breakefast goes before,
and a banquet follows after both these. Neither is the variety less then the
quantity. We plead; Nature bids us eat and drink. It is granted, Yea, a
solemn Festival inuites us to more liberal feeding. It is not much denied,
if rare, if seasonable for thy appetite if reasonable for the measure. But many
content not themselves (only to steal the halter, except there be a horse at
end of it, as the shriuen thief said in his confession to the Priest) only to
feed and drink, to pleasure, but to sle^pe ^o surfeit, to ebriety, disabling
themselves to any sober exercise. Turpe est stomachum non nosse modum^: It is
vile, (and worse then bestiall) when the stomache (...) measure.

Seneca's rule is good, Dandum ventri quod debes non quod potes: Allow thy
belly what thou should, not what thou may. I shame not to convince this
error, even from the example of Heathens; that if Religion cannot rule us as
Christians, yet nature may correct us as men. Whiles others (says Socrates,
viuunt vt edant, ego edam vt viuam) Live to eat, I will eat to live. It is
perhaps easy to find some that abstain, but how few for conscience of Gods
precept? The sick, the poor, the covetous, the full, all moderate, but to
what purpose? The sick man for his healthes sake, AEger. Egens. Cupidus.
Satur.
the poor man for his purse sake: the covetous for miserablenes, the full for
the loathing of his stomach. But let us that are Christians moderate our selves
in conscience of Gods commandment; because Gluttony is a Romans 13.12. 13.
Work of darkness; and the night is now past. So shall we at once, provide
well for our bodies, and better for our souls.

2 Labor in our callings is no small furtherance of our healthes. The bread
Eccl. 5.12.
of him that labors (as Solomon says of his sleep) is sweet and
rellishable, whether he eat little or much. Therefore Pro. 5.15.
drink waters out of thine own cisterne: live of thine own labors: the
bread thou have earned shall never be grauel in thy throat. Prou. 12.11
He that tilleth his land shall be satisfied with bread, whereas others shall
either Hag. 1.6.
eat, and not have enough; or have enough and not eat: Hence surfets light so
frequently on the rich, and the gentle blood grows so quickly foul: because
they think themselves bound to no labors, so long as they may live on their
lands. It was the Fathers charge to his Math. 21.28.
eldest son, Son go and work to day in my Vineyard. The privilege of
primogeniture must not exempt him from labor. He sends him to the Vineyard,
to dress it before he has it, he will keep it the better when he has it:
Industry in our vocation is not only a means in nature, but even by the
ordinance and blessing of God, to the conservation of health.

3 Abstinence. I mean more than moderation, that which we call Fasting.
Ie^unium ieiunantis, a free and voluntary fast, when the body refraineth such
refections as nature takes pleasure in, and that only for healths sake. As
the tree by a gentle shaking knits faster at the root: this moderate weakening
begets strength. So that at once, it may be a help to devotion, (for
repentance comes not before God with a full belly, and meat between the teeth)
and a preservative to health, physic to defend from the need of physic, a
voluntary medicine to prevent a necessary trouble. Thus of the Body.

2. The Souls sanitie is not less precious, though more neglected. Spiritual.
It was made in the image of the most high God. which Image consisted ( in
lumine mentis, reclitudine cordis, affectuum moderatione, as some.) in the
brightness of the mind, rightnesse of the heart, and just governance of the
affections. Or as others: It was ( Bern.
libertas arbitrij, intellectus sapientiae, and potentia obedientiae.) freedom
of will, wisdom of understanding, (kingdom or) power of obedience: Seruire
Deo, regnars est.
for here to serve was to reign. Herein consisted the health. The privation
of these perfect habites, is not less than the sickness of it. This health
thus lost, cannot be recovered, but by him that was sick to the death for us:
neither is it hindered!, when he will bestow it. For Gratia non respuitur a
cor^ed^ro, etc. August.
grace is not refused of the hard heart, because it takes away the hardness of
that heart it lights on. Christ madefies it with his water, and mollifies it
with his blood, both which issued out of his Ioh. 19.34.
side at one wound, and followed the murdering spear of a Soldier, to save
them which fight under his Standard.

Thus from man's sickness arises his better health, and he now stands surer by
his first fall. Such is the greatness and goodness of God, such his power and
mercy concurring, that it works health out of sickness, good out of evil.
There is an infinite Good, but not an infinite evil. For the Good cannot by
any means be diuerted into evil. but the evil may be converted to good. By
the conspiracy of Jews, Gentiles, Judas, Devils, against Christ, is our
salvation wrought. From the horridst and most unnatural treasons, God has
advanced his own glory, aduantaged his childrens security. We labor of three
diseases, birth, life, death: all these are cured by those three answerable in
Christ. Our unclean birth is sanctified by His so pure from the least spot of
sin. Our transgressing life is reformed by the virtue, informed by the
example of His. That tyrannizing, wounding 1 Cor. 15.
Serpent, Death has the sting pulled out by His death, that we may embrace him
in our secured arms. The Conqueror of us all is conquered for us all, by Him
that foiled the Giant in his own den, the Grave. Ver. 57.
Thanks be to God which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Oh death where is thy sting. Oh grave where is thy victory? This is our
insultation and holy triumph. Provided ever, that He be believed of us, that
has thus relieved us. Believe and fear not. A good conscience is never faild
of a good confidence, of a good consequence. Hence arises the souls sanity.

What can endanger, in damage this health? no losses to the estate, no crosses
to the flesh. The spiritually-sounde man, values all the fortunes of the world,
less then the freedom and health of the mind. He that wants this armor is
wounded by every blow of affliction. Other security is but a shield of wax
against a sword of power. They cannot choose but fear, even where no fear is,
and testify their inward guilt and sickness, by their pale and trembling
looks. Timida nequitia dat testimonium condemnations, and semper praesumit
saeua, perturbata conscientia. Fearful wickedness gives testimony of it own
damnation; and the troubled conscience imposes and presumes to itself
terrible things, but the health of faith is health indeed; yea this health is
life, a life Angelical, a life Euangelical, whether for obedience or peace:
inspired, spirited, sealed, assured by the word of Truth: Pallor in ore sedet,
etc.
Which is life to all that find it, and health to all their flesh, No fear
shall invade him, no troubles inuolue him, so that he cannot be extricated. For
Pro. 19.23.
the fear of the Lord tends to life, and he that has it, shall not be
visited with evil, His innocence may speed in the world, as deserts in a
lottery, be rewarded with a blank. But he in whom he affies, shall put the
marrow of health into his bones, distill the sap of grace inio his spirit.

Low in the world; lowly in himself, in his estimation, who sees not that the
clambring goats get upon rocks and promontory places, whiles the humble
sheep feed in the bottomes and dejected valleys. Only one day, the Sheep
shall be advanced above the Sun and stars, and set in heaven with Christ;
when the goats shall be cast down to the depth of depthes. Rich Dives was
well enough known to the world, yet nameles in the sacred Records. So we brand
our sheep, let the Goats go unmarked.) God sets his seal on his chosen:
Tim. 2.19
Nouit qu^ sui sunt, lets the wicked run without his cognizance.

Thus different is the state of Gods servants, and the worlds slaves. They
think none sick but we: we know none sick but they. If equal crosses
befall us both, our estate is soon descried. We differ as the Cammell and the
Camomell: the one is stunted, the other thriues by his burden. Afflictions
that so scatter them, and loosen the joints of their vain hopes, do more
knit and consolidate our healthes. As soon as they take themselves it is as
easy to prove, as to reprove their diseases. Though I confess in the days of
their Iouialty; he has great wisdom, that can make them sensible of their
sickness. Were Solon, nay Solomon alive to declare it, they see t not, 'they
will not feel it. If the want of health were perceived, how amiable, admirable
would the benefit appear? Gratior est saint as redita, qua^ retenta, vix aliter
qua^ perdendocognoscimus. Returning health is more welcome, then if it had not
been lost. We scarce know what health is, but by the want. Let others spend
their times, wits treasures, to procure health to their bodies, which I embrace
when it is offered, and would not loose by my own errors) give me a sound and
clear conscience, and let me not want this health, till I envy theirs.

2. Thus having enquired what health is, leaving a while the consideration
thereof as it is in it self; let us descend into it as respectively; casting an
oblique eye unto that which is diverse from it, or adverse to it. There is a
significant and lightfull demonstration or commentary, which one contrary
nature gives to another, when they are diametrally opposed. The day would not
seem so clear, if the departing Sun should not leave night to follow it.
The foil adds grace to the Jewel. It (no less then) glorifies learning,
that the malicious tongue of ignorance barks at it. He knows the benefit of
heat, that has felt the sharpenes of a freezing cold. If there were no
sickness to trouble us, health it self would be thought sickness. The very
enmity of these repugnances help the beholders judgment, either to embrace or
reject them. Even their opposition is an exposition of their natures,
deformity, darkness, sickness, sin, all those privative, corruptiue.
destructive things, which as they had no creation from God so give no direction
to the good; yield (by a sober meditation) an unwilling luster to those
virtues, graces, and happy habites; against which they vaunt their contrariety.
That if any lewd, vain, ill judging, worse affecting mind, shall still love
the desolation of sin, rather then the consolation of spiritual health: it
may appear to be, not because this object is not wretched, but because he is
blind and bewitched.

There is a twofolde Sickness incident to man, 1. in sin, 2. for sin. The
former of these is only spiritual: the latter is not only corporal, but
sometimes spiritual also: and of all the Vials of Gods wrath, holden to the
mouth of miserable men by the hand of justice, it is the forest, when sin
shall be punished with sin, and the destitution of grace, shall permit a
lapse to impenitency.

1 The Sickness in sin is double, according to the cause, which is a defect
either of right believing, or straight living, a debility of confidence, a
sterility of good works: lack of faith, wrack of charity. These effects (or
rather defects) are produced by two errors in our Souls diet: the one
excessive, the other deficient, 1. By Fasting too much from Christ, 2. By
feeding too much on the world. In what we should affect, we are abstinent, in
what avoid, very indulgent.

1 The first cause is, Ioh. 6.
by forbearing that sacred meat, living and life giving bread, which came down
from heaven, to translate thither those that eat it. This is the Son of the
most high God, not disdaining to become the food of the affamished sons of
men. Judge. 14.14.
Out of the strong came sweetness: the mighty is become meat: the Lion of
Judah yeeldes honey, such as never came out of any earthly Hiue, He is our
invincible Captain, to him we supplicate (as distressed Nerua to Traian.)
Telis Phoebe tuis lachrimas vlciscere nostras.
Oh Savior defend and keep us, yet he that is ( Victor) a conqueror for us,
is also ( victus) food to us. But this is ( Cibus non dentis sedmentis) meat
for our faith, Aug. ^ract. in Johan. 16.
not for our teeth, manducaemus intus non foris, We eat it inwardly, not
outwardly. Christ is verily ( panis verus, non panismerus) true, not mere
natural bread. Thus our Feeder is become our Food, our Physician, our
Medicine. He does all things for us, guide, feed, mediate, medieate: let us
meditate on him, and noi disappoint the intention of his mercies by our
auersenesse. No hope but in him, no help but by him. The Law could not
satisfy our hunger (not through it own, but our insufficiency) the Gospel
gives not only present satisfaction; but even impossibility of future John
6.35.
famine. There is no abiding the law, except the Gospel be by: not of that
thunder, without his rain of mercy to quench it.

Who gives this food to us, but He that gave himself for us? that shepherd
that feeds his Lambs (not on his grounds, but) with his wounds* his broken
flesh, and sluced blood, Hence from this great Parliament of Peace, made in
that once acted, and for euer-virtuall sacrifice) derive we pardon for our
sins, without impeachment to the justice of so high a Judge, as we had
offended. Thus the King of eternal glory, to the worlds eye, destating
himself (though indeed not by putting off what he had, Non ex^endo quod
habuit, sed iud^endo quod non habuit.
but by putting on what he had not) was cast down for us, that we might rise
up by him. Learn of me to be humble, wherein he gives us a precept and a
pattern: Math. 21.29.
the one requiring our obedience, the other our conformity. The Pelican rather
then her young ones shall famish, feeds them with her own blood. Christ for
the better incorporating of his to himself, feeds them with his own flesh,
but spiritually. So that we eat (not only panem Domini, as the wicked, but
panem Dominum) not only the bread of the Lord, but the bread the Lord, in a
Sacramental truth.

They that have ransacked the riches of nature, searched earth, sea, air for
beasts, fishes, birds, and bought the rarest at an inestimable price, never
tasted such a iunket. The fluid transient, passing, perishing, meats of earth,
neither preserve us, nor we them from corruption. This banquet of His flesh,
richer then that Belshazzer made to his thousand Princes, this cup of his blood
more precious then Cleopatra's draught, shall give ( vitam sine morte) life
without death to them that are received, to receive it. Dan. 5.1.
We perceive a little the virtue of this meat.

Now then, as the withdrawing of competent meat and drink from the body,
lessoneth that radical moisture (which is the oil whereon the Lamp of life
feeds) and makes way for drines: whence the kindly heat (which like other
fire might be a good servant, must needs be an ill master) getting more then
due and wonted strength* for want of resistance, tyrannizeth, and not finding
whereupon to work, turns upon that substantial viuiditie, exciccating and
consuming it This ouersparing abstinence wastes, weakness, sickens the body,
dangers it to an Ecticke or some worse disease, of no less hurt, then too
great repletion, So when the Soul (either through a mad frenzy of wickedness,
or dull melancholy darkness of ignorance or sensual perverseness of
affections) forbeares, forbids herself to feed on that sacred and vital
substance, Jesus Christ the viuid sap of grace and virtue, (which keeps true
life and soul together; stilled into the heart by the holy Ghost) begins to
dry up, as a Hos. 6.4
morning dew: shrinking at the thirsty beams of the rising Sun, and the
fire of sin; gets the predominance. Now where that unruly Element Rom 6.12
reigns in a mortal body, it hazardes the immortal soul to death. There is
then no marvel, if the soul descends into the fall of sickness, into the
valley of death, when she shall refuse the sustentation, health and very life
thereof, her Savior: who is not only ( cibus, but ipsa salus) meat, but
health it self, as Paul calls him ipsam vitam, qua viuimus, quam viuimus, the
very life whereby we live, which we live, Act. 17.28
We live in Christ, we live by Christ, nay, we live Christ, for our very life
is Christ. G^l. 5.20
Now live not I, but Christ lives in me.

This is He, that once 1. Pet. 3.18
suffered for our sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to
God. He suffered our sins, the cause most odious: the just for the unjust,
the persons most unequal, that he might bring us to God, the end most
absolute How well then may we yield (and if there might b^ any pride or glory
in us, it should be in our sufferings) to suffer for him. The Act. 5 41.
Apostles did so rejoicing, O Jesus, S^ adeo dulce est st^re pro^e, quam dulce
erit gaudere de te? Oh Christ, if it be so happy to suffer for thee, what will
it be to rejoice in thee? It cost him much, (oh how much!) trouble, sorrow,
beating, grinding, before he became bread for us. There may be a scarsity of
other bread, there is none of this, to those that rightly seek it. It is dear
in regard of the preciousnesse (they that have it will not part with it) not
dear in regard of the price we pay nothing for it, but faith and love. Though
thousands pray at once with the Disciples. Job 6.34.
Lord evermore give us this bread ( Iosephes Gen 41.36
may) Jesus his storehouse can never be emptied, Least the world perish
through famine. He only ( nec accipiendo proficit; nec dando deficit) grows
not r^ch with receiving, neither grows poor with giving. Rejoice then,
Beloved, in done, in Domino. The Lord is the giver, the Lord is the gift. Let
not your souls be starued with those inferior things, which are ( pauca,
parua praua) few in number, small in measure, bad in nature, Luke 15.17.
Whiles there is bread enough in your Fathers house. Why should we sicken ^ur
spirits in a voluntary want; and fast from that which is able to feast a world
of faithful guestes. This is the first degree of our spiritual sickness.

2 The excessive occasion to procure ill health to our souls, is by feeding
too heartily too hastily on the world. This is that too much oil, which
quenches our Lamp. For as in a body ouercharged with immoderate quantity of
meats or drinks, when the moisture swells (like a tide above the verges) and
extinguisheth the digestive heat: that their kindly embraces are turned to
conflictes, and the superfluities want their former dissolution, and egestion,
the necessary event is distemperature and sickness. So the affections of the
soul ouerloaden with the devoured burden of worldly things, suffer the benign
and living fire of grace to be quenched. Hence the fainting spirits of virtue
swoune and fall sick, 1. These. 5.19
and after some weak resistance (as a cole of fire in a great shower,) yield
the victory to the floudes of sin, and are drowned. Neither are the
affections only (which they call the neither part of the soul, as if this
dropsy were only in the feet) thus diseased; but the sickness^ takes the
head of the soul, the understanding and the heart of it, the conscience: that
faith (which is religious reason) is empaired, and the instrument, the tongue,
the Organ of Gods praise is hindered. As we see it in these corporal effects
by drunken men, the feet are too light, and the head too heavy: the legs
cannot stand, the tongue cannot speak: so both understanding and affections
are stifled in this deluge, inward faith, and outward profession falling sick
to the death.

For how can it be otherwise, that the soul (of so high and celestial a
creation) should thrive with the gross and homely diet of vanity? Plato deleg.
5.
Man is, says the Philosopher, (...), Gods kinsman. And Paul taking such a
sense from the Aratus in Phaino
Poet, makes of a conceit of nature a sanctified truth, (...), Act. 17.28
For we are also his offspring. And Peter says, that (though not really, but
in regard of renouation) 2. Pet. 1.4.
We are partakers of the divine nature. Why then contemn we not with a holy
disdain, the rude, crude and unwholesome morsels of the world; sensual
pleasures? I^ we considered aright the natures; either (...), or (...), of the
things nourishing, or things nourished, we would strive ( aut non admittere,
aut cito emittere) either not to let in, or soon to throw out such unsavory
repast. For the nourishment of the body, if it be alienum, it is vene^um, if
strange and contrary to nature, it is as poison to him that eats it, Quae
nutriuntur, familiaribus and naturalibus rebus nutriuntur, contrarijs
corrumpuntur: for creatures that live by nourishment, with natural and
familiar things are nourished, corrupted with their contraries. Otherwise the
food makes work for the Physician and his elder brother death.

Spiritual and celestial delicates, the diet of grace, and sanctification,
nourish and cherish the souls health, and put the good blood of holin^sse into
her veins, give her a fresh and cheerful look, roses and lillies, (the pride
of nature in their colors) make not so beautiful a mixtur. But the
world-affected, and sin infected delights pale her cheeks, drink up her
blood, and sap of virtue, dim her intellectual eyes, lame her feet the
affections, crase her health, crush her strength, and which is most wonderfu^l,
for morte carent animae, even kill her immortality.

Now they are not simply the things of this world, that thus sicken the Soul,
but our extrauagant desires and corrupt usage. For all these were made for man's
delight and comfort in the second place, yield them immediately for the makers
glory, and we offend not to serve our necessities in them it is their abuse
which brings this sickness. It is with nutritive things to the soul, (in
some sort) as with all meats to the body. They are of three kinds, Contraria
obsunt, naturalia prosunt, Neutralia vel obsunt, vel prosunt vt recipiantur.
Contraria, naturalia, neutralia, contrary, natural, indifferent. Contraires
hurt, natural and kindly help, neutrall or indifferent, either hurt or help
as they are received, 1. Food merely contrary to the soul is, Sin, this
kills, 2. natural and proper to it is grace, this saues, 3. indifferent, or of
a middle nature, are the inferior things of this world, house, lands, riches,
etc. these either hinder or further our souls health, as they are used or
abused. They may be consolations, they may be desolations, ladders of ascent,
or stairs of descent, as our regenerate or degenerate minds shall embrace
them. Now the reason why earthly things do neither strengthen our spirits, nor
lengthen our joys is doub^, 1. They be transitory, 2. They be not satisfactory.

1 They be transient. Meats of a washy and fluid nature, that slip through
the stomach, and tarry not for concoction, do no more feed a man's health,
then almost if he lived on air. They that have no other sustentation to their
souls, but such light, slight, and empty food, (except they live by miracle)
cannot be like David, ore rubicundo, nor like Daniel of a fresh hew, and
cheerful complexion, I mean the constitution of their soul, cannot thrive.
The Soul fed only with the frail circumstuous, humid, cloudy vanities of this
world, is so far from remaining sound, and retaining health, that she pines,
languisheth, dwindleth away, as a tree, whose life-feeding sap is dried up: So
perishable are all the things of this world. Pro. 23.5.
Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches certainly make
themselves wings, they fly away like an Eagle toward heaven. Not like a tame
bird that returns, nor like a Hawke, that will show where she is by her bells,
but like an Eagle, whose wings thou can neither clip nor pinion. Aut
deserunt, aut deseruntur: either they forsake, or are forsaken. All their
certainety is their uncertainty; and they are only stable in this, that they
cannot be stable.

Pro. ^7.^4
Riches are not for ever, and does the Crown endure to every generation? Hence
they are called 1 Ioh. 3.17
Riches of the world; which is a bar in the Arms of Riches, to demonstrate
their slippery hold: for the 1. Tim. 6.17
world it self being transitory, they must needs savor of the soil. Our
judgments must of necessity be convinced to confess this, though our
affections will not yield it: wherefore tend all those Writings for covenants,
if these earthly things were not uncertain? What are those labors and
appendances, but bands and ties, to keep close to us mad and starting
Riches? We plead, it is for the mortality of men, but we mean the mortality
of riches. If then these earthly things will boast of any thing, let them boast
(as Paul did) their 2. Cor. 11.30 Ver. 26.
fraileties. They are either i^ Iourneying, not got without labor, or ventured
on the Sea, (yea, together with goods) bodies and souls too, to make such ill
Merchants full adventurers. In peril of robbers, public and notorious
thieves: In peril of false brethren, secret and tame thieves, Lawyers,
Usurers, flatterers. Fire in the City Free-booters in the Wilderness, Pirates
on the S^^; for weariness, Ver. 27.
painfulness, watchings, etc. who doubts the miserable partnership twixt them
and riches.

Could the world be thought thy Servant, (which is indeed thy Master. Oh
Worldlings, as Christ's Maxim infers. No man can serve two masters: none
indeed; for he that has God for his obeyed Master, has for his obeying
Servant the world;) yet is it but a vagrant and runnagate servant. It has a
madding mind, and a gadding foot. And though by the greatness of the stature
and proportion, it may promise able service, yet it will be gone when thou
have most need of it. Neither will it slip away empty, but rob thee of thy
best Jewels, carry away thy peace, content, joy, happiness, soul with it.
Behold the Cosmopolite; Luke 12.17.
Luke 12. planting, transplanting, rebuilding, s^udying for room to lay up his
fruits; Non in visceribus pauperum, not in the bowels of the poor, but in his
enlarged Barnes, if ever their capacity could answer his enlarged heart. He
buildes neither Church nor Hospital (either in cultum Christi, or culturam
Christiani, to the service of Christ, or comfort of any Christian) but Barnes.
He minds only Horreum suum, and Hordeum suum, His barn and his Barley. Behold
at last he promises his Soul peace, Ver. 19.
ease, mirth, security: but when his Chickens were scarce hatched, whereon he
long ^ate and thought to sit long brooding, he hears a fatal voice
confiscating his goods, and himself too. Thou fool, this night shall thy
soul be required of thee: Ver. 20.
then whose shall those things be which thou have provided? No marvel then if
the Soul be famished, when she is only fed with such fugitive meat which
vanishes like Tantalus Apples, or Ixions cloud in the Poet: and like Medicines
rather then food, or like poisons rather then medicines, wash away the good
they find, and leave the bad (made yet worse by their accession) behind them.

2 They be not satisfactory, and therefore confer no true content to the
mind: no more then the dreamed bread of the Sluggard, who walks with an empty
stomach. Micah. 6.14
Thou shall eat, but not be satisfied. Eccl. 1.8.
All things are full of labor, man cannot utter it, the eye is not satisfied
with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing. There is nothing but emptiness,
vanity, vacuity in them: Simuloriuntur and moriuntur, they at once are borne,
and die, as Plutarch said of the Lightning, as Jonas found in his gourde. Like
the Mermaide, Virgo formosa superne,
Desinit in turpem piscem malesuada voluptas.
Face flattering Pleasure, that so much deludes,
Like that Sea Monster with sad ruth concludes.
The motion of the mind following these wandering Planets of earthly delights,
is ever errant, ever incessant, Ahab is sick of his neighbors field, though he
have a whole Kingdom to walk in. And Alexander finding himself Lord of the
whole world, is discontent, as if he wanted elbow room. Luke 12.17.
The poor man is not more perplexed because he has neither barn nor grain,
then the covetous wretch, because he has not barn enough for his grain.
What Cosmopolite ever grasped so much wealth in his gripulous fist, as to sing
to himself a Sufficit. Eccl. 5.10.
He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he that loves
abundance with increase. His cares fill up as fast as his coffers. He has much
in his keeping, yet does neither enjoy it, nor joy in it.

It breeds a disease in the soul, like that in the body, which they call
Caninum appetitum, an immoderate desire of meat; whereafter the body looks
thin, wan, sickly, as if it were starued. The cold, feculent, viscous,
vicious humors of covetousness, desire an unreasonable quantity of worldly
goods; yet leave the soul more weak, warish, sickly, then if she neither
had, nor had will to do any thing. This is the infallible effect of these
coueted vanities, vel sequendo labimur, vel assequendo laedimur, the soul
either falls in the seeking, or fails in the finding. She is not the better,
nay, she is the worse for her longing after them. Ovid.
Luxuriant animi rebus plerunq, secundis.
The mind may riot and grow rank for a while with these puffings up, but how
soon does a tabe and consumption take it down, when the joy answers not to the
expectation of the heart? i. Pro. 19.4
The world may set such a man in high estimation, The rich has many friends,
but the poor is separated from his neighbors. Aspicis vt veniant ad
candidatecta Columbae,
Accipiet nullas sor dida turris aues.
But all this while others are more satisfied with the sight, then he with the
possession of his own Still his soul is hungry, and he knows not how to
appease it.

I persuade not all abiuration of the world, as if it could not be used. Ego
niergam te, ne mergar a te.
but it must be abused. As the Philosopher of old, that threw his money into
the sea, purposing to drown that, least that should drown him. Or as the new
found and fond Votaries, that profess a voluntary want, as if all coin were
diseased, and had for the circumscription, a noli me tangere. So the Empiricke
to cure the fever, destroys the patient: so the wise man to burn the mise, set
on fire his barn. Is there no remedy, but a man must make his medicine his
sickness? I speak of things as they are, not as they should be. He that
feeds too hungerly on the world, falls with much ease to neglect Christ. As he
that was once following him, no sooner heard of his fathers death, but
presently left him; thinking perhaps that he should get more by his fathers
Executorship, then by his Saviors Discipleshippe, and therefore would leave to
minister in Christ's service, that he might administer on his Fathers goods.
Hence fall many souls into this spiritual sickness, when they forsake the
solid and substantial nutriment of Jesus Christ, to gape for the fugitive and
empty air of worldly riches: which if they do carry to their deaths, yet they
must then leave all, exuendo, expnendo, donec nihil vel intus vel foris
ma^serit, by putting off, by spuing up whatsoever their covetousness has
devoured. Nature shall turn the^ out naked and empty. Prou. 13.25.
Thus the righteous eats, to the satisfying of his soul, but the belly of
the wicked shall want. They are not satisfactory.

In a word, that we may a little perpend the effects, as we have perceived the
causes; al spiritual sickness is either in faith or conversation.

1. In Faith. This is a general and dangerous sickness. General, AEgrotat
sides iam proxima morti. Faith is so sick, that it is ready to die. These are
those last and Apostate times, wherein faith is become so little, that the
scarsity gives expectation of the general doom. We swear away our faith at
every trifle, and then no marvel (being so prodigal of such oaths,) if our
stock of faith be sworn and worn out. Dangerous, we affie the world, which
we have vowed to defy; and loosing that confidence we should live by, (for
the Heb. 10.38
Just lives by faith) How can it be, but the Soul must become Sick? Whiles
the Ephesians 6.16.
shield of faith is lost, we lie naked to the fiery darts of Satan: and many
wounds will let out the life blood. The Sun in the heaven passes through the
12. Signs of the Zodiac. Christ is our Sun, the 12. Articles of our Creed,
the 12. Signs, Mal. 4.
Faith is our Zodiac; do you wonder why in this day of the Gospel, the Sun
beams of grace lived in so few hearts? They have lost their Zodiac. Their
faith is form, and the clouds of infidelity have ecclipsed those Signs. They
beliue not beyond the extension of sense, they have a sensual, a senseles
faith. It is the forest shipwreck, which the vast sea of this world and the
Pirates of sin can put men to, the sinking of their faith; It was Paul's happy
triumph that he had 2 Timothy 4.7.
kept the faith, though Gal. 6.17.
he bore about in his body the market of our Lord Jesus. Needs must the soul
be sick, whose faith is not sound.

2 The other degree of our spiritual sickness is, in conversation, Our lives
are diseased? the ill beating of those pulses show we are not well Math. 7.20
The fruits manifest the tree, Vbicaro est regnant, peccatum est praegnans:
Sins are rife, where the flesh reigns: plentiful effects will arise from
such a working cause. In vain, (and not without the more hazard) do we plead
our soundness, when the infallible symptoms of our disobedience euince the
contrary. Saul stands upon his observation of Gods charge: 1 Samuel 15.14
What then (says Samuel) means the bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and
the lowing of the oxen which I hear? Whence flow those streams of impiety;
merciless oppressions, Church-deuouring sacriledges, bestiall luxuries,
cunning circumuentions, detracting slanders, heauen-threatning blasphemies,
malicious fires of rage and hatred, monstrous treacheries, behauiours
compounded of scorn and pride, close Atheism, open profaneness, gilded
hypocrisy. Whence if these vicious corruptions, if not from our vlcerous
conuersations? Shame we not to call sickness health; and to maintain that
Atheistical Paradox, Adoxe, Pseudodox, Esa. 5.20.
which judges evil good, and darkness light? If thy life be so unsound suspect
thy self, thou art not well.

2 Now (not unfitly) after the sickness in sin, follows the sickness for
sin, which distributes it self into a double passion, corporal and
spiritual.

Io^. 5.15.
1 All corporal sickness is for sin. The sick man heard it from his
heavenly Physician, Go thy ways sin no more least a worse thing come unto
thee. So sung David in the Psalm; Psa. 107.17.18.
Fools, because of their iniquities are afflicted, their soul abhors all
manner of meat, and they draw near to the gates of death. This Elihu grounds
against Job, that sin causes sickness: Job. 33.20.21.
So that his life abhors bread, and his soul dainty meat. His flesh is
consumed away, that it cannot be seen, and his bones that were not seen,
stick out. Weakness proceeds from wickedness: if the Soul had not sinned
his body should not have smarted. Indeed this blow is easy, if we respect
the cause that drew it on us. For if the Romans 6.23.
Wages of sin be death, Sickness is a gentle payment, Sickness is the malady
of the body, Death is the malady of sickness. But such is Gods mercy, that he
is content to punish sometimes corporaliter, non mortaliter; and to put into
our hearts a sense of our sins, by casting us down, not by casting us out.
But whether the affliction be quoad introitum, or quoad interitum, a more
gentle entrance or more piercing to death, all is produced by our sin.

You will say, that many afflictions, wherewith God scourges his children, are
the Heb. 12.6
Fatherly corrections of love; yet they are corrections, and their intention is
to better us. Now what need the bestowing such pains on us, to make us good,
if sin had not made us evil. Still Sin is the cause, whether it be
sickness: Mic. 6.13.
therefore I will make thee sick in smiting thee, because of thy sins. Or
whether more despairefull calamity, Mic. 1.8 9
I will wail and howl, I will make a wailing like the Dragons, mournings as
the owls: for her wound is incurable. Still the reason is, verse 5. For the
transgression of Jacob is all this, and for the sins of the house of Israel.
Oh that our sick bodies, when the hand of Visitation has cast them down)
would convey this lesson to our souls, All is for our wickedness. Our
stomachs loath meat, because we have ouerburdened them with Gods abused
blessings. We have made the Creatures (ordained for our comforts) Psalm. 69.22
an occasion of our falling. And now, lo, we abhor to be cheered by those
things, wherewith we have erst oppressed our selves. That Eccl. 30.18.
delicates powered upon a mouth shut up, are as messes of meat, set upon a
grave.

Our sins, that remain unpurged by repentance in our bosoms, are not only
diseases themselves to our consciences; but vigorous and rigorous enough, to
engender diseases in our carcases. We are framed and composed of four
Elements, Fire, Air, Water, Earth; and have the kindly concurrence of those
four original and principal qualities, heat and cold, moisture and dryness
to our making up. Their harmony and peaceful content preserve our little world
in health; but if those brethren of one house fall at variance with themselves,
their strife will vndoev^. So easy is it for God to take rods from our own
bodies, wherewith to whip us. Though those outward Elements fire, water, and
the rest, forbear to lay on us the strokes of vengeance: yet we have those
(primordial) humors within us, whose redundance, defect, or distemperature are
means able enough to take our breath from us. How evident is this, when

Fire.
Some have been burned in the pestilent flames of their hot diseases; the
violence whereof has set their blood on fire, wasted their bowels, scorched
their veins, withered away their vital spirits, and left the whole body (
flagrantem rogum) as it were a burning pyle.

Air.
Some have been choked up with the fumes and vapors ascending from their own
crude and corrupted stomachs, and poisoned their spirits no less then with
the contagion of infected airs. How many obstructed lungs suck in far
better air then they breath out.

Water.
Others have been drowned with a deluge of waters in their own bodies, a ^^oud
running betwixt their skin and bowels, glutting and ouercharging nature so
violently, that the life has not been able to hold up her head: and the soul
(like Noah's Dove) returns unto God the Arc of her strength, as not able to
set her foot dry in her former habitation.

Earth.
And yet others have buried themselves alive in the grave of their own earthly
melancholy; which casts such a thick fogge and dark obscurity over the
brain, that it not only chokes up the spirits of life, like the damp in a
vault that extinguisheth the lights, but even offers offensive violence to the
Soul. Melancholy men are (as it were) buried before they be dead; and as not
staying for a grave in the ground, make their own heavy, dull, cloudy, cloddy,
earthen cogitations their own Sepulchers. From what sink arise all these
corrupt steames, but from the sins in our owneselues, as proper and fit to
engender these sicknesses, as these sickenesses are to bring desolution? It is
our own work to make Eccl. 30.17. Ver. 19.
death better then a better life, or continual sickness, that our meat gives
no more sent nor savor, then an offering does to an Idol. Eccl. 38.15.
He that sins before his maker, let him fall into the hands of the Physician.

6 Spiritual sickness for sin, is yet far more perilous and mortal: nay,
well were it for some thus sick, if it were mortal. If the disease would
decease, the soul might revive and live. It varies (as some diseases do in
the body according to the constitution of the sick) thereafter as the soul is
that has it: whether regenerate or reprobate. The malignancie is great in
both, but with far less danger in the former.

1 In the Elect this spiritual sickness is an afflicted conscience, when God
will suffer us to take a deep sense of our sins, and bring us to the life of
grace through the valley ^f death, as it were by hell gates unto heaven. There
is no anguish to that in the conscience: Pro. 18.14.
a wounded spirit who can bear? They that have been valiant in bearing
wrongs, in forbearing delights, have yet had womannish and cowherd spirits, in
sustaining the terrors of a tumultuous conscience. If our strength were as an
army, and our lands not limited save with East and west, if our meat were
man^a, and our garments as the Ephod of Aaron; yet the afflicted conscience
would refuse to be cheared with all these comforts. When God shall raise up our
sins, like dust and smoke in the eyes of our souls, and the Job. 6.^.
arrows of his displeasure drink up our blood, and his terrors, seem to
fight against us; when he buffets us from his presence, and either hides his
countenance from us, or beholds us with an angry look; lo then! if any
sickness be like this sickness, any calamity like the fainting soul. Many
offenses touch the body which extend not to the soul; but if the soul be
grieved, the sympathizing flesh suffers deeply with it. The blood is dried up,
the marrow wasted, the flesh pined as if the powers and pores of the body
opened themselves, like so many windows to discover the passions of the
distressed Prisoner within. It was not the sense of outward sufferings,) for
mere men have borne the agonies of death undaunted) but the wrestling of Gods
wrath with his spirit, that drew from Christ that complaint, able to make
heaven and earth stand aghast: Mat. 26.38
My soul is heavy unto the death.

There is comfort even in death, when the clock of our life runs upon her last
minutes: but is there any disease during the torments of a racked conscience?
This wearisome guest does God often lodge with his own children, suffering the
eye of faith to be shut, and the eyes of flesh and blood open, that sorrow is
their bread, and tears their drink, and the still perplexed mind knows not
where to refuse it self. Always reserving and and preserving his Children
(but never d^ing) grace of his Spirit in their hearts: Esa. 6, ^3.
a substance of bl^ssing (...) the oak, though it has cast the leaves, though
the barrennes of the boughs, drines of the bark give it for dead and
withered. Faith being in a swoune may draw the breath inwardly, not perceived:
but Esa 65.8.
destroy it not, for there is a bl^ssing in it.

Neither is this sickness and trouble of conscience properly good in it self,
nor any grace of God, but used by God as an instrument of good to his, as when
by the Rom 8.
spirit of bondage he brings us to adoption. So the Needle that draws the
thread through the cloth, is some means to join it together. This is the
godly souls sickness for sin, full of sharp and bitter ingredients, but
never destitute of a glorious event and victorious triumph. I may say of it as
Physicians speak of agues, (which make a man sick for a while, that he may
be the sounder a long time after.) This sickness is physic to procure
better health.

2 Spiritual sickness for sin in the reprobate has other effects. To
restrain their number, they principal appear in two diseases, or disasters
rather, Impenitency and Despair.

1. Impenitencie, the symptom of an obdurate and remorselesse heart. Ephesians. 4.19
Who being past feeling, have given themselves over unto lasciuiousnes, to
work all uncleanness with gredinesse. Saint Paul calls it a Romans 1.28.
reprobate mind: a death rather then a sickness. He that labors hereof, is
rather deceased, then diseased. This is a heart so hard and impenetrable, that
all the holy dewes of instructions cannot soften it; all the blows of Gods
striking rod put no sense into it. It is inuulnerable to any stroke, save that
which makes a fatal and final end with it. Ier. 5.3.
Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved, etc. It is just with God,
but fearful on whom soever this iu^gement lights, to plague sin with sin,
that peccatum sit paena peccantis. For there is evermore some precedent
impiety in those ungracious persons, procuring God to deal thus with them. 2
These. 2.11 12.
For this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a
lie. That they all might be damned that believed not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness. First Pharaoh hardens his own heart etc. God all
this while holds his peace, gives him the hearing and looking on. In the end he
says I will harden Pharaohs heart; and then puts iron to iron, adamant to
adamant, and there is perfected a relentlesse repentlesse obduracy.

This is that retaliation of sin, which God returns into their bosoms that
foster it, that since Psalm. 109.17.
they loved cursing, it shall be unto them. So David in the Psalm. (Though
indeed it was not in him Precantis votum, but Prophetantis vaticinium: he did
not desire it should be so, but he knew it would be so.) Psalm. 69.27.
Add iniquitieto their iniquity. Neither does God this by infusion of
wickedness, but by substraction of his spirit. He is causa deficiens, not
efficiens; as the reuoking of the sun from us causes darkness: the
privation of grace, the position of all ungodliness. It is in him (not peccatum,
sed iudicium) not sin, but judgment. When he leaves us to our selves; it is
no wonder if we fall into horrid and prodigious sins. Peccatum est malum in
se: effectum prioris mali, and causa subsequentis: est and supplicium, and
causa supplicij. Sin is evil in it self, the effect of former evil, the
cause of future* It is both punishment it self, and the cause of punishment.
In all the store house of Gods plagues there is not a greater vengance. With
other punishments the body smarteth, the soul groneth under this. Hence sins
multiply without limits, that the plagues may be without end. Every affliction
is sore that offends us; but that is direful which withal offends God. Such
do at once act and suffer: it is both an active and a passive sin. The
punishment they suffer, is (in them) sin; the sin they do, is (from God) a
punishment.

There is nothing more wretched, then a wretched man recking his own
wretchedness. Either they do not feel as blocks, or they will not feel as
Stoickes. You know a seared conscience is not sensible: and usual whipping
makes some careless of the rod; except it be a stroke that shall fetch
blood of the soul. Indeed we are all of one mould, but some are more cloddy
and hard, others more soft and relenting. The best in their sorrows, may be
more then Miserius nihil est miserose non miserante.
Conquerors, not more then men. And let the Stoicke brag his tetricall
conclusions to the world, that no pain can bring sorrow to a Wise man; etc..
Let him (being put into that torturous engine of burning brass, called the In
Equaleo.
Horse) bite in his anguish; smother his groans, sigh inwardly, and cry to the
Spectators, non sentio, I feel not. The wicked may laugh out lighter
punishments; and like the surde deaf, and dead rocks of the sea, not regard
the waves of easier judgments beating on them; letting fall no tears of
repentance for so many blows. But when God sees that thou digestest his
Physic as diet, and with a strange kind of indulgencie, wilt neither grieve
that thou have offended, nor that thou art offended: God will strike home, and
sharpen at once both his blow and thy sense. Now thou shall feel; even thy
seared heart shall bleed. In a word, the wicked may be senseles Stoics, they
cannot be insensible stones. There is in all men an impossibility of
impassibility.

But these remorseles wretches, so spiritually sick (not of the stone in the
raines, but) in the heart, at least regard not to offend God, whiles God
forbeares to offend them. Psalm. 73.9.
They speak softly, they set their mouth against the heavens. The reason is,
Ver. 5
They are not in trouble, nor plagued as other men. At first they liberally
sin and spare not: God lets them alone. lo, now they sin and care not.
Impiety, impunity, impenitency thus swiftly follow one at the heels of
another. There are some sick of this disease, but not so far gone; of whose
recovery there is a little (and but a little) more hope. These have by the
chidings of their accusing conscience, a notion, a relish, a guess of the
number and nature of their own sins, which because they suspect to be
monstrous, they would by no means admit a sight of. Hence they fly the temple,
the society of the good, the voice of exhortation, whence soever it sounds:
lest it should call the Souls eye home, to glance at the own estate, and so
leave it amazed. Hence he has ( animum inscium, inscitum) an ill sight, an
ill-sighted mind.

So timorous is this Patient, that because he knows his wound deep, he will
not suffer the Surgeon to search it, willing rather to kill his soul, then
to ^isquiet it. Such is the folly of his partial indulgence to his conscience,
that whiles he would softer it, he does fester it. They write of the Elephant,
that (as if guilty of his own deformity, and therefore not abiding to view his
snowt in a clear spring:) he seeks about for troubled and muddy waters to
drink in, This sick wretch (without question induced by the like reason)
refuses to look into the glass of the Law, or to come to the clear springs
of the Gospel, or any perspectiue that may represent his evil conscience to
his eyes, but seeks to muddy and polluted channels, Tauerns, Theaters,
societies of sin, to drown the thought of former iniquities with floudes of
new. (And if he be enforced to any such reflection, he spurns and tramples
that admonition, as Apes break the glass that represents their deformity, He
runs himself prodigally into so deep arrerages and debts, that he cannot
endure to hear of a reckoning. Whiles he despaires of sufficiency to pay the
old, h^e reckes not into what new desperate courses and curses he precipitates
himself. And as it was in the Fable with the blind woman and the Physician:
the Physician coming often to her house, ever carried away a portion of her
best goods; so that at last recovered, by that time her sight was come again,
her goods were gone. So this wretch will not see the ransacking of his soul,
and spoil of his graces, till his conscience be left empty, and then he sees,
and cries too late, as Esau for his blessing.

2 That other spiritual sickness for sin, befalling a reprobate soul, is
final and total desperation. This is that fearful consequent, which treades
upon the heels of the former sickness. Presumption goes before, Despair
follows after. Cains fratricide, Judas treachery, presumptuous, aspiring,
heauen-daring sins, find this desperate catastrophe, to cut themselves off
from the mercy of God. This is insanabilis plaga, when the Physician promising
help of the disease, the patient shall thrust ^is nails into it, and cry,
Nay, it shall not be healed. As if the goodness of God, and the value of
Christs-all sufficient ransom, were below his iniquity. As if the pardon of his
sins would empty Gods storehouse of compassion, and leave his stock of mercy
poor. This is that agony, whose throbs and throws, restles, turbulent,
implacable cogitations cannot be quieted. Let rivers of those waters of
comfort, which glad the City of God, run with full streams unto it, they are
resisted and driven back.

This is that sin, which not only offers injury and indignity to the Lord of
heaven and earth, Flagitium perpeirare mors animae, veniam de^perare est au
ins^rn^m descendere.
but even breaks that league of kindness, which we owe to our own flesh. To
commit sin is the killing of the soul, to refuse hope of mercy, is to cast
it down into hell. Therefore Saint Ierom affirms that Judas sinned more in
despairing of his masters pardon, then in betraying him. Since nothing can be
more derogatory to the goodness of God, which he has granted by promise and
oath (two immutable witnesses) to penitent sinners, then to credit the Father
of lies before him Ianuas aeternae foelicitatis spes aperit, desperatio
claudit: Hope opens the door of heaven, desperation shuts it. As faith is
heaven before heaven, so despair is damnation before the time.

Shall the blood and death of Christ put sense into rocks and stones, and
shall man tread it under his desperate feet, eneruate his cross^, annihilate
his ransom, and die past hope? did he raise three dead men to life, one newly
departed, an other on the Bear, a third swelling, in the grave: to manifest
that no dgree of death is so desperate, that it is past his recovery? And shall
these men; as if Jude ver. 12.
twice, dead and pulled up by the routes, deny to the grace and glory of God, a
possibility of their reviving? (...), God (and the unfeigned repentance of their
own hearts) forbid it.

3 Thus we have heard the malignancy of spiritual sicknesses, whetherin sin,
or for sin. Now let us take a short consideration, how far spiritual
sicknesses, are more dangerous then corporal.

The Soul is; at all parts, more precious then the Body. It is that
principal, most divine, and excellent half of man. Dum viuisicat, anima: dum
vult, animus, dum scit, men's: dum recolit, memoria, dum iudicat ratio, dum
spirat spiritus: dum sentit sensus. It is called for quickening, a soul, for
knowing, mind, for remembering, memory, for judging, reason, for breathing,
spirit, for feeling, sense, when the soul is sick: all these are sick with
it. The soul is compared to heaven, the body to earth. The heaven is glorious
with Sun, Moon Stars; so the soul with understanding, memory, reason, faith,
hope, etc. The body like the earth, whereof it was made, is squallid with
lusts. The earth has no heat nor nourishment, but from heaven, nor the body
comfort, but from the soul. How then? oh how terrible is the souls sickness,
or death?

How indulgently should we tender the health thereof? We keep our chicken
from the kite, our lamb from the Wolf; our fawn from the hound, our doves
from the vermin; and shall we yield our darling to the Lions, our soul to
those murdering spirits, which endeavor to devour them? The Soul may be
well, when the body is full of griefs: but ill goes it with the body, when the
soul is sick. Nay even corporal diseases are ofen a means to procure
spiritual soundness. Therefore one calls it Plutarch. d^ remed. vtriusque
fortu. Dial. li. 4.
( optabile malum, cum mali remedium sit maioris,) a happy evil, which is the
remedy of a greater evil. We may say of many healthful bodies, tutius
aegrotassent, they might with less danger have been sick. Nusquam peius quam
in sano corpore, ager animus habitat. A sick mind dwells not rightly in a
sound body. But to find a healthful and sound soul in a weak, sickly body is
no wonder. Since the Soul (before smothered with the clouds of health) is now
suffered to see that through the breaches of her prison, which former ignorance
suspected not.

Corporal sickness is a perpetual Monitor to the conscience, every pang a
reproof, and every stitch reads a lesson of mortality; ready ever to check
for evil, or to inuit to good, which duty weighed, a man has less reason to
be over fearful of sickness, Sen.
then over glad of health. The Spiritual detriment that may ensue on health,
is more dangerous then the bodily pain that pursues sickness. If a man fear
not death, what power has sickness to make him miserable? Tolerabilis est
morbipraesentia, si contempseris id quod extre^um minatur. Sickness has
little terror in it, if thou shall contemn that which it threatens, Death.
If it teach thee by the sight of the first death instant, to prevent the fury
of the second; behold it makes thee blessed. Such good use may the wise Soul
make of the bodies enemy. I have read it said, that singulus morbus, paruula
mors, every disease is a little death. Therefore God sends us many little
deaths, to instruct our preparation for the great death. The oftener a man
dies, the better he may know to die well.

I yield, if in sickness we contract and narrow up the powers of our soul, and
direct them (as our finger) to the grief of our bodies only; forgetting either
that God strikes us, or that we have first stricken God: either flying to ill
means, or affying to good means more then to God; our sickness may be deadly
to body and soul too. 2. Chr. 16.22
Asa was sick but of his feet, his feet stood far from his heart, yet because
he relied more on his Physicians, then on his Maker, he died. Or if there shall
be no less confusion and hurly butly in the faculties of the Soul, then
there is distemperature in the parts of the body: when Reason which should be
the Queen, and dwell in the highest and choicest room, is deposed from her
government, When the Senses, which are the Court-guardes, and the Princesses
attendants, that give all admission into the Presence; are corrupted: when the
supreme faculties, which are the Peers, are revolted; and the Affections which
are the Commons perverted: and all this insurrection and disturbance,
dethroning the Queen, corrupting the Guard, drawing from fealty the Peers,
and the Commons from allegiance, wrought by those violent passions which are
refractory and headstrong Rebels, having once gotten head. Alas, how far is
this miserable distemper and perturbation of these spiritual parts, above the
distress or distraction of the corporal members? neither is the future peril
hereof only more full of prodigious desolation, but even the present sense is
also more tetricall, piercing, and amazing with horror.

We shall find the perplexity of this spiritual sickness; (how far?)
exceeding the corporal, if we either compare them generally, or particularly,
instance in any special disease.

1 Generally, The excellency of health, is measured according to the Life,
which holds it: and the dignity of Life is considered by the cause that gives
it, Vita vegetabilis.
1. The Life of the Plant is basest, because it consists but in the juice which
is administered by the earth to the root thereof, and thence derived and spread
to the parts, Sensitiu^.
2. The Life of the brute creature excels, because it is sensitive, and has
power of feeling, Rationali^.
3. The Life of man is better then both, because it is reasonable, conceiving
and judging of things by understanding 4. Gratiae.
The Life of a spiritual man is better then all the former, and it has two
degrees, 1. The life of inchoate regeneration, and it consists in grace, 2. the
perfect life of imputed righteousness, Gl^riae.
conferred and confirmed by Jesus Christ, 5. The Life of Glory exceedes all,
whereof there are also two degrees, 1. the fruition of glory in soul, 2. the
full possession in the union of the body to it. These two last sorts of Life
transcend the former in two maine respects, 1. Because the other may die, must
die; these have a patent of eternity sealed them, 2. Because the other have
transient causes: These have the Grace and Glory of God.

Now as by all consent, the Life of reasonable man is better then the vegetable
of plants, or sensitive of beasts; so the health of man must needs be more
precious: and as that virtue excels in goodness, so does the defect exceed in
miserableness. Respect man distinctiuly, as he is a Body only, and then to
be sick, and die are common to him with plants and beasts; and what
suffering is there in the one, more then in the other, save that as the Beast
is more sensible of pain then the tree; so man is more apprehensiue then the
beast, the bodies of all return to the earth. But man has a soul, wherein
his reason is placed; which fainting or sickening through sin, or the
punishment for sin, there is offered a passion and grief, whereof the other
are not capable. Death to the rest is not so terrible, as this sickness. The
goodlier the building is, the more lamentable the ruin.

2 Particularly, This will best appear, if we single out some special
disease, and confer the perplexity it can offer to the body, with the
sickness of the soul. Take for instance, the plague of the Leprosy. It was
a fearful and unsupportable sickness, every way miserable, as you may find
it described, Leuit. 13. etc. ver. 45.46. His clothes shall be rent, Leu. e.
23.14
and his head bare, and he shall put a covering upon his upper lip, and
shall cry, Unclean, unclean. He shall dwell alone, without the Camp shall
his habitation be.

The Leprosy infected their very garments and houses, sticking contagion in
the very wool and walls. But our Leprosy of sin has (with a more vast
extention) infected the Elements, Air, Earth, beasts, plants, etc. sticking
scarres on the brow of nature, and making the whole Rom 8.22
Creature groan under the burden of corruption.

2 The Leaprosie was violent in spreading, running eftsoons over all the body,
as in Gehizi, and making it all as one ulcer; yet could it not penetrate and
enter the soul; the mind might be clean in this general defiling of the
carcass. Behold the Laeprosie of sin has not content it se^fe to insult,
pollute and tyrannize over the body, but it defiles the Soul also, and turns
that purer part of Man into a Lazar. Esa. 46.6.
Our righteousness is become filthy rags, our heart is poisoned, Tit. 1.15.
our Consciences defiled.

3 The Leaprosie was an accidental disease, casual to some, whiles other
escaped it. It was Gods Pursuiuant to single out and arrest some for their
sins, his mercy spa^ing the rest. But the Leaprosie of sin is (
haereaitarius morbus) an hereditary sickness. We derive it from our great
Sire Adam, with more infallible conueyance then ever son inherited his
fathers lands. It is original to us, borne with us, borne before us. So that (
natalis would be fatalis) the birth day would be the death day, if the blood
of that immaculate Lamb should not cleanse us.

4 The Leaprosie was a dangerous disease, yet curable by natural means: but
ours is by so much the worse, as it admits not man as Physician, nor nature it
se^fe as Physic, sufficient to cure it. The medicine is supernatural; the
Blood and Water of that man, who is God. Faith must lay hold on mercy: Mercy
alone can heal us.

5 The Leaprosie is a sore disease, so entering and eating, that it is even
incorporate to the flesh: yet still ( cum carne exuitur) it is put off with the
flesh. Death is a Physician able to cure it. Mors vna inter^^t and leprosum and
Lepram. Death (the best Empericke) kil^ at once the Leaper and his Leprosy.
But the Leprosy of sin cleanes so fast (not only to the flesh, but) to the
Soul, that if spiritual death to sin do not slay it, Corporal death shall
neither mende it nor end it. Heb. 12.1.
It shall not fly the Soul, when the soul does fly the body: but as it
accompanies the one to the judgment fear of God, so it shall meet the other
in hell, if they both cannot be rid of it, through Christ on earth,

6 The Leaprosie makes man loathsome to man, that (seorsim habitaturus sit) he
must dwell alone. So was the Leuit. 13.46
Law, He is unclean, he shall dwell alone; without the Camp shall his
habitation be. Yea, though he were a 2 Reg. 15.5.
King, he must content himself with an vnvisited and removed lodging; yet what
is it to be secluded from man's (and not to be destitute of the Lords) company?
God forsakes not the clean heart, though man abhorres the leaprous flesh.
Psalm. 73.1
God alone is a thousand companions; God alone is a world of friends. He never
knew what it was to be familiar with heaven, that complains the lack of
friends whiles God is with him. Were thy Chamber a prison, thy prison a
Dungeon; yet what Walls can keep out that infinite Spirit? Even there the
good soul finds the Sun of heaven to enlighten his darkness, in
comparison of whom all the stars in the sky are the snuff of a dim
candle. Every cloud darkens our Sun, nothing can eclipse that. But the
Leprosy of sin separates a soul from Gods fellowship, from the company of
Angels. 1 Ioh. 1.6.
We lie, if we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness. Your
sins have separated betwixt me and you says the Lord of hosts. They
vnhouse our hearts of Gods spirit, and expel him from the temple of our
souls, who will no longer stay there, when the Dagon of sin is advanced,
adored. It is customable with men to eschew the society of their poor, maimed,
afflicted, diseased Brethren, and to show some disdain^ by their auersenes: but
to keep company with drunkardes, adulterers, swearers, usurers, etc. of whom
alone we have a charge, de non tangendo, they recke not, 1 Cor 5.11
E^te not with them? Turn away from them, says the Apostle, 2. Timi 2.5.
from those so diseased in Soul, not in body. But now d ( melior est conditio
vitij, quam morbi.) the estate of sin is better then of sickness. But God
looks unto (and is with) Lazarus living, and takes him into his bosom dying,
though he was full of sores: and lets healthy, wealthy, flourishing Dives go by
unnamed, vnaccepted.

7. The Leaprosie kept men but from the fading city, terrestrial Jerusalem.
This Leaprosie unpurged by repentance, restraines men from that Jerusalem which
is above; Reu. 21.19. ser. 2^
a city built upon Iaspers and Sapphires and precious stones; flowing (in stead
of milk and honey) with bliss and glory. For into f it shall enter nothing
that defiles, nor whatsoever works abomination or lies. Now as the
pleasures and treasures of this City are more, so much worse is the cause
hindering our entrance. You may judge by this taste, how far spiritual
sickness is more bitter then corporal. Every circumstance before has
reflected on this; but nunquam satis dicitur, quod nunquam satis addiscitur, it
is never taught enough, that is not enough learned.

4 I should now lastly inquire who are the sick, wherein (as the Philosopher
said of men; Non vhi sunt, sed vhi non sunt, faoile demonstratur, I can easily
show you where they are not, not where they are.) It is a small matter to find
out the sick, the difficulty is to find any sound. I know g there are a few
names in our Sardis, Rgen. 3.4.
that have not desiled their garments; but they are so few, that it is hard to
find them. Ier. 5.2.
Run to and fro through the streets, and seek in the broad places of our
Cities, if you can find a man, if there be any that executes judgment, and
seeks the truth. The whole World is very old and sick, given over, as man in
his dotage to covetousness. Huius aedest aet as extremae and far a mundi,
Alget amor dandi, praeceps amor ardet habendi.
Needs must the world be sick and old
When lust grows hot, and charity cold.
Wonder you at this? under is the daughter of ignorance, ignorance of nature.
God has foretold it, event has fulfilled it. Saint Paul gives the symptoms
of this general sickness. Ephesians. 5.16.
Redeem the time, for the days are evil. Our Savior premonish^th the great
decay of faith and love, to ensue the Apostacy of the latter times. His 2.
Tim. 3.1.
Apostles testify no less. Paul to Timothy, Know that in the last days
perilous times shall come. Men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous,
boasters, proud, etc. (read and observe.) 2. Pet. 3.3. Jude ver. 18.
Peter (with others) to make up a cloud of witnesses, prophecieth the like, if
not with addition; that men shall be so debauched, as even to deride and scoff
at goodness, as a thing rather derisory, than necessary. The plague of sin
ranckles, and (helped with fit instruments of dispersion) infects the times.

The Scribe points to the Publican, and thinks that destruction comes on the
city for his sake. The ungodly Protestant lays the fault on the profane
Gallant, that the days are evil, and says that pride deuoures all. The proud
on the covetous Churl: the well conceited Hypocrite on the dissolute; the
dissolute on the Hypocrites. Even the wicked think the godly the cause, but
the godly know the wicked the cause. Atheists will live as they list. Loquuntur
grandia. They lift up their mouths against heaven, and acknowledge no other
deity then their own guts. If good cheer may be their sickness, they care
not though gluttony be their grave. Grace is feign to give place to
wantonness, Religion to Idolatry, honesty to profaneness. Many live, as the
2. Tim. 2.18
Apostle says of Himeneus and Philetus, as if the resurrection was past, or
would never come.

I know, there was never age not complained of, not judged as worst. Laudamus
veteros etc. We see what is, not what has been. Eccl. 7.10.
Some times have been evil, others worse, ours worst of all. We are so much
worse than all, because we have more means to be better. We have Atheists that
serve no God, (...) that serve their money, Idolaters that serve creatures,
Apostates that forsake God, worldlings, temporizers, neuters, that serve many,
serve all, serve none. Love is banished, temperance gives place to
drunkenness, humility stoopes to pride, hope yields to sense, and religion it
self is used either for a show of good, or for a cloak of evil. Men's words
disagree from their deeds, their hearts from their words. If any say this world
is not so sick, as we give it, I durst tell them that they are a great part of
the sickness; and but for such we had less need to complain.

Satan's violence now doubling his forces, shows it to be the last and worst
time. For the Devil then rages most when he knows he shall rage but for a
while. The world is sick, the days are evil. You hear what makes them so.
Shortly, either doing or suffering ill: sin originally, misery by consequent.
If we would bate of our sins God would decrease our miseries. What plagues
the world with the sword, but malice and ambition? What turns the poor from
their right, but injustice? What brings famine but covetousness? Proud
Courtiers make rich Merchants and both make miserable Commons. We multiply
sins against God, Gods punishmens upon us: the former from our
unrighteousness, from his righteousness the latter: both together make the
world sick, the days evil. I would hope, it were now vain to bid you loath
the world. Is he less then mad, that can love and dote on such a cheek? The
beauty of it is black without by the miseries, and more foul within by the
sins: if any wretch shall now make it his choice, he is not worthy of envy,
if of pity, now as a modern Poet well. There Is only one way left, not to admit,
The Worlds infection, to be none of it.


Conclusion.
Seeing we are thus sick, why speed we not to means of


