A PARALLELE OR CONFERENCE OF THE CIVIL Law, the CANON Law, and the COMMON Law
of this Realm of England.

Wherein the agreement and disagreement of these three Laws, and the causes
and reasons of the said agreement and disagreement, are opened and discussed.

Digested in sundry Dialogues By WILLIAM FVLBECKE.

At the end of these Dialogues is annexed a Table of the Sections or Divisions
of the principal points, matters, and questions, which are handled in every
Dialogue.

AT LONDON Printed by Thomas Wight.

Anno Domini. 1601.

TO THE MOST Gracious and reverend Father in God JOHN by the providence of God
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, and
one of the Lords of her Majesty's most honorable privy Council.
RIght Reverend, right Honorable, and my singular good Lord, as nothing is more
comfortable to the Mariner, or Seaman, then after a great tempest to possess
a pleasant calm, and grateful serenitie: so nothing is more plausible and
acceptable, to them that have employed, and exercised themselfes in any part
of learning, then after their long and laborious travail, to enjoy the warmth
and bright reflection of an honorable countenance, this partly, and (if the
great arrearage of duty, and thankfulness, which I owe to your Grace, do not
challenge prioritie) especially has moved and enforced me, to present to your
honorable view and patronage these tripartite Dialogues, to whom her sacred
Majesty has committed the executing and maintenance of the Civil and Canon
laws, in these Dialogues by my slender pencill rather delineated, then
described: and because the Common law cannot otherwise be divided from these
twain, then the flower from the root and stalk, therefore this entier
discourse I have wholly submitted to your Graces tuition and disposal: in which
I sought rather to profit the understanding, then to please the sense with a
plausible, copious, and polished style, or with foreyne conceyts not belonging
to the titles of the Law, which I handle: assuring my self, that as verbal
delites and affected, vanities are to your Lordship odious, irksome, and of no
account: so they are in truth to the gaping ears of this curious age, very
snares, and Sirens. Wherefore humbly referring my self to your Graces excellent
wisdom, and abundant clemency, for the imparting of a favorable regard and
countenance to these my unworthy labors, I beseech the almighty God with the
most submisse devotion of my heart, that the days of your life (which the
Lord of life multiply) may be the degrees of your happiness, to the great good
of this Church, and Commonweal, to the exceeding comfort, and contentment of
such as be studious of virtue, Law, and equity, and to the immortal
propagation of your fame and memory thorough all ages, and times, until the
last time of all ages.

Your Graces most humble and bounden William Fulbecke.

TO THE COVRTEous Reader.
CVrteous Reader it is observed by Seneca, that in one and the same plotte of
ground, the Hound seeks for a Hare, the Ox for good grass, and the Storke
for a Snake or Lizarde, Senec. epist. 109. In eode^ prato bos herbam quaerit,
canis leporem, ciconia lacertam.
and my desire was, that in this book of Dialogues, the several students of
the Canon law, the Civil law, and the Common law of this Realm, might have
diverse repast according to their disagreeing appetites, Horat. Tres mihi
conuiuae prope dissentire videntur; Poscentes vario multum diuersa palato.
and matters suitable to their distinct contemplations, for it seemed strange
unto me, that these three laws, should not as the three Graces have their
hands linked together, and their looks directly fixed the one upon the other,
but like the two faces of Ianus, the one should be turned from the other, and
should never look toward, or upon the other: and weighing with my self, that
these laws are the sinews of a state, the Sciences of government, and the
arts of a common weal, I have seriously and often wished, that some joint
discourse might be made of these three excellent Laws, whereby the agreement
and disagreement of them, and the grounds, and reasons thereof might evidently
appear by some very skillful in these Laws well grounded, and if it might be,
which I never yet saw, professed in the same: and in such a plentiful harvest
of flourishing wits in this la^d, which are adorned with great variety of
reading, as the firmament with diversity of stars, I could not but expect
the event of so good a thing: yet in the end, when I saw many days ouerpasse,
and slide away without the success of my desire, taking my wish to be
somewhat more, then Vigilantis somnium, I thought it better to make some trial
of my sle^der ability, to put my wish in practice, and to lay that heavy
burden upon mine own feeble shoulders, then that such a profitable thing
should be altogether frustrate of attempt, howsoever void of effect, by that
mean (if it might be) to excite, and stir up some other, quem Musae
comitantur and arts, to undertake this task, and far more fully
iudiciously, and learnedly to accomplish this business. For I remember the
saying of D. Bartolus, a principal Author in the Civil law, that these
things, which are not very well invented, yet may be profitable in this
respect, because they may perhaps provoke others to the inuestigatio^ of the
truth Prosunt minus recte excogitata, cum alios incitent* saltem ad veritatis
inuestigationem. Bartol. in tract. test.
. Great and forcible reasons have moved me to have in special regard the
knowledge of the law, considering that by the good constitution,
establishment, and observation thereof, al commonweals, which are grown to
hight and prehemine^ce, have had their prosperous rising, their abundant
increase, and their fortunate continuance, but by the want, breach, or change
of good laws, nothing has ensued but the desolation, downefal, and inevitable
ruin of many dominions, and estates. Not to trouble your patience with
instances of petty provinces, and inferior regiments, by your favors let the
four most eminent commonweals of the world be tried by this touchstone, and
let my assertion by their destinated courses be measured and examined; The
four commonweals I speak of, were the Cretensian, Athenian, Lacedemonian,
and Roman estates: the first was of all these the foremost and most ancient,
famosed by the Laws of Minos, who so studiously employed his pains in the
making and amending of Laws for the space of nine years together, that this
Common weal being well settled, was well fenced against future mishaps, and
continued in great prosperity till the Romans grew too strong: The Athenian
Common weal was first guyded by Dracoes Laws, written not with ink, but with
blood, rather terrors then rules of estate: wherefore these for their too great
asperitie being cancelled, and antiquated, Solon that sage Father, being
(contrary to the foolish Proverb or rather by-woord) both a great Clarke, and
an excellent wiseman, and having the whole administration of that estate
committed to his hands did enact, and establishe Laws with such moderation,
and equity, that the greatest part of the Law called the Laws of the xij.
Tables, that absolute president, and worthy platform of all Justice (to the
full opening and clear expou^ding, of which it might be wished that some very
learned man would put to his painful hand) are said to be the fruit and
issue of his deep, and peereles judgment. The Lacedemonian common weal was
established by Lycurgus that famous lawmaker, by whose profitable directions
and ordinances that common weal did for the space of six hundred years
exceedingly florishe in equity and glory: but when the neglect of these Laws
had entered and pierced into the body of that common weal, and wantonness,
licentiousnes and desire of money had encroched into the place of these
commodious orders, they lost their renown with their liberty, and the
deformity of men's manners did wholly disfigure the bewtifull and decent
proportion of that goodly Common weal. Now I come by your favor to the Roman
estate, that is, to the miracle of miracles (if any humane thing may bear so
gorgious a title) surpassing far her predecessors in greatness, happiness, and
continuance of time: the cause of which rare felicity is no other in truth,
then the prescript of good Laws, made by Numa, and others, howsoever some
partially affected, do as their several fancies led the^, ascribe and
attribute the same to several causes, whose censures and opinions give me leave
by your patience, and permission in humblenes and modesty to examine. That
saying of Cicero seems not true unto me, that military virtue has purchased
to the people of Rome credit, and to the City eternal glory, and has made
the whole world obedient to that Empire: Cicer. pro Muren^ Virtus militaris
populo Romano nomen, vrbi aeternam gloria^ peperit, orbem terraru^parere huic
imperio coegit.
nor that of Lactantius accusing the Romans of injustice in these words: How
much profit, differs from justice, the people of Rome do testify, who
proclaiming war by their heraults, and doing injury in form of law, and
always desiring other men's goods, and altering the property by violence, have
achieved to themselves the possession of the whole world: Lactant. lib. 4.
institution c. 9. Quantum a iustitia recedat vtilitas, populus ipse Romanus
docet, qui per faeciles bella indicendo, and legitime iniurias infere^do,
semperque aliena cup^endo and rapiendo possessionem sibi totius orbis occupauit.
nor that of Liuie who is directly opposite to Lactantius. The gods (says he)
favor religion and loyalty, by which the Romans ascended to such an height
of estate: Liuius. lib. 42. Fauent pietati fideique Dij, per quae populus
Romanus ad tantum fastigij venerit.
nor that of Dio uttered in the person of Caesar: Our ancestors did make our
City so great as now it is, by hazarding and exposing to danger their own
wealth as if it had been other men's goods, but other Princes Dominions as
belonging unto them they did not doubt to seize: Dio lib. 38. Maiores nostri
tantam vrbem nostra^ fecerunt, cum suas fortunas tanquam alienam possessionem
semper periculis obiecerunt, alioru^ autem ditione^ tanquam pertinentem ad se
haud cunctanter suam facerent.
nor that of Orosius: The City of Rome like an insatiable belly did devour
all, and yet was always hungry: For into her bosom all the wealth and
treasure of other nations robbed and spoiled by the Romans was conveyed and
transported: Oroisius lib. lib 5. c 18. Quasi inexplebilis venture Roma cuncta
consumens, and semper esuriens, cum in sinus ipsius euersarum omniu^ vrbium,
nudaturumque terrarum abrasae vndique opes cogerentur.
whereupon he further exclaymeth. Look how happily she overcomes, so
unhappily other nations are vanquished, and ouercommed: the happiness of this
City is the unhappiness of the whole world: O unhappy world under this
conqueror, a subtle underminer, abitter enemy a bloody tyrant: Quam vincit
illa foeliciter ta^ infaeliciter quidquid extra est, vincitur: faelicitas vrbis
infoelicitas orbis: Infoelicem sub isto victore orbem, arguto insidiatore,
host infesto, domin* immiti Orosius lib. 5. c. 1. and lib. 6. c. 12.
though Arnobius a man of great sanctimony do in like sort surmise that this
only City was bred for the destruction of all mankind: Ciuitatem vnam in
huma^i generis pernitiem natam. Arnob. adu. genesis
neither do I like Claudian his strange and paradoxicall opinion, auouching
patience to be the cause of the Romans prosperity. Rome (says he) never sunk
under the burden of mishappe, and no wound dismayed it: after the great
slaughter of Cannae and the dangerous war of Trebia, she did more lift up
her head, and when flames of war did on each side beseige her, and the
enemies ram menaced the wall, she sent her army into the farthest and most
remote parts of Spain: Nunquam succubuit da^nis, and territa nullo: Vulnere
post Cannas mayor Trebiamque fremebat, Et cum iam premere^t fla^mae muru^que
feriret, Hostis, in extrem* acie^ mittebat Iberos. Claudi. 3. stilie.
neither do I agree to Florus and Ammianus both agreeing in opinion. The people
of Rome (says Florius) was tossed by many labors and dangers, so that virtue
and fortune might seem to have contended for the procuring of her soueraintie:
Populus Romanus laboribus periculisque iactatus est, vt ad co^stitue^du^ eius
imperiu^ co^te^disse virtus and fortuna videre^tur. Flor. in proaem. histor.
to whom Ammianus subscribeth, saying: virtue and fortune did herein iumpe n)
Ammian. lib. 14.
for the most part iarring: but the aforesaid Claudian being at another time
better advised, does very fully and truly describe the causes of the Roman
prosperity. Rome was the mother of military discipline and laws, and (by these
means) dilated and stretched her principality over al countries, and
prescribed unto the^ their first laws and orders: Armoru^ legu^que pare^s quae
fu^dit in omnes Imperiu^, primique dedit cunabula iuris. Claudi. 3. stilie.
for the good government n) Virtus hic conuenit and fortuna, pleru^que
disside^tes.
of their Commonweal at home, did make their wars to prosper abroad, and
the giving of laws to others, made others at peace with them, and to bear the
yoke of more inclinable obedience: and they which so obey, find more good by
the direction of laws, then the protection p.) Quo arma vestra pe^uenerunt
codem, ius vestru^ hinc profectum peruen^at.
of arms. Wherefore the Rhodians did very wisely make suite to the Romans for
their laws, rather then for their garrisons. Whether your weapons have
pierced, there let your laws arrive, p) Liuius lib. 37.
but more fit to judge of these matters, then any above mentioned is Polibius,
a man highly commended by a learned ciuilian; Alberi. Ge^til. lib. de arm. Romans
2. c. 13.
as a good soldier experienced in warlike affairs, Bonus qui rebus interfuit
miles.
as a good Captain in the regiment of soldiers, Bonus qui rebus praefuit
ductor.
as a good Judge in the controversies of great Princes: Bonus qui summis
imperatoribus adfuit arbiter.
his opinion of the cause of the Roman glory is this. Fortune only (says he)
did not purchase to the Romans the universal Empire of the world, but virtue
and discipline (he means I doubt not, the discipline of religion, of arms,
and of law) being all of them fit instruments for such an effect: Polyb. lib. 1
Non fortuna Romany universal imperiu^ peperit: sed virtus, disciplina apta,
ad tanta^ rem omnia.
and the law is prophesied by Anchises that grave Trojan to be the very ground
and occasion of the Roman felicity: for thus he says to Aeneas. Regard thou
(O Roman) to govern nations by just command: these shall be thy arts, to
be merciful to the meek, and stern to the proud, and to prescribe order to
peace: Virgil. lib. Acneid 6. Tu regere imperio populos Roman memento* (Hae
tibi eru^t arts) pacique imponere morem, Parcere subiectis; and debellare
superbos.
and Hannoes speech in the Senate house of Carthage was, that the best
education of young men was to be brought up in the obedience of Laws: he
speaks thus of Hanniball. I think it most fit, to schole and train up
this young man, under Laws and magistrates, and that he should be taught
to live in just manner amongst others, least from this little spark a great
scale-fire do grow: Ego istum inuenem sub legibus, sub magistratibus doce^du^
viuere equo iure cu^ caeteris censeo, ne quandoque paruus hic ignis incendiu^
ingens exsuscitet. Liuius lib* 21.
and as laws have supported and vpheld every estate into which they were
entertained, so the decay of them has been the desolation and downfall of
all estates: and the commonweal of Rome (if ever any) has tasted the
lamentable bitter, and wonderful experiment hereof. For Cicero in the person
of Scipio, that excellent man, does evidently and amply according to his manner
describe the ruin and declining of the Roman glory. Scipio is opinion that
the commonweal cannot be governed without great justice, and that as in
musical instruments, a concent or harmony is made of distinct sounds, which
being changed and distuned, the ears are offended with an unpleasant iarring:
so of the principal mean, and inferior sorts of men agreeing amongst
themselves, the good estate of a City does grow, and that which in music is
called harmony, in a commonweal is termed concord, which can never be
without justice: but when justice was obscured and suppressed in the Roman
commonweal, there was not then a vicious commonweal, but which was a great
deal worse then that there was no commonweal at all, but a apparent
disorder, and confusion. Cicer. in Laelio.
And this was well perceived by that ancient writer Ennius, for he bewailing
the great alteration and decay of the Roman commonweal, does withal disclose
the cause of that strange accident: alas whether is the power and strength of
Italy vanished: into what a slender shadow are we shrunk: the state of Rome
cannot stand without the ancient manners, and magistrates: Heu mihi quo latiae
vires vrbisque potestas Decidit: in quale^ paulati^ fluximus vmbra^: Moribus
antiquis stat res Romana virisque. Fragm. Enn.
for these ancient manners which he affirms to be wholly preserved and
retained by the just government of Magistrates, Cicero avouches by way of
comment upon Ennius his speech to be good laws and customs. Before our
memory (says he) our ancestors by custom did prefer excellent men to the
Magistracy, and themselves being worthy men, did observe the ancient
customs and the laws of our forefathers, Fragm. 5. lib Ciceron. de repub.
Ante nostra^ memoriam and mos ipse patrius praestantes viros adhibebat, and
veterum morem ac maiorum instituta retinebant excellentes viri.
and Saint Augustine a better judge then any that spoke yet, lays all the
fault and blame of the miserable and wretched estate of the Romans upon the
breach and contempt of laws. For (says Augustine) the noble and vn-noble were
put to death, not by laws and judgment of Magistrates, but by quarrels and
malice of mind. D. Augusti^us lib. de ciuit. dei. 3. c. 24. Neque enim legibus
and ordine potestatu^, sed turbis animorumque conflictibus, nobiles
ignobilesque necabantur.


This may suffice to conclude and and convince my former assertions, that no
Commonweal can flourish without laws, and if they be once received and
approved, and afterward altered, defaced, and trod under foot, such contempt
and careless neglect of laws procures the sudden and final^ misery,
calamity, and distreputation of that Commonweal. Now hear me a little
proouing likewise unto you the antiquity and long continuance of these three
laws (whereof the Dialogues ensuing do bear plentiful discourse) for the
good administration and regiment of all Commonweals.

The Cannon law is more ancient, then the other twain, and of greater
continuance. For amongst the ancient Egyptians priests were judges. Elia(...)
lib. 14. vari. Histor. c. 54.
The Druidae the priests of the aunciente Galls, did judge of all
controversies, as well private as public, and for offenses they did ordain
and inflict punishment, and if any man did not obey their decree, they did
interdict him their sacrifices, which was the greatest punishment amongst
them: for all other did avoid the speech and company of such persons as a
contagious evil: Iuli. Caes. lib. 6. com.
Numa Pompilius the second King of the Romans instituted a high priesthood,
with an inferior order, and he gave them power to make laws concerning
spiritual things, without the control or countermaund of any, and as a parcel
and member of religious matters, they had in charge the administration of poor
men's causes, and of all such matters which in the Civil law are called piae
causae. Plinius secun: lib. de viris illustri. c. 3. Eutropi. lib. 1. histor.
Dionis. Halicarnas. lib. 2. Liui: lib. 1. Fenestel. lib. de sacerdot. Romans
Plin. li. 13. c. 13 Cicer. pro do^. sua and de aruspec: respon.
But what need heathen examples, when the Commonweal, of Iudaea, that is Gods
own Commonweal does afford ple^tiful example and authority herein. Heli and
Samuel the priests of God did govern amongst the people of Israel. 1. Reg. c.
1. 1 Reg. c. 7. and 8.
And so God has expressly commanded: My priests shall teach my people, what
difference there is betwixt clean, and unclean, and they shall judge my laws
and my precepts. Ezech. c. 44
And in another place: Aaron, and the priests shall judge betwixt leprosy and
leprosy. Leuit. 13
Iosaphat the King of Judah, when he did appoint Judges in all the Cities of
Judah, he did appoint also in Jerusalem Levites and Priests, that they might
adiudge justice, and the cause of the Lord unto the inhabitants, and he
appointed them to judge of every cause of their brethren which was betwixt
kindred and kindred, whenever question should be of law, of commandment, of
ceremonies, of iustifications; and he appointed Amasias the high Priest in
these things, which belong to God: Paralipom. 2. c. 19.
afterward the high Priest Jesus Christ did give divine laws and rules unto his
people: Epistol. ad Hebr. c. 3. 4. 5. 8. 9.
after him his Apostels, Actor. 15. 2 ad Theslalo. 2.
then Bishops and Prelates in their dioses, De potest. sum. pontif. in Canon:
cuncta per mundum. 9. quaesti* 3.
their power, their Cannons, their laws were approved by diverse Emperors and
Kings, Philip, Valentinian, Marcus, Justinian, Constantine the great, Honorius,
and Theodosius, L. cum. l. 4. de sacros. eccles. lib. 1. C. tit. 5. priuileg.
quae general. l. 12. eod. tit:. 1. in. ecclesiast. tit. in authent. collat 9.
tit. 6. Rusin. lib. 10. hist. eccles. c. 1.
and many others: And by King Henry the eight of famous memory late King of
England in his Parliament held the 25. year of his most prosperous reign,
and revived in the first year of our renowned Queen and Sovereign Lady
Elizabeth. 25. H. 8. c. 19. 1. Elizab. c. 1.
As to the original of the Civil law I do not think, that, that which may
properly be called Civil law, and was so called at the first, is any other
then ius Romanum, or ius antiquum Romanorum, or that which has been commented
thereupon, or added thereunto. It is manifest that Romulus did establish laws,
Dionys. Halicarn. li. 3.
and so did the other kings that followed him: and that the law was brought
into a convenient form in these times, it is very apparent by this, that M.
Tullius being one of the dunmuirs was thrust into a sack, and by Tarquin his
commandment was cast into the sea, because corrupted by lucre, and reward, he
did suffer the book containing the secrets of the sacred laws of their City,
to be copied and written out by Petronius a Sabine: Valor. Maxim. lib. 1. c. 1.
and P. Papyrius is said to have brought all the regal laws into one volume:
Valor. Maxim. lib. 2. in princip. E^. iur. civil. de ^eter* iur. enudeat.
and for the perfitting of the other laws, the laws of the 12. tables were
given forth by the decem-uiri: L. 1. exactis. de origin. iur. Diodor. Sicul.
12. Dio^s. Halicarnas. lib. 2. and 10.
which excellent laws if they were well, and at large explained, would give
such light and intelligence to the makers of laws, that nothing (in my simple
conjecture) more commodious could ever happen to any co^mon-weale: these
together with other constitutions made upon principal occasion were observed
and retained as the leuil of the Roman government, and whereas in the times of
civil dissension they were repealed or discontinued, Augustus Caesar that
admirable and worthy Emperor did revive the good laws, and reformed the badde,
and by the perfection of that Commonweal brought about by him, the cicle of
the whole world as resting upon that center became presently and universally
peaceable and quiet: Veller: Pater. c. lib. 2 histor.
but the Emperors succeeding him having more care to be great, then to be
good, made small reckoning of these laws, but by volu^tary conceit commanding,
and forbidding, they rather raged the^ reigned, and the decrees of some of
the^, namely Tiberius, Caligula, and Co^modus are wittily termed of the learned
ciuilia^, furores no^ iudicia Alber. Gentil. lib. lecti. Et Epi. 3. c. 18.
but these laws in the times of Archadius, Theodosius, and Iustinia^, recovered
their strength, and shining to all the Common weals of Europe, as the Sun to all the climats of the earth, have for their worthiness, and necessary use and
emploime^t received intertainme^t, countenance and great reward of Emperors,
Kings, and Princes.

The law of this Realm has as the Realm it self suffered change by
conquest: yet as far as I can perceive by record of ancient times, rather
reason then soueraignety, and consent rather then command, was the principal
agent in the alteration, our greatest lawmakers in former times were Ina,
Alured, Guthran, Edward, Ethelstane, Edmund, Edgar, Ethelred, Canutus: after
their Reigns ended, and their laws established; K. Edward the Confessor after
his inauguration in the throne of England, finding in the garden of the
Commonweal some laws like to weeds, others like to flowers, as a diligent
be he extracted a good juice out of the better laws, and the worser by him
neglected by disusing withered. King William the Conqueror having wholly
subdued this Realm, perceiving that his subjects did with great applause savor
the laws of King Edward: yer seeing in them somewhat which himself and others
in politic consideration disliked, imitating the frugall huswife, who knows
that the best honey cannot be good until it be clarified and refined, singled
out twelve persons out of every shire (imitating perhaps the Romans, who
appointed decemuirs for the making of their laws:) Men of approved skill and
fidelity, who might by exploratio^ sever the dross from the the gold, and the
erroneous laws from the convenient and commodious, Lambard. lib. archaeon.
adding thereunto some customs of Normandy, Lib. des customs de Norman.
whereof many for the resonablenes of them have to this day continued. This
law has had daily increase, many of the old laws standing unaltered, some
of them by reason of some sinister effect or sequel happening by them, justly
changed, and others by reason of new accidents adjoined unto them: It has
flourished long in this good estate, and of the continuance and prosperity of
it, three reasons in my shallow conceit may be rendered. First, because it so
agrees with the law, religion, and discipline of the holy, Catholic, and true
Church of Christ, that there is nothing in it which to the law of God is
cross or opposite. Secondly, because other nations, with whom we have
commerce, and intercourse, do not find their commodities or liberties to be
impeached by this law. Thirdly, because they are rather popular, then
peremptory, rather accepted, then exacted, and rather embraced, then
persuaded. And with this I conclude, leaving these laws to your further and
more considerate commendation.

Thine in all duetifull respect. William Fulbecke.

The Table of the several Titles of the fifteen Dialogues ensuing.
1 Of Contractes. Fol. 1. a. 2 Of Gifts and Graunts. 7. b. 3 Of Bargains and
Sales. 11. b. 4 Of Seignories and Services. 17. b. 5 Of Iointenancie and
Tenancie in common. 28. b. 6 Of Exchaunges. 32. a. 7 Of Devises and Legacies.
34. b. 8 Of Borowing and Lending. 50. b. 9 Of the Bailement or Delivery of
goods and chattels. 54. b. 10 Of the form and manner of ordinary proceeding
in matters of Law. 57. b. 11 Of common Wrongs and Trespasses. 78. a. 12 Of
unlawful Assemblies, Riots, Routs, and forcible Entries. 82. a. 13 Of Treason
and Rebellion. 84. b. 14 Of Homicide that is Murder, Manslaughter, and
Homicide by chance or misfortune. 89. b. 15 Of Theft, Burglarie, and Robbery.
101. a.
The Introduction to the Dialogues.
A Gentleman by name Nomomathes, with the riches, fortunes and revenues of
this world very plentifully furnished, being liberally minded, and willing that
his fou^taines should flow forth to the benefit of others Proverb. 5. verse. 16.
, being a great favorer of learning, and desirous by all means to increase
and aduau^ce it, maintained and kept with him continually in his house three
learned men, and greatly addicted to the study of the Laws, one of the^ named
Canonologus a Canonist, the other Codicgnostes a Doctor of the civil law, and
the third Anglonomophylax a Barrister, and professor of the common law of this
realm of England: of them he made great account, and of their learning above
all humane sciences, as being most fit and pertinent to the guiding and
administration of public affairs: and as the famous Cosimus, Medices, and
Laurentius his nephew Machia. lib. 7. and 8. Flor. hist.
, did harbor in their houses at several times, and with many benefits
pleasured the two excellent men and stars of learning Marsilius Ficinus, and
Ioannes Picus Mirandula, being in their houses the nurseries of good learning,
as two fair flowers in their natural root: and as Cato Plut. in Cat.
the Vtican a long time before the family of Medices was known in Florence, or
Florence was known by the name, had continually in his company three worthy
philosophers Apollonides the Stoike, Demetrius the Peripatetike, and Cleanthes
a cunning Physician, many times conferring with them, always profiting by
them: so this Gentleman of whom I speak, reaping much good and benefit by the
persons abouesaid did use them exceeding kindly, and many times proposed
diverse questions of the law unto them, wherein he had good resolution; and
having sequestered himself from the multitude of private affairs, wherewith he
was often molested, having attained to a convenient dispatch and conclusion of
the^, he allotted certain times of purpose for the hearing of matters of law
handled and debated: and sometime in his parlor, and chamber, sometime in his
garden, and gallery, he would give diligent ear and atte^dance to such
disputation and discourse, having set down certain rules, and as it were, a
good platform of the exercise. The rules were but two in number, which were
great in weight. 1. He willed the^ to exclude all cauilling, to yield unto the
better reason, and with joint endeavor to search out the truth of every matter
proposed: for he said that nimium alterca^do amittitur veritas. 2. He would not
(sithence co^parisons were of al things most saucie and malepert) that they
should enter into any disdainefull comparison of the laws which they
professed, but should rather use them as brethren, then as enemies, and should
reverence the greatness of knowledge, where they found it, and pardon the
weakness when they had discovered it, without bitterness of tongue or venom of
heart, assuring themselfes that the meanest of these Laws might in some
particular things profit the greatest of these lawiers: for as he observed the
sayings and doings of Cato in stead of a law, so one of Catoes sente^tious and
judicious oracles he had always in his mouth, Aliena^ arte^ temere ne
conte^nito: having by these rules as by limits bounded the order and manner of
there conference, he proposed certain things distinctly, and in order to be
discussed, which were thus by him marshalled. Because in the raunge of all
humane affairs subject to the conte^platio^ of law, co^tracts have from
ancient time been the ground of vesting and altering the property of things, he
would therefore first have the^ to begin with a discourse of co^tracts: and
because there be two things following after co^tracts concluded much in use
namely. 1. a gift or grant. 2. a bargain or sale, he would therefore of these
two have the^ diligently to argue: and because gifts have been often made to
raise and create a tenure, his desire was that in the 4. place they should
discourse of seignories and services: and for that gra^ts or gifts be made
sometime jointly, or by moities he would have the^ to speak somewhat of
iointena^ts or tena^ts in common: and because they that have things by gift
and grant do often exchange the^, his mind was they should handle the nature,
and manner of excha^ges, and sithe^ce the last disposing of al worldly things
is by the last will and testament of the party, he therefore requested them to
be painful herein: after as touching the co^ueiances of lands, which be in the
realty he would have them to proceed to personal things, as namely to treat of
borrowing and lending, and of the bailement or delivery of goods and chattels:
because such things were much in use. And because these and the precedent
matters were many times occasions of action, therefore he thought it convenient
that they should speak somewhat of the form and manner of ordinary
proceeding in matters of law, and when they had finished this task abouesaid,
he prayed them to discourse of penal and criminal matters, of common
trespasses and wrongs, and other offenses against the peace, the order of which
he would hereafter set down. The method of their conference being thus
digested, and respit of study and deliberation being given, Nomomathes thus
spoke to Codicgnostes.

The first Dialogue. Of Contractes.
NOmomathes. I pray you Codicgnostes let me know whether any persons are by law
prohibited to make any contract: 1. Division.
deliver your knowledge herein, and let your companions speak to this point,
and others that I shall propose, when and as far forth as shall seem good
unto them.


Codicg. The chief ground of contracts is consent, 1. The ground of contractes.
L. 1. ff. de pactis, and in c. Antig. Eo. tit. de pact. and l. co^ sens. ff.
de action. and oblig. l. 1. ff. manda. Et l. sicut C. de actio. and obli.
so that the persons which contract must be able to consent, and consent
grows of knowledge and from a man's free will, directed by sufficient
understanding: for he that knows not what he does, can not be said to be
willing to 2. The contracts of infants, persons distracted of their wits, and
religious persons, whether or how far forth they be good.
do a thing: as a man that is distract of his wits: or an infant that is
within years of discre^ion, l. 5. ff. ad leg: Falcid. l. 12 de leg.
and the contract or covenant of such persons is not ratified by oath, which by
law are forbidden to contract, l. non dubiu^ C. de legib.
as Monks and Friars and such like religious persons.


Canonologus. Indeed such persons are said in our law to be mortui mundo,
dead to the world, 16. q. vltim. c. si.
and they cannot live without their Cloister no more then a fish without the
water, 16. q. 1. plac.
and he can have nothing private or proper to himself, and therefore the rule
of the Canon Law is Monachus habens aliquid de proprio sepeliri debet in
sterquilinio, De sta. mo. c. 2. and C. ad monaster. Ca. 1. and 2. de postula.
16. q. 1. monach. etc. religios. de procur. in cler.
and he ca^ not be any man's advocate in a cause, or any man's proxy without the
consent of his Abbot or Sovereign, and that must be to the use and behoof of
his monastery, and the like law is of Friars. Cle. dud. de sepul. and Cle.
ex^ri de parad. de verbo sig.



Nomomathes. But is there no difference in the Law, betwixt the contracts of
infants and the contracts of Monks and Friars?


Codicgn. Yes very great: For Monks and 3. Monks are absolutely prohibited by
the Civil law to make any contract: infants are disabled with a certain
qualification.
Friars are prohibited by Law to make any contract, so that as I have
abouesaid, their contract can not be good though it be confirmed by oath: But
infants are not ture prohibiti, but inhabiles ex iuris dispositione, and
therefore their contracts may by oath be established Authent. sacramenta puberu^
cum tota sua materia. C. si aduer. ve^dit. and in corpore vnde sumitur.
.


Anglonomoph. As the former Laws have very greatly disabled Monks and
religious persons, who are tied to a certain rule: so our Law has very much
diminished their ability, as to their intermedling in secular matters. In a
Scire facias brought by a Prior against a parson out of a recovery had against
his predecessor, it was 4. That by the Common law Priors under the obedience of
a Sovereign, and which wear datife and remoueable, could not impleade or be
impleaded without their sovereign, unless it were by special custom.
held that the defendant should not be estopped by the admittance of his
predecessor in the first action, to plead in this Scire facias that the Priour
was a Monk professed under the obedience etc. and was datife and remoueable,
34. H. 6. 2.
for though it have been held that a Prior perpetual may prescribe to
implead and to be impleaded without his Sovereign, yet by common intent a
Prior datife and remoueable at the will of the party shall have no action by
such usage, but if he will have any plea he must show some special matter, 39.
E* 3. 34.
and it has been said that the knights of S. John of Jerusalem had their
possessions several, 5. The same Law was of the knights of S. John of
Jerusalem.
yet they could not use an action without their Prior, 32. H. 6. 5* and 31.
and a Prior which was presentable, and had Covent and Common seal, could not
before the dissolution of Abbeys and Priories charge his house in perpetuum,
without the assent of the Patron and Ordinary, neither could he have the
Writ De aduocatione decimarum, nor a iuris vtrum, 12. H. 4. Stath. tit.
Charge.
and a writ was abated being brought against a Prioresse, because the Prior
of S. Iohnes was commander of the house whereof she was Prioresse, and
because she was made Prioresse by him, and was under his obedience, and
remoueable at his will, notwithstanding that she had Covent and Common seal
and had her possessions several, and was wont to Lease the land for term
of years, 12. R. 2. Nonabilitie. 4.
and if a contract be made with an Abbotte and his Monk, the writ that has
been grounded upon this contract has been brought against the Abbot only,
33. E. 3. B^^ 913. 2. H. 4. 21.
and so has a writ of Detinue been brought being conceived upon a delivery
of goods made to the Monk to the use of the Abbot, Ibidem.
yet it has been thought that an action will lie against a Monk, if he be not
in subjection to some Sovereign. 14. H. 4. 37.
But it has been taken for a general learning with us that Monks and Friars,
and Canons professed and the like, could not grant any thing, 14. H. 8. 16. 2.
R. 3. 5. 32. H. 6. 31.
neither could they be grau^tees of any thing, 5. H. 7. 25. 19. H. 6. 25.
neither are they capable by way of devise, Perk. tit. Deuis. sect. 537
and the coue^t of an Abbey or Priorie can yield so little advantage to the
house in matter of purchase, that if in former times land had been given to an
Abbot and to his covent, this could not be good save only during the life of
the Abbot for the want of this word (successors) 11. H. 4. 84. ^ Curi.
but touching the ability of infants in contractes and purchases the Law is
diverse according to the diversity of cases, and if an infant do buy of any a
coat or necessary vestme^t for a certain sum, or if he make a covenant for
his meat paying 12. d. a week according to M. Paston his opinion, this
covenant is void, yea and if 6. The infants contract for his meat, apparel,
and necessaries is good, if he be of the age of fourtene years.
he make a bond for it, the bond likewise is void: but Markeham thinks the
contrary if the infant that is so bond be of the age of fourtene years, 21.
H. 6. 31. 18. E. 4. 2. Perk. Grau. 4. D. S. dial. 2. fo. 113.
and by M. Brooks opinion this is the better Law, Br. Laborers 30.
and if an infant lease land for term of years rendering a rent, or do sell
a horse or 7. That which an infant does without actual livery may be avoided
by action without enter o^ seizure but that which he does by actual livery can
not be avoided without enter o^ seizure.
any other thing he may chose to have an action of debt for the rent reserved
upon the Lease, or a writ of trespass for the occupation of the land, and
so he may have an action of trespass for the occupation of a thing sold by
him: and if an infant do give to one a horse without actual delivery of the
horse into his hands at the time of the gift and the donee takes the Horse by
reason of this gift, the infant may have an action of Trespass against him,
18. E. 4. 2.
and if an Infant make an Obligation or Lease in writing and enseale it, and
deliver it to a stranger as a scrowle to deliver to him to whom it is made
when the infant comes to full age as his deed, and the stranger does it,
this is void, because it is done by a commandment, which is void, 27. H. 6.
7.
for the commandment or assent of an infant is void in law 11. Ass. pl. 14
, so that a difference is to be held, where an infant passes away a thing to
an other by livery in facto and where not: for in the one case the gift or
conueyance is voidable only, in the other it is void to all intents. For if an
infant make a lease for term of years or a lease by dures, if the lessee
enter, the infant may have an assise, but if the infant make a feoffement and
deliver seisin accordingly, he shall have no assise, for by the livery of
seisin the feoffee had a possession at will at the least: but if he make a
letter of attorney to deliver seisin he may have an assise, 9. H. 7. 24. and 2.
Mar. 109. Dyer, Rug. case
but where any man does a thing which is for the profit of an infant he shall
not be punished as a trespasser, as if an infant command one to repair his
houses and he does it, this shall excuse him in an action of trespass. 13. H.
7. 17. ^ Keble.



Nomomathes. You have spoken sufficiently 2. Division.
Anglonomop. of religious persons and infantes, and of contracts made by them:
Now I pray you 1. Whether the contract of the servant shall be accounted in
Law the contract of the master.
show unto me whether the contract of the servant shall be accounted in law
the contract of the master.


Anglonomop. It has been held in our books that if a man have a Baily or
servant who is 2. That according to the common Law the master shall be bound
by the contract of a known servant, if the
known for his servant, if he send him to fayres or markets, to buy, to
selle, or to do other things markettable, his master shall be charged with
the payment, if the thing which is Marchandized do come to his use, 2. R. 2.
Debt 3. per Curi.
and it thing Merchandised do come to his use: and he shall be bound by the
contract of his factor though the goods never came to his possession.
has been likewise held that if a man send his boy to the market to buy
things for him and he buyeth them and brings them to him, and the vendor
brings an action against the Master and auerreth that the goods came to his
use, he shall recover against him in the action, 4. E. 2. Debt 168.
and Pigot his opinion is that if one make an other man his Factor to buy
things for him, if he buy Merchandise of any, the Master shall be charged by
this contract though the goods never came to his possession, because he has
given unto him such a power, 8. E. 4. 1. and 9. Duchess de Suffolkes case, per
Pigot.
But in the eightenth year of King Edward the second a man was bound in a
recognisance to S. to pay at a certain day, at which day the Reconusor came
and proferred the money in Court, and because S. was in the Kings service 3.
The act of a man's Attorney or his general receyuor, does not bind the master
without special warrant.
there came one A. as his general Attorney, and said that he was ready to
receive the money and showed forth to the Court a warrant of Attorney, but
because the warrant of Attorney was that he should be his Attorney In
placitis and quaerelis ad lucrandum and perdendum, and the Recognisans was a
thing already adjudged and determined, and therefore could neither be plea nor
quarrel, therefore it was thought that his warrant did not extend to receive
money, 18. E. 2. Execut 245.
so in an action of debt brought upon an obligation the defendant did confess
the deed, and said that he had paid the sum to one C. the general receyuor
of the plaintiff, and he made thereof an acquittaunce which he showed forth
to the Court, but because he had acknowledged the obligation, and had showed
no warrant of the plaintiff, to pay the said money to C. so that the
acquittance which was showed, could not be the deed of the plaintiff, The
Court awarded that the plaintiff should recover his debt and his damages, 5.
E. ^. 63.
but as to a man's servant I take the Law to be that his contract shall
extend to his Master, as well for prejudice as advantage, And therefore if a
man's servant sell to one certain clothe, and warrant it to be of a certain
length the action will lie against the Master only, and not against the
servant, and if A. do assume to cure B. of a wound and he sends his
servant to B. to lay medicines to the wound, whereby he is hurt and
empayred, B. can not have his action upon the case against the Servant but
against the Master, 11. E. 4. 6. p* Choke and Brian
and of late time the Lord North being Chancellor of the augmentation Court,
delivered an Obligation made to Queen Marie to his Servant to deliver over to
the Clarke of the augmentations, the Obligee and the Servant did conspire and
cancel the Obligation, the Master was held in this case to be chargeable.
5. Mari. 161. Dyer per Iustitia^.



Nomomath. You have satisfied me touching 3. Division.
contracts made by a man's servant, now I pray 1. Whether the wifes contract
made in the behalf of
you show me whether a contract made by the wife in the behalf of the husband
will bind the husband. the husband, will bind the husband.



Anglonomoph. In an action of debt brought against husband and wife, and an
other, upon 2. That by the common Law an action of debt brought upon a
contract made by the wife for the behoof of the husband must be brought only
against the husband, without naming the wife.
a contract made during the couerture, for the woman it was said, that a feme
covert can not make a contract, wherefore judgment was demanded of the
action, and the husband and the third person pleaded the same matter to the
writ, and they could not be admitted to plead to the writ, because the
woman had pleaded to the action: but they pleaded the matter abouesaid in bar
of the action, and were received, 34. E. 3. Brief 923.
and if the husband and the wife do borowe money, this shall be accounted the
borowing of the husband only, 33. E. 3. Brief 913.
and if a man's wife do buy goods of one to the use of her husband, the wife is
not in such case to be named in the writ, that is to be brought hereupon. 2.
H. 4. 21. p. Markeham.



Codicgn. By our Law, no man's contract made 3. That by the Civil Law the
husband is in no sort to be charged by the contract of his wife.
in the behalf of an other, will bind the other, but such a persons contract
who may be bound for the other. C. and ff. de pact. in congr. tit.



Nomom. You have showed unto me abundantly, how contracts may stand good, and
how they may be infringed by reason of the persons, which are parties or agents
in the stipulation or contract and efficient causes thereof, by reason of their
ability or disability possitiuely set down in Law, now I would have you proceed
to declare how by the material causes of contracts, they may stand or fall.


Codicgn. A contract has a material substance 4. Division. 1 How contractes
may stand or fall by their material causes, or the defect of the^.
whereof it is made, as well as other things, and the material cause of a
contract is the thing for which we do contract: for as in mechanical and
artificial things there is required some apt matter, D. L. adeo. cum quid.
whereof a thing may be wrought, so in contracts and conuenants as well these
which are determinable by the Law of nations, as these which are sentenced by
the Civil Law and other Laws, to the end they may be well perfited and v) ff.
de verb. oblig. l. inter Stipulant*.. sacram^et de praescripre verb. l. insula.
concluded, some material cause is requisite. u


Nomom. Why, are any contractes ordered by 5. Division. 1 Some contracts are
ordered by the law of Nations.
the Law of Nations?


Codicgn. Yea, for by that Law an Ambassador may be impleaded for such
contracts as he makes during the time of his Embassage, least (as Iulianus 2
An Ambassador may according to the Civil Law be impleaded by the Law of nations
for a contract made whilst he is Ambassador.
says) he presume to take other men's goods with him into his own country,
L. 25. D. de iud.
or (as Paulus reasons plainly and pithily) least men fearing to contract
with them, if they be not in this regard subject to Law, they be excluded
from all commerce and intercourse of bargain: L. 24. de min. l. 11. ad Vell.
l. 12. de adm. tu.
and this Law is supported by that excellent rule of equity, that no man ought
to grow ritcher by an other man's loss, and if one that is no Ambassador do
contract with one, and after be made an Ambassador, yet he is now chargeable
with the contract: likewise an action will lie against an Ambassador by the Law
of Nations if he covenant to perform a thing when he is Ambassador, if it so
fall out that the charge and credit of Embassage be committed unto him. L. 3.
D. de lega: African. L. 2. p. 1. de iud.



Nomom. I am very desirous to know, Codignostes 6. Division. 1 Whether
co^tracts made with Pirates or robbers in the high way be good in Law.
whether contractes made with Pirates and with robbers by the high way are
available and of force by the Civil law, or the Law of nations.


Codig. I do not think that Pirates and robbers are to have advantage by any
Law in matter of contract, because they have cast aside all care of humane
society, and seek to reduce the world as much as lies in their power, to the
pristinate wildnes and sauagnes of nature, when men did live like beasts, and
as Lucretius says. Lucret. li. 5.


Quod praedae obtulerat fortuna cuique, ferebat
Sponte sua sibi quisque valere and viuere doctus.
And such persons may not enjoy the benefitte of 2 That Pirates and robbers are
not to have advantage of law in matters of contract.
Law to which they are enemies, Paul. l. 63. ad leg. Falc.
To such men which have withdrawn themselves from the communion and society
of men, and (as Florus Flor. lib. 3.
says) have broken the league of mankind, why should the Law of nations,
which is nothing else but the communion, and league of nations extend any
favor. Pirates (as Pliny says) are enemies to all men living: Plini lib. 2.
ca. 46.
and therefore Cicero avouches, that if thou do not bring to robbers or
Pirates, the ransom which thou have promised for thy life, there is neither
offense nor fraudulent dealing in thee, no though thou have promised with an
oathe. Cicer. pro leg. Manil. and 3. de offic.
Therefore some do wonder that D. Hotoman dare affirm, Hotom. 7. Illust.
question.
that the 3 That D. Hotoman erreth greatly in mainteining that Pirates and
robbers may lawfully contract.
Law of nations does extend to fugitives and robbers, and his chief reason
is, because there is no Law which does intredict and forbid to covenant or
contract with them, and such things in his opinion, as are not verbally
forbidden, are implicatiuely permitted, This reason is of no validity, for it
may be implicatiuely forbidden, and in that they may be enemies to all men, and
do spare no man, they ought not to protect themselves by the Law of nations,
which is the Law of al men: The question is not what may be done unto them, or
how many men have dealt with them, but how by rule of equity and soundnes of
reason they ought to be dealt with: For to dispute of Law is to dispute of a
public bond, whereby we are bound and obliged, but we are not bound to such
lawles, disorderly, and incorrigible persons, by any common respect of duty.


Nomom. I will not trouble you farther Codicg. 7. Division.
with more ample discourse of this matter, but will rest well apaied with that
which you have already spoken: Now I long to here somewhat of Anglono. touching
the matteriall causes of contracts.


Anglonomo. A consideration which is the proper 1 That by the common Law a
consideration ^s the proper mater^al cause of a contract, and that it may be
expressed or employed.
material cause of a contract, may in the concluding of bargains be either
expressed, or implied: expressed, as if I buy a horse of you for xx. s. you may
keep the horse til I have paid you the money, 10. E. 4. 18.
and M. Choke is of opinion that if you buy of one a horse in Smithfield for a
certain sum of money, and do not pay him the money presently, he may sell
the horse to any other incontinent, and you can not have any remedy against
him, for otherwise he might be compelled to keep his horse for ever against
his will, 17. E. 4. 1. per Choke.
For it is employed in the bargain that the vendee must pay the money
incontinent, otherwise he cannot have the thing sold, but if the payment be
respited unto a certain day upon the contract this is good enough, so that the
money 2 That a contract is not good without money paid in hand, or a certain
day of payment limited.
be paid within the time prefixed. 21. H. 7. 6.
and 28. H. 8. it is positiuely set down for Law that a contracte is not good
without present payment unless a certain day of payment be limited, so that
the one of them may have an action of debt for the money, the other a writ of
Detinue for the wares: 28. H. 8. 30. Dyer.
An implied consideration is when the Law it self does intend and enforce a
consideration, and therefore the Host of a common Inn may deteine a man's
horse if he will not pay him for his horse meat: And so if a Tailor make a
gown for any man he may deteine the gown till he be paid for his labor. 5.
E. 4. 2.



Nomomat. Does not the defect of form in 8. Division. 1 Whether the defect of
form do destroy the contract.
a contract frustrate and defeat the contract.


Codign. Yes: for as the substanciall form in material things is necessary
to the essence and constitution of such things: ff. ad exti^b. l. Julian.. and
l. falsi. l. si is qui.. quidem.
so in contractes a 2 That solempnitie and concurrence of circumstances is
required in contracts by the Civil law.
certain solemnity and concurrence of circumstances is required for the
perfiting of them, as their natural and proper form: ff. de verb. obligat' l.
sciend. and l. continuus in princip. Eo. l.. si quis ita.
and without such ceremoniousnes the contract is of no force.


Anglonomo. Our law likewise requires form either in pronouncing the words
of the contract, or else in observing some other circumstances belonging to the
contract. For the first, if a man promise to another xx. li. with his daughter
in marriage, if he marry the daughter and the money be not paid he shall not
have any action of debt, or action upon the case at the Common Law, but he must
sue for this money in the Spiritual 3 That matrimonial contracts, if there be
no assumpsit in them, are to be decided by the ecclesiastical Law: if there be
an assumpsit, by the common law.
Court. Fitz. not. br. 44. a, 14. E. 4. 6. Reg. 46. and 48. 15. H. 3
Prohibition 22. 16. H. 3. Prohi. 24.
For here is no good form of contract: and (as Master Bracton says)
Matrimonium est principale, and eiusdem iuris, id est iurisdictionis esse debet
accessorium. Bracton lib. 5. cap. 16.
And therefore if a man by reason of matrimony or testament do acknowledge in
a Spiritual Court that he ought to pay to one a hundredth marks, or some other
sum at a certain day, if the money be not paid at the day accordingly, he
may be sued for this money in the Spiritual Court, and no prohibition lies,
Fitz. na. br. 41. b.
but if in the former case he had promised one x. li. if he would marry his
daughter, if he do marry his daughter and the other will not pay the money he
may not sue him in the Spiritual Court for this money, but at the Common Law,
Fitz. na. br. 44. a, et 22. Ass. pla. 70. p Tho. and 16. H. 3. Prohibit. 22.
for now it goes in form of contract, as for the other matter where form is
required in observing some other circumstance in the contract, that may appear
by this case: if a felon sell a horse without couin in a market ouert, this
does alter the property, and the very proprietary cannot have restitution of
the horse notwithstanding the statute of 21. H. 8. c. 11. but if he had sold
him out of a market ouert the property had not bin altered. 33. H. 6. 5. 18.
E. 4. 24. 7. H. 7. 12. Crompt. Just. de Peace 172.



Nomom. I will trouble you no further in this matter, but will proceed to
inquire somewhat touching Gifts and Graunts.


The second Dialogue of Gifts and Graunts.
NOmomathes. In handeling the learning 1. Division. 1 What things may be given
or granted.
of Gifts and Graunts, I think it most fit in the first place to be inquired
what things may be given or granted, wherefore first I pray you satisfy me in
this.


Codicgn. A man may give all such things as 2 That all things that lie in
commerce and may be received may be given.
an other may receive: l. in aedibus. fi. ff. Eo. tit.
for dare and accipere sunt correlatiua: and all such things may be received
which lie in commerce.


Nomomat. Then things consecrated and ecclesiastical may not be aliened,
because they lie not in contract.


Canonologus, Things ecclesiastical though they 3 That things ecclesiastical
though they be not consecrate cannot regularly be granted.
be not consecrate, cannot regularly be given or granted, Cap. 2. de donation:
and Eod. tit. de re. ecclesi. non alien. in antiquis 6. and Cle. and in c. sine
except: cap. si quisquis 12. q. 2. and in l. Iubemus cum suis authen. C. de
sacrosan. eccle.
and I did use this word (regularly) because where such alienation may bring
profit to the Church, it shall be of force. In dict. iur.



Anglonomo. In our Law a writ of Contraformam alienationis lies where a man
gave lands or tenements to an Abobt or house of Religion before the Statute of
Quia emptores terrarum, to hold of him in frankalmoigne, and after the 4 That
if an Abbot did alien lands given in frankealmoigne to his house the donor
might have a writ of Contra formam collationis.
Abbot with the Covent did alien the same land in fee to another, now he that
gave this land or his heir may sue this writ of Contra formam collationis
against the Abbot or his successor, but not against the tenant of the land,
but when he has recovered the land, he may sue a Scirefacias against the
tenant of the freehold, Fitz. na. br. 210. f.
and this writ of Contra formam collationis lies not, though the Abbot does
alien in fee, unless the Abbot and the Covent do alien in fee, 19. E. 3.
Contra formam collationis. 5. Fitz. not. br. 211. c.
and if an Abbot with the Covent do alien an Aduowson in fee, at the next
auoydance the foundor or his heir may present to the aduowson, because they
cannot in such case sue a Contra formam collationis. 20. E. 3. Contra form.
collat. 6



Nomom. Let me know I pray you how many 2. Division.
kinds of Gifts there be.


Anglonomoph. They be of diverse sorts: some 1 The diverse kinds of gifts,
some being fre some compensatory.
are called free gifts, which proceed merely of a man's good will and
benevolence: others may be called Compensatorie, because they are given for
some cause or consideration: Gifts or graunts of the first kind are such as I
now shall recite out of our books. First, the Queen may grant 2 What is
wrought by the Queens grant ex mero motu.
to one land ex mero motu, and though her highness do rehearse some
consideration in the patent of her grant which is not true, as if the
consideration be, that whereas the grauntee has done her Majesty good
service on the Sea, or beyond the Sea, or in her Majesty's wars, or in some
other business: though the consideration be meerley supposed and not true, and
therefore no good consideration in Law, yet the words ex mero motu do make the
grant good, 26. H. 8. 1. per Fitz.
and whereas the Queen ex certa scientia, and mero motu does confirm a
grant, supposing that a grant was made before, where in truth there was no
such thing, it is held that her highness shall be concluded to say, that no such
grant was made: otherwise it had bin if this word ( informamur) had 3 What is
wrought by her Majesty's grant by words of Informamur.
bin used in reciting the grant. 9. H. 7. 2.
For if her highness grant any thing upon the false suggestion of the party,
this grant is void, because she is deceived in her grant, 11. E. 4. 1. per
Littlet'.
and we have a rule: Si suggestio non sit vera, literae patentes sunt vacuae.
3. H. 7. 6.
For when the grant is made upon the suggestion of the party, the words of
the grant shall be taken strictely, but when it is ex mero motu it must be
construed and interpreted according to the Kings intent, and as favorably for
the grauntee as reason will permit, 21. E. 4. 25. Abbe de Walthams case per
Brown and Genney.
and if a common person do without consideration give to I. S. his goods
(indefinitly) al his goods do pass, and if a common person do by deed
enrolled enfeofee the Queen of his lands without any consideration, the Queen
shall be seized to her own use, as having such prerogative in her person, that
she shall not be seized to the use of any other. 28. H. 8. 7. Dyer Bokenhams
case per Knightley.
Gifts made upon consideration may be explained by cases likewise drawn out of
our books, though in a common persons case the consideration which is
mentioned be false, yet the use shall be to the feoffees as appears by
Wilkeses case, who reciting by his deed falsely 4 Whether upon a false
consideration expressed an use shall be raised in a common persons case.
that in consideration of 700. li. paid, he had enfeoffed A. and B. to have
and to hold to them and to their heirs, to the proper use and behoof of the
said A. and B. in perpetuum: afterward by Office it was found that Wilkes was
seized of the land, and that he held in Capite, and I. was found to be his
heir and of full age: yet it was held that the heir should not be received
to auerre the consideration false against the acknowledgement of his auncestor:
1. Eliz. 169. Die. Wilk. case.
and so it has been held in Villiers his case, that where money is the
consideration expressed an other consideration shall not be auerred, neither
shall a Causa 5 That a consideration may be auerred which is not repugnant to
the use expressed.
matrimonij prelocuti be auerred where an other consideration is expressed, but
where no consideration is expressed, there a consideration may be auerred: or
where the consideration auerred is not repugnant to the consideration expressed
in the deed. 4. Mar. 146. Die, Villier case
And though the consideration be not valuable, yet it may be a good
consideration to raise or to alter an use: for in Sharingtons case it has bin
adjudged, that the affection of the father for the provision for the heirs
males which he may beget, and the affection which he has that the land may
remain in his blood and name, be 6 That an use may be altered by a
consideration not valuable.
causes sufficient to make uses in the land, for (as it is there said) Naturae
vis maxima, and Natura bis maxima. 8. Eliz. 298. Com^: Sheringtons case.
And so betwixt brethren pro fraterno amore is a good consideration to raise an
use, 13. Eliz. 302. Dyer.
and a man levied a fine to the use of himself, and such wife or wifes as he
should marry, and after he took to wife A. she shall take in iointure being by
way of use, otherwise it had been by estate executed. 10. Eliz. 274 Die. per
Wray, Mead, Plowden, and Ownslaw, and 3. Eliz. 100. Dame Brayes case.



Conono. By our law a man cannot give any thing to the common weal without
consideration, but to a private person he may. l. hoc iure in princi. ff. de
donat. Gl. in d: l. hoc iure: et l. Campanus ff. de oper: libert:



Ganonal. By the Cannon Law nudum pactum does bind the party, especially
being confirmed by an oath: much more a bare donation. c. 1. de pact*



Nomom. As to the point of consideration we 3. Division.
shall better perceive the strength and properties 1 In what cases graunts
shall be taken most beneficially for the grauntee.
thereof, when we enter into discourse of bargains and sales, now let me know
in what cases and how far forth graunts shall be taken most beneficially for
the grauntee.


Anglonomoph. When a grant is non-certaine, 2 That a grant non certain must
be taken most strongly against the grauntor.
it must be taken most strongly against the grauntor, for if a man grant an
annuitie out of certain land, and he has no land* at the ^ime of the
grant, yet the grant shall charge his person, 9. H. 6. 12. p Babingt.
and if a deed of grant be good in parcel, and 3 That a grant may be good in
part, and for parcel not.
for parcel not, that which is for the advantage of the grauntee shall be taken
to be good, as if a man grant unto me an annuity, prouiso that it shall not
charge his person, the prouiso is void, and the grant is good; 20. E. 4. 8. p
Towns. 14. H. 4. 30. p Hank.
And if an annuitie be granted pro consilio impendendo, though the grauntee be
well skilled in diverse sciences or faculties, yet counsel shall be given in that
faculty only, which was intended at the time of the grant, 41. E. 3. 6.
Annuit^e 19.
But in some cases the grant must be construed according to a reasonable and
indifferent intendment, as if a man make a lease of a house, so that the lessee
may make his profit of the houses within it, the lessee cannot in this case
take down or demolishe the houses, nor make wast in them, for the intent was
not so, 17. E. 3. 17.
but if the King grant to me visum franciplegij in omnibus terris meis, and
feadis, I cannot have this in any lands and tenements, which I shall
afterward purchase, 38. H. 6. 10.
But 4 How the ^ Queens grants and licenses shall be construed and interpreted.
if the king grant to a man that he and his heirs shall be quit of tax for
their lands which they have, this is a good grant though there be no tax due
at the time of the grant, Ibid:
And so is the Law of Tenths and fifteenes, 19. H. 6. 62. 21. H. 6. 43. 21. E.
4. 45.
and he to whom the King grants a license may not vary from the proper sense
and the significancy of the words. 18. E. 2. Fines 124.
And if the king before the dissolution of Monasteries had licenced an Abbot
and his Covent to make a feoffement, if the Abbot only had made it the
feoffement had been void, 21. H. 7. 8.
And 3. Ed. 3. the King licenced one to levy a fine of the manor of Dale, to
the intent to maintain two Chaplains, and he would have levied the fine
omitting the Chapleines, but was not suffered, 3. E. 3. 5.
and 30. Edward 3. the license was to levy a Fine of the Manor of Dale, and
he would have levied the Fine with a foreprise or exception of certain
acres, parcel of the Manor, rendering rent, but was not admitted to it,
because it could not stand with the license, which was that all the Manor
should be charged with the rent, 30. E. 3. 17.
So if the Queen license one to make a Feoffement by deed, he cannot make it
without deed, 21. H. 7. 8. per Frowike.
and this Law holds likewise in a common persons case, for if he that has
a warrant of Attorney to deliver seisin absolutely, do deliuer-seisin upon
condition this is a disseisin to the feoffour, 12. Ass. p^ 24
And a grant is not to be favored contrary to the evident and perspicuous
sense of the words. 5 That a grant is not to be favored contrary to the
manifest sense of the words.
For if a man grant to an other a load of wood to take in his soil every
year, and the grauntee surceaseth the two first years, and the third year
he takes three load, he is a wrong doer for two of them: so if a man
grant to an other a common for three beasts yearly, and he takes nothing
the two first years, he shall not have common for three beasts the third
year. 27. H. 6. 10.
The aduowson of the Hospital of Saint Katherins is appendant to the Manor
of B. the Hospital being void the Queen grants manerium ac omnes
aduocationes cum pertinentijs, the present presentment does not pass: 13.
Eliz* 300. Dyer.
for it is fructus aduocationis, and not the aduowson it self. 11. Elizab.
283. Dyer.



Codicgn. The words of a grant are to be taken most strictly against the
grauntor, because Phil. Deci. in Comm. ad Regul. iur.
he might have expressed his meaning in more full, large, and manifest words.


Nomom. Now resolve me whether a grant 4. Division.
that is not good at the first may be made good by matter ex post facto.


Anglonomoph. In no sort: for if there be 1 That by the common law a grant
that is not good at the first may not be made good by matter ex post facto,
neither by the C^uil Law.
Lord and three iointenauntes, and the Lord grants the services of one of
them to a stranger, this is a void grant though the same tenant do
attourne, and survive his compaignions. For no attournement can make an evil
grant to be good, 5. E. 3. 34.
and if a man lease land to the husband and wife duringe their lives, and
after grants the reuersion of the land which the husband holds for term
of life, and then attournement is had, the grant is void, and the
attournement also. 13. E. 3. Bro* Iointen. 63.
And if a man be bound to a Fem^ sole, and a stranger releaseth to the
obligour, and after maryeth the feme, yet the release is not good. 15. E. 3.
Feoffem^t 63.
So it is if in ancient time a Monk, Friar, or Cannon professed, which was no
Sovereign of an house had granted to one an annuitie, this was a void grant,
though he had bin after dereigned, or made Sovereign of the same house, or
some other. 2. R. 3. 5.



Codign. As that which is lawfully done cannot be made void to all intents, so
that which is altogether void at the beginning cannot be strengthened by
continuance of time. Phili. Decr. Comment. ad reg. iur.



Nomom. Let me ask you this question Anglonomoph. 5. Division. 1 Whether a
tenant at will may grant over his estate.
whether may a tenant at will grant over his estate or no, especially if he in
the reuersion do after agree to it.


Anglonomoph. I think not: for it is not properly an estate because it wants
certainty, 27. H. 6. 3.
but if my 2 That the estate of the tenant at will is in manner no estate.
tenant at will be outed by a stranger, he may reenter without my
commandment: for the enter of a stranger does not determine my will, 11. E. 4.
3.
and an other reason why he cannot grant his estate, is because his estate
depends as well upon his own will, as the will of the lessor, and if he
lease over the land, his will as to that intent is determined, and by
consequent his estate, 22. E. 4. 5. per Brian.
and his estate is such a non-estate in the eye of Law, that he cannot have aid
of his lessor, 12. E. 4. 5.
and if the heir accept a rent reserved upon a lease at will made by his
father, this cannot make the lease good, because it was void before, no more
then his acceptance of a rent reserved upon a lease for years which is
determined by reentre, can make that lease good. 14. H. 8. 11.



Codicgn. The estate of such a tenant is none at all in our law, unless he
should set down his will in certain who demiseth. l. qui se patris C. vnde
liberi.



Canonologus, So it is likewise in our Law. C. de summa tri. and side cathol.
l. 1.



Nomom. I will not insiste any more upon this matter, but will pass to the
consideration of bargains and sales.


The third Dialogue of Bargains and Sales.
NOmomat. I will not ask ye what 1. Division. 1 What things are forbidden to
be sold.
things may be sold, least perhaps you answer me such things as may be
bought according to your answer in your last discourse of Gifts and Graunts,
but I would have ye show unto me what things are forbidden to be sold.


Canono. Things consecrate and religious may not 2 That by the Canon Law
things consecrate and religious may not be sold.
be sold, as Monasteries, and other places deputed to religious uses whatsoever
name they challeng, as Temples, Hospitals, Chapels and such like, C. de Xeno.
docti. eo. tit. and C. de Epis. and cle^i in l. orphanatroph. and 42. distinct
oratorium.
and that is accounted a religious place, in which a man's body or head is
buried, ff. de reli. and sump. sune.
and therefore if a man be buried in an orchard parcel of a man's farm, that
becomes Religious, and it may not be pleadged or sold, but demised it may
be. C. quae res obligar. poslu^t l. 1. l. quid ergo.. sed si mortuum. ff. de
leg. 1.



Anglonom. Of this matter I have spoken I hope sufficiently in the beginning of
our second conference or Dialogue.


Codicgn. By our Law evil poisons are forbidden 3 That poisons by the civil
law are forbidden to be sold.
to be sold. l. quod sepe veneni. ff. de contrah.



Nomom. Why say you evil poisons? as if any kind of poison can be good.


Codicgn. Yea, there be some good and sit for 4 That there be some poisons
which be medicinable and profitable, and the prohibition extends not to these.
the expelling of diverse diseases, though they be not mixed with any other
matter or thing, which is medicinable, so neesingwort does cure frenzy or
madness, wolf bane the biting of a scorpion, quick silver the scabbe or
ytch, and arsenicke is profitable against the plague, as Mercurialis avouches,
and shows further that many artificers do use poison, and many creatures do
eat and live upon poison, and pustles be cured by poisons, and poisons were
before the fall of Adam, Mercurial. lib. 1. de vene. c. 3. and 4.
yet there are some kinds of poison which are evil in themselves, and may not
be used alone: and though Plato amongst his other laws promulgeth, that no man
ought to sell or any way intermeddle with poison. Plat. li. 11. de legi.
And Galen does condemn Orpheus who taught the use of poisons, Galen li. de
antid. c. 7.
and reports that the inuentor of a poysonfull herb was therefore punished,
Galen li. de purg. me:
yet because there 5 That some poisons are profitable alone, some with the
mixture of other things.
be some which are profitable alone, and other some (as our law speaks)
adiectione alterius materiae, Cai. in d. li. 3
therefore poison generally and absolutely is not forbidden to be sold by our
Law.


Anglonomoph. By our Law corrupt vitaile is forbidden to be sold, and leather
not sufficiently tanned. 13. H. 4. 1. 11. E. 4. 7. 1. R. 3. 1.



Nomom. Let me hear of you some special kinds 6 What things are forbidden to
be sold by the common Law.
and cases of bargain and sale out of your Law, and some good diversities,
whereby me thinks the knowledge and understanding are greatly 2. Division.
enlightened and increased.


Codicgn. If a man bargain and sell lands or 1 Where a thing was not sold at
the first and where it was sold, but the sale is defeasible upon condition.
goods to one upon condition, that if the whole price or that which remains
to be paid be not paid or satisfied at such a day, then the thing whereof
the price is agreed upon betwixt them shall be unbought: now if the money
be not paid at the day, the thing whereof the communication was, in the
intendement of Law was not sold at the first:

l. 1. ff. de leg. Comm. and li. qui ea lege C. cod.
But if it had been said, that if the money had not been paid at the day,
then the thing sold should reuerte to the vendour, here there had been a
perfitte bargain and sale, but resolubilis sub condition, defeasible upon
the condition not performed, l. 1. ff. de leg. commissor.
and in all conditions of bargain and sale this is done that either an
imperfitte sale is perfitted, or a perfitte sale is defeated. For when
communication is had about the buying of a thing, and the price is agreed
upon, and the bargain concluded, now if the vendour do at the time of the
bargain and sale add such a condition, that if any other man within a month
or fifteen days next after ensuinge, will give more money for the thing
sold, that then the bargain and sale shall be void: L. 2. 1. respon. ff. de
in diem adiec.
now the bargain 2. A difference betwixt a perfect sale, and a sale to be
perfited upon a condition performed.
and sale is perfect, but it is defeasible upon a condition: but if in the same
case the price be agreed upon so that no person do within a month or fifteen
days give more for it, now this sale is to be perfited upon a condition
performed, d. l. 2. 2. respon.
and there is great difference betwixt these two bargains and sales, For in
the first case the buyer does become owner of the thing Sed retractabiliter. l.
1.. sed and Marcellus ff. de addicti. in diem.
And in the mean time he shall take, and enjoy the profits of the thing sold,
d. l. 2. in si. l. Item quod dictum ff. de in diem addict.
and the peril of the thing sold if it be destroyed, lost, or made worse does
belong unto him, l. vbi autem. 1 ff. d. ti. de in die^ addict.
but in the other case, namely, when an imperfite bargain and sale is to be
perfitted, the bargainee does not take the profits, neither does the peril
belong to him. d. l. vbi aute^ in princip.



Anglonomop. You have put good diversities and we have many cases suitable unto
them in our Law, which I will not omit. If a man grant to one the keeping of
his Park, upon condition that if the grauntee do not well keep his Dear
within the Park the grant shall be held as no grant: and after the grantee
kills some of the Dear, the grauntor may bring an action of trespass 3.
That a priuiso though it be placed amongst covenants, may defeat a bargain
and sale.
for the breaking of his Park, and for the killing of his Dear, 2. R 2. Bar
237.
and a prouiso in an Indenture of covenants though it be placed amongst
covenants, yet it shall be of force in some case wholly to defeat and dissolve
the bargain and sale, as if a man bargain and sell a manor with the aduowson
in fee, habendum to the use of the bargainee and his heirs, in such manner as
in the Indenture of covenants is agreed, and he couenanteth to suffer a
recovery to the use expressed in the Indenture, re^dring a rent to the
bargainor and his heirs with a distress for the same, and a nomine paenae,
and further pro vlteriore securitate, it is concluded that the bargainor should
levy a fine to the bargainee with a rendering of the rent to the bargainor,
prouiso that the bargainee shall regraunt the aduowson for life to the
bargainor, and if it be couenaunted farther that all estates afterward to be
made shall be to the said uses, now if a recovery be suffered, and a fine
levied, but varying from the Indenture of covenants, and the bargainee dies
before the regraunt of the aduowson, the prouiso in this case is a condition,
and for the breach of the condition the bargainor may enter, 14. Eliz. 311.
Dyer.
and as to that which you have said 4. That where a bargain and sale is
perfect but defeasible upon condition, the ve^dee shall take the profits till
the condition be performed.
that where the sale is perfect, but defeasible upon condition, the vendee shall
take the profits till the condition be performed, it agrees to a case in our
law, where a feofme^t is made to a feme covert of certain land, and the husband
after disagreeth to the feofme^t, yet the mesne profits which were taken
betwixt the time of the livery* and the disagreement, shall not be restored to
the feoffor. For if a Praecipe quodreddat, had been brought against the husband
and the wife after liuerie, and the husband had disagreed pending the writ,
the writ shall abate, yet the taking of the profits is justifiable: for the
feofment made to the woman is good till the husband disagree. Per Br. Feofm. de
terres 36. contra opinion. Brian. 1. H. 7. 16.



Nomom. Suppose that no day be limited when 3. Division. 1. When no day is
limited for the payment of a sum what time the Law will require.
the vendee is to pay the residue of the money, or a stranger is to offer more
money as in your cases put before Codign. shall the defeasance be void? or what
time will the Law require for the payment of the money? 2. In such case the
party charged with the payment shall by the Civil law have lx. days.



Codicgn. In such cases the Law does limit a time and does assign to the
party charged with the payment, the space of lx. days. Gl. mag. in c. Illo vos
de pignori. and facit optime. l. quod si nolit.. qui mancipiu^ ff. de Aedil:
edict.



Anglono. In our law we have a rule that when 3. That by the Common law when no
day is limited* the money is presently due, yet in some case by some authority
the discretion of the Judge is to limit a time.
a man is bound in xx. li. to pay x. li. and no day of payment is limited, the
lesser su^me is a duty presently, and ought presently to be tendered, 20. E. 4.
8. and 21. E. 4. 38. le case del mayor de Exetor: per touts les Sergeants and
ascuns des Justices.
howbeit in such cases by the opinion of Starkey, Ibid. per Stark.
the discretion of the Justices shall limit a time having regard to the
distance of the place, and to the space of time wherein such a thing may be
performed: for the obligor is not co^pelable to pay the money within one hour,
neither may he differ the paime^t the space of 7. years, but the time must be
adjudged by law: so if I prescribe to have common because of vicinage in such a
village, namely every year after the corn be severed and carried away, to put
in my beasts into the field, and all the terre tenants of the village have
carried away their corn and hay except one man only, now the Law shall adiudge
whether he had sufficient time to carry away his corn and hay, when his
neighbors did carry it away, Ibi. p Stark. and ^airef.
and so in the case before, the discretion of the Justices ought to measure the
time, and surely his opinion seems reasonable unto me, though I dare not
affirm it to be Law. For every man's business ought to be rated by a convenient
time, and therefore the learned Philosopher has well 4. The definition of time
according to the opinion of Aristotle.
defined time in this sort: Tempus est mensura motus secundum prius and
posterius: and as the motion does measure the place: so does time measure
motion: for a days journey is measured of a day, an hours of an hour, Arist.
physicor. 4. c. 11. and 12. lib. 1. de anim. c. 3. lib. de generat. and
corrupt. 2. c. 10
and if a man be bound to enfeoffe one, and no certain day is limited when the
feofment shall be made, that may be done and performed in a reasonable time,
14. E. 3. Debt 138.



Nomom. Are there no other things to defeat a 4. Division.
bargain and sale but only conditions. 1. That a bargain and sale may be
avoided thorough defect of some substantial thing belonging to the act.



Codicgn. Yes: for a bargain and sale may be avoided for some defect of some
substa^tial thing required to the perfection of the contract, as where the
thing that is sold is not markettable or the price is not certainly set
down,. pretium. Iusti. Eo. and C. Eo. l. si.
or when lawful consent is wanting, as when a bargain and sale is extorted or
enforced thorough fear or threatening, Metus causa ff. and C. quod met. causa
and l. si voluntate C. de rescin. vend.
or when there is fraud and deceit in the contract, ff. de dol. l. eleganter
l. si voluntate C. de rescin. ve^d.
as if the thing sold have some inward fault: As if a horse or some other 2.
That fraud and deceit in the contract by the Civil law does defeat the
contract.
beast that is to be sold, be troubled with some inward or secret disease, C.
de act. empt. l. emptor. l. ex empto.. animalium quoque ff. eod.
for buying and selling being a contract bonae fidei, whatsoever thing is done
in it vltra probatum vendendi modum is auoiable by law, d. l. 1. l. Ex empto..
redhibition: ff. de act. emp.. si quis virginem ibid.
but the fault in such case, which is 3. A difference where the fault of the
thing sold is Latens or Patens.
in the thing sold is either latens or patens: if it be plain and visible, the
bargainor is cleared from fault,. nu^c qualit. retractetur l. ea quae. quaed.
ff. de co^trahen. emp.
but if it be a secret fault then a distinction must be used: for either it
was in beginning and growing at the time of the sale, so that it may easily be
cured, and yet not easily perceived, and then the seller is not any way to be
charged: or else the secret fault was some festered and inueterate disease, and
in such case the seller is to be charged, L. mortis C. de per: and com: rei
vend:
but if the thing that is sold be liquide and gustable, and the buyer does
taste of it, or if it be measurable and he does measure it as corn, or if it
be ponderable and he does wey it as metal: or if he mark a beast which he
has bought, and the beast be afterward changed, in all these cases the
damage rests upon 4. That whether the fault be Latens or Patens if the
bargainor do warrant the thing sold to be without fault, he is bound by the
warranty by the Civil law.
the buyer, L. 1. and l. q^ si neque. si. ff. de per: and com: rei vend: l. 2.
C. eo.
but if the things aforesaid be not tasted, measured, weyed, or marked, but be
sold at a venture, as if a man sell all his wine or oil in such a house, and
does warrant it to be good and merchantable, or if he warrant the beasts that
he sells to be sound, the seller in such cases is punishable, l. si vna* ff.
de per: and com. rei vend.
but if he had not warra^ted it, then the law is otherwise. d. l. 1.. 1. C.
eo. and l. quod saepe. in his ff. eo.



Anglonomoph. In these cases, which you have now put, our Law (as I take it)
differs very little, or nothing from yours: for whereas you 5. That bargains
and sales, matters in writing and obligatory, may be avoided by alleging that
they were made or done per menasse or by duresse.
say, that a bargain or sale enforced by terror may be avoided: in our Law
even matters in writing and obligatory may be for the same cause defeated and
frustrated: and if a man seized of an acre of land do give it in tail by
deed, and makes a letter of Attorney to deliver seisin, and all this is done
by duresse of imprisonment, and liuerie of seisin is made, this is a disseisin
to the donor, and the deed of gift and liuerie may by Law be avoided, 41. E. 3.
9. 2. E. 4. 19. per Littl. Park. tit. Graunts Sect. 17.
and if a man menasse me to kill me, if I will not grant to him an annuitie of
xx. s. and for doubt of death I grant it unto him, this grant is voidable, 11.
R. 2. Duresse. 13.
But if a man grant an annuitie to an other by threatening him that he will carry
away his goods, whereupon he grants unto him the annuitie, this grant is not
voidable by reason of such menacing, because he may have an actio^ to recover
the goods if they be taken away, 7. E. 4. 21. Park tit. Gra^ts Sect. 18.
but a threatening of battery is a good cause to avoid a deed, 4. E. 2. Duresse.
9.
and so is the threatening of imprisonment a good cause to avoid a bond, 8. H.
6. 12.
but otherwise it is of a threatening to burn my house, 39. H. 6. 51.
and a duresse or menacing at one place shall avoid an obligation made at an
other place, 38. H. 6. 13. ^ Moyle. 33. H. 6 24. 2. H. 5. 10.
and as to that which you have spoken of fraud and deceit in bargains and
sales, and the warranting of a thing to be good and sound, which is naught and
corrupt, I could put many cases agreing with your assertio^s and diversities.
6. That by the Common law a warrantie made upon the concluding of a bargain
and sale does bind, otherwise it is if the warrantie be made after the
bargain concluded.
If a man sell unto one certain cloth and warrant it to be of such a length,
and it is not of that length, he which buieth the cloth may have an actio^ of
disceit against him by virtue of the warra^tie: but if the warrantie be made at
some other time after the bargain, he may not have a writ of disceite, Fitzh.
N. B. 98. K.
and if a ma sell to an other seeds, and warrant the^ to be of a certain
country, if they be not so a writ of disceit will lie: otherwise it had bin,
if he had warra^ted that they should have grown, or if he should warrant that
the horse which he sells, should go 50. miles in a day: and a writ of deceit
lies for selling corrupt victuale, without warra^tie, but not for selling
rotten sheep though it be with warra^tie, and the warra^ting of a thing to 7.
That the warranting of a thing which is evident to the sense is no cause to
bring a writ of disceite by the Common law.
be black which is blew, where the colors is evident to sense is no cause of
bringing a writ of disceit, but is merely void: otherwise it is if the buyer be
blind, or the thing that is bought be abse^t, 11. E. 4. 7. 13. H. 4. 1.
and if a man sell a horse which has a disease in his body, or if he sell
certain quarters of corn which is full of grauel, a writ of disceite will lie
without warra^tie, 20. H. 6. 36. ^ Paston. 11. H. 6. 22.
and if one sell to an other certain tu^nes of wine, and warrant the^ to be
good and they be corrupt, the vendee may have an actio^ upon the case against
the vendor, Fitz. N. B. 94.
and the actio^ will lie without warra^tie 7. H. 4. 14.
according to the opinion of some, but M. Fitz. says that there ought to be a
warra^tie, or else no actio^ will lie, for in such case his taste may be his
judge, Fitz. N. B. 94. C.
but where it is with warra^tie the writ must say that the defend at the time
of the warrantie made, knew that the wine which he sold was corrupted 9. H. 6.
53.
.


Nomom. You have spoken enough of this matter: 5. Division.
now show me whether by a bargain and sale of of the profits of land, the land
it self do pass.


Anglono. The grant or bargain and sale of the 1. That by the Common law the
grant or sale of the profits of land is the grant of the la^d it self.
profits of the land is the grant of the la^d it self, 45. Ed. 3. Grants 90. 4.
Eliz. 219. Die.
and if a man do lease to one an acre of la^d for life, reserving to himself
the herbage, this reservation is void for he has reserved the same thing in
substance, 38. H. 6. 34.
because the profits of land and the land it self are one and the self same
thing in substance, 10. H. 7. 9. 6. ^. 6. 71. Die.
but he may lease his Park excepting the wood and underwood, and his ma^nor
reserving the warren, but the soil of the wood and warren shall go to the
lessee 14. H. 8. 1. 33. H. 8. Br. Reseruat. 39.
.


Codicgn. By our Law a man may grant and 2. That by the Civil law a man may
grant and demise the use of a thing and yet not grant the thing it self.
demise the use of a thing and yet not grant the thing it self, Suppose a man
grant unto me his mare for a certain time, I may during the time use the
mare at my pleasure, but I may not lend her or set her over to some other to
use, neither ca^ I have the fool which comes of her, for by the grant I may
claim vsum only, but not vsumfructum: and so he to whom the use of a man's
ground is granted may take the profits of the ground to his own use, but may
not sell the^ to others. G^^atup. in vocabular. verbo vti and frui.



Nomom. I would gladly know when a man 6. Division. 1. When a man sells land
in which treasure is hid and the vendor knows not of it, whether shall the
vendee have the treasure. 2. How this word (treasure) is taken in the Civil
law.
sells his land in which there is treasure hid, whether the vendee shall
have the treasure, because the vendor knew not of it at the time of the sale.


Codign. It may be you take the word Treasure generally, not properly and as
it is used strictly in our Law, for if a man do hide any thing in the ground
for gain, or through fear, or to keep it more safely, within time of memory
this may not properly have the name of treasure, l. nunquam D. de acquir: rer.
domin.
for a treasure properly is, when money or things of good value have lain from
time out of mind hidden in the ground, so that no man now has property in
it. d. l. nunqua^.
It has been forbidden by many 3. That by the Civil law money and other things
necessary to the common use of this life are forbidden to be hidden, and buried
in the ground.
laws that money may not be buried, l. 4. D. ad leg. Iul: pecul.
and these Laws have reason for them, for it is against the s) Aristot.
Nicomach. 5.
nature of money that it should be buried, being invented for the daily and
common use of men: and the same may be affirmed of other things which are
hidden: L. 5. l. ^. D. de vsufr. ca. re. que us. co^.
and these prohibitory laws are fortified with this penalty, that things so
hidden shall be forfeited to the Treasury. Plato had 4. Plato his
superstitious opinion of things hidden in the earth.
such a scrupulous, or rather such a superstitious conscience, that he made by
his laws treasures to be immob^les, and Dijs inferis sacros, and his precept
is strange in this case. Quae minime deposuisti, ne tollito. Plat. lib. 11. de
legi.
Adrianus Caesar made a law (as Spartianus reproteth) that if any man had found
treasure in his own ground, himself should have it: if in an other man's, he
should give the half to the owner of the soil: if in a public place, he
should divide it equally with the treasury. This law was abrogated by other
laws following, and revived by Justinian, but now 5. How the Civil law does
order and dispose of treasure.
and long time ago our law has transferred it to the Prince in whose Realm
it is found, L. 3.. Nerati. D. de acquir. posses. Alberic. Gentilis Disputati.
Decad. 1. c. 10.
So that I cannot possibly see how the vendee in your case proposed shall by
our law have it.


Auglonomoph. Nor by our law which says, Quod the saurus competit domino regi,
and non domino libertatis, si non sit per verba specialia, aut per
praescriptionem. Fitz. Coro. 281. 436.
And in this case though he selle 6. What the Common law does determine of
treasure.
unto him the profit de terra: yet he does not sell unto him the profits in
terra which treasures are. Plowd. co^en le informa. pur mines.



Nomom. I will content my self with this difference which you have put, and
will now proceed according to the platform of our forementioned order to
learn something of seignories and services


The fourth Dialogue of Seignories and services.
NOmomathes. Because things are better 1. Division.
and more certainly known by the definition of them, therefore I pray you let
me first have of you some definition or description of a seignorie.


Codicgn. A seignorie, which we call feudum 1. The description of a seignorie
by the Civil law.
may be thus described. A bountiful granting of land for doing homage or some
other special service. Glo. in vsi. feu. tit. quib* mod. feod. acquir. in
princip. c. vnico. in primis and tit. in quib. cause. feud. amit. and de feud.
dat: mi. valuas. ca. vnico. and melius tit. de feud. dat: in vicem leg:
co^missor: reprob: cap: vnic:



Anglonomoph. A seignorie with us, is nothing 2. Likewise by the Common law.
else but a relation of delitie betwixt the tenant and the Lord.


Canonolog. In our Canon law it is shortly desined: 3. By the Canon law.
The granting of land for homage. C. ex diligenti. de simon.



Nomomath. Show me I pray you how homage 2. Division.
and other services had their first existence and beginning, but first show me
what homage is.


Anglonomoph. Homage is thus performed. The 1. What homage is, and how it is to
be performed by the Common law.
tenant that is to do homage, must have his head discovered, and his Lord
sitting, he must kneel before him upon both his knees, and shall hold forth
both his hands between the hands of his Lord, and shall say as follows. I
become your man from this time forward of life and member, and earthly honor,
and to you shall be faithful and loyal, and shall bear unto you faith for
the tenements, which I claim to hold of you saving the faith which I bear to
our Lord the King: which being done the Lord sitting shall kiss him. c)
Littlet. lib. 2. c. 1.



Nomom. Has this ceremony been ancient?


Codicgn. The kneeling and giving of a kiss 2. That Homage has been practiced
in ancient times.
at the doing of such service is very ancient: for Tiridates the King of
Armenia did kneel down before Nero the Emperor, whom Nero lifted up and gave
him a kiss. Tranquil. in Neron.
And long before his time, Alexander the great did embrace, and with a kiss
greeted such as made the like protestation of obedience and loyalty unto him,
Plutarth. in Alexand.
and long before that as it seems it was used in Iudaea, for upon these words
of the Psalm Psalm. 2. r. 12.
(kiss the son) our english gloss adds by way of interpretation (in sign
of homage) and Tremellius and Iunius (in sign of fealty:) sithence these times
this respective humiliation has spread it self into other countries and
territories: for the Duke of Gelderland did conceive an oath in these words to
Charles King of France: Ego deuenio vassallus ligeus Caroli regis Francorum,
pro ratione quinquaginta millium scutorum auri ante festum diui Rhemigij mihi
soluendorum, etc. Bodin. lib. 1. de repub. c. 9.



Nomom. I desire greatly to know the original 3. Division.
and first blossoming of other seignories.


Anglonomoph. The most common seignorie of 1. What a Manor is, and whereof it
consists.
account which we have in our Law, is a seignorie by reason of a Manor, which
may be thus defined: A Manor it an inheritance of ancient continuance
consisting of demesnes and services, perquisites, casualties, things appendant
and regardant, customs liberties, etc.


Nomoma. What? do so many things concur to make a Manor: will not demesnes
and services serve?


Anglono. Yes, demesnes and services will suffice as material causes to make a
Manor, 26. H. 8. 4.
but it is a naked Manor which has nothing else.


Nomom. I would gladly hear somewhat of the commencement and first creation of
a Manor.


Anglonomo. M. Parkins does very well and originally 2. The original of a
Manor.
describe it in this manner. The original of a Manor was when the King did
give a thousand acres of land, or a greater or less parcel to one of his
subjects and his heirs, to hold of him and his heirs, and the donee
edifieth a house upon this land, as his mansion place and of 20. acres or
less or greater, parcel, he does enfeoffe a stranger before the Statute of
Quia empto. terrar. to hold of him and of his heirs as of the same house by
the plowing of 10. acres of arable la^d parcel of that which remains in his
own possession, and enfeoffeth and other of an other parcel to hold of him by
carrying ordure to his arable land, and enfeoffeth a third man of a third
parcel to go with him in the war against the Scots, and so by continuance
of time (says he) a Manor is made. Park. Reseruat. fol. 128. Sect. 670.
Yet by his favor somewhat else goes to the making of a Manor: namely, suite
of Court at his house or mansion place, 33. H. 8. Br. Comprise. 31. Manor. 5.
and this suit must be the suite of more freeholders then one (so that some
doubt may be made of M. Kitchins assertion, when, he says, that in some Manors
there be no tena^ts but copiholders, and yet in such Manors be Court barons
Kitch. Court Leete and Baron tit. Maner^um. fol. 4.
) for if all the freeholds do eschete unto the Lord beside one, or if he
purchase al but one the ma^nor is extinct, for it can not be a ma^nor unless
there be a Court baron belonging to it: and a Court baron must be held before
suitors, and not before one suitor, therefore one freehold can not make a manor
Br. Ca. Sect. 210. and 23. H. 8. Br. Court baron. 22. in fi. and 33. H. 8. Br.
Suit. 17.
.


Nomom. You have well delared unto me the 4 Division.
beginnings of Seignories and manors: but have there been no laws made for
the strengthening and preserving of the^: for me thinks they be good means to
increase and support, the wealth, puissance, and flourishing estate of the
Realm.


Anglono. Yes, our law in this case has not either slu^berd or winked. For in
the ancient Statute of Magna Charta it is provided that Nullus liber homo
Statutes made for the preservation of seignoties and Manors.
det de caetero amplius de terra sua, vel ve^dat de caetero, quam vt de residuo
terrae suae possit sufficienter fieri domino feodi seruitium ei debitum quod
pertinet ad feodu^ illud, Magna charta. c. 31.
which statute (as M. Sta^ford avouches,) is but a confirmation of the Common
law: and he (a most diligent and exquisite searcher of the reasons of Law, so
that I may boldly speak of him, that which I shall not say impudently and
untruly, Faelix, qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas) sifteth out the reason of
this Law. For says he) if one that held by Knights service might have been
suffered to have aliened the greatest part of his land, he would have aliened
the same peradventure to hold of him but in Socage, or by some small rent, and
then having so little a liuelod left to himself, how had he been able to have
done the service of a Knight or man of war, or what should his Lord have had
in ward to have found one to have performed the service? surely little or
nothing. Stamf. praerog. c. 7. tit. Alienati: sans license.
But it seems doubtful notwithstanding the Statute of Magna Chart. whether
the tenant might alien his whole tenancie or not, whereupon the Statute of
Quia emptores terrarum was made, which permitted every free man to sell his
lands or tenements, or any part thereof at his pleasure to hold of the chief
Lord by the same service, that the feoffer held, provided always that by any
such sale, there come no lands to mortmain. This Statute (as M. Stamford
notes) remedieth the mischief, which was before found in the wardship, but not
the other mischief touching the defense of the Realm, for when one man's
living is so dismembered, never a one of the feoffees nor the feoffor is able to
do the service of a warrior for want of liuelode, there being so little
quantity of land in every of their hands, yea much more unable sithence this
statute is the feoffor then before, for before when he gave it to hold of
himself, he reserved somewhat in lieu of the land which went from him, whereas
now he can reserve nothing of common right. Stamf. ibid.
And the land which he retains in his own hands may perhaps be of small
value.


Nomom. What is the most general and most common service of all? 5. Division.



Anglonomoph. Fealty, for that is incident to every 1. Fealty is the most
general service in the Common law. 2. And in the Civil law.
tenure, unless it be tenure in frankalmoign. Littlet. lib. 2 c. 3. Sect. 13.
etc. 5. Sect. 22.



Codicgn. So it is with us: for fealty which of us is called fidelitas, is due
to every Lord to whom any service is to be performed: and every ^ That by the
Civil law the Common law and the Canon law, a religious man ought to do
fealty.
tenant ought to do such service, yea though he be a religious man and
professed under rule. ca. vnico tit: de natura feudi. Et tit. qualiter vassal.
iur. deb. sideli: domi: Et in ca. vnico tit. quib. mod: feud: amittatur. Et in
quib. causis feudum amitt. and tit. quae ^uit pri. causa benef. amit.



Canonolog. But such a religious man may not say, Ego deuenio homo vester, nor
humiliate himself to execute the rite of homage. C. venie^s and C. ex
diligenti. de Simon. grauem de excess: praelat: cap. fin: de re Iud:



Anglonomo. By our Law he may do homage: but may not say to his Lord ego
deuenio homo vester, because he has professed himself to be only God his man,
but he may say, I do unto you homage, and to you shall be faithful and loyal.
Littlet. lib. 2. c. 1. Sect. 2.



Nonoma. Show me I pray you some special 6. Division.
kinds of these services, that I may know them morefully, and more distinctly.


Codicgn. Services are diuersified according 1. The diverse kinds of services
in the civil Law, and their definitions.
to the qualities of the persons to whom they are to be done: if it be to be
done to an Emperor, it is to be termed an Imperial service: if to a King, a
regal service, Cap. 1. de feud: march: and ducat^ and in ca. 1. quis dicat.
dux, comes, marchio.
if to Religious persons Ecclesiastical: if to Lay men, secular, Tit. de his
qui feud. dar. pos. and tit. Episcop. vel Abbat.
but when it is to be done to a lesser estate then to an Emperor or King, as
to a Duke, Marquess, or Earl, then it is called feudum honoratum, sometime
land is given by inferior persons and meaner men without expressing any
service, and the^ the Law intends that fealty only is to be done, and this
is called Francu^ or Liberu^, Ca. 1. de no. form: fidel:
sometime it is given with reservation of special service and that is feudum
non nobile, Ca. f^. de capilan: qui cur: vendid.
sometime it is given in perpetuu^ and sometime but for term of life, and then
it is called Perpetuum vel temporale De feud: march: in prin. de alien. feud.
in fine, and de feud: guard: and castald.
: But though by the oath of fealty the vassalle be bound to serve his Lord in
war, yet this is limited to such case where the war is not notoriously
unjust or unlawful: for if it be otherwise, though he do him no service in
war, yet he shall not forfeite his tenement, In cap: Domino guerram in prin.
in tit. hic sini. lex deinde etc.
neither is he bound to do his service to his Lord if his Lord be
excommunicate, or bannished, until he have obtained absolution or a recalling
from bannishment: but d) D. cap. Domino guerra^. in sin:
in a just war the vassalle is bound to help his Lord against every other
person who is not the Lord of the vassalle, yea even against his father,
brother, or son.


Anglonomoph. Services in our Law are of diverse 2. The diverse kinds of
services in the Common law and their definitions.
sorts: some being more noble and some less noble: of these which are more
noble, some belong to the king and some both to the king and to subjects: of
these that belong to the king, some be domestical only, as Petite Sergeancie:
some bellicall only as Knights service: in Capite some both domestical and
bellicall as grand sergeancie, and some of the more noble services belong unto
subjects as well as to the king, as knights service and homage: these which be
less noble may be divided into two branches: for either they are ingenuous or
servile: the ingenuous are of two sorts: either performable by particular men,
or a certain people, as fealty, rent service, and the like which make socage
tenure: or else performable by a certain people only, as burgage: the servile
or base service, is villenage. Of all these services save such only as have bin
before described I will speak somewhat, severally, briefly, and in order.
Petite Sergeancie, is where a man holds his land of the King, paying yearly
unto him a Bow, or a spear, or a dagger, or a lance, or a spur of gold
etc. Littlet. lib. 2. ca. 9. sect' 1.
Knights service in Capite, is where a man holds his lands or tenements of
the king as of his crown immediately ab antiquo, by doing some warlike service.
Graund sergeancie, is where a man holds his lands or tenements of the king as
of his Crown immediately, by doing some special service to the King in person,
as by carrying his banner or lance, or by being his marshall, or sewer, or
caruer, or butler, etc. Litt' li. 2. ca. 8. sect' 1. 23. H. 3. Guard 148
of homage and fealty has been spoken before. Rent service, is where the
tenant holds his land of his Lord by a certain rent, for which, if it be
behind at the day, wherein it ought to be paid, the Lord may distreigne for
it of common right. Burgage, is where the tenants of an ancient borough do
hold lands within the Borough of the King or some other person, as of his
borough by a certain rent. Litt' lib. 2. c. 10. sect' 1. 2.
Villenage, is where a man holds of his Lord, either by doing unto him some
partiticuler base service, and such a one is called a tenant by villenage, or
by doing generally whatsoever base service his Lord will command and impose
upon him, and such a tenant he is termed in our Law a villain. Litt. lib. 2.
c 11. sect' 1. and 2
This miserable estate of villenage, had his beginning soon after the diluge,
and now by the consent of all nations it is ratified, for the West Indians
though they have 3 The original of villenage and the nature thereof.
no knowledge of divine or humane Laws, yet bondmen they have, and the
Mahometistes make Christians their bondeslaues, the Portugallians make
villains of the Mahometistes which they sell by companies as flocks of sheep
in the market. Bodin. lib. 1. de repub. c. 5.
The Romans had power by their law to sell or kill their villains: Tacit. li. 14.
but for mittigation of cruelty the Law Petronia was made, whereby it was
forbidden that none should put his villain to death without cause, which law
was executed by Nero, Senec. lib. 3. de benefic.
and after by Adrianus: Sparcian. in Adrian.
but our law a more concionable fauorer of life has restrained the hands of
the Lord from the bloodshed of his villain, and from the mayming of him, Lit^'
lib. 2. c. 11. sect' 32.
having regard to the Law of God which recompenseth these bondmen with freedom
whom the Master has by some blows maimed, Exo. 21. ver. 26. and 27.
which law Constant. the Emperor did put in practice, l. 1. de Eme^d, seruor.
C.
but all the lands and goods purchased and possessed by the villain the law
frankly gives to the Lord, if he will seize and claim the^, Litt' lib. 2. c.
11. sect' 8. 10.
wretched I confess is the estate of such men, but yet patiently to be
tolerated, because qua^ potestate^ alijs defer voluimus, far debemus, and
they whose ancestors, or themselves have acknowledged themselves to be
villains, must now duetifully bear the yoke, though Cui plus licet quam
parest, plus vult quam licet, Gellius lib. 17. c. 14.
and let the Lords of such villains harken to that which is spoken of an
heathen man divinely: Boni moderatoris est restringere potestatem, Ammian. lib.
29.
but to leave these particulers and to proceed more generally, as one man may
hold lands of another by every of these 4 The tenure whereby a man holds of an
honor or Manor is discribed, and by examples illustrated.
abouesaid services as of his person, so likewise he may hold of him as of his
Honor or Manor: for if a man hold of the king as of any Honor which is come to
his highness by disce^t from any of his au^cestours, he shall not hold in
Capite, for by the words in the first Chapter of Prerogatiua regis, it is
evident that if it shall be said a tenure in Capite, it must be holden of the
Crown of a long time, the words be ab antiquo de Corona, and that cannot be
when it is but newly comen to the Crown, and the statute of Magna Charta cap.
31. did (as Master Stamford says) help this matter by express words, if such
an Honor came to the Crown by way of escheate, but not if it came by way of
descent, or any other way: and that statute does set 5 Certain honors which be
not of the auncientnes of the Crown.
forth certain honors by name which be not of the auncientnes of the Crown,
that is to say, the honor of Wallingford, Notingha^, Bullingbrook, and
Lancaster, therefore he that holds of the King as of these Honors, holds
not of the king in chief, Stamfords Praerog. c. 7.
but other honors there be which of so long time have been annexed to the
Crown, that to hold of the^ is to hold in chief, for whereas one held of the
king as of a certain honor, to 6 Some honors which are annexed to the C^owne.
yield a certain rent to the keeping of the Castle of Dover, this has been
taken to be a tenure in chief, and so it has been thought if one held of his
highness as of the Honor of the Abbe of Marle, Fitz. not. bre. 256.
and Anno vndecimo of king Henry the seventh, the honor of Ralegh was annexed
to the Crown, therefore if any man hold as of that honor it is a tenure in
capite, 34. H. 8. ^r. Cas. 230.
and therefore there is a good rule in the Register of Writtes, that a man
shall not make a fine for alienation of lands held of the King as of his
honor, but for land held in Capite only: for there be certain honors which
be held in Capite, and there is a certain writ that the Eschetor shall not
grieve any man for alienation of land held as of an Honor, for that is as of an
honor, and not as of the kings person, and no Fine shall be paid for the
alienation of such land, Regist' 184. Br. Alienac' 33.
And whereas it was found by Office that land was held of the Queen as of
her principality of Wales, by the service of goinge with the Prince in War
at the charge of the Prince per Curia^. 18. Eliz. Die. per Curiam.
This is no Tenure in capite, and Master Finchden puts this diversity, that
where an Honor is seized into the Kings hands, if a Manor held of the Honor
do escheat to the king by a common Escheate, if the King alien the Manor to
hold of him, the tenant shall hold by the same services as he held by before
of the Honor (for the Honor seems to be vice domini in this case and as a
mean Lord) but if it come to the King by forfaiture of war or by some other
treason, or by some other cause which touches the Kings person, and the King
seiseth, and enfeoffeth an other, the feoffee shall hold of the King as of his
Crown: 47. E. 3. 21. per Finchden.
and though the Statute of Magna Charta Cap. 31. before recited do say, Si
quis tenuerit de nobis de aliqua escaeta vt de honor Wallingforde, Bolen etc.
non faciet aliud seruitium quam fecit praeante: yet this is to be intended of a
common Escheate and not otherwise. 19. H. 8. (...) Ca. 114.
So a man may hold of the King as of his Manor, and yet not hold in Capite,
for it was found by office that one held land of the King, as of his Manor of
Plimpton, and other lands as of his Manor of Darington, which came to the
king by the attainder of treason of the Marquess of Exetor, this has been
thought to be no Tenure in capite, for tenures in chief did begin in ancient
time upon the graunts of Kings to defend them against rebels and enemies:
and at this day the Queen may create a tenure in Capite, if she give land to
hold of her person: otherwise it is if it be given to hold of an Honor,
Manor, etc. for a Tenure in chief must be immediately of the King, and is
created by the King only: for a tenure created by a subject cannot be a tenure
in chief, nor have any prerogative annexed unto it, and if the tenants of an
Honor should hold of the King in Capite, the Honor when it came to the King
should be destroyed, which may not be, and there is no reason that the tenant
in whom there is no default should be prejudiced in his tenancie by the offense
of the Lord, 30. H. 8. 44. Dyer.
and if the Q. purchase a Manor of which I. S. holds by knights service, the
tenant shall hold as he held before, and he needs not to tender his
liuerie, nor primer seisin: for he does not hold in Capite, but as of a Manor,
and if his heir be in ward by reason thereof he may have an Ouster le maine at
his full age, and if the Queen grant the Manor afterward to W. N. in fee,
excepting the services of I. S. now I. S. holds of the Queen as of her
highness person: yet he shall not hold in Capite but by such services as he
held by before of the Manor: for the Queens act may not prejudice her
tenant, 29. H. 8. Br. Ca. 113.
but where a man holds of the Q. by reason of an other thing, as namely by
reason of a Manor, this is no tenure in Capite, 3. Eliz. Com^ 241. Wilgous
case.
but if the King be seized of a Manor, and gives to a stranger an acre of
the Manor, to have and to hold to him and to his heirs of his body engendered
without expressing any service, the donee shall hold of the king by knights
service in Capite, Ibid 240. per Car.
and tenures likewise may be to hold of one as of his person or of his Manor by
diverse other services, as if a man had made a feoffement of land before the
statute or a gift in tail sithence the statute, to hold of him by the making
of a bridge over certain land, or by making a beacon in the land given, this
is a good tenure: for a man may hold of an other by doing service for a common
good, as well as for the private profit of the Lord as to repair a bridge, or
a high way, or by keeping such a Castle, for the Lord himself in this has
profit with others. 11. H. 7. 12. 12. H. 7. 18. p Finch. 24. H. 8. Br. Cas. 51.



Nomom. You have taken some pains Anglonomoph. 7. Division. 1 Whether one
within age be compellable by law to do all manner of service either by himself
or some other.
in discribing the particular kinds of tenures: now I would here somewhat of
Codicgn. whether one within age be excused from personal service, because his
age is not fit to serve, so that the seruiceage is suspe^ded until the maturity
of his age: or whether he shall be compelled to do his service by a substitute.


Codicgn. To dissolve that question a difference is to be taken, for either the
Father of the heir which is within age died in the warlike service 2 A
diversity in the Civil law, whether the father of such an infant dyed in a
just war, or at home in his bed.
undertaken for the defense of his Lord in a just war, I mean that which is
waged for the safety of the common weal, or else he dyed in his house by
humane infirmity without any bearing of arms, in the first case he is not
bound to do any service either in his own person or by any other person
interposed during his minority, because his father who died in the field is
supposed in Law still to serve by the glory of his valor, Instit. de Excus.
tutor.. sed si in bello ff ad leg. Aqu. l. qua action,. si quis in
colluctatione.
which the best and most learned of all Poets did well imagine: who when he had
placed Caesar in the midst of extreme troubles, to comfort and encourage
him, represents unto him the ghost of Scaeua, one that dyed a good while
before, but yet after many assaults and many wounds stood out as a Conqueror,
Lucan. li. 10.
which conceit of Lucan, Tasso a modern Italian writer, a man of an excellent
poetical wit in the discriptyon of Guidoes funeral does passionatelye
though Popishely glaunce at, S. Torquat. Tasso Canto. 4. Gierusal. liberat.
but if the father died not in war, nor in the expedition, but by natural
death in his own house, then if the heir at the death of his Father be in
his pupillage, he must perform that service by a substitute.


Anglonomoph. But by our Law he shall be in 3 That by the common law the
infant shall be in ward if his father died seized of land held by knights
service without any such diversity.
ward to the Lord during his minority, if he hold his lands by Knights
service, and the Lord shall have the profits of his land that he may
maintain a sufficient man to do him service in the war, whereas the heir
by reason of his tender age cannot personally perform the service, nor by the
want of discretion provide a convenient person to accomplish it, Litt' lib. 2.
c. c 4. sect' 3.
but if he be made a Knight within age, then because the Law intends that he
is fit to do his service, because knighthoode is bestowed in regard of
precedent merit, or of some eminent prowess and towardnes, as may appear by
that saying of Scipio in the Senate. ab annis septemdecim ad senectutem semper
vos aetatem meam honoribus vestris anteistis, ego vestros honores rebus
gerendis precessi: Liuius li. 38.
the Law is otherwise: But 2. Ed. 6. in the case of Sir Anthony Brown of
Surrey vicount Mountegue, a difference was taken, where the tenant by 4 A
diversity in the common law where the heir of the tenant by knights service
is within age, and a knight at the time of his fathers death and where not.
Knights service dies seized his heir being within age, and a Knight at the
time of his death, and when after his death he is made Knight during his
minority, for in the former case it was held that he should be in ward
notwithstanding his knighthoode, 2. E. 6. Br. Guard 42. and 72.
For otherwise the auncestor may procure his son within age to be made knight
by collusion, to the intent to defraude the Lord of his ward, but this seems
to be but a weak reason, because knighthood is not by intendement of the law
granted upon so slight a cause: but it seems to Master Brook, where the
heir is in ward, and is made knight being in ward, this shall free him from
wardship, for the statute of Magna Chartaca. 3. (Postquam here is fuerit in
custodia, cum ad aetatem peruenerit scil. 21. annorum habeat heredit atem suam
sine releuio and sine fine: ita tamen quod si ipse dum infra aetatem fuerit
fiat miles, nihilominus terra sua remaneat in custodia dominorum vsque ad
terminum supradictum) this (says Br. ibid.
Master Brook) very probaly, guyding his opinion by the premises, is only
to be intended where the heir is made Knight within age being in ward after
the death of his auncestour, and not where he is made knight in the life of the
auncestour, but admit this to be meant of such an heir only, yet by no
consequence can a man infer hereof, that if an heir within age be made
knight in his fathers life time he shall be in ward after the death of his
father, nay there is good authority for the contrary. 6. Elizab. Comm^ 268.



Nomomat. Let me know I pray you what 8. Division.
penalties lie upon the tenant if he do not his service.


Codicgn. By our Law the vassalle is deprived 1 What penalties lie vpnon the
tenant if he do not his service.
of his tenancie, of whom fealty is demanded, and he refuses to perform
it: C. vnico, que fuit prima causa.. sed non est alia.
so that the Lord do demand fealty at due times and allowed by Law,
because if he should demand it every year the vassalle should not loose his
tenancie,. and si vastallus si de feud: de funct'.. licet vastallus etc. domino
guerra^ in tit. hic finit. lex etc.
also the vassal loses his tenancie, if 2 Many causes of the tenants
forfaiture in the civil Law.
being at full age, he be not in expedition with his Lord, or if he do not
depute some able person for the discharge of the duty, or if he do not pay
to his Lord stipendia militiae pro quantitate feodi, when he is lawfully
demanded, de pace iuram: firm:. fin:
and that is said to be a due quantity of a knights see, when the vassal
which goes not in war, nor sends a sufficient man, does yield the half
part of the yearly value of his tenancy to the Lord. C. Imperialem firmiter de
prohi: feud: alien: p Freder:



Angonomo. There be many conclusions in our 3 Some cause of forfaiture at the
common Law.
Law aunswerable to that which you have said, for it has bin affirmed, that
if a man hold his land of his Lord by homage and fealty, and he has done
homage and fealty to his Lord, and the Lord has issue a son and dies,
and the seignorie discendeth to the son, in this case the tenant which has
done homage to the father shall not do homage to the son, because when a
tenant has once done homage to his Lord he is excused for term of life to
do homage to any other heir of the Lord, Litt' lib. 2. c. 7. sect 13.
But if a man be seized of a Manor, and an other man holds land of him as
of the foresaid Manor by homage, and has done his homage unto him, and a
stranger brings a Precipe quod reddat against the owner of the Manor, and
recouereth the Manor against him, and sueth execution, in this case the
tenant shall again do homage to him that recovered the Manor, though he
have done homage before, because the estate of him who received the first
homage is defeated by the recovery, and it lies not in the mouth of the
tenant to falsifye or defeat the recovery which was against his Lord. Litt'
ibid' sect' 17.
And if if a tenant which ought by his tenure to do homage to his Lord come
to his Lord and say unto him, that he is ready to do him homage for the
tenements which he holds of him, and the Lord does then refuse to receive
it, after such refusal the Lord cannot distreigne the tenant for the homage,
before the Lord require him to do homage unto him and he refuses, Litt' lib.
2. c. 7. sect' 19. 20.
and he that holds by Knights service of the King, need not go to war
with him, if he will find a sufficient person conveniently armed, and fit
to go with the King, and this seems good reason: For it may be, that he
that holds by such services does languishe in sickness, so that he cannot
go, nor ride: And a Feme sole which holds by such services may not in such
case go in proper person, and it has been said, that Escuage shall not be
granted unless the King go to war himself in proper person, and after
such a voyage royal it has been likewise affirmed, that by authority of
Parliament Escuage shall be assessed and put in certain how much every one
that holds by an entier fee of Knights service, which was not with the King
by himself or by an other for him, shall pay to his Lord of whom he holds by
Escuage, as if it be ordeigned by authority of Parliament that every one which
holds by an entier fee of Knights service that was not with the King nor any
other etc. for him shall pay to his Lord forty shillinges, then every one that
holds of his Lord by the moitie of a Knights fee, shall pay to his Lord
forty shillinges, and he that holds by a fourth part ten shillinges, and
so pro rata. Litt' lib. 2. e. 3. sect' 5. 6. 8. 7. E. 3. 29.



Nomom. Resolve me I pray you whether when 9. Division.
the tenant has committed treason or felony, and thereof is convicted and
attainted, he shall as to his tenancie incur any prejudice.


Codicgn. In such case either the offense is 1 Whether, when the tenant has
committed felony or treason and is attainted, he shall suffer any prejudice in
his tenancie. 2 A diversity in the Civil law where the offense is committed
against the person of the Lord, and where against the person of a stranger.
committed against the person of his Lord, and so he does prejudice all these
that are to succeed him in the land by order and course of Law depriving them
of the advantage of inheritance, Cap. vnico. denique in si: in illis verbis si
tamen fuerit paternumt. it: que fuit prima causa ben: amitt:
or he has offended against some other person, and not against the person of
the Lord, then the children only, and such as were to take benefit by the
person of the father, as issuing from his body are repulsed from the
inheritance,. Si vassallus culpam: si de feud^ defunct'.
and then it goes to them of the kindred which are nearer in degree. Gloss.
super verbo reuocabuntur in d. si vassallus culpam.



Anglonomoph. By our Law where the tenant is outlawed of felony, it is in the
Lords election to have a writ of Escheate, supposing that his tenant was
outlawed of felony, or that he dyed without heir, for by the attainder the
blood is corrupted: 48 E. 3. 2.
But it seems by Nicholses case, 3 That by the common law by attainder of
felony or treason the blood is corrupted, and in the one case the land shall
eschete to the king: and in the other to the immediate Lord.
that the party attainted ought to be dead before the land can escheate, for
according to the opinion of Dyer and Barham in the Kings case after the
attainder, and till Office be found the sea simple shall be in facto in the
person attainted so long as he shall live, for as he has a capacity to take
land of a new purchase, so he has power to hold his ancient possessions, and
he shall be tenant to every Precipe, and if he died before office found, and
the land be held of the King, the land shall go to the King in nature of a
common eschete, 18. Eliz. Com^ 477. Nichols case.
but this is to be intended in case of felony, for in case of treason the King
shall be presently after the attainder in actual possession without office
found by the statute of 33. H. 8. cap. 20. and if a man be executed for
felony or die after Judgment before he be put in execution, yet the writ
shall say pro quo suspensus fuit, and if he be put to death by some other
punishment then hanging, though the writ say pro quo suspensus fuit, that is
not material, Fitz. not. bre. 144. H.
and if the father purchase land, and his eldest son is attainted of felony
and dies, having issue a son, and the father dies, the next in degree of
descent and worthiness of blood unto the son attainted shall not have the
land, but it shall escheate to the immediate Lord of whom the Land is held,
for the blood is corrupted: otherwise it had b in if he had died in the life of
his father having no issue. 32. H. 8. 48. Dyer.



Nomom. Though I must needs confess that it is very good reason that the
sons of the^, which are dissoyall subjects and traitors to their Prince
should be barred from the enheritance of their ancestors, that their fathers
infamy should always accompany them, and that they should live in perpetual
memory, indignity, and disgrace, that their life should be a punishment unto
them, and their fathers fault a continual corrisiue (for that is done, because
their fathers vices are feared in them, and it may be well thought, that being
bredde, and brought up of naughty parents, they will be prone to do the like,
and punishment in that case is used in the nature of a medicine and not in
form of a penalty: and as it has the effect of a punishment every one is
punished for his own fault only: but as it has the effect of a medicine, so
one man is punished for an others fault, that by suffering shame he may be
deterred from crime) yet here it may be said what place is there left for
innocence if the most guiltles may be punished for the misdemeanor of the most
guilty, for as it is not the fault of the corn that it grows in a badde
soil, so it is not the fault of the sons that they are begotten of lewd
fathers, therefore it may seem meet and expedient that there should be ibi
paena, vbi culpa and that offenses should rest upon the authors, and that the
fall should go no further then the fault, and there is a Law in Deutronom.
Non interficiantur patres pro filijs, nec filij pro patribus, sed quisque pro
peccato suo interficiatur, Deuteronomy. c. 24.
and in an other place, vnusquisque in iniquitate sua morietur, and quicunque
comederit vuam acerbam illius dentes obstupescent, Ierem. 31.
and again anima que peccauit ipsa morietur, filius non portauit iniquitate^
patris. Ezechi. 18.



Codicgn. But Saul did not observe that rule in Deutronom. when he did put to
the sword the citizens of Nobe, where he did slay men, women, children, ox,
ass, and sheep ore gladij. 1. Reg. 22.



Canonol. But David did keep it, who would 4 The aforesaid determinations and
conclusions of civil and common law touching the forfaiture of the offender are
examined by the Law of God.
not have had revenge taken upon Isboseth the son of Saul, 2. Reg. 4.
and caused them to be slain, who wrought his death.


Codicgn. Yet God did otherwise, who in the diluge did destroy the parents
with their children, who spared neither sex nor age in Sodom, who destroyed
together all the whole nation of the Amalekites, who would needs have Achan
destroyed with the children, who did root out all the inhabitants of Jerusalem.


Cononol. We must otherwise conceive of God his judgments, then of men's
proceedinges: he has said viae meae non sunt viae vestrae, all perfection,
goodness, and justice begins at him, who does not any thing because it is
just, but it is therefore just because he does it, or would have it done, and
if Achan had bin arrained before an Ordinary tribunal he only had perished
and not his children, but God his judgment is extraordinary, and his will is
therefore a Law because he is God, he is not bound to render account to any:
neither is he guided by any Law but by the Law of his own will, and though
one man know not what an other does purpose and imagine, yet God knows the
heart and searches the reins and might see somewhat condemnable in Achans
children which man could not discover, yet in some cases he does observe an
ordinary course of punishment, for Numb. 26.
Core perished only but not his sons, but they were kept safe for the Lords
service, and of their posterity came Samuel.


Codicg. That which I spoke before ( Canono.) out of the scripture was but by
way of objection, for our law punishes not the Sons with death, but only with
loss of inheritance in case of treason. ff. and C. ad l. Iul. may.



Anglonomoph. The same Law do we observe both in felony and treason together
with the forfaiture of the goods.


Codicgn. The loss of inheritance in our Law does comprehend the forfaiture
of the goods.


Nomom. Ye have dwelt a long time in this discourse of tenures and services:
now therefore I would have ye to speak somewhat of Iointenancie and tenancie in
common.


The fifth Dialogue of Jointenancie, and tenancy in common.
NOmom. Let me ask you this question 1. Division.
Codign. when two be iointenants, or tenants in common as we term them,
whether by rigor of law the profits ought to go to them all in common, or no.


Codicgn. By common right they ought to have 1 That Iointenants, and tenants in
common ought to have equal profit.
equal profit, whether it be of money, merchandise, or other matter of
negotiation: for if one should have more profit the^ an other, and the gain
should not be alike, the society or as it pleases you to term it
Iointenancy, or tenancy in common should be Leonina, that is rather the
devouring of Lions, ff. Pro socio l. si non fuerint. vlti.
then the dividing of men, or according to the common proverb, a man should
divide honey with a Bear, yet in this equal division, which the law requires,
recompense must be had of things, persons, and the industry of the parties.
l. omnes, and l. si socij, and l. l. si. non fuerint ff. cod.



Anglonomoph. By our law if two bring a writ of ward of the body of the heir
being within age, and the one of them is summoned and severed, and the other
recouereth, he which was severed may have a writ of account against the other
for the profits, 45. E. 3. 10.
and a writ of account lies, if one iointenant take all the profits, 39. E.
3. 35.
and 2. That by the Common law a writ of account will lie, if one iointenant
take all the profits.
for cutting of wood which is held pro indiuiso and the selling of it, a writ
of account will lie for the one iointenant against the other, 47. E. 3. 22.
and the plaintiff need not show in certain in his writ of account, by whose
hands the resceit of the money given for the profits was, 39. E. 3. 35.
and if one of the iointenants do cut wood and carry it away, the other may
take it, and remove it to his own house, 2. E. 4. 24. p Danby.
but if one of the iointenants take money for all the profits, the writ of
account shall not be brought against him as receiuor generally, 14. E. 3.
Account. 70. 19. E. 2. Brief 339.
but as receiuor to the common profit of them both, 30. E. 1. Account 127.
and if two executors be, and the one assigns auditors, he that assigns
auditors shall not have a writ of debt sole for the arrerages of account
without his compaignion: 9. H. 6. 11.
also there is an other case in our books, that E. and I. did deliver an
hundred pounds to R. and T. and R. and T. did put a hundred pounds of their
own together with this money to merchandise with the whole stock for the
common profit of them al, according to the rate of every one of the^, in such
case E. sole may not have a writ of account against R. and T. 10. E. 3. 489.
10. E. 4. 5.
so if their be two iointenants of a Manor, and the one of them undertakes to
be baily for the other for his moity, a writ of account shall be maintenable
against him, 21. E. 3. Account. 66.
if he have any especialty to show proouing the assumpsit, otherwise not, 17.
E. 2. Account. 122.
yet in an account brought against one as the baily of his Manor which the
plaintiff had in ferme, the defendant said that himself was joint farmor with
the plaintiff of the lease of A. and this plea was allowed, though the plaintiff
showed forth a deed of demise made to him only, 8. E. 2: Account. 115.
and if two Merchants occupy their goods and merchandise in common to their
common profit, the one of them may have a writ of account against his
companion, Fitzh. Not. Bre. 117. D. 10. H. 7. 16.
or the writ may suppose that the defendant was receiuor of the plaintifes
money and the defendants for all manner of contracts to their common profit,
30. E. 1. Account. 127. 39. E. 3. 35. 16. H. 7. 16. p Keb.
but one executor shall not have a writ of account against his coexecutor for
the goods of the dead. 39. E. 3. 35. 6. H. 4. 3. 13. E. 3. Execut. 91.



Nomomath. Whether is iointenancie, though 2. Division.
it be a iointenancie of the inheritance, dissolved and determined by the death
of one of the iointenants.


Codicgn. Iointenancie is dissolved by natural 1. That iointenancie is
dissolved by death, unless there be some clause in the creation of the estate
to the contrary.
death, unless there be some clause in the demise of the land and in the
creation of the estate to the contrary. ff. pro socio. l. action. morte. in
fin: Iusti. eo.. soluitur.



Anglonomoph. Indeed there be such clauses sometimes used in demises, for we
have such a case that a lease was made to two habendum ijs pro termino vitae
successiue vni eoru^ post alteru^, sicut nominantur in Indentura, and non
coniunctim: the question was in this case, whether they were iointenants or no,
and it was ruled without argument that they were not iointenants, but that
there is a remainder to him who is put in the second place in the Indenture:
20. Eliz. 361 Die.
And so where a lease was made to three, by the premises habendum to the one
for life, the remainder to the second, the remainder to the third, the opinion
of the court was that they should take successively and not jointly. 5. Mari.
160. Die.



Codicgn. And by a civil death iointenauncie may be determined: ff. pro socio
l. action.. publicatio. and Iusti: eod.. publicatio.
Likewise by the will, and by the alienation of one of the iointenants. L.
verum in sin: and l. societatem. 1. ff. eod. l. tamdiu. C. eod.



Anglonomo. By our law the nature of iointenancy is such, that he that
suruiueth shall have the whole tenancy according to such estate as he should
have had if the iointure had still continued. For if there be three iointena^ts
in fee simple, and the one of the^ has issue and dies, yet they that survive
shall have the whole tenementes to themselves, and the issue shall have nothing:
Littl. lib. 3. c. 3. Sect. 5.
and if lands be given to two, and the heirs of one of the^, this is a good
iointure, and the one has freehold and the other fee simple, and if he which
has the fee die, he that has the frehold shall have the entierty by suruiuor
for the term of his life: Littl. lib. 3. c. 3. Sect. 13.
and if two iointena^ts be seized of an estate of fee simple, and the one of
the^ gra^teth by his deed a rent charge to another man out of so much of the
laud as belongs to him, in this case during the life of the grauntor, the
rent charge is effectual, but after his decease the grant is void as to
charge the land, and he that holds by the suruiuor shall hold it
discharged, because he claims the land by suruiuer and not by descent from
his companion: Littlet. lib. 3. c. 5. Sect. 15.
And so the law seems to have been when one iointenant did enter into
religion, least the freehold of a moitie might be in suspense, as well as an
assise of Mortdauncestor will lie, and a warrantie collateral may discende in
the like case. Fitzh. N. B. 166. a. 5. E. 4. 3 34. E. 3. Garrantie 71.



Nomoma. If a man grant all his goods to two what passes by this. 3. Division.
1. That by the Civil law by the joint gift of all the goods of a man all
corporal things pass.



Codicgn. By our law all corporal things pass both in demesne, and
possession, and they are iointenants of them, ff. eo. l. 1. and 2.
but actions do not pass, but the grauntor if he will have the grauntees to
take any benefit by the grant, must make the grauntees or one of them his
procurators to sue in his name, and to recover to their own use. L. 3. in
princip. ff. eo.



Anglonomoph. By the name of goods in our law no inheritance passes, but it is
a question with us, if one devise to his wife the third part of all his goods
and chattels, whether this shall be intended as they shall be after the
legacies or debts paid, or as they were at the time of the devise: 30. H. 8.
59. Dyl
But this doubt of later time has received decision, for where a man devised
the 2. That by the Common law if a man devise the third part of his goods to
his wife it shall be so rated as they wear at the time of the death of the
testator. 3. That the Queen may grant a thing in action.
moitie of his goods to his wife, and died, it was ruled that she shall have
the goods as they were at the time of the death of the testator, if the
testator be not indebted: 5. Mari. 164.
and as for granting things in action, we have this positive ground in law,
that the Queen may grant over her rent and condition of reentrie for the
nonpaiment of it, and her action or any thing that her highness has in action:
but contrariwise it is of a common person. 2. H. 7. 8.



Nomom. Now show me of what things and 4. Division.
in what sort iointenancie or tenancie in common may be.


Codicgn. It may be of all such things as lie in 1. That iointenancie by the
Civil law may be of all such things as lie in contract.
contract, as lamb, milk, woll, cheese and corn, and whatsoever is gained by
the labor of oxe^, or the harrowing of horses or the letting to gift of kine:
L. si no^ fuerint. ff. pro soc.
and by the nature of the contract, when two are agreed to be tenants in common
of the profits coming and rising of beasts, the loss of the beasts
perteyneth only to him in whom the very property of the beasts be: but the
charge of the pasture and labor, which is to be taken about the^ belongs
only to him who is admitted to be tenant in common for the profits. 2. That
the limitation of tenancie in common is by the party, but the construction of
it by the law.
The possession in common of beasts does continue until they have young, if the
possession were limited at the first until they had young: and if two be
agreed to be tenants in common of all the profits of a certain ground, the
tenancie in common cease not till all the profits be taken: and therefore if
two be agreed to be tenants in common from the Calends of March, until such
time as their fields are new to be tilled and sown, they shall be tenants in
common unto the Calendes of November, because betwixt both the Calendes the
fields may be tilled and sown, or suppose that they have contracted a tenancie
in common of kine from the Calendes of July, until they have young, this
tenancie in common shall continue till the Calends of April next ensuing,
because for the most part they are wont to calfe betwixt both the Calends. L.
si conuenerit in princ. ff pro socio.



Anglono. A parson may grant to another the moitie of his tithes for years,
whether it be lamb wool, or corn, and yet he has no possession of them,
because they are not yet in esse, 38. E. 3. 6.
but yet he has an interest in them, and may grant the moitie of them as well
as one may grant to another that it shall be lawful for him to take every
year a Dear, or a Hare, or a Cony within his soil, this is a good grant: 10.
H. 7. 30.
and by the same reason that he may grant his tithes, he may grant the moitie
of them, and so make a tenancy in common.


Nomoma. Suppose the case to be this, that two 5. Division.
iointenants or tenants in common have agreed to make a common wall about their
ground, or that they should plant a certain number of trees in their common
soil, and one of them alieneth his part, whether is his assignee bound to
perform the covenant? 1. That an assignee in the Civil law is bound by the
the covenant of his grauntor.



Codicgn. In our law there be many authorities, that he ought to perform the
covenant. L. quaesit.. quod a Titio. ff. de praeca. and arg. l. in hoc
iudiciu^. penult. ff. de co^mun. diuid. and ff. de damn. infect. l. fluminu^.
adducitur. and ff. pro soc. l. 1. demque.



Anglonomoph. To that our law agrees, for if a man lease a house and land for
years by deed indented, and the lessee does covenant that he 2. That by the
Common law in such case the assignee is bound by the covenant.
and his assignees shall repair the house, and after the lessee grants over
his term, and the assignee does not repair it, an action of covenant lies
against the assignee, for this is a covenant which runs with the land: 25.
H. 8. Br. couen. 32. Deputy. 16.
and according to M. Brooks opinion, it lies also against the lessee after
that he has assigned over his term: and if he bring several writs of covenant
against the^ both, there is no remedy, till he have had execution against one
of them, and then if he sue the other, he may have an Audit a querela. Br.
Couen. 32.



Nomom. I will content my self at this time with your instructions touching
iointenants, and tenants in common, and will pass over to the examining of the
course of exchaunges.


The sixth Dialogue of Exchaunges.
NOnomath. What if two do deal together 1. Division.
after this sort: the one of the^ gives a horse and x. s. for the horse of an
other man, whether is this a bargain and sale, or an exchange.


Codicgn. In such case either it is intended, and 1. That by the^ Civil law
co^tracts for a certain price are not exchaunges.
uttered betwixt the parties, that the one shall have such a thing for a
certain price, as namely that A. shall have the horse of B. for ten pounds:
and B. takes of A. six pounds and an other horse in full payment and
satisfaction, this is clearly a bargain and sale L. tenetur.. 1. de action:
emp.
: but if A. had given B. a horse for a horse that had been an exchange Ar. I.
item si pretio.. 1. ff. locat:
.


Anglonom. By our Law there must be the express 2. That by the Common law the
word Excambium must be used in the exchange.
word of exchau^ge mentioned, otherwise a thing ca^ not be said to pass by
exchau^ge, for the word excambiu^ only makes an exchau^ge, as the words
liberu^maritagiu^ only do make frankmariage: for if I give to one an acre of
land by deed indented, and he by the same deed gives to me an other acre for
this acre, nothing passes except liuerie be made, and then the liuerie only
transferreth the land: otherwise it had been if the word (exchange) had been
used in the deed, and the estate which the parties are to have in the land
exchaunged ought to be equal: 3. That the estates most be equal.
and Choke says that both the things exchanged ought to be in esse at the time
of the exchange, and therefore an exchange of land for rent granted de nouo is
not good, but an exchange betwixt 4. That the things exchau^ged must be in
Esse.
a rent and a common which are in esse at the time of the exchange is good,
and so it is of land and rent: 9. E. 4. 21. p Brian, Choke, and Nedham.
And according to his opinion an exchange of the right which the dissesee has
to the land whereof the disseisin is committed, for an acre of land in which the
disseisor has right is no good exchange: 3. E. 4. 10. p Choke.
And where the word (exchange) is mentioned, though the conueyance be but an
Indenture of covenants, yet it shall amount to a good exchange: for an
Indenture of covenants was made betwixt a Prior and the Master of Gunnell hall
in Cambridge that the Master should have three acres of land to him and to his
successors, in perpetual exchange for one chamber of two chambers to be
assigned by the said Master at his election to the said Prior and his
successors, this has been held to be a good exchange, though it be by way of
covenant: 9. E. 4. 38.
And though it be avouched for law, that if by a deed of composition it be
agreed betwixt two, that the one shall have such lands in allowance of other
lands belonging to him, that this is a good exchange: 3. E. 3. 19.
yet I doubt whether an exchange may be accomplished by such counteruaileable
words: but a man may 5. That an exchange is good, though the one part of it
do mure by way of extinguishment.
give land in excha^ge for a release which cannot mure but only by way of
extinguishme^t, though there be some authority against it, 7. E. 3. 37.
and therefore Nortons opinion is justly denied by Thorpe, whereas he held that
in every exchau^ge there must be a mutual transmutation of the possession, 16.
E. 3. Exchange 2.
for if a man release to an other his estouer of wood, which he is to take
yearly in his wood, in exchange for land given to him in exchange for the
same release, this is a good exchange though the release take effect by way of
extinguishme^t: but it is as great a profit and advantage to the tenant to be
discharged of the estouers, as if so much had been granted unto him out of an
other man's wood, Park. tit. Exchaun. 53. 31. E. 1. Exchange 16.
and the Law well perceives the profit which a man may have by way of
extinguishment, for if the father being tenant in tail do alien the land
entailed with warrantie, and has a rent charge in fee issuing out of the land
of his Son which does descend unto the son, this is a good assets in value
notwithstanding the extinguishment. 31. E. 3. Garrantie 29.



Nomomath. Whether may Ecclesiastical benefices, 2. Division.
promotions, and livings be exchaunged or no.


Canonolog. The incumbents may not by their 1. That incu^bents may not
exchange their benefices by the Canon law.
sole authority change their benefices, but they may exchange them
Interueniente authoritate Episcoporum, ad quos pertinet collatio: but there is
a question in the gloss, whether the Chapter 2. That the Chapter may warrant
permutations sede vaca^te in such benefices wherein they have interest or
authority.
may authorize such permutations sede vacant C. quaesitu^ de rer: permut:
glos. in Clem: vnica. E. tit.
: and it resolves briefly, that in such things, wherein they have a common
collation, either by reason of authority, or by reason of interest and
consent, it may authorize exchanges sede vacant, but in other cases not. Glos.
in d. Clem. vnic. super verbo. Conferantur.



Anglonomophylax. The reason in our Law 3. That by the Common law
Ecclesiastical persons their patrons and ordinaries joining together can not
make any good exchange of Ecclesiastical benefices.
wherefore such ecclesiastical persons, nor their patrons and ordinaries,
though they all agree can not exchange the inheritances of spiritual livings,
is because the statute, strictly provides that no alienation be made in
mortmaine: for a thing which was amortised before, may be again amortised, and
therefore if a religious person do appropriate a Church which is of his own
presentation without the kings license, it is forfeited though it were
amortised before, 19. E. 3. Mortmain. 8.
and in such case where one Abbot did alien to an other, the collusion was to
be enquired of, as well as in the alienation of land made by a secular man to
a religious corporation, 16. Assis. pl. 1.
for the words of the Statute of Mortmaine be very 4. That the statute of
Mortmain is most strict and pregnant in words.
strong and large against such purchasors, which are thus: Prouisum est quod
nullus religiosus emere, vel sub color donationis, aut termini, aut alterius
tituli cuiuscunque ab aliquo recipere, aut art vel ingenio sibi appropriare
praesumat, per quod terrae, and tenementa huiusmodi ad manum mortuam quocunque
modo deueniant, Statut. de religios. 7. E. 1. Mortmain. 3.
and therefore the case was, that a femme sole purchased land in fee, and
took to husband the villain of a Bishop, which he had in right of his
Bishoprike, and the Bishop entered and this was adjudged a mortmain, for
according to Wickinghams opinion the words of the Statute of Mortmaine are
quocunque modo: otherwise it shall be if the tenant of the Bishop do die
without heir, 41. E. 3. 21.
but 19. Henr. 6. the contrary is held to be Law, but if the villain
himself purchase land, it is held there that in such case a Bishop or an
Abbot can not enter, 19. H. 6. 56.
but Thorpes opinion is 41. E. 3. that though he may not enter in the case
aforesaid, yet he may reteigne the land against the villain, and the king may
afterward ratify his estate, which is no more in plain terms, then that an
estate so gained is voidable only and not void, and as to the exchange of
benefices betwixt parson and parson it is severely punished by edict of
Parliament in our realm. 31. Eliz.



Nomomathes. I will not stay longer upon the inquiry of exchaunges for you
have opened unto me the nature of them, and how far they extend in these
few cases: now let us pass to a larger examination of the doubts and points
of devises and legacies.


The Seventh Dialogue. Of Devises and Legacies.
NOmomathes. First I pray you tell 1. Division.
me, whether this manner and custom of disposing by a man's last will and
Testament, has been in ancient time practiced or no.


Codicgn. It is very ancient, for it was one 1. The antiquity of wills.
of the Laws of the twelfe Tables, Vti legassit, suae rei ita ius esto, L.
verbis legis ff. de verb. signif.
But before Solons time it was not lawful for a man to devise his goods Extra
familiam, to strangers: and therefore, when Solon did by Law established,
grant this liberty to the Athenians, it was plausibly received of them, and
accounted the best of all his Laws. Plutarch. in Solon.
But Plato in his writings straungely, 2. Plato his exception against Solon his
Law concerning wills.
howsoever divinely conceited, dispraiseth this Law, and calls the makers of
it childish, because by that mean, a window is opened to deceit, and to
flattery: for he says, that when men are at point of death, they begin to
dote, and their understanding is broken, and therefore it is very likely, that
every man dying will dispose and appoint many things contrary to the Law, to
the usual practice of them that live, and to the example of their ancestors.
Plat. lib. 11. de legib.
This sentence of Plato, Justinian an Emperor exquisitely busied in the
compiling of Laws, because he had rather err with Plato, then yield unto
the truth with Solon, allows, and frames his Laws accordingly, Authent. de
trient: and sem. in l. Paulus ad Treb.
and S. Ierom writes, that Solons Law was repealed in his time, because
Priests which were commonly employed in the making of wills, did greedily and
odiously draw to themselfes, the inheritance of the dead: L. 1. C. de sacr:
Eccles.
and an other reason may be added in defense of Platoes opinion: because men in
danger of death are for the most part too prodigal, which Aristotle noted,
Diogen. Laerti. in vit. Aristotel.
and Tacitus pronounces more peremptorily speaking of Otho, Tacit. lib. 2.
lustor.
Pecunias distributt parce, nec tanquam periturus, having affirmed before,
Difficilius est temperare, qua te non putes diu vsurum. But Solons 3. Solons
law is maintained and defended against Plato.
Law leans to a more stable root, then that it may be shaken by the weak
blaste of such colorable reprehensions: and Solon did make exceptions to his
Law for he made these testaments void which were made by any in the
extremity of his disease, or which a man was enforced to make by imprisonment
or torment, or by the persuasions and flattery of his wife: But surely the
making of wills is necessary, L. 3. D. qui test. fa. pos.
and without it men can not effect the good education and bringing up of their
children, nor be able of their proper goods, chattels and other mooueable
substance to discharge their dettes, and after their degrees set forth and
advance their children and posterity. 32. H. 8. c. 1. Wills 2.
nor leave their wifes such comfortable support as in conscience they ought.


Nomomathes. Let me know I pray you 2. Division.
what persons may be legataries or deuisees, and who not?


Codicgnostes. Every one that may be made 1. Such as be incapable of
inheritances and goods may not be deuisees, heirs, or executors by the Civil
law. 2. A difference in the Civil law betwixt the making of a deuisee and the
making of an executor.
heir or executor may be a legatarie or deuisee, but to the^ which are
incapable by Law of inheritances or goods no devise can be made, neither can
they be made heirs or executors, C. de haered. instit. l. 1.
but there is a difference betwixt the making of a deuisee and the making of an
heir or executor, because he that is to be made heir or executor must be an
able person in Law, as well at the time of the making of the Testament, as at
the death of the testator, and the undertaking of the executorship, or enter
into the inheritance: ff. de haered. Insti. l. si alienu^. de extraneis and
Just: de haer. qual. and differ.. in extraneis.
but as to the deuisee it is sufficient if he be capable at the time of the
death of the testator. ff. de donat. causa mort: l. in mortis. and de condit:
and demon. l. eu^ qui. and ff. de iur. fisc: l. non intelligitur. quando.



Anglonom. By our Law to al such persons, to whom a grant may be made, a
devise may be 3. That by the Common law all persons to whom a grant may be
made a devise may be made, unless it otherwise happen in some few cases.
made, unless it otherwise happen in some few cases, and the devise ought to
be good and effectual at the time of the death of the deuisor: as if a man
seized of lands deuisable, do devise the same to the fellows of a college,
or the Priests of a Chauntery, and there is no such College nor Chauntery at
the time of the death of the deuisor: and after such a college or chauntery is
made, yet the devise is void, because devises are purchases, and when a man
takes lands or tenements 4. That the deuisee must be a person capable of the
thing devised.
by purchase, he must be an able person to take when it falls to him by the
purchase, Park. 97. Sect. 505. 9. H. 6. 23. 2. Eliza. 119. Pl. 18. Die. 13. Eli.
303. Pl. 49. Die. and 300. Pl. 39. and 5. E. 4. 6. p Billing.
and the Co^minaltie of a guild, which is not incorporate by the kings charter
to purchase lands, is not capable of lands, and if a man seized of lands
deuiseable in fee, do devise the same land to A. for life, to find a Chapleine
chaunting in the Church of Dale, the remainder to two of the best men of the
Guilde or fraternity of Whittawers in London to find a chaplain etc. if the
Whittawers be not incorporate by the Kings charte^, and enabled to purchase,
this remainder is void, Park. 98. sect. 510. 49. E. 3. 3.
and if a rent be granted for life to I. S. the remainder in fee to him that
shall first come to Powles the next day in the morning, this remainder is good
though it be upon condition, if I. S. die not before the next day, and if one
come to Powles the next day in the morning, if he which comes thither then
be not a person disabled to take by the grant, 30. Assis. pl. 47. Perk. 13.
Sect. 56.
so that whereas you say that by your Law it is 5. That by the Common law the
deuisee ought to be capable at the time of the death of the deuisor.
sufficient that the deuisee be capable at the time of the death of the
testator, so it is likewise by our law: for though a man may not grant nor
give lands to his wife during the couerture, because they both are but one
person in law, yet by custom heretofore, which the Common law did favor, and
now by statute, he might or may devise his lands to his wife to have in fee
simple, or otherwise, because such devise takes not effect till the death of
the deuisor, Littl. lib. 2. c. 10. Sect. 8. 27. Assis. pl. 60.
and then they are not one person. 24. H. 8. Br. Deuis. 34.



Nomom. Now let me know what things may 3. Division.
be devised.


Codicgn. Whatsoever things the testator has 1. That by the Civil law all
such things may be devised as the testator has in his own right at the time
of the devise
as in his own right, ff. de legate. 2. l. vinum. si re^ tuam.
and if he happen to devise a thing, which is not his own but an other ma^s,
the executor is by our Law compelable to buy it, and to give it to the deuisee
by virtue of the will, or if the owner will not sell it, he ought to pay the
very value and full estimation of it to the deuisee, ff. de legate: 3. l.
dubium. vlti.
and if land be bought by the deuisor, for which he has not paid any money,
or not all the money, if he died, and the deuisee will have the land, he must
pay the money, and so enjoy the land, L. 39.. Ide^ Iulianus de legate. 1.
but if the deuisor have sold land, and has not received the money, and he
deuiseth the land so sold to I. S. the deuisee in this case shall not have
the land sold, but the money that is to be paid for it, for an argument is
rightly drawn ab augmento ad diminutionem, L. si ex toto eo. tit.
so that this conclusion may be made, is the thing bought due to the deuisee?
then the deuisee ought to pay the money: is the thing not sold not due to the
deuisee? then he must have the money that is to be paid for it.


Anglonomoph. In our Law the making of a testament 2. The three degrees of a
testament by the Common law.
has three parts, Inception, which is the writing of the testament,
Progression, which is the publication of it, and Consummation, which is the
death of the party, and when after the devise the deuisor purchases other
lands, it cannot 3. A differe^ o^ in the Common law where a man deuiseth a
thing whereof he is not seized particularly, and by name, and where not.
be intended by any possibility that he would have them to pass by the
devise: for there is nothing contained in the will which does purport such
intent: but it was held in Brettes case, that if a man devise land in
certainty, as the manor of Dale, or white acre, and he has no interest nor
possession in them at the time of the making of the will, and after the does
purchase it, in such case it shall pass to the deuisee, for then it shall be
taken that his intent was to purchase it as it is said 39. Henr. 6. 13. and it
was likewise said that the statutes of 32. and 34. Henr. 8. required that the
deuisors should be seized of the land devised at the time of the devise, for
the words be Every person having, or which after this act shall have etc. 10.
Eli. Com^ Brets case, per Louel and touts les Just.



Nomom. I pray you let me know more particularly what things may be devised.


Codicgn. A thing may be devised which is not 4 That things which are not in
esse at the time of the devise made may be devised.
in rerum natura at the time of the devise, if afterward it may be, as the
corn which shall grow in such a soil, or the lambs which shall come of his
flock of sheep in such a field, Instit. de legate.. ea quoque res. and ff. de
legate. 1. l. quod in rerum.
but if the testator do devise ten quarter of corn coming of the corn
which shall grow in such a soil, or two tons of wine of his grapes in such
a vineyard, or ten lambs of such a flock, though so much corn, or wine, or
so many la^bes do not arise of the things abouesaid, yet the heir or
executor is compellable by law to make them good integraliter, because he may
seem to have mentioned the soil, the vineyard, and the flock, rather by way
of demonstration then by way of condition: l. quid testamento in prin. ff. de
leg. 1. and l. Paulo Callimacho.. Iullanus Seuerus ff. de legate. 3. and l.
Lucius ff. de alim. leg:
but if the testator do devise certain goods, or a certain sum of money to
I. S. and in his life time after recovery of his health, he gives the goods
or pays the money to the said I. S. now without any alteration of the devise
in the will, the executors shall be discharged of perfourming the devise after
the death of the testator. l. Lucius Titius in testamento in prin. ff. de
legate. 2. gl. in Clem. dudum. de Sepultur.



Angonomoph. It is said in our books that if a 5 That the devise of tenant for
term of life or tenant i^ dower, of corn growing at the time of their death
is good.
man which has estate for life, or tenant in dower do devise their corn
growing upon the land at the time of their death, this is a good devise, and
he in the reuersion shall not have the Corn, 4 H. 3. Deuis. 26.
But if a man seized of land in fee as in right of his w^fe, do lease the
same land for years to a stranger, and the lessee sows the land, and after
the woman dies, the corn being not ripe, in this case the lessee may devise
the corn growing upon the land, and yet this estate is determined, and it
was certain, but a thing non-certaine was the cause of the determination of
it: 7. E. 3. 67. 7. E. 4. 17. Park. 99. sect 513. 10. E. 3. 29.
And if a man be seysed of land in the right of his wife, and sow it, ad
deuiseth the corn growing upon the land, and dies before it be severed, the
deuisee shall have it, and not the wife: but otherwise it is of herbs or
meadowe growing upon the land, and not severed at the time of the death of the
deuisour. 7. Ass. pl. 16.
And if tenant in tail of land lease the land for life, and the lessee
sows the land with Corn, and the tenant in tail dies, and the issue
recouereth in a Formedon in discender before the Corn be severed, the issue
in tail may well devise it* Park. Deuis. 100 sect 520.
and if a man which is seized of land in fee, have issue a daughter, and dies,
his wife being grossement enseint with a son, and the daughter enters and
sows the land, and after the sowing and before the seuerance the son is
borne, and one of his next friends enters for him, yet the daughter may
devise the Corn growing upon the land, 19. H. 6. 6.
And the Statute of Merton, which says that omnes viduae possint legare blada
is but an affirmation of the common Law which was used in the time of King
Henry the third above mentioned, in the beginning of his reign: and so it is
of other things future contingent, they may be devised well enough, for if a
man enfeoffe a stranger of his land upon payment, or non-payment on the part
of the feoffee, as if the feoffee shall pay unto the feoffour twenty pounds,
at the feast of Easter next ensuing, that then he may reteigne the land to him
and to his heirs, and if he do not pay that then it shall be lawful for
the feoffour to reenter, now if the feoffour make his will, and devise the
money when it shall be paid to A. and dies before the day of payment, this
is a good devise condicionally, that is, if the feoffee pay the money to the
executors. 12. E. 3. Condic. 8.
For when 6 That when the party has a certain, and lawful interest in a
thing, he may lease it, grant it, or devise it before the existence of it.
the party has a lawful and a certain interest in a thing, he may grant,
lease, or devise it before the thing have actual existence, therefore the
saying of Master Keble that worthy man is well to be marked, when he says
that the King cannot grant any disme before it be granted to his highness
by Parliament, neither a wardshippe cum acciderit, otherwise it is of the
amerciaments of his tenants in such a village, the wrecke of the Sea or catalla
felonum, for he has an inheritance in them and a possession in law, but in the
disme he has no interest before the grant. 21. E. 4. Abbot de Walth. case
45. p Keble.



Codicgn. By our Law a man may devise to one 7 That a devise may be uncertain,
but yet good in Law, because it may by special means be reduced to certainty.
that he shall have yearly xx. load of stone out of his quarrie in Dale, or
three load of wood out of his grove or coppies in Sale, ff. de legate. 1. l.
apud Julian.. si quis.
and if the testator do devise one of his vineyardes, one of his horses, or
one of his rickes of corn, it shall be in the election of the heir or the
executor, what vineyarde, what horse, or what ricke of corn he will give him,
so that he give him not the very worst, but these which be indifferent. l.
legato generaliter ff. de lega. 1.



Anglonomoph. So in our Law a man may grant, and therefore as I think if one
devise unto an other one of the horses in his stable, and he has five in his
stable, the grauntee may chose which of them he will have: and if a man grant
to one xx. s. of rent charge, or xl. s. of rent charge, I may distreine for
which of the rents I will. 9. E. 4. 39. 11. E. 3. Annuity 27. Park. Gra^ts 17.
sect 74.



Nomomat. Let me ask you this question: The 4. Division.
Testator having but one daughter, deuiseth by his will that 1000. li. shall be
paid for the marriage of his daughters, meaning as well other daughters that
should be borne as her that is living: there is none afterward borne, the
testator dyethw, hither is the executor bound to pay the whole thousand
pounds to the daughter that is living.


Codicgn. I think he is bound by Law to pay 1 That by the Civil law Ius
acrescendi takes effect in legacies.
the whole sum unto her, l. qui quarta^. fin. ff. de legate. 1.
for ius accrescendi habet locum in legatis, d.. fin. cum l. seq. and l. a
Titio. ff. de verbo oblatio.
and so if the testator do devise that if he shall have a daughter, the
executor should give a C. li. for the marriage of his daughter, and two
daughters be borne, now the executor shall pay to every of them C. li. l. qui
filiabus. si quis ita. ff. de legate. 1.
and if the case be, that the testatour does devise the sixthe part of his
houses, of his lands, or vineyards to Sempronius, whereupon Sempronius
demands a sixth part of every house, of every farm, and of every vineyarde:
and the heir says that these things cannot well be divided, but that he is
ready to pay to the deuisee the very 2 Whether, when the 6. part of a thing
is devised the heir is compellable to divide it by the Civil law, or to render
the value.
value of every sixth part, the question is whether the law regards this
answer of the heir, and for this doubt we have this general decision: if
the thing which is so to be divided, be indivisible by the nature of it, or if
it cannot be commodiously divided, the heir has the choice to pay the value:
but if it be deuisible then the law is otherwise. l. non amplius.. cum honorum.
ff. de legate. 1.



Anglonomoph. As to your last case our law does accord with yours, for
legacies shall be favored and ordered as dower is, and if a woman have title of
dower to a house, a chamber in the house may be allotted unto her, as the third
part of the 3 That by the common law some time there may be a seuerance of ye
thing devised: sometime of the profits of the thing, or of the advantage.
house or in allowance of her dower, but she shall not so be endowed of a milne,
but shall have the third part of the profit of the milne, because the milne
cannot be severed, and a woman may be endowed of a villain ingrosse as to
have his services every third day, and of an aduowson in gross to have the
third presentment, and of the moitie of an aduowson ingrosse to have the sixth
presentment, and a woman shall be endowed of a bailywicke to have the third
part of the profit of it. 1. H. 5. 1. 45. E. 3. Dower 50. Na. Br. 7. 2. H. 6.
11. 13. E. 2. Dower 161. Fitz. na. br. 148 C. 150. G. 149. K. 148. C. 12. E. 2.
Dower 157. 11. E. 3. Dower 85. 15. E. 3. Dower 81.



Nomomat. Let the case be that the Testatour 5. Division.
deuiseth to one a plotte of ground, and speaks nothing of the house which
is built upon it, whether shall the deuisee have the house.


Codicgn. By our Law he shall have the 1 That if a man devise a plott of
ground whereon a house is built the house also passes.
house, whether it were built before the Testament were made, or after, l.
seruum silij. si are ae ff. de l. si are ae. ff. de leg. 2.
and we have a rule in our Law, Quidquid plantatur, seritur, vel
inaedificatur, omne solo cedit, radices si tamen egit.


Anglonomoph. It is so likewise in our Law, 2 A house built upon la^d entailed
after the gift shall be recovered in a Formedon.
for if a man give land in tail, and the donee builds a house upon it, and
dies without issue, the donor if he be deforced from the land, shall demand
it in a Formedon per nomen mesuagij. 32. H. 8. 47. Dyer.



Nomomat. Put case the Testatour deuiseth to 6. Division.
one a deed or instrument conteyninge a certain debt, whether does he devise
the debt or not. l. seruum silij ^um qui chirographum. de legate. 1.



Codicgn. In that case the debt passes, h but 1 That by the civil law when an
especialtie containing a debt is devised to one, the debt it self passes.
if ten several payments ought to be made by the condition of a bond, as
suppose ten pounds is to be paid yearly by ten several payments, and five
years be past, and five payments made, and the testator deuiseth the sum
comprised in the condition to I. S. in this case the deuisee shall not recover
against the executor the whole sum conteigned in the condition, but five
pounds only. d. l. seruum filij. sed et si nomen.



Anglonomoph. Master Perkins, a man that writes 2 Master Parkins his opinion
touching the devising of an obligation is examined.
of diverse Titles of our Law, rather subtly, then soundely, says that if
twenty pounds be due to a man upon an obligation or a contracte, which ought
to be paid at the feast of Easter, and he euiseth it to a stranger, this is a
good devise, if the money be afterward paid: but if he had devised the
obligation, or the counterpaine of the Indenture of covenants, wherein the bond
is contained, the deuisee shall not use an action upon the bond in his own
name, but he may give or sell the obligation to the obligor, or to a stranger,
Perkins 101. sect' 527.
but how bonds, or things in action may pass directly from one to another by
way of grant, or devise, I cannot yet perceive by any authenticke opinion in
our year books: for to say that the especialty, or bond containing the debt
or duty, does pass unto the deuisee, though the debt do not pass, as namely
the parchment, ynke, and wax, but not the sum conteigned, is as if one
should imagine, that a man roweth over Thames in body, and yet remains at
the Temple stairs in soul, for if the debt being the principal do not
pass, I cannot understand how the parchment or paper, or the deed it self,
being the accessorie can pass, for accessorium sequitur suum principale.


Nomom. Resolve in this, if a man devise to an 7. Division.
other a horse, a garment, or the like, and they perish in the hands of the
executour, whether is the executor bound by Law to make them good.


Codicgn. In such case either the executor does linger and delay the delivery,
or giving of the thing devised to him, to whom it was devised, and then I doubt
not, but he is bound to pay the 1 That by the Civil Law the executor is bound
to make good the thing which perishes through his default.
value of the thing which perishes through his default, or there is no default
in him, and then he is not to be charged with the making of it good, l. cum
here is. si. and l. huiusmodi,. si cui homo. ff. de legate. 1.
and then the executor or heir may be said to delay the administration of the
legacye, when he may speedily perform it, and will not, but if he be by the
act of a stranger hindered from executing the bequest, as suppose he has not
the money ready which is devised, or the devise be that he shall purchase an
other man's land with the money of the deuisor, and assure 2 That in some cases
the time of performing legacies is left to the discretion of the Judges.
it to I. S. if he cannot easily compass this purchase doing his best
endeavor, the rigor of law is to be tempered in this case by discretion, and
respite must be given by the arbitrage of the Judge. l. si domus. in pecunia.
ff. de legate. 1.



Anglonomoph. In our Law we have many cases, wherein they that are charged with
the delivery of a thing upon some trust and confidence 3 That by the common law
the executors are bound to perform the devise in convenient time.
reposed in them, and the thing that should be delivered perishes through
their default, they are enforced by law to make full amends, for if a man be
seized of land deuisable in fee, and deuiseth by his Testament that his
executors shall sell his land, and shall distribute the profits coming thereof
to the use of the poor, and the deuisor dies, if a stranger tender unto them
money for the land, but not so much as the land is worth in their opinion,
and they to the intent they may sell it more dear, differ the sale for two
years space, and take the profit themselves, now the heir for their long
delaying may enter, 4 A diversity betwixt an obligee and a deuisee.
and put them out of the land, 38. Ass. pl. 3. and 39. Ass. pl. 3.
but if a man be bound in xx. li. to pay x. li. at the feast of Saint Michael,
the obligee refuses the money when it is tendered in pollardes, which
afterward are embased, the obligor shall bear the loss of the embasement,
because he must plead uncore prist, 7. E. 6. 83. Dyer.
and yet the refusal was the default of the obligee.


Nomom. Put case that a man deuiseth to one a 8. Division.
beadsteede, whether shall the deuisee by force of this devise have the
curtains of the bed.


Codicgn. The accessorie goes always with the 1 That things which are
acc^ssory do pass with their principal.
principal, and the curtains therefore in this case shall pass with the
bedsteade, l. liberorum. sin. and ibi glo: de legat' 3.
so if a man devise to one his land or his house, the arrerages due by the
farmor or inhabitant from the death of the Testator are payable to the deuisee,
but not the arrerages before. l. praedijs.. 1. ff de legate: 3. l. Nomen.. filio
ex part de legate: 3.
And if a house be devised, the Bathe belonging to the house, and the orcharde
also which belongs to it do pass, if from the house there be a way to the
Bathe or orcharde, for then they may well be said to belong to the house and to
be provided for the benefit of the inhabitant, l. praedijs in. balneas, and.
qui domum ff. de legate: 3.
and if a man do by his last will devise land, and live many days after the
testament made, 2 That a mine of coal passes with the land if it be jointly
used with it, otherwise it is if it be severally used.
and in his life time a mine of coal, lead, or tin is opened and discovered
in the soil, then the testator dies after that he has used the mine jointly
with the land, in this case the deuisee shall have the mine, but if he had
demised for life, or for years, the mine to one, and the land to an other, so
that they had been severed, and disioined in particular interest, then the
deuisee should not have had the mine, l. cu^ fundus nominatim. ff. de legate. 2.
but if the Testator devise all his corn which he has in such a barn, and
the deuisee being one of his household servants of purpose brings a greater
quantity of corn into the barn, the deuisee shall not have this increase,
because it grew by the fraud of the deuisee. cum ita legatur in princ. ff. de
legate. 2.



Anglonomoph. As to your two last cases, devises as I have said before are so
to be favored as dower, and I think that if a man do marry a wife, and die
seized of land, and after his death a mine of coal is discovered in the
ground, and 3 That a woman shall be endowed of a mine of coal discovered after
her husbands death.
then the woman brings a writ of dower, she shall have her dower as well of
the mine being parcel of the land, as of the land it self being the
principal, 14. E. 3. Admeasurement 10. 13. E. 1. Itin: North. 17. Fitz. na. br.
149. C.
and as to your other case where the corn in such a barn is devised, and it
is afterward increased, the deuisee shall have no more corn then was in the
barn at the time of the devise, for it is as much as if he should have said
(all the corn which he now has in his barn) for words of the present tense
which has a present beginning and ending, may not be drawn either to a time
past which has had his beginning and 4 That words of the present tense in a
devise may not be extended to the future tense
end, or to a time future which has neither beginning nor end, and therefore if
a man be bound to keep the prisoners of the jail of D. that they shall not
escape, this shall extend only to the prisoners which are in the Jail at the
time of the making of the bond, and not to such which shall be afterward in
the Jail, unless it had been expressly said which be, or shall be in the
Jail, 21. H. 7. 37.
and so if the Queen grant to me visum franciplegij in omnibus terris meis,
and feodis, I shall not have view of frankepledge in any lands, but such as I
have at the time of the grant, 38. H. 6. 10.
so if a man be bound for the tenants of I. S. it shall be intended of these
tenants only which I. S. has at the time of the obligation made, 39. H. 6. 6.
and if a man grant to another housewood and hedgewood to be burnt in his
houses in Dale, this shall not extend to houses which are afterward built, Temps
E. 1. Common 28.
and though Wilbyes opinion be, that if a man grant to another a way over his
land with waines, and the grauntee has no freeholde at the time to which he
may have caryage, yet if he purchase freehold afterward, he may have a way to
it, and Hankeford seems to be of this opinion 11. H. 4. 21. E. 3. 2. per
Wilby 11. H. 4 82. per Hank.
because in a general grant there needs to be no naming of a certain
freehold, yet in that very case dubito quid sit lex.


Nomomat. Admit that a man devise the profittes of his land for five years
to I. S. the deuisee dies within two years next after the devise, then the
deuisour dies, whether shall the residue of the term go to the benefit of
the executor 1 That by the civil law if the deuisee of a term die before the
deuisor the executor shall have the term.
or administrator of the deuisee.


Codicgn. We have express authority in our Law that it shall. l. vxori
v^ufru:. quaesitu^ ff. de v^ufru: le:



Angonomoph. Brettes case which is very famous in our law is to the contrary:
10. Eliz. 46. Com^ Brets case.
but if a man devise 2 By the common law a diversity is taken where the deuisee
dies in the life of the deuisor, and where after his death but before the
legacy executed
xx. li. to be paid yearly in 4. years after his death to I. S. and died, and
after the deuisee dies within four years, yet the executours of the deuisee
shall have the money or the residue of it by suite before the Ordinary in the
spiritual Court, for it is a duty by the testament or devise, 24. H. 8. Br.
Devise 27. 45. Condic' 187.
and an administrator may as well sue for that duty in the spiritual Court, as
he may have a writ of Covenant at the common law upon the covenant made with
the party intestate. Fitz. na. br. 146. D. 2. Mar. 112. Die.



Nomom. What if the testator do say I devise such 10. Division.
a thing to God or to Christ, what is wrought by this devise?


Cononol. The thing so devised is due to the 1 That by the civil law when a
thing is devised to God or to Christ, it shall go to the Church of the parish
where the Testator dwelt.
Church of the parish where the testator did dwell at the time of the devise.
Authent: de ecclesiast' tit^. si quis in nomine argu: l. quae co^ditio.. sin:
ff. de cond: and de monstr:



Anglonomoph. In ancient times such devises were good, and so was a fine
levied deo, and ecclesiae, but the law is now altered, Scir: faci: 18. E. 4.
22. 19. E. 4. 2. 4. 7. per Pigot en le cas de Prior de Merton.
and in the one and twenteth year of king Richard the second a devise of land
was made to one for life, the remainder to an other for life, the remainder to
the Church of S. Andrew in Holborne, and this was adjudged a good devise, 21.
R. 2. Deuis. 27.
but now such a devise is made void by the statute of 23. H. 8. cap. 10. but
before that statute it appears by the book of 37. H. 6. that upon a gift
made to the parishioners 2 That by the common law, and by the statute of 23. H.
8. such a devise is void.
of such a parish without naming them the Churchwardens might have an action,
37. H. 6. 3^.
but the^ the gift must have bin of a personal thing, for of inheritance of
land they cannot take to the use of the Church, 12. H. 7. 27.
but if a man in ancient time had given his lands or his goods deo and
Ecclesiae sanct' Petr' Westimonast' this had been a good devise, because the
Church is not the house, nor the walls, but the entier spiritual house, that
is the Abbot and the Covent, and because they may take by such a gift it is
good, but if the Abbot were dead at the time of the gift it is not good, be
cause the Coue^t is not persona capax: but a church 3 What is meant by a Church
parochial according to Rolfes opinion.
parochial by Rolfes opinion (as to the endowement of it with land) cannot
otherwise be intended, but a house made of stones, walls and roof, which
cannot take by any gift or feoffement, and so it is of a Church conuentual
which lacks a sovereign. 8. H. 5. 4. per Babi. and Rolfe.



Nomom. Suppose that two testaments be exhibited 11. Division.
to the ordinary which were made in one day, containing several sums to the
same deuisees bequethed, whether shall they both be approved, and the legacies
of both stand good.


Codicgn. These legacies only shall stand good, 1 That by the civil law where
two testame^ts conteigne in them several sums, that which contains the
lessee shall stand but by the common law the later.
which do conteigne in them a lesser sum. l. Sempronius Procul. ff. de legate.
2.



Anglonomoph. In our Law we have a case, that if a man make a testament, and in
it he makes one only man his executor, and then he makes an other testament,
and in it he makes him and a stranger executors, and the first testament is
proved, that only shall stand, 2. H. 5. 8.
but by other authority the later only shall take place, what sums soever
they conteigne. 4. H. 7. 13.



Nomomat. Say that an ox is devised to one, and 13. Division.
the ox dies without any default in the executor, whether is the skin or
hide of the ox due to the deuisee or no?


Codicgn. By our Law it is not due: l. mortuo boue. ff. de legate: 2.
for the 1 That by the Civil law if an ox be devised and he dye the skin is
not due to the deuisee.
thing devised, that is the ox, did perish and was non ens before the skin
were taken off, and the skin was not taken from an ox, but from a carcass.


Anglonomoph. It seems in that case, that the 2 That by the common law, it
seems to be due, otherwise it should be if there had bin* an exception of the
hide.
deuisee shall have the hide, for it is parcel of the ox, and the ox was an
entier thing, but if he had given the ox, excepting the hide, that perhaps
would amount to a seuera^ce in law, so that the ox living should have belonged
to the deuisee: but being killed the flesh should belong to the deuisee, the
hide to the executor of the deuisor, and if a man make a lease of land,
excepting the trees which grow upon the land, the trees are severed in Law,
for he has no reuersion of them, and if he sell them and after the sale make
a feoffement the feoffee shall not have them because they were severed by the
vendition. 20. H. 6. 22.



Nomomat. Put case that I. S. do borow a C. 13. Division.
li. of I. N. and for the sure repayment thereof he binds all his lands and
goods by recognisans of statute Merchant to the said I. N. after he deuiseth
all his lands to the recognisee and dies, the recognisans is forfaited, the
recognisee brings an action of debt, and recouereth against the executors,
and has execution of the goods of the testator by Fierifacias, and then he
claims the land by virtue of the devise, whether is his claim good or no? 1
That if the recognisor devise all his goods to the re^onusee, yet he shall have
execution of the land.



Codicgn. I think he may claim the land also, if it may not be proved by
circumstances, or directly, that the land was devised unto him in satisfaction
of the debt, and upon condition employed that he should not alter the property
of the goods by execution. l. creditore^ ff. de legate: 2.



Anglonomoph. I do not perceive any repugnancie in our Law to that which you
have said.


Nomomath. If he had made his creditour his executour in this case, what would
then have followed.


Anglonomoph. Then the debt had bin extinct: 11. H. 4. pl. 31.
2 That if the obligee make the obligor his executor the det is extinct.
for if two be bound to one in a certain sum of money, and the obligee
makes one of them his executor, this is a release in law of the bond, and debt
to them both, 21. E. 4. 81.
so if one make his dettor and an other his executours and die, in this case if
the executor, who was not indebted survive, he shall not have an action of debt
against the executour of his coexecutour, although the party indebted did not
administer in his life time: for the action was once extinguished and
determined, for no action can be brought but in the name of them both, 20. E.
4. 17. 21. E. 4. 3. 21. H. 7. 31. per Fineux.
but if one that is indebted make his creditour, and an other his executours,
the creditour may have an action, if he do not administer, 8. E. 4. 3. per
Brian.
but when the testator is indebted to me, and makes me his executor, I may
deteigne the goods for my bebt: so that it seems that though the action be
extinct in regard of the testatour, yet the debt is still in esse in respect
of strangers. 7. H. 4. 18. 27 H. 6. en Scire fac' 7. Eliz. Com^ Greysbrookes
case 275.



Codicgn. When the creditour makes the debtor his executor, by the
executorship the debt is confounded, and because of impossibility in Law,
for so much as the executor may not bring an action of debt against himself
being one, and the same person, the obligation therefore is by secreate act of
Law disanulled. Philip. Deci ad reg. iur.



Nomom. Now I will put you a case, which is 14. Division.
a common co^tingent, The testator ordeigneth by his will that his daughters
shall be married by the appointment and disposal of Titius his brother, the
Testator dies, Titius also dies before he has disposed any thing of the
marriage, whether may the marriage and the portion be arbitrated and disposed by
some other or no, as namely by the executor of Titius?


Codicgn. I think the executor of Titius may 1 That by the Civil law if a man
ordeigne by his will that his daughters shall marry by the appointment of
Titius, that Titius his executor may dispose of the marriage.
well enough order and accomplish this matter according to the degree of the
daughters, the wealth of the father, and the number of the children. l. si
filiae pater ff. de legate. 3.



Anglonomoph. I think quite contrary because there is a confidence reposed
specially and incommunicably in the person of Titius, and there be many cases
in our Law to prove this assertion, Cesty que use before the statute of 27. of
king H. 8. did devise that A. B. and C. his feoffees should 2. That by the
Common law where a confidence is reposed in certain persons, it is
incommunicable to others.
sell his land, whereof they were seized to his use. A. dies: it was held
that B. and C. could not sell the land, otherwise it had been if he had spoken
generally of his feoffees, without naming them specially: 2. Elizab. 177. Die.
Likewise a man devised, that after the death of his wife, his land should be
sold by his executors together with the assent of A. and makes his wife, and a
stranger his executors and dies: the wife dies, A. dies, the authority of
selling the land is fully determined and gone: 5. Eliz. 219. Die.
and so it was held per curiam, that if a man did declare his will, that B. and
C. his executors should sell his land and the testator dies and B. dies: and
C. makes M. his executor and dies, and M. sells it, this sale is void, for
the trust is strict: but M. Brudnell says that if a man devise by his will
that H. and N. his executors shall sell his land, and they refuse to be
executors, yet they may sell the land, because they are named by their proper
names: 19. H. 8. 9.
But where the executors are not specially named for the sale of the land,
there one of them only may well enough sell the land: for the case was, that a
man did devise all his lands to his sister, except one manor, which he
appointed to pay his debts, and he made two executors and died, the one
executor died, yet the other may sell the manor and pay the debts per
intentionem testatoris, the words of the devise as touching the sale were
general (which I appointe to pay my debts). 23. Eliz. 371. Die.



Nomomath. I have often heard, that a devise 15. Division.
shall be taken most largely, and beneficially for the profit and avail of
the deuisee, I pray ye let me hear some cases, which may confirm this unto
me.


Codicgnostes. If the testator do devise all his 1. That by the Civil law
devises are for the most part construed for the deuisce.
horses to one, all his horses and mares shall pass by the devise, L. legatis
seruis.. iu^ctis. ff. de legate. 3.
and if the testator do devise all his beasts, all fourefooted cattaile,
which are beasts of pasture, do pass by this devise, D. l. legatis. pecoribus.
and if a flock of Sheep be devised, the Lambs and the Rams are contained
in the devise L. seruis legate.. si. ff.
, but if he devise his Sheep, without saying his flock of sheep, his lambs
do not pass, D. l. legatis seruis.. ouibus.
and if a man devise his plough horses to one, and after the deuisor sells
the horses, and buyeth and uses mares for his plough, and dies, now the mares
shall pass by the devise L. qui duos mulos. ff. de legate: 3.
, and if the testator do devise to one all his woolle, all his wo^lle as well
washed, as not washed, spunne as not spunne, and generally al his woolle which
is not wrought into clothe is devised, L. si cui lana. in princip. and in.
lanae. ff. de legate. 3.
and herein it differs from line, because under the name of line, even line
that is wrought or linen is contained, D. l. si cui lana.. lino.
so if a man devise all his silver to one, his silver cups and all his other
vessels of silver do pass L. cum aurum. ff. de auro and argent: leg: in
princip. and l. lana.. fi. ff. de legate. 3.
, but no silver coin does pass, L. Quintus in prin. ff. de aur: and argent:
leg.
otherwise it had been if he had devised all his silver wrought or labored
Ibid.
, for if the testator devise to one all his cloth which is in such a cheste, no
garments nor apparel are contained within the devise, but only the rude and
plain matter of clothe, because when marble is devised the imageries of marble
are not meant, but the gross matter of marble, L. quaesitum. illud fortassis.
ff. de legate: 3.
and if wood be devised, only wood fit to be burnt is comprehended in the
devise, but not timber, L. ligna. ff. de legate: 3.
yet the testator his meaning is in these later cases to be examined by
circumstances. L. pediculi. labeo. ff. de aur: and arg* leg:



Anglonomoph. And by our Law, the favor of which is equally divided betwixt
the advantage of the deuisee, and the intent of the deuisor. Devises are often
times ampliated and extended by beneficial construction for the help and
profit of the deuisee if they be not repugnant to 2. That the Common law so
favors devises that it vpholdeth equity and the correspo^dence of reason.
law: but if they be repugnant, the Law then, as a Lady jealous of her
Justice, does utterly frustrate, and make void the devises: That which I
affirm shall by cases and examples better appear: The L. Latimer did devise
to his Lady and wife the third part of all his goods and chattels, and great
question was made, whether this devise should be intended of the third part of
the goods and chattels as it should be after the dettes and legacies paid, or
as it was at the death of the testator: and whether the third part of the dets
due to the testator do pass by this devise, but it was agreed by the
Justices, that by the word ( vtensils) Plate and Jewels do not pass, and if
a man devise to his daughter five hundred pou^ds, for and toward her marriage,
and she dies before the marriage, by the opinion of the greater part her
executor shall have the sum, otherwise it had been if the words of the
devise had been (to be paid at the day of her marriage, or at the age of 21.
years) and she dies before, 36. H. 8. 59. Die.
and 16. Eliz. A man devised laud to one so that he do pay 10. li. and if
not that it should remain to his house, provided that the lands shall not be
sold, but shall go to the next of blood being male, it was held that this was
an estate tail, and that these words (shall go to his house) shall be
construed to the eldest person of his family, and these words (being male)
shall be construed in the future tense, and in many cases an estate may be
limited in a devise by implication: as if a man devise land to one and to his
heirs males in fee simple, the remainder to the next heirs males of the
kin, there is an entaileme^t both in the first estate and also in the
remainder, 16. Eliz. 333. Die. 2. Eli. 171. Die.
but where a devise is contrary to Law, it is void of effect: for a man
devised land in London to the 3. That the Common law frustrateth these devises
which are repugnant to Law.
Prior and Covent of S. Bartholmewes, so that they pay to the Deane and
Chapter of Powles 10. li. yearly, and if they failed, then their estate to
cease, and that the land should remain to the Deane, and it was held by
Fitzh. and Baldwin Justices that this was a void remainder, because it could
not be limited after an estate in fee, and as of a condition the Deane and
Chapter could not have advantage but the heir, 29. H. 8. 32. Die.
and so if a man devise la^d to one in fee, and that if he die without heir
that then it shall remain to an other in fee, this is a void remainder
because one fee simple cannot depend upon an other 19. H. 8. 8.
.


Nomom. What if the testator do devise to his 16. Division.
wife certain land, whilst she should live chastely, and she marieth, whether
is her estate determined?


Canonolog. I think it is not determined, for 1. That by the Cannon law if
land be devised to a woman whilst she shall live chastely, marriage is not
implicatiuely and absolutely prohibited.
though the words of the devise do implie a condition, yet the condition is not
broken, because matrimonium est reshonesta, and therefore not to be imagined to
be within the intent of the condition. Authent. de nupt: in princ: 28. quaest.
1. ca. sic enim 33. q. 2. c. 2. l. 2. C. de indict: viduit: toll:



Nomoma. Yet it seems that the condition fails, Quia coitus and castitas
opponuntur, D. authent. de nup.. qu^a vero.
therefore it may seem that she should lose the legacy as well by marying, as
by living incontinently.


Canonol. But I think rather that she shall not lose the legacy, because there
was no condition expressed in the devise that she should not marry, and
therefore she can not be said in marying to do against the will of her husband:
but yet it may seem, that if she had married within a year after the death of
the testator, she had broke the condition, ff. de iur. patron: l. adigere. fi.
for doubtless otherwise, Mulier secundo nubeus castitatem seruat. D. authen: de
nup.. fin. autem and ide^ Extra. de diuor. c. gaudeamus. in fin: l. mulier..
cum proponaretur. ff. ad Trebel.
2. That the Civil law, and Common law do favor marriage.



Codicgn. Our Law in such cases favors matrimony, ff. de reg. iur: l. In
ambiguis. and l. in testamentis eod:
and where there is no condition prohibitorie expressed, the Law will not in
such case intend it. In authent. hoc locum C. de secund: nupt.



Anglonomop. In our Law we have a case that King Edward the sixth granted to
his sister the Lady Mary the manor of D. as long as she should continue
unmarried, and this is admitted in our Law to be a good limitation but no
condition, as has been before surmised. 4. Mar. 1. 141. Die. 37. H. 6. 29. 10.
Assis. pl. 8. 17. Assis. pl. 7. 3. Assis. pl. 9. and 6.



Nomom. Let this be the case: the husband deuiseth 17. Division.
to his wife the profits of al his goods, the question is whether the wife may
take the profits by her sole authority, or by the appointment of the judge, or
by the administration of the executor. 1. That there is a diversity, in the
Civil law where a man makes his wife vsufructuariam of his goods, and where
he deuiseth them to her.



Codicgn. In our law we take this difference: where he makes his wife by his
will vsufructuariam of the goods, and where he does devise unto her his goods:
For where he makes her vsufructuariam, she may of her own power take the
profit and benefit of the goods, and she needs not to expect or attend the
curtisie of the executor: L. si habitatio. si vsus fu^di. and l. fundi ff: de
vsu and hab:
But if he devise his goods, or the profits of his goods, or command and
charge his heir or executor by his will, that they allow sufficient
maintenance to his wife out of his lands or goods, now the woman is a deuisee,
and she must take that which is devised, by the hands of the heir or executor,
or else sue for it by law. ff. de vsuf^uct: legate. l. patrimonij and l. si quis.



Anglonomoph. By our law the power and authority 2. That by the Common law the
administration of the goods and chattels of the testator does appertain only
to the executor.
of delivering goods and chattels, or putting the deuisee in possession
belongs only to the executors, who must see debts paid before legacies
performed: 37. H. 6. 30. ^ Prisot. 2. H. 6 16. Perkins Testam. 94. D. S.
Dialog. 2. 79.
And therefore if a stranger take goods devised to me out of the possession of
the executors, I cannot have an action of trespass for the taking: For it is
not like to a gift of goods which is presently executed: and if a man devise
the ^ourth part of his goods to another, the deuisee may not seize the fourth
part but he must sue for it in the spiritual court, 27. H. 6.
but if a man devise a book or some other thing to one for term of life, the
remainder to an other for ever, if the executor deliver the book or the goods
to the first deuisee, the second deuisee may seize the^ without liuerie of the
executor, for the possession of the first deuisee was the possession of the^
both, otherwise it is if the first deuisee has the possession and die 37. H.
6. 30.
: but if a man seize in an other right then as deuisee, then he need not
depend upon the delivery of the executors: and therefore the case was 9. E. 4.
that an action of debt was brought against one as executor in London, and the
defendant said that the testator did give unto him certain goods by his deed,
and he showed in particular what goods they were, the testator being at the
time of the gift in the village of B. in the county of Essex, and that he
suffered the goods to be in the possess. of the testator until his death at
London, and after the death of the testator he took the^, absque hoc that he
did administer as executor: and the whole Court held that the Jurors ought to
find this matter of the gift of the goods upon pain of attaint 9. E. 4. 40.
, but where a man ought to take a thing by the delivery of an other, and he
takes it of his own head, he is a trespassor: and therefore if a man grant
to an other an estouer of wood to be taken by the view, and delivery of his
Bailie, if he take it without the delivery of the Bailie, the grauntor may
have an action of trespass against him, Quare vi and armis 8. E. 3. 422.
.


Nomomathes. Suppose that a legacy of money 18. Division.
is devised to a man in regard of his wife, and the testator dies, whether may
the husband in this case demand the legacy without naming the wife?


Codicgn. By our Law the husband may demand 1. That by the Civil law the
husband may demand a legacy due to the wife without naming the wife.*
it, without naming the wife. L. Titio centum.. Titio genero. ff. de condit:
and demonst:



Anglonomoph. I see little reason but that the husband only may demand it in
his own name, he being the sole deuisee: and the thing devised being a
personal thing: but if it had been a real thing, and the wife had been
interested in it, then the law would be otherwise.


Nomoma. I pray you put me some cases touching this difference, that I may
better understand your meaning.


Anglonomoph. The writ of mesne because it 2. That in the Common law there is a
diversity as touching bring ing of actions in the wifes name where the matter
of the writ is real and where it is personal.
is in the realty ought always to suppose the husband and wife to be mesnes,
13. R. 2. Brief 642.
but in a writ of trespass it has been held a good declaration, if the
plaintiff allege that the defendant entered into his manor of Dale though he
have nothing in the manor but in right of his wife: for this is a a personal
wrong done unto the husband 4. E. 4: 31.
: and by Danbyes opinion the husband takes the profits of the land in his
own right, Ibid. per Danby.
so that it can not be law, which is said 21. R. 2. that an actio^ of trespass
for trees cut in the land of the wife must be brought as well in the wifes name
as in the husbands, 21. R. 2. Brief 933.
and the contrary is held for Law, 6. H. 4. and 47. E. 3. because as M.
Finchden says, well the husband only may release the damages when they are
recovered, 6. H. 4. 10. 47. E. 3. 9. per Finch.
neither may Husseyes opinion 7. H. 7. be admitted for Law where he says
that the writ may be brought in both their names 7. H. 7. 2. ^. Hussy.
, and in an actio^ of dett brought by the husband upon an obligation made to
him and to his wife the writ may be brought in the husbands name only 12.
R. 2. Br^e. 639.
, and so where a lease is made for years rendering rent by the husband and the
wife of the land of the wife, the action of debt must be brought in the name
of the husband only 7. E. 4. 5.
, howsoever 2. R. 2. be to the contrary that in a writ concerning a chattell
real they may join 2. R. 2. Brief. 37.
, but where the husband is seized of a Seignorie in the right of his wife, a
man may not make conusans as baily to the husband, but as baily to them both
12. R. 2. Auowrie 88.
, but that is because the conusans and auowrie in such case is en le droit 48.
E. 3. 8. ^ Finch.
: but as to such things which concern the person of the wife immediately, there
the writ must be brought in both their names, and therefore the husband cannot
sue a writ of appeal 3. That where the wrong does immediately concern the
person of the wife, the wise must of necessity be named.
for the rape of his wife without naming the wife 8. H. 4. 21. 1. H. 6. 1. 10.
H. 4. Br. Baron and fem. 34.
, and whereas they brought an action of battery for the beating of them both,
the writ was adjudged good for the battery of the wife, but not as to the
battery of the husband 9. E. 4. 54.
, and the husband and the wife shall both bring an action of trespass for the
taking away of the goods of the wife before the marriage 21. H. 6. 33.
: but in a writ of detinue of charters against husband and wife the
declaration was upon a trouer, and the writ was abated 13. R. ^. Brief. 644.
, but a writ of covenant was brought by the husband and the wife, because the
defendant leased unto them land for term of years by deed, and afterward
outed the^, and the writ was awarded to be good, for if the husband die, the
woman shall have the term 47. E. 3. 12.
, and in this case they were both parties to the covenant, and by the books of
6. E. 4. and 17. E. 4. an action of debt for the arrerages of a rent reserved
upon a lease for years made unto the husband and the wife shall be brought
against them both, and so shall a writ of waste: for the wife cannot waiue
the lease during the life of the husband 6. E. 4. 10. 17. E. 4. 7.
, and 8. Rich. 2. an action upon the statute of Laborers was brought against
husband and wife supposing that the wife had couenanted with the plaintiff to
be da^sell or waiting woman to his wife for a year, and that she departed out
of service within the year, and the writ was awarded to be good being brought
against them both 8. R. 2. Laborers 59.
.


Nomoma. No more of this matter, let me ask 19. Division.
you farther, If the testator do devise to one within age his maintenance to
be given and allowed him by his executor until he come to ripenes of age, how
shall these words (ripenes of age) be understood, whether of age of discretion,
or full age?


Codicgn. I think it shall be meant of his full age: 1. That by the Civil law
when maintenance is devised to one till the ripenes of age* is intended of full
age.
for that is the common intendme^t, and the authorities of our books do sway
to that point l. Mela. ff. de aliment. and ci^a. leg.
.


Anglono. In our law though there be but two ages for the heir male namely,
the age of 14. which is the age of discretion, and the full age 2. The
diversities of ages by the Common law.
which is the age of 21. years Littlet. lib. 2. c. 4. Sect. 8. and 9.
, yet the heir female has in our Law many ages, namely at 7. years to have
aid to be married, and 9. years to deserve dower, and 12. years to consent to
marriage, and 14. years to be out of ward: and 16. years for the lord to
tender unto her a marriage: and 21. years to make a feofme^t or a deed which
may bind her 35. H. 6. 4^.
, but by common intendment ripenes of age is fulness of age: and full age by
constitution of our law is the age of one and twenty.


Nomom. Then I know your opinion as touching 20. Division.
this question, now let me demand an other. If the testator do devise his
ma^sion house which he has in the parish of S. Andrew: and that has some
appurtenaunces lying in the parish of S. Giles, whether do these
appurtenances pass by the devise or no?


Codicgn. The appurtenances do pass, and we 1. That by the Civil law when a
mansion house that is in one parish is devised, the appurtenances in an other
parish do pass by the devise.
have good authority for it in our Law L. patronus.. Sempronio. ff. de legate.
3.
.


Anglonomoph. And me thinks the appurtenances being in an other parish do not
pass by this devise, for not to aid my self with ancient authority of law, it
has bin lately, fully, and upon ample discourse of this very point ruled,
that nothing shall be said to be appurtenant to a house, save only the
garden, the curtilage, and the close adjoining to the house, and no other
land, though other land have been occupied with 2. That by the Common law
land cannot be appurtenant to land.
the house 23. H. 8. Br. Feosm. 53.
, for land cannot belong to a house, because they be of several natures: for
the house is a place to inhabit, and land is a thing to be plowed, or sowed,
or improued, and so cannot properly be appurtenant to a house: no more then one
liberty may be appurtenant to an other liberty of several nature as a warren to
a leete, or a leete to a hundred 3. Mar: com. 168. Hills case. per Walpoole,
Rastall, and Morgan.
, and all the Justices but Cook who spoke not to this point in Patridges case
agreed that land cannot appertain to a house, and this Mountague said was a
ground in the law: but Hales there said, that a garden may contain 11. acres
in quantity and by such special mean be parcel of a house 6. and 7. E. 6.
Comm. 85. Partriges case.
, this is sufficient to prove that the appurtenances do not in this case
pass by the devise of the house, without the authority of 27. H. 6. where it
is consonantly avouched, that though a man may give an acre of land unto me by
the name of a carue, and a carue by the name of a Manor, yet by a deed of
feofment of a house, land cannot be co^ueied as parcel of the house 27. H. 6. 2.
.


Nomomath. Ye have removed all the doubts touching devises which perplexed my
mind: and we have bin long in conference of this title, now from real things
let us pass to personal, in which I pray ye continue your pains according
to your former diligence, and first ye are to speak of borowing and lending.


The eight Dialogue of Borowing and Lending.
NOmomath. I would know the perfect 1. Division.
difference by the Civil law betwixt Mutuum and Commodatum, I pray you
Codicgn. let me use your help herein.


Codicgn. They differ in our Law many ways.

1. That which we call Mutuum, does consist 1. The difference in the Civil
law betwixt mutuum and Commodatum.
only in things which are consumed by the very use, which consist in number,
weight, or measure, as corn, spices, salt, and such like: Co^modatum is that
which by using is not spent, and as it is not delivered by weight nor measure,
so neither is it restored by weight or measure, as books, apparel, and the
like. 2. In lending that which we call mutuum, the very property of the thing
leant does pass, L. 2.. appellata. ff. si cert. pet.
but we do still retain the property of that which we call Commodatum. L.
rei commodatae. cum l. seq: ff. commod.
3 That which we call Mutuum is leant for every use in general, as if the
lender should say unto him that boroweth, Vtare, fruare pro tuo arbitrio, sicut
dominus, L. in re ma^data. C. mandat:
but Co^modatum is leant for a certain, and prescript use, L. in co^modato..
sicut ff. commod.
and if any man do use it otherwise, he commits theft L. 5.. quin imo* ff.
eo. and. placuit. instit. de oblig. quae ex delicto nasc.
. 4. If the thing which we call Mutuum be made worse or perish, he to whom the
loan is made shall not sustain any damages: otherwise it is of Commodatum,
if through his fault, defaulte, couin, or negligence, the thing leant do
perish or become worse L. si vt certo. nunc viden. verse. quod vero l. cum, qui
in princ. l. ad eos, and l. argentum cum l. sin. ff. commod.
.


Nomomath. What persons may be bound by 2. Division.
borowing and lending?


Codicgnost. Every particular person every 1. That particular persons,
corporations and Churches parochial may be bound by contract of borowing and
lending by the Civil law.
church being parochial or conuentuall, In authent* hoc ius porrectum C. de
sacros. Eccles.
every university, comminaltie or corporation, L. ciuitas and ibi plene per
Ba^tolum. ff. si cert. pet.
yet with this restreint if the money be converted to the use of the City or
Church Innocent. in c. 1. Ext. de pos. and per Ferrar. in form: libell. de act.
hypoth. in glos. super verb. sub. ead* obligati.
.


Anglonomoph. Indeed thereto does our Law accord, for before the dissolution
of Abbeys and monasteries the successor of a Prior should have 2. That by the
Common law Abbots, Prior^ and such religious persons might charge the house by
their contract, and by recognisans.
been charged with an annuitie granted by his predecessor, pro consilio
impenso and impendendo without the covent where counsel was given in the
matters of the predecessor, and of the coue^t, for so it was a thing which came
to the use of the house which must needs charge the successor 38. H. 6. 22. 39.
H. 6. 21.
, and it was said by M. Littlet. 14. E. 4. that an Abbot or Prior by matter of
record as by recognisance, might charge the successor, though nothing
cou^teruailable did come to the use of the house, and he said that this has
been diverse times adjudged, and he said that the cause was for that the Covent
cannot be party to such record, but only the Abbot, otherwise it is of Deane
and Chapter, for the Chapter may be party to a matter of record 14. E. 4.
Abbe 4.
, and an Abbot might have been charged in a writ of debt upon a loan of
money made to his predecessor which came to the use of the house Fitzh. N. B.
121. K. 9. H. 6. 25. 22. H. 6. 64.
, and an Abbot should have been charged by a writ of debt for vitaile and
other things bought by his caterer, or manciple, or other officer deputed to
make purueyance for the Abbey in time of vacation Fitzh. N. B. 122. F. 25. E.
3. 48. 26. E. 3. 55. 4. E 2. Debt 168.
.


Nomomath. Codicgnost. how many kinds are 3. Division.
there of borrowing and lending?


Codicgnost. Two: one that is called natural, 1. Two kinds of borowing, and
lending by the Civil law natural and civil.
when the thing which is lent unto A. by B. is delivered unto him by B. or by
some other in the name of B. L. certi condictio in sin. l. singularia, and l.
proinde ff. si cert. pet. and not. per Bartol. in l. 2.. appellata eod. titu.
the other is called Civil which is only contracted by the confession and
acknowledgement of the party as when a man confesses by word of mouth or
writing, that he has had and borrowed so much of such a one L. 1. 2. and 3. C.
de no^ number: pecun: and Instit: de literat: oblig: inprinc.
.


Anglonomoph. From this diversity our Law 2. That the Common law
acknowledges this difference in substance and effect.
dissenteth not: for when a man lends to an other money, and paieth it into
his hands, or some other for him, which you term a natural lending, if this
be until a certain day, and the day be incurred, and the money not paid,
the creditor* may sue an action of debt against the dettor Fitzh. N. B. 119. G.
, and whereas you say that a man by confessing that he has borrowed so much
money of such a man may make himself a dettor, it is true and agreeable to our
Law, for when a man makes such a bill, namely this bill does witness that I.
A. have borrowed so much money of C. without saying more, this shall charge the
executor as well as an obligation: and the testator could not have waged his law
against this bill: or if it be Memorandum quod I. S. debet A. B. 10. li. or
that I. S. acknowledges that he does owe to A. B. 10. li. and this be by
writing, and be delivered as the deed of the party, this is a good oblig': for
these words recepisse or debere: or teneri ad soluendum 20. li. or where a man
recites, that whereas he borrowed of I. S. 20. li. he has paid unto him 15.
li. so that 5. li. remains to be paid, this is a good obligation, and shall
bind the executor: for every word which proves a man to be a dettor, or to
have a strangers money in his hands, though it be by bill, yet it shall charge
the exec': As if a bil be made which witnesses, that I have found 20. li.
belonging to I. S. without other words, I shall be charged, and shall be
outed of my Law 28. H. 8. 20. Cores C. per Fitzia: and Mou^tag.
.


Nomomath. Let me know now whether usury, 4 Division.
or lending for interest, be prohibited by your Laws yea or no? and me thinks
(to speak by way of objection) that it should not, for first it seems not
repugnant to the law of nature or to 1. An vsurous lending or lending of money
for interest, is by way of objection maintained.
natural reason, because reason enforces and nature moves us to this, that
we should do well to them that have done well to us, otherwise we might
incur the sault of ingratitude, which dries up the very fountain of
liberality, and besides by the Law of nature it is lawful for every one to
lend of his own as he list, and to receive for his own as it pleases him:
and it seems to be permitted by the Law of God when it is said: Ego veniens
cum vsuris exegissem illud, Luc: 19.
and so it is appointed in Deuteronom. Faeneraberis gentibus multis, Deuter. 29.
And hereto agrees the opinion of Aquinas, who writing upon Ecclesiast. 2.
Aquinas his authority is vrg^d for proof h^reof.
says thus: Faenerare proximo tuo in tempore necessitatis illius: And again:
Read proximo tuo in tempore suo. Multi quasi inuentionem aestimauerunt faenus
and praestiterunt molestiam suis qui se adiuuerunt. Donec accipiat osculatur
dantis manum, and in promissionibus humiliat vocem suam, and in tempore
redditionis postulabit tempus, and loquetur verba taedij and murmurationum, and
tempus causabitur Aquin. in Ecclesiast c. 29.
: And surely me thinks it is a point of brotherly love to lend unto a needy
brother a competent sum of money, so much as will serve him for a reasonable
surplusage of increase.


Cononol. Usury may well be called the devils 3 The objection is answered by
the Comonist.
charity: for as the devil cannot do any good howsoever he would seem to
do it, because it is against his nature to do any good thing: so his charity
howoseuer it may seem to do good, yet in truth cannot perform any good
thing, because the nature of it is opposite to all goodness being by Cato
resembled to murder, by the Canon law to theft: Ca: si quis vsuram: l. 4. q. 4.
yet it makes some show to do good, but so as if a man were troubled with a
burning ague, and greatly inflamed in his body, should in the extremity of
his heat ask a cup of single bear of one that stands by, and he
reaches it unto him this cools the heat for a time, and the sick man
thanketh him for it, but when the disease does reuerte upon him and his fittes
grow worse then they were before, and he perceives that the drink which he
drunk has two much inflamed him, then he begins to complain of the
hurtful courtesy and pity of the other man: so when the usurer lends money
at the first he that boroweth it thanketh him, and thinks himself deeply
beholden to him, but in the end when he finds that his goods decrease and
his debts increase by the usurers kindness, when not only pot and pan, but
even garments and jewels must be either gaged or sold to satisfy the usurer,
and when they perceive the Be that had a flower in her mouth to have a stinge
in her tail, then (that is to say) too late they find that under this bait
lies a hook, under this charity cruelty. And as to Aquinas his opinion of
this matter quis tumidum guttur miretur in 4 Aquinas his authority disproued.
Alpibus? and who will wonder if Aquinas patronize an error in divinity? yet
he defends it straungely for he holds in the very same place, that it is
prohibted by the Law of God, and yet that it maybe tolerated in a politik
respect, is not this Theomachein? is not this to permit unto flesh and blood,
which the spirit of God has forbidden, but to answer you more particularly:
First usury is against the law of nature, because it is against the Law of
nature that money should engender money, and against the Law of God, in which
it is said: Si pecuniam mutuo dederis pupillo meo pauperi, non vrgebis eum
quasi exactor nec vsuris opprimes, Exodus 22.
and again mutuum date, nihil inde sperantes, and by our law it is flatly
forbidden. 14. quest: 4. ca. 1. cum sequent: and in Clem. 1. de vsur.



Codicgn. So it seems by our Law which in 5 The Civil law in condempning
usury agrees with the Canon Law.
this professes it self to imitate the Canon law for the Emperor says of
this matter, leges non dedignantur Authent: de Ecclesiast: tit:
imitari sacros Canones, and he commands the four general Counsels to be
observed, wherein usury is forbidden. l. 1. C. de sum: trin: and sid: Catholic.



Nomomat. But Anglonomoph. I think your law does wink at usury if it take
but after the rate of x. li. in the hundred.


Anglonomoph. It winketh at it as he that shoots 6 The common law in this
agrees with both other Laws.
in a Caleeuer at birds, who winketh with one eye and wounds with the other,
so our law sees not when the usurer lets forth his money to interest, but
when an information is exhibited against him then it sees the fact, condemns
the fault, and punishes the offendour: and though he take but after the rate
of 10. li. in the hundred, yet he shall forfaite the full value of the
interest, and worthily truly does the statute note usury with terms of
disgrace censuring it to be vice, increasing by corrupt shifts, to the
importable hurt of the common wealth. 13. Eliz. Ca. 8. Usury 8.



Nomomath. Ye have in this point satisfied me 5. Division.
now, I will* further proceed in questioning, Suppose that a man lend money to
an other, and the other would repay it in some kind of coin is debased,
whether is the lender bound to take it?


Codicgn. The change of money may happen two ways, for either it may be
changed in respect of the matter, whereof it is made, as if in stead of silver,
brasse-coine be used, or in stead of gold, silver: for the ancient Germans,
as Tacitus reports, had silver in greater price then gold, Tacit: de moribus
Germanor:
and in Pisana silver money is of more account then gold, because the people
of that country do pay many tributes and taxes to the Pope, whose collectors
and officers will not take any payment in gold, in Sparta yron-money was only
in use, Polyb. lib. 6. Plutarch. in Lych.
or else it may be changed in the value, as if a Floren, which was worth 4. li.
to be debased to 3. li. for in the value of money, neither the matter nor form
is respected, but the determination 1 A diversity in the Civil law when money
is tendered at the day of payment* and is after embased, and when it is
tendered after.
of the Prince, wherefore Aristotle said well, that money is not ce^sured by
nature but by law, and is of such value, as the law published of it does
determine, Aristot: lib. 5. Ethic.
which Galen likewise shows, Galen lib. 2. de pulls. diff.
in both these cases if the debasement were before the day of paime^t the
debtor may pay the det in the coin embased, Argum: l. vinum, and l. quod te:
ff. si cert. pet.
but if it were after the day of payement then the law is otherwise, because he
paid it not in due time. arg. dictae. l. quod te, and l. vinum.
2 To the aforesaid diversity the common law seems to agree, 6. Division.



Anglonomoph. To that reason our law seems likewise to incline. 7. E. 6. 82.
Dyer.



Nomom. If a man borowe money of one, and procure one to become suertie for the
repayement, whether is he that boroweth the money discharged of the payment, or
else charged as principal?


Codicgn. Though the surety in our Law be 1 That by the bond of the suertie
the principal debtor is not discharged by the civil law.
termed Fideiussor, because alienam obligationem in suam suscepit fidem, yet
the principal debtor remains still obliged: Hostiens. in sum: de mutu: and
co^mod: and l. 1. C. de Constable. pecun.
and by intendement of Law the surety (as he is a surety) is therefore
bound, because the principal debtor is bound. Ferrar. in form: lib: cont: plur:



Anglonomoph. To that the Common Law agrees, 2 That by the common law as well
the one as the other may be sued.
and that an action may be maintained as well against the one as the other. 44.
E. 3. 21. per Monbr^.



The ninth Dialogue of the bailement or delivery of goods and Chattelles.
NOmomat. It remains now by the order of your conference, that you should
speak of the baylement and delivery of goods and chattels, in which I would
have you to be very brief, because I had rather be resolved in other matters
belonging to the next title, whereof year to treat, wherein I shall stand in
need of more instructions* but because some doubts touching the aforesaid
title do trouble me, ye shall give me leave to move unto ye some two or three
questions thereupon, what is that Codicgn. which in the Civil law ye do
properly call depositum? for I do imagine that the true 1. Division.
knowledge thereof will ease my mind of many doubts.


Codicgn. Depositum, is that which is committed 1 The definition of depositum
by the civil law.
to the credit and faithfulness of a man, to keep safely to the use of him
that delivers it, to the end that it may be restored, when he shall call for
it, l. 1. ff. depos. vbi doct', and in l. quod ^eruus eod: and dict: l. 1.. est
autem: and. penult. and l. Lucius eod: l. lic^t in sin: eod:
and in the one is the property, in the other the trust.


Angonomoph. To this our Law accords, for 2 The nature and course of it at
the common law.
if a man deliver goods and chattels to one to keep and he will deliver them,
he that delivered them may have a writ of Detinue against the other for these
goods and chattels, and so if a man deliver goods or money to an other in a
bag ensealed, Fitz. na. br. 138. A.
or not ensealed, 18. H. 6. 20.
or in a chest, or coffer, to deliver to an other and he to whom they are
delivered will not deliver them over accordingly, he to whom they should be
delivered, may have a writ of Detinue, but if a man deliver money to one being
not in a bag or coffer, to redeliuer to him, or to deliver over to a
stranger, in such case, neither he that delivers, nor he to whom the money,
or goods are to be delivered, shall have a writ of Detinue for the money,
but a writ of Account, because a writ of Detinue ought to be of a thing
certain, as of money in a 3 A diuersiti^ where a writ of Account, of Detinue,
and of Trespass are to be brought concerning things delivered at the common law.
bag, or of a horse, or twenty kyne, or such things in certain, Fitz na.
br. 138. A. 7. H. 4. 13. 13. E. 3. Detin: 53. 6. E. 4. 11. 36. H. 6. 9. per
Wa^gef. and Billing. 5 Ma: 152. Die. 39. E. 3. 30. 46. E. 3. 16.
and if the bailie open the bagg, in which money is delivered, the party to
whom the money belongs may have a writ of Trespass, or Detinue at his pleasure,
21. E. 4. 36.
or if he do burn or consume the things delivered unto him, 33. H. 6. 26. per
Litt' 20. H. 6. 17.
So where a deed is delivered to one to deliver over upon a condition to be
performed to a stranger, and he delivers it without mencioning the
condition, a writ of Detinue will lie against the first Bailie, and no other
remedy may be had, 9. H. 6. 37. per Curiam.
and where I deliver goods, and a stranger takes them out of the possession
of the Bailie, I may have a writ of Detinue against the stranger, or against
my Bailie, 20. E. 4. 11.
for my Bailie is chargable into whose hands soever the goods do come: but if
he deliver them over to an other, that baily is not chargeable to me, but only
for the possession. 12. E. 4. 12.



Nomomat. Suppose that a man enfeoffeth me 2. Division.
of certain lands with warrantie, who reteigneth all the deeds and evidences
concerning the lands in his own possession, whether may these deeds after
livery made to me of the lands be said to be my depositum in his hands as a
thing which I have left in his hands, and whether will a writ of Detinue lie
for them at the common law?


Codicgn. They cannot be said to be deposita in 1 That a thing cannot be said
to be a depositum at the civil law, except it be delivered to the party.
his hands, because a thing cannot be said to be depositu^, except it be
delivered to the party, l. 1. ff. de pos. and ibi Doct'.
and if these writings, which you speak of, do belong to the feoffor, as I
think they do, then they cannot be said to be deposita: for we have a rule
in our law, that res propriae frustra deponuntur apud dominum cum ex deposito
non obligetur, and it is contra l) quirem: eod:
bona^ fidem that the owner should redeliuer his goods in which he has a
property to an other man. l. bona fides ff: depos. in s^:



Anglonomoph. It is good to be considered to 2 That by the common law the
feoffee of the land is to have the charters when the feoffement is without
warrantie: otherwise it is, when it is with warrantie.
whom these charters or deeds above mentioned do belong. The authority is
very pregnant, that if a man make a feoffement of his land to an other by
deed, the feoffee shall have the charters concerning the land, though the
feoffor do not expressly give them to the feoffee. 18. E. 4. 14. 9. E. 4. 53.
39. E. 3. 22. 7. H. 4. 7. 34. H. 6. 1.
And if a man make a lease for term of years, and after confirm the estate
of the lessee in fee, and he to whom the confirmation was made dies, now his
heir shall have as well the deed of the lease for term of years, as well as
the deed of confirmation, because that deed makes the confirmation good, 9. E.
4. 53. Fitz. not. br. 138. K.
and so where a gift is made to one for life, the remainder to an other in
tail, if the donor release all his right to the tenant for life, he in the
remainder cannot have a writ of Detinue for this release after the death of
the tenant for term of life: 9. H. 6. 54.
But in the case which you have proposed, because the feoffement is with
warrantie, so that the feoffour is bound to warrantie, now the feoffee shall
not have the charters concerning the land, for so the feoffour might sail of
the maintenance of his warrantie, and so if a man be enfeoffed with warrantie
and after enfeoffeth an other with warrantie, the heir of the feoffour may
have a writ of Detinue against a stranger in whose possession are any deeds
or charters concerning the land, because he may have advantage of this
warrantie, Fitz. na. br. ibid' L.
but let the feoffement or gift be made without warrantie, it is clear that
the donee or feoffee may claim the charters concerning the inheritance de
iure, and therefore if a gift of land be made to A. in tail the remainder to
B. in fee, and after A. dies without issue, B. shall have the deed, 3. H. 7.
15.
so if lands be given to two, and the heirs of one of them by deed, now if
the tenant for life die he that has the fee simple shall have a writ of
Detinue for the deed, Fitz. not. br. 138. F.
for the deed runs with the land and is of the nature of the inheritance,
and therefore a repleuin lies not for such charters, 4. H. 7. 10.
and it is said by Newton 22. H. 6. that he in the remainder in tail shall
not have a writ of Detinue against the tenant for term of life, if he have
the deed specifying the remainder, yet he cannot have a Formed on in the
remainder, nor an action of Waste without showing the deed. 22. H. 6. 1. p*
Newt.



Nomomath. Whether ought he to whom the 3. Division.
goods be delivered make them good if they be stolen and embeasilde from him or
by some other mischance do perish?


Codicgn. He is not to be charged if the goods 1 That the bailie is not to be
charged with the loss of the goods which happens merely by casualty.
be lost by any casualtie, but only in such case where there is default,
deceit, and couin, or apparent negligence in him. l. quod Nerua: and Iaco:
But: in l. in re mandata C. Mandati, and Iustit. quib: mod: re: contra oblig:.
penult.



Anglonomoph. If a man deliver to me his goods to keep, and I put them
amongst mine own, and they be embesiled, I shall not be charged for the goods,
29. Ass. pl. 28
and if a man be bound to bring me a sum of money and he is robbed of it by
the way, he shall be by Law excused, 40. E. 3. 6.
But 9. E. 4. he shall not be excused, unless he undertake to keep it, and to
bring it as he will his own goods, and then he may plead this in discharge of
account before auditors, but not in bar of Account, so that it appears by
this Book, that if he undertake generally to bring the goods, he must bring
them at his peril. But 3. H. 7. is that if a) 9. E. 4. 40.
the Baily be robbed of the goods, he shall not be further charged, but if the
goods be taken away by a trespassor, whom the Baily does know, he shall be
charged over to his Bailor, because he may have an action against the
trespassor. 3. H. 7. 4.
But 20. E. 4. it is said that if I. S. deliver goods to one to keep, and a
stranger takes them out of his possession, I. S. may have an action against
him or against his Bailie, 20. E. 4. 11.
but in that case if the goods be stolen from the Bailie, in the endictment of
the felon the words must be bona I. S. in custodia talis. 7. E. 4. 14. Lamb.
Eirenar. 494. and 495.



The tenth Dialogue of the form of ordinary proceeding in matters of Law.
NOmomat. It remains Codicgn. that 1. Division.
ye should now speak of the form and manner of ordinary proceeding in matters
of Law, which because it depends wholly upon the practice and custom of
Courts, in which I have employed no great travail, nor observance, I must
therefore request you to stretche your sinews in this regard, and not only
to argue, but open things unto me, and be not angry with me, if in the
handeling of these matters I bring ye from the hill, that is your high and
intricate points, to the valley or plain, that is to matters more plain and
easy, and again from the valley to the hill, when I find in my self
strength of understanding to ascend. First I pray you show unto me what is
to be done at the commencement or beginning of a suit or action.


Codicgn. Because in every controversy of law, 1 The things which are to be
observed of the plaintiff at the beginning of a suit by the Civil law.
there must be a plaintiff and a defendant, it is not amiss nor impertinent to
mention such things as ought to be observed and regarded of the plaintiff,
when he draws any man into suit: and they are three in number, the one
concerning profit, the other necessity, and the third vrbanitie. It is a point
of profit or wariness for the plaintiff before he commence suit against any,
to be well advised and assured whether himself be a lawful person to stand
in judgment, and to demand that which he brings into question, l. 1. C.
qui legit: person: standi in iud: hab:
he ought likewise to be sure that he have a good cause of controversy, or else
in some cases he must be adjudged to pay the costs to the defendant: in other
some he must bear the loss of the charges of the suit, l. eum quem temere ff.
de iudicijs.
likewise he ought to beware, least he draw the defendant before an incompetent
Judge. 2. It is a point of necessity that the party whom the plaintiff sueth,
be cited, or summoned before: for against the party not summoned, nor heard,
nothing can be determined, l. de vnoquo. que ff. de re: iud: etc. 1. exc. de
cause. poss. and proprietat:
Citation (as we say) is parcel or the 2 Citation is proved to be of the
substance of the proceeding, contrary to the opinion of some ciuilians.
Law of nature, Clem: pastoralis de re iud:
therefore of necessity the party defendant must be summoned, because in
every action the judgment has a retrospect to the original, and to the
summons, and as we say in plain terms to that part of the action which is de
in ius vocando: Ext. de procurat: C. in nostra in sin: and l. prolatam C. de
sent: and interloq: om: iud.
otherwise the judgment is erroneous, Iusti: de offic: iud: in princ: and in.
omnem in authen: delitigios. Gloss. in cap prudentia.. 1. de offic: de leg:
because Citation is of the substance of the proceeding, for that is the
beginning of the suit, howsoever some hold opinion that the suit is not begun
ante litis contestationem, d. authen: de litigios. si vero a preside. l.
apertisaimi. C. de Iudic:
before the appearance of the party def. and the libel exhibited in Court, and
notice taken thereof by the def. by by some responsory act, because (say they)
post litis contestatione^ non potest forum declinari, ff. de iudic: l. 1. and
2. and C. de litis Contest.
the jurisdiction cannot be avoided after the appara^ce and the exhibiting of
the libel, and any kind of answer applied, but others hold in my opinion more
agreeable to the truth, that it is one of the fundamental beginnings of the
suit, and one of the essential and formal parts of the judgment, because the
omitting of it does frustrate the judgment. l. de vno quoque ff. de re: iud:
and in c. 1. de cause. poss. and proprietat: extra
3. The other point is a matter of civility, or courtesy, because humanity
does require that before any man do contend in suite, and do prepare and
address himself ad experiendum summum ius, that he friendly and mildely do
admonish him, with whom he is to deal, of his duty, that if by fair means
he may be won, the rigor of Law may not be exercised. l. quid vberius ff. de
seruitut: urban. praed: and l. debitores C. de pign:



Anglonomoph. These cautels which your Law 3 The cautch to be observed at the
common law in the co^mencement of an action.
prescribes to such as enter into suit, are not utterly rejected of our law,
for as to the 2. first which concern profit and necessity, our law does
rigorously exact them: as to the other it is not against it, for it does not
forbid, nor hinder any man to be curteouse to an other, but it being a science
rather politic then moral, does more respect the Justice of causes, then the
courteous gestures of men, our law does urge men to deal well and honestly, and
if they do otherwise it does punish the^, but curtesy is a free, spontaneal and
ingenious quality, to which no inforcement may be used, but I will first examine
by your patience, how farreforth our law regards the ability of the person,
which is to impleade an other, and then by course will examine all the parts
of your precedent speech, inquiring by our books how they may sort, and be
suitable to our law. First it has been received of us as a current rule from
all antiquity, that the desendant may 4 Disableme^ts in the person of the
plaintiff at the common Law.
plead outlawrie in disablement of the plaintiff, but if he do imparle now he
cannot plead outlawrie to the disablement of his person, but yet he may well
plead it in bar of the action, 32. H. 6. 32. 35. H. 6. 36.
so in a writ brought by one as son and heir to I. S. after imparlance the
tenant cannot plead to the writ that he is bastard, or that he is not
heir, but he may very well plead it in bar of the action, 22. E. 4. 35.
and so outlawrie is a good plea in bar of an action of debt: for by the
outlawrie of the plaintiff, the debt if it grow by especialtie is vested in
the Queen, otherwise it is of an action of debt upon a contract: 16. E. 4. 4.
for in that case the debtor might wage his law against the debtee who is
outlawed, and as it seems by 10. Hen. 7. the outlawrie goes rather in bar
of the action, then to the writ, for there it is said, that where a man
cannot plead to the writ, but by showing of a matter in bar, there he may
show it and conclude to the writ: for in an action of debt a man may plead
outlawrie in the plaintiff, and conclude to the person, and yet the matter
goes in bar, and he may plead it also in bar, 10. H. 7. 11.
and conclude to the action, and after that a voucher is counterpleaded, and
the tenant put to an other answer, he may notwithstanding plead that the
demaundant is outlawed, 21. E. 4. 64.
but after voucher the tenant may not plead to the form of the writ, 5. E.
3. 223.
and 32. Hen. 6. is very plain, that where a man pleads that the plaintiff
is an alien borne, or a villain, or an outlawed person it is left to his
choice, whether he will conclude these special matters to the writ or to the
action, 32. H. 6. 27.
and though the defendant have made an attorney in a repleuin, yet he may
afterward allege that the plaintiff is his villain, 29. E. 3. 24.
So 21. R. 2. in Assise brought by the husband and wife against diverse
persons, the tenantes said that the wife of the plaintiff was entered into
religion in the house of B. and there was a Nun professed, and demanded
judgment if she should be answered, and the Assise was adiorned into the
common place, and a writ was sent to the Bishop to certify, who certified
that she was professed, wherefore the defendants prayed that the husband and
wife might be barred forever, and it was held by the whole Court, that
for so much as the pea did stretche only to disable the wife of the plaintiff,
and if the husband and wife had purchase jointly, that the baron should
notwithstanding the disablement have an Assise of the whole, but otherwise it
is if the husband and wife bring an Assise, and a feoffement or release of the
husband or the wife or of some auncestour of one of them be pleaded in bar,
both of them shall be barred, therefore in this case it was held that the
judgment ought not to be that the husband should be barred, but by the advice
of the whole Court it was awarded that the husband and the wife nihil capiant
per breue suum, sed essent in misericordia. 21. R. 2. Judgem^t 263.
and in the third year of Henry the sixth it was held a good plea to say that
the demandant was an alien borne in Portugal, which is out of the Kings
legeance with conclusion, sil serra respondu. 3. H. 6. 11.
and therefore Master Theloall in his Digest of writtes well observes, that an
exception taken to a writ propter defectum nationis, vel potius defectum
subiectionis, vel ligeantiae is peremptory, and that the action can not be
revived by peace, or league subsequent, and that the King may grant license to
aliens to impleade, and likewise that such aliens as come into the Realm by
the Kings license and safe conduite may use personal actions by writ,
though they be not made denizens, and that denizens lawfully made by the
Kings grant, and such aliens borne which are within the express words of
the statute of 25. of Edward the third, may use actions real by originalll
writ, Thelo: Digest de briefes lib. 1. ca. 6.
And where a man is excommunicated, and he sueth an action real or personal,
the tenant or defendant may plead that the plaintiff is excommunicated, and
hereof he ought to show the Bishops letters under his seal testifying the
excommunication, and then he may demand judgment whether he ought to be
answered, Litt' lib. 2. ca. 11. sect' 42.
but if the demaundant or plaintiff cannot deny this, the writ shall not abate,
but the judgment shall be that the tenant or def. shall go quite without day:
because when the demanda^t, or plaintiff has purchased letters of absolution,
and they are showed forth to the Court, he may have a resummons or
reattachement upon his original according to the nature of his writ, Litt'
ibid.
and whereas you say, that it behooves the plaintiff to be sure that he have a
good cause of action least he pay the costs, that now by statute is made
common Law, for by the statute of 23. H. 5 The statute of 23. H. 8. of giving
damages to the defendant is compared with the rule of the civil Law.
8. it is enacted that if any person or persons, commence or sue in any Court
of Record, or elsewhere, in any other Court, any action, bille, or plaint of
trespass upon the statute of King Richard the second, made in the fifthe
year of his reign for Entries into lands or tenements where no entry is
given by the Law, or any action, bill, or plaint of debt or covenant upon any
especialtie made to the plaintiff or plaintifes, or upon any contract supposed
to be made between the plaintiff or plaintifes, and any person or persons, or
any action, bill, or plaint of detinue of any goods or chattels where the
plaintiff or plaintifes shall suppose that the property belongs to them or
any of them, or any action, bill, or plaint of Account, in the which the
plaintiff or plaintifes suppose the defendant or defendants to be their
Bailife, or Bailifes, receiver or receivers of their Manor, mease, money or
goods to yield account, or any action, bill, or plaint upon the case, or upon
any statute for any offense or wrong personal, immediately supposed to be done
to the plaintiff or plaintifs, and the plaintiff or plaintifes in any such kind
of action, bill or plaint after appearance of the defendant or defendants be
nonsuted, or that any verdict happen to pass by lawful trial against the
plaintiff or plaintifes in any such action, bill, or plaint: that then the
defendant or defendants in every such action, bill or plaint, shall have
judgment to recover his costs against every such plaintiff or plaintifes 23.
H. 8. c. 15. Rast. Damages 6.
. Likewise whereas as you say, that the party plaintiff ought to be wary,
least he 6. Suite must not be maintained before an incompetent judge according
to the common law.
cause the defendant to appear before an inco^petent judge, that agrees
fully with the common law, for if a man do swear unto me that he will
enfeoffe me of such land before such a day, if he do not enfeoffe me, I may
not sue him in the Ecclesiastical Court Pro laesione fidei, because the act
which is to be done, is a temporal act and ought to be tried by the Common
law, and therefore if the party be sued in the Ecclesiastical Court for it,
he may have a prohibition Fitzh. N. B. 43. D.
, so if a man devise to one lands or tenements deuiseable, the deuisee may not
sue for these lands in the ecclesiastical Court, but if he make a devise of
goods or chattels real as of an estate for term of years, or of a ward,
for such he may 7. The several jurisdiction of diverse courts is described.
sue in that Court Fitz. 161. F.
, and if a trespass be done upon the gleabe of a beneficed person, this must
be tried at the Common law 19. H. 6. 20.
, but if the termor of certain land do devise his croppe and die, the
spiritual Court shall hold plea for this crop 8. H. 3. Prohibit. 19.
, but if a man sue in the spiritual Court for a rent reserved upon a lease for
tithes or offerings, a prohibition lies, for this is a lay rent 44. E. 3. 32.
, and a man may sue a prohibition directed to the Sheriff, that the Sheriff
shall not permit, nor suffer the Queens lay people and subjects to come to any
place at the citation of Bishops ad faciendu^ aliquas recognitiones vel
sacramentu^ praestandu^ nisi in causis matrimonialibus and testame^tarijs
Fitzh. N. B. 41. A.
, but if a testament bear date at Cane in Normandy, yet it may be proved in
England, and the executors may thereupon have an action 18. E. 2. Testam. 6.
, and a testament showed under the seal of the Ordinaire is not trauersable
36. H. 6. 31. Pa^k. tit. Testam.
: furthermore, if one which is of the Queens household sue an other, which is
not of her Majesty's household in the court of Marshalsie, the defenda^t may
plead to the jurisdiction of the Court, and if the Court will not allow this
exception, he may have a writ of Error, and the judgment given in the
Marshalsie may be reuersed in the Kings bench 18. E. 4. 22. 19. E. 4. 2. 4. 7.
in Scir. fa. inter Prior. de Merton. and Prior. de Bingh. per Littlet.
, and if one of the Queens household sue an other of the same household, and the
plaintiff is put out of service depending the plea, the other may show this
and abate the writ, but otherwise it is if the defendant be put out of
service Lib. de diverse. des Courts fol. 102. b.
, and if a man be impleaded in the Common place for lands within the cinque
ports, the tenant may show to the Court that the land is within the Cinque
ports, and by this plea the Court shall be outed of jurisdiction, but if the
tenant do plead a plea in bar, which is found against him, so that the
demaundant has judgment to recover the land, this judgment shall bind the
tenant forever Lib. de diverse. des courts 107.
, and so it is of lands in ancient demesne, if a writ be brought for them
in the Common place, if the tenant appear and plead in bar and take no
exception to the jurisdiction, and the plea is found against him, so that the
demaundant recouereth, the tenant shall not reuerse this by a writ of Error,
because he might have taken in time, exception to the jurisdiction of the
Court, and that should have been allowed Ibidem.
, but the lord may reuerse this judgment by a writ of disceite, and make the
land ancient demesne as it was before Ibid. and 16. E. 2. Continual Claim
10. 11. H. 4. 86. 7. H. 4. 44. 8. H. 4. 24. 17. E. 3. 41. 26. E. 3. 33.
: now I come to the citation ^. That the summons of the party defendant is
necessarily exacted by the common law.
or summons of the party defendaunt, which you have proved to be necessary
by the Civil law, and I will likewise prove that it is by the Common law
necessarily exacted: In a writ of Trespass the Sheriff returned Non est
inuentus, wherefore a Capias issued that the defendaunt might be taken, who
afterward came into the Court, and said that he was sufficient, and might
have been summoned, and prayed a writ to make the Sheriff to come to
answer to the King, and to the party for his false return, and he had it
31. E. 3. Process 55.
, and in an attachment upon a prohibition, the Sheriff returned Non est
inuentus, the plaintiff prayed a Capias to an other Sheriff in an other
County, but the Clerks said that he ought not to have any other process then
an attachment in the other County, because it may be that he has assets in
the other County 13. E. 3. Process 34.
, (by which he may be summoned) and so 11. H. 4. it is said that in an action
of debt or trespass, a Capias will not lie against an Earl, or any of like
estate, because it is to be intended that they have assets whereby they may
be summoned, and brought to their answer 11. H. 4. 15. per Hals.
, and in a writ against P. and T. and A. the wife of T. by diverse praecipes:
in the summons A. was omitted, wherefore the writ abated 2. E. 3. 39. 8. E.
3. 44. 10. E. 3. 532. 27. H. 6: 6
, likewise in a writ of dower by several praecipes, the name of one of the
tenants was omitted in the clause inde queritur and in the summons, whereupon
the writ was abated 12. E. 3. Brief. 671.
, furthermore if a man recover in a writ of waste by the default of the
defendant, where he was not summoned, he may have a 9. That by the default of
lawful summons the proceeding of the plaintiff is frustrated by the Common law.
writ of disceit 19. E. 3. Disceit 3. 20. E. 3. Disceit 5. 29. E. 3. 54. 48. E.
3. 19. 19. E. 2. Disceit 56. 17. E. 3. 58. Fitzh. N. B. 98. b. 105. a.
, and in this writ of disceit (if there wear two summoners returned upon the
writ, in which the summons failed) if the Sheriff do return one of the
summoners dead, yet the other summoner shall be examined: and if it be found
that he did not summon the party, he shall be restored to his land 8. E. 3.
Disceit 7. 1. E. 2. Disceit 48.
, but if the summons be returned to be made by four men, whereas in truth they
did not execute the summons of the writ, as long as two of them live, the
tenant who lost in the writ may have a writ of disceit Fitzh. N. B. 98. D.
, but if three of the^ die, a writ of disceit may not be brought 35. H. 6. 46.
, but an action upon the case 1. H. 6. 1.
, and in a Praecipe quod reddat against the husband and the wife, if at the
grand Cape the husband appear in person, and the wife appears by Attorney,
who has a warrant of Attorney which is not sufficient, and therefore judgment
is given upon the wifes default against the husband and wife, yet they may have
a writ of disceit if they were not summoned 18. E. 2. Disceit. 54. and 55.
Fitzh. N. B. 99. B.
, and how necessary a summons is, may appear very plainly by the book of 7.
H. 6. where in a Formedon they were at issue, and the tenant at the Nisi prius
made default, and the demandant showed how he was in prison in the ward of
the Marshall, and prayed that they would send for him to appear, otherwise
he would save his default afterward by imprisonment, wherefore the Court sent
for him and he came 7. H. 6. 38.
.


Nomomath. Ye have spent a great deal of 2. Division.
time in treating of the commencement or beginning of a suit or action: yet I
desire to have some further knowledge of the nature of a citation or summons,
therefore resolve me, when a man is summoned to appear within two or three
days after such a return, whether shall the second or third day be accounted
in the citation, so that then he that is cited may well enough appear, when as
in the one case one day is past, so that he does not appear within the two
days appearing first in the morning of the second day: in the other case two
days be past, so that he appearing the third day does not appear within the
three days so that if he will save his default, me thinks he should appear
the first day of al.


Codicgn. This question is easily resolved, for if 1. That by the Civil law if
a man be bound to appear within ten days the tenth day is taken inclusiue.
he appear within the two days or three days, it is clearly sufficient
because the last day that is put in the citation, does implie that he may
differ his appearaunce unto the last day ff. de verb. oblig. l. qui ante
Calendas and l. eum qui ita ff. eod.
, and though an appeal be to be brought within 10. days after the judgment,
yet the last day is taken inclusiue, and not exclusive ff. de success. edict:
l. 1.. dicimus.
: and if time be given to one either by the party or by Law, that he may pay
so much money within, or do or propound anything de iure suo within 10. days,
or from hence until 10. days, he may pay, do or propound the 10. day
without any prejudice or surcease of time Instit. de verb. oblig.. si in diem.
.


Anglonomo. If a man be bound to pay money in festo sanctae Trinitatis, if he
tender the money in the vigil of the feast, it is not good, nor in the octaues,
but the tender must be made the very day of the feast, but if the paime^t had
bin limited on this side the feast, or before the feast, then it may well be
made in the vigill of the feast 21. E. 4. 52.
, and these words ab octabis sanctae Trinitatis must be intended a 4. die
octabis Trinitatis: and thereupon M. Brook notes, that to this intent the
first day and the 2. That the first day and the fourth day of appearance are
all one at the Common law.
fourth day and all the days mean are but one day in law 21. E: 4. 43. Br.
Iour and iours en court 57.
, and therefore if after the day of the return of the writ of Capias, and
before the fourth day which is full term, the Sheriff does arrest a man this
arrest is not justifiable, because the first day and the fourth day be all one
day 33. H. 6. 42.
.


Nomom. I would not have you to insist longer 3. Division.
upon this matter, but now show unto me how causes are opened, declared and
disclosed in your Courts, and how faults and wrongs are manifested to the
judges.


Anglonomoph. Al wro^gs and offenses are either 1. A diversity of opening and
prosecuting of private and public offenses at the Common law.
private, or public, private offenses, which are done by one man to the hurt
of an other, are made known to the Court, and remedied by original writ,
bil or plaint: public offenses, which are committed by the party against the
Queen and Commonweal, are opened and punished by way of enditement and
information, which is put in practice by common informers.


Nomom. The manner of such informing seems 2. Exception is taken to
informations used by common informers.
to me to be a very hard course of Justice: for by that mean lewd persons
are animated to terrify and impeach poor simple men, and to bring them into
danger? for what mischief will they not do, when a reward is proposed unto
them?


Codicg. It is true and our law does generally disallow such proceeding, and
therefore the name of a delator or informer is in our law accounted dishonest L.
3. C. de Iniur.
: and therefore it says expressly. Delatores 3. Many objections are made out of
the Civil law against common informers.
inimici generis humani, maximu^ humanae vitae malu^, and execranda pernities
De Delatoribus C. lib. 10 and lib. 10. C. Theod. de petion: and vltro dat. and
delat.
. Plutarch calls them, Impios, and dijs inuisos homines Plutarch. in Dion.
. Tacitus calls them Genus hominu^ publico exitio repertum, and paenis
nunqua^ satis coercitu^ Tacit. lib. 4. annati:
. The Roman Senate after the death of Nero demanded instantly, that such kind
of men might be punished more maiorum Tacit. lib. 2. and 4. histor.
, and these words ( more maiorum) an interpreted by Alciat and Faber, to be the
most extreme punishment that could be devised Alciat. lib. 4. Parerg. c. 21.
Faber lib. 2. semestr. c. 7.
. In like fault and punishable after the same manner does our law adiudge
suborners to be, which do minister occasion to the informer, and do serve his
turn in the prosecuting of his information L. 2.. 3. and 4. l. 22. 23. 24. de
iur: sisci. ff. Harmenop. li. 2. tit. 15. and l. 1.. pen: Ad S. C. Turp: ff.
. Against such suborners and informs sharp and severe punishments were 4.
Punishments ordained by diverse Empeiours against common informers.
adjudged and established by Titus Sueton. c. 8.
, Pertinax Herodia. lib. 2.
, Seuerns Herodia. ibi.
, Macrinus Herodi. li. 5.
, Gordianus Herod. lib. 7.
, Aurelianus Vopise.
, Traianus Plin. in Panegyr.
, these men were in ancient time bannished unto the Gaetulian sands, which
are in the remote parts of Affricke Martial. lib. 1. epigram.
, and this sort of men did never flourish in the Roman common weal but under
tyrans, as namely Nero, Tiberius, Commodus, and the like, and therefore these
exclamations were heard when they were dead, Delatores ad leonem, Delatoribus
metum, Delatores de senatu, Delatoribus f^stem Lamprid. in commod.
.


Anglonomo. Thus you deter informers from their just accusations by minatorie
speeches, uttered by male-contented persons, but as archers when they aim at a
mark do often shoot beside it, so you disputing of this question, have spoken
5. Codicgnostes is* charged by Anglonomophylax to mistake the point in question.
clean beside the purpose, for the question is not whether some delators or
informers be dishonest men, and intolerable in a common weal: for none will
doubt of that: but whether no informers ought to be suffered in a good Common
weal: and these censures of informers which you have brought out of histories
and out of the Civil law do only respect, and concern such 6. He is likewise
charged eo mistake the Civil law in this point.
lewd persons, which by slanderous detractio^ do traduce and falsely accuse
men of honest life and good report, thorough the vile and corrupt desire of
unjust lucre, whose informations Tacitus calls Interpretationes,
interpretations, that is a wresting to an ill sense of that which was well
meant, or a misco^struing of that which was done without evil intent or
conueyance Tacit. lib. 3. anuali.
: and Suetonius terms the^ Calumnias slanderous accusations Sueton. in
Domiti. c. 9.
, such men did not openly prove, but secretly impeach the good name of
others, as Cuiaci well observes Cuiaci. ad Paulum.
, but none of your former speeches do touch these, which prove directly and
fully that which they allege in their information neither does your law (for I
look sometime into it) punish such L. 8. 10. 12. C. Th: de pet. and delat. l.
1. ad S. C. Tu^p. ff.
, but if they do not prove their surmises, they are worthily punished: 7. The
statute of 18. of our sovereign lady the Queen touching common informers is
compared with the edicts of Emperors.
and by the statut of 18. Eliz. it is well provided, that if any such informer
shall willingly delay his suit or shall discontinue, or be nonsuit in the same,
or shall have the trial or matter pass against him therein by verdict, or
judgment of law, that the^ in every such case the same informer shall yield,
satisfy, and pay unto the said defendant his costs, charges and da^mages to
be assigned by the court in which the same suit shall be attempted 18. Eliz. c.
5. Rast. Inform. 1
: and whereas you say that your law does generally disallow such proceeding, by
your favor it is not so, for he which by office is appointed and charged to
inform, or by some other obligation of Law is bound to inform, and he which
does it directly for the profit of the common weal is allowed by your law to
execute that course of proceeding L. 1. l. 2. and l. 6. Ad S. C. Turpil: ff.
, Codicgnostes his surmise that informations were not used in the best times of
the Romans is answered and confuted.
furthermore in that you say, that informers did never flourish in the Roman
common weal, but under tyrants, it is not true, for in the times betwixt the
2. and last Carthagenian war the Romans did most excel in virtue, and were
most renowned for good example and desert as witnesses Salust a great judge in
matters of state, and in the ma^ners of me^, whose testimony S. Augustine
neither does affirm nor deny but qualifieth with this censure, Toto illo
interuallo ^uorum bellorum punicoru^ tolerabilior infaelicitas fuit S.
Augustine. lib. 3. de ciuitate dei. c. 21.
: and Florus writes agreeably to Salust: Hactenus populus Romanus pulcher,
egregius, pius, sanctus, atque magnificus Flor. histor. lib. 2. c. 19.
: I say in these happy times, or if you will in these last unhappy times of
the Roman commonweal, certain informers were earnestly busied in courts which
were the^ termed (as appears by Plautus Plaut. in Pers.
, who lived in those times) quadruplatores, because they had the 4. part of the
forfeiture of the defenda^t Festus.
, if their informatio^ were true, and these were accounted alone, and in the
same degree with delatores Vopisc. in Aureli.
. This may suffice to infring that which you have delivered, Codicgn. against
informers: Now give me I pray you a little leave to prove that informers are
not only tolerable in a well governed common weal, but even expedient and 9.
It is showed likewise that informations are expedient for the administration of
Justice.
necessary instruments for the good administration of Justice: but always I
require in the^ honesty, faithfulness, and conscience taking this to be an
infallible rule, that he can never be a good informer, who is not a good man.
These qualities being in the^, and truth being the ground of their proceeding,
I see no reason but that their pains should be recompensed and rewarded,
sometime with the 4. part, sometime the third, sometime the moitie of the
forfeiture, which the defendant by diverse penal statuts is to foreit and
incur: for by reward the spirits of a man are stirred up and quickened:
without it they linger, languish, and consume away, and why is reward due unto
such men? The causes and reasons be many, without informatio^ there will be
hardly any punishment inflicted upon many offenders, and sithence nothing is
more acceptable to God, or beneficial to the common weal, then that offenders
should receive their proper and co^digne punishment, all lawful means must be
assaied to atteine to this effect, and what does restrain men more from
committing offenses the^n a continual fear of the informers eye to be cast
upon the^, or his ears to be open for the harkning out of their offenses:
wherefore as the Hu^tsma^ does bestow upon his dogs some part of these beasts
which he takes and kills in hunting, that by such inticements they may be
afterward drawn to pursue there pray fiercely and eagerly, so it behooves a
lawmaker diligently to hunt out the domestical lions and wolfes, and to allow
some reward to the hounds of the Common weal, which informers are Plutar. in
Lucul.
: Conanus the king of Scots did make a law, that in every great Church there
should be a cheste having some holes in the top, into which the informers might
put in at pleasure their several bills of information, wherein the fault
committed, the place, the time, the witnesses and the parties accused wear
contained: then the Magistrate opens the cheste, brings the matter into
question, and the guilty person being condemned the half part of the goods
forfeited goes to the informer: which law is now put in practice, by them of
Millaine Bodin. li. 4. de repub. c. 6.
.


Nomomath. You have spoken enough of this 4. Division.
matter Anglonomoph. I desire greatly to know, whether if a man do allege
some impediment happened by the act of God, whereby he could not appear, this
be a sufficient excuse of his default in Law. Codicgn. Process of contempt
which we call literas Defaults are dispensed with all by the Civil and Common
law when they happen by the act of God.
co^tumaciales, are never addressed against such as be hindered by inevitable
accident, as namely when the place where the court is held is besieged of
enemies, or when the plague is hot in that place: for citatus ad locu^ non
tutum non arctatur co^parere De appell. extra. C. ex part. and in Clem.
Pastoralis. and ibi glos: sup. verbo Notorum. de re iudicat.
, and so it is if through great snow, or inundation of water the ways and
passages be stopped and shut up, in these and the like cases, the Law does
dispense with defaults, and therefore the matter of delays is for the most
part committed arbitrio iudicis L. 2. ff. de re iudicata.
, who may take certain notice of these things.


Anglonomo. It is a received opinion with us, that infirmity or the fall of a
man from his horse whilst he was in his journey, though the party be by the
fall in danger of death, is no sufficient cause to save a default, but the
swelling and ouerflowing of waters is a good and sufficient cause, and so is an
imprisonment 38. H. 6. 12.
, for though the imprisonment do originaly happen by the act of the party,
yet it is an impediment of appearance against his will, and it is a restraint
imposed by act of Law 3. H. 6. 46.
: so that the party is as it were by* Law made corpus immobile, and therefore
his default must needs be excused 4. H. 5. sickness was held a good excuse to
avoid an outlawrie 4. H. 5. Challenge 153. Br. Sauer. de def. 45.
, but M. Br. doubts of that, because sickness may be feined, yet upon the
book of 4. H. 4. cited in the book called the abridgment of assizes, because
there malady was pleaded against outlawry and was admitted Abridgem. d^ssise
48.
, he begins to wayuer in opinion Br. Sauer de def. 48.
, and therefore I may with more color leave it doubtful.


Nomomath. Which is the most common actio^ 5. Division.
in your law Codicgnostes.


Codcignost. The action which is called actio 1. The most common action in the
Civil law is actio iniurariu^, which is either ciuilis or praetoria.
iniurariu^, which is either ciuilis or praetoria. Ciuilis, if a man do assault
an other, or do beat him, or do enter into his house ff. de iniur. l. lex
Cornelia.
, in all other cases it is praetoria: but both kinds agree in this, that the
fault and injury is punished Instit. de iniur:. penult. and ff. de iniur: l.
iniuriarum.
: and in the pursuing of it a man may deal either ciuilly or criminally, but
one of the ways being chose^, the other may not be entered into L. quod
senatus. and l. praetor.. 1. ff. de Iniurijs.
, and if the party bring ciuilem actione^ iniuriarum, he shall recover the
damages ff. Iniur: eod: l. Ide^ apud. si quis seruo.
: but if he bring praetoriam he shall effect nothing thereby but vindictam, the
punishment of the party which has offended.


Anglonomoph. This your speech te^deth to no other purpose as it seems, the^
to insinuate that such wrongs may be pursued by actio^ or enditement, 2.
Actions and enditements at the Common* law are compared with Civil and
praetorian actions.
wherein our Law does not any whit disagree. For if four men enter into land,
and one of them enters by force, this is force in them all and they may be
impleaded by action or impeached by enditeme^t 2. E. 3. 12. li. ass. 33.
Cro^pt. I. P. 61.
, but if a man enter by force where his enter is lawful (so that there is no
fault in the matter of his title, but in the manner of his enter only) he
shall not be punished by way of actio^, but by way of enditement 15. H. 7* 17.
Fitzh. I. P. fol. 117. Br. Forcib. enter 11. 9. H. 6. 19. Fitzh. N. B. 248.
, and so if the disseisor hold possession by force during the space of three
years, if the disseisie bring an action upon the Statute of 8. H. 6. he shall
be barred by this matter pleaded, but otherwise it is in an indictment upon
that statute, which is the Queens suit, and upon such indictment the party
shall have restitution, though he may not have an action 14. H. 7. 29. per
Fineux, Read, and Tremaile.
, and if the disseisie out the disseisor with force, the disseisor shall not
have an action, but yet the disseisie may be indicted upon the aforesaid
statute, and the disseisor shall thereby be restored 6. Division.
15. H. 7. 17. Fitz. N. B. 248.
.


Nomomath. I would have you to proceed Codicgnostes in describing unto me, the
form of your action which you call actionem iniuriarum, that it may be more
certain and manifest unto me.


Codicgn. I have it here written in a Book, which I have ready at hand.


Nomomath. I pray you the^ read it as distinctlie as you can: for I mean
diligently to observe 1. The libel of an action of injuries is fully set down
according to the form of the Civil law.
the points and parcels of it.


Codicgn. The libell stands thus in the book: Coram vobis clarissimo, magno,
and potenti viro etc. dicit, ponit, asserit and quatenus etc. iustificare
inte^dit Titius, quod ipse existe^te die. 19. me^sis Augusti proxime praeteriti
hora tertia vel circa in arenis Nema^sensibus ante ecclesia^ S. Petri and in
Comitiua pluriu^ nobiliu^ personaru^ pacifice conseruando, neminique iniuria^
infere^do, superuenit ibidem dictus Sempronius reus, qui animo iniurioso ipsum
actorem prouocauit, and incitauit per rixosas and iniuriosas allocutiones, and
qua^qua^ dictus actor ipsum reum dulcibus and placabilibus verbis refraenare
and mitigare niteretur: dictus tamen reus semper magis atque magis insistebat,
and iniurias proru^pebat, et in tantu^ quod in ipsum actore^ talia verba, seu
in effectu similia, bonorum nominis and famae ipsius actoris denigratoria, and
infamatoria iniuriose protulit, dicens: Thou naughty thief, thou do
nothing but rob, and quia dictus actor, talia sibi imponendo dixit, quod
mentiebatur dictus reus, non contentus de verbalibus iniurijs praefatis ad
reales, and facti iniurias processit, and in personam ipsius actoris irruit,
and cum pugno pluribus ictibus ipsum actorem in faciem percussit, liuores, and
concussiones fecit, and alias iniurias plurimas intulit, quas quidem iniurias
dictus actor mox illico and incontinenti ad animum reuocauit, and iterum
reuocat, nolens tales and tam atroces iniurias sibi illatas fuisse pro summa
mill librarum coron: quinimmo suadet tantum perdidisse quam dictas iniurias
sustinuisse, vel passus fuisse: et ad quam quidem summam dictas iniurias
existimat, iudiciali tame^ vestra semper taxatione salua. Quare ex his and
alijs ex processu result a^tibus agit dictus actor contra dictu^ reum, and
petit per vos vestramq, definitiuam sente^tiam pro suorum nominis and famae
redintegratione, dictum reum ad public dissonandum, profitendum, and
declarandum, dicta verba diffamatorta and iniurio sa fuisse per eum inconsulto
and contra veritatem dicta, and prolata, and pro satisfactione iniuriarum
dictarum ad dandum, and soluendum eidem actori summam praedictam mill librarum
coron: iudiciali tamen vestra vt saepe dictum est taxatione salua, vna cum
omnibus expensis factis and fiendis: de quibus dictus actor per expressum
protestatur condemnari, conde^natumque cogi and co^pelli vijs iuris, and
remedijs optimis: et alias petit in omnibus ius, and iustitia^ sibi fieri and
administrari, vestru^ benignu^, quod, quale, and qua^tum decet, officium
humiliter etia^, loco actionis si opus fuerit, implorando.


Nomomath. This is a very long and circumstantiall libell, and to my
understanding, many exceptions may be taken to it, which you shall give me
leave for argument sake, and for my more understanding in order to pursue.
First when you say 2. Exception is taken to the form of the libell for
uncertainty.
in declaring the words, which are the original occasion of this action, that
he spoke talia verba seu in effectu similia, me thinks that should not be good
form, for your libell being like to a declaration at the Common law, should
be certain, and without ambiguous or equivocal terms, but of this matter I
require the censure of Anglonomophylax.


Anglonomoph. Your exception is good, and 3. The exception is approved by the
common law.
maintenable by our Law: for in an action upon the case brought for calling
the plaintiff false Justice of Peace, vel his similia, these words his similia
were ordered by the Court to be expunged, or blotted out by reason of the
uncertainty 4. E. 6. Br. Action sur le case. 112.
.


Nonomath. Your libel likewise displeases me 4. Exception is likewise taken to
the libell for mingling things of several and diverse natures in it.
in an other matter, because if I conceive aright, you lay and allege in your
libell as the ground of your actio^ things far dista^t in nature, which it
seems to me might very well bear two several actions: for when as you say,
that the defendant uttered these words (thou naughty thief etc.) me thinks
that of it self should be are action: and when you say further that ( in
personam ipsius actoris irruit, and cum pugno pluribus ictibus ipsum actorem in
faciem percussit liuores and concussiones fecit) I think under favor that
these words of them selves require a several and distinct action, and not
such an action as lies for utterance of slanderous words.


Anglonomoph. Your opinion is good and sound 5 This exception likewise is
maintained by common law.
in reason, and as for several diseases there be diverse medicines, so for
several wrongs (I mean such as are different in nature) there should be
several Actions, least the offeringe of these things jointly to the
understanding, which are different in substance, there arise a great
confusion and disproportionable Chaos: Wherefore by our law, if things of
sundry natures be mingled in one action, and the action is good for the one
and not for the other, in such case the writ shall abate as to that for which it
was misconceiued, for example in a writ of Trespass for breaking his close, and
taking away certain lambs, whereas the lambs were supposed to be tithe, and
the close to be the Churchyard parcel of the Vicarage, brought by the Parson
against the Vicar, it was held that the Court should be outed of jurisdiction
as to the lambs, and the defendant should answer to the residue, 13. R. 2.
Iurisdict' 19.
and so in an action of Trespass brought against the Lord for breaking his
close, and taking his horse vi and armis, it was ruled that the writ should
abate for taking the horse, did not as to the breaking of the close: 48. E. 3.
6.
For the Lord cannot justify the breaking of his tenants close, 20. E. 4. 2.
7. R. 2 Brief 632. 8 H. 4. 16 8. E. 4. 15: 10. E. 4. 7.
So in an action of Trespass for entering into a Warren brought by the tenant
against the Lord of the soil, and for chasing there, and taking of conies the
writ shall abate as to the enter into the warren vi and armis, and shall stand
good for the remnant, 3. H. 6. 13.
and if it appear by the writ or the declaration that the action will not lie,
for somethinges mentioned in the writ, yet the writ may be in force for the
remnant, as in a writ of Wast, if a man assign parcel of the wast in a thing
which cannot properly be said to be wast, the writ notwithstanding shall not
abate for the whole, and so a writ of Dower shall not abate for the whole,
though the plaintiff do demand Dower of something, whereof she is not
endowable, 9. H. 6. 10. 46 10. H. 6. 5.
So in a writ of Account brought against one as Bailie, if the defendant plead
to parcel that he was lessee for years, and not Bailie, this shall abate the
writ only for that parcel, 18. E. 3. 16.
and 8. E. 4. in a writ of Enter brought upon the statute of 5. of King
Richard the second for entering into a Manor and into an aduowson, because the
action will not lie for the aduowson, it was held by Lakin, that the writ
should abate for parcel, 8. E. 4. 3.
likewise in an action of Trespass brought by the husband and wife for a batery
done to the^ both, after verdict found that both of the^ were beaten, the writ
abated as to the battery of the husband, and as to the battery of the wife they
recovered their damages, 9. E. 4. 54.
and it is said 11. E. 3. that a man may not allege in a writ of Eiectment de
guard, quod blada sua apud B. nuper crescentia messuit and blada and alia bona
etc. cepit, because proclamation lies for the one, but not for the other, 11.
E. 3. 471.
but a man may have a writ of Detinue of Charters and of Chattels jointly, 44.
E. 3. 41. Brief 583.
because there one thing is the ground of the action, namely the deteiner, and
so a man may have a writ of Det, where parcel of the debt is due by
obligation, and parcel by contract, because there the debt is the only
occasion of suit, and so in things of the like nature i) 41. E. 3. Damag: 75.
1. H. 5. 4.
one writ may comprehend many wrongs, and therefore an action upon the c^se
was maintained for the hindering of the plaintiff to hold his Leete, for the
disturbance of his servants and tenants in the gathering of his tithe, and for
threatening made, so that the people etc. durst not come to a certain Chapel
to do their devotion, and to present their offeringes, and for the taking of
his servants and chattels, 19. R. Actio^ sur le case 52.
but in Adamses case it was ruled, that whereas an action upon the case was
brought for speaking these words (you have made a false record, I will make you
answer where you dare not show your face, and you have sought my death) the
defendant as to the falsifiyng of the record justified, because he did make a
misentrie once into a roll in a Court where he was Steward, and as to the
rest he pleaded non Culpable, and he was found guilty of the whole, and
damages were assessed to twenty pounds, and it was moved for stay of
Judgment, that some of the words would not bear action, as namely to say
(that he sought his death,) because that may be by due means in Law: nor the
other words (that he would make him answer where he durst not show his
face) wherefore because no action will lie for part of the matter alleged, the
assessement of the damages for the whole is not good, and therefore judgment
ought not to be given: to which it was answered that when words are spoken to
the disgrace of a man, they cannot be otherwise understood then in malam
partem, and therefore to say to one that he has been laid of the pockes is
t^ be intended of the French pockes, and though action will not lie for some
of the words which were uttered, yet it must be intended that damages were
assessed for these words which are of effect to bear action: and this case
has bin adjudged that one called an other villain and strong thief, the
defendant pleaded non Culpable, and he was found guilty to the damages of xl.
li. though action do not lie for the words very villain, yet judgment was
given that the plaintiff should recover the entier damages: and so was judgment
given in the principal case. 25. Elizab. Adamses case.



Nomomat. Well no more of this: give me leave 6 An other exception is taken for
superfluous alleging of the day and hour of the trespass done.
further to object, what need you say in your libel die decimo nono Augusti
proxime praeteriti? for it is not material when a wrong is done, but me
thinks it should suffice to allege that it was done, and therefore much
less need you have said hora tertia vel circa: again, me thinks your libel
is too prolixe in setting down the words and circumstances of the injury: and
likewise you have used too many words in describing the assault and battery,
which might have bin briefly expressed by these words insultum in eum fecit and
eum verberauit, neither do I see the use of these words pacifice conseruando,
neminique iniuriam 8 Exception is taken for saying nemini iniuriam inferendo.
inferendo: For what if Titius the plaintiff had been fighting, with Seius a
stranger, is it therefore lawful for Sempronius the defendant in this case to
assault and beat Titius? and what need you say in your libell, animo
iniurioso: for 9 Exception is likewise taken for using these words animo
i^iurioso being taken for a surpl^sage.
no wrong can be done without an injurious meaning, and the secreate meaning
must needs appear by the open description of the wrong.


Codicgn. Give me leave to satisfy you in all these particular objections, and
to render a reason of the allegations in the libell. The very day 10 Codicgn.
answers the exceptions.
wherein the wrong was done (to begin with your first objection) is
necessarily to be set down, that the defendant may have certain notice of
the wrong:. atrox: Institut: de iniur:
and that it may appear to the Court, that the injury was committed within
the year etc. for a verbal injury is ended and cease within the year etc.
l. non solum:. 1. ff. de iniur:
and whereas you disliked the multitude of words in discribing the wrong,
surely the wrong cannot better be discribed then by fullness of terms, which
are apt and significant to agrauate the injury, l. praetor.. sin: and l.
vulneris and l. si est questionis, and l. sed si vnus.. quidam. ff. de iniur.
and whereas you find fault, because it is alleged in the libell, that the
plaintiff did behave himself peaceably nemini iniuriam inferendo: they are to
very good purpose, for if the plaintiff had been a quarrellous, or
contencious person, and had given some occasion of strife, the wrong might with
more reason be imputed to him, then the defendant, Glo. in l. ob haec verba
ff. de his qui no: inf: and in l. 1.. cum arietes ff. si quad^up. paup: fec:
and he cannot be said to have done a wrong, who incontinently for his
safegarde after the same manner, whereby he is assaulted does defend himself,
for when a man is assaulted by weapons, he may resist with weapons, l. vt vim:
ff. de inst: and iure l. si quis percustor: C. ad leg: Cor. de sicar:
but if he do exceed measure in repealing injury, as if being vexed with
words he resist with weapons, and by such resistance do beat or wound the
party, he that is so grieved may have an action of injury against him, l.
sententiam. qui cum aliter, ff. ad l. Aquil.
and recover damages: l. item apud La be one^.. si quis seruo ff. de iniur:
and to prescribe some temper and moderation in the resisting of verbal and
actual injuries, I remember a verse not altogether unpleasant:

Res dare pro rebus, pro verbis verba solemus,
Pro bufis bufas, pro trufis reddere trufas:
Things must be recompensed with things, buffets with blows:

And words with words, and taunts with mockes, and mowes.

And to conclude, you seem not (with your favor be it spoken) justly to
reprove these words animo iniurioso, for they are expressed for difference
sake, because if a man in jesting wise should strike an other or use broad
boward against him, this would not bear an action, because it was not done
animo iniuriandi, sed iocandi. l. illud peraeque, ff. de inim: and l. si non
conuicij C. cod:
this I think you are sufficiently quieted in opinion as to the doubts which
you proposed.


Nomomat. Nay verily I rest as yet doubtful, and for the fuller clearing of my
mind, I would have Anglonomoph. to speak somewhat of these things out of
the common Law, which in matters of declaration and pleading is very curious
and exquisite.


Anglonomoph. Truth and error are both equally 11 Anglo. particularly examineth
and discusseth the exceptions.
beholden unto you, for in some things by the censure of our Law one of you
has the upper hand, in other some the other: for proof hereof I will by your
patience particularly handle every of the aforesaid objections, which has in
it any color of truth, as to the day of the month wherein the wrong is
supposed to be done, I do not with Codicgnostes think that in this case the
very day necessarily ought to have bin mentioned, because it is not trauersable
nor material to make any issue, but it is sufficient (for observing
formalitie) to set down any day that is past.


Codicgn. But with us it is material, and if the day be not truly set down,
the defendant may take advantage of it.


Anglonomoph. With us it is not so, for as Newton says 20. H. 6. the day in an
action of Trespass and repleuin are not trauersable, for if the defendant
justify at an other day after, he ought to say without that he took them
before, 20. H. 6. 40. per Newt.
and so 19. H. 6. in a trespass of battery the def. said that the plaintiff did
assault him at an other time, then he has declared, and that the hurt which
was done unto him came of his own wrong, sans ceo that he was Culpre before or
after, and this ple he was enforced to pled by the court, 19. H. 6. 47.
yet in some case the day and time for avoiding uncertainty, and that the Jury
may more easily find out the truth is issuable, and therefore in an action of
trespass supposing a battery, the defendant said, that the same day, wherein
the trespass was supposed, the plaintiff and the defendant by common accord did
play together at cudgels, and the hurt which he did unto him was by that play,
without that, that he hurt him in any other manner, judgment si action: To which
the plaintiff replied, that the same day when they were departed, the defendant
came unto him and assaulted him and beat him of his own wrong, and the
defendant reioined that all the day and at every time of the day by their
common accord they played together, without that that he beat him in other
manner, 12. R. 2. Barr^ 244.
And so in a repleuin of his beasts wrongfully taken, the first day of August
the defendant auowed, because the plaintiff held the land etc. of him by
homage and fealty and suit at his Court at such a place, and because he was
summoned to be at his Court the fifth day of the said month and year, and
did not come he was amerced, and for the said amerciament he took the beasts
the twenteth day of August, without that, that he took them the first day of
August, and it was said by Markeham that this was no plea: for if you took the^
at an other day before the presentment it is wrongful, wherefore you ought to
say without that that you took the beasts before the twentieth day: but issue
was in this case taken, without that he took them the first day of August, 20.
H. 6. 40.
whereupon Master Fitzherbert notes, that the day in a writ of Trespass or
Repleuin is not trauersable, but where the special matter does require it,
Fitz. Repl. 7.
and this he seems to ground upon 2. H. 4. likewise in an action of trespass
for the taking of goods the 8. day of April the defendant said that the
plaintiff was possessed of them as his proper goods and chattels, and sold
them to such a one who left them in the custody of the plaintiff, and after he
sold them to the defendant, wherefore he took them at the time time supposed,
to which the plaintiff replied, that he was possessed of them until the
defendant took them the 8. day of April as before has bin alleged, sans ceo
that the other sold them to the defendant before that day, and hereupon they
were at issue. 2. E. 4. 16.



Nomomas. Well let this matter pass, what say you to the multitude of words
used in the description of the wrong? is that the tolerable in your Law?


Anglonomoph. Surely it is convenient that the 12 Anglo. Excuses and defends
the abundance of words in declarations and libels.
quality of every thing should be apparanted by terms of efficacy, and it is
better to have a declaration too copious then carion-leane, neither is any
thing more plausible to a good understanding, then that words be ponderous and
emphaticall, where the matter seems to bleed, wherefore Virgill in describing
the lofty pace of the lusty and courageous horses, makes his verse after a
sort to gallop, and does in lively terms as it were present it to the eye,

Quadrupedante putrem cursu quatit vngula campum. And Persius decently makes
his verse to rise and swell with the matter.

Torua Mimalloneis inflarunt cornua bombis. But not to digress from our
purpose, in an appeal of mayhe^ the wrong must be in this form, or the like
set down. Johannes Nan propria persona sua hic instanter appellat W. G. de eo,
quod cum idem querens tali die et anno fuit in pace dei and dominae Reginae
nunc apud talem villam in tali comitatu circa horam sextam etc. ibi venit
predictus W. vi and armis viz. baculis vt felo, insidiando, et ex insultu
premeditato adtunc and ibide^ in dictu^ Io. insultum fecit and adtunc and
ibidem cum quodam baculo pretij etc. quem praedictus W. adtunc and ibidem in
manibus suis tenuit, praedictu^ querentem super brachium dextrum felonice tunc
percussit, per quod venae and nerui brachij sui praedicti restricti fuerunt ac
sicct and mortificati deuenerunt etc. Lib. de diuersit des Courts 115.
Here you have the Mayhem described from the beginning to the end in full
terms: and yet every of them, or at least almost all, so necessary, that if
you take away one of these flowers ye mar the whole garland, and so in a writ
of trespass for the hurting of his sheep (though briefes be short
comprehensions of things) the wrong is fully set down in this sort, Quare vi
and armis centu^oues ipsius A. apud T. inuentas cum quibusdam canibus fugauit,
canes illos ad mordendum oues praedictas intantum incitando quod per fugationem
illam and morsus canum praedictorum oues praedictae multipliciter deterioratae
fuerunt and magna pars ouium illarum faetus abortiuos fecit. Fitz. na. br. 89.
L.



Nomom. Well what say you to these words ( animo iniurioso) whether are they
needles or not.


Anglonomoph. These words carry sense in their foreheads: for they amount to as
much as malitiose in our Law and that ought to be set down to distinguishe it
from iocose as Codicgn. hah before very well reasoned: and when the action
sounds to malice, the word malitiose or the like in substance is to be used,
as well as when the action sounds to deceit, the word fraudlenter or some
equiuolent term is of necessity to be expressed.


Nomomat. Of these matters then I know what to think, and will move no other
doubt or question of them: Now Anglonomoph. because I think at the common law
an action upon the case conceived upon a slander does most rese^ble this actio^
of injury before discribed, let me therefore know the form of the declaration,
which is fit for that actio^.


Anglonomoph. You have conceived in this a 13 The form of a declaration upon
an action upon the case, resembling actionem aniu^iarum.
right opinion, and I will roundly show unto you the form of the declaration
whereof you spoke, because it is very plain and much in use, it is thus: W.
C. queritur de P. L. in custodia Marr' pro eo videlicet, quod cum predictus W.
bonorum mominis ac fame ac honest arum conuersationis, gesture, and conditionis
fuerit and vt verus ligeus domine Regine nunc, absque illo scandalo ac sine
quacunque macula latrocinij, furti, falsitatis, vel cuiusuis alij criminis ac
sine vllo scandalo earunde^ macularu^, and ab omnibus huiusmodi fallacijs,
dolis, and malis ille sus, intactus, et immaculatus a te^pore natiuitatis sue
hucusque se gesserit, habuerit and gubernauerit and huiusmodi status,
conuersationis, and honestatis apud vicinos suos and vniuersos fideles dominae
Reginae nu^c subditos quibus idem W. cognitus erat sine aliqua criminosa
nequitia latrocinij furti and cuiuscunque insignis fraudis aut huiusmodi
criminis hucusque immaculatus fuerit: praedictus tamen P. L. praemissorum non
ignarus, ex eius diabolica instigatione, and peruersa malitia, machinans
statum, honestatem, necnon famam and opinionem dicti W. laededere, and funditus
deprauare, ac eunde^ W. de tam malis conuersatione co^ditione and gestura, apud
omnes dominae Reginae fideles subditos acceptare, vt idem W. omnino periret ac
totaliter destrueretur ac vt vniuersi fideles subditi dictae dominae Reginae a
consortio ipsius W. penitus se subtraherent 25. die Septembris anno etc. apud
L. in presentia and audientia A. B. and aliorum multorum fide dignorum dicte
domine Reginae eodem W. notorum, de eodem W. dixit, retulit, publicauit, and
alta voce pronunciauit and asseruit in haec verbain Anglicis verbis sequentibus
videlicet, Thou art a thief and thou have received xx. pounds of my goods:
quorum quidem verborum propalationis and relationis pretextu, predictus W. de
suo statu bono nomine and in negocijs suis: quibus cum honestis personis and
dictis domine Regine subditis vsus fuit, and consortium habuerit multipliciter
laesus, and deterioratus existit, vnde dicit quod deterioratus est, et damnum
habet ad valentiam ducentarum libraru^ etc.


Nomomath. These two proceedings do little differ in substance, and there is
in them me thinks great redundancie of words, which might well be spared, but
tell me I pray you is there such necessity of these formal terms, that if
they be wanting or changed, the declaration, or proceeding shall abate?


Codicgn. Surely, because the tedious and odious 14 The cutting off of delays
by the civil law.
protracting of suites did greatly offend justice, therefore to cut off
delays, and that suits might not be endless, and immortal (for matters of form
and the exceptions to them were grown to such an excessive heap and infinite
number, that the whole age of man did scaresely suffice for the trial of one
suit, and he that failed in a syllable failed in the cause) our lawmakers
therefore, that Justice might walk in a shorter and more compendious way, did
therefore very willingly root up the thornie grove of cauils, and
sophistical wrangelinges, which had mingled themselves with good and
reasonable exceptions, and scouring the stream of such weeds and sedges, they
have now made a smooth and more easy passage for Justice. In rubr: and nigr:
C. de form: and impetrat: action: Iublat:



Anglono. Upon like consideration and to the very 15 The diminishing of delays
by the common law.
same purpose our lawmakers have made laws for amendment of writs,
declarations, and other proceedings in matters of form, as may appear by
several statutes made for the establishing of such amendements, as namely 14.
E. 3. ca. 6. 9. H. 5. c. 4. 4. H. 6. c. 3. 8. H. 6. c. 12. and 15. 32. H. 8. c.
30. 18. Eliz. c. 14. 27. Eliz. c. 5. and by the equity and direct meaning of
these statutes diverse amendementes have bin made and used in our law, and
therefore in an action of debt grounded upon a recovery of damages had in an
assise, the date of the writ of Assise was not put in the writ of debt, and it
was held that it should be amended, because the Clarke had the record for his
instruction, 13. H. 7. 21.
but whereas a writ of debt was brought per Iohannem Gargraue Esquire, and
the obligation was Joan Gargraue only, this was not amended, but abated,
because this misprision came of the plaintifes part, Quaere tamen, but 8. E. 4.
and 11. E. 4. if an action of debt the Clarke of the Chauncerie have the
obligation with him at the time of the making of the writ, and there be
variance between the writ and the obligation, it is clearly amendable, but
if no addition be given to the defendant, that is not amendable, 8. E. 4. 4.
11. E. 4. 2.
and 22. Ed. 4. if an action of debt be brought against executors of the debt
of the testator, if the writ be in the Debet and Detinet, it is not amendable,
22. E. 4. 21. per Cur.
and in a writ of Audita querela the surname of the defendant was Langawaite,
and in the Indenture of Defeasance his name was Langwaite without the letter
(a) in the midst, whereupon the writ was amended by statute, because that
was not of the substance of the name, or surname, and also it was to be
intended that the Clarke had the Indenture of Defeasance at the time of the
making of the writ, 21 H. 6. 8.
and so in an action of debt, where the writ was Hille, and the Obligation
was Hulle, the writ was amended, 22. H. 6. Amendm^t 31. 37. H. 6. 32.
and where more was in the Obligation then in the writ, it was amended, 19.
H. 6. Amendm^t 47.
but 41. E. 3. it is held by Finch. that a writ original shall abate for
default of form, and shall not be amended in the Courts of common Law, for
though it be pleadable there, yet (as Master Statham reasons) the Chauncerie
is an other Court, and a superior Court: Stath. ti^ Amend 20. H. 6.
and therefore the things done there cannot bealtered in Courts of common Law,
41. E. 3. 14. ^ Finch. 9. H. 7. 16. per Vauis. and 2^. E. 4. 20.
and for the more full and forcible destruction of delays and ambushes in
pleading, it is by the common Law ruled, that every demurrer upon a plea
which goes in bar, and to the disproofe of the Title is peremptory: and
though a plea in Abatement of a writ be not peremptory, but a respondeat
vlterius* yet if the plea in Abatement of a writ be tried by the Cuntrie,
this is doubtless peremptory for the delay of the party, 48. E. 3. 10. ^
Finch. 34. H. 6. 8. 50. E. 3. 20. 34. H. 6. 37.
But it is peremptory only against the tenant or defendant, not against the
plaintiff or demaundant, for he is still at large. 5. E. 4. 90. 2. E. 4. 10.



Nomomath. Let me interrupt you Anglonomoph. for I do very much desire to
hear of you and Codicgnostes, the fourmes of the defenses or bars, which the
defendants are to make against these declarations, before recited by you.


Codicgn. I will make known unto you the most common and usual form of
pleading in bar in this case. Vt vobis clarissimo magnifico 16 The form of a
defense or bar in an action of injuries.
etc. constet and legit^me appareat de innocentijs, inculpabilitatibus,
legitimisque defensionibus predicti Sempronij delati, preuenti, seu inquisiti,
ipsumque ad malam, iniustam, dolosam, and iniquam nonnullorum suorum
maleuolorum and inimicorum delatione^, instigationem, seu denunciationem fuisse
preuentum, and in processu inuolutu^, et per vos vestramque definitiua^
sententia^ dictus etc. delatus, seu preuentus, seu inquisitus, pronuncietur and
declaretur innocens, exoneratus, and minime culpabilis sibi impositorum, vt ab
eisdem impositis eadem vestra sententia absoluatur: dictus vero denuntiator in
omnibus damnis, interesse, and expenssis erga eundem praeuentum delatum seu
inquisitum condemnetur, condemnatusque ad refarciendum and soluendum cogatur
and compellatur, and alias ius and iusticia eidem praeuento and intitulato fiat
and administretur: Inprimis igitur dicit, ponit, asserit and quatenus opus
erit, prout supra, iustificare intendit, quod ipse praeuentus, seu denunciatus
ex nobilibus, catholicis, legalibus, probis, honestis, and in omni genere
virtutis exercitatis parentibus, seu genitoribus, traxit originem. Item dicit
and ponit, quod dictus intitulatus and preuentus vestigia dictorum parentum
suorum insequens, toto tempore vitae suae, fuit and est catholicus, legalis,
probus, honestus, absque eo and praeter id, quod Titius praedictus querens, de
eodem intitulato seu praeuento aliqua laborauerit infamia, sinistra suspicione,
aut mala fama. Item and quod semper pacifice, and quiet inter omnes se habuit
and conuersatus fuit omnibus prodessendo, and neminem ledendo seu offendendo.
Item negat se dictum Tittum pulsasse, verberasse and ei vel cuiquam alteri via
facti, seu dicti, seu alias nocuisse, and vulnera, liuores, vel concussiones
intulisse, Ex quibus apparet dictum intitulatum seu praeuentum fuisse and esse
a sibi impositis innocentem and minime culpabilem, indebiteque and unjust
intulatum and preuentum, and in processu inuolutum fuisse, and per
consequentiam in via absolutionis and relaxationis fore and esse.


Nomomat. This bar is somewhat long, let me hear the form of your bar
Anglonomoph. which I hope is a great deal shorter.


Anglonomoph. It is so, if you will have the ordinary plea in bar which
comprehends the 17. The form of a defense in an action upon the case.
general issue. For it is no more then this: Et praedictus P. L. per R.
attornatum suum venit and defendit vim and iniuriam quando etc. and dicit quod
ipse non dixit, retulit, nec propalauit de praedicto W. verba praedicta etc.
modo and forma quibus idem H. superius versus eum queritur, and de hoc ponit se
super patriam and praedictus H. similiter etc.


Nomomath. This is brief and substantial, but now what is to be done
according to the order of your proceeding?


Codcign. Now that the matter is grown to 18. The form of trial by the
Civil law.
this ripenes, so that the one makes perfect affirmation the other absolute
denial, the matter is to be tried by proofs and witnesses, which now are to
be examined.


Anglonomoph. So it is with us: for the cause 19. The form of trial by the
Common law.
now being come to issue, the trial is to be by the country, which as to such
matters in facto, are to be directed by the testimony and evidence of
witnesses.


Nonomath. Well if the defendant happen to be found not guilty, what is then
the judgment upon these precedents.


Codicgn. It is thus: Et nos Seneschallus praedictus 20. The form of judgment
in the Civil law.
visis, and diligenter Iurisperitorum nostrae praesidialis Curiae consilio
totius praesentis processus merit' appensate, diligenter, and accurate
examinatis, Quia per processum defensionalem dicti rei praeuenti denuntiati,
and intitulati, elicitur intentio praedicti quere^tis, ideo exhis, and alijs ex
processu result antibus, per hanc nostram definitiua^ sententia^, qua^ pro
tribunali more maioru^ nostroru^ sedenies in his ferimus scriptis dicimus,
pronuntiamus and declaramus dictu^ reum denu^tiatum and praeuentum non fuisse,
vel esse criminu^ sibi impositorum culpabilem: Quinimmo a dictis criminibus
sibi impositis fore, and esse absoluendum, quem eadem nostra sententia
absoluimus, expensas hinc inde factas in causacompensando etc.


Anglonomoph. Our form of judgment is a great deal shorter, for it runs
thus: Ideo consideratum 21. The form of entering judgment at the Common law.
est quod praedictus W. nihil capiat per breue suum praedictu^ sed sit in
misericordia sua pro falso clamore suo inde, and praedictus P. L. eat inde sine
die.


Nomomath. Well ye have bin long in ha^dling these matters of formal
proceeding, wherefore I will ask you of this, but one question more, and then
will pass over to entreat somewhat of common trespasses and wrongs, resolve
me first in this, whether may the executor of the testator that 7. Division.
was wro^ged by such diffamatorie speeches, have an action for the said
slander after the death of the restator?


Codicgn. It neither lies for the executor of 1. That by the Civil law an
action of injuries will not lie by executor against executor.
him that is slau^dered, nor against the executor of him that did slander,
because noxa caput sequitur, unless the suit were begu^ne in the life of the
testator, in which case the executor may well prosecute it Insti. de iniu^..
non omnes. and. penales ff. de miur. ^miuriarum.
.


Anglonomoph. It is a rule with us that actio personalis 2. That by the Common
law actio personal^ moritur cum persona. unless it be in some special cases.
moritur cu^ persona: yet this is not generally and indefinitely to be
admitted, but only in such case, where the wrong did principally and
immediately rest upon a man's person, and when (as the Ciuilians say) it is ita
affixa ostibus vt in aliu^ transferri non possit. ff. de pecu. l. si quis ergo.
. And therefore where one is entitled to have a writ of account, or an actio^
of trespass for the taking away of his goods, and is attainted of treason or
felony, the Queen shall have these actions as forfaited to her highness 30. H.
6. 5. 28. E. 3. 92.
, but otherwise it is of a trespass of battery Stamf. fol. 188.
, and so it has been pronounced for law, that if a termor make wast, and after
he makes his executors and dies, the action of waste is gone, for it lies
not against his executors 23. H. 8. Br. Waste 138. 46. E. 3. 31.
, but though a covenant be a thing merely personal, yet both an executor and
an administrator may have a writ of covenant Fitzh. N. B. 146. D. 2. Mari. 112.
Die.
.


The eleventh Dialogue of common wrongs and Trespasses.
NOmomath. Now that ye must treat of 1. Division.
common wro^gs and trespasses, I doubt not but you will be less troubled with
my questions, because such matters ar more plain to you, and to me not very
difficult. Notwithstanding for learning sake, and because I would ground my
self upon some certainty of knowledge, I will move some doubts of these
matters: first how many sorts or wro^gs are there?


Codicg. Injury as we say is two fold, for either 1. The diverse kinds of
injuries in the Civil law.
it is done re or verbis: re, when a man is assaulted or beaten: verbis, when a
man is slaundered and by terms disgraced or discredited L. 1. ff. de iniut^^s.
.


Nomomath. I pray you Anglonomophylax illustrate and explain the members of
this division by some convenient cases.


Anglonomoph. Very willingly, and to begin 2. What an assault is according to
the Common law.
with the first: an assault is made when one man menaceth an other with a
weapon or staff, though never a blow bestroken, yet this is an assault 22.
Assis. pl. 60.
, and 43. E. 3. the writ was Quare insultum fecit vulnerauit, verberauit and
maihemauit, and it was allowed though the wrong did sound to be mayhem 43.
Assis. 39.
, and as it was held per Curiam, where a man makes an assault it is not
lawful for any to beat him, if the party assaulted may escape with his life
2. H. 4. 8.
, yet the opinion of M. Brook is that he may beat him if he cannot otherwise
escape without stripes or wounds or mayming Br. Trespass 71.
, yet the opinion of 9. E. 4. is, that I may beat a man if he will take my
goods from me: and a servant may justify a battery in the defense of his
master 9. E. 4. 28. and 48.
, but the assembling of people in a warlike manner is no assault, but he that
is the ringleader of such assemblies, before he may be impeached of assault
must do something else, as namely by uttering contumelious speeches, or
stretching out his arms, or some other token whereby his intent may be known
17. E. 4. 4.
, and he that comes in company of them that make the assault, or he which
comes to aid them, is a principal trespassor 22. Assis. pl. 43.
, and if a Justice of Peace see a man doing an assault, he may presently arrest
him by commandment or word, to the intent that he may find surety of the
peace 9. E. 4. 3.
, and it is lawful for one man to beat an other in defense of his goods and
chattels or of his wife 19. H. 6. 31. 35. H. 6. 51.
, and a man may likewise have an action of trespass for the entering into his
house Fitzh. N. B. 88. l.
, but if a man license one to come into his house, and he does a trespass
there he shall be punished for the trespass but not for the enter which was
granted unto him 3. H. 7. 15. p Towns.
, and nothing 3. That the Common law gives an action upon the case for a
slander.
is more usual then a man to bring an actio^ upon the case for a slander, and
therefore if one man call an other bankerupt an action upon the case will lie
6. E. 6. 72. Die.
, or if one say to an other that he is infected of the robbery and murder
lately committed and smelles of the murder, an action upon the case will lie
for these words 15. Elizab. 317. Die.
, and the Duke of Buckingham brought an action de scandalis magnatu^ against
one Lucas, because he said that the said Duke had no more conscience the^ a
dog, and so he had goods he cared not how he came by them 4. H. 8. rotul. 659.
, infinite other cases might be brought tending to this purpose.


Nomomath. I will trouble you no further herein, 2 Division.
but tell me Codicgnostes, whether by your law may the husband have an action
for the wrong doneto his wife, the father for a wrong done to his son, and
the master for an injury done to 1. That by the Civil law, an action of
trespass lies by the father, husband, master, for a wrong done to the son,
wife, servant.
his servant?


Codicgn. They may, and the Praetors edict in our Law to that intent is very
manifest and notorious L. 1. ff. de iniur:
.


Anglonomoph. To that our law accords: and first to show, that the husband
may have an action 2. That by the Common law the husband may have an action for
a wrong done to his wife.
for a wrong done to his wife, it seems that these words: and came cu^bonis
and catallis praedicti A. (mariti) ad valentia^ etc. abduxit, are necessary in
the writ, for as to the taking and deteining only of the woman, it seems
that the suit will only lie in the spiritual Court, where things any way
touching matrimony or to be decided: yet I will not be peremptory herein,
because M. Fitzherh. opinion is Fitzh. N. B. 52. K.
, that the suit for the taking of the woman only, without mentioning any other
thing in the writ, is maintenable at the Common law, howbeit he puts this
case, that if a man sue in court Christian for the taking and deteining of his
wife, which was lawfully married to him, if the other sue a prohibition
hereupon, he may have a consultation quatenus pro restitutione vxoris suae
duntaxat prosequitur Fitzh. ibid.
, and if the woman do lie asunder from her husband the suit will lie in the
spiritual Court to have again the fellowship of marriage and to dwell together
as may appear by these words of the statute D. Cosins in li. de iurisdict.
ecclesiastic.
: (unless he will receive her without ecclesiastical co^pulsio^ 13. E. 1. c. 34
Westminst. 2.
) but where a man brings an actio^ at the common Law de muliere abduct a cum
bonis viri: he must be sure that his wife has atteined to age of consent, and
that she has actually co^se^ted to the marriage: for where a man marries a
wife before she be of the age of 12. years, and after she comes to the age
of 12. years, and before she assent or disassent one takes or carries her
away, the husband in this case cannot have a writ of trespass cu^ muliere
abduct a cu^ bonis viri by some authority, because it is not properly a marriage
till she assent 47. E. 3. Br. Trespass 420.
: yet M. Brook doubts hereof and rather thinks upon very good reason the
contrary, because it shall be intended a good marriage until the woman do
disasse^t Brook ibid.
: but where the marriage is co^plete, and without all danger of contradiction,
though the wife be dead or divorced at the time of the actio^ brought, yet the
action is maintenable for the husband 43. E. 3. 22.
, but the word ( rapuit) must be in the writ as well as the word ( abduxit)
and therefore it will not lie against a woman, because one woman cannot ravish
an other 43. E. 3. 23.
, and if a man do carry 3. In wh^ cases by the Common law an action will lie
for the master for a wrong done to his servant.
away a woman by the license of her husband this writ will not lie 1. E. 4. 1.
, for it is vi and armis, and as to the bringing of an action by the master
for some hurt done to his servant, it is frequent in our books: for by the
beating, or maiming or wou^ding of the servant, the master has the loss of
his service 3. H. 6. 53.
: and therefore if any man take the servant of an other man out of his service,
an action of trespass will lieagainst him that takes him 39. E. 3 38. Fitzh. N.
B 91. I. 21. H. 6. 31.
, but if a man find an other ma^s servant wa^dring abroad, and reteyne him,
this is lawful, if he knew nothing of the fist reteiner. But though by the
common law an action of trespass quare vi and armis did lie against him that
took an other man's servant out of his service: yet if he did only procure him
to go out of service, and the^ retained him, the master could have had by the
Common law no action, but only an action upon the case, but now by parliament
an action is given upon the statute of laborers 11. H. 4. 23. Br. Trespass.
92.
: Lastly it is plain by our law, that the 4. In what cases by the Common law
an action will lie for the father for a wrong done to the son.
father may have an action for the taking away of his son and heir, but in
the writ he must say cuius maritagium ad ipsum pertinet: for this writ is
given unto the father, because the marriage of his son and heir or of his
daughter and heir does of right appertain unto him, and if the father have
married his heir before, so that he has once enjoyed the fruit and benefit
of the marriage, which the law allotted unto him, he shall not have this writ
12. H. 4. 16. 8. E. 2. Trespass 235. 32. E. 3. Guard. 32.
, and if a man take away an other man's son and heir apparent and bestow upon
him good apparel, and the father seiseth his son as he lawfully may, he
shall not be impeached for the taking of the apparel; for in that he may make
a good justification for the taking of the body, the justification must needs
exte^d to the apparel of the body, because the law considers not bare and
elementall bodies, but bodies apparelled: And Haukf. with others resoneth well,
that if a man put an other into apparel, and speaks nothing of the loan of
it, neither by express act reserueth the property to himself, this is a
gift in law: and if an aduowterer do take a woman from her husband, and
apparelleth her with good attire, the husband may take the wife again, and
with her the apparel 11. H. 4. 31. Br. Trespass 93.
, and as the father may have this remedy for his son and heir apparent, so
may the mother, likewise if she be an inheritrix 30. E. 3: Brief 300.
: so that I marvel at M. Catesbies opinion 9. E. 4. that this writ lies
not for the wife 9. E. 4. 53.
.


Nomomath. I will require no more at your hands Anglonomoph. of this matter,
now I pray you Codicgnostes resolve me in this, whether when any man's beasts do
any hurt unto an other man, if this be not done by the owners act, default, or
procurement, shall the master make good the damage sustained by such wrong.


Codicgn. Surely brute beasts, because they 1. How the owner shall be punished
by the Civil law for a trespass done by his beasts.
want understanding and reason, cannot be said properly to bind their owner (
noxaliter, so that the fault should be accounted his) for any rauin, hurt, or
damage whatsoever, neither do such wrongs bind the owner of the beasts ex
quasi delicto, for a matter like unto a wrong: yet notwithstanding for
preventing of hurt, that may in such sort happen, the law does provide, that if
the owner will not voluntarily yield up the beast as a recompense to him that is
enda^maged, he must render the da^mages, or else by the authority of the judge
be awarded and compelled to yield up the beast L. 1. ff. si quadrup: paup: fec:
dic.
, and therefore if any man do keep or nourish a Mastife, or Boar, or Fox, or
Bear, or Lion or Wolf, or some like beast which does hurt or damnifie an
other man, he that receives the hurt shall recover da^mages against the owner
of the beast. Caeterum Instit. si quadru: pauperie^ fecisse dicatur.
, but if such a beast do escape away from me, 2. In what case he shall not be
punished though his beasts do hurt to an other man.
or goes so far from my pasture or ward that I cannot by pursuing recover
it, neither do I know whether it is fled, and so being escaped from me it
do hurt an other man, in this case I am not to sustain any damage, because
in this case, I am free from fault: for the beast by such escape cease to be
mine, and may become his that shall take, or seize, or kill it d. l. 1.. in
bestijs and. Caeteru^, versic. Denique si vrsus.
.


Anglonomoph. To this our Law agrees: for we have a writ of Trespass which
says, Quare vi and armis centum oues ipsius A. cum quibusdam canibus fugauit
canes illos ad mordendum oues praedictas intantum incitando quod per fugationem
illam and morsus canum praedictorum oues praedictae multiplititer deterioratae
fuerunt and magna pars ouium illarum faetus abortiuos fecit etc. per quod 3.
That by the Common law a man shall be punished for a trespass done by his
beasts.
etc. Fitzh. N. B. 89. L.
But if a Dog do kill or hurt any man's beasts, the Master being ignorant
of his mischievous property, he is not punishable 28. H. 8. 25. Die. and 29. Die.
, whereby I gather that if he know of his property (though he do not set on
his dog or maintain him to do hurt to others) he shall be punished by
action of trespass, and if a man do drive his beasts thorough the Queens
high way, to which way my land that is sown with corn is adioining, and the
beasts do enter and spoil my corn, the owner shall be punished for this,
though he did drive them out presently, or earnestly endeavor to chase them
out of the corn 10. E. 4. 7.
, so if a man chase his beasts in the high way, and they do escape into
land, which is not enclosed, and the owner does freshly pursue them, and
chaseth them out, yet this is no good plea in bar without showing that the
tenant of the land, and all those whose estate he has in the land, have
used to enclose the said land toward the high way 15. H. 7. 17.
.


Nomomath. I crave no more of this matter: now I would have you to transfer
your invention to the discourse of other offenses against the peace, which I
do thus dispose and distribute to your handling: because all offenses against
the peace are either in an inferior degree, as these whereof ye have lastly
spoken, or in a middle degree, as unlawful assemblies, riots, routes, and
forcible entres, or in a higher degree, and they be of three sorts, namely
such as be committed against the dignity of man as treason and rebellion: or
against the life of man, as murder, manslaughter, and homicide by chance, or
against the good estate of man, as theft, burglarie and robbery: I would
therefore have you first to begin to treat of unlawful assemblies, riots etc.
and then to go on with the rest, accordingly as I have set them down.

Codignostes, Canonologus, Anglonomophylax, we are willing to pleasure you in
any thing that we can, and as you propose doubts of every of these titles
severally, we will endeavor to satisfy and resolve you to our power.


The twelfth Dialogue of unlawful assemblies, riots, routes, and forcible
entries.
NOmomath. Tell me Codicgnostes what 1. Division.
do you take to be public force in your Law?


Codignostes. When an unlawful assembly is met together in the high
street, 1. The description of public force by the Civil law.
or in the open sight of men to offer abuse, hurt, or injury to a man's
person, or to take away his goods from him by violence and strength of hand L.
armatos. ff. ad L Iul: de vi pub:
.


Anglonomophylax. That likewise is public 2. That in the matter of public
force, the Common law agrees with the civil.
force by our law: of private force done to a ma^s person we have spoken
before, which if it be publicly done, it turns to be public force, but as
to the taking away of goods by open force, if a man do disseisie an other, and
when he has entered* he does carry away the chattels of the disseisie, this
is in our Law a disseisin 3. A difference by the Common law betwixt public
force and op^n force.
with force and arms, and the disseisor shall be punished by imprisonment 11.
H. 4. 16. Westminst. 1. c. 37. 4. H. 4. c. 8.
, and a man disselsed an other but not with force at his first enter, and it
was found by assise that incontinent after his first enter he cut down trees,
and this was awarded a disseisin with force and arms 30. Assis. 50. Assis. 301.
.


Nomomath. What punishment have they by your laws which commit such force?


Codicgn. The punishment of this fault in our 4. The punishment of public
force by the Civil law.
law is diuersified by the quality of the persons that commit it: for
otherwise bondmen, otherwise they that are free, are punished: and if it be
mixed with an other fault, it was punished in a free man by ancient Laws, with
perpetual bannishment, and the confiscatio^ of goods L. 2. ff. de publ iudic:
and l. si quis ad se fundun. C. eod. and. item lex. I^st: eod:
, but now it is punished with bannishment for a certain time without
confiscation of goods. relegati. Instit: quib: mod: ius patr^ potest. soluit.
, but it is to be noted that the said punishment only takes place, when force
is actually done or committed, but if nothing be done forcibly, but certain
men having weapons are assembled in a great multitude together to commit
force, the punishment of that offense is arbitrarie and lest to the discretion
of the Judge, but the Law sets down this mulcte in certain, that if he be
a man of worth he shall pay to the common treasury an hundred pounds in
gold, whosoever in such sort offends L. si. C. Ad L. Iul. de vi publ: l. 1.
and 2. in prin. ff. eod.
.


Anglonomoph. By our Law if a disseisin be 5. That by the Common law the
Counsaylors and committors of force are alike punished.
found to be done by diverse men, and to be done by force, and one of them is
found to be but a cou^sailor of the disseisin, yet every of them shall be
awarded to prison 17. Assis. pl. 14.
, and if a man be attainted of Trespass at the suite of the party, or of a
disseisin with force, wherefore he is commanded to prison, if he be present,
or that he shall be attached, if he be absent, whereupon he is attached and
put in prison at the Kings suite, until he have paid a fine to the King,
and after he finds pledges for his fine, and prays that he may be at
large, he shall not be permitted to go at large, until the Court be
sufficiently informed that he has agreed with the party, if the plaintiff
do require before that his body may continue in prison, until the defendant
have agreed with him 22. Assis. pl. 74.
. An unlawful assembly is where above the number of two do assemble to do
some unlawful 6. What an unlawful assembly is by the Common law. 7. What a
rout is.
act, and they do it not in fact, but after their said assembly they
depart without doing more, and a route is their tumultuous proceeding to
perform the act purposed: but a 8. What ^ riot is.
riot is when more the^ two do assemble together to the intent to do an
unlawful act, as to beat or to maime an other, and they do this in fact: but
if diverse assemble, and none know to what intent, this is not punishable till
the intent be known Fitzh. Just. de Peace. 28. Mar^. lect. 8. Crompt. Just. de
peace 53.
, and when men are indicted of riot, they commonly pray to be admitted to their
fine, that by the paying of their fine they may escape imprisonment, but de rig
ore iuris they ought as well to be imprisoned as fined Crompt. Justice. de
peace. 53. b.
.


Nomomath. I would know of you Canonologus, whether there be any penalty in
your Law prescribed for such offenses.


Canonolog. Yes there is a penalty set down 9. The punishment of the
aforesaid offenses by the Canon law.
for Clerks, and such as have taken holy orders, for if they do commit
public force, they are to be excommunicated until they be reformed, and they
may be deprived for such public offense c^veritatis ext. de dolo and contum:
etc. Inquisitionis, etc. qualiter and quando, extr. de accusat. etc. licet Heli
extr. de simon. etc. Generali de elect. lib. 6.
.


Nonomath. But what if the Magistrates in the 2. Division.
country be negligent and remiss in punishing such offenses, has not your
Law Codicgnostes provided reformation for them.


Codicgn. Yes, if any Judge will not do justice 1. The punishment of the
Justice not punishing such offenses by the Civil law.
in the repressing and punishing of such offenders, but shall either differ
the punishment, or neglect to give sentence, or shall partially demean himself
in the smothering of that fault, or shall not inflict the punishment due to
such offenses, the said magistrate is by Law to be made infamous, to be
deprived of his office, and to be made incapable and unable for any other
office, and further he is to be fined a C. li. in gold L. fin. C. ad leg: Iul.
de vi public. vel private.
.


Anglonomoph. Our Law is likewise severe against 2. That the Justices of Peace
by the Common law are punished for remiss^nes of punishing others, for the
afore^aid faults.
such: for if the Justices of Peace and sheriff or vndersheriffe do record the
force, and do not commit the riotors to prison, or if they commit them, and do
not record the force, they shall pay every of them a C. li. for the statute is
that they shall record and commit 13. H. 4. c. 7.
, and if any riots, routs, or assemblies of people be done against the Law,
two Justices of Peace at the least with the Sheriff or vndersheriffe must go
to the place where the riot etc. is committed, and they must take the offenders
etc. and this is by the statute of 13. H. 4. c. 7. but notwithstanding this
statute Fineux chief Justice was of opinion 14. H. 7. that for so much as the
statute is but merely in the affirmative, that therefore one Justice of Peace
may go and take power with him, and repress the riotors etc. and he needs
not to stay for his co^panio^s, nor for the Sheriff, nor etc. because the
statute is a beneficial Law made to avoid a mischief which might otherwise
happen if one Justice should stay for his companio^s 14. H. 7. 10. per Fin.
Fitzh. Just. de P. 16*
, and the Sheriff and Justices of Peace may take with the^ as many men in
harness as are necessary and gunnes etc. and may kill the riotors if they will
not yield themselves: and if the two Justices which be nearest unto the place,
where the riot is committed, and the Sheriff or vndersheriffe do not execute
the said Statute of 13. Henr. 4. they shall every of them pay an hundred
pound, as before I have said and the other Justices of the same county, where
the riot is committed shall be fined for the not repressing of the riot, if
there be any default in them 23. Eliz. Crompt. I. P. 54.
, but in such case it seems that the Justices of the Peace should have notice
of the riot given unto them, or else that it should be so notorious that by
common intent they may take notice of it Crompt. I. P. 54. b. Die. 210.
.


Nomomath. We will proceed no further in this matter, but will now pass to
the title consequently ensuing.


The thirtenth Dialogue of Treason and Rebellion.
NOmomath. Let me know Codicgnostes, before we enter into particular 1.
Division.
inquiry of the things, which are in themselfes, and ipso facto treason, what
in ancient times, and other commonweals, has been taken to be treason, and
how has it bin punished, for I think that will give great light to matters
subsequent, because that which is past was the original of that which is
present, and it is good in matters of Common weal to have a diligent
retrospect to the course of former ages. 1. The reason is showed by
Codicgnostes wherefore treason is aptly termed a fault against the dignity of
man.



Codicgn. It is true: and first I will show how aptly you have termed this
offense to be a crime or fault against the dignity of man: for as nothing
should more debase man's nature, the^ if against man, whom God has made little
inferior to the Angels, whom he has crowned with glory and worship, whom he
has made Lord of the works of his hands, and has put all things under his
feet: Psalm. 8. ver. 6. 7. 8. 9.
If I say against him the beasts of the field should rage and rebel, as it
happened in Room, when as a preamble of the fatal confusion of that City,
all the beasts subject and necessary to man's use, namely dogs, horses,
asses, oxen, etc. would not suffer their Masters to touch them, or come near
them without destruction and peril: Orosi: lib. 5. Iuli: Obseque^s in lib. de
prodit D. Augustine: lib. 3. de ciuitat: dei c. 23.
so surely when they, who are in subjection to a Prince or monarche, do
violently and mutinously break the bond of obedience and loyalty, and will
do as they list, and thereupon rebel, and trecherously conspire against the
life of their Prince, this is against the dignity of man, who being Lord of
brutishe creatures, does imitate them, and becomes as wild and savage and
disobedient as they. Now I will call to remembrance, how this disloyalty or
treachery in the highest degree, has in other ages received censure and
punishment. Traitors 2 The punishment of treason in auncien^ times.
were always loathed, detested, and sharply punished of the Romans: and
treason was accounted far more grievous then paricide, Dionis. Halicarnass.
tit: 2. and 8.
sometime they were thrown headlong down a rock, as Cassius: sometime hanged,
as Lentulus and others of Catilines seditious society, or by some special
kind of infamous death executed, as Suetonius reports, Sueton: in Neron: c.
49.
and they which conspired against Augustus, when he was newly come to the
Empire, bore the smart of their treacherous designements, and were severely
punished for the imagination of that heinous mischief. Dio Nicae: in August:
This Justice of the heathens is justified by divine authority. Non mittam
manum meam in vnctum domini. 1. Reg. c. 24
Quare non timuisti mittere manum tuam vt occideres vnctum domini: 2. Reg. c. 1.
for surely the majesty of a Prince offended and hurt, does require a deep
revenge: and if Nemesis, that is Revenge it self, do take sharp punishment
of those which offer any violence to the person of an Ambassador, Appian^in
select:
representing a Prince or monarche; with what extremity of pain are they to
be tortured, which imagine or go about to compass the death and downfall of
their liege and dread sovereign: Wherefore worthily does the excellent Lawier
out of the Code apply these titles of Majesty unto kings and Monarchs:
Celeste oraculum, diuinitas, Eternitas, Eternales vultus. Alber^c: Gentilis
lib. 2. lection: and epistolar: c. 14.
Majesty therefore, which by some is said to be the daughter of honor and
reverence, ought always, and in all things to be respected with honor and
reverence.


Nomom. Show me I pray you what may properly 2. Division.
and justly be termed treason by your laws. 1. The diverse kinds of treason
by the civil law.



Codicgn. It is treason when any thing is sediciously attempted against the
Prince or common weal: Likewise to help the enemies of the king, or common
weal with munition, money or cou^sail, likewise to take any castles,
fortresses or holds against the king or common weal: also to suffer him to go
out of prison who is accused of this fault, and he that coineth or causes
false money, l. 1. 2. 3. and 4. ff. ad l. Iul: may: and l. quisquis C. eo:
and C. de falls. monet: l. pen:
which may be committed diverse ways. I. When he coineth money, which has no
authority to 2 The diverse kinds of treason by coining of money in the civil
law.
coin, l. qui falsam. l. qui nomine and l. lege Cornelia testam: ff. ad leg:
Cor: de falls.
because to coin or form money ad regalia pertinet, C. vnico, quae sunt
regalia in vsib: f^ud: l. 2.. de inde cum aeratium ff. de origaur:
2. When money is coined in an unlawful and disproportionable matter, as when
the diverse impressions of particular coins of silver and gold are stamped upon
copper, brass or tin, or pewter, l. 1. in prin: C. de falls. monet: and l.
quicu^que nummos ff. ad l. Corn: de falls.
3. When one that has authority or license to coin money with a peculiar
impression or character, does use a strange and unlawful stamp of his own
devising, d. l. lege Cornelia testam: in princ:
4. When the lawful and ordinary weight of the coin is falsified, and altered
by one that has no authority to alter. c. quanto de iur^ iur: extra. and l. 1.
de veteris numism: potest. C. li. 11.
5. To utter or cause to be uttered false money knowing 3 The punishments of
traitors by the civil law.
it to be false, l. lege Cornel: cauetur. ff. de falls.
In all which cases, except the last, the offenders do suffer punishment of
death, some of them being burnt by fire, gloss. in l. 2. C. de falls: Moneta:
sup verb: flammaru^ in 3. solut. ad argum: l: 1.
other some being thrown to devouring beasts, l: quicunque cu^ sequent: ff: ad
leg: Cor: defal:
and their goods be confiscated, l: si quis in prine: C. de fall: mon:
but he which utters false coin is punished with serving all his life time
to them which dig in mines for metal, ff. de varijs and extra or: crim:
and the punishment of them that clippe money is by our law capital. d. l.
quicunque ff. ad leg: Cor: de falls.
But he that coineth money with the impression of a strange prince is not
punished with a natural, but with a civil death: for he is punished with
perpetual exile, and his goods are co^fiscated, for every Prince of every
nation and kingedome has his several stamp and coin, and so they had in
ancient times: the Aetolians did give for 4 The several coins of forain
princes in ancient time.
their coin the image of Hercules breaking with his club the horns of
Achelous: the Thebanes did give the twibil of Hercules: the Trachinians
Hercules sitting: the Macedonia^s Hercu: his club b l: 3. ff: eod;
and the horns of a goat: the Thasians, Bacchus crowned, and Hercules their
Deliverer: the Dymeans a goat, which did tread upon a frogge: the Corinthians
Pegasus, with Neptune having a three-forked mase in his hand, sitting upon him:
the Naxians did give Bacchus with a long beard, and a Satyr with a pot in
his hand: the Metapontinia^s Ceres with a sheafe of corn: the Baeotians did
give a Fly with a Heart, and Bacchus his mazarde with a cluster of grapes: the
Dardanians did give two cocks fighting, the Athenians an Owl: the Argiues a
Wolf. Alexander the great gave for his coin the image of Bucephalus his horse
with victory having wings: Pyrrhus, Pallas having a spear in her hand
sitting on a thron: August. Caesar the star of Capricorn, under which he was
borne. Pollux. Sophocles interpres. Hadrian: Iunius. de re nummar. in Nomen:
clat:



Anglonomoph. I will particularly examine all the precedent matters of your
last discourse, which have any resemblance or be of any use in our Law,
sithence order enforces me to speak of disorder, and of the disloyal, and
seditious, and traitorous attemptes against the person of the prince, and the
good estate of the common weal, which may fully appear by a statute made 25.
E: 3. de proditionibus ca. 2. and likewise by the common Law, for as Thorpe
says 22. E. 3. 22. E. 3. p. 49
it is treason 5 The diverse kinds of treason by the common Law.
to succor the kings enemies, and to levy war against the King in his
Realm, or to be adherent to the Kings enemies in his Realm, by giving them
aid and comfort in his Realm or other-where is made treason by the abouesayde
statute, as may appear by the case of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, who was
arraigned for being of Counsel with Wyat in leuying his seditious war. 1.
Mari. Die. 98. Crom. Just. P. 40.
And D. Story being beyond the sea, and practicing with a foreign Prince, to
invade the Realm and to work the death of our dread sovereign Lady the
Queen, was justly attainted of high treason, 13. Eliz. 298. Dyer.
and Sherleys a French man, taking with Stafford the Castle of Scarborough
rebelliously in Yorkshire, was arraigned in the Kings Bench upon an
indictement of treason, which was contra ligeantiam suam debitam. 4. Mari. 144.
Dyer.



Nomom. It seeme^h to me that these words should only extend to lieges, and
subjects.


Anglonomoph. Nay they do extend to any one 6 How far forth this word
(leageance) does extend by the, common law.
who is in the Realm in the time of peace, and he that has the benefitte of
the Queens peace (forrainer or other) ought not to violate or disturb it any
way, but if it had been in time of war betwixt the two kingdoms, then he
could not have been arrained, but should have been ransomed: but he that in a
foreign commonweal, 4. Mati. 144: Dyer.
7 How the Q. enemies are to be pun^shed by the common law agreeing with the
law of God.
where he is permitted to soiourne, will raise tumults, and kindle rebellion,
deserves to be punished as a rebel, and therefore it is truly, and iudicially
said of Albericus Gentilis: Criminosos, violentos, ne quidem very dei tuetur
altar, quos neque intuetur deus, nisi iratus, Alberic: Gentil. lib 2. de Arm.
Romans c. 2.
And again: Innocentia praestat securitatem. Alb: Gentil: lib. 1. de Arm: Rom:
c. 2.
And therefore the Romans did well in arraigning Bomilcar of treason, who
being a stranger conspired against their state: Salust: in Iugurth.
But it is true which before I said, that if war be betwixt two Kings, as
namely the King of Fez, and the King of Polonia, if the king of Polonia do in
his own kingdom take prisoner one of the subjects of the King of Fez working
mischief against him, this is lawful: but to arraigne him or put him to death
is unlawful: for a prisoner so taken is to be put to his ransom, but not
to open shame as a traitor: and therefore the Prophet said unto the King of
Israel: An quos captiuos abduceres, gladio tuo and arcu tuo eos percuteres?
Eliseus by a wonderful miracle did make the Syrians enemies to the King of
Israel his captives, whom the King would have slain, but the Prophet did
forbid him by this argument, that they which are taken in war ought not to
be slain, much less these whom God had given up into his hands. 4. Reg. c.
6. Joseph. 9. Ambrosi: 1. de offic: 29.



Cononol. Indeed so is our law, which says, Hostem 8 How enemies are punished
by the Canon law.
pugnantem necessitas perimat, sicut resistenti violentia redditur, ita victo,
vel capto misericordia debetur: c. 3. 23. q. 1.
and this Law has been practiced of the Grecians, Plutar. in apoph.
Romans, Alex. 4. genesis 7.
Thessalians, Illerians, Triballians, and Bulgarians, Nic Grego. lib 4. 6.
and to this purpose it has bin said, vendere cum possis captiuum, occidere
noli. Horat. ep. ad Quin.



Nomomat. I have interrrupted you Anglonomo. But I pray you continue that
course which you propsed to your self in comparing the assertions of the Civil
Law touching matters of treason, with your rules of common Law.


Anglonomoph. Whereas he has said that to suffer one to go out of prison for
treason which is impeached for that crime, is treason: that is also agreeable to
our Law established by Statute: whereof I will recite the words: de
prisonarijs prisonam frangentibus dominus rex vult and precipit, quod nullus de
cetero qui prisonam fregerit subeat iudicium vitae vel membrorum pro fractione
prisonae tantum, nisi causa pro qua captus, and imprisonatus fuerit tale
iudicium requirat, si de illa secundum legem and consuetudinem terrae fuisset
conuictus: 1. E. 1. c. 2. Rast. Felony 2.



Nomomath. Do ye then account every suffesering of a prisoner to eschape, to
be a breach of prison?


Anglonomoph. Yea, for if a man arrest one for 9 How breaking of prison is
taken in the common law.
felony, and after let him go at large, whether he will: if he be arrested
for Felony it is Felony, if for Treason it is Treason, if for a Trespass it
is a Trepasse and sic de singulis. Stamf. lib. 1. c. 26.



Nomomat. Well, I pray you proceed in your purpose.


Anglonomoph. As to that which is uttered of 10 How treason is committed by
coining of money according to the censure of the common law.
Codicgnostes touching the unlawful coyninge of money, it is for the most
part consonant to the Common Law of this Realm, as now it is, and as it was
in ancient times by the testimonies of Bracton, Bract: li. 2. ti^ de crim:
laes, may:
Britton, Britt. fol. 16.
and Glanuille, Glan: lib. 14.
and the aforesaid Statute of 25. Edward the 3. makes it treason for a common
person to coin the kings money without his warrant and authentike, which the
statut calls Counterfaiting: and whereas the statute says (the kings money) it
must be intended the coin of this Realm or the dominions of it: Sramf. 1.
lib. 1. ca. 1.
and this word (counterfeit) does import, that if a man do counterfeit the
Kings money, though he do not utter it, this is treason: 6. H. 7. 13. 1. R. 3.
1.
and the forging and counterfaiting of coin of another Realm is made treason
awel as the cou^terfaiting of the coin of this Realm. 4. H. 7. c. 18. 1. and
2. Phi: and Ma: ca. 11.
But then it must be current by proclamation in this Realm, 1. M^r: c. 6.
Cromp: I: P: 40.
and as to the clipping of money hear the statute of 5. of our Sovereign
Lady the Queen. Be it enacted, etc. that after the first day of May next
coming, clipping, washing, rounding or filing, for wicked lucre or gain sake
of any the proper money, or coin of this Realm or the dominions thereof, or
of any other Realm allowed or suffered to be current within this realm, or
the dominions thereof etc. shall be taken and adjudged to be treason by virtue of
this act etc. 5. Eliz. c. 11.



Nomomat. I pray you now declare the forfaitures and punishments of these
several treasons.


Anglonomo. The judgment of him that is convicted 11 The several punishments of
treasons by the common law.
of high treason is to be carried back to the place whence he came, and from
thence to be drawn upon a hurdle unto the place of execution there to be
hanged by the neck, and to be cut down quick, and his entrails and privy
members to be sundred from his body, and to be burnt within his view, and his
head to be cut off, and his body to be divided into 4. parts, and to be
disposed at the Queens will. Stamf. lib. 3. ca. 19.
This is the Judgment and sentence of condempnation of a man, but of a woman
it is otherwise, namely that she shall be drawn on a hurdle and burnt, Stamf.
ibid, and 23. lib. Ass. pl. 2. Com^ 31 6
and the offendour shall forfait his goods and lands to the King of whosoever
the lands are holden, 25. E. 3. c. 2. Stamf. ibid* 1. H. 6. 5. Stamf. li. 2.
c. 37. etc. 40. and lib. 3. ca. 20. 4. H. 7. 11. per Towns.
but he which has estate in lands for term of life or for years shall
forfaite his estate only, Stamf. lib. 3. c. 26.
and by the statute of 26. H. 8. ca 13. and 5. and 6. Ed. 6. ca. 11. tenant in
tail shall forfait his land if he offend in high treason, but no man shall
forfaite lands which he has in the right of an other, as in the right of his
wife, or in the right of a Church, 5. and 6. E. 6. ca. 11. Stamf. lib. 3. c. 26.
and with the land which a man forfaiteth, he shall forfaite his ^uidences
which concern the land, 49. H. 6. 15.
and if a man levy war against the King, and is slain in it, yet his land
shall be forfaited, 7. H. 4. 27. P Mark. 34. E. 3. c. 12. 39. H 6. c. 1. Stamf.
lib. 3. 29.
and in such case the wife of such offendour shall loose her dower, and his
blood or lineage shall be corrupt, Stamf. lib. 3. c. 19.
But such as clippe, wash, round, or file money are only to forfait their
lands during their life: 5. Eliz. c. 11.
but such offense causes not corruption of blood, nor the loss of Dower.


Nomomat. Now time and order does require that ye should speak of Homicide.


The fourtenth Dialogue of Homicide, that is Murder, Manslaughter, and Homicide
by chance or misfortune.
NOmomat. Because the apt division 1. Division.
of things gives great light and ministers exceeding help to the knowledge
and understanding of them, I would therefore know Codicgnostes, how many
kinds of Homicide are set down in your Law.


Codicgn. Homicide in our Law is either the 1 The several kinds of Homicide by
the civil Law and first murder is described.
wilful killing of a man of set purpose: l. 1. in princ. and in. diuus ff. ad
l. Corn. de sicar: and l. 2. C. eod.
or else the killing of a man in the defense of his own person: as if I. N.
should assault I. S. with a sword he 2 Manslaughter se defendendo by the civil
law.
may defend himself with a sword, and so avoid the injury, if otherwise he
cannot eschew it: but if I. S. may fly from him without danger, then the
Law binds him to fly: but if a man should so assault me, that he should
drive me to a very narrow pinch, so that I cannot find a mean to escape with
my life, in this case it is lawful for me manfully to defend my self though
it be with killing him, Iodoc: Da^^ouderius in re^u^ criminal. prax. c. 78 and
79
and these sorts of manslaughter may be committed with clubbe, in d.. Diuus l.
1. ff. ad leg. Corn: de sicar:
stone, sword or dart, with arrows, lances, pertisanes, iauelins, or with
gunnes, Iusti: de pub: iudic:. Ite^ lex Cornelia.
or a man may be killed by poison, l. 3.. 1. ff. Ad: Corn: de sicar:
or by precipitation and being thrown headlong from the top of some house,
or some bridge, or some hill, or some tree, d. l. 1. ff. ad leg: Corn: de sicar:
There is an other 3 The description of selfe-slaughter by the civil law.
kind of Homicide, which is termed homicidium sui ipsius, when a man kills
himself, and such offenders are punished by our Law according to the quality
of their mind, whereby they were moved: for if they kill themselves through
grief or impatience G. de Bon^ eoru^ qui mort: sibi consc:
of some infirmity, no punishment follows their fact, but they are left to
the tribunal 4 A diversity of killing a man's self by the civil Law.
of the almighty Judge of the quick and the dead: but if they kill themselves
upon any other cause, their goods are confiscated, Authen: bona damnatoru^ C.
de Bon: da^nat: Nouel: 134. c. fin: ff. de iur: sisc: and C. de priuil. sisc.
tit^ lit:
and their bodies though they be dead, and so impassible, and free from
punishment, yet for the terror of the^ that live, they are thus ordered. The
body is drawn out of the house, wherein the man did kill himself, with ropes,
not by the door, but through some hoal or pit made under the threshold of the
door, ^^ The punishment of selfe-slaughter by the civil law.
because it is unworthy to be brought out the same way, which the man whilst
he lived, did use: and he is drawn by a horse to the place of punishment or
shame, where he is hanged upon a gibbet, and none may take the body down, but
by the authority of the magistrate: Da^houder. in prax. rer: criminal: c. 88.
and none may wear any mourning roabe for such an offendour. l. liberorum.
Pomponius in versic: no^ solent. ff. de his qui notan: infamia.
The last kind of Homicide is Homicide 6 Homicide by casualtie is described.
per infortunium, or homicidium casuale, as if a Tiler with one of his tyles,
which he uses about his work, do hurt or kill one that passes by, he is
not to be punished for this hurt or fault, if he did give warning before in
convenient time, Argum. l. cu^ quis l. si solutu^us ff. de solut: l. 1. in
princip: and l. de pupillo.. in p^u^iu^, ff. de no^. oper. nuntiat.
the like may be said of these which use bows, or crossebowes, which loppe
trres, or cut them down by the root, if a man be slain thereby, l. si
putator: ff. ad l. Aquil: ff. Item si putator, de l. Aquil:
So it is of them that ride a race, if they give warning, and so it is of
Carmen or Coachmen, and so it is of others, whilst they do such things as
are permitted by Law, yet such persons must susteigne an arbitrary punishment,
because so great a mischief ensues, Damhorder rer: criminal: prax: cap. 85.
and so it is of others which throw suddenly, staffes or stones at birds or
dogs, and by that means hurt or kill a man, Damhorder ibid.
but yet God would have man to be free from this fault, and therefore such
offenders had Asyla, temples of mercy permitted unto them as things necessary
for their absolution. Deutero. 19. ver. 5.



Anglonomo. It seems that we make more 7 Anglo. Takes exception to the
division of homicide by the civil law.
kinds of Homicide then you, for with us there is one kind of Homicide of
malicious purpose, which we call murder, an other which is committed upon the
sudden in a heat and fury of mind, which we term Manslaughter, a third
which we call se defendendo, a fourth per infortunium, the fifth Homicide of a
man's self, whereby the offender is called Felo de se.


Nomom. Indeed Codicgnostes you have not, as to me seems, comprehended in
your division all the particular kinds of Homicide: for you seem under your
first member, which is the wilful killing of a man of malice forethought, to
comprehend manslaughter, which is done in the heat and fury of anger and
sudden falling out.


Codicgn. In deed so I did mean it, for our most 8 An other division of
homicide by the civil Law.
compendious and complete division of Homicide is thus: either it is done
destinato, or necessario, or casu destinato, when a man of malice preconceiued
does kill himself or an other man, as Nero, Judas, and others, which kind of
manslaughter is impious, because the power of life and death is Gods and not
ours, and therefore is not to be usurped by man, wherefore we have a very good
rule. Nemo membrorum suorum dominus est: l. liber homo ff. ad leg. Aquil. and
l. lex Cornelia. Constitutu^ ff. ad l. Corn. de sicar.
Necessario a man commits manslaughter, when he does it in his own defense,
and to beat back force by force, which kind of manslaughter being done by
necessity, and not by will, deserves pardon according to the saying:

Iudice me, fraus est concessa repellere fraudem:
Armaque in armatos sumere iura sinunt.
And it is a Maxim in our Law: Quod quisque in tutelam corporis sui fecerit,
iure fecisse existimatur: l. vt vim. ff. de inst. and iur.
Casu Homicide is committed, when a man kills one not purposing that, but
doing an other thing, as the Hebrews do report of Lamech, that meaning to
strike a wild beast he killed Cain with his darte, Ioh. Wolph. in Comm. ad
Deuteronom. lib. 2.
and so you may perceive that we comprehend that which you call murder, and
that which you call manslaughter under that kind of Homicide which is
committed destinato.


Nomomath. I do rather perceive it, then approve it: wherefore I would have
you Anglonomoph. to show the difference betwixt these two kinds in their
several natures, and what difference they hold from other kinds of Homicide,
that so I may more easily understand wherein your Laws agree or disagree, and
likewise the reasons of the said accordance and disagreement.


Anglonomoph. The dyfference of killinge men voluntary and inuoluntarylie is
very ancient. 8 The difference of killing men voluntarily and inuoluntarily
is showed to be ancient.
Genes. 9. and 4. Exodus: 21. Deutre. 5. Leuit. 24. Number. 35. Deuter. 19.
And Demosthenes says, that the Phaenicians did punnishe such as did
voluntarylie kill men with death, and with the loss of all that they had:
but such as did unwillingly cause the death of a man, they did pardon, and
forgive: Demost. in orat. contr. Mid.
But the difference betwixt murder and manslaughter has not been heretofore
much opened, or effectually stood upon, which because it is large, and of
great compass in our Law, I will (God permitting me) by some cases make
clear and apparent and then discende to the description of the other 9 The
definition of murder by the common law.
kinds of Homicide. Murder is when a man kills an other feloniously upon
malice fore thought, Pl. Com^ 261.
and it is not material whether he kill him openly or secreatly, or whether
he that is slain be an Englishman, or of other nation, if he live in this
Realm under the Queens protection, Stamf. 18.
and he can not have 10 Malice whereof murder comes, is showed to be
twofolde and diverse cases are put thereupon.
the benefitte of Clergy and Sanctuary, 22. H. 8. c. 1.
and there be two sorts of malice which are motives to this horrible act,
namely a malice employed and a malice expressed: malice employed is when one
kills an other suddenly, without any defense on the part of the other:
malice expressed, when it is known that there is malice betwixt the parties:
Crompt. Just. P. 19.
I will illustrate both these several kinds with several cases, beginning
first with malice employed. A Jailer had malice to a Recusant who was in his
ward, because he suspected that he was too familiar with his wife, and after
the prisoner purchased to go out of prison, as he went before for his
disporte, and the Jailer suddenly stroke the prisoner upon the head, so that he
fell to the ground, whereupon he died, and this was adjudged murder at the
Assizes at Chester: Cromp. Iu. P. 20.
And if a thief rob an other man, and kill him, this is murder, though he did
never see the man slain before, and though he had never inueterate malice
against him: yet he had malice before the murder to this intent, that he
would rather kill him then be disappointed of his purpose. Com. 474.
Two fought together of malice forethought, having purpose to kill, and a
stranger came to part them, and one of them killed him, this was felony in
them both, and they both were executed because they had an intent the one of
them to kill the other, and this act came originally of that: 22. E. 3. Co^on^
262. and Dyer 120.
And if the Justices of Peace with the Sheriff come to suppress riotours, and
one which attends upon them is slain by one of the riotors, this is murder
in him, and in all the other riotors which are present, Cromp. Iu. P. 21.
And if a man without quarrel offered do kill one of the standers by this is
murder, Crompt. Iu. P. 22.
proceeding from employed malice, Lam. E^renarch. 255.
Thus far of malice employed: malice expressed may more easily appear unto
you, as if a man bring an appeal of felony against B. and the said B. meets
the plaintiff and they quarrel together upon the using of the said appeal,
and fight, and B. kills the plaintiff, this seems to be murder. Cromp. Iu.
P. 21.
and if a man be attainted of murder he shall suffer pain of death, and 11
The punishment of murder by the common law.
shall sorfaite lands and goods and chattels: but manslaughter as it is in
fact less heinous, so it is 12 The description of manslaughter by the common
law.
in punishment less grievous: for it is then committed when two or more fight
together upon the sudden without malice precedent, and the one of them
kills the other, in such case 13 The punishment of manslaughter by the common
law.
the offendour shall have his Clergy, Cromp. I. P. 23. Com. 261.
but shall forfaite his goods, and if two do fight together without malice
precedent, and after diverse blows given, the one of them flies a great
space from the other, and the other goes into a house very near for a
weapon, and pursues incontinent, and kills him that flies, this is but
manslaughter, because it was done in a continuing fury, Crompt. Just. P. 23.
and two did fight together upon the sudden without malice preconceiued, and
one comes to part them, and the one of them, which fights kills him, this
is manslaughter in him, because the fighting was an unlawful act: 22. Ass.
Coron^. 180.
but if they had fought together Ex malitia precogitata, and the one of them
had slain him, this had been felony in them both. (22. E. 3. Coro. 266.
Sta^f. 16
Manslaughter se defendendo is, where 14 Ma^slaughter se defendendo by the
common law.
two fight together upon the sudden, and before a mortal wound on either
party, the one flies unto the wall, or to some other place, beyond which he
cannot pass, for the safeguard of his life, and the other pursues him, and he
which flies kills him that pursues, this is manslaughter in his own
defense, 3. E. 3. Coro. 284. and 286.
and it is not material in this case which of them begun the affray, or
which of them gave the first stroke Stamf. 15.
, and the offender in this case shall forfeit his goods 4. H. 7. 2. 43. Assis.
pl. 3. 21. E. 3. 17.
, homicide by misaduenture is no other 16. Homicide by misaduenture.
then has been described by Codign. for he has recited out of the Civil law
almost all the cases which we read in our lawbookes: and his distinction
likewise is of force and effect with us: for if a man do an unlawful act, and
any misaduenture 17. The punishment of it.
do happen upon it, by which a man is slain, this is felony though it be not
murder: and for every homicide by mischance a man shall forfeit his goods 22.
Assis. cor. 180. Stamf. li. 1. c. 8.
, likewise he that is a homicide 18. Homicide of a man's self and the
punishment of it.
of himself, is such as has been before discovered by Codicgnostes, and he by
our Law shall forfait his goods Fitz. Coron. 301. 362. 426.
.


Nomomath. I pray you let me know this Codicgnostes, 2. Division.
whether he that counsaileth, commands, abetteth or assisteth a murderer,
ought by yuor law to be taken and censured as a murderer?


Codicgn. Yes verily, for homicide is either 1. Homicide is showed to be
twofold in the Civil law, consili^, and operis.
consilij or operis, and therefore if a man counsel one to do a murder, who
if the counsel had not been would have done it, he that executes the
counsel, and he that gives the counsel, are both in the eye of Law
murderers c. sicut dignum 1.. qui vero de homicid. Extra and cap. fin. eo. tit.
lib. 6. and l. qui seruo. ff. de furt. etc. Nullus ex consilio de regal. iur.
in sexto.
. But when it is done by commandment by persons executing the commandment,
which otherwise would not have done it, then the commander only is accounted
guilty of homicide l. 3.. item versi. item qui author. ff. ad leg. Corn. de
sica^ cap. fi. de homici. lib. 6. l. In hoc iudicio. ff. de seru. corrupt.
, and if one lend one a sword to kill an other man or himself, he is guilty
of homicide l. nihil interest. ff. ad leg. Corn. de sicar: l. 15. qui opem. ff.
de furt: and in. interdum quoque Iusti. de oblig. quae ex quas. delic.
nascuntur.
, and if a man be cooperant in the act, he is a principal offender Gloss: c.
sicut l. dignum. illi vero verb: mors de Homic: extra.
.


Anglonomoph. By our Law the counsailor, co^mandor, 2. By the Common law the
counsailor and assistor in murder are accounted principal offenders.
or assistor are without any such difference or limitation as you have made,
guilty of homicide, and principal offenders: for all that be present, ayding,
abetting or comforting him that does murder, are principal offe^dors though
they give no stroke, for the stroke of him that smites and wounds is the
wounding, and striking of all the others in law 4. H. 7. 18. Comm. 100. 3. E.
3. Coro. 309 13. H. 7. 10.
: and therefore they which come in the assembly or company of others into any
place where any evil is done, be it homicide, robbery, or any other misdemenor,
shall be held principal offenders though they stand apart, and do nothing 2. E.
3. Inditem. 22. Stamf. 40. ^o^m. 475. 3. E. 3 Cor. 314 and 350.
, but in these cases it is necessary that they be confederate in the fact: for
if they be not co^federate, they shall be punished by fine, and no otherwise 8.
E. 2. Cor. 395. and 293.
, but if they levy hue and cry and stretch out their hands to take the
offenders they shall not be fined Stamf. 40.
, and he which is within age shall not be fined in such case 14. H. 7. 31.
.


Nomom. I pray ye show me whether they that 3. Division*
kill men by witchcraft, or make their bodies to languish and consume away, are
punishable by death in your Law? for some be of opinion that there be no
witches.


Codicgn. They may as well think that there be 1. Homicide by witchcraft is
described.
no devils, surely Europe is too full of such wicked wretches, which either by
magical arts calling up damned spirits, or corrupting the elements, which
God has made for the use of this life, do work the destruction of many
innocent persons, or else by acquainting themselves with familiar devils do
effect the like mischief, and their judgment in 2. The punishment of witches,
and magicians by the Civil law.
our law, because they are such strangers to nature, is, quod feralis bestia
eos absumat l. multi. C. de malefic. and mathem.
, and such as by Images of wax inchaunted do cause the death of any man, if
they be co^uicted and do confess the fault they are punished as is before
said, but if they will not confess their flesh is torn from the bone with
nails and with hooks l. si excepta si quis C. de malefic.
, and not only witches, but 3. They that have asked counsel of witches have
been in ancient time punished.
even such as have asked counsel of witches for the remedy of diseases, have
been in former times punished. For Ammianus reports that in the time of the
sons of Constantine, and the other Emperors, which next succeeded the^, if
any man did wear about his neck any thing as a remedy of the fever quartaine,
or any other infirmity, he was punished capitally as accessarie to witchcraft
Ammian. Marcellin. lib. 19.
: and he tells in an other place that a certain simple old woman, because
she was wont to cure fevers by a kind of incha^tment was put to death as
guilty of witchcraft: and a young man in the bath putting his hands sometime to
a marble stone, and sometime to his breast, and rehearsing withal, certain
letters of the Alphabet, imagining this to be a good remedy against the pain
of the stomache, was put to death by the sword Ammian. lib. 29.
.


Nomom. The Romans it seems were in this, stra^gely opinionated: for the
Graecia^s and others did approve such medicines. Pericles did hold that
diseases might be cured by hanging certain written books about the neck of
the diseased Plutar. in Pe^ic.
. And Bion the Atheist was of the same opinion Diogen. Laert. in vit. B^on.
, the Indians (as Strabo testifies) do account this the only Physic Strabo
lib. 15.
, and Vallesius reports that charms have been called remedies of Cato,
Varro, Theophrastus, Serenus, Trallianus and of many Physicians of Italy,
Greece, and Arabia Valles. lib. de sa. philos.
. And Vlpian shows that many have affirmed unto him, that such charms and
enchantments have done the^ good l. 1.. Medicos, ff. de extr. cogn.
, and we know that there was a kind of exorcisme 4. An objection is made of
exorcisme used in the church.
and we know that there was a kind of exorcisme or coniuration used in the
Church, whereby the devils were restreined from doing hurt unto men l. 6. C.
de Ep: and cler. Alciat. lib. 2. parerg. c. 23.
, and Josephus says, that this was Salomons invention Joseph. lib. 8. antiquit.
, wherefore me thinks they that use such things, or work any good effect by
such things, should in no sort be punished. For (as Apuleius says) Nihil quod
salutis causa fit, criminosum est Apulei. apolog. 1.
.


Canonolog. It may be that Codicgnostes had rather believe the ce^sures of
Roman magistrates in matters of Justice, then the opinions of Roman and
Grecian Philosophers in table talk and common speech. I know by good
authority these things are condemned, and therefore it is said of such men and
their medicines in the Canon. Quae alij scelera, isti remedia nominant c. Illud
quod 26. q. 2.
: And Tacitus clearly affirms that such things medicorum disciplina
condemnat Tacit. lib. 1. histor.
: And Plutarch calls such practices Insanias Plutarch. in pericl.
: and if Lucian be of any authority with you, he says, Per verbula and
incantationes sanitatem operari non credo Lucian. in Philopseud.
. Pliny likewise speaks to the same purpose in these words: Maximae
quaestionis and semper incertae est, valeantur aliquid verba and incantamenta
carminum in medendo: sed viritim sapientissimi cuiusque respuit fides Plini.
lib. 28. c. 2.
: As for these exorcismes heretofore used in the Church, Bodinus teaches that
the Prophets never used in their times any such matter Bodin. lib. 3. demon.
, and he 5. Answer is made to the aforesaid objection according to the opinion
of Bodmus.
says further, that the primitive Church never used them, and he disalloweth
the testimony of Josephus and disprooueth it in this point: but sithence the
matter is so doubtful, I do not think that the lawmakers ought to punish the
using and applying of charms or such things, which are for that purpose hanged
about the neck of the sick body, if they be innocently done and without
mixture of magic or evil art, with death: but it principally apperteineth
to divines and preachers to extirpate such superstitions out of the hearts of
men, and to teach them that it is irreligious and against the glory of God, to
go for remedy to such dumb things and not to God himself, and that false
is that saying of Apuleius, Nihil quod salutis causa fit criminosum est: for
there is nothing subject to the use of man so good, but it may be abused: yet
surely the Laws ought not to extend their leueritie against this last recited
fault, if no greater fault be joined with it.


Nomomath. I am reasonably taught for this matter: but I pray you show me
whether witches have any such power as has been before spoken of.


Codicgn. Doubtless they have and that may be 6. The great and strange power of
witchcraft.
proved by innumerable authorities. Virgil says that they have this power:
Sistere aquam fluuijs, and vertere sydera retro Virgil. 4. Aenedi.
. And again, Carmina vel coelo possunt deducere lunam Virgil. in Pharm.
: and Claudian affirms the like, Thessalidas patrijs lunare venenis incestare
iubar. But most fully, most deeply, and most 7. Lucan is commended for his
ample disclosing of the detestable secrets of forcery.
exquisitely does Lucan in his sixth book describe, and discourse of these
things.


Nomomath. These are the frivolous imaginations of poets, which may lie for
the whetstone.


Codign. But in many things, and doubtless in this, they do neither lie nor
dally: for whereas Virgil says, Atque satas alio vidi traducere messes, this
is no flying fancy, but the sage and grave determination of the makers of the
Laws of 8. The laws of the twelfe tables do condemn witchcrafte.
the twelfe Tables where it is said in the old Latin, Qui alienas fruges
excantauerit quiue alienam segete^ pellexerit.
Quei alienas fruces excantassit queiue alienam secetem pelexerit: and
therefore vain is the surmise of Seneca when he says of such matters, 9.
Seneca his opinion of charms and enchantments is disliked.
Rudis adhuc antiquitas and attrahi imbres cantibus, and repelli credebat:
quorum nihil fieri posse tam palam est, vt huius rei causa nullius Philosophi
sohola intranda sit Senec. lib. 4: naturali quaestion. c. 7.
. Whom S. Augustine does iudicially 10. S. Augustine confuteth the opinion of
Seneca.
confute in his eight book De Ciuitate Dei, where he absolutely affirms,
Haec maleficia generi humano pernicio sa esse non dubium est D. Augustine. lib.
de Ciuit. dei 8. c. 19.
. And 11. It is likewise disproued by Pausania.
Pausania a credible writer witnesses, that he has seen men, Qui sacris and
incantamentis grandinem auerterent Pausan. li. 2.
.


Nomom. If such hurt be done, it is done by the devil, and the wicked spirits
his ministers, which suggest such things to selie old women, and are ready to
perform them at their command: but what fault can be justly imputed to these
women. 12. Witches are proved to be apostates and in what manner they become
apostates.



Canonol. Surely their offense is very great, for they are most abominable
apostats, and workers of extreme mischief, they have denied Christ and vowed
the^selfs to the devil, which manner of vow is done either secretly or
expressly: secretly, when one witch or co^iurer voweth with an other coniurer or
witch, that in consideration that A. has promised to B. that he shall do great
and marvelous things, as namely that he shall know future things, and do other
things, which others shall not be able to do, B. therefore repromiseth to A. that
therefore he will renounce the catholic faith, that he will obstinately despise
the holy Sacraments, that he will with all his strength and power worship and
cleave to his master, and will give to him all kind of adoration under the
form of idols: and this is called a secreate protestation because it is not
done to the Devil himself but to his servant c. qui sme saluatore. 26. q. 2.
Sum: confession: eo. tit. q. 3. and 6. and q. 10. in sin.
, the other protestation is called the express protestation and it is double,
either private, or solemn and public, the solemn or public is that, which
is done to the devil sitting in the throne of his pride, to receive the
general assemblies of all witches, coniurers and inchau^ters, as is very
lively and wittily described by Torquato Tasso in his Jerusalem etc Tasso
Gierusa. liberat. Canto. 4.
.

Siede Pluton nel mezo, econ la destra
Sostien lo scettro ruuido, e pesante;
Ne tanto scoglio in mar, ne rupe al pestra,
Ne pur Calpe s'inalza, o'l magno Atlante,
Ch'anzi lui non paresse un picciol colle,
Si la gran front, ele gran corna estolle.
Horrida maesta nel fiero aspetto
Terrore accresce, epiu superbo il rende,
Rosseggian gli occhi, e di veneno infetto,
Come infausta Cometa il guardo splende.
Gl'inuolue il mento, e su l'irsuto petto
Hispida, efolta la gran barba scende.
E in guisa di uoragine profonda
S' apre la bona d'atro sangue immonda etc.

Nomomath. At what place and in what time is this wickedness done?


Canonolog. It is done in woddie places, or in caves under the earth, which are
far remote and distant from the places of men's conversation, such dark and
shadowed groves, and corners as are very fully portraited by Lucan Lucan. lib.
3.
.

Lucus erat longo nunquam violatus ab aeuo
Obscurum cingens connexis aeraramis,
Omnisque humanis lustrata cruoribus arbos:
Illis and volucres metuunt insistere ramis
Et lustris recubare ferae, etc.
In such desolate places, or in ruinated Castles this mischief is celebrated,
and commonly it is done in the darkness of a most tempestuous night c. Episcopi
26. q. 5.
, for the Devil falling from Paradise fell into extreme darkness, and by
defect of grace deliteth in darkness Thom. Aquinas in tractat. 44. quaestion.
16. artic. 1. est in tit. de demon.
, so that all the works that proceed from him are black, horrible, and full
of darkness, clean contrary to the works of our Savior Christ, which he did
in the open light, for the glorifying of his father and the edifying of his
Church.


Nonomath. Yet my assertion remains firm, that all the evils whereof you have
before spoken, are done by the devil, and not by the witch.


Canonol. They are done by the witch cooperating 13. It is proved that the
bodies of witches do work with their minds in lewd enterprises.
with the devil, who will not do any such hurt without their commau^d, for
surely the bewitching of men's bodies must needs be accounted their own work.
The bodies of aged persons or impure, which when they wax cankered in malice,
they use their very breath and their fight being apt for contagion, and by the
devil whetted for such purpose, to the vexation and destruction of others: for
if they which are troubled with the disease of the eyes called Ophthalmia, do
infect others that look earnestly upon them: is it any marvel that these
wicked creatures having both bodies and minds in a higher degree corrupted,
should work both these and greater mischiefs? but their malice does especially
exercise it self upon the weak and tender bodies of children and young women,
which are most subject to the impression of the air that is infected by them
as Heliodorus plainly shows Heliod. Aethiopic. lib. 3.
, and that it has been so thought in ancient time, may appear by Theocritus
speaking of the remedy which was wont to be used against such witchcraft
Theocrit. eidyl. 6. and 7.
, and again they deserve severely to be punished, not only for vowing
themselfes to the devil, but also for mingling themselfes in the company of
wicked spirits, which must needs infect their bodies and souls, and so make
them apt instruments for the hurting of others.


Nomomath. I do not think, that, that is possible 14. Alciate his opinion
touching the meeting of witches amongst themselves, and the meeting of the the
devil is urged.
to be done, which is commonly reported of witches, dwelling in several
places, meeting one an other, and meeting likewise the Devil, and that opinion
holds Alciat Alciat. lib. 8. parerg: c. 22.
, and some other in these days: wherefore I see no reason that they should be
punished for it.


Canonolog. That is both true and possible, as 15. Alciate his said opinion is
confronted by the authority of Bodinus.
against Alciat, and other writers straungely conceited in this point Bodinus
has largely and learnedly disputed: Alciat denies it to be possible, that
naturally bodies, which are said to meet in places far distant, should at
the naming of Jesus vanishe into the air, and be carried swiftly and inuisibly
thither, but this is possible enough: For if the Spirits cannot in a moment
withdraw the sight of things, surely they can do very little: for this is
many ways done, and Iuggelers and professors of feats can perform it, and
as to the swifte transporting of them to remote places, Bodinus reasons well;
that if the Spirit of the eight Sphaere of the heavens, do move a thing of
so great compass and quantity in so short a space, that in one hour it
passes above a hundred times an hundred miles, why may not a wicked Spirit
carry the small bodies of such Witches in the minute of an hour, the space of
a hundred or two hundred miles: yet I do not think it possible which some
affirm, that the bodies of such witches may pierce through a chinke or riffe
of a wall (for the nature of the body cannot be altered) but this seems
rather to be an illusion of the devil offered to witches: but what of this?
suppose that a witch do confess unto a Magistrate, that she went in by a
risse of the wall to kill a child, which she did kill, because it is not
possible that the witch should pass through such a narrow creuise, shall the
Magistrate therefore absolve the witch as guiltless of the childs death? Nay
rather let him divide the matter, and sever that which is impossible, from that
which may be, namely the passing thorough the riffe of the wall, from the
killing of the child: for it may be, that in truth the Devil brought her in
at the door to kill the child, though he made it seem to her that she came
in at a chinke of the wall: but surely if there were no other fault in witches,
then the renouncing of God and the abiuring of the Sacraments; yet this being
in it self consummate apostasy, does deserve extreme punishment, and
whosoever thinks that witches, because for the most part they be sottish,
old, and doting are very easily deceived, and therefore ought to be spared, he
is in a great error, for malice drives them to desire that, which by the
devils means they compass; when they have obtained it, their froward nature
does joy in it, and the devil for the most part leaves them, before they leave
him.


Nomomath. Indeed so it seems: for when they fall into the hands of Justice,
and be cast into close prison, the Devil commonly practices no more feats
for the^, but suffers them to sustain the punishment of law without any
intermedling for them: but I have much wondered what should be the cause of
this.


Canonolog. That is done for two causes. First, 16. A double reason is alleged
wherefore the devil works not for witches after that they be imprisoned.
because the devil seeks nothing more desirously then the gain of their
souls: for when he thinks that the soul is wholly brought under his power,
he expects for nothing so greedily, as the departure of the soul from the
body, that he may torment the soul, which before the death of the party he
does retinere sub pacto, and he not only labors, but hasteneth his death as
much as he can, least repentance (God is the God of mercy) do deliver the
miserable caytife out of the snare of damnation: c. Nec miru^ 26. q. 5. D.
Augustine. lib. 3. de Trinit. 10. de ciuitat. dei. Thom. Aquinas in tractat. 44.
primae partis quaest. 5. in tit. de mira.
an other reason is, wherefore they being imprisoned cannot escape, though the
devil would deliver them out of prison, is because the Justice of almighty
God will not suffer the devil to exercise his natural power for the^: for if
he should permit him, God might perhaps seem to weak and shallow consciences,
to have cast of the care of humane affairs, and of doing Justice: wherefore
for his truth and glory he will not suffer it D. August. d. lib. 10. de ciuit.
dei, and Thom. Aquin. in d. tractat. 44. d. q. 5.
.


Nomomath. You have spoken sufficiently of witches, and their lewd practices,
of their punishment, and danger of their souls. Now I would have you to
speak of co^iuration, and necromancie, whether the practices of it are able to
work such effects, as is commonly reported, and how by your law they be
punishable.


Canonolog. This wickedness has been in ancient 17. That Necromancie and Magike
was used in ancient time.
times practiced. Suetonius in the life of Nero says, Facto per magos sacro
euocare manes tentauit Sueton. in Neron: c. 34.
. And Tacitus makes mention of a certain young man misled to this naughtines:
Iuuenem improuidum and facilem inanibus, ad Chaldaeorum promissa, magorum
sacra, somniorum etiam interpretes impulit, tentatus vt infernas vmbras
carminibus eliceret Tacit. lib. 2. Annal.
.


Nomomath. I pray you tell me when there be such apparitio^s in the persons of
the dead, whether are they devils or dead men's bodies that are so raised up.


Canonolog. It is an easy matter to resolve this question, but a hard matter
to discourse of it: but shortly to answer it: I think they be Devils which
resemble men that are dead.


Nomomath. Yet in the book of Ecclesiasticus 18 A discourse of the apparitio^
in the likeness of Samuel.
there is speech made of the body of Samuel raised by the witch of Endor
Ecclesiast. c. 46.
.


Canonolog. But that book is not Canonical Scripture.


Nomomath. But a man may reason out of Canonical Scripture that it was no
devil, which appeared to Saul in the likeness of Samuel, because the devil
would not use such holy speeches as ar attributed to Samuel in the first book
of Samuel, which is Canonical Scripture 1. Sam. c. 28.
.


Canonolog. What marvel is that? when the devil can transform himself into
an Angel of light? and so he did deliver true testimony of Christ Matthew. 8.
Mar. 1. Luc. 4.
, though to a false and evil purpose, and likewise of Paul Act. 16.
, but holy Samuel would not have suffered any such adoration, as is expressed
in that Scripture: and therefore Tremellius and Iunius do rightly comment upon
that place, that it is not in the power of the devil, nor of the witch his
servant, to draw again into the world just men, but that it was a crafty and
false pretense of the devil, to make men think, that the true worshipers of
God are in his hands after their death.


Nomomath. You have almost made me of your opinion. But tell me Codicgnostes
what punishment has your Law ordained for Necromancers and Coniurers.


Codicgn. They are by our law either executed 19. The punishment of
necromancers and coniurers by the Civil law.
upon a gibbet, or thrown out to devouring beasts Paulus lib. 5. tit. 23.
.


Anglonomo. By a statute made in the fifth year of the fortunate reign of our
sovereign Lady 20* The punishment of Necroma^cers and Witches by statute.
Queen Elizabeth it is enacted that if any man do use any invocation or
co^iuration of evil spirits for any cause, or have used any witchcraft,
inchanteme^t, charming, and sorcery, whereby any person is slain or destroyed,
this is felony in the^ their aydors and counsailors, and they shall lose
Clergy, and Sa^ctuarie: and if any do languish in his body by such
witchcraft, inchantme^t or sorcery, the offe^dor co^uicted shall suffer a years
imprisonment, and shall stand on the pillory in some market town in the said
County where the said offense is committed, on the market day once in every
quarter of that year, and this offense if it be committed the second time, is
made felony 5. Elizab. c. 16.
.


Canonolog. It is an excellent law, and worthy of 21. The punishment of
coniurers by the Canon law.
so noble a lawmakers: by our law, which stretches not to the taking of man's
life, such offenders are shaue^ and made baulde on the head 26. q. 1. ca* de
benedicto.
, and they wear a miter on their heads wherein their offense is in great
letters painted ca. episcopi. ibid:
, and they are set upon a ladd^r whilst the people go to hear divine service
In d. c. Episcopi. and ca. de benedicto.
, and so they are cast out of the parish 26. q. ca. Episcopi.
, and diocese ca. Episcopi, and ca. de benedict.
: and if they have any office or benefice they are deprived of it Glos^. sin:
in ca. 1: de sorti. Extra c* non oportet. 26. q. 5.
, and if they be of the clergy and not beneficed they are disgraded Cap:
Admonendi 26. q. 7. de haere.
.


Nomomath. You have not yet showed unto me, 4 Division.
whether if a woman do procure a liue-child to be killed in her womb, or
causes it as soon as it has received life to be cast out of her womb being
by that mean an abortiue, and so is delivered of it, whether the woman in this
case be guilty of Homicide or no by your laws?


Canonolog. Surely by our law, if any woman 1. Homicide committed by the Canon
law by procuring the untimely birth of a child if death do ensue.
without malice or evil co^ueiance do bring forth an abortiue child which has
received life and is borne before his due time and it dies, the woman is
accounted homicida occasionaliter ca: quod vero. etc. Moses 23. q: 2. and ca:
si expositus. 87. Did:
.


Codicgn. Our law punishes the woman whether 2. The Civil law punishes such
offense whether the child have received life or no.
the child has received life or no, if it be done of malice and evil
meaning, for though the Physicians do make a distinction, and several degrees
of that which is conceived in a woman's womb, as namely: first there must be a
thing engendered: the next degree is a thing that is increased in the womb: the
third degree is a thing formed or delineated like to a man: the fourth, a
child or infant: yet our Law punishes vndistinctly, and without difference the
immature eiecting of any of these out of the womb: and the reason is for the
only hope and possibility of a child that may be borne l. Cicero. de paen.
ff. and l. diuus. ff. de extraord. crimin. gloss. in cap. si aliquis. de
homicid. Extra. l. si mulierem. Ad l. Corn: de sicar: ff.
, and therefore with us such things as are done for the hindering of the
conception of a child are punished Paulus lib. 5. sent. tit. 23. and l. 38..
qui abortionis de paen:
, and that worthily, because it is done to the injury of nature, and in
contempt of the most high God, who has said Crescite and multiplicamini, and
that by no other mean, then by continual generation of mankind: howsoever
there be some, of whom Victor makes mention, which think that the woman
commits no fault in this act Pet. Victor. lib. 27. vari. lect. c. 2.
, but as to the punishment of this fault in our Law, if it be done for the
gain of money, the Law inflicteth punishment of death, if through hatred or
malice, with exile for a certain time d. l. Cicer. and d. l. diuus.
.


Anglonomoph. In Bractons time it seems that 3. That though in Bractons time
the Common law did agree with the Civil and Canon laws, in the punishing of
aborti^ements yet now there is no such punishment by the Common law.
our Law did in this point somewhat nearly agree with yours: for he has these
words: Si sit aliquis qui muliere^ praegnante^ percusserit, vel ei venenu^
dederit per quod fecerit abortiuu^, si puerperiu^iam formatu^, vel animatum
fuerit, and maxim, si animatu^, facit homicidium Bract. lib. 2.
: but now the Law is altered: for by the Law now in force, Homicide cannot be
committed, unless the thing slain be in rerum natura: and therefore if a man
kill an infant in his mothers womb, this is not felony, neither shall he
forfeit any thing, because it cannot be certainly known, whether the infant
died by the stroke or no 3. Assis. pl. 2. 22. Assis. pl. 44 1. E. 3. 24. Brit.
45.
.


The fiftenth Dialogue of Theft, Burglarie, and Robbery.
NOmomath. Time now requires that ye should deliver your opinions of these
crimes which are against the good estate of man as theft, burglarie, and
robbery, and because theft is either single as Petty larcenie, and the sole
act of taking away feloniously a man's goods: or else compounded and mixed with
other wrongful acts, as when burglarie and robbery are committed, therefore
first I would have you to speak of the former, and after of the latter:
wherefore show me first Codicgn. what is accounted Petty larcenie on pilfering
theeuery in your law, and how it is to be punished.


Codicgn. I think it fittest by your favor, to declare 1. Division.
first what theft in general is, and then to discourse of the particular kinds
of it as you have proposed them.


Nomomat. I like your course well, I pray you therefore proceed.


Codicgn. Theft is thus defined in our Law: (A 1 The definition of theft by the
Civil law.
fraudulent contrectation of an other ma^s corporal moveable goods, which is
done against the will of the owner, with a mind to gain either by the things
stolen, or by the possession of them, or by the use of them.) ff. de paen: l.
1. in ^^:
and this word (Fraudulent) 2 Wherefore the word (faudulent) is used in the
definition of theft.
is therefore used in the definition, because if a man take away another man's
goods as thincking him to be the owner that bids him take them, or mistaking
the goods which the owner appoints him to take, he is not in this case
guilty of theft, Iusti. vi: bon: rapt:. ita tamen.
because neither the co^trectation only, nor the fraud only does make a thief,
Arg: d. l. 1.: inde sola.
By the 3 How petty theeuery is punished by the civil law.
imperial law, if a man do steal any thing worth v. s. or about, he shall be
hanged, and if it be of a less value, then he shall be whipped, c. 1.. si quis
quinque solidos de Feudis: and glos in. and iudican: Authent: de defens.
ciuitat. glos. in l. fin: and ibi Alexan: ff. de in ius vocand: glos. in. fin:
in f^: instit: de pen: temere litigant:
but if he commit the second time, he is punished with the cuttinge off of one
of his ears, or of one of his hands: and if he commit it the third time he
is to be hanged, Authen: sed nouo iure C. de se^u: fug: and Authen: vt null:
iud:. quia vero nos oport.
and the first time he is called fur: the second time, consuetus fur: the third
time famosus fur: d. Authent: sed nouo iure.
and he that steals a sheep, a goat or a swine is less punished then he
that steals an horse or an ox: for he may be whipped if he be of a servile
condition: ff. de paen: l. in seruorum.
Or if he be a freeman 4 How the stealing of things of greater value is
punished by the civil Law.
he may be bannished for a certain time: l. 1. ff. De abigeis.
but he that steals a flock, as ten sheep or four swine: or he that
steals an horse or an ox shall be adjudged to perpetual banishment. l. 1..
quanquam ff. eo.



Anglonomo. By our Law it is felony, if a man 5 What is felony by the common
law, and what is petty larceny.
steal above the value of xij. ^. but if it do not exceed the value of xij.
^. it is then petty larcenie, for the which the party shall have imprisonment
according to the discretion of the Justices, Stamf. lib. 1. c. 15. Cor. 178.
but as to the stealinge of lesser or greater things which be above the value
of xij. d. 22. ass. p. 39. si soit est felony, ideo cest error.
we have no difference of judgment or punishment in our law.


Nomom. Declare I pray you whether these that 2. Division.
receive and favor thieves, are not guilty of theft by your laws and
punishable as thieves.


Codicgn. Because these receiuors are a lewd sort of men, without whom
malefactors cannot long 1 Receiuors and thieves have the like punishment in the
civil Law, but yet with many diversities and limitations.
be unknown, therefore our law inflicteth upon them and the others which
commit theft the like punishment, l. 1. C. de his qui latron: vel alijs crim:
reos occultant:
but if a man do not receive them, but do gainsay or refuse to offer unto the
trial and judgment of law such offenders, which do lurk in his graunge or in
his manor, if he be personally resiant, and do keep house there, he for this
fact shall forfait his graunge or Manor if he have an inheritance in it, but if
he have only estate for years or at will, he shall be punished with perpetual
exile: l. sin: in sin: eod:
and they shall in both cases forfait their goods, l. 1. eod:
but that this matter may more clearly appear unto you, it is good to observe
that if a man either keeps the thief in his house, graung, or Manor, not
knowing him to be a thief, or knowing him to have committed theft: in the
first case he shall not incur the aforesaid forfaiture, unless he refuse to
yield up the thief into the hand of Justice, when he is pursued: l. 1. eod: in
vers^: vel offerre. and l. require^di, C. de se^ui^ fugit:
But if the owner of the house or graunge etc. do know that a thief lurketh
within the precinctes of his house or graunge etc. then he is either a thief
simply, or a thief compositiue, as a robber by the hige way, or a burglarer:
if he be a thief simply, he that hides him, must sustain the same punishment
that the thief himself, d. l. C. de his qui latron:
which punishment is sometime wayed by the quality of the person, by the
greatness of offenses, and by the multitude of offenses iterated as before has
bin showed: but if he who^ he hides, have committed robery, or burglary, of
what estat soever he be, and though it were the first offense, both in the
thief and in the favorer: yet either of them shall sustain the like
punishment: d. l. 1. C. de his qui latron: and l. 1.. in pari: ff. de receptat.
but here an other distinction is to be used, for either he sauoured the
thief, or the theft: if he favor the theft, he shall have equal punishment
with the thief, l. secunda.. non tantum ff. de incend. ruin: naufrag.
but if he favor not the theft, but only the person of the thief, then he is
punishable by the same Law, but not by the same pain, for then his punishment
is arbitrary, and left wholly to the discretion of the Judge, l. 1. in sin: ff.
de receptat.
and in the very same state are they, which when they may apprehende such
malefactors do either for lucre, or for part of the things stolen let them
go. d. l. 1. ff. eo.



Canonol. By our Canon law, they that are receiuors of heretics are
Excommunicated, and are accursed with the highest degree of malediction, and
when they are dead, Christian burial is to be denied unto them, ca. sicut ait.
de heretic. Extra.
But this is to be understood 2 How the receivers of heretics, and other
offendo^s are punished by the Cannon law.
of such receiuors, as favor the person, but not the heresy, for they are
punished by the same punishment which our Law does appoint for the heretics
themselves, ca. 2. de haere: lib. 6.
but in other crimes, which are not heresies, our law uses this distinction:
either the receiuors are publicly diffamed, or not: if they be publicly
diffamed, they are punished as the offenders themselves are punishable by our
Law, but if not publicly diffamed, then they are punished with a milder
punishment. Gloss. in ca. 1. sup: verb: receptauerit: de homic: lib. 6. ar.
eor. quae habe^tur, in ca. cum non ab homi: de iudic: in ca: tuae: de paen^ and
in ca. fin: de furt: Extra.
3 How receivers of felons are punished by the common law, and who be accounted
receivers.



Anglonomop. Our law punishes the receiuors of felons, with great and rigorous
severity, and without respect of the quality and circumstance of the persons:
and if goods be stolen and I. S. knowing they be stolen receives them, in this
case, though he receive the goods only, and not the felon himself, yet he is
accessarie to the felony, 3. E. 6. ca. 24 and 27. Eliz. per Wind. Justice al
Ass. al Staff. Cromp. Just. P. 37. Sta^f. 43.
but in case of high treason there be no accessaries, but all be principal, 3.
H. 7. 9.
But otherwise it is in case of petty treason: Stamf. 40.
but in high treason as well the commanders as the assistors, abbettors, and
receiuors knowing thereof are principal, Exposit. termin: leg: sol. 4.
If a man receive one that is attainted of felony by outlawrie in the same
County etc. he is accessarie to the felony, because the outlawrie is a matter
of record, of which every one ought to take notice, Stamf. 96. Dyer 355.
but the Law would be otherwise if he should receive him in an other County,
12. E. 2. Cor: 377.
and the reason wherefore the receiuors and accessaries should be punished, as
well as the principal offenders, Lucan wittily shows in the person of one of
his rebellious captains:

Rheni mihi Caesar ad vndas
Dux erat, hic socius, facinus quos inquinat, aequat.

Nomomat. Now I pray you proceed and open 3. Division.
unto me the offense of robbery, how it is in your Laws, and how it is to be
punished.


Codicgn. Robbery is committed, when a man 1 The description of robbery by
the civil law. 2 The punishment of robbery by the said law.
by force bereaueth an other of his goods, lying in awaite in highwaies and
secreate paths, in woods, in heathes and in other places removed from the
sight and testimony of men: for this, the offenders head shall be cut off with
a sword, and he shall sorfait his goods, and his body shall be laid upon a
wheel, unto which are fastened the boughs of these trees, under which the
robbery was committed, as the witnesses of the crime, l. 1. C. de his qui
latron: occult: and l. 1. ff. de receptato.
and he that does wittingly and willingly receive such felons, is no less
capitally punished then they. d. l. 1. ff. de recept:



Canonolo. This crime is so odious in our Law, 3. The punishment of robbery by
the cannon law.
that it suffers not temples to be sanctuaries, or places of protection to
such offenders. c. inter alia Ext: de immu: Eccles.



Anglonomoph. By our law robbery is then committed, 4. The description of
robbery according to the common law.
when a man takes any thing from the parson of an other man feloniouslie,
though it be but of the value of a penie, yet he shall be hanged: 22. Ass. pl. 55
31. H. 6. 16.
and if a man do threaten one to deliver his purse incontinent, and if he will
not that he will kill him, whereupon he delivers it presently, this is
robbery as well as that, where he takes it from a man's person by force: Stamf.
27.
and therefore the case was that two did lay hold on a man, and did make him
swear upon a book that he would bring unto the^ xx. li. by force whereof he
brought unto them xx. li. and they took it, this is robery, for it must be
intended to be done by force of the threatening and against his will, 44. E. 3.
14. 4. H. 4. 3.
but where a thief takes xl. s. from an other man by the high way, without
assaulting him, and putting him in fear of loosing his life, this is not
robbery, but he shall be put to his Clergy. 5. Eliz. 224. Dyer.



Nomomat. Now I would know somewhat of the offense which is commonly called
Burglary, or breaking of houses in the night time, and stealing things out of
them, and how it is to be punished. 4. Division.



Codicgn. They which break into any man's house in the night time with purpose
to kill, if any 1. What kind of house-breach is capital in the civil law.
man be within the house that will resist their violence, are accounted in our
Law famous thieves and are punished capitally. l. Capitalli^. Famosos ff. de
poenis.



Anglonomoph. Burglarie is where any man in 2. The definition of burglarie by
the common law.
time of peace, and in the night time, does break any dwelling house, church,
walls, towers, or gates to commit felony there, and he enters, though he
carry nothing away, yet this is burglary and the offender shall be hanged. 22.
Ass. pl. 95 and 39. Stam. 30 Brit. 17. Die. 99 18. Eliz. c. 6.



Nomom. I give ye great thanks for your pains bestowed in the clering of
these doubts, which I moved unto you: I will not trouble you further in these
matters; accompting my self for your travail so long continued, to be greatly
beholden, and very much bound in all duetiful kindness unto ye.


FINIS.
A Table of the Sections, or Divisions of the principal points, matters, and
questions, which are handled in every Dialogue.
The Divisions, and principal contents of the first Dialogue, of Contracts.
The first Division. _1 THE ground of contracts. 2. The contracts of infants,
persons distracted of their wits, and religious persons, whether and how far
forth they be good: 3. Monks are absolutely prohibited by the civil law to
make any contract: infants are disabled with a certain qualification: 4. That
by the common law priors under the obedience of a sovereign, and which were
datife and remouerable, could not implead or be impleaded without their
sovereign, unless it were by special custom. 5. The same law was of the
Knights of S. John of Jerusalem. 6. The infants contract for his meat,
apparel, and necessaries is good, if he be of the age of fourteen years. 7.
That which the infant does without actual liuerie, may be avoided by action
with out entry or seizure, but that which he does by actual liuerie, cannot
be avoided without entry or seizure.

The 2. Division. 1. Whether the contract of the servant, shall be accounted in
law the contract of the master. 2. That according to the common law the master
shall be bound by the contract of a known servant, if the thing marchandised
be come to his use, and he shall be bound by the contract of his factor, though
the goods never come to his possession. 3. The act of a man's attorney or his
general receiver, does not bind the master without special warrant.

The 3. Division. 1. Whether the wifes contract made in the behalf of the
husband, will bind the husband. 2. That by the common law, an action of debt
brought upon a contract made by the wife for the behoof of the husband, must
be brought only against the husband without naming the wife. 3. That by the
civil law the husband is in no sort to be charged by the contract of his wife.

The 4. Division. 1. How contractes may stand or fall by their material
causes, o^ the defect of them.

The 5. Division. 1. Some contracts are ordered by the law of nations. 2. An
Ambassador may according to the Civil law be impleaded by the law of nations
for a contract made whilst he is Ambassador.

The 6. Division. 1. Whether contracts made with Pirates, or robbers in the
high way be good in law. 2. That Pirates and robbers are not to have advantage
of law in matters of contract. 3. That D. Hotoman erreth greatly, in
maintaining that pirates and robbers may lawfully contract.

The 7. Division. 1. That by the Common law a consideration is the proper
material cause of a contract, and that it may be expressed or implied. 2. That
a contract is not good without money paid in hand, or a certain day limited
for the payment.

The 8. Division. 1. Whether the defect of form do destroy the contract. 2.
That solemnity, and concurrence of circumstances is required in contractes by
the Civil law. 3. That matrimonial contractes if there be no assumpsit in
them, ar to be divided by the ecclesiastical law, if there be an assumpsit by
the Common law.

The divisions and principal contents of the second Dialogue, of gifts, and
graunts.
The first Division. 1. WHat things may be given or granted. 1. That all things
that lie in commerce, and may be received, may be given. 3. That things
ecclesiastical, though they be not consecrate, cannot regularly be granted. 4.
That if an Abbott did alien lands given in Frankalmoigne to his house, the
donor might have a writ contra formam collationis.

The 2. Division. 1. The diverse kinds of gifts some being free, and some
compensatorie. 2. What is wrought by the Queens grant ex mero motu. 3. What is
wrought by her Majesty's grant by of informamur, etc. 4. Whether upon a false
considelation expressed an use shall be raised in a common persons case. 5. That
a consideration may be auerred, which is not repugnant to the use expressed. 6.
That an use may be altered by a consideration not valuable.

The 3. Division. 1. In what cases graunts shall be taken most beneficially for
the grauntee. 2. That a grant noncertaine must be taken most strongly against
the grauntor. 3. That a grant may be good in part, and for parcel not. 4. How
the Queens graunts and licenses shall be construed and interpreted. 5. A
grant is not to be favored contrary to the manifest sense of the words.

The 4. Division. 1. That by the Common law a grant that is not good at the
first, may not be made good by matter ex post facto, nor by the Civil law.

The 5. Division. 1. Whether a tenant at will may grant over his estate. 2.
That the estate of the tenant at will is in manner no estate.

The Divisions and principal contents of the third Dialogue of bargains and
sales.
The first Division. 1. WHat things are forbidden to be sold. 2. That by the
Cannon law things consecrate, and religious, may not be sold. 3. That poisons
by the Civil law are forbidden to be sold. 3. That there be some poisons,
which be medicinable and profitable, and the prohibition extends not to
these. 5. That some poisons are medicinable alone, some with the mixture of
other things. 6. What things are forbidden to be sold by the Common law.

The 2. Division. 1. Where a thing was not sold at the first: and where it was
sold, but the sale was defeasible upon condition. 2. A difference betwixt a
perfect sale, and a sale to be perfited upon a condition performed. 3. That a
prouiso though it be placed amongst covenants, may defeat a bargain and sale.
4. That where a bargain and sale is perfect, but defeasible upon condition, the
vendee shall take the profits till the condition be performed.

The 3. Division. 1. When no day is limited for the payment of a sum of money
what time the law will require. 2. In such case the party charged with the
payment, shall by the civil law have threescore days. 3. That by the common
law when no day is limited, the money is presently due, yet in some cases by
some authority the discretion of the Judges is to limit a time. 4. The
definition of time according to the opinion of Aristotle.

The 4. Division. 1. That a bargain and sale may be avoided by the defect of
some substantial thing belonging to the act. 2. That fraud and deceit in the
contract by the civil law does defeat the contract. 3. A difference where the
default of the thing sold is Latens or Patens. 4. That whether the default be
Latens or Patens, if the bargainor do warrant the thing sold to be without
fault, he is bound by the warrantie by the civil law. 5. That bargains and
sales, matters in writing and obligatorie, may be avoided by alleging that
they were made or done per minas, or by duresse. 6. That by the common law a
warrantie made upon a bargain and sale does bind, otherwise it is, if the
warrantie be made after the bargain be concluded. 7. That the warranting of a
thing which is evident to the sense, is no cause to bring a writ of disceit by
the common law.

The 5. Division. 1. That by the common law the bargain and sale, or the
grant of the profits of land is the grant of the land it self. 2. That by the
civil law a man may grant and demise the use of a thing, and yet not grant
the thing it self.

The 6. Division. 1. When a man sells land wherein treasure is hidden, and
the vendor knows not of it, whether the vendee shall have the treasure. 2.
How this word (treasure) is taken in the civil law. 3. That by the civil law
money and other things necessary to the common use of this life are forbidden
to be hidden and buried in the ground. 4. Plato his superstitious opinion of
things hidden in the earth. 5. How the civil law does order and dispose of
treasure. 6. What the common law does determine of treasure.

The divisions and principal contents of the fourth Dialogue, of seignories,
and services.
The first Division. 1. THe description of a seignorie by the civil law. 2.
By the Canon law. 3. Likewise by the common law.

The 2. Division. 1. What homage is, and how it is to be performed by the
common law. 2. That homage has been practiced in ancient time.

The 3. Division. 1. What a Manor is, and whereof it consists. 2. The
original of a Manor.

The 4. Division. 1. Statutes made for the preservation of seignories and
Manors.

The 5. Division. 1. Fealty is the most general service in the common law. 2.
In the civil law. 3. That by the civil law, the common law, and the Canon
law, a religious man ought to do fealty.

The 6. Division. 1. The diverse kinds of services in the civil law, and their
definitions. 2. The diverse kinds of services in the common law, and their
definitions. 3. The original of villenage, and the nature thereof. 4. The
tenure whereby a man holds of an honor or manor is described, and by
examples illustrated. 5. Certain honors which be not of the ancientnes of the
Crown. 6. Some honors, which be annexed to the Crown.

The 7. Division. 1. Whether one within age be compellable by law to do all
manner of service either by himself, or some other. 2. A diversity in the
Civil law whether the father of such an infant died in a just war, or at
home in his bed. 3. That by the Common law the infant shall be in ward if his
father died seized of land held by Knights service, without any such
diversity. 4. A diversity in the Common law where the heir of the tenant
by Knights service is within age, and a Knight at the time of his fathers
death, and where not.

The 8. Division. 1. What penalties lie upon the tenant if he do not his
service. 2. Many causes of the tenaunts forfeiture in the Civil law. 3. Some
causes of forfeiture by the Common law.

The 9. Division. 1. Whether when the tenant has committed felony or
treason, and is attainted, he shall suffer any prejudice in his tenauncie. 2. A
diversity in the Civil law, where the offense is committed against the
person of the lord, and where against the person of a stranger, 3. That by the
Common law by the attainder of felony or treason, the blood is corrupted, and
in the one case the land shall eschet to the King, in the other to the immediate
Lord. 4. The aforesaid determinations and conclusions of Civil and Common law
touching the forfeiture of the offendorare examined by the law of God.

The Divisions and Principal contents of the fifth Dialogue, of iointenauncie,
and tenauncie in common.
The first Division. 1. THat iointenaunts, and tenauntes in common ought to
have equal profit. 2. That by the Common law a writ of account will lie if
one iointenaunt take all the profits.

The 2. Division. 1. That iointenauncie is dissolved by death, unless there be
some clause in the creation of the estate to the contrary.

The 3. Division. 1. That by the Civil law by the joint gift of all the goods
of a man, all corporal things pass. 2. That by the Common law if a man
devise the third part of his goods to his wife, it shall so be rated as they
were at the time of the death of the testator.* That the Queen may grant a
thing in action.

The 4. Division. 1. That iointenauncie by the Civil law, may be of all such
things as lie in contract. 2. That the limitation of tenauncie in common is by
the party, but the construction of it by the law.

The 5. Division. 1. That an assignee of a moitie in the Civil law is bound by
the covenant of his grauntor. 2. That by the Common law in such case the
assignee is bound by the covenant.

The Divisions and principal contents of the sixth Dialogue of exchaunges.
The first Division. 1. THat by the Civil law contractes for a certain price
are not exchaunges, 2. That by the Common law the word excambium must be used
in the exchange. 3. That the estates must be equal. 4. That the things
exchaunged must be in esse. 5. That an exchange is good, though one part of it
do inure by way of extinguishment.

The 2. Division. 1. That the incumbents may not exchange their benefices by
the Cannon law. 2. That the Chapter may warrant permutations sede vacant in
such benefices, wherein they have interest or authority. 3. That by the Common
law, ecclesiastical persons, their patrons and ordinaries ioining together,
cannot make any good exchange of ecclesiastical benefices. 4. That the
statute of mortmaine is most strict, and pregnant in words.

The Divisions and principal contents of the seventh Dialogue, of Devises and
Legacies.
The first Division. 1. THe antiquity of wills. 2. Plato his exception
against Solons law concerning wills. 3. Solons law is maintained and defended
against Plato.

The 2. Division. 1. Such as be incapable of inheritaunces and goods, may not
be deuisees, heirs, or executors by the civil law. 2. A difference in the
civil law betwixt the making of a deuisee, and the making of an executor. 3.
That by the Common law all persons to whom a grant may be made, a devise may
be made unless it otherwise happen in some few cases. 4. That the deuisee,
must be a person capaple of the thing devised. 5. That by the common law the
deuisee ought to be capable at the time of the death of the deuisor.

The 3. Division. 1. That by the civil law all such things may be devised as
the testator has in his own right at the time of the devise. 2. The three
degrees of a testament by the common law. 3. A difference in the common law
where a man deuiseth a thing whereof he is not seized, particularly and by
name, and where not. 4. That things, which are not in esse at the time of the
devise made, may be devised. 5. That the devise of tenant for life, or tenant
in dower of the corn growing at the time of their death is good. 6. That when
the party has a certain, and lawful interest in a thing, ^e may lease it,
grant it, or devise it before the existence of it. 7. That a devise may be
uncertain, but yet good in law, because it may by special mean be reduced to
certainty.

The 4. Division. 1. That by the Civil law Ius accerscendi takes effect in
legacies. 2. Whether when the sixth part of a thing is devised, the heir or
executor is compellable by the civil law to divide it, or to render in value.
3.* That by the common law sometime there may be a seuerance of the thing
devised: sometimes of the profits or of the advantage of the thing.

The 5. Division. 1. That if a man devise a plot of ground, whereupon a house
is built, the house also passes. 2. A house built upon land entailed after the
gift shall be recovered in a Formedon.

The 6. Division. 1. That by the Civil law, when an especialtie containing a
debt is devised to one, the debt it self passes. 2. Master Parkins his
opinion touching the diuising of an Obligation is examined.

The 7. Division. 1. That by the Civil law the executor is bound to make good
the thing, which perishes through his default. 2. That in some cases the time
of performing legacies is left to the discretion of the judges. 3. That by the
Common law the executors are bound to perform the devise in convenient time.
4. A diversity betwixt an obligee, and a deuisee.

The 8. Division. 1. That things which are accessorie do pass with their
principal. 2. That a mine of coal passes with the land if it be jointly used
with it, otherwise it is if it be severally used. 3. That a woman shall be
endowed of a mine of coal discovered after the husbands death. 4. That words
of the Present tense in a devise may not be extended to the Future tense.

The 9. Division. 1. That by the Civil law if the deuisee of a term die
before the deuisor, the executor shall have the term. 2. By the Common law a
diversity is taken where the deuisee dies in the life of the deuisor, and
where after his death, but before the legacy executed.

The 10. Division. 1. That by the Civil law, when a thing is devised to God or
to Christ, it shall go to the Church of the parish, where the testator dwelt.
2. That by the Common law and by the statute of 23. H. 8. such devise is void.
3. What is meant by a Church parochial according to Rolfes opinion.

The 11. Division. 1. That by the Civil law where two testaments contain in
them several sums, that which conteyne^h the lesser shall stand, but by the
Common law the latter testament.

The 12. Division. 1. That by the Civil law if an ox be devised to one and he
die, the skin is not due to the deuisee. 2. That by the Common law it seems
to be due, otherwise it had been if there had been an exception of the hyde.

The 13. Division. 1. That if the reconusor devise al his goods to the
reconusee, yet he shall have execution of the land. 2. If the obligee make the
obligor his executor, the debt is extinct.

The 14. Division. 1. That by the Civil law if a man ordeyne by his will that
his daughters shall marie by the appointment of Titius, that Titius his executor
may dispose of this marriage. 2. that by the Common law, where a confidence is
reposed in certain persons it is incommunicable to others.

The 15. Division. 1. That by the Civil law devises are co^stru^d for the most
part most favorably for the deuisee. 2. That the Common law so favors
devises that it vpholdeth equity, and the corespondencie of reason. 3. That
the Common law frustrateth these devises which are repugnant to Law.

The 16. Division. 1. That by the Canon law, if land be devised to a woman
whilst she shall live chastely, her marriage is not implicatiuely and absolutely
prohibited. 2. That the Civil law and Common law do favor marriage.

The 17. Division. 1. That there is a diversity in the Civil law, where a man
makes his wife vsufructuaria^ of his goods, and where he deuiseth them to her.
2* That by the Common law the administration of the goods and chattels of the
testator does apperteine only to the executor.

The 18. Division. 1. That by the Civil law the husband may demand a legacy
due to the wife without naming the wife. 2. That in the Common law there is a
diversity, as touching bringing of actions in the wifes name where the matter
of the writ is real, and where it is personal. 3. That where the wrong does
immediately concern the person of the wife, the wife of necessity must be
named.

The 19. Division. 1. That by the Civil law when maintenance is devised to one
till ripenes of age, is intended of full age. 2. The diversity of ages by the
Common law.

The 20. Division. 1. That by the civil law, when a ma^sion house that is in
one parish is devised, the appurtena^ces in another parish do pass by the
devise. 2. That by the Common law land cannot be appurtenant to land.

The Divisions and principal contents of the eight Dialogue, of Borowing, and
Lending.
The first Division. 1. THe difference in the Civil law betwixt mutuum and
commodatum.

The 2. Division. 1. That particular persons, corporatio^s, and churches
parochial may be bound by contract of borowing and lending by the Civil law.
2. That by the Common law Abbots, Priors, and such religious persons might
charge their house by their contract, and by recognisans.

The 3. Division. 1. Two kinds of borowing and le^ding by the Civil law,
natural and civil. 2. That the Common law acknowledges this difference in
substance, and effect.

The 4. Division. 1. An vsurous le^ding or lending of money for interest is by
way of objection maintained. 2. Aquinas his authority is urged for proof
hereof. 3. The objection is answered by the Canonist. 4. Aquinas his authority
disproued. 5. The Civil law in conde^ning usury agrees with the Canon. 6. The
Common law in this agrees with the other laws.

The 5. Division. 1. A diversity in the Civil law when money is te^dered at
the day of payment and is after embased, and when it is tendered after. 2. To
the aforesaid diversity the Common law seems to agree.

The 6. Division. 1. That by the bond of the surety the principal dettor is
not discharged by the Civil law. 2. That by the Common law as well the one, as
the other may be sued.

The Divisions and principal contents of the ninth Dialogue, of the baylement,
and delivery of goods, and chattels.
Hhe first Division. 1. THe definition of depositum by the Civil law. 2. The
nature and course of it at the Common law. 3. A diversity where a writ of
account of detinue, and of trespass are to be brought concerning things
delivered at the Common law.

The 2. Division. 1. That a thing cannot be said to be a depositu^ at the
Civil law, except it be delivered to the party. 2. That by the Canon law the
feoffee of the land is to have the charters when the feoffement is without
warrantie.

The 3. Division. 1. That the Baylie is not to be charged with the loss of
the goods, which happens merely by casualtie.

The Divisions and principal contents of the tenth Dialogue, of the form and
manner of ordinary proceeding in matters of Law.
The first Division. 1. THe things which are to be observed of the plaintiff at
the beginning of a suit by the Civil law. 2. Citation is proved to be of the
substance of the proceeding, contrary to the opinion of some Ciuilians. 3. The
cautels to be observed at the Common law in the co^mencement of an action. 4.
Disablements in the person of the plaintiff at the Common law. 5. The statute
of 23. of H. 8. of giving da^mages to the defendant, is compared with the rule
of the Civil law. 6. Suit must not be maintained before an incompetent judge
according to the Common law. 7. The several jurisdiction of diverse Courts is
described. 8. That the summons of the party defendant is necessarily exacted
by the Common law. 9. That by the default of lawful summons the proceeding of
the plaintiff is frustrate by the Common law.

The 2. Division. 1. That by the Civil law if a man be bound to appear
within 10. days, the tenth day is taken inclusiue. 2. That the first day and
fourth day of appearance are all one by the Common law.

The 3. Division. 1. A diversity of opening and prosecuting of private, and
public offenses at the Common law. 2. Exception is taken to informations used
by common informers. 3. Many objections are made out of the Civil law against
common informers. 4. Punishments ordained by diverse Emperors against common
informers. 5. Codicgnostes is charged by Anglonomophylax to mistake the point
in question. 6. He is likewise charged to mistake the Civil law in this point.
7. The statute of 18. of our sovereign Lady the Queen is compared with the
edicts of Emperors. 8. Codicgnostes his surmise that informations were not
used in the best times of the Romans, is answered and confuted. 9. It is
showed likewise that informations are expedient for the administration of
Justice.

The 4. Division. 1. Defaultes are dispensed withal by the Civil law, when
they happen by the act of God.

The 5. Division. 1. The most common action in the Civil law is actio
iniuriarum, which is either Ciuilis or praetoria. 2. Actions and enditements at
the Common law are compared with civil and pretorian actions.

The 6. Division. 1. The libell of an action of injuries is fully set down
according to the form of the Civil law. 2. Exception is taken to the form of
the libell for uncertainty. 3. The exception is approved by the Common law. 4.
Exception likewise is taken to the libell for mingling things of diverse and
several natures in it. 5. This exception likewise is maintained by the Common
law. 6. An other exception is taken for the superfluous alleging of the day
and hour of the trespass done. 7. Exception also is taken for using too many
words in describing the wrong. 8. Exception is taken for saying, nemini
iniuriam inferendo. 9. Exception is likewise taken for using these words (
animo iniurioso) being taken for a surplusage. 10. Codicgnostes answers the
exceptions. 11. Anglonomophylax particularly examineth and discusseth the
exceptions. 12. Anglonomophylax excuses and defends the abundance of words
in declarations and libels. 13. The form of a declaration upon an action upon
the case, resembling actione^ iniuriaru^. 14. The cutting off of delays by the
Civil law. 15. The diminishing of delays by the Common law. 16. The form of
a defense or bar in an action of injuries. 17. The form of a defense in an
action upon the case. 18. The form of trial by the Civil law. 19. The form
of trial by the Common law. 20. The form of judgment in the Civil law. 21.
The form of entering judgment at the common law.

The 7. Division. 1. That by the Civil law an action of injuries will not lie
by the executor against the executor. 2. That by the Common law actio
personalis moritur cu^ persona, unless it be in some special cases.

The Divisions and particular contents of the Eleventh Dialogue of common
Wrongs, and Trespasses.
The first Division. 1. THe diverse kinds of injuries in the Civil law. 2.
What an assault is according to the Common law. 3. That the Common law gives
an action upon the case for a slander*

The 2. Division. 1. That by the Civil law an action of trespass lies for the
father, husband, master, for a wrong done to the son, wife, servant. 2. That
by the Common law the husband may have an action for a wrong done to his wife.
3. In what cases an action will lie for the master for a wrong done to his
servant. 4. In what cases by the Common law an action will lie for the father
for a wrong done to his son.

The 3. Division. 1. How the owner shall be punished by the Civil law for a
trespass done by his beasts. 2. In what case he shall not be punished though
his beasts do hurt to an other man. 3. That by the Common law a man shall be
punished for a trespass done by his beasts.

The Divisions, and principal contents of the twelfth Dialogue of unlawful
assemblies, riots etc.
The first Division. 1. THe description of public force by the Civil law. 2.
That in the matter of public force the Common law agrees with the civil. 3.
A difference by the Common law betwixt public force and open force. 4. The
punishment of public force by the Civil law. 5. That by the Common law the
counsaylers and co^mitters of force are alike punished. 6. What an unlawful
assembly is by the Common law. 7. What a rout is. 8. What a riot is. 9. The
punishment of the aforesaid offenses by the Cannon law.

The 2. Division. 1. The punishment of the Justice not punishing such offenses
by the Civil law. 2. That the Justices of peace by the Common law are punished
for remissenes of punishing others for the aforesaid faults.

The Divisions and principal contents of the thirtenth Dialogue of Treason and
Rebellion.
The first Division. 1. THe reason is showed by Codignostes, wherefore Treason
is aptly termed a fault against the dignity of man. 2. The punishment of
treason in ancient times.

The 2. Division. 1. The diverse kinds of treason by the Civil law. 2. The
diverse kinds of treason by coining of money in the Civil law. 3. The
punishments of traitors by the Civil law. 4. The several coins of foreign
princes in ancient time. 5. The diverse kinds of treason by the Common law.
6. How far forth this word (Ligeance) does extend by the Common law. 7. How
the Queens enemies are to be punished by the Common law, agreeing with the law
of God. 8. How enemies are punished by the Coannon law. 9. How breaking of
prison is taken in the Common law. 10. How treason is committed by coining of
money according to the censure of the Common law. 11. The several punishments
of treasons by the Common law.

The Divisions and principal contents of the fourtenth Dialogue of Homicide,
that is murder, manslaughter etc.
The first Division. 1. THe several kinds of Homicide by the Civil law, and
first murder is described. 2. Ma^slaughter se defendendo by the Civil law. 3.
the description of self slaughter by the Civil law. 4. A diversity of
killing a man's self by the Civil law. 5. The punishment of self slaughter by
the Civil law, 6. Homicide by casualtie is described. 7. Anglonomoph. takes
exception to the division of Homicide by the Civil law. 8. An other division
of Homicide by the Civil law, the difference of killing men volu^tarily and
inuolu^tarily, is showed to be ancient. 9. The definition of murder by the
Common law. 10. Malice whereof murder comes is showed to be twofold, and
diverse cases are put thereupon. 11. The punishment of murder by the Common law.
12. The description of manslaughter by the common law. 13. The punishment of
manslaughter by the common law. 14. Manslaughter Se defende^do by the common
law. 15. The punishment of manslaughter Se defendendo. 16. Homicide by
misadue^ture. 17. The punishment of it. 18. Homicide of a man's self, and the
punishment of it.

The 2. Division. 1. Homicide is showed to be twofold in the Civil law,
Consilij and Operis. 2. By the Common law the counsayler and assistor in murder
are accounted principal offenders.

The 3. Division. 1. Homicide by witchcraft is described. 2. The punishment of
witches and magicians by the Civil law. 3. They that have asked counsel of
witches have bin in ancient time punished. 4. An objection is made of exorcisme
used in the Church. 5. Answer is made to the objection according to the
opinion of Bodinus. 6. The great and strange power of witchcrafte. 7. Lucan is
commended for his ample disclosing of the detestable secret^ of sorcerie. 8.
The laws of the twelve Tables do condemn witchcraft. 9. Seneca his opinion
of charms and enchantments is disliked. 10. S. Augustine confuteth the opinion
of Seneca. 11. It is likewise disproued by Pausania. 12. Witches are proved to
be apostataes, and in what manner they become apostataes. 13. It is proved that
the bodies of witches do work with their minds in lewd enterprises. 14.
Alciat his opinion touching the meeting of witches amongst themselves, and the
meeting of the devil is urged. 15. Alciat his said opinion is confuted by the
authority of Bodinus. 16. A double reason is alleged, wherefore the devil
works not for witches after they be imprisoned. 17. That Necromancie, and
Magike was used in ancient time, 18. A discourse of the apparition in the
likeness of Samuel. 19. The punishment of Necromancers, and coniurers by the
Civil law. 20. The punishment of Necromancers and witches by statute. 21. The
punishment of coniurers by the Cannon law.

The 4. Division. 1. Homicide committed by the Cano^ law by procuring the
untimely birth of a child, if death do ensue. 2. The Civil law punishes such
offense whether the child have received life or no. 3. That though in Bractons
time the Common law did agree with the Civil and Canon laws in the punishment
of abortiuements, yet now there is no such punishment by the Common law.

The Divisions, and principal contents of the fiftenth Dialogue of theft, etc.
The first Division. 1. THe division of theft by the Civil law. 2. Wherefore
the word fraudulent is used in the definition of theft. 3. How petty theefery
is punished by the Civil law. 4. How the stealing of things of greater value
is punished by the Civil law. 5. What is felony by the Canon law and what
petite larcenie.

The 2. Division. 1. Receiuors and theefes have the like punishment by the
Civil law but yet with many diversities and limitatio^s. 2. How the receiuors
of heretics and other offenders are punished by the Canon law.

The 3. Division. 1. The description of robbery by the Civil law. 2. The
punishment of robbery by the said law. 3. The punishment of robbery by the
Canon law. 4. The description of robbery according to the Common law.

The 4. Division. 1. What kind of housebreach is capital in the Civil law.
2. The definition of burglarie by the Common law.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Faults. Page. Corrections. delitie 17. b. duty it 18. a. is memory 27. a.
ignominy portarit 27. b. portauit beadesteede 41. a. bedsteade will deliver
them 56. a. will not deliver them hing ibid. b. thing pea 59. b. plea inde 62.
b. vnde ipse 67. b. ipso offerminge 69. a. offeringe villain 70. b. very
villain this 71. b. thus the tolerable 73. a. tolerable intulatum 76. b.
intitulatum ostibus 78. a. ossibus or to be decided 79. b. are to be decided
purchased 92. a. purposed valeantur 94. b. valeantne queire 95. b. queiue bona
96. b. bocca or impure 97. a. are impure or about 101. b. or above


