To the Right excellent and most honorable Lady, the Lady Marie, Countess of
Pembroke.
VOi, pia nympha, tuum, quem tolse la morte, Philippu^,
AEdentem llenas coelestis melle palabras.
Italicum lumen, flower of France, splendour Iberus,
Italicus Tasso, French Salust, Boscan Iberus,
(...) Virgil, (...),
Greekish Homer, tanto lati iunguntur (...).
Your Honors most affectionate. Abraham France.

The first Chapter of the first Book.
UUhat Rhetorike is.
RHetorike is an Art of speaking. It has two parts, Eloqution and
Pronuntiation. Eloqution is the first part of Rhetorike, concerning the
ordering and tri^ming of speech. It has also 2. parts, Congruitie and
Bravery. Congruitie is that which causes the speech to be pure and cohaerent:
and it is performed either by Etimologie, which concerns the affections of
several words: or Syntaxis, which does orderly conioyne them together. Here
should all Grammatical rules (as they call them) be placed: I omit them for
this time, as being scarce resolved in this conceit. Bravery of speech
consists in Tropes, or turnings; and in Figures or fashionings. A Trope or
turning is when a word is turned from his natural signification, to some
other, so conveniently, as that it seem rather willingly ledd, than driven
by force to that other signification. This was first invented of necessity for
want of words, but afterward continued and frequented by reason of the delight
and pleasant grace thereof. Sometimes these Tropes be excessive, signifying in
word, more than can be true in deed, and then are they termed Hyperboles. The
excellency of tropes is then most apparent, when either many be fitly
included in one word, or one so continued in many, as that with what thing it
begin, with the same it also end: and then it is called an Allegory or
Inuersion. And so much of the general proprieties of tropes: now to the diverse
kinds thereof.

Cap. 2. Of the Metonymia of the cause.
THere be two kinds of tropes. The first co^teineth Metonymia, the change of
name: and Ironia, a scoffing or jesting speech the second comprehends a
Metaphore and Synecdoche. Metonymia is a trope which uses the name of one
thing for the name of another that agrees with it, as when the cause is turned
to signify the thing caused, the thing caused to signify the cause, the
subject to expres the adiunct, or the adiu^ct the subject. The Metonymia of the
cause is double, of the efficient, or material cause: of the efficient, as
when the Author and inuentor is put for the things by him invented and found.

Homer. 2. Iliad. -- (...).
Virgil. 1. Aeneid. Tum Cererem corruptam vndis, Cerealiaque arma
Expediunt --
and 1. Georg. Aut dulcis musti Vulcano decoquit humorem.
Sir Philip Sydney in the 2. Act of Arcadia, speaking of the furious multitude.
Bacchus they say was begotten of thunder, I think that ever since made him so
full of stir and debate; Bacchus indeed it was, which sounded the first
trumpet of this rude alarm.

2. Act. Therefore, Alas, you use vile Vulcans spite
Which nothing spares, to melt that virgins wax,
Which while it is, it is all A siaes light.
3. Act. More white than Neptunes fomie face
When struggling rocks he would embrace.
4. Act. Philanax speaking of Pyrocles, and Philoclea. The violence the
Gentleman spoke of, is now turned to marriage: he alleged Mars, but she
speaks of Venus.

Torquat. Tasso in his Godfrey of Boloigne: the first song speaking of
Clorinda. A i lauori d' Aracne, a l' ago, a i fusi
Inclinar non degno la man superba.
Salust in his Semaine, the first day. La terre de tout temps n'est ceinte de
Neptune.

The 5 day. Contre l'ire du ciel, et la fureur de Mars.

Boscan. 3. book. Consus ondas Neptuno, etc.



And here it is usual, nay necessary, for want of words, to put the Autors
name for the book by him made. So it is in a certain Epistle written to
Boscan, lib. 3. Vendrias tu: y Hieronymo, Augustine,
Parts del alma mia a descansar,
De vuestros pensamientos.


The Metonymia of the material cause is, when the matter is put for the thing
thereof made.

Hom. T. Il. (...).
Virg. Aen. 1. Spumas salis are ruebant.
Georg. 2. Vt gemma bibat, and sarrhano dormiat ostro.
Aegl. 1. Syluestrem tenui musam meditaris auena.
And

Ludere quae vellem calamo permisit agresti.
And

Stridenti miserum stipula disperdere carmen.
And

Hanc nos, hac fragilis donauimus ante cicuta.
And

Agrestem tenui meditabor arundine musam.
Sir Philip Sydney Act 4. Who evermore will love Apolloes quill?

Torquat. Tass. 1. Song. Geme il vicino mar sotto l'incarco
De l'alte naui, e de' piu lieui pini.
2. Song Alete says. Cosi potente armata in un racorre,
Ch' a questi legni tuoi si possa opporre?
Salust in his history of Judith. 1. Book. Dans le champ de Ragan se campent
un matin
Les ots des plus grands rois qu'oncques Mars le mutin,
Arma d'ire et de fer.
Garcilasso 1. Aeglog. Espera que en tornando,
A ser restituido,
Al ocio ya perdido,
Luego veras exercitar mi pluma,
Por la innumerable suma,
De tus virtudes y famosas obras, etc.
And there. El arbor de victoria,
Quae cine estrechamente
Tugloriosa srente. etc.


Cap. 3. Of the Metonymia of the thing caused.
THe Metonymia of the thing caused is when we attribute that to the efficient
which is made by the efficient. And hereof come most of Poets and Orators
Epithetes.

Homer. A. Iliad. (...).
Et 16. Odyss. -- (...)
(...).
Vir. 6. Aen. Pallentesque habitant morbi, tristisque senectus.
2. Georg. Auxilium venit, ac membris agit atra venena.
Et 3. -- artus depascitur arida febris.
4. Aen. Et cum frigida mors anima seduxerit artus.
Sir P. Syd 2. Act. Nay even cold death inflamd with hot desire
Her to enjoy where joy it self is thrall,
Will spoil the earth of her most rich attire.
Torquato Tasso. 1. Song. Dunque in te sola, ^piglio colui,
Cadera l'ira mia vendicatrice.
Et 2. Ilfuror pazzo, e la discordia fera.
Salust 6. book of Judith. Et qu' ore le deuoir la peur tremblante donte.

Boscan. 1. Siento pena tan mortal
Que con ansia desy gual
Me muero por me morir.


Cap. 4. Of the Metonymia of the subject.
THe Metonymia of the subject, is when the word that properly signifies the
subject is brought to express the thing adjoined thereunto, as when the thing
that contains is put for that which is contained, the place for the thing
therein placed, the possessor for the thing possessed.

Homer. 1. Iliad. (...)
4. Odyss. Telemachus to Nestor. (...).
Virg. Aen. 2. Inuadunt vrbem somno vinoque sepultam.
Aen. 2. -- Iam proximus ardet
Vealegon.
i. Vealegons house. Aeneid. 1. Of Bitias carowsing. Ille impiger hausit
Spumantem pateram, and pleno se proluit auro.
Georg. 2. Casta pudicitiam seruat domus.
Georg. 4. -- dulcem nidis immitibus escam.
Aen. 1. Gens inimica mihi Tyrrhenum nauigat aquor,
Ilium in Italiam portans, victosque penates.
Sir Philip Sydney 1. Here ye do find in truth this strange operation of Love,
How to the wood love ru^s, as well as rides to the Palace.
Torquat. Tass. 1. Song. Sic habbian tante, e tante in si poch' anni
Ribellanti prouincie a lui sommesse.
And in another place. Altri Inghilterra, e Francia, and altri Olanda,
E la fertile Sicilia altri ne manda.
2. Of A'rmida. Mane la bocca, ond' esce aura amorosa,
Sola rosseg'gia e semplice la rosa.
Salust 1. Judith. The people cries to God. Veus-tu que derechef l'idolatre
Caldee,
Sous un ioug tyrannique accable ta Iudee?
Boscan 3. Book. Los altares delante estauan puestos,
Ardiendo encima d'ellos toda Arabia.


Cap. 5. Of the Metonymia of the adiunct.
A Metonymia of the adiunct, is, when by the adiunct we express the subject.
So the names of virtues and vices are used for virtuous or vicious men: the
sign for the thing which it does signify: the adiu^ct of the time for the
things subject, etc.

Homer. N. Il. (...).
So in 6. Odyss. (...).
for Alcinous himself.

V. Ae. 1. Quis genus Aeneadum, quis Troiae nesciat vrbe^,
Virtutesque, virosque, and tanti incendia belli?
Aeneid. 1. Haud aliter puppesque tua, pubesque tuorum, etc.
Aeneid. 1. Aspera tum positis mitescent saecula bellis.
Georg. 1. Impiaque aternam timuerunt saecula noctem.
Aglog. 1. -- libet Partho torquere Cydonia cornis Spicula.
Sir Philip Sidney 5. Musidorus to Euarchus. Howsoever it be, my death shall
triumph over thy cruelty.

Torquat. Tass. 2 Song of Olindo and Sophronia. Ma il sospettoso testimo
periglio
Tanta virtu congiunta hauer vicina,
Onde, com'egli volse, ambo in essiglio
Oltre a i termini andar di Palestina.
Salust 5. Semain. Et qu'encor toute voix, et tout style, and tout age,
Louangeassent l'ouurier, en louant son ouurage.
And 7. Clerement on conut que ta saint justice
Preserve l'innocence, and chastie le vice.
Boscan. 3. Pero viniendo a nuestro presupiesto,
Digo tambien que el no marauillarse
Es proprio de iuizio bien compuesto.
And 2. speaking of Italy. La qual es vna tierra muy floreciente de ingenios,
de letras, de iuizios, y de grandes escritores.



Cap. 6. of Ironia.
IRonia is a Trope, that by naming one contrary intends another. The
special grace whereof is in jesting and merry conceipted speeches. This trope
continued makes a most sweet allegory, and it is perceived by the
contrariety of the matter it self, or by the manner of utterance quite
differing from the sense of the words, for then it is apparent that we speak
but iestinglie, and not as we think.

Homer. Iliad. P. Patroclus, when Cebrion fell from his Chariot (...),
(...).
Vir 4. Aen. Egregia^ vero laudem, et spolia ampla refertis,
Tuque puerque tuus, magnum and memorabile numen,
Vna dolo diuum si foemina victa duorum est.
3. Aeglog. Tum, credo, cum me arbustum videre Myconis,
Atque mala vites incidere falce nouellas, etc.
8. Aeg. Mopso Nisa datur. Quid non speremus amanteat
Iungentur iam gryphes equis: oeuoque sequenti
Cum canibus timidae venient ad pocula damae. etc.
^digno coniuncta viro. etc.
Aeneid. 2. Cui Pirrhus, referes ergo haec, and nuncius ibi^
Pelidae genitori, illi mea tristia facta,
Degeneremque Neoptolemum narrare memento:
Nunc morere.
And in another place. quando tot stragis aceruos
Teucrorum tua dextra dedit.
and

Istic nunc metuende iace
and

quam bello Troiane petisti
Italiam metire iacens.
Sir Philip Sid. a continued Ironia between Pas and Nico. Nico. Who doubts but
Pas fine pipe again will bring
The ancient praise to Arcade shepherds skill?
Pan is not dead, since Pas begins to sing.

Pas. Who evermore will love Apolloes quill,
Since Nico does to sing so widely gape?
Nico his place fair better furnish will.

Nico. Was this not he who for Cyringaes escape
Raging in woes, first Pastors taught to plain?
Do you not hear his voice and see his shape?

Pas. This is not he, that failed her to gain
Which made a bay, made bay a holy tree:
But this is one that does his music stain.

3. Of Mopsa. So that the pretty pig, laying her sweet burden about his neck;
my Dorus, said she, tell me these wonders.

In the same book Philoclea says.

O kind mother of mine, said she, did you bestow the light upon me for this?
or did you bear me to be the author of my burial? A trim purchase you have
made of your own shame, robbed your daughter, to ruin your self.

In 4. Timantus of Philanax. O notable affection, for the love of the father,
to kill the wife, and disenherite the children. O single minded modesty, to
aspire to no less, than to the princely Diadem.

Torquat. Tass 7. Argante, says. O gente inuitta: o popolo guerriero
D' Europa: vn' huomo solo e che visfida.
Venga Tancredi homai, che par si fiero:
Se ne la sua virtu tanto si fida:
O vuol, giacendo in piume, aspettar forse
La notte, ch' altra volta a lui soccorse?
In 16. Vbaldo calls Rinaldo. Egregio campion d' vna fanciulla.
Salust 1. Semaine. Composes hardiment, o sages Grecs, les cieux
D'vn cinquieme element: disputes curieux,
Qu'en leur corpse par tout ro^d l'oeil humain ne remarque
Commancement, ny fin: debates que la parque
Asseruit seulement sous ses cruelles loix
Ce que l'astre argente reuoid de mois en mois:
Le foyble estayement de si vain doctrine
Pourtant ne sauuera ce grand tout de ruin.
Boscan 2. Book. Que vfaneza ta man^a
os parece Sennora poruentura,
triumfando de mi sangre lleuar gloria?
que gran famaos procura,
tender contrami solo vuestrasanna?


THere is also a kind of Ironia called (...) in Greek, Praeteritio in Latin, a
kind of pretended omitting or letting slip of that which indeed we elega^tly
note out in the very show of praetermission, as when we say; I let this
pass; I pass it over with silence. Like unto this is that which is called of
the Graecians (...), of the Latinists Negatio, a denial or refusal to speak,
as, I will not say that which I might, I will not call you, etc. when
nevertheless we speak and tell al.

Homer. Il 1. Achilles to his mother. (...);
V. 1. Ae Quid memore^ infand as caedes, quid facta tyranni
Essera?
and 10. Aen. Quid repetam exustas Erycino in littore classes?
Quid tempestatum regem, ventosque furentes
Aeolia excitos, aut actam nubibus Irim?
Geor. 2. Quid tibs odorato reseramsudantia ligno
Balsamaque and baccas semper frondentis Acanthi?
Quid nemora Aethiopum molli canentia lana,
Velleraque vt folijs depectant tenuia Seres?
Sixth Aeglog. Quid loquar aut Scyllam Nisi? aut qua^famasequuta a est
Candida succinct am latrantibus inguina monstris
Dulichias vexasse rates and gurgite in alto,
Ah, timidos nautas cambus lacerasse marinis?
Aut vt mutatos Terei narrauerit artus?
Quas illi Philomela dapes, quae dona pararit,
Quo cursu desert a petiuerit, and quibus ante
Infoelix sua tecta, superuolitauerit alis?
Geor. 1. Non ego cuncta meis amplecti versibus opre,
Non mihi, si linguae centum sint, oraque centum,
Ferrea vox, etc.
Sir P. Syd. 2. of Musidorus. To tell you what pitiful mishaps fell to the
young Prince of Macedon his cosyn, I should too much fill your ears with
strange horrors: neither will I stay upon those laboursom adventures, nor
lothsom misaduentures, to which and through which his fortune and courage
conducted him: my speech hastes it self to come to the point of all Musidorus
misfortunes.

Torquat Tass. 8. Song. Taccio, ch'oue il bisogne, c'l tempo chiede
Pronta man, pensier fermo, animo andace,
Alcuno iui di noi primo si veds
Portar, framille morti, o ferro, o face.
And,

Taccio, chefu da l'arme, e da l'ingegno
Del (...) Tancreds la Cilicia doma.
2. Clorinda says. Ma taccio questo, e taccio i segni espress^
Ond' argomento l'innocentia in ess^.
Salust 3 Semain. Que diray-ie de toy, o fontaine Sclauonne?
Que diray-ie de toy, o source de Dodone?
Else where, Ie tairay la Geiette, and le marbre, and l'ardoise,
Ie tairay pour se coup la croupe Oromenoise.
And 4. Ie ne veux mettre en ieu les diuerses saisons,
Que causa le soleil en changeant de maisons.
Ie tairay que iamais la torche iournaliere
Ne destobe a not yeux en plain iour sa lumiere.
Que quelque grand eclipse, and qu'endor Alecton
N'exile pour un temps des regnes de Pluton,
La beequetante faim, la trahison funeste,
La sanglante Enyon, and la puuaise peste,
Pour des border sur nous vne mer de douleurs,
Et noyer l'vniuers and de sang and de pleurs.
l'oublieray que la mer sensle and se diminue
Parl'accroist and descroit del' estoile cornue.


I remember nothing in Boscan or Garcilasso fit for this purpose.

Cap. 7. Of a Metaphore.
THus much of the first kind of trope in Metonymia and Ironia: now follows
the second, containing a Metaphore and Synecdoche. A Metaphore is when the like
is signified by the like: so then a Metaphore is nothing but a similitude
contracted into one word. There is no trope more flourishing tha^ a Metaphore,
especially if it be applied to the senses, and among the senses chiefly to the
eye, which is the quickest of all the senses.

Homer, Il. 1. Calchas of Agamemnon. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Else where. (...).
And of Nester. (...).
Virg. Aen. 4. -- spem front serenas.
Else where. Magnoque irarum fluctuat aestu.
Aeglog 4. Te duce, siqua marens sceleris vestigia nostri
Irris a perpetua soluent formidine terras.
Georg. 1. Omnia ventorum concurrere praelia vidi.
And, Sape etiam immensum caelo venit agmen aquarum.
And, Nunc nemora ingenti vento, nunc littera plangunt.
Aegl. 3. Et nunc omnis ager, nunc omnis parturit arbos,
Nunc frendent sylua, nunc formosissimus annus.
Georg. 3. -- ruunt que effusi carcere currus.
And

-- at fulua nimbus arena
Tollitur.
And,

-- gressus glomerare superbas.
Aen. 2. Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus.
Aen. 4. -- est mollis flamma medullas
Interea, and tacitum viuit sub pectore vulnus.
Vritur infoelix Dido, tot aque vagatur
Vrbe furens.
Aen. 12. -- it toto turbids coelo
Tempestas telorum, and ferreus ingruit imber.
And there of Aeneas.

-- ir arumque emnes effundit habenas.
And,

Fulminas Aeneas.
And,

-- nunc, nunc
Fluctuas ira intus.
Sir Philip Syd. 23. Son. -- Alas the race
Of all my thoughts, has neither stop, nor start,
But only Stellaes eyes, and Stellaes heart.
Of Pyrocles. 1. Ar. For besides his eyes sometimes even great with tears.

In the same place. And might perceive in him store of thoughts, rather stirred
than digested.

2. And the extreme bents of my affection, which will either break out in
words, or break my heart.

Elsewhere. The muddie mind of Dametas, he found most easily stirred with
covetousness.

Elsewhere. Began to throw her thoughts into each corner of her invention.

Elsewhere of Basilius. Each coffer or cupboord he met, one saluted his
shinnes, another his elbowes, Iometimes ready in revenge to strike the^ again
with his face.

4. Of Damet as when his wife Miso had beaten him. She gave him the wooden
salutation you heard of.

Torquat. Tass. 1. Song. Cio ch'alma generosa alletta, epunge:
Cio che puo risuegsiar virtu sopsta.
In another place Goffredo says. Mafu de pensier nostri vltimo segno
Espugnar di Sion le nobil mura:
Esottrarrei Christian dal giogo indegno
Diseruitu cosi spiacente, e dura:
Fondande in Palestina un nouo regne
Ou' habbia la pieta sede sicura.
3 Song. I defensori a grandinar le pierre
Da l'alte mura in guisa incominciaro.
Elsewhere. Che nulla teme la sicur a testa
O di sassi, o di strai, nembo, o tempesta.
4. Vela il souerchio ardir con la vergogna,
E sa manto del vere a la menzogna.
There of Armida. Esce de vaghe labbra aurea catena
Che l'alme a suo voler prende, and affrena.
And in another place. En voce di Sirena a i suoi concenti
Addorment ar le piu suegliate menti.
Salust 4. Semaine. Mes verse conceus en peine, en liesse enfantez.
In the same, of the sun. Car a chaque pais dans l'espace d'un iour
Tu donnes le bon soir, tu donnes le bon-iour.
Boscan. 1 Amor, dolor, y cuydado,
sus penas en conueniencia
publicaran la sententia,
yo que soi el condenado,
porne solo la presencia.


But hyperbolicall amplifications and allegories have singular excellency in a
Metaphore, and therefore commonly they are here most usual: and by these
hyberbolicall metaphores the speech is made very lofty and full of majesty,
when we attribute life and action, to dead and senseless things.

Homer. Odyss. 8. Ulysses says. (...).
Iliad. 2. (...).
Virg. Aen 1. -- geminique minantur
In coelum scopuli.
10. -- Pontem indignatus Araxes.
3. Aeneid of Charybdis. -- and sidera verberat vnda.
And,

Ter spumam elisam, and rorantia vidimus astra.
5 Aegl. Daphni tuum Paenos etiam ingemuisse leones
Interitum, montesque feri syluaeque loquuntur.
2. Geor. Sinon ingentem foribus domus alta superbis
Mane salutantum totis vomit aedibus vndam.
4. Georg. -- Caesar dum magnus ad altum
Fulminat Euphraten bello.
2 Aen. At domus interior gemitu, miseroque tumultu
Miscetur, penitusque caua plangoribus aedes
Foemineis vlulant: ferit aurea sydera clamor.
Sir Philip Syd. 2. of Musidorus. But alas, to what a sea of miseries my
plentiful tongue does lead me?

3. of Miso. She that could before scarco go, but supported by crowches, now
flew about the house borne up with the wingsof anger*

Torquat. Tass. 1. of Rinaldo. Se'l miri fulminar ne l'arme accolto,
Mart lo stimi: Amor S'ei scopre il volto.
2. Of Argante, parue etc. Et che ne gli occhi horribili gli ardesse
La gran face d'Aletto, and di Megera.
And there. E'n cotal' atto il rimiro Babelle
Alzar la front, e minacciar le stelle.
6. Song Lampo nel fiammeggiar, nol romor tuono,
Fulmini nel ferir le spade sono.
8. Lampi, e folgori arde an nel regio aspetto
Mentr' ei parlo di maesta, d'horrore.
Salust. 3. Sem. -- mais voy comme la mer
Me iette en mill mers, ou ie crains d'abismer.
1. Of Judith. Son palais, que sembloit d'vn front audacieux,
Et mespriser la terre, and menacer les cieus.
1. Semaine, of God. Il fait de l'Ocean deces douces largesses
Regorger, liberal, mill mers de richesses.
Boscan. El sentir de mi sentido
tan profundo ha nauegado,
que me tiene ya engolfado
donde viuo despedido
de salir a pie ni a nado.


Allegoriis.
Homer. P Achilles to Patroclus. (...)
(...).
Iliad P. Ajax to Menelaus. (...)
(...).
And,

(...)
(...).
Vir. 2. Aen. of a wild ash cut down. -- illa vsque minatur,
Et tremefacta comam concusso vertice nutat,
Vulneribus donec paulatim euicta, supremum
Congemuit, traxitque iugis auulsa ruinam.
Sir Phil. Syd. 1. Of Pyrocles. And when with pity once his heart was made
tender, according to the aptnes of the humor, it received straight a cruel
impression, of that wonderful passion, which to be defined is impossible. etc.

And,

And herewith the deep wound of his love, being rubbed afresh with this new
unkindness, began as it were to blee'd again, in such sort, that he was unable
to bear it any longer.

The same Pyrocles when he was clad with the habit of the Amazon. Transformd in
show, but more transformd in mind
I cease to strive, with double conquest foyld:
For, woe is me, my powers all I find.
With outward force, and inward treason spoyld.
For from without came to mine eyes the blow
Whereto mine inward thoughts did faintlie yield:
Both these conspird poor reasons overthrow,
False in my self thus have I lost the field.
Torquat Tass 1. Tu magnanimo Alfonso, il qual ritogli
Al furor di fortuna, e guidi in porto
Me peregrino errante, e fra li scogli*
E fra onde agitato, e quasi absorto.
Salust. 7 day. Dieu est le president, qui par tout a justice
Haute, moyenne, and basse, and qui sans avarice,
Ignorance, faueur, crainte, ^pect, courroux
Ses arrests sans appel prononce contre nous.
1. Tout beau, muse, tout beau, d'un si profond Neptune
Ne sonde point le fond: guard toy d'approcher
Ce Charybde glouton, ce Caphare rocher,
Ou mainte nef, suyuant la raison pour son ourse,
A fait triste naufrage au milieu de la course.
Qui voudra seurement par ce gouffre ramer,
Sage n'aille iamais cingler en haure mer:
Ains costoye la ryue, ayant la foy pour voile,
L'esprit saint pour nocher, la Bible pour estoile.


Cap. 8. Of Synecdoche of the part.
SYnecdoche is when the name of the whole is given to the part, or the name of
the part to the whole. Synecdoche of the part is, when by a part we mean the
whole, and it is either of the member or of the special. Of the member, when
by one integrall member the whole is signified.

Homer. 1. Iliad. (...).
Virg. 1. Aen. Haud aliter puppesque tuae, pubesque tuorum.
Aeglog. 5. Candidus insuetum miratur limen Olympi.
Sir P. Sydney 2. of Basilius. Basilius having combd, and trickt himself more
curiously, than any times forty winters before.

Torquat. Tass. 2. of Sophronia. Non speri piu ds ritrouar perdono
Cor pudico, alta mente, e nobil volto.
Salust. 1. Semaine. Combien d'espris subtils out le mond abuse.
Pour auoir c'est esprit pour patron refuse?
Boscan 3. Yarompere las ondas de Neptuno
Yla proraporne contra los vientos
De Eolo? In another place.
Alma gentil dignissima de impero,
Y que de sola vos cantasse Homero.


Cap. 9. Of Synecdoche of the special.
THe Synecdoche of the special is when by the special we note the general,
so we put a finite number for a great one; so the singular for the plural.

Vir. 3. Geor. Haud secus ac patrijs acer Romanus in armis.
4. AEg. Alter erit tam Typhis, et altera quae vehat, Argo,
Delectos heroas, erunt etiam altera bella,
Atque iterum ad Troiam magnus mittetur Achilles.
1. Georg. Ter centum niuei tondent dumet a iuuenci.
4 AEg. Mill mea Siculis errant in montibus agua.
Sir P. Syd. 1. Dorus of Love. Neither he shows reverence to a Prince, nor
mercy to beggar.

Torquat. Tass. 1. S'egli auuerra ch' in pace
Il buon popol di Christo vnqua si veda,
Et con naui, e caualli al fero Trace
Cerchi ritor la grand' ingiusta preda.
2. Song. Qui mill immondi Arpie vedresti, e mill
Centauri, e Sfingi, e pallide Gorgoni:
Molte, e molte latrar voraci Scille.
E fischiar Hidre, e sibilar Pitoni:
E vomitar Chimere atre fauille:
E Polifemi horrendi, e Gerioni
En noui mostri, e non piu'ntesi, o visti
Diuersi aspetti in un confusi e misti.
Salust. 1. Semaine. Auant qu' Eure souflat, quel' onde eut des poissons.
And,

Pour lire la dedans il ne nous saut entendre
Cent sorts de iargons: il ne nous faut apprendre
Les characteres Turcs, de Memphe les pourtrets,
Ni les poincts des Hebrieux, ni les notes de grees.
L'antarctique brutal. le vagabond Tartare,
L'Arabe plus cruel, le Scythe plus barbare,
L'ensant qui n'a sept ans, le chaissieux viellard,
Y lit passablement, bien que despourueu d'art.
2. Tous ces doctes esprits, don't la voix flateresse
Change Hecube en Helene, and Faustine en Lucresse.
3. Ne fait d'vne formy un Indois Elephant,
D'vn mol Sardanapale un Hercule triomphant,
D'vn Thersite un Adon, and ne prodigue encore
D'vn discourse impudentle losd' Alceste a Flore.
Boscan. 3. Si alli fuera Leandro Palinuro,
O no fuera Leandro, claro viera
Elpeligro que el tiempo amenazaua.


Cap. 10. Of Synecdoche of the Integrall.
THe Synecdoche of the whole, is when by the whole we mean a part, and it is
either of the integrall whole, or general and universal. Of the integrall,
when by the whole integrall we mean a part.

Homer. Odiss. (...)
(...).
Vir Aen. 1. Ardentesque auertit equos in castra, priusquam
Pabula gustassent Troiae, Xanthumque bibissent.
2. Aeg. Ante pererratis amborum finibus exul
Aut Ararim Parthus bibet, aut Germania Tigrim.
10. Aeg. Nec sifrigoribus medijs Hebrumque bibamus,
Sith^asque niues hyemis subeamus aquosa.
Sir P. Syd. 2. As if the stars would breath themselves for a greater mischief.

Torquat. Tass. 4. Come sonanti, e terbide procelle,
Che vengan fuor de le natie lor grotte
Ad oscurare il cielo, e portar guerra
Aigran regni del mare, and de la terra.
Salust 1. Semaine. Combien d'espris subtils out le monde abuse.
Pour auoir c'est esprit pour patron refuse?
Garcilass. AEglog 1. El arbol de victoria,
que cinne estrechamente
tugloriosa frente?


Cap. 11. Of Synecdoche of the general.
THe Synecdoche of the general is when by the general we intend the special,
so the plural for the singular, so the Poet for Virgil.

Homer. Il. 1. (...).
And,

(...).
Vir Aeg 1 Tityre tu patula recubans sub tegmine fagi.
And,

Ille meas errare boues, vt cernis, and ipsum
Lude^ equae vellem calamo permisit agresti.
Sir P. Syd. 1. Vile creature, said she, laying her hand upon her sword, force
me not to defile this sword in thy base blood.

And 1. So if my man must praises have,
What then must I that keep the knave?
Torquat. Tass. 1. Ma poi c'hebbe di questi, e d'altricori
Scorti gl'intimi sensi il re del mondo.
Salust 4. Semaine. Et nos deportemens dignes cent and cent foits
Du pleur Ephesien, and du rire Abderois.
Boscan. (...). Passando el mar Le andro el animoso
En amoroso suego todo ardiendo.


Thus much for Tropes, whereof the most excellent is a Metaphore; the next,
Ironia, then Metonymia; lastly, Synecdoche: The most usual also is a
Metaphore, then a Metonymia, next, Synecdoche, lastly, Ironia. Metonymia,
Metaphora, and Synecdoche oftentimes concur together.

Cap. 12. Of Figures.
NOw of Figures. A figure is a certain decking of speech, whereby the usual
and simple fashion thereof is altered and changed to that which is more elegant
and conceipted. For as a Trope is of single words, so a Figure of coopled and
conjoined: and as of words, some be proper* some turned, so of speeches, some
be simple and natural, some finely fashioned and figured artificially. A
figure is either in the word, or in the sentence. A figure of the word is that,
whereby the words do sweetly and fitly sound among themselves. In these
figures especially consists the conceipted pleasance and delicacie of speech.

Cap. 13. Of verse and rhyme.
THe figure of words consists either in the just dimension and measuring of
sounds or words, or else in the pleasant repetition of the same. This dimension
or measuring is either belonging to Poets, or used of Orators. Poetical
dimension is that which is bound to the continual observation of prescript
spaces. Poetical dimension makes either rhyme, or verse. Rhyme contains a
certain number of sillables ending alike.

Sir P. Syd. My heart my hand, my hand has given my heart
The giver given from guilt shall never part.


Cap. 14.
VErse or meter is a poetical dimension comprehending certain feet settled in
certain places. A foot is a dimension of certain syllables with a strict
observation of distinct time or quantity. A foot is either of two syllables,
or three, and both of them either simple or compound. The simple one of two
sillables, is Spondaeus, consisting of two long sillables, as, ego^ Musas:
Learning: Tutta: Chacun: Obras. Or Pyrrichius, containing 2. short sillables:
as, logos: Deus: Pretty: oue: amys: mia. The compound one of two sillables, is
either Iambus, of one short and one long, as, (...): deos: revenge: tuoi:
seras: aguas: or Choreus, of one long and one short, as (...): arma: noble:
notte: vaincre: porne. The simple one of three Syllables is either Molossus of
three long Syllables, as (...): Romanos: Transformings: Diuiso: Effraye:
Contemplando: or Trochaeus of three short, (...): legere: pretelie: huomini:
alme Venus: que cosa: The compound one of three sillables consists of two
sillables like or unlike: the feet of two like sillables are twice two,
Dactylus, of one long and two short, as, (...): Tityre: company: matino: alme
Venus: vidamia: and Anapoestus of two* short and one long, as, (...): fluuios:
monument: non era peccato: resonant: que principio. Bacchius of one short and
two long, as (...): Athenas: reserving: ritorna: rechanter: palabras: and
Palimbacchius, of two long and one short, as (...): cantare: almighty:
parlare: verse digne: estressa. Now the feet of two unlike are but two,
Creticus, of a long, a short, and a long, as (...): Indies: impotent: vita
sincera: digne verse: causa secreta: and Amphibrachus: of one short, one long,
and one short, as, (...): amare: disorder: amore: benign: palabra. Thusmuch of
feet, by the dimension whereof a verse is made. In a verse, sometimes a vowell,
or this letterm, or both be cut off in the end of a word, if the next word
begin with a vowell. The last syllable in a verse is common, either long or
short. There be many kinds of verses, and may be more: those that be now in use
may be referred to these two general heads, a simple verse and a compound. The
simple consists only of two feet, as Adonium, of a Dactylus and Spondaeus.
Nubibm atris
condita nullum
fundere possunt
sydera lumen.
Fear is a greater
plague to the fearful,
than be the greatest
plagues that he fears.


The compound of more than two, as Tetrametrum of four, and Polymetrum of more
than four. Tetrametrum is that which is called Asclepiade, of a Molossus,
Anapoestus, and two Dactyli, as Moecenas atauis aedite regibus, etc.
Sir Philip Sydney 2: Dorus. O sweet woods the delight of solitariness:
O how much I do like your solitariness:
Here no treason is hid veiled in innocence,
Nor flattrers venymous insinuations,
Nor cunning humorists pudled opinions,
Nor time pratled away, cradle of ignorance, etc.


Polymetrum is either Pentametrum of five, or Hexametrum of six. Pentameters
bethree: first a Phaleucium of a Spondaeus, a Dactylus, and three Chorei, as
Passer delitiae meae puellae.
Sir Philip Sydney 2. Reason tell me thy mind if here be reason,
In this strange violence to make resistance,
Where sweet graces erect the stately banner
Of virtues regiment, shining in harness
Of fortunes diademes, by beauty mustred*
Say then, Reason* I say, what is thy counsalle?
Her loose hairs be the shot, the breasts the pikes be,
Scoutes each motion is, the hands the horsemen,
Her lips are the riches the wars to maintain,
Where well couched abides a coffer of pearl:
Her legs carriage is of all the sweet camp,
Say then, etc.
Her canons be her eyes, mine eyes the walls be,
Which at first volee gave open entry,
No rampire did abide, my train was vpblowne,
Vnderminde with a speech the piercer of thoughts:
Thus weakened by my self, no help remains,
Say then, etc.
And now Fame the herald of her true honor
Does proclaim with a sound made al by men's mouths,
That Nature sovereign of earthly dwellers,
Commands all creatures to yield obeisance,
Under this, this her own, her only dearling
Say then, etc.
Reason sighs, but in end he thus does answer,
Naught can reason avail in* heavenly matters.
Thus natures diamond receive thy conquest,
Thus pure pearl I do yield my senses and soul,
Thus sweet pain I do yield, what ere I can yield,
Reason look to thy self, I serve a Goddess.
Comes de Alcinois. Encore France se veut trauailler en vain,
En vain France se veut trauailler encore,
De chanter un amor, de chanter un Dieu.
etc.


Secondly a Sapphike, of Choreus, Spondaeus, Dactylus, and two Chorei, where we
must observe, that after every such third verse, one Adoniu^ be added
thereunto, as Iam satis terris niuis, atque dira
Grandinis misit pater, and rubento
Dextera sacras iaculatus arces
terruit vrbem.
Sir Philip Sydney 1. Cleophila looking on Philoclea, speaks to Hope. If mine
eyes can speak to do hearty arrant,
Or mine eyes language she do hap to judge of,
So that eyes message be of her received:
Hope, we do live yet.
But if eyes fail then, when I most do need them,
Or if eyes language be not unto her known,
So that eyes message do return rejected,
Hope, we do both dye.
Yet dying and dead do we sing her honor,
So become our tombs monuments of her praise,
So become our losses the triumph of her gain,
Hers be the glory, etc.


Remy Belleau has some of this kind, as Ie fremis tremblant, le frisson me
saisist,
Palle ie blesmis comme l'herbe des champs,
Sans chaleur, sans poux, d'amoreuse langueur
Presq ie transis, etc.


Thirdly and lastly, Elegum, or the Elegiacall verse of a Dactylus or
Spondaeus, in the first place, and in the third place of a Spondaeus with two
Anapaesti. Turpe quid ausurus, te, sine test, time.
Sir Philip Sydney 4. Passion unto my rage, rage to a hasty revenge.



The Hexameter is most famous, consisting of Dactylus or Spondaeus
indifferently in all the four first places: but in the fifth place, of a
Dactylus only, as Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus.
And, O formose puer, nimium ne creed colori.
Sir Philip Sydney 1. First shall a trusty Grehound transform himself to a
Tiger.



The Pentameter is never lightly separated from the Hexameter, but this is
oftentimes severed from that. Hexameters joined with Pentameters be, as Nescio
quid plus est, quod donat saecula chartis,
Victurus genium debet habere liber.
Well, but faulty I was, reason to my passion eelded,
Passion unto my rage, rage to a hasty revenge.
Tutta notte piou, il matino chiaro ritorna,
Diuis il mondo con Jove Caesar have.
Nocte pluit tota, etc.
Iodelle. Phoebus, Amor, Cypris, veut sauueur, nourir, and orner,
Ton verse, coeur, and chef, d'ombre, de flame, de fleurs.
Comes de Alsinois. Voi de rechef o alme Venus, Venus alme, rechanter,
Ton los immortel par ce poet facre.
Voi de rechef, un verse anime, verse digne de ton nom,
Verse, que la France recoit, verse que la France lira.
Et fais, qu'en resonant ton los, il puisse de ses verse,
Par ta benign faueur, vaincre la sorce d'amour.
Incerta autoris. Tant que seras opulens, amiss auras par chemin assez,
Chacun s'enfuyra, quand miserable seras.
Donec eris foelix, etc.


The Iambike is also very usual: which is either pure consisting only of
Iambikes, as Suis and ipsa Roma viribus ruit.
Or mixed, which admits also Spondaeus, as Rex est tyranni, quisquis
contemnit necem.
Immerito: Spencer. Unhappy verse, the witness of my unhappy state,
Make thy self fluttring wings of thy fast flying
Thoughts, and fly forth unto my love whersoeuer she be.
Whether lying restles in heavy bed, or else
Sitting so chearles at the cheerful board, or else
Playing alone careless on her heavenly virginalls,
If in bed, tell her, that my eyes can take no rest,
If at board, tell her, that my mouth can eat no meat,
If at her virginals, tell her, I can hear no mirth.
Asked why? Say, waking love suffers no sleep:
Say, that raging love does appale the weak stomach:
Say, that lamenting love marreth the musical.
Tell her, that her pleasures were wont to lul me asleep,
Tell her, that her beauty was wont to feed mine eyes:
Tell her, that her sweet tongue was wo^t to make me mirth
Now do I nightly wast, wanting my kindly rest,
Now do I daily starve, wanting my lively food,
Now do I always die, wanting thy timely mirth.
And if I wast, who will bewail my heavy chance?
And if I sterue, who will record my cursed end?
And if I die, who will say, this was Immerito?
Remy Belleau. Senarij Iambici. Quand sur ta leure douce a plat ie vay succant
L'ambrosine douceur qui mon ame empoysonne.
Au ciel ie pense estre fait alors un demydieu,
Ou quelque image pluis divine, si plus se peut,
Mais ceste douceur tu detrampes si soudain
De fiel, and d'aigueur, and de poison si cruel, etc.


Other kinds there be, as Anacreontica,

Sir P. Syd. 2. My Muse what ailes this ardour? to blaze my only secrets.
Alas it is no glory, to sing mine own decayed state:
Alas it is no comfort, to speak without an answer:
Alas it is no wisdom, to show the wound without cure, etc.
Cap. 15.
THus much shall suffice for poetical dimension. Now follows that of
Orators, both unlike that of Poets, and always unlike it self. In prose avoid
verse, unless now and then a verse be brought in out of some author, either
for proof or pleasure. The beginning or ending of a verse must not be the
beginning or ending of prose. For the beginning, a little consideration will
suffice, for the middle, less; but in the end the chief care is to be had,
for it is most examined, and longest continues in memory. It must therefore
be sweetly contrived, that it seem not hasty and abrupt: it must also be
varied and changed oftentimes, least satietie be procured, if the same foot
should in the end be continually repeated. Yet notwithstanding this
diligence, it is not required that a man should be bound to the observation of
certain feet any further than six sillables from the end. As I require
diligence in this point, so I condemn curiosity, affectation, and open art.
The end is seldom of long sillables altogether, but very oftentimes of long
and short together, as three Chorei continued, an Iambus with a Dichoreus.
Tullie so loved Dichoreus, that in one Oration to Pompeius, he used it an
hundred and fourteen times. Neither must we only have regard to the
quantity of the sillables, but also to the goodness of the letters, for that is
a great cause of this sweet dimension used of Orators.

Sir P. Syd. 1. Philanax to Basilius. I would then have said, the heavenly
powers to be reverenced, and not searched into, and their mercy rather by
prayers to be sought, than their hidden counsels by curiosity.

In 4. of Gynecia. She saw the rigor of the laws was like to lay a shameful
death upon her: which, being for that action undeserved, made it the more
insupportable, and yet in the depth of her soul, most deserved, made it more
miserable.

Cap. 16. Of Epizeuxis.
THus much of the dimension of words: Now follow those figures that consist in
the repetitio^ of words and sounds, either like or unlike; and like, either
continued, or severed: and continued, either in the same sentence, or in diverse
sentences: in the same sentence, it is called in Greek (...), a joining of the
same word or sound, for that one sound is continually joined to another. It is
called also Palilogia, or iteration.

Homer. 5. Iliad. (...).
Virg. Aeg. 3. -- vale vale, inquit, Iola.
2. Ah Coridon Coridon, quae te dementia caepit?
4 Aen. -- sic sic iuuat ire sub vmbras.


Sometimes there is a parenthesis put between, but yet the thing is all one as
if there had nothing been inserted.

2. Aen. -- vos (o quibus integer aeui
Sanguis, ait, solidaeque suo stant robore vires)
Vos agitate fugam.
Sir P. Syd. 1. Up, up, Philisides, let sorrows go.
1. Only Jewel, o, only Jewel, which only deseruest
That men's hearts be thy seat, and endless fame be thy servant.
2. The time is changed, (my lute) the time is changed.
And,

The evil is inward (my lute) the evil is inward.
Torquat. Tass. 8. Arm Arm, freme il forsennato, e'nsime
La giouentu superba Arm Arm freme.
12. Argante to Clorinda. No, no sefui ne l'arme ate conforte
Esser vuo ne la gloria, o ne la morte.
12. Ma dove (o lasso me) dove restare
Le reliquie del corpo bello e casto?
19. Vieni (o famoso re) vieni: e la seur^
A la rocca fortissima ricoura.
Salust. Judith 6. Chantons, chantons de caeur, d'instrumens and de voix
Le los de dieu des dieus, le los du roy des rois.
Judith 2. La voix, o cas piteux, la voix del' immortel
Luy command d'offrir son Isac sur l' autel.
Boscan. 2. Oyd oyd los hombresy las gentes
un casa nueuo qu'en amor se ofrece,
amor in mi con su deleyte crece.
3 Traedle, respondio, traedle hermanas.


Cap. 17. Of Anadiplosis.
THat which is in diverse sentences is either Anadiplosis, or climax.
Anadiplosis, redubling, or reduplication is when the same sound is repeated in
the end of the sentence going before, and in the beginning of the sentence
following after.

Homer. E. Iliad. (...)
(...).
g. Iliad. (...).
(...).
Virg. Aeg. 6. Addit se sociam, timidisque superuenit Aegle.
Aegle, Naiadum pulcherrima.
6. Aenid. Deiphobum vidit lacerum crudeliter ora
Ora manusque ambas.
10. Aenid. -- sequitur pulcherrimus Astur.
Astur equo fidens, and versicoloribus armis.
Sir P Syd. 1. Over these brooks trusting to ease mine eyes,
(Mine eyes even great in labor with their tears)
I laid my face, my face wherein there lies
Clusters of clouds which no sun ever cleares.
3: O stealing time, the subject of delay,
Delay the rack of vnrefrain'd desire,
What strange dessein have thou my hopes to stay?
My hopes which do but to mine own aspire.
4: And having plast my thoghts, my thoughts thus placed me,
Me thought, nay sure I was, I was in fairest wood
Of Samothea land, a land which whilom stood.
Torquat. Tass. 8. Rinaldo han morto'l qual fu spada, e scudo
Di nostra feed: and ancor giace inulto.
Inulto giace: e su' l terreno ignudo
Lacerato il lasciaro, and insepulto.
19. Erminia to Tancred, lying half dead. Dopo gran tempo i ti ritrouo a pena
Tancredi: e'ti rueggio, e non son vista,
Vista non son da te: benche present,
E, trouando, ti perdo eternamente.
In Amynt. 27. -- hor non rammenti
Cio che l'altr'hier Elpino raccontaua,
Il saggio Elpino, a la bella Licori
Licori ch'in Elpin puote con gli occhi
Quel ch'ei potere in lei dourra col canto,
Se'l douere in amor si ritrouasse.
Salust. 1. Semaine. Detousiours le clairfeu n'enuironnent les airs:
Les airs d'eternite n'enuironnent les mers.
3. -- tant and tant ardamment
L'Eymant aim le fer: le fer aim l'Eymant.
Boscan 2. No puede ser que d'cl amor eshijo,
Eshijo d'el amor, mas es bastardo.
And

Gran tiempo ha, que amor me dize, escriue,
escriue lo que en ti yo tengo escrito.
3. Atreuiose a tomar la mano de Hero
De Hero la mano se atreuio a tomarla.


Cap. 18. Of Climax.
CLimax, gradation, is a reduplication continued by diverse degrees and steps,
as it were, of the same word or sound, for these two be of one kind.

Homer. Iliad. 3. (...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
V. aeg. 2. Torua le^na lupum sequitur, lupus ipse capellam,
E lorentem citisum sequitur lasciua capella.
Sir Philip Sydney 1. Song. Loving in truth, and saine in verse my love to show,
That the dear she might take some pleasure of my pain,
Pleasure might cause her read, reading might make her
Knowledge might pity win, and pity grace obtain (know
I sought fit words, etc.
3. Dorus. Sweet glove the sweet despoile of sweetest hand,
Fair hand the fairest pledge of fairer heart,
True heart whose truth does yield to truest band,
Chief band, I say, which ties my chiefest part,
My chiefest part, wherein do chiefly stand
Those secret joys, which heavens to me impart:
Unite in one, my state thus still to save,
You have my thanks, let me your comfort have.
44. Song. My words, I know, do well set forth my mind,
My mind bemones his sense of inward smart,
Such smart may pity crave of any heart:
Her heart, sweet heart, is of no tigers kind.
Torquat. Tass. 6. Sparsa e d'arme la terra: e l'arme sparse
Disangue, e l sangue co'l sudor simesce.
15 Enudre a i prati l'herba, a l'herba i fiori,
A i fiori l'odor.
Salust 1. Semaine of the garden of Eden. Ains d'un doux ventelet l'halene
^usquetee
Coulant dans la forest par l'eternel plantee,
Donnoit vigeut aux corpse, a la terre verdeur,
A la verdure fleurs, aux fleurs un alme odeur.
And 1. Semaine 2. day.

Ci bien qu'auec le temps le ius vertement aigre
Se fait moust, le moust vin, etc le bon vin vinaigre.
3. Des fontaines se font les ruisseaux murmurans:
Des murmurans ruisseaux, les rauageus torrens:
Des torrens rauageus les superbes riuitres.
Des riuieres se sont les ondes marinieres.
And,

Le germe croist en herb, and Therbe en long tuyan,
Le tuyau en espic, l'espic en ble nouueau
Judith. 3. Dieu peut tout ce, qu'il veut: dieu veut tout ce qu'il doit:
Dieu doit toute faueut a cil que march droit.
Boscan. 3. Tanto que d'ella sama tira y corre,
D'el Istro al Tago, y d'el Tago hasta al Nilo.


Cap. 19. Of Anaphora.
THus much of the continued repetitio^n of the same word in one or diverse
sentences: now follows the severed repetition of the same sound, and that
either in the same place, or in diverse. In the same place, either simple or
conioined. Simple, Anaphora and Epistrophe. Anaphora a bringing back of the
same sound, is when the same sound is iterated in the beginning of the sentence.

Homer. Iliad. 1. (...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
Vir. 4. Geor. Te dulcis coniux, te solo in littore secum,
Te veniente die, te decedente canebat.
Aegl. 1. Pan primus calamos cera coniungere plures
Instituit: Pan curat oues, ouiumque magistros.
Aen. 3. Sic oculos, sic ille manue, sic ora ferebat.
Sir Philip Sydney. 1. And thus mine eyes are placed still in one sight,
And thus my thoughts can think but one thing still,
Thus reason to his servant gives his right,
Thus is my power transformed to your will.
2. Old age is wise, and full of constant truth,
Old age well staid from ranging humors lives,
Old age has known, what ever was in youth,
Old age overcome the greater honor gives.
And to old age since you your self aspire,
Let not old age disgrace my high desire.
Torquat. Tasso. 20. Giace il cauallo al suo signore appresso,
Giace il compagno appo'l compagno estinto.
Giace il nimic^ appo'l nimico, e spesso
Su'l morto il viuo: il vincitor su'l vinto.
Salust. 1. Semaine. Tout estoit sans beauty, sans reglement, sans flame,
Tout estoit sans facon, sans mouuement, sansame.
1. Semaine 3 day. Qui boit le Styx sulphreux, le Phiegeton brulant,
Le bourbeux Acheron, le Gocyte sanglant.
5. Of the sea. Elle a son herisson, son belier, son pourceau,
Son lion, son cheual, son elephant, son veau.
1. of. Mari. Et qu'elle ensantera pour le salut humain
Son pere, son espoux, sons fills; and son germain.
Boscan 3. Cantauete en partiendo el clarodia,
Cantauete en viniendo la mannana.
Garcilasso. Por vos naci, por vos tengo la vida,
Por vos he de morir, y por vos muero.


Cap. 20. of Epistrophe.
Epistrophe, Conversion or turning to the same sound in the end, is when the
like sound is iterated in the endings.

Homer. 14. Odyss (...).
V. aeg. 3. Si ad vitulam spectes, nihil est quod pocula lauds.
Aegl. 8. Ignis vt hic durescit, and haec vt cera liquescit
Vno eodemque igni, sie nostro Daphnis amore.
Aeg. 10. -- solet esse grauis cantantibus vmbra:
Iuniperi grauis vmbra.
Sir Philip Sydney 1. But since it is weakness, too much to remember, what
should have been done, and that your commandment stretches to know what
shall be done; I do, etc.

There, of Dametas. O no, he can not be good, that knows not why he is good,
but stands so far good, as his fortune may keep him vnassailed.

10. Nay we are to resolve, that if reason direct it, we must do it, and if we
must do it, we will do it: for, to say, I cannot, is childish; and, I will
not, is womanish.

Torquat. Tass. 1. S^ su fedeli mei, su via prendete
Le fiamme, e'l ferro, ardete, and vccidite.
In Amynt. 45. Satyrus in comparing Syluia to Sylua for her cruelty. Celan le
selue, angui, leoni, and orsi,
Dentro il lor verde: e tu dentro (...) bell pett^
Nascondi odio, disdegno, and impiettate,
Fere peggior, ch'angui, leoni, and orsi,
Che si placano quei, questi placarsi
Non possono, per prego ne per dono.
Salust 1. Semaine. Non en temps, auant temps ains mesme auec le temps
I'enten un temps confus.
Boscan. 1. Los dos iuntos en dannarme
Hemos sido y en vencerme:
Armados para perderme:
Vos comigo por matarme,
Yo con vospor ofenderme.


Cap. 21. Of Symploce.
Conjoined as Symploce, Complexio, Comprehensio, coupling of both the other,
when the same sound is repeated both in beginnings and endings.

Vir. aeg. 7. Fraxinus in syluis pulcherrima, pinus in hortis,
Populus in fluuijs, abies in montibus altis
Sir Philip Sydney 5. Pyrocles. My blood will satisfy the highest point of
equity, my blood will satisfy the hardest hearted of this Country.

2. Of Musidorus. Such was as then the estate of the Duke, as it was no time by
direct means to seek her, and such was the estate of his captiued will, as he
could delay no time of seeking her.

Torquat. Tass. 9. S' affronta insieme, horribilmente vrtando
Scudo a scudo, elmo ad elmo, e brando a brando:
Salust. 4. Semaine. Reglant ensemblement nos moeurs, and nos humeurs,
Troublant ensemblement nos humeurs and nos moeurs.
Boscan. 1. Y assi esta la vida mia
D'el todo desconsolada,
D'el cuerpo desamparada:
Y fuera de l'alegria,
Pues es de vos apartada.


Cap. 22. Of Epanalepsis.
THese repetitions be in the same place; the two following, that is Epanalepsis
and Epanados, be diversely placed. Epanalepsis or resu^ption, is when the same
sound is iterated in the beginning and ending.

Virg. 2. Aen. Multa super Priamo rogitans, super Hectore multa.
Aeg. 1. Ambo florentes at atibus, Arcades ambo.
1. Georg. Nudus ara, sere nudus.
Aeg. 4. Occidet and serpens, and fallax herba veneni Occidet.
Aeg 9. Tityre, dum redeo, breuis est via, pasce capellas, Et potum pastas age
Tityre.
4. Georg. Amba auro, pictis incincta pellibus amba.
2. Aeneid. -- Arma viri, ferte arma.
12. Aeneid. Victus amore tui, cognato sanguine victus.
And,

-- Socer arua Latinus habebat,
Imperium solenne socer.
Sir P. Syd. 5. Fear is more pain, than is the pain it fears.

34. Sonet. They love indeed, who quake to say, they love.
3. Hark plaintfull ghosts, infernal furies hark.
3 Gynecia. The thoughts are but ouerflowings of the mind, and the tongue is
but a servant of the thoughts.

Torquat. Tass. 18. Audace si: ma cautamente audace.
Torris: to Aluida. 35. Estingua tutti gli odij il nostro amore,
E n^ssuno odio il nostro amore estingua.
In Amynta. fol. 87. Pari e l'eta, la gentilezza e pari. In Amynt. 70. O Dafne,
o Dafne,
A questo amaro fin tu misaluasti
A questo sine amaro?
Salust. 1. Semaine* Or done auant tous temps, matiere, form and lieu,
Dieu tout en tout estoit, and tout estoit en Dieu.
1. l'architecte du monde ordonna qu' a leur tour
Le iour suiuist la nuict, la nuict suiuist le iour.
In the triumph of faith speaking of Christ. Parole qu' on ne peut exprimer par
parole.

In the same place of the mother and her seven sons slain. Mere digne des
fis, fis dignes de la mere.

Boscan 1. Si de amor es tu sentido
Di me que cosa es amor.
3. Contemplando tras esto en las mudancas,
De la mar, y d'el viento contemplando.


Cap. 23. Of Epanados.
EPanados, regression, turning to the same sound, when one and the same sound
is repeated in the beginning and middle, or middle and end.

Homer. 2. Iliad. (...).
(...),
(...).
Virg Aeg. 8. -- Crudelis tu quoque matter,
Crudelis matter magis, an puer improbus ille?
Improbus ille puer, crudelis tu quoque matter.
7. Compulerantque greges Coridon and Thyrsis in vnum:
Thyrsis oues, Coridon distentas lacte capellas.
1. Geor. Quacunque illa leuem fugiens secat ethera pennis,
Insequitur Nisus: qua se fert Nisus ad auras,
Illa leuem fugiens raptim secat ethera pennis.
4. Geor. Tum quoque marmorea caput a ceruice reuulsum
Gurgite cum medio portans Oeagrius Hebrus
Volueret, Eurydicen vox ipsa, and frigida lingua,
Ah miseram Eurydicen anima fugiente vocabat:
Eurydicen tete referebant flumine ripa.
Sir Philip Sydney. Son. 7. Whose senses in so ill consort their stepdame
nature lays
That rauishing delight in them most sweet tunes do not raise.
Or if they do delight therein yet are so cloyed with wit,
As with sententious lips to set a title vain on it.
OF let the^ hear these sacred tunes and learn in wonders schools,
To be in things past bounds of wit, fools, if they be not fools.
Who have so leaden eyes as not to see sweet beauties show,
Or seeing have so wooden wits as not that worth to know,
Or knowing have so muddie minds as not to be in love,
Or loving have so frothy thoughts as easlie thence to move,
O let them see these heavenly beams, and in fair letters reed
A lesson sit both sight and skill, love and firm love to reed.
Hear then, but then with wonder hear, see, but adoring see
No mortal gifts, no earthly fruits now here descended be.
See do you see this face? a face? nay image of the skies,
Of which the two life* giving lights are figured in her eyes.
Hear you this soule-inuading voice, and count it but a voice?
The very essence of those tunes when Angels do rejoice.
8. Son. Each day seems long, and longs for long stayed night,
The night as tedious wooes the approach of day:
Tyrde with the dustie toils of busy day,
Languisht with horrors of the silent night:
Suffering the evils both of day and night,
While no night is more dark than is my day,
Nor no day has less quiet than my night.
With such bad mixture of my night and day:
That living thus in blackest winter night,
I seele the flames of hottest summers day.
Torquatus Tass In Amynt. 22. Dafne. Cosi la gene prima, che gia visse
Nel mondo ancora semplice and infant,
Stimo dolce beuanda, e dolce cibo,
L'acqua; e le ghiande:
Et hor l'acque e le ghiande,
Sono cibo e beuanda d'animali.
Poiche s'e posto e posto in vso il grano.
e l'u^a.
In Amynt. 84. A dio pastori, Piagge a dio: a dio selue: siumi, a dio.
There, 67. Padre vecchio* orbo Padre: achi, non piu Padre.
Salust. 2. Semaine. Immortel and mortel Adam donques nasquit.
Immortel il mourut, and mortel il vesquit,
Car auant les effects de sa rebelle offense,
Mourir and non mourir, estoient en sa puissan^e,
Mais depuis qu'il osa de dieu l'ire encourir,
Las, mourir il peut bien, mais non pas non mourir.
Comme au contraire, apres sa second naissance
Il aura seulement de non mourir puissance.
3. Semaine. Vigne qui cede autant a tout arbre en beauty,
Comme tout arbre cede a la vigne en bonte.
Boscan. 2. O coracon que siempre has padecido
dime tan fuerte mal, como es tan largo?
Y mal tan largo, di como es tan fuerte?


Cap. 24. Of Paronomasia.
Hitherto of the repetition of sounds like. It follows to speak of the
repetition of sounds somewhat unlike, as Paronomasia and Polyptoton.
Paronomasia, Agnominatio, allusion, is when a word is changed in signification
by changing of a letter or syllable.

Homer. Il. 2 (...).
2, (...).
2, (...).
2, (...),
2, (...).
4, (...).
E. Il. (...).
I. Il. (...).
8. Od. (...).
15. Od. (...);
(...).
16. Od. (...).
V. 2. Geor. Auia tum resonant auibus virgulta canoris.
2. Aen. Fit via vi: rumpunt aditus.
4. Aen. Longa procul longis via diuidit inuia terris.
And,

Quid struis? aut qua spe Lybicis teris ocia terris?
6. Aen. -- quo non praestantior alter
Aere ciere viros, Martemque accendere cantu.
And,

-- gemina super arbore sidunt
Discolor vnde auriper ramos aura refulsit.
And, -- Fixit leges pretio, atque refixit.
Elsewhere, -- Tauro Jove digna, vel auro.
Sir Philip Sydney 1. Come shepherds weeds, become your masters mind.

2. Of Musidorus. But, alas, what can saying make them believe, whom seeing
cannot persuade?

3, But namelesse he, for blameless he shall be.
And, Because in wrestling and in pastoral,
He sarre did pass the rest of shepherds all.
3, Those lamps of heavenly fire to fixed motion bound,
The ever turning sphaeres, the never moving ground.
Torquat. Tass. 1. Giu i decreti del ciel porta, and al cielo
Riporta de' mortali i preghi e' l zelo.
2. Nel profan loco, esu la sacra imago
Susurro poi le sue bestemmie il mago.
In Amynta. -- Syluia honor de le siluo.
Salust. 1. Semaine. Voir les murs and les moeurs de maint estrange empire.
4. Car ie ne pense point que tous les elemens
Peussent pour un seul iour les fournir d'alimens.
Judith. 2. Qu'il est autant aise de le vaincre parlarmes,
Comme il est malaise de le vaincre par arms.
In the Triumph of faith. La loi non par Platon, ains par Pluton ecrite.

2. Semaine. 1. De cruelles douleurs, qui tantost d'un lent pas,
Tantost d'un pas haste, nous guident au trespass.
2. Semaine 4. -- Perde repos and repas.
Boscan. 1. No me falta
buen remedio en esta falta.
Garcilass. Aeglog 2. -- accompan^ada
De un amor llanoy lleno de pureza.


Cap. 25. Of Polyptoton.
Polyptoton, often falling or declining of one word, is when as words of one
offspring have diverse fallings or terminations.

Homer. Il. 1. (...),
(...),
(...).
2. (...),
(...).
N. Il. (...).
(...).
6. Od. (...).
(...).
Virg. 4. Aen. Littora littoribus contraria, fluctibus vndas
Imprecor, arma armis.
Hunc morem, hos cursus, atque haec certamina primus
Ascanius, longam muris cum cingeret Albam,
Rettulit.
Sir Philip Sydney. 1. Thou art of blood, joy not to make things bleed:
Thou fear death, think they are loath to dye.
Torquat. Tass. 2. Olindo. Ahi tanto amo la non amante amata.
19. Moriua Argante: e tal moria, qual visse:
Minacciaua morendo: e non lauguia.
Superbi, formidabili, e feroci
Gli vltimi moti fur, l'vltime voci.
In Amynt. 20. In tanto io piu ridea del suo rossore,
Ella piu s'arrossia del riso mio.
Salust. 1. Semaine. L'immuable decret de la bouche divine,
Qui causera sa fin, causa son origin.
2. Sem. 3. of the fall of Adam. Esprit animetout, grand dieu, qui iustement
Change de pere en judge, as fait ce changement,
Change moy etc.
Boscan. 1. Descubrio nueuos tormentos
Para sentir nueua gloria.
2. Con esto me efforce,
si efforcarse se llama ser forcado:
efforcando me pues, menos hiziera.


Before I leave of to talk of these figures of words, I will here confusedly
insert a number of conceited verses, since all their grace and delicacie
proceeds from the figures aforenamed. Theocritus has expressed the form of
an egg, and an alter in verse, so has Willy represented the figure of a
swoard, and an old Abbot, the image of the cross in very labored and
entangled verses: but let them pass, and come we to such as are more
plausible. Sir Philip Syd. 4; act. a double sestine. Strephon. Ye goteheard
Gods that love the grassie mountains,
Ye nymphs which hunt the springs in pleasant valleys,
Ye Satyrs ioyed with free and quiet forests,
Vouchsafe your silent ears to playning music,
Which to my woes gives still an early morning,
And draws the dolor on till weary evening.

Klaius. O Mercury foregoer to the evening,
O heavenly huntresse of the savage mountains,
O lovely star entitled of the morning,
While that my voice does fill these woeful valleis,
Vouchsafe your silent ears to playning music,
Which ost has Echo tried in secret forests etc.

So in the beginning of the same act. Since wayling is a bud of careful
sorrow. etc.


Spenser takes the words one after another. Ye wastfull woods bear witness
of my woe,
Wherein my plaints did oftentimes resound:
Ye careless birds are privy to my cries,
Which in your songs were wont to make a part.
Thou pleasant Spring have lulld me often a sleep,
Whose streams my trickling tears did often augment.
Resort of people does my grief augment,
The walled towns do work my greater woe:
The Forest wide is fitter to resound
The hollow Echo of my careful cries,
I hate the house, since thence my love did part,
Whose wailfull want deterres mine eyes from sleep, etc.


Petrarch has nine sestines, or thereabout, one is fol. 421. Mia benigna
fortuna, e'l viver liet^,
I chiari giorni, e le tranquille notti,
E i soaui sospiri, e'l dolce style:
Che solea risonar in versi, e'n rhyme,
Volti subitamente in doglia, e'n pianto,
Odiar vita mia mi fanno, e bramar morto.
Crudele, acerba, inessorabil morte
Cagion mi dai di may non esser lieto:
Ma di menar tutta mia vita in piant^,
E i giorni oscuri, e le dogliose notti.
I miei graui sospir non vanno in rhyme,
E'l mio duro martyr vince ogni style, etc.


Sir Philip Sydney 1. has a rhyme, wherein the last word of the first does
iumpe in sound with the middle word of the second, thus: Up, up, Philisides,
let sorrows go,
Who yields to woe, does but increase his smart:
Do not thy heart to plaintfull custom bring,
But let us sing, etc.
So Petrarch, fol. 153. May non vo piu cantar com' io soleua,
Ch'altrui non m'intendeua, etc.
And Garcilasso aeglog. 2. Filomena sospira en dolce canto,
En amoroso llanto se amanzilla
Gime la tortolilla sobre el elmo, etc.


Petrarch fol. 56. has an odd kind of rhyme used in Prouance, where
continually he puts six verses between every rhyme, so that the first rimeth
with the 8, the second with the ninth, the third with the tenth, etc. thus:
Verdi, panni, sanguigni, oscuri, o Persi, etc.


Sir Philip Sydney 2. Philisides and Echo. P. In what state was I then, when I
took this deadly disease?
E. Ease.
P. And what manner a mind, which had to that hu nor a vain?
E. Vain.
And after. P. Then to an earnest love, what does best victory lend?
E. End.
P. End? but I can nere end: Love will not give me the leave.
E. Leave.


The like be in Erasmus his Dialogues, and Ouids Metamorphoses: such an one is
that Semicaper Faunus cur ita clamat? E amat.
and. Participem vote me fore reris? E. eris. etc.


In Willies Poems there be diverse conceipted kinds of verses, some whereof
resemble those old ones, Qu an di tri mul pa
os guis rus sti cedine uit
H san mi Chri dull la


I had almost forgotten an other old verse, inferior to none of the rest, it
is this. Sacrum pingue dabo, nec macrum sacrificabo,
Says Cain, in an Hexameter; which (if you read it backward) will make Abels
answer in a Pentameter, thus: Sacrificabo macrum, nec dabo pingue sacrum.


Sir Philip Sydney 3. Virtue, beauty, and speech, did strike, wound, charm,
My bart, eyes, ears, with wonders, love, delight.
First, second, last, did bind, enforce, and arm,
His works, shows, suites, with wit, grace, and vows might.
Thus Honor, liking, trust, much, fair, and deep,
Held, pearst, possessed my judgment, sense, and will,
Till wrong, contempt, deceit, did grow, steal, creep,
Bands, favor, faith, to break, defile, and kill.
Then grief, unkindness, proof, took, kindled, sought
Well grounded, noble, due, spite, rage, disdain.
But ah alas in vain, my mind, sight, thought
Does him, his face, his word, leave, shun, refrain.
For nothing, time, nor place, can loose, quench, ease,
Mine own, embraced, sought, knot, fire, disease.
And, The fire to see my wrongs, for anger burns,
The air in rain for my affliction weepeth,
The sea to ebb for grief his flowing turns,
The earth with pity dull, the center keeps.
Fame is with wonder blazed,
Time runs away with sorrow,
Place stands still amazed,
To see my night of ill that has no morrow.
Alas all only she no pity takes
To know my miseries: but chaste and cruel,
My fall her glory makes,
Yet still her eyes give to my flames the fuel.
Fire burn me quite, till sense of burning leave me,
Air let me draw no more thy breath in anguish,
Sea, drowned in thee, of tedious life bereave me,
Earth take this earth wherein my spirits languish,
Fame say I was not borne,
Time have my dying hour,
Place see my grave vptorne:
Fire, air, sea, earth, fame, time, place show your power.
Alas from all their helps I am exiled:
For hers am I, and death fears her displeasure,
Fie death, thou art beguiled,
Though I be hers, of me she makes no treasure.


These two be as well known, as their author is unknown. Pastor, arator,
eques, paui, colui, superaui,
Capras, rus, hosts, fronde, ligone, manu.
In English, thus. A goteheard, plowman, knight, my goats, my fields, my foes,
I fed, I tild, I killed, with bows, with plowes, with blows.


In French, thus. Pastre, laboureur, duc, i'ay peu, besche, submis,
De rams, de pies, de mains, cheures, champs, enemis.
Or thus. Pasteur, rustic, guerrier, i'ay peu, besche, mis bas,
Cheures, champs, enemis, de fueille, hay, and bras.


Hadrian the Emperor of three Shepherds. Almo, Theon, Thyrsis nati sub monte
Pelori
Semine disparili, Laurente, Lacone, Sabina:
Vite Sabina, Lacon sulco, sue cognita Laurens.
Almo puer, pubesque Theon, and Thyrsis ephebus,
Thyrsis oues, vitulos Theon egerat, Almo capellas.
Canna Almo, Thyrsis stipula, Theon ore melodus.
Nais amat Thyrsin, Glauce Almona, Nisa Theonem:
Nisa rosas, Glauce violas, dat lilia Nais.
The same of the battle of the Amazons. Vt belli sonuere tuba, violenta
peremit
Hippolyte Teuthranta, Lyce Clonon, Oebalon Alce,
Oebalon ense, Clonon iaculo, Teuthranta sagitta.
Oebalus ibat equo, curru Clonus, and pede Teuthras.
Plus puero Teuthras, puer Oebalus, and Clonus Heroes.
Figitur ora Clonus, latus Oebalus, ilia Teuthras.
Charus Epo Teuthras, Dorycle Clonus, Oebalus Ida,
Argolicus Teuthras, Moesus Clonus, Oebalus Archas.


In imitation whereof, a countreyman of ours, in his sweet description of the
Troyan war, has made diverse: among the rest I remember these three Stemona
sternit Ion, Ionem proturbat Acontes,
Mactat Aconta Pholus, Pholo^ Oebalus, Oebalon Astor,
Astora Thyodamas, and Thyodamanta Lyceus.


Tamisier. De fer, de feu, de sang, Mars, Vulcan, Tysiphone
Bastit, forgea, remplit, l'aime, le coeur, la maine,
Du meurtrier, du tyran, du cruel inhumaine,
Qui meurtrit, brusle and perde la Francoise couronne.
D'un Scythe, d'un Cyelope, and d'un fire Lestrigone,
La cruaute, l'ardeur, and la sanglante faime
Qui l'anime, l'eschauffe, and conduict son desseine
Rien que fer, rien que feu, rien que sangue resone.
Qu'il puisse par le fer cruellement mourir,
Ou per le feu de ciel horriblement perir,
Et voir du sang des siens la terre estre arrousee.
Soit rouille, soit esteint, soit seche par la paix
Le fer, le seu, le sang, cruel, ardent, espais
Qui meurtrit, brusle, and perde la France diuisee.
Remy Belleau. Un berger, un cheurier, and un bouuier venus
De Sicile, de Thebe; and de Smyrne congneus
Des prez, and des coustaus, and des loges champestres
Des brebis, des cheureaux, des boeufs: les meilleurs maistres
Du flageol, du rebec, and du cornet retors,
Mouton, cheures, and boeufs gardoient dessus les bords
D'Arethuse, d'Ismene, and du Phrygien Xanthe.
L'un le hurt, l'un lex ieux, le tierce les combats chante
Des beliers bien cornus, des follastres cheureaux,
Des taureaux mugissans, l'honneur des pastoreaux,
Des cheutiers, des bou^iers: Aussi sur touts les prise
Pales, le dieu cheutier, and le pasteur d'Amphrise
D'un chapelet de fleurs couronnant le premier,
D'un branche de pin le second, le ternier
D'un tortois de laurier. Mais Perot l'outrepasse
Ce berger; ce cheutier, and ce bouuier surpass
D'autant que les moutons, les boeufs, and les taureaux
Les aigneaux, les cheureaux, and les ieunes bouueaux,
Ou que les bleds, les monts, and les maisons royalles
Les herhes, les coustaux, les cases pastoralles:
Tant Perot fluste bien, fredonne, and son icy.
Du flageol, du rebec, and du cornet auxi,
Son Charlot, sou Amot, son Henriot, les maistres
Des prez, and des coustaux, and des loges champestres.
The same upon the death of Signeur Bonniuet. La France, and le Piemont, and
les cieux, and les arts,
Les soldats, and le monde out fait comme six parts
De ce grand Bonniuet, carvne si grande chose
Dedans un seul tombeau ne pouuoit estre enclose.
La France en a le corpse qu'elle auoit esheue,
Le Piemont a le coeur qu'il auoit esprouue,
Les cieux en out l'esprit, and les arts la memoire,
Les soldats le regres, and le monde la gloire.
(...)
(...)
Fit cignus, taurus, satyrusque, aurumque, ob amorem
Europa, Laedes, Antiopae, Danaes.
Spencer in his Fairie Queen. 2. book. cant. 4. Wrath, jealousy, grief,
love, do thus expel:
Wrath is a fire, and jealousy a weed,
Grief is a flood, and love a monster fell:
The fire of sparks, the weed of little seed,
The flood of drops, the monster filth did breed:
But sparks, seed, drops, and filth do thus delay,
The sparks soon quench, the springing seed outweed,
The drops dry up, and filth wipe clean away.
So shall wrath, iealosie, grief, love, die and decay.


There be some called Serpentina carmina, because they turn and wind
themselves inorbem like a snake, and their only grace proceeds from a
Rhetorical Epanalepsis: as those in Ovid,

Vna dies Fabios ad bellum miserat omnes,
Ad bellum missos perdidit vna dies. and
Militat omnis amans and habet sua castra Cupido,
Attice creed mihi, militat omnis amans.
And these in Martial, Phospore read diem, quid gaudia nostra moraris?
Casare venturo, Phospore read diem.
And that in Virgil before, Multa super Priamo rogitans, super Hectore multa.
Philelphus of Pope Pius. Laus tua, non tua fraus, virtus, non copia rerum
Scandere te faciunt hoc decus eximtum.
The words turned, ouerturne the sense, thus. Eximium decus hoc faciunt te
scandere, rerum
Copia, non virtus: fraus tua, non tua laus.
The same in French by L'officiall de Langres. Bien faict, non dol, los, non
faueur
Fait te gaigner tresgrand honneur.
Faueur, non los, dol, non bien fait.
Honneur tresgrand gaigner te fait.


There be certain old verses that thus turned, retain the same sense still,
thus. Praecipiti modo quod decurrit tramite flumen,
Tempore consumptum iam cito deficiet.
Deficiet cito iam etc.
And these, which you must take at the half turn, thus. Odit, amat, reprobat,
probat, execratur, adorat,
Crimina, iura, nefas, fas, simulachra, deum:
Fas, simulachra, deum, probat, execratur, adorat:
Odit, amat, reprobat, crimina, iura, nefas. Or thus.
Crimina, iura, nefas, odit, amat, reprobas.
Marot. Dieu des amans d'amour me guard,
Me gardant done moy bon heur,
En me-bienheurant prens ta darde,
En la prenant naure son coeur,
En le naurant me tiendra seur,
En seurete suiuray laccointance,
En laccointant ton seruiteur,
En servant aura iouissance.
Ausonius. Res hominum fragiles alit, and regit, and perimit sors,
Sors dubia, aeternumque labans, quam blanda fouit spes,
Spes nullo finita auo, cui terminus est mors,
Mors auida inferna mergit caligine quam nox,
Nox obitura vicem reme auerit aurea cum lux,
Lux dono concessa deum, cui praeuius est sol,
Sol cui nec furto veneris latet armipotens Mars,
Mars nullo de patre satus, quem Thressa colit gens,
Gens infraena virum, quibus in scelus omne ruit fas,
Fas hominem mact are sacris, ferus iste loci mos,
Mos ferus audacis populi, quem nulla tenet lex,
Lex naturali quam condidit imperio ius,
Ius genitum pietate hominum, ius certa dei men's,
Men's, quae caelesti sensu rigat emeritum cor,
Cor vegetum, mundi instar habens, animae vigor ac vis,
Vis tamen hac nulla est, verum est iocus, and nihili Res.
Of four Popes.
Paul, Leon, Iule, Clement
Ont mise nostre France en torment.
Iules, Clement, Leon, and Paul
Ont pertrouble tout la Gaul.
Paul, Clement, Leon, and Iules
Ont beaucoup gaigne par lour bulls.
Iule, Clement, Paul, Leon
Ont fait des maux un million.


He that made the book called Pierce Plowman, makes three or four words in
every line begin with the same letter, thus. In a summer season, when set was
the sun, etc.


Who so desires to see more of this kind, let him read Accords Bigarrures,
and Scaligers books de art Poetica, where he has one verse, which he calls
Proteus, Perfide sperasti te diuos fallere Proteu?
Which may be turned to as many fashions as ever was Proteus; for as I
remember, it is apparent by that which Scaliger there puts down, that it may
be varied threescore and ten times, keeping the self same words and sense.

Cap. 26. Of figures of sentences.
THis shall suffice to have spoken of figures in words: now follow the figures in
Sentences, which in the whole sentence expres some motion of the mind. These
are more forcible and apt to persuade, than those of words, which be rather
pleasant and fit to delight. Generally, as in tropes there is a certain
grace, in figures of words a kind of delicacie, so in these of sentences,
appears force and majesty.

Cap. 27. Of exclamation.
THese figures consist in simple speech alone, or in conferring and debating
with others. In speaking alone, such as respect either the matter, or the
person; the matter, as Exclamation and Reuocatio^, or calling back of ones
self: Exclamation is expressed by some note of exclamation, either put down,
or understood: an excellent instrument to stir up diverse affections,
sometimes wonder and admiration. Homer. 3. Iliad. Priamus of Agamemnon. (...).
Virg. aeg. 3. O quoties, and qua nobis Galatea loquuta est?
Georg. 2. O fortunatos nimium, sua si bona norint,
Agricolas.
Sir Philip Sydney 3. Histor says. Lord, what by-words they speak, what spite
they spit?

Torquot. Tass. 1. O merauiglia, Amor, ch' a pena e nato,
Gia grande vola, e gia trionfa armato.
7. -- O viuo specchio
Del valor prisco: intela nostra gente
Miri, e ciascun n'apprenda, in te di Mart
Splende l'honor, la disciplina, e'larte.
Salust. 3. Que diray-ie de toy o fontaine Sclauonne?
Que diray-ie de toy, o source de Dodone?
Don't, l'vne ard les drapeaux, l'aultre, o merueille! estaint
Le brondon allume, and le r' allume estaint.
Boscan. 2. En qual part d'el cielo, en qual planeta,
Guardado fue tangrande nacimiento?
Qual estrella alcanco merecimiento,
Para influir en cosa tan perfeta?
Que principio: que causa tan secreta,
Pudo tener tan alto fundamento?


Sometimes despair. Homer. 1. Iliad. Thetis to Achilles. (...)
V. 2. Ae. Namque vt conspectu in medio turbatus inermis
Constitit, atque oculis Phrygiae agmina circumspexit,
Heu quae nunc tellus, inquit, quae me aequora possunt
Excipere, aut quid i am misero mihi denique restat?
Cui neque apud Danaos vsquam locus: insuper ipsi
Dardantdae insesti poenas cum sanguine poscunt.
Elsewhere. Venit summa dies, and ineluctabile tempus
Dardaniae. Fuimus Troes, fuit Ilium and ingens
Gloria Dardanidum. Ferus omnia Jupiter Argos
Translulit, incensa Danai dominantur in vrbe.
Again, Heufugenate dea, teque his, ait, eripe flammis.
Sat patriae Priamoque datum, si Pergama dextra
Desendi possent, ettam hac desensa fuissent,
Host is habet muros.
And that, Heu nihil inuitit fas quenquam fidere diuis.
Sir P. Syd 2. Gynecia exclaimeth. But wretch that I am, my torment is beyond
all succor, and my evil deserving does exceed my evil fortune. For nothing
else did my husband take this strange resolution to live solitary: for nothing
else have the winds delivered this strange guest to my country: for nothing
else have the destinies reserved my life to this time, but that only I, most
wretched I, should become a plague to my self, and a shame to womankind.

Torquat. Tass. 4. Armida cries out when Godfrey had spoken. Nulla speme piu
resta: in van midoglio:
Non hanpiu forza in human petto i preghi:
Forse lece ilsperar ch'il mio cordoglio,
Che te non moss, il rio tyranno preghi?
Ne gia te d'inclementia accusar voglio:
Perch'il picciol soccorso a me si neghi:
Ma il cielo accuso, ond'il mio mal discende.
Ch' in te pietate inessorabil rende.
Non tu, signor, ne tua bontade e tale:
Ma il mio destino e, che me nega aita:
Crudo destino: empio destin fatale
Vccide homai quest* odiosa vita:
L'hauermi priua, (ohime) fu picciol male
D'dolci padri in loro et a fiorita,
Se non mi vedi ancor del regno priua?
Qual vittima al coltello, andar cattiua?
Salust. Judith 6. Bagos exclaimeth, Holofernes being slain. Malheur malheur
sur nous: vne esclaue maudite
En tuant Holoferne, a tue l'exercite
Donteur de l'vniuers.
Judith. 3. Las! quel comfort nous rest? o ville miserable,
L'enemi qui te ceint, t'est doux and pitoiable
Les tiens te sont cruels: il te veut preserver,
Les tiens te veulent perdre: il tachce conseruer
La vie de tes fis, and tes fis au contraire,
Courant test baissee a la mort volontaire.
Boscan. 1. O vida llena de enoios,
O mundo que vas assi:
Que buen fuera para mi,
Si yo no tuuiera oios
Para vezos quando os vi.


Sometimes wishing. Homer 3. Iliad. Hector to Paris. (...),
(...).
Vir. aeg. 2. O tantum libeat mecum tibi sordida rurae,
Atque humiles habitare casas, and figere ceruos.
8. Aen. O mihi praeteritos referat si Jupiter annos.
Sir Philip Sydney. 2. O Diana said Philoclea, I would, either the clowd that
now hides the light of my virtue, would as easily pass away, as you will
quickly overcome this let; or else that you were for ever thus darkened, to serve
for a better excuse of my outrageous folly

Torquat. Tass. 7. Godsr. of Raimondo. O pur hauessi fra l'etate acerba
Dieci altri di valor al tuo simile:
Come ardirei vincer Babel superba:
E la croce spiegar da Battro a Tile.
There Raimondo says. O fuss io pur su'l mio vigor de gli anni:
Qual sete voi, che qui, temendo chiusi
Vi state.
Salust. 5 Sem. of the Virgin and Eagle burnt together. O couple bien-heureux,
sur vostre obscure tomb
Tout-iour tout-iour le miel, toutiour la manne tomb:
Tout-iour tout-iour vos-os soyent de Myrre couuers,
Et tout-iour puissiez vous viure dedans mes verse.
Boscan 3. of Hero. O si alcancasse, sospiraua elotro,
Tenella por muger si quiera vn'hora,
Y en sus bracos me resoluiesse todo,
Como al solnieue, o como cera al fuego.


Sometimes indignation. Homer Il. 1. Achilles to Agamemnon. (...),
V. 1. Aen. Heu stirpem inuisam, and fatis contraria nostrie Fata Phrygum.
Sir Philip Syd 4. in Philisidis dream of Venus and Diana. I would have spoken
out, but out they both did cry,
Fie fie, what have we done, ungodly rebel, fie.
Torquat. Tass. 9. Argillano. O vilfeccia del mondo: Arabi inerti
Ond' e c' hortanto ardire invois alletti?
8. Et non fulmina il cielo? and non gl'inghiotte
La terra entro La sua perpetua notte?
6. Esce fuori gridando: anima vile,
Ch'ancor ne le vittorie infame se^
Qual titolo di laud alto, e gentile
Da modi attendi si scortesi, e rei?
Fra i ladroni d'Arabia, o fra simile
Barbara turba anezzo esser tu dei:
Fuggi la luce, e va con l'altre belue
Ancrudelir ne' monti, e tra le selue.
Salust. 6. Sem. of him that gave his servant to be devoured of a Lion. Canibal
selon, Cyclope inexorable,
Puis que tu veux combler de maux ce miserable,
Et pourquoy l'ostes tu, o Busire inhumain,
Et pourquoy Lestrigon, l'ostes tu de ta main,
Pour le liurer aux Ours, aux Onces, aux liones,
Qui mile and mile fois moins que toy felonnes?
Judith. 6. O gofiers affames! o entrailles profondes!
Tous les viures exquis de mile and mile mondes
Songs par l' Abderois ne vous poutroint souler.
Pour vous, ventres goulus, pour vousil faut aler,
Aux Moluques chercher la fine epicerie,
En Candie le vin, le sucre en Canarie,
Il faut depeupler l'air, and le Phoenix unique
Peut a peine eschaper votre dent famelique.
Boscan. 2. Que estrella fue por donde ya cai
en el mundo con tanta pesadumbre?
qual madre ya de vida me dio lumbre?
porque me'cho tan huerfano, y assi?
Quien primero holgo quando naci?
qual dolor me subio tan en su cumbre?
que no halle remedio en la costumbre,
yoy sienta mas lo qui air mas senti.
Porque no mori en el vientre o en naciendo,
porque me tomo nadie ensus rodillas,
criando m'entre viuos no viuiendo?
Forcado es ya, que vaya descubriendo,
enter mis enemigos mis manzillas,
y vnos lloren, y otros esten riendo.


Sometime derision. See that which Patroclus spoke in scorn of Cebrion falling
dead from his chariot. Homer. P. Iliad. in Ironia before. And that of Thersites
in 2. Iliad. in Paronomasia before. Vir. aeg 8. O digno coniuncta viro.
Aen 9 O vere Phrygia, nec enim Phryges, ite per alta
Dyndima.
Sir Phil. Syd. 2. Pas of his less Cosma, whom Nico would have kissed. Kiss
her? now may thou kiss, etc.

Torquat. Tass. 7. that of Argante in Ironia, O gente inuitta, etc.
Salust 1. Que vous estes, helas! de honte and de foy vuides,
Escriuains, qui couches dans vos Ephemerides,
L'an, le mois, and leiour, qui clorront pour tousiours
La port de Saturn, aux ans, aux mois, auxiours?
Boscan. See that in Ironia, though no note of exclamation be there.

Sometimes protestation or obtestation. Homer. 1. Iliad. (...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
O. Iliad. Juno. (...),
(...)
(...).
Virgil. 2. AEneid: of Sinon. Ille dolis instructus, and art Pelasga
Sustulit exutas vinclis ad sydera palmas,
Vos aeterni ignes, and non violabile vestrum
Testor numen, ait: vos ara ensesque nefandi
Quos fugi, vittaeque deum, quas hostia gessi,
Fas mihi Graiorum sacrata resoluere iura:
Fas odisse viros, atque omnia far sub auras
Siqua tegunt: teneor patria nec legibus vllis.
Sir Philip Sydney 2. Nico. O fauns, o fayrees all, and do you see
And suffer such a wrong? a wrong I trow,
That Nico must with Pas compared be.
Torquat. Tass. 16. Armida to Rinaldo. O cielo, o dei, perch soffir questi
empi?
Fulminar poi le torri, e i vostri Tempi.
Salust. 1. (O ciel qu'elle many)
Boscan. 3. of Leander. Boluiendo al cielo sus cansadosoios,
A los mayores dioses y menores,
A todos inuoco congrandes ruegos,
Y a Venus ya Neptuno mas que a todos,
Conlagrimas diziendo estas palabras.
O santa Venus que en la mar naciste. etc.


Sometimes grief and misery. Homer. 1. Iliad. (...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
Virg. Aeg. 1. Impius hac tam culta noualia miles habebis?
Barbarus has segetes? en quo discordia ciues
Perduxit miseros: en quess conseuimus agros.
Sir Philip Syd. 1. Musidorus. O miserable wretch, whether do thy destinies
guide thee?

Torquat. Tass. 2. Olinda. Ahi tanto amo la non amante amata.
Salust. 5. Semaine. He! que ne vendrions nous,
Pour fournir aux souhaits d'vne avarice extreme,
Puis que pour un peu d'or nous nous vendons nousmesmes?
Boscan. 1. O muger desconocida,
O dolor, O perdimiento,
Vuestromal conocimiento
Me hai traido en esta vida,
Que hora siento.


Sometimes pity and commiseration. Homer P. Iliad. Jupiter of Hector. (...),
(...).
Virgil. 1. Aeneid. Mercury to Aeneas. -- tu nunc Carthaginis altae
Fundament a locas, pulchramque vxorius vrbem
Extruis, heu regni, rerumque oblite tuarum.
2. Aeg. Eheu, quid volui misero mihi? floribus austru^
Perditus, and liquidis immisifontibus apros.
Aeg. 1. Spem gregis, ah, silice in nuda connixa reliquit.
2 Aen. Hei mihi qualis erat, quantum mutatus ab illo
Hectore, qui redit exuuias indutus Achillis.
And, O patria, o diuum domus Ilium, and inclyta bello
Maenia Dardanidum.
Sir Philip Sydney 2. Dorus. Alas, excellent Mopsa, consider, that a virtuous
Prince requires the life of his meanest subject, and the heavenly sun
disdaines not to give light to the smallest worm.

Torquat. Tass. 12. Misero, di che gods? o quanto mesti
Siano i trionfi, and infoelice ilvanto:
Gli occhi tuoi pagheran (s'in vitaresti)
Di quel sangue ogni stilla un mar di pianto.
Salust. 2. in the description of the flood. Plus il cerche la terre, and plus
and plus, helas,
Ill'a sent, effraye, se perdre sous ses pas.
Garcilass. 1. Aeglog. Ay quanto m' engannaua,
ay quan diferente era,
y quan de otra manera. etc.


Sometimes cursing. Homer. 1. Il. (...), etc.
-- (...),
(...).
3. (...),
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
Virgilius 4. Aeneid. Sed mihi vel, tellus optem prius ima dehiscat,
Vel pater omnipotens adigat me fulmine ad vmbras,
Pallentes vmbras Erebi, noctemque profundam,
Ante, pudor, quam te violo, aut tua iura resoluo.
2. Aen. At tibi pro scelere, exclamat, pro talibus ausis,
Dij, (siqua est coelo pietas qua talia curet)
Persoluant grates dignas, etc.
Sir Philip Syd. Pyrocles to Philoclea. There is none here etc. but only the
almighty powers, whom I inuoke to be the triers of my innocence. And if ever
my thoughts did receive so much as a faint in their true affection: if they
have not continually with more and more ardour, from time to time pursued the
possession of your sweetest favor: if ever in that possession they received
either spot or fellowship, the^ let there most horrible plagues fall upon me:
let mine eyes be deprived of the light, which did abuse the heavenly beams
that stroke them: let my falsified tongue serve to no use, but to bemone mine
own wretchedness. Let my heart impoysoned with detestable treason, be the seat
of infernal sorrow: let my soul with the endlesle anguish of his conscience,
become his own tormentor.

Torquat. Tass 4. Armida. Ahi che fiama dal cielo anzi in me scenda,
Santa Honesta, ch'io le tue leg offenda.
In Amynt. 46. O chiunque ti fosti, che insegnasti
Primo a vender l'amor, sia maledetto
Il tuo cener sepulto, e l'ossa fredde,
E non si treus may pastore, e nimfa
Che lor dica passando, habbiate pace,
Ma le bagni la pioggia, e moua il vento,
E con pie immondo la gregia il calpestri,
E'l peregrin.
Salust. Judith. 1. Plustost dessus mes pies, Terre, creuasse toi,
Et dans ton sein ombreus Beauty, englouti moi:
Plustost, o just ciel, lance sur moi ce foudre,
Don't tu mis courrouce, iadis Sodom en poudre:
Que sous un voile saint, ma malice sachant
Ie done aux fills d'Isac un conseil si meschant.
Garcilass. Aeg. 1. Salicius. O dios porque si quiera
pues ves desde tu altura,
esta falsa periura,
causarla muerte d'un estrecho amigo,
no recibe d'el cielo alcun castigo?


Epiphonema is a kind of exclamation when after the discourse ended, we add
some short acclamation, as a conclusion or shutting up of all in wondering wise.

Homer 1. Iliad, when he had laid down the miseries of the Graecians, says
thus; (...).


Virgil when he had told the causes of Iunoes wrath against the Troyans,
concludes thus; 1. Aeneid. Tantae molis erat Romanam condere gentem.
When he had set forth the natures, proprieties, etc. of horses. 3. Geor. he
makes up all thus: Tantus amor laudum, tantae est vistoria cura.
When he had laid down the industrious nature of the busy Be, Georg. 4. he
adds, Tantus amor slorum and generandi copia mellis.


Sir Philip Sydney 3. when he had expressed the heavy departure of Dorus from
his friend Pirocles, ends thus; So much his own heart did find him faulty,
to unbend any way the continual use of their dear friendship. 5. When he had
manifested the inconstancy of the people, and settled perseverance of Philanax
and Euarchus, he adds; So evil balanced be the extremities of popular
minds, and so much natural imperiousnes there rests in a well framed spirit.

Torquato Tasso 15. After the description of the diverse alterations and
commutations of regions and kingdoms, he says; Tanto mutar puo ^unga eta
vetusta.


Salust. 1. Semaine. When he had taught that there was no vacuum by examples of
water, hour glasses, Conduites, etc. he shuttteth up all thus: Tant and tant a
tous corpse le vuide est odieux.


Garcilasso when he had expressed the transformation of Daphne, he uses this
acclamation to make up all; O miserable estado, o mal tamanno,
que conllorarla, crezca cada dia
la causa y la razon porque lloraua.


License also and liberty of speech seems to be a certain exclamation; when
in the presence of those to whom otherwise we owe duty and reverence, we
speak boldly and confidently. For examples let these suffice till I call to
mind better.

Homer. 1. Il Achilles to Agamemnon. (...).
(...),
(...).
(...):
And that which there follows. Virgil. 2. Aeneid. of Sinon. Ille haec deposit
a tandem formidine fatur.
Cuncta equidem tibi rex, fuerit quocunque fatebor,
Veta, inquit, neque me Argolica de gente negabo.
Hoc primum: neque si miserum fortuna Sinonem
Finxit, vanum etiam mendacemque improba finget.
Then. Eripui fateor laetho me, and vnicula rupi. etc.
By and by. Nec tacui demens, and me, fors siqua tuisset,
Promisi vltorem, and verbis odia aspera moui.
After, Sed quid ego haec autem nequicquam ingrata reuoluo?
Quidue moror? si omnes vno ordine habetis Achiuos
Idque audire sat est, iamdudum sumite poenas,
Hoc Ithacus velit, and magno mercentur Atride.
Sir Philip Sydney. 5. Gynecia. I therefore say to thee, o just Judge, that I,
and only, I, was the worker of Basilius death: they were these hands that gave
unto him that poisonous potion, that has brought death to him, and loss to
Arcadia. It was I, and none but I, that hastened his aged years to an
unnatural end, and that have made all this people orphans of their royal
father: I am the subject that have killed my Prince: I am the wife that have
murdered my husband: I am a degenerate woman, an vndoer of this Country, a
shame of my children. What could thou have said more, o Philanax? and all
this I grant.

Torquat. Tass. 2. Sofronia. -- ilreo si troua al tuo cospetto,
Opra e il furto, signor, de questa mano,
Io l'imagine tolsi, io son colei,
Che tu ricerchi: e me punir tu dei.
Salust. Judith. 3. The Moabites to Holofer. Seigneur, ce n'est la peur, and
moins l'extremite,
Ou nous voions reduite un amie Cite,
Qui nous fait ranuerser les emprises guerrieres.
Car auant que quitter tes heureuses banieres,
Pour toi nous deffirons tous les dieus immortels:
Pour toi nous briserons leurs encenses autels:
Pour toi nous franchirons le Pinot Antarctique,
Et l' eternel glacon de la contree Arctique:
Pour toi nos bras hardis entreprendont d'oter
Letrident a Neptune, and l'aigle a Jupiter:
Pour toil fis cruel n'esparguera le pere,
Nile pere le fis, nile friar le trere.
Boscan. 3. Leander to Her. Yo mismo sere el barco y el remero,
Y siendo el lleuador, sere el lleuado.
Y o rompere las ondas de Neptuno,
Y mi proa porne contra los vientos
De Eolo, y no me turbaran los phocas,
Nime ternan las muy peynadas nimphas,
Aunque Thetis alli venga con ellas,
Mostrando los suspechos sobre l'agua:
Ni aquellos con sus rostros monstruoses,
Ni aquestas con sus hermosuras blandas
Diuertirme podran de mi camino.
No temere los montes de las aguas,
Ni el bramido d'el mar embrauecido. etc.


Cap 28. Of Epanorthosis.
THe calling back of a man's self follows, when any thing is revoked, and it
is as it were, a cooling of that heat of exclamation whereof we lately
spoke. It is either Epanorthosis, or Aposiopesis: Epanorthosis correction, is,
when any thing passed is called back.

Homer. 1. Il, Agamemnon, when he had railed on Achilles. (...),
V. 2. Aen. Nec requieuit enim donec Chaloante ministre:
Sed quid ego hac autem nequicquam ingrata reuoluo?
3. Geor. Sed fugit interea, fungit irreparabile tempus,
Singula dum capti circumuectamur amore.
Sir Philip Sydney 2. In the Country of Thessalia (alas why name I that
accursed Country, which brings forth nothing but matter for tragedies? but
name it I must) in Thessalia I say there was (well I may say there was) a
Prince: no, no Prince, whom bondage wholly possessed, but yet accounted a
Prince and named Musidorus. O Musidorus, Musidorus! But to what end serve
exclamations, where there are no ears to receive the sound?

Torquat. Tass. Of Latino who saw his five sons slain by Solomon Il padre
(ah non piu padre! ah fera sort etc.
Salust 2. Semaine. Hebrieu, non plus Hebrieu, ains semerice barbare,
D'vn Lestrygon, d'vn Tur, d'vn Scytlie, d'vn Tartare,
Die moy, que pensoy tu, que pensoy tu voyant
Ton temple menace d'vne glaiue flamboyant?
Boscan 1. Mas para queme fatigo
en escreuir mi tormento.


Cap. 29 Of Aposiopesis.
A Aposiopesis, Reticentia, concealing, is when the course of a speech begun is
in such sortstaid, that some part thereof not vttred, is nevertheless perceived.

Homer. 1. Iliad. Achilles says. (...)
(...)
(...).
Virgill. Aen. 1. Neptune. I am coelum terramque meo sine numine venti
Miscere, and tantas audet is tollere moles?
Quos ego: sed praestat motos componere fluctus.
Aeglog 3. Dametas. Nouimus and qui te, transuersa tuentibus hircis
Et quo, sed faciles nympha risere sacello.
There Menal. Cantando tu illum? aut vnquam tibi fistula cera
Iuncta fuit?
5. Aen. Mnestheus, Non i am prima peto Mnestheus, neque vincere certo:
(Quanquam o,) sed supere^t quibus hoc Neptune dedisti.
9. Nisus, Me me, adsum quifeci, in me conuertite ferrum
O Rutuli! mea fraus omnis, nihil iste nec ausus,
Nec potuit.
Sir Philip Sydney. 2. Nico. And if I better sing, let me thy Cosma kiss.
Pas answers. Kiss her? now may thou kiss.
47. Sonet. Virtue awake, beauty but beauty is,
I may, I must, I can, I will, I do
Leave following that, which it is gain to miss.
Let her do: soft, but here she comes: go too
Unkind I love you not. o me, that eye
Does make my heart give to my tongue thelye.


Cap. 30. Of Apostrophe.
THus much of Epanorthosis and Aposiopesis which respect the matter: now follow
Apostrophe and Prosopopoia which touch the person. Apostrophe turning away, is
when the speech is turned to some such person to whom it was not first
prepared, sometimes the turning is to men.

Homer. Il. 2. Thersites turns his tale from Agamemnon to the Gracians. (...),
(...).
Virg. En. 2. mdash;Nec te tua plurima Panthu
Labentem pietas, nec Apollinis infula texit.
Aen. 4. Quis tibi tune, Dido, cernentitalia, sensus?
Quosue dabas gemitus?
Aen. 6. Eruet ille Argos, Agamemnoniasque Mycaenas,
Ipsumque Aeaciden, genus armipotentis Achilli,
Vltus auos Troia, templa and temerata Minerua.
Quis te, Magne Cato, tacitum: aut te,, Cosse, relinquat?
Quis Gracchi genus, aut geminoi, duo fulmina belli,
Scipiadas, cladem Lybiae? paruoque potentem
Fabritium? vel te sulco, Serrane, serentem?
Quo fessum rapitis Fabij? tu Maximus ille es
Vnus, qui nobis cunctando rostitues rem.
Sir Philip Sydney S. Philanax. But now my speech must be directed to you, good
Master Dorus, who with Pallas help pardy, are lately grown Palladius.

Torquat. Tass. 1. in the catalog of the Captains. Oue voi me, di numerar gia
lasso,
Gildippe, and Odoardo amanti, esposi
Rapite? o ne la guerra anco consorti,
Non sarete disgiunti, anchor che morti.
Salust. 1. Semaine. Profane, qui t'enquiers, quel important affair
Peut l'esprit and les mains de ce dieu solitaire
Occuper si long temps.
Elsewhere, Camposez hardiment, o sages grecs, les cieux. etc.


Sometimes from men, to Gods. Homer. 2. Iliad. Agamemnon, from Nestor to
Jupiter. (...),
(...), etc.
Virgil 1. Georg. Dij patrij Indigetes, and Romule, Vestaque matter
Quae Tuscum Tiberim, and Romana palatia seruas,
Hunc saltem euerso iuuenem succurrere saeclo
Ne prohibete: satis iampridem sanguine nostro
Laomedonteae luimus periuria Troiae.
Sir Philip Sydney 3. Dicus. Pan, father Pan, the god of silly sheep,
Whose care is cause that they in number grow:
Have much more care of them that them do keep,
Since from their good, the others good does flow.
Torquato Tasso 11. Te, Genitor: te figlio eguale al paare,
E te, che d'ambo unity, amando spiri:
E te d'huomo, e de dio, vergine e madre,
Inuocano propitia a i lor desiri, etc.
Salust. 1. Semaine. C'est alors, c'est alors, o dieu que ton fills cher
Qui semble estre affuble d'vne fragile chair.
Descendra glorieux des voutes estoilees, etc.
Boscan 2. O poder eternal y sober ano
quien sanara con propria diligencia,
sila salud no datu largo mano.


In Apostrophes are contained poetical inuocations. Homer. 1. Iliad. (...),
(...).
Virgil. 1. Aeneid. Musa mihi causas memora, quo numine laeso,
Quidue doleus regina deum, tot voluere casus
Insignem pietate virum, tot adire labores
Impulerit? tantae ne animis caelestibus irae?
1. Geor. -- vos o clarissima mundi
Lumina, labentem calo qui ducitis annum,
Liber, and alma Ceres --
4. Geor. Quis deus hanc; Musa, quis nobis extudit artem? etc.
Sir Philip Sydney. 1. Dorus. O Muse historifie
Her praise, whose praise to learn your skill has framed me.
Torquat. Tass. 4. Ma di tu Musa, come i primi danni
Mandassero a Christiani, and di quai parti:
Tu'l sai, and di tant opra a noi si lunge
Debil aura di fama a pena giunge.
Salust. 1. Semaine. Mais o Muse, di-moy quels sont tousces oiseaux,
Qui quittent, pour voler, les iongs, and les roseaux?
Boscan. 3. O polimnia agora el tiempo pide,
que te buelua a pedir algun socorro
conque des a mi canto un nueuo aliento.


Sometimes to a dumb and senseless creature, sometimes to brute beasts. Homer.
24. Iliad. brings in Andromache speaking to the dead corpse of Hector. Virgil.
Aeglog. 2. Et vos o lauri carpam, and te, proxima Myrte:
Sic positae quoniam suaues miscetis odores.
1. aeg. Ite meae, foelix quondam pecus, ite capellae,
Non ego vos post hac, etc.
Sir Philip Sydney. 2. Alas poor Lute, how much thou art deceived, to think
that in my miseries, thou could est case my woes, as in my careless times, thou
were wont to please my fancies.

Torquat. Tass. where Clorinda and Tancred fought in the night. (...) (...)
(...) profondo, oscure seno
(...), e ^d' oblio fatto si grande:
(...), (...) ^'l tragga: e'n bell ser^
(...) (...) (...) spieghi, e mande:
(...) (...) lord, etra lor glaria
Spl^da del (...) alta memoria.
(...). (...) (...) in (...), (...) del (...) care
(...) (...) (...) sparso, e nobilossae. etc.
12. Argante. (...) (...) (...), che prometta
(...) (...) (...) ^cielo: e se'ncio manco:
(...) (...) (...) capo, io la vendett^
(...) (...) (...) (...) homicida France.
Salust. Hebd. 3. Semaine. (...) (...), o terre, o terre portegrains,
Porte-or, porte-sante, porte-habite, porte-humaine. etc.
Boscan. 2. Cancion si de muy largate culparen,
Responde les que sufran con paciencia,
Que vngran dolor a todo dalicencia.


Sometimes this figure is used in the very beginning of a speech; but not often:
as by Tullie, where he turns from the Senators, and exclaimeth against
Catilines insolency. How long Catiline, etc.

Cap. 31. Of Prosopopoia.
PRosopopoia is a fayning of any person, when in our speech we represent the
person of any, and make it speak as though he were there present: an
excellent figure, much used of Poets, wherein we must diligently take heed,
that the person thus represented have a speech fit and convenient for his
estate and nature. A Prosopopoia is either perfect, or imperfect: imperfect,
when the speech of some other person is but brought in by the way and lightly
and slightly represented. V. Aeg. 6. Cum canerem reges and praelia, Cynthius
aurem
Vellit, and admonuit: pastorem, Tityre, pingues
Pascere oportet oues, deductum dicere carmen.
Sir Philip Sydney of Dametas. At length, staying, he came a little nearer her
again, but still without the compass of blows, holding one leg as it were
ready to run away; and then fell to scolding and railing, swearing, it was
but a little bashfulnesse in him, that had made him go back, and that if she
stayed any longer, he would make her see, his blood came out of the eldest
shepherds house in that Country.



The perfect Prosopopoeia is, when the whole speech of any person is fully and
lively represented; wherein we must make both a fit and orderly access too, and
regresse from the same Prosopopoeia. Homer 2. Iliad. describes Thersites
excellently, and there gives him a fit speech for such a personage.

So he makes Patroclus appear in sleep to Achilles. 5. Iliad.

So 1. Iliad. Patroclus brings in Peleus Achilles father, speaking thus.
(...),
(...).


This is as it were the preparation; the speech of Peleus follows. (...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).


This is the Prosopopoeia of Peleus, which is thus left off; (...).


Virgil. Aeneid. 1. Of Aeneas. -- and dictis moerentia pectora mulcet.
O socij (neque enim ignari sumus antemalorum)
O passi grauiora! dabit Deus his quoque finem.
Vos and Scyllaeam rabiem, penitusque sonantes
Accestis scopulos: vos and Cyclopea saxa
Experti: reuocate animos, moestumque timorem
Mittite: forsan and haec olim meminisse iuuabit.
Per varios casus, per tot discrimina rerum
Tendimus in Latium, seeds vbi fata quietas
Ostendunt: illie fas regna resurgere Troiae:
Durate, and vosinet rebus seruate secundis.
Talia voce refert, curisque ingentibus ager,
Spem vultu simulat, premit altum cord dolorem.
So of Achemenides 3. Aeneid. Cum subito e syluis, macie confecta suprema
Ignoti noua forma viri, miserandaque cultu
Procedit, supplexque manus ad littora tendit.
Respicimus: dira illuuies, immissaque barba,
Consertum tegimen spinis: at caetera Graius,
Et quondam patrijs ad Troiam missus in armis.
Isque vbi Dardanios habitus and Troia vidit
Arma procul: paulum aspectu conterritus haesit,
Continuitque gradum: mox sese ad littora praeceps
Cum fletu, precibusque tulit. Per sidera testor,
Per superos, atque hoc coeli spirabile lumen,
Tollite me Teucri, quascunque abducite terras.
Hoc sat erit. Scio me Danais e classibus vnum,
Et bello Iliacos fateor perijsse penates:
Pro quo, sisceleria tanta est iniuria nostra,
Spargite me influctus, vastoque immergite ponto.
Si pereo, hominum manibus perijsse iuuabit.
Dixerat, and genua amplexus genibisque volutans
Harebat.
Sir Philip Sydney 1. Of Musidorus clad in shepherds weeds. She might
percetue a far off one coming toward her in the apparaile of a shepherd,
with his arms hanging down, going a kind of languishing pace, with his eyes
sometimes cast up to heaven, as though his fancy straue to mount up higher;
sometimes thrown down to the ground, as if the earth could not bear the burden
of his pains: at length she heard him with a lamentable tune sing these few
verses:

Come shepherds weeds, become your masters mind,
Yield outward show, what inward change he tries,
Nor be abasht, since such a guest you find,
Whose strongest hope in your weak comfort lies.
Come shepherds weeds, attend my woeful cries,
Disuse your selves from sweet Menalcaes voice,
For other be those tunes which sorrow ties,
From those clear notes which freely may rejoice.
Then power out plaints, and in one word say this,
Helples his plaint who spoils himself of bliss.
And having ended, she might see him strike himself upon the breast, uttering
these words. O miserable wretch, whether doothy destinies guide thee?

Torquat. Tass. 3. Godfrey to his Soldiers. Il saggio Capitan, che l'ardimento
Solite loro, in essi hor non comprende:
Cerca con lieto volto, e conparole
Come gli rassicuri, e riconsole.
O per mill perigli, e mill affanni
Meco passati in quelle parti, e'n queste,
Campion di Dio, ch'a ristorare i danni
De la Christiana sua feed nasceste,
Voi, che l'arme di Persia, e i Greci ing anni
E i monti, e i mari, el verno, e le tempeste,
De la fame i disagi, and de la sete
Superaste: voi dunque hora temete?
Dunque il signor, che m'indirizza, e move
Gia conosciuto in caso assai piu ^io,
Non v'assicura? quasi hor volga altroue
La man de la clementia, e'lguardo pio.
Tosto un difia, che rimembrar vi gious
Gli scorsi affanni, e sciorre i voti a dio.
Hor durate magnanimi, e voi stessi
Serbate, prego, (...) i prosperi successi.
Con queste detti le smarxite menti
Consola, e con sereno e lieto aspetto:
Ma preme mill cure egro e dolenti
Altamente riposte in mezz' alpetto.
Salust. Judith. 2, God to Moses. Vniour que cet Hebrieu sur Oreb menoit paitre
Les laineuses brebis de son beau pere Ietre,
Il voit, tout effraie comme un rougeatre feu
Sans amorce s'espend en un halier toufu:
D'ou sort auec grand bruit vne tell parole
Qui soudain fait trembler and la terre and le polo.
Iesuis cil qui seul est, seul fut, and seul sera:
Cil qui de rien fit tout, and qui fort reduira
S'il veut, le tout en tien. Iesuis le grand, le just,
Le beau, le bon, le saint, don't la dextre robuste
Balance l'vniuers. Iesuis le tout-puissant,
Qu' Abram seul adoroit: qui d'vn fleau puissant
Destrui mes enemis, and qui benin, fa grace
A ceux qui m'ont pour Dieu voire a toute leur race.
Si doncques mon vouloir. Va-ten, despeche toi,
Fai scauoir de ma part a ce profane roy,
Qui tient les tours de Memphe, and la grass campaign,
Que le Nil deborde de son flot rich bagne,
Qu'il assranchisse Isac. Et de peur que le roy
Incredule ne mettent en doubt ton enuoy,
Ieveus que sur les fleurs ta houlette alongee,
Pour confirmer ta charge, en serpent soit changee.
Boscan. 3. of Hero. Ella mouida entonces con mas san^a,
Nise dexolleuar por donde el quiso,
Nisobre el manto le sufrio la mano,
Mas buelta sobre si congraue gesto,
Semeiantes palabras d'estas dizo:
O hombre que veniste por mal tuyo
A este templo, a des lustrar mi houra,
Sin entender quan gran locura emprendes.
No sabes tu que soy sierua de Venus,
Y virgin, y por virgen que la siruo?
No sabes tulos hombres de mi sangre
Que ti castigaran, si saben esto?
Y no sabes tambien que estoy criada
Engrande encerramiento con mis padres?
Y que nunca salit querer llegar
Allecho virginal, es cosa dura:
Vete y iamas parezcas do estuuiere.
Esto dicho calla como vencida,
Conlagrimas venidas a los oyos
Pero bueltas atras luego en un punto.


By this figure we sometimes make dumme and senceles things speak.

So Homer. T. Iliad. makes Xanthus Achilles horse speak. (...)
(...), etc.
And ends thus. (...)
Virgil. 3. Aeneid. makes the Images of the Trojan Godds appear to Aeneas in
sleep, expounding the Oracles, instructing him in his way, etc. And there, the
chief of the Harpies, Celeno speaks thus. Vna in praecelsa consedit rupe
Celeno,
Infoelix vates, rupitque hanc pectore vocem.
Bellum etiam pro caede boum, stratisque iuuencis,
Laomedontiadae, bellumne infer paratis?
Et patrio insontes Harpyas pellere regno?
Accipite ergo animis, atque haec mea figite dicta.
Quae Phaebe pater omnipotens, mihi Phoebus Apollo
Praedixit, vobis furiarum ego maxima pando.
Italiam cursu petitis, ventisque vocatis
Ibitis Italianm portusque intrare licebit:
Sed non ante datam cangetis maenibus vrbem,
Quam vos dira fames, nostraque iniuria caedis
Ambesas subigat malis absumere mensas.
Dixit and in syluas pennis ablata refugit.
Sir Philip Sydney 5. Philanax to Euarchus. And give me leave, excellent
Euarchus, to say it, I am but the representer of all the late flourishing
Arcadia, which now with mine eyes does weep, with my tongue does complain,
with my knees does lay it self at your feet, which never have bin unready to
carry you to the virtuous protecting of innocents. Imagine, vouchsafe to
imagine, most wise and good King, that here is before your eyes the pitiful
spectacle of a most dolorous ending tragedy. Wherein I do but play the part
of all this now miserable province, which being spoiled of her guide, does lie
like a shipp without a Pilote, tumbling up and down in the uncertain waves,
till it either run it self upon the rock of self division, or be
overthrown by the stormy winds of foreign force. Arcadia finding her self
in these desolate terms, does speak, and I speak for her, to thee not
vainlie puissant Prince. That since now she is not only robbed of the natural
support of her Lord, but so suddenly robbed, that she has not breathing time,
to stand for her safety: so unfortunately, that it does appale her mind
though she had leisure, and so mischievously, that it does exceed both the
sodaines and vnfortunatenes of it: thou will bend thine arms unto her, and as
a man, take compassion of mankind: as a virtuous man, chastise most abominable
vice; and as a Prince protect a people. etc.

Torquat. Tass. 20. Emiren to the Soldiers. Credi, dicea, che la tua patria
spieghi
Per la mia lingua, in tai parole, i preghi.
Guarda tu le mie leggi, e i sacri tempi:
Fa, che io del sangue mio, non bagni, e laui,
Assicura le vergini da gli empi,
E i sepolcri, e le cineri de gli aui.
A te, piaigendo i lor passati tempi,
Mostran la bianca chioma i vecchi graui,
A te la moglie le mammelle, e'l petto:
Le cune, e i faghi, e'l marital suo letto.
16. He makes the Parrat to speak. Volafragli altrivu, che le piume ha sparte
Di color vari: and e purpureo il rostro:
E lingua suoda in guisa varia: e part
La voce si, ch' assembra il sermon nostro.
Quest'iui alhor continuo con art
Tanta il parlar che fa mirabil mostro.
Taequero gli altri ad ascoltarlo intenti:
Efermaro i susurri in aria i venti.
Deh mira, egli canto, spuntar la rosa
Dal verde suo: modesta, e verginella,
Che mezzo aperta ancora, e mezzo ascosa:
Quanto si mostra men, tant' e piu bella,
Ecco poi nudo ilsen gia baldanzosa
Dispiega. Ecco poi langue: e non par quella:
Quella non par, che desiata innanti
Fu da mill donzelli, e mill amanti.
Cest trapassa, al trapassar d'un giorno,
Da la vita mortale il fiore, e'l verde,
Ne perch faccia indietro Aprilritorno:
Si rinfiora ella may, ne si rinuerde.
Cogliam la rosa in su'l mattino adorno
Di questo di, che tosto il seren perde:
Cogliam d' amor la rosa: amiamo hor quando
Esser si puote riamato amando.
Tacque: e concord de gli augelli il choro
Quasi approuando.
Salust. 2. Semaine. That of the Serpent. Ingress. Le dragon pur forcer
l'humaine forteresse, etc.
The Speech. Eve second honneur de ce grand universe, etc.
Regress. Auec l'ayr de ces mots l'infidele viper
Souffle un air venemeux au sein de nostre mere, etc.
2. Semaine. 6. Of God seeing the tower of Babel. Ingress. Quoy voyant
l'eternel, etc.
Speech. Voyez, dit il, ices nains, voyez ceste racaille, etc.
Regress. Celadit, tout soudain sespand confusement,
Un ie ne scay quel brust par tout le bastement.


Cap. 32. Of Addubitation.
TThe conference or debating follows, and it is either in asking, or in
answering. In asking be contained deliberation, and occupation, or preventing
and meeting with an objection. Deliberation is, when we ask and enquire in
consultation wise: then when we have thus for a while held the auditors in
suspense, we determine of some what either more or less contrary to their
expectation. Deliberation is either in Addubitation, or communication.
Addubitation or doubting is a kind of deliberation with our selves.

Homer chapter Iliad Hector. (...),
(...),
(...).
And so forward, for it is all excellent and contains thirty linei more.
Virgil. Aeneid. 4 Dido. Sic adeo insistit, secemque ita cord volutat.
En quid agam? rursusne precos irrisa priores
Experiar, Nomadumque petam connubia supplex
Quos ego sum toties iam dedignat a maritos?
Iliacas igitur classes, atque vltima Teucrum
Iussa sequar, quia me auxilio iuuat ante leuatos,
Et been apud memores veteris stat gratia facti?
Quis me autem, fac velle, sinet, ratibusque superbis
Irrisam accipiet? nescis, heu perdita, necdum
Laomedontea sentis periuria gentis.
Quid tum? sola fuga nautas comitabor ouantes?
An Tyrijs, omnique manu stipata meorum
Insequar? and quos Sydonia vix vrbe reuelli,
Rursus agam pelago, and ventis dare vela iubebo?
Quin morere, vt merita ei, ferroque auerte dolorem.
Sir Philip Sydney. 2. Gynecia. Yet if my desire, how unjust soever it be,
might take effect, though a thousand deaths followed it, and every death
followed with a thousand shames, yet should not my sepulcher receive me
without some contentment. But, alas, sure I am not, that Cleophila is such as
can answer my love: and if she be, how can I think she* will? since this
disguising must needs come for some foretaken conceit. And either way,
wretched Gynecia, where can thou find any small gtound-plot for hope to
dwell upon? No, no, it is Philoclea his heart is set upon, if he be a he, it
is my daughter which I have borne to supplant me. But if it be so; the life I
have given thee, unnatural Philoclea, I will sooner with these hands bereave
thee of* than my birth shall glory she has bereaved me of my desires. In
shame there is no comfort, but to be beyond all bounds of shame.

Torquat. Tass. 4. Armida. Che, poiche leg d'honestate e zelo
Non vuol, che qui si lungamente indugi?
A cui ricorro intanto? oue mi celo?
O quai contra'l tiranno hauro rifugi?
Nessun loco si chiuso e sot'il cielo
Ch'a l'or nons'apra: horperche tanti indugi?
Veggio la morte, and silfuggir e vano,
Incontr'a lei n'andro con questa mano.


In 16. is a singular addubitation of Armida when Rinaldo fled.

And in 22. another of Tancrede, when he perceived that he had slain Clorinda.

Salust, that of Judith is most excellent, Judith. 6. Iudit, c'est a ce coup
(dit elle) que ton bras
Doit deliurer Jacob: Mais non, ne le fai pas.
Si, fail: mais non sai: voi laisse cete crainte.
Tu veus donc profaner l'hospitalite saint?
Cen' est la profaner, plus saint elle sera,
Quand par elle ma main les sains garantira.
Mais sans honte iamais le traitre ne peut viure.
Traitre est ceil qui trahit, non qui ses murs deliure.
Mais contre les meurtriers le ciel est irrite.
Tout homme qui meurtrit n'est meurtrier repute.
He* n'est il pas meurtrier cil qui meurtrit son Prince!
Holoferne est tyran, non roy de ma province.
Mais quoi? dieu maintenant le nous done pour roy.
Celui n'est point de dieu, qui guerroie sa loi.
Tons peuuent etre donc des tyrans homicides?
Iahel, Aho, Ichu furent Tyrannicides.
Voire, mais il leur fut command du seigneur.
D'vne pareille loi le sen sorcer mon coeur.
Las! pour saire un tell coup, ton brace a peu de force.
Asses fort est celui qui l'Eternel renforce.
Mais aiant fait le coup, qui te garentira?
Dieu m'a conduite ici, Dieu me ramenera.
Que si dieu te deliure es mains des infideles?
Mortle Duc ie ne crain les mors les plus crueles.
Mais quoi? tu souleras leur impudicite?
Mon cors peut etre a eus, mais non ma volonte.
Boscan. 3. Leander. O flaco coracon despuestes que osaste,
Emprender la masalta y peligrosa
Empresa, que iamasse haya emprendido:
No osaste tu mirar Hero en el templo?
No osaste tener euenta consus oios?
No osaste declarar te por su sieruo?
No osaste de recebir la merced grande,
Que su valor te hizo en admitirte?
No osaste en fin tan alto leuantarte,
Que pudiste alcanzar merecimiento,
De ser en breue tiempo su marido.
Pues si esto osaste que ay que osar agora:
Temes quica d'el mar lasbrauas ondas?
No temes mas aina el fuego ardiente,
Que abrasando t'esta dentro en tu alma?
Implacable es la mar, pero impacable
Es mas el fuerte amor que en ti esta ardiendo.
Confia coracon de l' alta Venus,
Pues que en la mar nacio, y en ella reyna,
Que se hizo el effuerco, que tenias,
Quando muy en tu seso alla en el templo?
Dezias a tu Hero mansamente:
Yo rompere las ondas de Neptuno,
Y la proa porne contra los vientos
De Eolo? mas fue entonces prometello
Visto el lugar ado lo prometiste,
Qu' es agora cumplir lo prometido.
Mira do esta tu lumbre a la ventana,
Centelleando assi tan viuamente,
Que en su centellear muestra lla mart.
Espera te tu gozo, y tu te tardas?
Tu mayor bien te aguarda, y tu no buelas?
O coracon tu estas alla en tu cuerpo,
No me detengas mas aca este mio,
Recogete en tu fuego, y passa l' agua,
Salta en la mar, ten oio a la tu lumbre,
Ella te lleuara por do quisieres,
Sin que llegues tus plantas a las ondas,
Hasta dexarte puesto enter los bracos,
De aquella para quien naci en el mundo.


And that of Albanio, Aeg. 2. in Garcilasso.

Cap. 33. Of Communication.
COmmunication is a consultation, or deliberation with others. Some such thing
is in, 2. Il. in Thersites his speech. Virg. 4. Aen. Anna refert: o luce magis
dilecta sorori,
Solane perpetua maerens carpere iuuenta?
Nec dulces natos, Veneris nec praemia noris?
Id cinerem, aut manes credis curare sepultos?
Esto, aegram nulli quondam flexere mariti,
Non Lybiae, non ante Tyro despectus Iarbas,
Ductoresque alij, quos Africa terra triumphis
Dives alit: placitone etiam pugnabis amori?
Nec venit in mentem quorum consederis aruis?
Hinc Getulae vrbes genus insuperabile bello,
Et Numidae infraeni cingunt, and inhospita Syrtis:
Hinc deserta siti regio, lateque furentes
Barcaei: Quid bella Tyro surgentia dicam,
Germanique minas?
Dijs equidem auspicibus reor, and Iunone secunda,
Huc cursum Iliacas vento tenuisse carinas.
Quam tu vrbem soror hanc cernes, quae surgere regna
Coniugio tali? Teucrum comitantibus armis
Punica se quantis attollet gloria rebus?
Tu modo posce deos veniam, sacrisque litatis,
Indulge hospitio, causasque innecte morandi,
Dum pelago desaeuit hyems, and aquosus Orion,
Quassataeque rates, and non tractabile caelum.
Sir Philip Sydney. 2. Philoclea. Alas how painful a thing it is to a divided
mind, to make a well joined answer? how hard it is to bring inward shame to
outward confession? and how foolish, trow you, must that answer be, which is
made, one knows not to who^? Shall I say, o Cleophila? alas your words be
against it: shall I say prince Pirocles? wretch that I am, your show is manifest
against it. But this, this, I well may say, if I had continued, as I ought,
Philoclea, you had either ever been, or never been Cleophila. You had either
never attempted this change, fed with hope, or never discovered it, stopped with
despair. But I fear me, my behavior ill governed, gave you the first
comfort; I fear me my affection ill led, has given you this last assurance.
If my Castle had not seemed weak, you would never have brought these disguised
forces. No, no, I have betrayed my self, it was well seen I was glad to yield,
before I was assaulted. Alas, what then shall I do? shall I seek far fetched
inventions? shall I seek to lay colors over my decayed thoughts, or rather,
though the pureness of my virgin mind be stained, let me keep the true
simplicity of my word. True it is, alas, too true it is, o Cleophila, for so I
love to call thee, since in that name my love first began, and in the shade of
that name, my love shall best be hidden; that even while so thou were (what
eye bewitched me I know not) my passions were far fitter to desire than to
be desired. Shall I say then, I am sorry? or that my love must be turned to
hate, since thou art turned to Pirocles? how may that well be, since when thou
were Cleophila, the despair thou might not be thus, did then most torment
me? Thou have then the victory, use it now with virtue: since from the stepps
of virtue, my soul is witness to it self, it never has: and pledge to it
self, it never shall decline. No way to make me leave to love thee, but by
making me think thy love unworthy of me.

Torquat. Tass. 2. Olindo. Come i ministri al duro officio intenti
Vide, precipitoso vrto le genti.
Alregrido: non e, non e gia rea
Costei del furto, e per follia se'n vanta:
Non penso, non ardi, ne far potea
Donna sola, e' nesperta opra cotanta.
Come inganno i custodi? o, de la dea
Con qual art inuolo l' imagine santa?
S'il fece, il narri: io l' ho signor, furata,
Ahi tanto amo la non amante amata. etc.
Salust. Heb. 1. Semaine. Profane quit' enquiers, quel important affair
Peut l'esprit and les mains de ce dieu solitaire
Occuper si long temps? quels souci l' exerca
Durant l'eternite qui ce tout deuanca:
Veu qu' a si grand puissance, a si haute sagesse
Rien ne sied point si mal qu' vne morn paresse?
Sache, o blasphemateur, qu' auant c'est universe
Dieu bastissoit l'Enfer, pour punier-ces peruers
Don't le sens orguilleus en iugemens appelle
Pour censurer ses faits, la sagesse eternelle.
Quoy? sans bois pour un temps viura le charpentier,
Le tisserau sains toil, and sans pot le potier:
Et l' ouuner des ouuriers, tout puissant and tout sage
Ne pourra subsister sans ce fragile ouurage?
Quoy? le preux Scipion pourra dira a son droit
Qu'il n'est iamais moins seul, que quand seul il se voit:
Et dieu ne pourra point (o ciel qu'elle many)
Viure qu'en lougaron, s'il vit sans compagnie?
Quoy? des sages Gregeois l' honneur Pryenien
Dira, que luy merchant, chemine tout son bien:
Et dieu, qui richement en tous tresors abonde
Sera necessiteus, sans le tresor du monde?


Cap. 34. Of Praeoccupation.
PRaeoccupation is when we prevent and meet with that which might be
objected, and do also make answer to the same: of the first part it is
called Praeoccupation, or the laying down of the objection, of the second,
subjection, or answering thereunto. So that co^monlie it has a kind of
prosopopoia adjoined unto it. This preventing therefore is either indirect, most
fit for beginnings, and more used of Orators than of Poets.

Virg Aeg. 2. Nec te poeniteat calamo triuisse labellum:
Hac eadem vt sciret, quid non faciebat Amyntas?
Sir Philip Sidney 2. Cleophila to the inconstant multitude. An unused thing it
is, and I think not heretofore seen, Arcadians, that a woman should give
public counsel to me^, a stranger to the country people, and that lastly
in such a presence a private person, as I am, should possess the regal
throne. But the strangenes of your action makes that used for virtue, which
your violent necessity imposes. For certainly a woman may well speak to
such men who have forgotten all manlike government: a stranger may with reason
instruct such subjects, that neglect due points of subjection, and is it
marvel this place is entered into by an other, since your own Luke, after
thirty years government, dare not show his face to his faithful people?

Torquat. Tass. 2. Aletes to Godfredo. Ma forse hai tu riposta ogni tua spe^e
In queste squadre, and hora cinto siedi:
Ques, che sparsi vincesti, unity insieme,
Divincer anco ageuolmente credi.
Salust. Heb 2. Semaine. Pourtant ne cuide point que cest excez reduise
Rien du corpse a neant: seulement il desguise
Leur form en cent facons, sans que le corpse des corpse
Perde ou gaigne rien, soit dedans soit dehors.
Car tout ce qui se fait, se fait de la matiere,
Qui dans l' antique rien fut faite la premiere.
Tout ce qui se resoult, en elle se resoult.
Boscan. 3. Leander to Hero. No pienses que te traygo a la memoria
Estas historias, por traer te exemplos,
Que donde la razon esta tan clara,
Escusado sera qualquier exemplo:
digolo por dezirte lo que passa,
Porque no y erres contra la que sirues,
Que gran error seria, si tu errasses.
3. Que diremos agora de Leandro?
Que diremos? sino que padecia
Los mismos acidentes y dolores.
Or full and direct, that of Musid. to Phila. is full and perfect, in 5. But you
will say etc. Boscan. 2. Buenoes amar, pues como dan^a tanto?
Grangusto es querer bien, porque entristece?
Plazer es dessear; como aborrece?
Amor es nuestro bien, porque da llanto?
Effuerco amor; pues como causa espanto?
Por el amor el bien d'el alma crece,
Pues como assi por el ella padece?
Como tanto contrarios cubre un manto?


Cap 35. Of Sufferance.
THus much of asking. Now in answering there is either Permissio, sufferance,
or Concessio, a granting or yielding unto. Sufferance is when we mockinglie
give leave to do somewhat.

Homer. I. Il. Agamemnon to Achilles. (...)
(...)
And after, (...)
(...)
(...).
Virg. 4. Aen. -- Nunc and Jove missus ab alto
Interpres diuum fert horrida iussa per auras.
Scilicet is superis labor est, ea cura quietos
Sollicitat: neque te teneo, neque dicta refello.
I, sequere Italiam ventis: pete regna per vndas.
Sir Philip Sydney. 1. Pyrocles. If you seek the victory, take it, and if you
list, triumph: have you all the reason of the world, and with me remain all
the imperfections?

Torquato. Tasso. 16. Armida to Rinald. flying. Vattene: epassa ilmar, pugna,
etrauaglia.
Struggi la feed nostra.
In Amynt. 28. Segui, segui tue style, estimata che sei.

Salust. Hob. 1. Semaine. Composer hardiment, o sages grees, les cieux
D'vn cinquieme element: disputes, curieux,
Qu'en leur corpse par toutro^d l'aeil humain ne remarquae
Commancement, ny fin: debatez que la parque
Asseruit seulement sous ses cruelles lois
Ce quel' astre argente reuoid de mois en mois:
Le foible estayement de si vain doctrine
Pourtant ne sauuera ce grand tout de ruin.
Boscan. 3. Leander to Hero. Las virgins yran tras su Diana
En soledad de vida por los yermos:
Tu, y las que estays a Venus consagradas,
En lecho coniugal aueys de veros. etc.


Cap. 36. Of granting.
Granting is when we iestinglie admit of any speech or argument.

Virg. Aen. 10 Italiam petijt fatis authoribus: esto.
Aen 7. Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheront a mouebo.
Non dabitur regnis (esto) prohibere Latins:
At trahere, atque moras tantis licet addere rebus.
Sir Philip Sydney. 5. Philanax. But yet even of favor, let us grant him thus
much more, as to fancy, that in these foretold things, fortune might be a
great actor, perchance to an evil end, yet to a less evil end, all these
entangled devises were intended. But I beseech your Ladyship, my Lady
Timopirus, tell me what excuse can you find for the changing of your lodging
with the Duchess, that very instant she was to finish her excerable
practice? how can you cloak the lending of your cloak unto her? was all that
by chance too?

Torquat. Tass. 2. Aletes. Hor quando pure estimi esser fatale,
Che non ti possa il serro vincer mas:
Siati concesso, e siasi a punto tale,
Il decreto del ciel, qual tu tell fai.
Vincer atti la fame: a questo male
Che refugio, per dio, che schermo haurai?
Vibra contra costs la lancia, e stringi
La spada, e la vittoria anco ti fingi.
Salust. Judith. 3. Ie ne puis, ni ne veus (respond le gouerneur)
Nier que nous n'aions offense le siegneur.
Fol est notre conseil, notre promise est folle,
Mais quoi? nous ne pouuons fausser notre parole, etc.
Boscan. 3. Mas sea todo en fin como a ti plaze,
tenga sennora el nombre que le dieres
este dolor que l'alma me deshaze.
Sea su nombre tal qual tu quisieres: etc.


This figure delights very much when we grant that which hurts him to who^
it is granted, as it many times falls out in contentious disputations. Thus
much of Eloquution in tropes and figures: in all which observe this one lesson,
the more the better: yet with discretion, and without affectate curiosity.

THE SECOND BOOK.
1. Cap. Of utterance or pronunciation.
OF Eloquution which was the first part of Rhetorike, we have spoken already:
it now remains to talk of Utterance or Pronunciation the second part.
Utterance is a fit delivering of the speech already beautified. It has two
parts, Voice and Gesture, the one pertaining to the ear, the other belonging
to the eye. A good voice is to be wished: but although it be but mean, we must
have care to keep and better it, that whatsoever we utter, it may be
pronounced with a voice fit for the thing delivered. The voice must be neither
too low, nor too high, but mean: for as the one disgraceth all contention and
earnest speech, so the other bewraieth a brawling disposition. Nothing is
either better for his voice that speaks, or more pleasant to the ears of
them that hear, than often changing: nothing more hurtful to the one, or
harsh to the other, than continual straining without intermission. To brawle
in the beginning with a shriking voice is rude and unmannerly. It is best to
begin with a submisse voice, and so ascend by degrees as occasion serves. The
consideration of voice is to be had either in severed words, or in the whole
sentence. In the particular applying of the voice to several words, we make
tropes that be most excellent plainly appear. For without this change of
voice, neither any Ironia, nor lively Metaphore can well be discerned.

By that kind of voice which belongs to whole sentences, all kinds of
figures and passionate ornaments of speech are made manifest. In figures of
words which altogether consist in sweet repetitions and dimensions, is chiefly
conversant that pleasant and delicate tuning of the voice, which resembles the
consent and harmony of some well ordered song: In other figures of affections,
the voice is more manly, yet diversely, according to the variety of passions
that are to be expressed.

A sharp voice is that in Homer 1. Iliad. before in license.

Virgil. 1. Aeneid. Ilioneus his voice is first mild, then sharp, and so by
degrees enhaunceth it self. O regina! nouam cui condere Jupiter vrbem
Iustitiaque dedit gentes fraenare superbas,
Troes te miseri ventis maria omnia vecti
Oramus, prohibe infandos a nauibus ignes:
Parce pio generi, and propius res respice nostras.
Non nos aut ferro Lybicos populare penates
Venimus, aut raptas ad littora vertere pradas:
Non ea vis animo, nec tanta superbia victis.
Est locus, Hesperiam Graij cognomine dicunt,
Terra antiqua, potens armis atque vbere gleba,
Oenotrij coluere viri: nunc fama, minores
Italiam dixisse ducis de nomine gentem,
Huc cursus fuit.
Cum subito assurgens fluctu nimbosus Orion
In vada caeca tulit, penitusque procacibus austris
Dispulit: huc pauci vestris adnauimus oris.
Quod genus hoc hominum, quaeue hunc tam barbara more^
Permittit patria? hospitio prohibemur arenae:
Bella cient, primaque vetant consistere terra.
Si genus humanum, and mortalia temnitis arma,
At sperate deos memores fandi atque nefandi.
Rex erat AEneas nobis, quo iustior alter
Nec pietate fuit, nec bello mayor and armis:
Quem si fata virum servant, si vescitur aura
AEtheria, nec adhuc crudelibus occubat vmbris,
Non metus, officio ne te certare priorem
Paeniteat, sunt and Siculis regionibus vrbes,
Armaque, Troianoque a sanguine clarus Acestes.
Quassatam ventis liceat subducere classem,
Et syluis aptare trabes, and stringere remos,
Si datur, Italiam socijs and rege recepto
Tendere, vt Italiam laeti Latiumque petamus.
Sin absumpta salus, and te* pater optime Teucrum,
Pontus habet Lybiae, nec spes iam restat Iuli,
At freta Sicaniae saltem, sedesque paratas,
Vnde huc aduecti, regemque petamus Acestem.
Sir Philip Sydney. 4. Nay, said Philanax, speaking a loud, and looking with a
just anger upon the other Noble men, it is now season to hear Timantus idle
sclanders, while strangers become our Lords, and Basilius murderers sit in his
throne.

Salust. Judith. 1. Mais le vieillard Cambris, prince au rest tresdous
Gronde, tremble, pallit de'vn louable courrous:
Et rompant ce propos, d'vne vehement langage,
Le courage effraie des princes accourage,
Plustost dessus mes pies, Terre, creuasse toi,
Et dans ton sein ombreus, Beauty, englouti moi,
Plustost, o just ciel
etc. As before.

A bitter, angry, cholerike, and furious voice is that.

Homer. 1. Iliad. Agamemnon. (...).
(...),
(...).
Virg. 4. AEneid. of Dido. Talia dicentem iamdudum auersa tuetur,
Huc, illuc voluens oculos, totumque pererras
Luminibus tacitis, and sic accensa profatur.
Nec tibi diua parens generis, nec Dardanus author
Perfide, sed duris genuit te cautibus horrens
Caucasus, Hyrcanaque admorunt vbera tyres.
Nam quid dissimulo? aut quae me ad mayor a reseruo?
Number fletis ingemuit nostro? number lumina flexit?
Number lachrymas victus dedit? aut miseratus amante^ est?
Que quibus ante feram? iam iam nec maxima June,
Nec Saturnius haec oculis pater aspicit aquis.
Nusquam tuta fides. eiectum littore, egentem
Excepi, and regus demens in part locaui:
Amissam classem, socios a morte redemi.
Heu furijs incensa feror: nunc augur Apollo,
Nunc Lycia sorts, nunc and Jove missus ab alto
Interpres diuum fert horrida iussa per auras.
Scilicet is superis labor est, ea cura quietos
Sollicitat. neque te teneo, neque dicta refello.
I, sequere Italiam ventis, pete regna per vndas.
Spero equidem medijs, si quid pia numina possint,
Supplicia hausurum scopulis, and nomine Dido
Sape vocaturum sequar atris ignibus absens:
Et cum frigida mors anima seduxerit artus,
Omnibus vmbra locis adero: dabis improbe panas:
Audiam, and hac manes veniet mihi fama sub imos.
Especially there. -- Proh Jupiter, ibit,
Hic, ait, and nostris illuserit aduena regnis?
Non arma expedient, totaque ex vrbe sequentur?
Diripientque rates alij naualibus? ite,
Ferte citi flammas, dato tela, impellite remos:
Quid loquor? aut vbi sum? qua mentem insania mutat?
Sir Philip Sydney. 3. Gynecia. O said Gynecia, how good leisure have you to
frame these scornful answers. Is Gynecia thus to be despised? am I so vile a
worm in your sight? No, no, trust unto it, hard hearted tygre, I will not be
the only actor of this tragedy. Since I must fall, I will press down some
others with my ruins. Since I must burn, my spiteful neighbors shall feel
of my fire. Dooest thou not perceive that my diligent eyes have pierced through
the clowdie mask of thy disguisement? Have I not told thee o fool, (if I were
not much more fool) that I know thou would abuse us with thy outward show?
will thou still attend the rage of love in a woman's heart? The girl thy well
chosen Mistres, perchance shall defend thee, when Basilius shall know, how thou
have sotted his mind with falsehood, and falsely sought the dishonor of his
house. Believe it, believe it, unkind creature, I will end my miseries with a
notable example of revenge: and that accursed cradle of mine shall feel the
smart of my wound, thou of thy tyrany, and lastly I confess my self of my
own work.

Torquat. Tass. Torrismondo speaks so almost in every part of Torrismondo.

Salust. Judith 2. -- O prophet effronte,
Di moi quelle Sibylle, ou Tre-pie t'a dicte
Ces oracles certains? quel demon t'a fait croire
Que furles Syriens Isac aura victoire? Aster,
Meur, meur donques mechant: de tal ingue saussaire
Et de ton double coeur rec oi le deu salaire, etc.
Homer. 1. Il. Achilles to Agamemnon. (...)
(...),
(...), etc.
Virgil. 2. Aeneid. Aeneas. Talibus insidijs, periurique art Sinouis
Credita res: captique dolis, lachrymisque coactis,
Quos neque Tydides, neque Larissaus Achillet,
Non anni domuere december, non mill carinae.


Where, in the last verses every thing must be dilated and produced, the mouth
opened, the vowells drawn out, that the Troyan calamity may there especially
appear.

Sir Philip Sydney 1. Philanan to Basilius. No he can not be good, that knows
not why he is good, but stands so far good, as his fortune may keep him
vnassayled: but coming to that his rude simplicity, is either easily changed,
or easily deceived, and so grows that to be the last excuse of his fault,
which seemed might have been the first foundation of his faith.

Torquat. Tass. 4. Pluto. Tartarei Numi, di seder piu degni
La sour' il sole, and el'origin vostra:
Che meco gia da i piu felici regni
Spinse il gran caso in quest horribil chiostra:
Gli antichi altrui sospetti, e t ferisdegni
Noti son troppo, el'alta impresa nostra:
Hor colui regge a suo voler le stelle,
Evoi siam giudicati alme rubelle.


A moderate, temperate, and stayed voice is that: Homer 1. Iliad. Calchas.
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
Virgil. 2. Aeneid. Priamus to Sinon. Quisquis es, amissos hinc tam obliuiscere
Gratos,
Nostereris: mihique haec edissere vera roganti:
Quo molem hanc immanis equistatuere? quis author?
Quidue petunt? quae relligio? aut qua machina belli?
Sir Philip Sydney 2. Cleophila to the people. Hear therefore, o Arcadians,
and be ashamed. Against whom has this zealous rage been sturred? Whether
have you bent these manfull weapons of yours? In this quiet harmless Lodge
there are harbored no Troyans your ancient enemies; nor Persians, whom you
have in present fear. Here lodge none but such, as either you have great
cause to love, or no cause to hate. etc.



Chapter 2. Of the application of the voice to several affections.
THese things be common almost to any kind of affection: now a word or two
of peculiar voices applyable to certain affections. In pity and lamentation,
the voice must be full, sobbing, flexible, interrupted, as

Homer. P. Iliad. Jupiter. (...).
(...). etc.
Virgil. 4. Georg. Of Eurydice. Illa, quis and me, inquit, miseram and te
perdidit Orpheu?
Quis tantus furor? en iterum crudelia retro
Fata vocant, conditque natantia lumina somnus.
Iamque vale. Feror ingenti circundata nocte,
Inualidasque tibi tendens, heu, non tua palmas.
1. Of Venus. Atque illum tales iactantem pectore curas,
Tristior, and lachrymis oculos suffusa nitentes
Alloquitur Venus, o qui res hominumque deumque
Aeternis regis imperijs, and fulmine terres.
Quid meus Aeneas in te committere tantum,
Quid Troes potuere, quibus tot funera passis,
Cunctus ob Italiam terrarum clauditur orbis, etc.
Sir Philip Sydney. 3. Philoclea to her self. Ah silly soul, that could
please thy self with so impossible imagination.



For Tasso and Salust. See misery in Exclamation: and see also Addubitation.

Boscan. 2. Hero to Leander. Mi dulce bien, mi dulce esposo, y dulce
Coracon mio, por quien todo me es dulce,
Pudiste tu mi bien tan gran trabaio,
Y peligro passar como has passado?
Pudiste tu romper las fuertes ondas
Con la blanda ternez dessos tus pechos?
Y pude yo ponerte en auentura
De perderte en vnpunto, y de perderme?
Puede ponerte yo en tanto peligro,
Como ha sido passar, la mar anado?
Si fuera tu enemiga, que pudiero
Hazer mas contrati de lo que he hecho, etc.


In anger, shrill, sharp, quick, short. Homer. 1. Iliad. Agamemnon to
Chryseis. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...).
Virgil. 1. Aeneid. Neptune. Eurum ad se Zephirumque vocat, dehine talia fatur.
Tantane vos generis tenuit fiducia vestri,
Iam coelum terramque meo sine numine venti,
Miscere, and tantas audetis tollere moles?
Quos ego: sed prastas motos componere fluctus,
Post mihi non simili poena commissa luetis.
Maturate fugam, regique haec dicite vestro,
Non illi imperium pelagi, saeuumque tridentem,
Sed mihi sort datum: tenet ille immanta saxa,
Vestras, Eure, domes: illa se iactet in aula
Aeolus, and clauso ventorum carcere regnet.
Sir Philip Sydney 3. Of Basilius. And therefore bending his brows, as though
he were not a man to take the matter as he had done; What, said, he, shall
my Wife be my Mistress? Think you not that thus much time has taught me to
rule her? I will mewe the Gentlewoman till she have cast all her feathers, if
she rowse her self against me. And withal he walked up and down, nodding
his head as though they mistook him much, that thought he was not his wives
master.



In fear and bashfulnesse, contracted, stammering, trembling.

Such was Tullyes voice in most of his beginnings.

So Helena to Priamus, in the Troyan Tower Homer. Iliad. 3. And, Ulysses to
Nasicaa Alcinous his daughter, (...).
(...). etc.


Virgil. 3. Aeneid. Aeneas of Andromache. Vt me conspexit venientem, and Troia
circum
Arma amens vidit: magnis exterrita monstris
Diriguit visu in medio, calor ossa reliquit,
Labitur, and longo vix tandem tempore fatur:
Verane te facies, verus mihi nuntius affers,
Nate Dea, Viuisne? aut si lux alma recessit,
Hector vbi est? dixit, lachrymasque effudit, and omnem,
Impleuit clamore locum,
Sir Philip Sydney 2. Philocea. Alas how painful a thing it is to a divided
mind to make a well joined answer?

Salust. Judith 6. Judith to Holophernes. Si tossed qu'ils sont dehors, Holoferne
caresse
La tremblante Iudit. Cesse o grand Prince, cesse,
(Dit la veufue) and pourquoi te veus tu tant hater
De cuellit le dous fruit qu' on ne te peut oter?
Me toi donc daus le lit, ou, pont te heureuse, prendre,
Tes dous embrassemens, ie ne faudray me render,
Quand i'aurai decharge de tant' d'habillemens
Mon cors brulant d'amour, and flairant d'oignemens.
Boscan. 3. Aristeus. Tu lo sabes Protheo, respondio el moco,
Tu lo sabes muy bien, pues nada puede
A tu grande saber ser escondido.
Yo vengo aqui por mandamiento expresso
Del'alta diuina sabiduria,
Y vengo te a pedir algun socorro,
A mi calamidad tan miserabile.


In joy, gladness, or pleasure, tender, mild, sweetly flowing. Sir Philip
Sydney. 3. Musidorus when Pamela slept. Lock up fair lidds, the treasures of
my heart,
Preserve those beams, this ages only light:
To her sweet sense, sweet sleep, some ease impart,
Her sense too weak to bear her spirits might. etc.
Salust. Judith. 6 Judith. Ouures (dit elle) ouures: car dieu nostre grand dieu
A froisse cete nuit la force Assyriene,
Et hausse iusq'au ciel la corn Isaciene.


In anguish and grief of mind without compassion, a hollow voice fetched from
the bottom of the throat, groaning. Homer. 1. Iliad. Achilles. (...),
(...)
(...). etc.
Virg. 1. AEneid. AEneas. -- o terque quaterque beatos
Queis ante ora patrum Troiae sub moenibus altis
Contigit oppetere* o Danaum fortissime gentis
Tydide, mean Iliacis occumbere campis
Non potuisse? tuaque animam hanc effundere dextra,
Saeuos vbi AEacidae telo iacet Hector: vbi ingens
Sarpedon: vbi tot Simois correpta sub vndis
Scuta virum, galeasque, and fortia corpora voluit.
Sir Philip Sydney. 2. Gynecia. O Deserts, Deserts, how fit a guest am I for
you? since my heart is fuller of wild ravenous beasts, than ever you were.

Torquat. Tass. 4. Ahi, quando may la Tana, o'l Reno, ol' Istro,
O l'inospite mare, o'l mar vermiglio,
O l'onde Caspie, ol' Ocean profondo
Potran lauar occulta, e'ndegna colpa
Che mi tinse, e macchio le membra, e l' alma?
Viuo ancor dunque, e spiro, e veggio il sole?
Ne la luce del mondo ancor dimore?
E reason detto, e caualier m'appello?
La spada al fianco io porto, in man lo scettro
Ancor sostegno, e la corona in front?
E pur v' e chi m'inchina, o chim' assorge,
E forse anchor chi m' ama: etc.
And a little after. Ma che mipuo giouar, s'io non m'ascondo
A me medesmo? oime, son'io, son'io,
Quel che fuggito hor sono, e quel che fuggo:
Di me stesso ho vergogna* e scorno, and outa,
Odioso a me fatto, e grave pondo.
Che gioua, ch'io non oda, e non pauenti
I detti, e'l mormorar del folle volgo,
O la'ccusi de* saggi, o i fieri morsi
Di troppo acuto, o velenoso dente?
Si la mia propria conscienza a immonda
Altamente nel cor rimbomba, e mugge,
S'ella a vespro mi grida, and a le squille,
Se mi sueglia te notti, e rompe il sonno,
E mill miei confusi, e trifti sogni?
Misero me, non Cerbero, non Scilla
Cosilatro, come io ne l'alma her sent^
Il suo fiero latrar, non mostr^, od angu^
Nel' Africa arenosa, od Hidra in Lerna,
O di Furia in Cocito empia cerasta
Morse giamai, com' ella rode, e morde.


In desiring, soothing, flattring, yielding, gratifying, a smoothing and
submisse voice. Homer. 1. Iliad. Thetis. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...), etc.
Virg. 1. Aen. Ad qua^ tum Juno supplex his vocibus vsa est.
AEole (namque tibi, etc.
Aeneid. 4. Dido. Mean fugis? per ego has lachrymas, etc.
1. AEneid. AEolus yielding to Juno. AEolus hac contra: tuus, o Regina, quid
optes
Explorare labor, etc.
Elsewhere Aeneas to Dido. O sola infandos Troiae miserata labores,
Qua nos relliquias, etc.
Sir Philip Sydney. 3. Gynecia. By the happy woman that bare thee, by all the
joys of thy heart, and success of thy desire, I beseech thee, turn thy self
into some consideration of me, and rather show pity, in now helping me, than
in too late repenting my death, which hourlie threatens me.

Torquat. Tass. 12. Clorinda dying to Tancred. Amico, hai vinto: io ti perdon:
perdona
Tu ancora: al corpo no: che nulla paue:
Al' alma si, deh per lei prega: e dona
Battesmo a me, ch' ogni sua macchia laue.
In queste voci languide risuona
Un nonso che di stabile, e soaue
Ch' alcor gli serpe: and ogni sdegno ammorza:
Egl' occh^ a lagrimar gl'inuoglia, e sforza.
Salust Judith 4. Holofern. Le tyran lui respond, o dorure du monde,
O dame egalement belle, honest, and faconde,
Vous soies bien-venue, and tou iour puissies vous
Auee contentement seiourner auec nous.
Si vous m'estes autant fidele and veritable,
Comme a l' oreille, and l' oeil ie vous trouue agreeable,
Ie veus dor-en-auant-adorer ce grand dieu,
Qui seul est adore de vostre peuple Hebrieu:
Ie veus que vous soies dor-en-auant la dame
Non de mon scepter seul, ains aussi de mon ame:
Ie veus que desormais vostre nom soit conu
Et del' Ebre, and du Gange, and del' Istre cornu.
Boscan. 3. Leander. O Neptuno, que a ti quiero boluerme,
Y tornar otra vez a suplicarte,
Por estas tantas lagrimas que vierto,
Por el mal entran^able que padesco,
Por la veiezy el llanto de mis padres,
Por el afrenta y por la muerte de Hero,
Por los dolores que de amor sentiste,
En el amor de quantas te he nombrado,
Que ataies esta mar que anda boluiendo,
A leuantar sus poderosas fuercas,
Contra un hombre tanflaco y tan cuytado,
Como agora yo estoy en esta arena.


This shall suffice for the framing of our voice both in single words and also
in whole sentences. The practice and exercise is all in all: learn therefore
some such speech wherein are contained all, or most varieties of voice, and
oftentimes use to pronounce the same in such order and with as great heed as if
thou were to utter it in some great assembly. Walking a little after supper,
annoynting, moderation of diet, and such like bodily pleasures keep the voice
in temper.

Cap. 3. Of action or gesture of the whole body.
Hitherto of voice: now of gesture and action, which is both more excellent and
more universal than voice: as belonging not only to those that use the same
speech, but generally to all people, yea to beasts and senceles creatures, as
the very pictures which being dumme, yet speak by gesture and action. The
gesture must follow the change and variety of the voice, answering thereunto
in every respect: yet not parasiticallie as stage plaiers use, but gravely
and decently as becomes men of greater calling. Let the body therefore with
a manlike and grave motion of his sides rather follow the sentence than
express every particular word. Stand upright and straight as nature has
appointed: much wavering and ouercurious and nice motion is very ridiculous.

Cap. 4. Of the gesture of the head, eyes, lips, etc.
THus much of the whole body: now to the parts, and first the head. The holding
down of the head, and casting down of the eyes betokens modesty.

Homer. 3. Iliad. of Helena. (...),
(...), etc.
Virg. of Dido. 1. AEneid. Tum breuiter Dido vultum demissa profatur,
Soluite cord metus, Teucri, etc.
And 3. AEneid of Andromache. Deiecit vultum, and demissa voce loquuta est,
O faelix vna ante alias Priameia virgo, etc.
Sir Philip Sidney. 2. of Philoclea. At length Philoclea, having a while mused
how to wade betwixt her own hopeles affection, and her fathers unbridled hope,
with blushing cheeks, and eyes cast down to the ground, began to say. My
father, to whom I owe my self, and therefore must perform all duties unto.

Torquat. Tass. 2 of Alete when he came to speak before Godfrey. Ma la destra
sipose Alete al seno,
E chinol* capo, epiego a terra i lumi,
E l'honoro con ogni modo a pieno,
Che disua gente portino i costumi:
Commincio poscia, e disua bocca vscieno,
Piu che mel dolci, d' eloquentia i fiumi,
O degno sol, etc.
4. Of Armida speaking to the same Godfrey. Esta a inchinollo riuerente, epoi
Vergognosetta non facea parola
Ma quei rossor, ma quei timori su^^
Rassicura il guerriero, e riconsola:
Si ch'i pensati inganni al fine spiega
In suon, che di dolcezza i sensilega.


So did Ulysses cast his eyes on the ground.

The countenance must turn with the body, unless we cast aside the face in
token of detestation or abhorring any abominable thing.

Homer. P. Iliad. of Jupiter. (...).
And. Iliad. of Pallas. (...).
Virg. 3. Aeneid. Achemenides of Polyphemus. -- dij talem terris auertite
pestem.
3. Georg. Dij meliora pijs, erroremque hostibus illum.
1. Aen. Of Pallas being angry. Diua solo fixos oculos auersa tenebat.


The shaking of the head notes grief and indignation: sometimes also
compassion. A nodd is a token of a grant.

Homer. 1. Iliad. Jupiter to Thetis. (...). etc.
The same Jupiter, Iliad. P. when Hector had the spoils of Patroclus. (...),
etc.
Virg. 1. Aeneid. Juno. Tum quassans caput, hac effudit pectore dicta,
Heu stirpem inuisam, etc.
Sir Philip Sidney. 1. Pyrocles. In so much that shaking his head, and
delivering some show of tears, he thus uttered his grief: Alas, said he,
Prince Musidorus, how cruelly you deal with me*



To make often gesture with the head alone is forbidden. But the chiefest force
of the head is in the countenance, and of the countenance, in the eyes, which
expres liuelilie even any conceit or passion of the mind: as therefore the face
and countenance must be comelilie and orderly composed, so the eyes very
diligently are to be regarded.

Homer. 3. Iliad. Menelaus. (...),
(...), etc.
So, 1. Iliad, of Agamem. chafed. (...)
(...).
(...).
There of Achilles. (...).
4. Of Ulysses and Diomedes. (...).
(...).
Virg 2. AEneid. At pater Anchises oculos ad sidera latus
Extulit, and caelo palmas cum voce tetendit,
Jupiter omnipotens, etc.
Sir Philip Sidney 2 of Gynecia. Insomuch that having a great while cast her
countenance gastlie about her, as if she had calde all the powers of the
world to be witness of her wretched estate, at length casting up her watrie
eyes to heaven; O son, said she, etc.

Torquat. Tass. 12. Leuo al fin gli occhi'e disse, o dio, che scerni
L' opre piu occulto.
Salust. Judith 6 of Judith. Etant donc de ce point saintement resolve,
Verse le pole elle eleue and ses mains and sa veue:
Et puis a basse vois pry ainsi l'Eternel.
O bon dieu etc.
Boscan. 3. of Leander. Boluiendo al cielo sus cansados oios,
A los mayores dioses y menores, etc.


The lips, nose, chin, shoulders must be also carefully looked unto and
decently moderated; the particular ordering is left to every man's discretion.

Cap. 5. Of the gesture of the arm, hand, fingers, etc.
THe casting out of the right arm is as it were an arming of the speech, and
becomes continued and flowing sentences, where the very speech it self
seems to power forth it self with the stretching out of the arm.

Homer. 1. Achilles to Calchas. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
Virg. 4. Dido. Sed mihi vel tellus optem prius ima dehiscat, etc.
Sir Philip Sid, 3. Gynecia. The sauagest beasts are won with service, and
there is no flint but may be mollified: how is Gynecia so unworthy in thine
eyes? or whom cannot abundance of love make worthy?

Torquat. Tass. 4. Godfredo to Armida. Ben ti prometto, e tu per nobil pegno
Mia fe ne prendi, e vius in les sicura,
Che se mas sottrarrem dal grogo indegno
Queste sacre, e dal ciel dilette mura:
De ritornaris al tuo perduto regno
(Come pieta m'essorta) haurem poi cura:
Hor mi farebbe la pieta men pio,
ganzi il suo dritto io non rendessi a dio.
Salust Judith. 3 Judith. Tous peches sont peches: mais ce peche surpass
Tant d'enormes forfaits, don't notre aueugle audace
Fait guerre au sacre ciel: car par lui le seigneur
Est comme degrade de'ses titres d'honneur,
Pour les communiquer aux pierres cizelees,
Aux trones, aux masses d'or subtilement moulees.
Garcilass. 1. Aeg. Salicius. Con mi llorar las piedras enternecen
su natural dureza y la quebrantan,
los arboles parece que se inclinan,
las aues que m'escuchan, quando cantan.
Con diferente vozse condolecen,
Y mi morir cantando me adeuiuan.
Las fieras que reclinan,
su cuerpo fatigado,
dexan el sossegado,
suenno por escuchar mi llanto triste.
Tu sola contra mi t'endureciste,
los oios aun si quiera no boluiendo
a los que tu heziste,
salid sin duelo lagrimas corriendo.


Without the hand the gesture is nothing, yet a moderation is to be had in the
gesture of the hand and fingers, that it rather follow than go before and
express the words.

V. Aen. 12. At pius Aeneas dextram tendebat inermem,
Nudato capite, atque suos clamore vocabat,
Quo ruitis? quaeue ista repens discordia surgit?
O cohibete iras, etc.
And there of Turnus. Significatque manu, and magno simul incipit ore,
Parcite vos Rutuli, and vos tela inhibete Latini:
Quaecunque est fortuna, mea est etc.


There is no gesture of the left hand alone, but the left hand joined with the
right is fit for addubitations or doubts, and obtestations or prayers, and
very much frequented.

Home. 1. Iliad of Achilles. (...).
There, (...).
Virgil. 1. Aeneid. Aeneas. Ingemit, and duplices tendens ad sidera palmas,
Talia voce refert: o terque quaterque beati,
Queis ante ora patrum, Troiae sub moenibus altis
Contigit oppetere, etc.
There Sinon. Sustulit exutas vinclis ad sidera palmas.
And Cass. Ad coelum tendens ardentia lumina frustra,
Lumina, nam tener as arcebant vincula palmas.
2. Aen. At pater Anchises oculos ad sidera latus
Extulit, and coelo palmas cum voce tetendit, etc.
3. Aen. -- tendoque supinas
Ad caelum cum voce manus.
And, At pater Anchises passie de littore palmis
Numina magna vocat.
4. of Iarbas. Multa Iouem manibus supplex orasse supinis,
Jupiter omnipotens etc.
Torquat. Tass. 13. of Godfredo. Giunge le palm, e fiamme gianti in zelo
Gli oechi riuolge, e parole al cielo.
Padre, e signor, etc.
Salust. Judith. 2. Dress droit verse le pole, and ses mains, and ses ieus,
Puis parle en cete sort: o grand dieu qui presides, etc.


The clapping of the hands is fitter for the stage than the court.

Thus much of the whole hand: the parts follow: the middle finger meeting with
the thumb and the other three stretched out, is an urgent and instant gesture.
The former finger stretched out does point at or show, when the other three
are closed and kept in with the thumb. In expostulating or declaring of any
thing, this former finger does affirm and asseuere, when it is somewhat
inclined and bowed down, the whole hand now and then somewhat lifted up, and
tending toward the shoulders. If it be turned directly down toward the
ground, it urges.

That gesture is very fit for modest speeches and bashful beginnings when the
4. first fingers a little going together in the end, the hand it self is
brought not far from the mouth or breast of him that speaks to those that
hear, and then after turned downward, and somewhat spread abroad, it loses
again.

Cap. 46. Of the gesture of other parts of the body.
FOR the other parts of the body, no man is almost ignorant of the unseemly
gesture of them, as, to cast out the belly and breast: yet to strike the breast
is

not (...)


