THE FRENCH HERAVLD SENT TO THE PRINCES OF CHRISTENDOM.

Printed according to the French Copy. 1622.

THE FRENCH HERAVLD SENT TO THE PRINCES OF CHRISTENDOM.
MY people are fools (says the Lord) and shall perish for want of counsel.
Alas who sees not this prophecy fulfilled; who beholds not Christendom
running headlong into her own destruction, in the mean while, that the
enemies thereof subsist by means of their human wisdom, and the Lord
upholding them, who shall give counsel, shall it be the Lord? that is grieved
and offended for the wicked life of man.

Shall the Pope do i^? he is one of the contrary parties, shall we expect it
at the hands of wise politicians? are not the greatest part of them, for their
own intrests, engaged to the one or other side? but there is inequaletie
amongst them, (It is true,) but such as is between the wolf and the sheep,
one seeks only for his own preservation, the other for nothing else but to
devour all. Here I lament the bad success of them both, of the wolf, because
God does not send a Lion out against him to tear him in pieces, of the sheep,
that they do not kill and eat him up at unawares. To give advise unto them
both were a work of charity, and thou christianetie the common mother of us
all, open thy bowels, to dispose them unto peace, hold Esau from killing of
his brother, and send Jacob among his kinsmen, that thou may not be deprived
of them both in one day, what would thou do then, poor widow, being
bereft of thy children: Think upon (I advise thee) the mischief which is the
cause of this. There are three, that is, manners of life, and conversation,
religion and state. The devil author of sin at the beginning, in every
nation has endued some to drunkenness, which has drowned all offices of
charity, and abandoned all indeauor and exercise of piety. Others, he has
made so ambitious, that they seek all the means they can to maintain their
dignity, sparing neither God, his saints, nor his service, but employeth them
to uphold him: Sodom and Gomora justify the manners and behauiours of diverse
of them. The covetousness of others, makes them to forget God, to hide their
dealings from men. The wrath of others, moves them to make religion a step to
their profane greatness: for you are profane, that have a great deal of
godliness in your mouths, but deny God in your hearts. Your Balams intent is,
to make you fall in love with strange women, and so to draw the wrath and
punishments of God upon you.

Christian religion has brought forth 3 sisters, whereof the two last are
twins, but by men they are called Catholics, Lutherians, and Caluenists. The
poor and small number of Caluenists, think on nothing else but to desend
herself against the blows that men seek to give her, to keep in the house,
where she is assigned to be, she is esteemed and held to be a criminal like
Mephibezeth, she is arested in Jerusalem, and there is nether bands of nature,
mecknes of Spirit, nor law, required of her seruitures, that permits her to
come out of her house of humility and servitude, to take place in honorable
throanes, to be employed in good offices, to participate with greatness (the
benefit of our common father,) she dares not speak to her mother but secretly,
pray unto God but in the fields, baptize her children but out of the towns, to
maintain herself in this deplorable state, what then must she do? she must
not cry out against her sisters, she must suffer herself to be beaten by
Kings and Princes, to have her riches and Jewels taken from her. the (gages of
her masters word) and she must not speak one word, for if she do, her tongue
shall be cut out, alas poor desolate woman.

The Lutherian extends her bounds further abroad, she loves not the
Caluenist; she hate h the Catholic, the one having first beaten her, the other
because she cannot endure to see her prosperity, she is well grounded in the
one, and has nothing but envy of the other, for her foundation she would
gadly see them both fair buried, to effect this, sometimes she agrees with
the one, and then again with the other, to watch them both, attending the
occasion to shake off the yoke of the great one, and to give the lesser a blow
on the ear, vseing the cloak of state to cover her maxim of religion; Oh
most dangerous deceit: but her mask being once pulled off, it will cause
lesabel to be thrown out of the window, by him whom thou most honor.

The Catholic, has other designs, she will strech her wings abroad in all
places, she will have no companion, much less a controler, she must drive away
the Lutherians for having injured her, calling her wife and spouse of
Antechrist, and she must punish the Caluenist for calling her an Idolater, and
as there is but one pastor, so there is but one flock of sheep, whereof the
Pope is avouched to bethe head and guide.

To effect the same he holds the good sheep tied fast to his greatness, by
Saint Peter's chain, those that are scabby, by the fear of the whip of
excommunication, the most sencible by the golden calfe, and all in general by
auricular consession, greatness of revenues, and support of houses.

We must bring the others unto us, they say and therefore ask the Lutherian,
what communion will you have, with a sister, that is of so different a humor
from you. The Samaritans and the Jews, are some what a kin one unto the other,
come lets us together build up Jerusalem, let us agree together against this
presumpteous wench, that will believe nothing but her own reasons, we promise
you to let you go to worship in this mountain, to go to the Temple of
Garezin, trust our word^, we observe it well to the Jews, our common enemies,
and why not to you that are our friends, but death is in the kettle, the flesh
is made ready for the banquet, we will not make the birds wild before they are
in the cage, when we have taken their arms and legs from them, we will bind
them like Sampson, and put out their eyes. Sister the advantage that thou shall
have, is, that they will eat thee in the desert, but keep thee until the end.

To the Caluenists? give not a good word, we must beat her and break her
ribs, and look on her again to see if she be through dead, if she flies into
Bohemia, we must cut her in pieces by the sword of the state, if she retireth
into Germany, we must persuade her that she blasphemed God, and the King, and
with Naboth she must be stoned to death by the principalle^t of the country, by
Iesabels commandment. If she flies into Swytzerland, we must make her believe
that she has carried our gods away, ravished the rights of our house, and then
they must make her return again, and suffer her to be beaten. Shall she hide
herself in the mountains, shall she cover herself with the height of the
Alps, shall she alledg her long soiourning, her nest built by her auncesters,
we must send a bird to murder her with a blow of his bill, and for want
thereof come and lodge in the fields. If she goes into France, under the
safeguard of that great Monarch, it is an easy matter to tell him of his oath,
and to prophecy unto him his damnation, if he should favor so wicked a woman,
to threaten him with Saint Peter's sword, if he does not use Saint Bartholmews
sword. If that fish chances to swime into the little world of England, we will
send a knife, out against that nourishing Father, if he will not have our keye
to open his house, we will send the Friars Minors, that know how to bring it to
pass, to conclude, little dove, they will have thee to pour out thy blood
upon the Altar, and to take the wings of the wind to fly into the North.
David, do thou withdraw thy self amongst the Philistians, out of the house of
the eternal, or else thou shall never have rest in Israel.

The State encloseth all, it is the flying Eagle through all the corners of
this house, and visiting all the family, says, that there is but one God, and
that we must have but one religion, and one King, my house is of long
continuance, It has vpholden the Empire, it has possessed the most Noble
Kingdoms in the world, which bears the title of Catholic, and shall it not
take the effect? what hinders it? The Germains, Ltalians, Frenchmen,
Englishmen, and their adherents, then we must take away all these obstacles,
that the prophecy may be fulfilled.

Who is heat this day that is so ignorant of the affairs of the world, that
knows not, that the King of Spain only pretends to make himself sole
Monarch of the world, that it is the project whereupon (all the enterprises
that are made from day to day throughout the world) are grounded, he believes
that he has his right, by the long possession of the Empire, by the force of
his house, the greatness of his estates, the subtilty of his counsel, the
fidelity of his people, and his great abundance of treasures, he thinks no
man to be a lawful King but himself.

The Germains, Netherlands, and Zwitzers, withdrew themselves from the Empire
by the cowardice of some Emperors. The Common wealths have abused their
bounty and freedom, having a respect to other designs. The Frenchmen are to
presumptious. The Englishmen by order of decency ought to do homage unto him.
The Sauoiard ought to blush for shame, for measuring his sword with the
Spaniards sword. The Italian Princes should be to rash, if they proceed with
their designs to prauaile of his blessing, the right of commanding all men
belongs unto him.

If they do it, every one of them shall peaceably feed under his own fig
tree, he is no Tyrant, he asks no tribute, he is content that his titles of
honor may be increased, by adding thereunto Emperor of Germany, King of
France, England, Denmark, Swethland, Bohemia, and Hongaria, he quiteth the
kingdom of Iuitot, the States, the Common wealths, the Princes, and the
Barons shall have their privileges, doing homage unto him. He is the the most
mild Prince, his estate most just and upright, and people most accomplished
that are in all Christendom.

But the diffacultie consists in bringing the same to pass, but thus it must
be done. The Emperor is the greatest Potentate in all Christendom, he is of
his house, he must put down the Kings of Bohemia and Hongaria, those two arms
which he had bound. Bohemia shall be easily won by money, that shall be sown in
that auaritious Country, and the honor that shall be promised to the principal
persons of the land, the people will follow their train between both, the
rebels shallbe punished, their goods confiscate, wherewith we will pay that
which we corruptly promised.

Germainy is full of free Princes and Common wealths, how shall we bridle
them, we must offer the whip to the Caluenists Princes, to the Lutherians the
purse, to the Catholic the Popes Bull, so then they are ours, if any of them
be stif and will not bow, examples, discourses, and the sword, are puisant
arguments to dispute withal. The Zwitzers are united in league together, so
they are, against others, to mock the Frenchmen, laugh at the Sauoyans, and
jest with all their neighbors, but if we say unto the small Cantons, we will
let you live in your Sates, exalt your condition, give you the spoil of your
fellow Citizens, assist you against their forces, and Dagon will bless you,
to what thing will they not be drawn, they will falsefie their faith alliances
being cast into the fire, they will run unto the pray, as young Eagles run to
carrien.

The Sates have a strong bulwark, and in a manner impregnable, we must not
begin that way, we had need of as many Stratagems, as there are grains in a
Pomegranat, against this Orange and his adherents? The Country is like the land
of Canaan, there is some divine protection, that semes to impeach the course of
our Empire, all that is nothing, for a knife will cut his throat, a fig will
pierce his intrailes, a Mule laden with gold will win tongues in the Country to
speak, hands to strike, and feet to run.

Italy is ours, if that begin once to stir, we will have recourse to our
necessity, we will lessen the money thereof by borrowing, we will require men
never to send them again, we will employ the holy Pantofle, to blow a spirit
of obedience into their hearts. The Union between our two crowns agrees like
the Sun and the Moon, we will yeald unto him to have light in the lantern,
let him cause us to find out the Monarchy, after that we will reckon
together; and she as the strongest, shall bear the blows of our arms.

The Duke of Sauoye, will put himself into the balance to serve to make
weight, he depends upon the infernal gods, he lifts up his hand against us,
but it is but in jest, we will impose silence unto him, upon hope to be our
companion in the benefit. Money shall rain into his purse, by the passage of
our Soldiers, his officers shall be faithful unto us, we will give him the
town that long time has bin a thorn in his finger, of Prince of Piemont, we
will make him Bishop and Prince of Geneua, Religiously for the sword and the
mass, cannot live together without Scandal.

The great and puisant King of France, seems to merit some thing in our house,
his person and ours are equal, we will never remove our Fathers bounds, our
alliances bind us together, every one shall perticipate in the cake, I will part
it take all to my self, and give nothing to others, I will let him deal with
the Huguenots, treat of places of security, and say that they thought not to
keep them, to offend him, if they refuse him, then he shall be troubled to take
them, either by force or fraud. If they yield them unto him, it is as much as to
take the dogs that were the gardians of the sheep, from them. The necessetie
of great affairs constraines the King to employ the impressed money otherwise
then for the mainetenance of ministers, there needs but the fourth part, for
the principalest amongst them, to keep them from barking, the rest dare not
blow: we will not touch the liberty of conscience, we will preserve the
obedient child under the benefit of the edicts, we will cause the rebels to
feel the force of the French arms, and the conclusion shall be, that will
make them agree, to their own damage.

The Englishman withdrawes himself out of the world, can he well escape our
hands: let him not be persuaded that it is now as it was in the time of Queen
Elizabeth, her people loved her, her subjects feared her, her courage made her
redoubtable, her neighbors received great blows for seeking to offend her.
This trusts in our promises, believes our words, gives ear unto our
Ambassadors, which makes his estate capeable of our dominion. Thus we have
attained the degree of our intent, and are come to the end of our enterprise,
long since proiected: where unto the aid of the most puisant God, and our
wisdom, without doubt will bring us, rejoice you that are our subjects for
the greatness which we prepare for you, every gentleman shall be a prince, in
that happy day. You that are under other men's Dominons, stretch out your arms
unto us, we will place you in an April, where you shall no more fear the
heat of the Sun of wars, in a sure haven without fear of Tempests, every
one that will not bow under this yoke, shall be rooted out, for the mouth of
the Lord has spoken it.

You hear this Thundering voice of Spain, this Roman Trumpet, hearken
likewise unto me all you people and Nations, that I may freely give you my
advise. Would you have the devil to be your master, all of you will say, no,
then fly from, and shun the causes that may make you his slaves: forsake
drunkenness, ambition, covetousness, lust, profanation, and Athisme, which make
your lives abominable, and filthy, and your conversation in famous before the
just Lots, that converse amongst you as ^n Sodom.

Youi Princes observe you godlynes, and you that are subjects submit your
selves unto them, and the great King of Kings will shortly tread Satan's head
under his feet. And you Churches, would you lose your Sancttuarie, and make
your candlestick to be taken out of the place, and your lamp to be put out
for ever? by no means. Then thou Catholic, content thy self with thy wide
and spacious Sea, stir not the sand because it is small, it is given thee for
a Herald sent by the Sovereign God, and a bridle to thy chollor, learn and
know that the Apostles and thy ancesters planted the faith of Christ, by the
sword of the Gospel, and not by the King of Spaines sword, that by good life
and conversation they converted the Jews and Pagans, and did not by fire and
sword take away the lives of so many Innocents, which cry for vengeance before
the heavenly throane, whose blood shall be required at thy hands.

You Lutherians, have you lost your wits and understandings, to hold with
those, that observe for a maxim, that they must not keep faith nor troth with
Heritickes, are you ignorant of that which they have done to your Predicessors,
are you not informed of the treaty made in France, in 1572. Among the Grissons
the last year, and in Languedoc not long since, do you not know, that they
seek to persuade you, like as Dalila did when she betray Samson. Have you
forgotten, that we are your brethren, and your selves like Doeg to be sent
against the anointed of the Lord. Shall you be in the land, will they there
pardon you, shall not you be dealt withal, as we are, when you shall no more
have our support, which should make you consider, save your selves and your
Religon, will you cast your selves into the fire, to shun the smoke? Do you
love them better that seek to bring you into, and make you drink of the cup
of Babylon, then us, that entreat you by the bowels of our mother, open your
eyes, pluck up your hearts, and with us weep and bewail the miseries of
Jerusalem, let us unite our courages, to preserve the throane of Jesus Christ,
against the invasions of his enemies, let us love together by good
corrispondence, whereby we may clear our doubts, let us end our differences,
and establish a good foundation of our faith, we have all the principles
Common, let not opinion and stubbornes draw and carry us away, to refuse that,
which concerns the salvation of us a'l.

And thou Caluennists, it is thou that have most to do, as having the greatest
number of enemies, but yet thou must labor. Thou have but two human means,
the one, that thou observe distrust for a maxim, and believe nothing (further
then thou see) that shall be propounded unto thee, suffer not thy spirit to
be seized, with the fear of evil, no more then with security, when there is
none, if any man kiss thee, look in his face, to see if he be not a ludas. If
any man speaks peaceably unto thee, look if the sword be not in loabs hand.
If thy friends persuade thee to yield unto the course of the water, look well
about thee to see whether the way be not paued with false money, examine the
prepositions, sound the persons that propound them, mark the natures of those
that bring them, weigh the shaking of that which is past, with the gages of
present promises, hold thy self within the bounds of the Common Law, and
demoure not, for fear, least one undermine thee, either at the botome, or on
the top of the wall. The other hold fast, let the mother live with her young
ones, spare not men's writings, and all sorts of arguments, interpose the
authority of the God of Israel, his sacred word, the bands of promises, to
join those pieces together that are furthest asunder, if any one be rotten, to
heal him, cast not thy self headlong into death, to spare him, expose not the
rest into danger. If there be any that will say, but what shall we do Elias?
What a number of enemies are there, let us yeald to save ourselves, let us
preserve our brethren that are under the Wolves paws: cry out and say, alas,
I would gladly save both the mother and the child, but I see them both in
danger, if I seek not to save the one. They promise to spare the feeble,
because that without pain they may send them to dine with the dead one morning
or other, they will have nothing to do but with the Samons one of their heads
ways more then fifty others. If God be with us, who shall be against us, will
they not stretch out their arms unto us in this need? Above all things let us
not wake the sleeping dog, but in the caves, let us resist those that pursue
us, as David did King Saul, and let us fight for our souls, God will preserve
them, or give them us again in the happy resurrection without being seized
upon by the wicked Spirit.

These are great projects, but all the world knows, that they are subtle
devises, there is no politician, that has not long since proved them, but what
remedy to withstand them? It can no more be done then the prosperity of
Alexander, or the good success of the Romans could ever be hindered? here
conscience and courage march equally together. If the counsel be of God, it
cannot be avoided, and let us beware, that thinking to resist against men, we
do not resist against the ordinance of him, that transfereth kingdoms to whom
he will. If it be of men, it shall be overthrown, and we or some others shall
by the arm of the Lord. To take the Nimrod by the neck. If it be of God let
us go and meet him, to submit our necks under the yoke of Babylon, let us
not only turn back without opposing our arms against those of leroboam, the
usurper of the Kingdom: but let us yield unto the Romans, and by their
authority preserve both our lives and our alters, Israel was led into
captivity, lerusalem was destroyed, the Temple was broaken down, her
ceremonies left off, and the Arc taken. Let not this pretended German Union
seduce us: trust not in your houses and treasor, your heriticall Nations,
believe not those that measure their courages by the else of the bulwarks of
the Gospel, trust not in that nation, (although it be warlike) which loves it
self, but like the Gebeonites prevent losuaes sword, for he is not come, but
with commission from the Eternal, that said unto him, go, and thou shall
conquer kingdoms. Oh God, if we had a leremie, who would not go unto him to
know, whether the mouth of the Lord has said it? If we had a Samuel, who
would not go to that Oracle, to say, Lord, I will do all that which thou
say. The Eternal is King, and we are his people, we will obey, whom he has
chosen. But we never read of any prophesies which threaten us, with a fifth
Monarchy, we have no prophecy that the Spaniard shall raise the fourth up
again, and swallow up the Roman, has not God showed the contrary, wherein
short time the Spiritual and Temporal heads, have bin prevented in the
greatest points of their hopes.

He will preserve nothing but the arms and the hands to hold the rod of his
fury, not to subject us unto them, but to receive the punishment that we have
deserved, our fathers never taught us to lose the liberty, that we may have
from God, but to possess it with a good conscience, If strength and force
fail us, God is strong enough for his Israel, if he does punish us for a time
because of our sins, by that Antiachus, at the last he will be appeased with
his people, how many times was Israel subject to the Philistians, and how many
times did God restore them to their liberty again? he sold them for their
sins, and brought them again to his compassions.

Then knowing not the particular will of our Master, let us follow the general
with David, let us leave the Arc with the Tabernacle, that it be not lost, and
let us pray, weep, and cry out and say, Lord weaken the counsel of
Achitophel, let us with Jacob fight valiantly, and God will do all that
pleases him, with Iehosaphat we will cry out, Lord, we know not what to do,
but our eyes are lifted up unto the Lord, with Hester, let us fast, let us go
to the king, if in doing so we perish, we will perish, as Zonobie said to the
Emperor Aurelian, thou and I may begin war, but God gives the victory, If I
overcome thee, it will be no honor. Therefore let every man in his calling
indeanor puisantly to resist Tirranous proceedings.

Great Princes, you would not for any thing in the world lose your liberties,
and yet you take the course to do it, either for want of courage or counsel.
Prince of Spain, thou that have extended thy limits even unto the place, where
God has said unto thee, that thou shall not go no further, go not against
the anointed of the Lord: for he has not sent thee, thou shall not prosper,
the land belongs unto the Eternal, and he has disposed of kingdoms at his
pleasure. The fourth Monarchy has but his bounds, build not upon the walls
of lerico, where thy sons shall pay the forfeiture.

Germany Princes, are you bewiched with the respect of the image of an Eagle,
do you doubt his claws, are you afraid of his bill? D oe you not know that
all of you are brethren, and that if you suffer one member of your body torn,
all the rest will feel it, and at last you shall all die in Slauonia, prevent
petfidrous Treasons and disloyakies, whereof you are accused, take away envy
and cowardlines wherewithal men blame you, call baeke your blood, bid your
bones join together to you, and you to them, can your consciences judge of the
equity of the cause by the first success? stay till the end, and you shall
know, that the hand of the Lord is for his anointed: then be not the last to
bring back the king, will your wisdoms permit you to bury this essential
distinction, it is another thing to be king of Bohemia, and Emperor, for the
quarrel is not with him, in other qualetie, then the first, Will your courages
permit, that after so notable promises, you should turn your backs in the day
of battle? Does not your native country move you at all; will not his
aliances far extended prick you forward? Be all well united, for the
interest of your consciences, your honor, and your duties, hold fast together,
for your common liberty. Will you suffer the Turk, to take part with you upon
necessity, or to eat you because of your cruelty? will not God ask an
account of you, for the blood which he shall spill? For the Churches which he
shall overthrow, and for the Mosques which he shall erect. Your eyes shall see
it, but he will not permit you to enjoy it, his Cimiterre will destroy you in a
moment. This Attila the scourge of Christians, will make us dearly pay for the
peace obtained, at the price of your consciences and remembrances.

You Zwitzer Bulls, you were feared, Princes and Kings made much of you, you
are in danger now to be bitten by them, if you seek not to drive away from you
all seeds of division, tie the aple of discord to your Cabinet, and bind this
maxim as a chain unto you, we are all brethren, let us resist against our
common enemy,

You States, whom God has favored with so much good success, that he has
raised you up a valorous Danid, to lead forth your battles: that great God
has put those Towns, and Countries into your hands, which he has taken from
the King of Canaan, abhor the remembrance of his bloody battles, that you
may not put any trust in deceauers, establish persons of good qualeties with
the purity of doctrine, banish those little conceits of Hispaniolesed love.
The double ducats will make you have double hearts, but join prudence with
your invincible courages, unite your hearts together, have respect to your
assemblies, and make account of the puisant arm of war for your preservation.

Italy, how happy art thou to be alone to thy self, thou art undone if thou
do not join better with thy neighbors, and apprehend the greatness of him,
that hates thee, and so long time has warred against thee, hold on the side,
that the balance may not fall one the one side, and thou on the other side of
thy dceay.

Savoye, thou art a valiant Prince, his house, his courage, his alliances, the
good will of his people, deserve not to suffer thy self to be muffled like a
beast, thou art feared more then loved, thy friends flatter thee, and thine
enemies tell thee most thereof, fear not fools, neither harken to the wicked
any more, but follow the counsel of thy predicessors, seek peace with thy
neighbors, and make war upon him that seekth to give a blow with his foot
against thy throane.

Geneua, thou that have so great a part in these public mischiefs, not for
thy greatness, but for that of thy enemies, I will place thee in this raneke,
they have a great spite against thee, and reserve thee for a break all for
the great bird, thou need not fear him, I, he will be ashamed to think
thereon, unless it be to give thee to one of his vassaules, but to prevent it, I
will tell thee how thou must fear the enemies, live in continual cistrust,
least they make thee rise before it be day: employ thy friends, and good
neighbors, fortesie and fill thy self with good munition, and above all
things live in unity together, hearken unto all those that give thee good
advise, and use it wisely, have an eye to some of thy inhabitants, fearing
least that upon some occasion they should seek to win the favors of their
Lord, by the loss of your heads.

Great King Monarch of France, if you will shun the means that your scepter
may not become subject to him that is your enemy, and be of so good a house as
your Wife, harken not to deceitefull words, you must exterminate your
rebellious subjects, for those are the vailaines, that stir you up against
David, and not the Lord, It is the double ducats of Spain that speak, and
not the good Counselors of the late King you Father, think upon making puisant
war against your enemies, that unjustly with hold your goods, and not against
your Children, that daily pray unto God, for the maintenance of your Crown,
who is it, that with holds the Rauilliac knife, and the Spanish sword, but
the prayers made to God, which those poor Huguenots, and their good friends
the faithful French Catholics pour out before the Throane of him that
disposes of Kingdoms.

King of England, you that have long hands, cut out the tongues of those
flatterers, that exalt you as a god, and only praise your wisdom, and tell
you not the truth, do you not see that Aegipt perishes, because you save us
not, will you be lost? Wake out of your slumber, giua your servant the pen, and
take the sword in hand, to that end you are called of God, make your name to be
feared, deface the blame that is laid upon you (whether it be true or not, I
will not speak it) for not helping and maintaining your own blood, fear the
force of the ancient enemy of your Country, and take heed that for want of
exercise abroad, you have not some thing to do at home, deny not (for want of
action) that most reverent name of Protector of the Church, which you ascribe
unto your self, and not to become subject unto Spain, show your self to be
King of England.

Christians excuse the boldness of an old man, his gray hears bereave him of
the fear of death, he has not sought to offend God, despise signeuries, much
less to cause blood to be shed, but rather to prevent the storm which he
sees coming, and fears that which is to come, by that which is past.

I beseech him that was before all beginings, to look down from heaven upon
his poor desolate people, to hearken to their prayers, to cleanse their tears,
to draw his hand out of his bosom to aid his servants, to maintain peace in
his Church, to preserve the States in their just right, to abate the pride of
those, that seek to incroach upon other men's inheritance, and to give grace to
us all, to acknowledge the Scepter of his Son, to fight under his banner
against Satan his enemy, and after the victory to make us perticipants in
the Crown of Glory.

FINIS.

