OFFER MAID TO A GENTILMAN OF QVALItie by John Fraser, to subscribe and embrace
the Ministers of Scotlands religion, if they can sufficiently prove, that they
have the true kirk and lauful calling. VVHERETO AR ADJOINED certain reasons
and considerations concerning these tvva heads and foundaments, without the
light of vvhilks others can not be cleared, nor assured ground in religion in
their dayis established.

Ad ipsam salutem ac vitam aeternam nemo peruenit, nisi qui habet caput
Christum. Habere antem caput Christum nemo poterit, nisi qui in eius corpore
fuerit, quod est Ecclesia. D. Augustinus. AT PARIS, Printed by Stephane
Preuosteau, in the rue of S. Io. de Lateran, besyd the college of Cambray

M DCIIII.

Munus beatae vitae non nisi intra Ecclesiam reperitur, quae super petram etiam
fundata est, quae ligandi and soluendi claues accepit. Haec est vna quae tenet
and possidet omnem sui sponsi and Domini potestatem, per quam coniugalem
potestatem etiam de ancillulis filios parere potest: qui si non superbiant, in
sortem haereditatis vocabuntur: si aute^ superbiant, extra remanebunt. D.
Augustinus. Quisquis ille est, and qualiscunque ille est, Christianus non est,
qui in Christi Ecclesia non est. Idem. TO THE MINISTERS OF SCOTLAND, HIS dear
contry-men, JOHN FRASER visheth the knavvledge of the verity and eternal life in
JESUS CHRIST our Lord.
AS my offer is reasonable, so hope I that ye will accept the same, and clear
your selfis vith reason, both for your avvin cause, and for the contentement
of sic as ar in doubt, if ye have the true kirk and lauful calling, or else
believes assuredly that ye have nather of them. J am in died but a
particulaire and single man, quha makes the offer, yet assure your selfs that
there is no Catholic on life being of discretion and knavvledge, but vvil say
and promise, yea man accomplish the same, as being oblished to acknavvledge the
true kirk under no less pain then eternal condemnation. Quherefore J pray you
to answer with a common accord, or, if any particulair among you ather
takes the burding of him self, or gets that charge of you, to approve his
labors by your public consent. Mairouer because sindry in place of good and
solid reasons, gives injurious words, reason vvald ye abstain therefra,
examining my arguments and answering thereto solidelie, and to vvy weal my
proofs and mind, rather then to pik at words. For so I think to do, if any
answer be is maid to me, vvilling nather to give nor receive falls or light
money, for good paime^t, meikle less the dross and scumme of injurious talk
for good gold of sufficient proofs. It is question of a may precious
iovvell, lat vvs touch it with an innocent and clean hand, mouth, and heart.
He shall be victorious, quha hes or finds the truth, quhilk can not be haid
except in the true kirk among the lauful pastors, to quhome we ought
duetiful obedience, quhilk moves me at this time to submit all that I have
vvrittin here, or shall writ eftervvard in matters of religion, to the
judgment of the Catholic Apostolik and Roman kirk and pastors of the same:
(as in matters of estait, to his M. his honorable counsel, and other
whatsoever his magistrates or officers, if I have spoken in any thing
irreverently: for my intention is upright to both) because at this present I am
assuredly persuaded that she is only the true kirk guyded by lauful pastors.
Quhen ye prove me that this honor appertineth only to your company, and sic
others as agrees with you in unity of doctrine, J shall behave my self vith
lyk submission and reverence toward you in all respects. J have tald you my
opinion and joined reasons thereto, quhereby ye may see me reddie to receive
yours and to knavv thereby quhat assure^ce ye have of your kirk and calling,
without the quhilk assurence nather can we enter in vith you, nor they quha
ar alreddie vith you, remain vith saif conscience: for quha can be in quyetnes
of mind, not being assured if he be in Gods house, out of the quhilk there is
no salvation? J protest before him, to quhom no thing is hid that my offer
proceeds of a sincere mind toward his honor with earnest desyr of your
weal, and all Christians and principally of my contray men; and nather of
contempt of you, nor presumption of my avvin strenth. As to any of your
persons, the evil arrive to me, that I vvald vvish to you. I am affectionat
to the religion that J profess, true it is (quhilk as J believe, can not
justly offend you, seeing that if ye make me youris, ye may have me alse
forvvard for you) yet I have used alse litil offensive language as I culd. But
if any thing hes eschapped out of my pen, that may be interpreted otherways
then I vvald vvish, J pray you pardon me; and think that oftentimes the
bitterness comes rather of the matter it self, then of my natural. If any be
so hard and difficil that he vvil not accept my excuse, nor pardon that quhilk
in his opinion is offense; the best way to revenge him self on me, is to be
maire modest then he thinks me to have beine; for he vvil bear away by that
moyen the honor of Christian modesty, quhilk J vvald glaidlie have. The arms
of flyting ar vnpropre in this field, quherein these of solid reason may only
obtain the victory. If ye prove your kirk to be good and your calling lauful,
J vvil esteime worse of all other companies divided from you in doctrine,
then ye can say, writ, or think. God of his infinite mercy by virtue of his
truth join vvs all together here in his kirk militant, that we may be
partakers of eternal bliss in his kirk triumphant, to the quhilk bring vvs the
father, son and holy spirit.

AMEN.
1. To Timothee 3. These things Jvvrit to thee, hoping that I shall come to thee
shortly. But if I tarry long, that thou may knavv how thou aughtest to
converse in the house of God, vvhilk is the Kirk of the living God, the pillar
and ground of truth. OFFER MAID TO AN GENTILMAN OF QVALItie by M. John Fraser
Priour of S. Nicolas, to subscribe and embrace the Ministers of Scotlands
religion, if they can sufficiently prove, that they have the true kirk, and
lauful calling: VVHERETO AR ADJOINED CERTAIN REASONS and considerations
concerning these tua heads and foundaments, without the light of vvhilks,
others can not be cleared, nor assured ground in religion in their day is
established.
BEING now in the fields (where solitude gives me laiser) and weal myndful of
the offer and promise I maid you at visiting, I thought it not out of propos to
affirm now by wreit, whilk I spak then by word unto you.

If the Ministers may schavv by good and solid reasons, that they have the
true kirk, and ar lauful pastors thereof, I shall without any farther
inquisition, examination, or tryel of their doctrine subscrybe their cofession
of faith, obey to their command and vvil, yea accept that charge.

Whilk promise and offer I make for no vain ostentation of my self nor to
prouok any man by sic braging, but that an necessary duty Act. 4. 12.
oblisheth me to follow this course, whereof my grouds ar their. No man can be
saif except by JESUS CHRIST: no man can be saif by him, except he be a membre
of his mystical body, whilk is his kirk, whereunto can be Ioa. 10. 1.
no entry but by the door (if we wald not be estimed as theafs and robbers)
that door can not be opened but by them wha hes the keys, that is, by the
lauful pastors: Our Lord hes gotten al power in heaven and in Matthew. 28. 18.
earth; he hes sent his Apostles with lyk power and charge; and that they should
exercise this power truly, and in all holiness, perpetual assistence of the
haly spirit in all verity was promised and given to them: and in them Matthew. 28.
20.
and by them to their successors in the kirk unto the consummation of the
world. So I am forced to have recourse to the Kirk our Saviors spouse: whilk I
will find in vain and to no effect, if I be not received by the true officers
in that holy tabernacle and house of God. Now in this great no^bre of pretended
kirks (for there be more then an hondreth of diverse companies wha hes usurped
that honorable and sovereign nam where as there can be bot one true, except we
wald gif many bodies to one head, whilk sort of monster lies hidderto surpassed
al poetical fiction) we should use al caire and diligence to find out the true
kirk gouuerned by lawful pastors: for whosoever goes wrang in this matter
entering in the synagog of Satan in place of Gods kirk, he strayeth from
eternal salvation, how soever he persuade him self to be in the true way.

I think the reward or danger might make any man careful in seiking; and
circumspect in election and choising, not giving rashly credit to every man,
wha shall promis or undertake to lead him to Gods house. we araduertist by our
blessed Savior to be war, and not to belief them, wha shall Matthew. 24. 23. Mar.
13. 21. Luc. 21. 8.
say lo here is Christ, lo there. We at fallen in a dangerouse time, where the
diversity and multitude of opinions and sects puts many-men in doubt whom
to flee, whom to follow. Only this is confessed and granted by all men, that
there is a kirk and but ane only (I mean Catholic and universal) espouse and
mystical body of JESUS CHRIST, house of God, pillar of verity, mother of al
faithful, out of the whilk there is na salvation, nor life. For na man can have
our Lord for head, wha is not a member of his body. And seeing no man
gainesayeth this, of necessity it must be true, as a thing prented in all men's
hearts by God him self, wha will no man to have excuse where he wills no man to
refuse.

And for that cause in the symbol of faith immediately after the articles
pertining to the holy Trinity and mystery of our redeption, is adjoined. I
belief the holy Catholic kirk, or as it is in the symbol of Nice. I belief
one, holy, Catholic, and A postolique Kirk. we must acknawlege her for our
mother; for by her moyen the lawful son man know his genealogy, birth, and
kindred in this spiritual family. By her the child man know God his father: I
ESVS CHRIST apperteined to her only: no man can cleam right bot by her only, in
whais favor the contract of marriage was maid: he man be auowed by her wha wald
justly prote^d any part in Christ's eternal inheritance. S. Cyprian says De
vnitate Eccle. cap. 5.
very weal. Illius (Ecclesiae) foetu nascimur. Illius lacte nutrimur, spiritu
eius animamur: adulterari non potest sponsa Christi, incorrupta est and pudica;
vnam domum nouit, vnius oubiculi sanctitatem casto pudore custodit: haec nos
Deo seruat: haec filios regno, quos generauit, assignat* Quisquis ab Ecclesia
segregatus adulterae iungitur: a promissis Ecclesiae separatur. Nec perueniet
ad Christi praemia, qui relinquit Ecclesiam Christi, alionus est, profanus est,
hostis est: habere iam non potest Deum patrem, qui Ecclesiam non habet matrem.
Si potuit euadere quisquam, qui extra Arcam Noe fuit, and qui extra Ecclesiam
foris fuerit, euadit. etc. We ar borne of her birth and generation; we ar
nourished with her milk; we ar quickened and takes life by her spirit. The
spouse of Christ can not be defiled with adultery; she is vncorrupt and
chaste. she knavveth bot one house: she keippeth vith a chaste shamfastnes the
holiness of one bedchamber: she does keip vvs to God. She does appoint to
the kingdom the sons vvhilks she hes begottin. Whosoever being separated
from the kirk joins him self to the adulteress, he is separated from the
promeisses of the Kirk; nether shall he com to the rewards of Christ, who
leaves Christ's kirk: he is a mere stranger, a profane man, ane enemy: he can
not now have God to his father quha heth not the kirk to his mother: If any
man could escape wha was without the Ark of Noe, he also shall escape wha
shall be without the Kirk Sic lyk S. Augustine says: Si quis absq. Ecclesia
inuentus fuerit, alienus erit a numero filioru^. lib. 4. C. 10 de symbolo To. 9
If any man shall be fond without the kirk* he shall be as an stranger and not
coumpted in the number of the lauful sons. Out of Adams syd sleipping in
Paradise was formed Eua, of whois marriage come al mankind; out of christ's syd
sleipping on the cross was formed the kirk, the only lawful mother of all the
faithful.

Knawing once this kirk I will make no difficulty to enter therein, to follow
and obey her voice; because I am sure she can not err, fail, nor be deceived,
nor deceive any man: And this I believe without any doubt: I say belief, for
many good and w^^ghty reasons, yea and it must be so: for otherway is how shall
she preserve and keip me from error and heresy, not being her self exempt
and free there fra, unless perchance ye wald have me more skeilful nor my guyd,
in whilk case it war more seamly that I should guyd her, nor she me: for
certainly a doubtful leader can not make an assured company. If the wisdom
and authority of the Kirk be not sufficient to help our infirmity and
ignorance in matters of faith, where shall we have any sure guyd know in to the
wardle, to whom men of every estait and condition may have recourse in their
doubts and controversies? qui dubitatin fide, infidelis est. wha doubts in
faith is an infidelle; at leist if he remainestil in doubt.

I doubt not bot some will send me to the scriptures with certain rules; the
whilks may resolve all questions and open wp al sort of conttouersies arrysing
in matters of religion. I will accept their consel, and serve me with their
invention provyding I can see good reason. I will say only at this time, that
they wha vanteth them selfis to have invented and keiped (according to their
judgment) these rules, can not agree among them selfis (as I shall be habil to
prouue, God willing, if any man call my saying in doubt) so that I can not
hoppe to accord with any of them, except, without any farther rule, I say as
he says, wherein I most disagree with many, seeing he agrees with so few. But
to the matter. I know there is no error teached, nor can be teached in the
scriptures: they war dytted by the holy spirit to holy men, wha, as good and
true instruments of the verity, did wreit as it was dytted to them by God. So
I worshipe the scriptures for their authors cause, I embrace them for the
verity contained in thom: yet by reason of high mysteries hid therein, I dar
nor be so bold as to decyd al 2. Pet 1. 20
questions thereby, knawing assuredly that no prophecy of the scripture is of
private interpretation, but man be interpreted by the holy spirit as it was
wreittin, that is by holy men, remaning within the bosom of the kirk, and
authorized by her, as they war, wha received it from God: that is the true
interpretation man be takin of the kirk, to whom God hes committed al verity
for our instruction. for if we shall with some men make doubt of the kirks
authority and firmitie in all verity, as not being every where certain,
thinking and planly affirming, or rather as a ground of religion, surely
beleifing, that she may err and fail, to whom shall we have refuge? what
remeid shall we have for the wounds of a doubtful conscience? wha shall without
just reproach apply these rules to the scriptures and give ws the true sense?
Wha shall pronunce the sentence, and decreit, where to al parties man stand?
there man be one, ne circumferamur omni vento doctrinae: That we be not Ephesians.
4. 14.
carried about with every; vvinde of doctrine. There will be an evil ordered
house if every man be left to his awin fantasy. We are not put here nather to
pley nor play, but with the honor of God seik our awin salvation in humility,
verity, and charity. I man have an better and maire sure guyd nor my self,
before I leave the kirk: he man be better nor she also, or else I shall change
in vain. If there be any siclik, I wald glaidly hear his nam, his quality,
where he dwells, how I might know him. I wald willingly tak the pain, and
bestow the expenses to seik him out. The love and desire of verity with hoppe
of a may ample reward will make the labor light.

But ye will say, it is the scriptures. but it is not the scriptures I seik, for
I have found them. I seik that whilk I culd not find, where I fand the
scriptures, to wit the true sense of the scriptures; for otherwayis any
libraire might have satisfied my just curiosity: for what curiosity can be
more just, nor to seik eternal life? The heretics and schismatiks, yea some
Jews and Turks hes the bible, and alleges theirselfs to have the true sense
of the same: but how far they be therfra, their maiste perniciouse incredulity
does declaire. But it may be said, that they tak not the scriptures, as they
should be taikin. I doubt not but they fail, because they go wrang not having the
assistance and help of the halie spirit. that is as meikel as wha wald say,
alse lang as ye gang right ye gang not wrang. that is true: but how shall I go
right? that is my question: I desire a guyd (for he who is unlearned and
ignorant of the tounges can not serve him self with these rules, whilks learned
men can scaircelie weal practeis) wha not only knaweth the true way and
contains the same, but also will schaw me it, and in case I understand him not
weal at the first or secund time, will tell me it over again in mair plain
langage, and if I yet mistak him, will schaw me my fault and teach me the true
meaning. And siclik if my nightbour and I, be in contrary opinion, will schaw
ws in plain terms whois meani^g is good, and whois meaning is not good: or if
there be any other sense better nor them both, will produce it for our good
instruction.

The scriptures tells me the truth* I doubt not, but they suffer me to tak^ a
wrang sense and aduertises me not that I am deceived: as we may see to our
great regrait now by experience of so many diverse sects bred of sinistrouse
interpretation takin out of the scriptures. Think not that al these men do
willingly deceive them selfs decipimur specie recti. We ar deceived by the
outvvard schevv of the right. If they wald have hard and obeyed the voice of
the kirk (wha cried heigh and loud that they understood not the true meaning of
the scriptures) they haid not gone wrang, as they have done now, following
their awin judgment. Ye will say perchance they laiketh the holy spirit, for
whosoever haith his assistance must go weal. I grant you that (and concludis
thereon, that the kirk most go weal) but seeing that every man hes not the
holy spirit; how shall I know who has him, who not? Among this infinite
nombre of them, wha pretends to have that privilege (notwithstanding of
their contrariety, manifest mark of their vntreuth, and that Satan oftentimes
does transfigurat and 2. Corynt. 11. 14.
chenge him self in an angel of light) it shall be very hard to any man to
know whidder his spirit be albus an ater, Blak or white, as sayeh Zuinglius of
de subsidio Eucharist. To. 2.
his spirit. Moreover this can be but a spirit particulaire, and a spirit of
discord, except he agree with the general: for in matters of religion priuata
veritas opinio est, non veritas. A private verity is but an opinion and not a
verity. It can not be proper to ane only whilk was given for all. I seik a
commound guyd of al Christians. I will not credit my awin private spirit, an
other should not luk for any farther at my hand. The verity is but one, the
guyd and judge must be of that saime nature. If I find out the true guyd and
rule, al men, wha wald be safe must follow that guyd and rule. So if mine, or
any other particulaire man's spirit be that sure and true guyd, whasouer goes
therefra, must go wrang: yea all other rule without him serves for noght. where
as the holy spirit can do weal althought he have no rule prescrybed to him: he
wha maid the ass of Balaam to speik, may cause any man he pleaces, tell the
verity he neiddeth no help of rules; his only assistance was sufficient for
the Apostles to speik, and understand all tounges and know all verity for man's
salvation. If any particulaire person hes gotten the spirit in this sort,
lat him speik baldlie, we must be all his disciples. There are sindrie who wald
willingly tak on them that name as their staitly still in wreitting may
evidently declaire, yet for fear of mockery they dar not say it: But lat ws
return to the scriptures examinated and interpreted by their rules.

The scriptures (say they) be as the touchestone, wherewith the gold and silver
of Christian religion be tried and knawne from the false and contrefaict gold
and basse money of erroniouse and heretical doctrine. At all sic trial there
should be three thingis, the touchstone, the gold or metal to be tried, and the
goldsmith: we have the touchstone, to wit the scriptures, the gold to be tried,
at the heads of religion called in doubt, to know if they be of good and fine
metal of verity or noth. The debat is for the goldsmith, who should try the
gold. It apperteined not to every man, seeing that every man hes not learned
the craft. Until we find a better, I think it best we receive the kirk, or
rather suffer the kirk stand with that charge seeing no other presenting him
self, is worthee of that place, as in deid it apperteineth to no other but to
the kirk. Yet seeing that many does other ways at this time we may justly say
with Sanct Hierom sola scripturarum Epistola a Paulinum.
ars est, quam sibi passim omnes Vendicant; hanc garrula an us, hanc delirus
senex, hanc sophista verbosus, hanc vniuersi praesumunt, lacerant, docent
antequam discunt. There is only the craft of the scriptures, that all men
challenge and vendicats to them selfs euerievvher every old babbling vvyf,
every raving old fellow, every sophist full of words. yea every an in
general do tak this scripture dismember and teach it, befoir that they have
learned it. We are not now in question of the scriptures, but of the
interpretation of them, whilk should not be thrawin to our judgment, but our
judgment drawin to it, Bringing in 2. Cor* ^1 5.
captivity all understanding unto the obedience of Christ and having in
reddines to revenge all disobedience, when our obedience shall be fulfilled.
JESUS CHRIST'S house is the schoolle of faith, and not of science; he knaweth
sufficiently, wha beleefeth as he should do. God hes at all time served him self
with the kirk to teach men, to declaire and schaw his will publishing his
verity to the world. he will be credited on his only word quoniam ipse dixit
and facta sunt, ipse mandauit and creata sunt. his saying is more sure, then
any mathematical demonstration, he may make an instrument of any thing, wha
maid all thing is without any instrument. So our master and Lord maid clay
with his spattle to hail the blind man: in the hand of any other that Ion. 9. 6
haid bein sufficient to make a seeing man blind. May he not with the clay of
mortal men heall our blindness in the truth. The river of Jordan haid only
commune water without any extraordinaire virtue, yet Naaman being sent there,
by the prophet, 4. Reg.
it receaueth the power to heal him of his leprosy: the prophet of all
prophets or rather the make air of al prophets heth sent ws to the kirk: why
shall she not have the virtue to hail ws of our leprosy of ignorance by him,
wha sent ws to her? S. Peter said in his name to the crippel man surge and
ambula, Rise and gang. the natural act. 3. 6
seiknes from the birth culd not resist his command. his schaddow healled
infirmities: his word act. 5. 15.
slayed, his prayers raised wp the dead. ib. 8. 8. 9. 4.
Shall Christ's awin word have no strenth? there is virtue in all abundance,
where ever he will: ourweacknes can not stop him. I man say with Orosius:
Hocsi quisquam hominum Aduer. Pelagium de arbit. liber.
ita dicendum putet, vt sub infirmitate hominis Deum non posse affirmet, and
omnipotentiae Deialiquid impossible suspicetur in omni creatura Coelestium,
terrestrium, and infernoru^: hunc non tantum sententia mea dixerim blasphemum,
anathema detestandum, sed etiam vel in exemplum Nadah and Abiu Diuino igne Leu.
10. 2.
damnandum, vel iuxta perditionem Dathan and Abiron hiatu terrae receptum viuum
Deuteronomy. 11. 6
ad inferna mergendum. If any man thinks that it may so be said, that by
reason of man's infirmity and weakness he will say God can not, and thinks
any thing impossible to the omnipotency and almighty power of God in all
creature of heaven, of earth and of hell. J vvald esteim according to my
judgment this man not only blasphemouse, and detestable cvvrs, bot also ather
to the exemple of Nadab and Abiu vvorthie to be condemned by the fire coming
from God, or according to the perdition and destruction of Dathan and Abiron
being received be the opening of the earth vvorthie to be quick thrust down to
hell. Shall our Master and Lord have no strenth except that whilk he receaues
from the instruments he imployeth? shall the weacknes of the instrument hald
bak his will? Quam potens in faciendo de nthilo, tam facilis in Idem. ibid.
perficiendo de facto. He is als facile and easy in perfecting any thing
maid, as he is mighty in making any thing of noght. there can be no weack
instrument in so mighty an hand. Potest ergo omnia (sayis the same Orosius) in
homine qui vtique potest omnia. He may then do all thing in man, wha may do
all things. I will therefore follow the kirk with full confidence: I shall have an
good guyd, seeing God hes commanded me so to do. It will be hard to persuade me
that the contrary should be done, except they may schaw that ather they are
maire wise then God, in taking an other guyd; or that he heth given ws that
command to deceive ws; whereof nather can be true. He is a God of wisdom and
truth. he hes promised to gowerne his kirk in all truth, If she err the
shame redou^deth to her head and spouse JESUS CHRIST, wha is her guyd,
redeemer, groundston, and Maisson, wha promised to buld her upon an rock, and
that the gettes of hell should not preuail againes her. what reproach should it be
to his wisdom or power, if he culd not, or wald not keip her from error,
according to his promise? But he knew not perchance, when he maid this promise,
what power he haid: their new Lords haid not as yet limitat the merches of his
might: their brief of perambulation was not put, as yet, in execution. or shall
we say Immensa est sinemque potentia coeli non habet, quicquid superi voluere
peractu^ est? Promisit quiae voluit, seruauit quia potuit. He promest because
he vvald, he keiped it, because he might. and in truth if this plight ancre of
the kirk war lost, how shall we be assured of the verity? where shall we seik
it? at their hands perchance, wha assures ws that the heal Catholic kirk may
err, because they are but men. If they be Gods, or may schaw ws any special
privilege, where by they are exemtpted from the general ruell of error, to the
whilk al men without exception (according to their judgment, notwithstanding
Gods promise) ar subject, it is reason we should hear them, obey, and follow
them, because of their special prerogative above all others. But whasoeuer
says that al men ar subject to error and falls opinions, tyneth his credit in
all other things having obtained credit in that. yea being a man as others, why
may he not be deceived in that, als weal as in the rest? And doubtless he is
deceived, if he think his maxim of error to have place in the kirk of God,
where he is rueller and gowernour him self. Wha can keip any thing weal, if it
be so unsure whilk he hes takin in his awin keipping? Farther the certain and
infallible constancy of the kirk in matters of faith may best be sein in the
grounds and moyens she uses in teaching and guyding ws. It is may certain
that the wark depends on the workar, the effect on the cause, and the end on
the chief beginnig. Where the Author, workar, cause, fondament, and original
beginning ar necessaire all togidder and unchangeable, the wark, effect, and end
most be of the same nature and condition: Now seeing the kirk hes for internal
author, mouer, cause, and beginning, the father, the son, and holy ghaist
spirit of verity and truth, wha hes assisted assists, and will assist her to
the end of the world, why shall not her doctrine, and she her self be without
error or falt because of her good guyd? for faith whilk surpasses al natural
and humain reason can have no sure ground but by the revelation of God in his
kirk. This assurance may be easelie sein in the scriptures; because where it is
spokin of the mission and power whilk our Lord gives to the officers and
magistrates of his house; there also is maid mention of the promises of his
perpetual assistance and presence to his kirk. All power is given to me in
heaven and in earth: going therefore, Matt. 28. 18
teach ye all nations, baptizing them in the nam of the father and of the son
and of the holy ghaist, teaching them to observe all thingis whatsoever I
have commanded you: and behold I am with you al dayis even to the
consummation of the vvarld: As my father hes sent me, 10. 20. 21.
also I send you etc. And I will ask Ion. 14. 16.
the father and he vvil gif you ane other paraclete, that he may abyd with
you for ever. Item. but the paraclete the holy spirit, whom the father vvil
send in my name, he vil teach you all things, whatsoever I say unto you. And
in an other place he prays for his kirk. For them do I pray etc. Sanctify
Ion. 16 13. 14. 26.
them in truth etc. as thou did send me in the vvarld, I have also sent them
in the vvarld. The hail place is to be red for it makes to the propose. Now if
nather his promeises does oblish him, nor his prayer have any place for the
stabilitie of the verity in his kirk, how can it be true that S. Paul says.
And he gave some Apostles and some prophets, and other some Evangelists Ephesians.
4. 11.
and other some pastors, and doctors to the consommation of the sanctes unto
the vvark of the ministry, unto the edification of the body of Christ until
we meit all into the unity of faith. Where it is plainly said that our Lord
hes established Ecclesiastical persons for the perfection of his elect in
conseruing the^ from the maliciouse craft of Satan, that they be not deceived
by error, nor carried away with every wind of doctrine; whilk can not be
eschewed, unless the doctrine of the kirk be without error. We see the people
of every contray does embrace the religion of their true or falls pastors: so
except the pastors have some certain ruel and guyd mair then human, without
doubt their inco^stant doctrine shall make a flock inconstant. Ye ar the salt of
the earth, Matt. 5. 13.
ye ar the light of the vvarld etc. Ye have not choisen me, but I have choisen
you, Io. 15. 16.
and appointed you that ye go and bring forth fruct and that your fruct,
remain: Whilk things war said to the Apostles as representing the kirk,
because they war the first fondaments thereof, laid by JESUS CHRIST him self
being yet on earth.

The words of God hes yet their Genesis 1. 28.
force: crescite and multiplicamini, bring forth fruict and multiply: the
words apperteineth to the posterity, and yet does keip their strenth, whilk
they received in the beginning. If so be in the temporal and corporal
propagation, what shall it be in the spiritual? or shall his liberality be less
toward his kirk? shall she be vnius aeui, of on aage, as says Liuius of Rome
new lib. 1. dec. 1
begoune? Shall we think that so great privilege and so deir coft appertineth
only to the Apostles? there is na appeirence of reason: seeing the promises
contains a perpetual and continual assistence: I have appointed you, that ye
go, and bring forth fruict, and that Ion. 15. 16.
your fruict remain. that whatsoever ye ask of my father in my name he
maygifit you. Wha can doubt but they have desired that, according to his awin
saying, the fruict brought out by them should remain in the kirk: that is that
the verity should remain for ever in the kirk? Should not the spirit of
consolation and verity eternally abyd in the kirk, where as neine of the
Apostles did leif an hondreth years? when they past wp to heaven by their
gloriouse martyrdom as our eldest brethren to enter in their land of eternal
life, whilk our Lord head coft to them with his pretiouse blood: They drew not wp
the ledder after them. The assistence in all verity was given to them as being
necessaire for man's salvation: the necessity remains, why shall not the gift
remain? it was not given to the kirk for the Apostles cause, as apperteining
to them only, but to the Apostles for the kirks cause they being her principal
members: so the principal motive remaining, why shall not the privilege so
necessaire remain? they received it but as members nearest to the head, to be
continued and conuoyed by them to the rest of the body, Sicut vnguentum in
capite, quod descendit Psalm. 133. 2.
in barbam, barbam Aaron, quod descendit in oram vestimenti eius. this sueit
oyll of verity whilk is in the head JESUS CHRIST why shall it not descend unto
the beard of Aaron and to the border of his garment, that is to the Apostles
and their successors to the extreme border of Christ's kirk signified by his
garment? And reason wald or rather Gods infinite mercy, that the successors of
the Apostles should have that same assistence of the holy spirit, because they
have the same place and charge for the perfitti^g of Christ's body, whilk is his
kirk. And therefore they are called his officers and servants. and doutbles it
war agans all good reason to think, that the holy spirit haid gotten only
charge to guide the Apostles, as thought our Savior haid sufferred death for
them only, and not for the kirk in all aages. About the year of our Lord
1525. (sindry sects being risin wp under the color, that the true kirk haid
failled, all the pastoures having erred, and at last having decayed, and
therefore alleging that they war sent by God to teach the verity so many years
vnknaw in to the world) David Georgius an chief of the Anabaptists taking
occasion of that alleged and imaginaire fall of the Catholic kirk, give him
self out for the true Messiah: Among the reasons whilks he used againes the
Lutheriens and other sects, the principal was takin from their newnes, and
from the defection of the kirk, whilk they preached for that same occasion of
their nouueltie; for otherwise they culd not have teached, nor yet bein
ministers, doctors or pastors. If the doctrine of Christ (sayis this
pestilent David Georgius) and of his Apostles was true and perfect, certainly
the kirk that they planted and formed by their doctrine should have remaned, and
dured necessairly, and never have decayed, seeing that Jesus said, that the
gettes of hell should never preuaill aganes her: but now it is manifest and
knavvin to the hail vvarld (according to your avvin common saying) that the
Antichrist hes altogether ouerthravvin the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles,
and the kirk fonded and bulded by them, as may be seine in the papistrie:
vvherfor the doctrine of Christ, and of his Apostles was falls and inperfect.
An blasphemouse conclusion, yet altogether necessaire, if the assumption war
true, whilk sindrie now adayis not only admittes to be true, bot also takes
it for ane ground may certain, whereupon they have bulded their new kirk.
Abyssus abyssum inuocat.

But to refut this perniciouse opinion lat ws see and considder what honorable
titles the kirk hes in the holy scriptures, and how fair promises ar maid by
God of her stabilitie and infallibility: Sho is called the body, the fulness,
the spouse of Jesus Cstrist, the house of the Lord, the pillar and firmament or
ground of truth, boght with his blood, his vvealbeloued, his dovv, his
vvinzard, his inheritance, his kingdom. etc. over fair and speciouse names to
euanish so sone contraire to his bontiful promeises. I will marie the unto
Hose 2. 19
me for ever, yea I vvil marie the unto me in richtiousnes and judgment and
mercy. etc. May I not say heir with S. Aug. Tom. 6. co^cione ad Cath. cap. 22.
Haec est matter vera, pia matter and casta intrinsecus viri sui dignitate
ornata, non forinsecus mendacio fallente turpiter colo. rata. This is the true
mother, godly and chaste mother decked invvardlie with the dignity and
majesty of her husband, not shamefullie colored outwardly with a deceauing
lie. and in deid as the same S. Aug. sayis, In ventre Ecclesiae veritas Tom. 8.
in psalm. 57.
manet: quisquis ab hoc ventre Ecclesiae separatus fuerit, necesse est vt falsa
loquatur, necesse est, inqua^, vt falsa loquatur qui aut concipi noluit, aut
quem conceptu^ matter excussit. Within the belly or bosom of the kirk the
verity remains. whosoever shall be separatted from this bosom of the kitk,
of necessity he man speik lies, of necessity, J say, he man speik lies, wha
ather vvald not be conceived and engendered, or else being conceived, the mother
has cast him out. But if she heth become an harlotte and adultresse, she hes
maid divorce, she hes violat the law of marriage, whilk God haith promised
suldbe keiped in faithfulness. I doubt greatly if they be lauful childring to
God, wha calls their mother a whore, matris adulterio patrem quaerunt: can
any man say mair freely that he is an heretik, nor to say that the kirk he
followis may, and hes erred: she wha abandoneth her self so easelie to every
sutter, can not be a true spouse, she must be an harlotte. Excuse me if I say,
that sic men may be bastards, but the kirk of God will remain a virgin for
ever, by the assistence and diligence of her head and spouse he was born of a
virgin, he will have his me^bres and offspring to have that same honor, their
true and spiritual mother being a virgin, because she is his spouse. God man
have something out of the devils power; he hes Ephesians. 5. 27.
maid to him self a gloriouse kirk not having spot or vvrincle, or any sic
thing: but that she should be holy and vvihout blame. to wit in doctrine. If
God be ouerthravvin in his avvin house, he man be Matt. 12. 29
weackar then the devil, whilk can not be granted, yea not thought, without an
execrable blasphemy. Wherefore I man say with S. Aug. (whom I cite the maire
willingly that sindry of the protestants alleges that he is theirs,
notwithstanding he be their greatest enemy, at lest to their doctrine)
Credimus Ecclesiam Catholicam Tom. 9. de symb. lib. 1 cap. 5.
ipsaest Ecclesia Sancta, Ecclesia vna, Ecclesia vera, Ecclesia Catholica,
contra haereses omnes pugnans: pugnare potest expugnari non potest: haereses
omnes de illa exierunt tanqua^ sarmenta inutilia de vite praecisa: ipsa autem
manet in radice sua, portae inferoru^ non vincent eam. We belief the Catholic
kirk, she is the holy kirk, the only kirk, the true kirk, the Catholic kirk
fighting aganist all heresies, she may fight, but she can not be ouercum, al
heresies ar gone out of her, lyk vuprofitable branches cut of the vynetree.
She (the kirk) does remain in her avvin root: the gettes of hell shall not
overcome her.

Lat ws see the other promises maid to her, by her head and master, whilk ar
so cleir and in so great number, that no man can doubt, except he that will
receive no thing, but that only whilk heth passed by the trial of his
judgment, to whois judgment to stand war tobe without any judgment. God
promised, as I have said now oftymes, Matthew. 16. 18.
that the gettes of hell, that is the power of Satan by error and heresy should
not preuail againes her. hes not Satan preuailled, if he hes caused her err in
teaching and authorizing falls doctrine? S. Aug. says passing weal. Non
insultent haeretici per parts concisi, Tom. 8. in Psalm. 47.
nonse extolla^t, qui dicunt Ecce hic est Christus, ecce illic: Qui dicit ecce
hic est, ecce illic Matthew. 24. 23.
ad parts inducit, vnitate^ promisit Deus. Reges in vnum collecti sunt, non
per schismata dissipati sunt. Sed forte ista ciuitas, quae mundu^ tenuit,
aliquando euertetur? psalm. 47.
absit: Deus fundauit eam in aeternum: Si ergo Deus fundauit eam in aeternum,
quid times? ne cadat firmamentum? Lat not the heretics insult and triumph
being divided in sects, lat not these magnify and praise them selfs, wha
says lo heir is Christ, lo there. Who says lo heir is Christ, lo there, he
induces to factions. God did promise unity and concord. The Kings war
gathered to gether in one; not scattered by division. But perchance this city,
vvhilk haith comprehended and occupied the vvarld, at lenth shall be
ouerthravven? God forbed: God haith founded and established her for ever. if
then he heth founded her for ever, quhat fear ye? least the firmament should
fall? He promised also he should be with her all day is even to the consummation
of the Natt. 28 20
world: if he left her not one day, when should error have occupied her? So
Joan. 14. 16
should the holy spirit tarry with her for ever, and teach her al verity: al
verity and error cannot consist together. The father promised to his eternal
son, the same perpetual verity for his seed. J vvil make this my co^uenent
Isa. 59. 21.
with them says the Lord: My spirit yat is upon the, and my words, quhilk I
have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth
of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of the seed of thy seed, says the Lord from
hence forth even for ever. For his kingdom shall Luc. 1. 33.
have no end. So says Daniel of his dominatio^, whilk shall be throch al, and
cap. 7. 14 and 27.
for ever. And Micha says als far. cap. 4. 7.
Now behold the amplitude greatness and authority. I shall gif thee the heathen
for thyn inheritance, and the endis of the psalm. 2. 8.
earth for thy possession. In an other place al nations, whom thou hes maid,
shall come and vvorshipe befoir the o Lord and psalm. 85. 9.
shall glorify thy name. Isaias says: In the last day is shall be prepared the
montaine 2. 2.
of the house of the Lord in the top of the montaines, and shall be exalted
above the hills, and all nations shall flow to it. Not only Isaias, but also
the other prophets say is the same. Mairouer the sins of the childrine shall
not takaway his inheritance of verity among the Christians: King David
assures ws: his seed vvil I make psalm. 88. 29.
endure for ever, and his throne as the dayis of the heaven. But if his
cheldren leif my law, and walk not in my judgments, if they brak my statutes
and keipe not my commandment; then vvil I visit their iniquities with a rod
and their sins with strockes; yet my mercy will I not tak from him; nor
offend in my truth: my conuenant will I not brack. etc. Ye see that God will
keip his sons heritage notwithstanding of man's iniquity.

But they wha approuueth not this stabilitie and constancy of the kirk,
answers that she failleth not, als la^g as she hears the voice and obeys
the commandment of her spouse JESUS CHRIST, and is guyded by the holy spirit,
following the word of God, whilk is perpetually joined with the holy spirit;
But if she leif the word and obey not her spouse, she may fail and err. What
is this other to say, then that the kirk can not fail nor err at all. For we
have schawin alreddie that there can be no sic separation, nor disobedience:
wherwpon we have concludid the certain and perpetual verity of the kirk, in
respect of the perpetual and assured asistance of JESUS CHRIST and of his holy
spirit in all verity: for if she war without her head and governor she culd
no maire be a kirk. In whilk case they might rather say she war decayed and
dead nor erred and failled. but nather of their can be true as we have schawin
by evident places of the scriptures. We man think that our Lord hes bulded her
upon a rock, as it becomes his wisdom, and Matt. 7. 24
not upon the sandis, as fools do who is houses can not stand because the
ground is not sure.

As to the promises, whilk some men pretendes to be conditionally maid to the
kirk, because some promises ar of that nature: they man understand that sic
promises touches only the particulaire, if they remain in the kirk, if they
follow the Lords commandment. God says to Moses Ecce estlocus apud me, and
stabis supra petram. Exodus 33. 21
Be hold there is a place by me, and thou shall stand upon the rock: On this
rock the kirk is bulded, she man be stabill: She is the Lords inheritance
gifin to him by God his father without any condition: whilk may be schawin by
great number of places of the scriptures. It depends not upon men's virtue or
wice, strenth or weacknes, folly or wisdom: he hes tak in the keipping of his
awin right in his a win hand: he will not be spoiled Matt. 12. 29
by a mightier, because there is Mar. 3. 27.
neine mightier: if it haid depended upon our worthiness, I doubt if Christ
Jesus should have haid any kirk at all: we man cleime to his infinite mercy,
goodness, and extreime love, by the whilk he hes promised not to abando^ne his
kirk: not to suffer her to go wrang: his grace is a sufficient beild againes al
storms, and an sure ancre in all danger. he will cair for nothing in this
world, if he be cairles of his wealbeloued spouse, who is his dow Can. 2. 7. 6.
8.
his perfect and undefiled.

The ark of Noe was not surmonted by the flood; it was ay hier then the water
of the flood, whilk notwithstanding was hier then all the rest of the things
upon earth. Men, towns, hills, montaines war lawer then the water, whilk yet
acknawledgeth the Ark to be above it: for it drouneth the rest, but lifts wp
the Ark. quia dominus supposuit manu^: Because psa. 37. 23
the Lord did put his hand under it: and what culd surmont it, whilk was
sustained by the mighty hand of the Lord? This was without any condition: but
who war to be sauued, it behooved them to be therein: to the^ the promise was
conditional. The Ark, if it haid not haid the special assistence of God, haid
beine ouerthrawin as the rest, wha wanted that safegarde and protection.

The verity of that figure is given to Christ our savior without any
limitation or condition: but to the particulaires, if they be there the water
whilk out of the ark was mortal and deadly, within scrueth for life. So may we
say of the kirk, sola est, quae Aug. to. 10 de temp. serui. 181.
intra se positos validae caritatis compage custodit; vnde and aqua diluuij
arcam quidem ad sublimiora sustulit, omnes autem quos extra arcam inuenit,
extinxit. It is she only who keipeth with a mighty band those quha ar
vithin her: quhereby the vatter of the deluge carried vvp the ark on hight, but
quhosoeuer it fand with out the ark, it destroyed. Why shall not arca Ecclesiae
superior esse omnibus vndis and fluctibus erroris? No thing can be in danger
that co^stantlie remains in the Lords keipping, how weack soever it be of it
self, having strenth of it keipper.

But they will say perchance that all their promises and prerogatives ar ather to
the kirk invisible, or for the revelation of the holy spirit maid to every
man in particulaire, whereby they are gowerned and called his. Lat ws see, or
rather lat ws consider (seeing it can not be sein) this invisible kirk. I pray
you reid the places cited before, and ye will see that the promises ar maid to a
visible company. The salt of the earth, the light of the world. Sic lyk a
city set upon a montaine. a candle set upon a candlestick: wha hears the
kirk, hears God. wha contemns her, contemns God: wha will not heir, nor
obey the kirk should be to ws as an exco^municat person. She is signifiet by
the Ark of Noe, by the children of Israel in the desert, by the wynzard, by S.
Peter's bark, by a montaine, by the nets cassin in the sea, by a pillar. etc.
what is here invisible, or rather what can be visible to him wha sees not these
things? he hes mister of a medicin, and not of reasons, wha can not see a bark
and nets, an Ark of three hondreth cubits lang, a vynzard, a city, a candle
upon an candilstik, a montaine, a pillar, fyf or sex hondreth thousand
persons to gidder. what remeid for so desperata blindness? in so wolful a
seiknes? Iubeas miserum esse libenter. He man perish in his awin blindness, wha
will not oppen his eyes. How can we acknawledge or obey this invisible judge?
Where shall we find her? nusqua^est si nusquam videtur, cum non sit incorporea:
how can we be joined with her? and out of her bosom there is no salvation. The
kirk haid charg to teach al nations and baptiz the^. I think it shall be als
difficil to hear as to see invisible doctors, except we will receive the auld
brounies for pastors. Shall we belief that the kirk of God hes never beine
seine, because the doctrine teached now in sindrie places was never hard
before, the doctors thereof not being as yet borne? If the kirk was ever
visible, it was that she might be know in and so followed. Whil their men come
she was hid, now she is know in. why hes she changed nature? is it to deceive
ws? God forbid: shall we give the cause won to the Anabaptists with their
foolish and new invented synagoge? Whilk doubtless man be received according to
this opinion, or if it be received in others, why shall it not be received in
them? If they haid yet remained invisible, they haid beine more worthy of
credet. But what? any thing is good enouch to these fantastical spirits.
Notus in Judea Deus, know in but in his kirk, and by psalm. 75 1.
his kirk, seeing she is the pillar of verity and trompet of his holy name.
It is she wha hes discouuered, assaulted and condemned, yea and at last
destroyed all herisies in every aage, not by inuisibilitie, but by visible
presence, in general concels, by daily preaching and teaching of her doctors
and pastors, and souueraine decreits of her ministerial head. If there be
neine of their things true, the kirk man be only an vain fantastical
imagination forged to abuse men, lyk to the philosophical stonne, where foolish
men imployeth their life, mind and moyens to find right noght at last. Quid
amplius (says S. To. 9. in Epi. Ion. tract. 2.
Augustine) dicturus sum quam caecos qui tam magnum montem non vident? qui
contra lucernam in candelabro positam oculos Ibid. tract. 1.
claudunt, What shall I say farther but that they are blind wha sees not so
great a montaine? wha closseth their eyes over againist the candle put on the
candlestik. And in an other place. Ecce mons implens vniuersam faciem terrae.
Ecce ciuitas de qua dictum est: non potest Daniel 2. 35
ciuitas abscondi super montem constituta. Matthew. 5. 14.
Illi autem offendunt in montem, and cum eis dicitur, ascendite, non est mons,
dicunt: facilius illuc faciem impingunt, quam illic habitaculu^ quaerunt.
Behold the montaine filling the face of the whole earth. behold the city of
vvhilk it is said: a city set one an hill can not be hid. They (to wit the
heretik is) do strik them selfs againest the hill. and when it is said to them,
go vvp, they say, it is not the hill. They do more willingly dash their face
against that hill, nor seik an dwelling there. I must say with To. 8. psalm. 56.
the same S. Augustine. O haeretica insania, quod non vides, credis mecu^: quod
vides negas credis mecum Christum exaltatum super coelos, quod non vidimus; and
negas gloriam eius super omnem terram, quod videmus. O heretical frovvardnes,
and obstinate maddenesse, thou beleifis vith me that thou sees not; thou
denies that quhilk thou sees, Thou beleifis vith me that Christ is exalted
above the heavens, quhilk we have not seine: and thou denies his glory to be
upon all the earth, vvhilk we see. And if I be not abused the persecutions
(whilk continued almost from Christ's days to Constantin the greats aage,
althoght not in all place and with lyk cruelty, where many thousand martyrs did
bestow their lyfis) war agains the visible kirk of that aage: for if this new
invisible kirk haid beine in tho is days, she haid conserved al her members
from danger by moyen of her inuisibilitie: And in deed al sic men eschapped the
tyra^nie of the may cruel Emprioures by that ring Gyges. or rather because
Plato 10 de repub.
neine of these invisible men as yet war forged. Shall the kirk of God have no
other refuge in persecutions (whidder they come of tyra^nes, or of heretics
oppugning the verity) but to flee to the darkness of inuisibilitie (maire fit
for the me^bres of Satan prince of darkness, then for the members of JESUS
CHRIST author of light) as sepia to her blak blood or ink? God forbed. If they
answer that they understand by the invisible kirk, the elect, wha because they are knawin only to God ar called invisible. I answer that the same argument
makes the confession of faith ar. 17. insered in the act of parliament halden
the 1567. prented 1568. and 1597.
the condemned persons als weil to be invisible, seeing they are knawin to God
only in that quality, so all the world salbe invisible. Secundly seeing that I
am oblished to join my self with the true kirk only: how shall I know her not
being God? I say only that we fand als la^g as they did regne, a visibel, at
leest sensible, and may cruel persecution agains sic as culd not com out of
the contray: for they war constrained to subscribe and sweir that the present
religion was good, albeit in their conscience they knew and war persuaded to
the co^traire: whilk persecution was so cruel that the death it self haid bein
mair tolerable: yea I persuad my self that if the Ministers wald have proceeded
by way of death agains the Catholics, that they should not have won so meikil
agains the^ as they did then, by an extreme necessity to whilk they pat them.
But to return to their inuisibilitie: we are seiking a kirk to guyd ws, she
was invisible before our days (and now we have so many kirks visible that we
know not whilk to choice) why so lang invisible, and why now sein? invisible
when she might have bein knawin, because there was but few; and now visible
when the great number makes her uncertain to ws. Their dark questions
requiteth a new Oedipus to solue them. I say that absolutely she man be kuawin
to ws, and not to God only: God of his infinite mercy, and goodness, hes and will
co^municat to ws his knawledge so far as it is necessaire for our salvation:
but it is altogether necessaire (if any thing be altogether necessaire for ws)
to know the true kirk, seeing she is the only house where God is surely to be
found, truly served, deulie obeyed and eternal life mercifully obtained, as
is sufficiently prouen before. If I should promise a thousand pound to any man,
and after send him to an invisible thesaurer to be paid, should he not have just
occasion to think me an abuser? God hes promised truly to his son by the
mouth of David that his seed shall remain for ever, and psalm. 88. 36.
his throne shall be as the sun before him, and lyk to the moune perfect for
ever: if the sun and the moune, when they are in there great clearnes, be
invisible I understand no thing. The kirk never hes beine obscured so far by
persecutions, but she might be kanwin besides the miserable blindness of the
Jews and Gentiles, and maliciouse obstinacy of heretics, or factiouse
separation of schismatiks. What? will they make the enemies of God to be easelie
seine and found, where his servants and friends dar not schaw them selfis? then
God man hyd and keip close his friends for fear that Satan spoille him. he
shall have only sic as he may steal without the devils knawledge by moyen of
the inuisibilitie, changed now in a visibilitie by virtue of an act of
parliament halden at Edenbrugh without a vow, in the Queens M. absence the
year of God 1560. ratified by an parliament of lyk force in his Majesty's
minority 1567. But I pass this nec veterum memini, laetorue malorum. The
devil should feght agains the members of the kirk, but should not preuail, because
the victory should be theirs, and they for their victory should be crouned, whilk
can not be without battle. Nam qui certat in agone, non coronatur nisi legitime
certauerit. And if any 2. Tim. 2. s
man strive for a maisterie, he is not crouned except he stryu^^ as he aught to
do. And Sanct Paul says of him self, Bonum 2. Tim. 4. 7.
certamen certaui, cursum consummaui, fide^ seruaui: in reliquo reposita est
mihi corona institiae, quam reddet mihi Dominus in die illa iustus index etc. I
have fought a good fight, I have consumate my course, I have keipt the faith.
Concerning the rest, there is laid up for me a crown of justice, vvhilk the
Lord will render to me in the last day a just judge.

If any think her invisible because she can not be seine all at one time, but
only in her parts: by that same reason they may think hills and mo^taines
invisible, yea the haill world invisible, or rather no thing in the world tobe
visible, nather man nor beist, nor other thing, great nor small; because no
thing can be seine al at one instant, one part cutting away the sight of an
other, as may be sein by daily experience.

As to them wha thinks that all Gods promises appertieneth to the
particulaires, whom he assists by a secret and particulaire inspiration and
fortifieth by an interne and inward consolation; wherefore the holy spirit is
called the spirit of consolation: we have refuted them before, and if this
opinion war true, as it is not, it wald confirm and strengthen our sentence:
For if the spirit of verity be given to every man in particulaire, meikil
maire to all together. So the kirk having the spirit in so great abondance culd
not err. And doubtless natural reason will co^straine ws to think that if the
particulaire can not err (whilk man be if every man be assisted with the holy
spirit according to Gods solemn promises) the pastors of the kirk should les be
subject to error, because of their office, seeing that the charge is given to
them to teach and and guyd the faithful that they be Ephesians. 4. 14.
not haid away with every wind of doctrine, except they will say that pastors
be altogether vnneidful, seeing that the halie spirit hes takin the office upon
him to guyd every an in particulaire, or that the particulaire men heth the
holy spirit in all abonda^ce whilk is denied to the pastors, who for that
cause may err, whereas the particulaire is assured; an opinion ridiculouse and
pernisiouse, althoght it be embraced by many now adayis. But this opinion of
private inspiratio^ is false, because our Lord (to whom all appertineth by the
gift of his father) maid these promises to the Apostles when he sent them as
masters gowernours and pastors of his kirk, to preach and teach throughout
the hail world. and therefore it was for the publik charge duty and utility of
the kirk universal. In omnem terram exiuit sonus eorum, and infines orbis
terrae psalm. 18. 5. To. 10. 18.
verba eorum. Mairouer this opinion, is absurd, for if every man hes the haly
spirit, in sic abondance, no man culderre, but wald say the treuth in althing
is (I mein in mattres of faith) yea no man culd have need of a master or
pastor, (as said is) every one being may sufficiently instrucked by the
holy spirit, wha can not err. upon these vain imaginations the Anabaptists
hes bulded their foolies. Nevertheless it man not be thought that we deny that
the holy spirit does assist the particulaires: For he assisteth them in deed
with his grace, whereby they are moved to obey consent and believe the doctrine of
the kirk, and to keep the unity required therein, but not to command guyd and
gowerne, whilk appertineth only to the pastors, as said is.

Rests yet two objections againes the stabilitie of the kirk in all verity.
The first is, that the particulaire kirk may err, whilk may be schawen by
many exemples: and therefore the kirk catholic and universal may err. The
second is, that the kirk Catholic is represented by a general concel: but the
general concel may err, and hes erred: Then the catholic and universal kirk
may err. To confirm the first objection they collect againes the Jews kirk
the faultis committed from the beginning of the world to our Lords time: to
the whilk albeet it be easy to answer, yet because it is not our question, wha
ar speeking of the Christian kirk, I will pass it for the present, as making no
thing agans ws. I say only that they sal not be habil to schaw any error in
the Jews kirk approuued by publik consent. For the sentence of death pronunced
by Caiphas aganes our Lord was nawayeserroniouse of it self, (if we wald lay
asyd the wicked mind wherfra it proceeded) seeing it was according to our
Masters will (qui passus est, quiae voluit) and Gods awen decreit of his
infinite mercy and love toward mankind. And S. Iohne approves it as coming of
the holy spirit, wha prophesied by the mouth of an wicked man. The words of the
Euangelest ar their: But one of them named Caiphas, Io. 11. 49.
being the high priest of that year, said to them, you knavv nothing, nather
do you consider that it is expedient for vvs that one man die for the poeple,
and the vvholl nation perish not. And this he said not of him self, but being
high priest of that year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for the nation,
and not only for the nation, but gather into one the children of God, that war
despersed. whereby we may understand the quality of the decreit,
notwithstanding the wickedness of the instrument. God blisseth his people by
Balaams mouth: but this is maire solemn, Nom. 23.
seeing that JESUS CHRIST is put in possession of his inheritance by the
sentence and decreit of the synagoge pronunced by Caiphas at that time high
priest, Christ being declaired to be he, wha was to redeame the world with his
death, by the whilk the sacrifice of Aaron was to tak end, the synagoge having
resigned oueral right to the true heir, and that by a general consent, to the
Jews greatter and inexcusable condemnation.

As to the rest of the argument it follows not. The particulaire may err,
ergo the general may err: For the parts (whilk ar as it war particulaires) of
the elements do perish every day, the elements notwithstanding does remain,
yea and recouuer at one syd, what they loss at the other: for it is impossible
that the hail elements can perish all at one time, I meine naturally.

So we see men die every day and that in great number at some times, yet
because there comes others in their place, man can not perish altogether,
because God hes blissed him, and all leuing things by these words Crescite and
multiplicamini. Arist. wald have answered homo non moritur, sed hic homo. And
whilk is maire, as man in particulaire remaining man, that is, retening the
nature and proprieties of man, can not die (for if he die he cesseth to be man)
so the particulaire kirk remaining kirk, that is remaining in the doctrine,
union, and communion of the Catholic kirk, can not err: for if she fall in
error of doctrine generally received and approved, outdrawing her self from
the holy Catholic kirk, she is no maire kirk, but as a dead body possessed by
schism and heresy. But if she remain in obedience and union with the
Catholic kirk, albeet she be assaulted with any seiknes, or troubled with
any wound of error, yet by the life, strenth, and health of the hail body of
the Catholic kirk, she may recouuer her health. Even as we see the finger
being cut of the body, the interne and inward form being lost, it losseth the
nature of a finger, althoght the material part remains as before: But
remaining joined and unite with the body, notwithstanding any infirmity or
wound, it may be cured and hailled, by reason of the life and health of the rest
of the body with the whilk it is conjoined. A green tree by violence of
stormy wind, frost or season of year may tyne the leefis, or branches some
time, whilk the spring or space of tym will bring again: but if the stok be
rotten or drawn out of the ground, there is no hoppe of leefis, meakelles of
branches. he most plant an other tree, wha wald see leesis or branches there
again: whilk experience can not be soght in the kirk: For JESUS CHRIST will
plant no other; and I know not wha culd tak the charge in his place. for it
hehoued him to do better then our Lord hes do^ne before him, where by the
promises maid to the perpetual kirk might ons be accomplished, seeing that
Christ's kirk hes failled by interruption, as they say: whilk cannot be,
notwithstanding the faill of some parts, prouyding the parties noble keip
their integrity: but they being lost, there is no moyen to set wp again that
kirk; they may perchance set wp an other, if they have received that power.
And this far for the first objection.

As to the second we receive the proposition as good and true, if they
understand a general concel laufully called, halden, concluded, and confirmed:
for doubtlessic a concel represents the Catholic and universal kirk, whilk we
belief can not err: but that sic concels heserred or culd err, we deny
plainly. Yet to prove their saying, they allege that the co^cels ar co^traire
one to an other, whilk cannot be but error of one, or both the parties. And
farther, concels hes corrected concels, as says S. Aug. but correction (say
they) presupponeth error: for the proof of the first they bring exemples at
her of particulaire and prouincial synods agains general concels; or
conuenticuls of heretics agains a general, or else concels suspect and disawoued
agains a lauful and general: Wherefore that proves nothing againes ws, no maire,
then makes againist the authority of a lauful parliament (si parua licet
componere magnis) the co^uentions halden in diverse schyres being one aganist an
other, or any of them agains an just and lauful parliament; or yet a
seditiouse assembly of rebelliouse persons rising agains their laufull
prince; or agains a parliament of the haill estaites called, halden, concluded,
and confirmed by the free authority of a just and lauful prince in his
maioritie. There can not be any co^tradiction in a kings or co^moune Weatlh
edicts, or acts, for correcting, or agreing together the opinions of
particulaire towns or schyrs, or for condemning of rebels, and their famous
libelles: or by improuing of acts never approved by his forfathers; yea nor
for changing of anything of policy in a better form being admonist by good
experience, althoght it haid bein otherwise ordonat by a parliament before;
provyding the mattres of them self war indifferent. Where it is to be notted
first, that we speck here of general co^cels, and not of particulaires, whilk
as they may err, so aught they to be corrected by the generals (as meineth S.
Augustine aganist the Donatists) if there be any thing wrang. Secondly it is
to be notted, that this disput should be takin of things appertining and
concerning the substance of the faith, where there can be no changing or
variety, meakelles contrariety: for it that is ons verity remains ay
verity, because the verity is but one, whilk may be maid maire clear and
plain, not changed in the contraire. But things appertining to manners, civil
discipline, commoune policy, and ceremonies, because they touch oftentimes but
singulaire men's actions, or certain contrayes and persons, or else ar maid by
reason of the tym; not only may they be changed, the circumstances being takin
away, but some tym of necessity man be changed, except men wilfully wuld tyn
all: of whilk things S. Aug. may be understa^d: for it is certain he culd not
understand of mattres of faith, seeing in his days there was but tw a general
concels halden (except ye will count the co^cel halden by the Apostles at
Jerusalem for one) the first of Nice, and the first of Constantinople, whilk
with one consent ar estimed to be without error, and so culd not receive
correction the an, from the other. Thridlie it is to be notted that we
understand the only conclusions, whilk ar takin in the general co^cels, and not
al things whilk ar do^ne or said during the time the concels haldeth, as in
disputes and conference; whilk things proceeds of men, and may therefore be
conjoined with error: and so can serve for na argument agains our sentence.
Althoght the matter requires an maire ample discourse (if our intention haid
bein to expone this subject at lenth) yet this may serve for the present.

But or I pass farther I wald pray you not to mistak me in my former discourse
(for I see many mistaken in the same matter) as if I wald thrust down, and
tread under foot, or diminish the authority of the holy scriptures, by having
recourse to the kirk in seiking the true sense of the^: we acknawlege them
both in equal dignity, verity and certainty, because they are both of the
holy spirit, having their virtue and force of him, as the Ambassador and
Ambassede or commission of the King or prince wha sends them. The an
derogateth no thing to the other: for if there be any thing obscure in the
commission, why may we not ask the Ambassadors judgment without any prejudice
of his commission? or rather as appertining to him, why shall we not ask his
judgment? for the lettres often times ar very schorte co^tining sommerlie the
matter, who is maire ample declaration is referred to the Ambassador, wha for
that cause is sent with lettres of credit, he otherwise not being necessaire,
because the lettres might do all, except they might not authoriz them selfs.

The kirk is Gods Ambassador sent to declaire his will, having the scriptures
for lettres of commission and credet, and that in may ample for me; as we
have schawen before: why shall not her voice be hard before al others in
declairing the true meaning of her commission? shall I ask at any other why
she was sent? The kirk and the scriptures ar two lauful sisters of one father,
none of the^ should be cassin out, Alterius sic poscit ope^res and co^iurat
amice. Therefore Sanct Augustine says, To. 7. con. Cresc. lib. 1 cap. 33.
that we keip the verity of the scriptures, when we do that whilk is approved
by the hail kirk, whom we see so weal reco^mended to ws by the authority of
the same scriptures, as that whilk can not deceive ws, because it is the holy
writ. So without any preference we prove the scriptures by the kirk, and by
her also the true sense of them, as the commission and the intelligence thereof,
is authorized by the Ambassador.

JESUS CHRIST proved him self to be the true Messiah promissed to the Jews,
and that by the prophets and law: because all things war compleet in him, that
war forespokin by them to be in the true Messiah. The same was done by the
Apostles and is done now every day agains the Jews: yet it is not to be
concluded that the prophets and law ar preferred to our Lord. It is enough
that the witness be of sufficient credet and authority with the parties. If any
man refuse this dignity to the kirk, I will pray him pardon me, if I say he
does that whilk Satan desires may: for he laboreth to tak away the three
thing is whilk only does assure ws of our Master and Lord JESUS CHRIST, to
wit, the kirk, scriptures and miracles: whilk may be easelie seine: for the
kirk being estimed a liar, and worthy of na credet, what can be thought of the
scriptures and miracles, whilk we know by the kirk only: but if the kirk be (as
she should) of sufficient authority with all true chistia^s, thois things can
not be called in doubt. And why should not her deposition be hard, or rather her
judgment received, in whatsomeuer matter of religion, as a thing appertining
justly to her, and whilk she may better know then any other, by reason of the
strait alliance betwixt her head and spouse JESUS CHIRST and her? Shall every
man know the will of the Lord, and sense of his commandments, and his dear
spouse only shall be ignorant? Then in vain heth he kissed her with the kiss
of Can. 1. 1.
his mouth: in vain heth he put his left hand under her head, and with his
right hand in vain heth he embraced her. in vain heth he brought her in 2. 6.
his chalmers, if any man hes greatter privilege then she; whilk must be, if
every man should tak that, whilk he think is good and true, and not that whilk
the kirk thinks and declares good and true. And in very deed, neane of these
new factiouse sects can have credet till they have persnaded their auditors
that the spouse of our Lord is an unworthy lear. O blasphemouse toungis, and
foolish hearars, wha so rashly gives credet, to an thing of it self so
incredible, and so pernisiouse when it is received. Christ commands ws to
hear the kirk, Knox and Calvin forbeddeth ws, and will, we follow only the
scriptures, that is, theirs or out awin judgment. Should it be doubted to whom
we should here obey? I man on force receive the judge ordonat by the prince, and
not to constitute my self, or any other in that place, for that war a crime of
laesmaiestie, and worthy of a may severe punition to serve for exemple to
other presumptiouse persons.

Now if we should prefer the kirk to the sctiptures (whilk we do not, althoght
we prefer her to private men's interpretation forged now of new, whilk when we
contemn and reject, they deceptfully allege ws to misprise the scriptures)
wha culd justly be offended with ws, seeing she is the spouse of our Lord and
Master, and the scriptures the contract of marriage betwixt them? wha doubts
but the spouse is to be preferred to the contract of marriage? Mairouer the
scriptures at maid for the kirk, and not the kirk for the scriptures: The
sabbath was maid for man, and not man for Marc. 2. 27
the sabbath, says the Lord. And also the kirk was before the scriptures, and
shall be after them. for the kirk triompha^t shall have no neid of these memories
and directions, having the plenitude of al knawledge and verity in the
conte^plation of him, in whom can be no ignorance, in cuius lumine videbimus
lumen: satiabimur enim cum apparuerit eius gloria. And last of al, our Master
and Lord died for the kirk, and not for the scriptures: the price should make the
matter maire preciouse. Wherefore she man have some prerogative, seeing she
laiketh nothing that the scriptures hes, and heth many things whilk nowayes
can be attribute to the scriptures? here I may say with S. Augustine Me piget
eam To. de vnitate Eccles. cap. 10.
(Ecclesiam) commendare Verbis meis, and haereticos non pudet eam oppugnare
verbis suis. I am in pain to praise her (to wit the kirk) by my Words: and
heretics are not ashamed to assault her with their words. But it may be asked
seeing it is so, to what end serves the scriptures? suffer me to use a
familiare exemple to declaire, and expone a difficill and obscure matter: we
see by daily experience the blind (notwithstanding he have a guyd, on whom he
depends and in whom he trusts) seek for a staff by moyen of his guyd,
whereby he may be maire habill to follow him over high montaines and rocks,
rivers and myres, save him self from stokes and stonnes in the way, and
precepices or heughes besides the way, and defend him self from bytting of
dogs where he shall pass. The kirk (wha not ans in the scriptures is compared
to the moune, and to a body) of her self blind, having the light and sight of
her sun and head JESUS CHRIST, hes for her guyd the holy spirit, by whois
moyen she hes the staff of the scriptures, whereby she in following hit guyd
and leader surmonteth maire easelie the high montaines of spiritual and
supernatural difficulties, and rocks of natural subtilities, passes over the
deape rivers of tribulation and persecution, and myres of vice, saves her self
from stomling stocks and stonnes of this present life, and precipices of
schism and heresy, not standing to go the straght way for the sclandrous
townges of the one or the other. This is done to hald ws in exercice of al
virtuous humility and good actions: God does nothing without good and just
reason: Sed qui scrutator est maiestatis opprimetur a gloria. This staff whilk
our mother hes received of her guyd should nather be violently nor craftelie
taken from her, to abuse or beat her* it is good in her hand, to whois use it
was prepared; It is violence and spoliation, if it be found any other where: It
appertineth only to her and hirs: as given for her service. Other men hes no
part by just title.

And to conclud this disput of perpetual verity in the kirk (for that is my
principal motive to seak to the kirk) it can not be thought with good reason
that God hes suffered his kirk and wealbeloued spouse, to whom he hes maid so
many great and notable promises, given so high titils, and honored with the
marriage and death of his only son, hes suffered (I say) his kirk to perish
in her chyldhead and first age, for laik to have continued in her the life of
vetitie, whilk hes beine lossed ay since the Apostles days, if we will believe
some men. Shall we not rather think that God is merciful without repentence, and
constant in his liberal promises; and that sic pestilent opinions ar invented
only by presumptiouse brains, who is vain imaginations culd have no place if
the kirk keippeth her authority, whilk they wald glaidlie ouerthraw to
establesh and authoriz their nowelties, by the whilk, they wald have ws believe
that God is a lear: For what is it other to call and think God a lear, then to
say that nather is it, nor can it be true, whilk he hes said and promised. S.
Augustine disputane aganist the Donatists of the greatness and amplitude of the
kirk, makes almaist the lyk conclusion. Quasi aliud sit prophetiam crimine
falsitatis arguere, quam de vnitate Ecclesiae c 9. Tom. 7.
dicere quae prnunciauit non posse co^pleri: hoc est enim dicere, non esse
prophetiam, sed pseudoprophetiam. As if it war an other thing to accuse the
prophecy of falshed then to say that, that vvhilk it haid forespoken culd not
becompleit: for that war als metkel as to say that it war not a prophecy,
but a falls prophecy, or lee.

Because I have maid mention now sindry times of S. Augustine, and some other
ancient writars, and wald be over prolixt, if I should citte all the places whilk
may be propre here, I will pray the learned reader tak the pains to see and
read diligently S. Augustine de vtilitate credendi ad Honoratum, and de vnitate
Ecclesiae contra Petiliani Donatistae epistolam. and Tertulian de
praescriptionibus aduersus haereticos. to their may be adjoined S. Cyprian de
vnitate Ecclesiae, and Vincentius Lirinensis aduersus prophanas nouitates.

I know sindry wald be glaid to read these buikes wha can not have them; to who
is just desyr I wald willingly satisfy, if I haid the moyen. In the mein
time, if I shall gather out some proprieties, whilk the ancients hes notted in
the true kirk, and pastors, and also falls kirk and falls pastors, no man
justly can be offended.

1 Antiquitas. 1 Nouitas. 2 Vnitas 2 Schismata. 3 Consensus and concordia. 3
Dissensio ac discordia. 4 Multitudo ide^ sentientiu^ 4 Paucitas idem
sentientiu^ 5 Amplitudo per orbe^ ter tatum. 5 Angustia in angulis. 6 Maiorum
reuerentia 6 Maiorum, etiam suorum contemptus. 7 Majestas etia^ regibus ipsis
venetanda and culta. 7 obscuritas, vicinis vix cognita, suis neglecta. 8
Pastorum succes^io. 8 Sibisuccedere and in se desinere 9 Perpetuitas. 9 Nupera
origo. 10 Visibilitas 10 Inuisibilitas. 11 Veriras. 11 Error. 12 Constantia in
eadem patr^mque doctrina. 12 Inconstantia in sua patr^mque doctrina. 13
Firmitas contra omnes omni^ hostium incursus 13 Infirmitas, aeui breuitate
cognita. 14 In lia quae ad nominis Christiani propagatione pertinent,
diligentia. 14 In ijsdem vel propagandis inertia, l vel euertendis peruers^^^
quis deijcit, non erigit. 15 Doctrinae vniuersalitas. 15 Priliata opmio. 16
victoriae co^tra hosts heteticos and schismaticos. 16 Infoelices, etiam contra
fubs pugnae. 17 Authoritas secure audienda quia, sine errore. 17 Nullum ad
firmandos animos pondus, quia ag^osci^se errori obnoxio^. 18 Humanitas and
modestia 18 Superbia and iactantia plusqam Thrasonica. 19 Otdo and disciplina.
19 (...) and f^^ilis conuer satio. 20 Certa fides and minime dubia. 20 Perpetua
inquisitio cut verius fluctuatio. 21 Fidei regula Christianis Ecclesia, quia
Dei tabernaculum in sole positum and vitis frugifera Domini manu plantata. 21
Apud haeretidos sibi quisque regula est, quia in sen su suo latebtas quae^^^^,
vi sarme^ta inutilia a vite resectafacile agnoscas.

I have put these two ranks the one opposite to the other, to know what the
Ministers will approve, or improve in any of them: as to ws, we firmly believe
that the qualities mentionat in the first appertineth to the true kirk only;
and ar found in the Catholic, Apostolik Roman kirk only; whilk we
constantly believe to be the true and only kirk, because we find neine but
her, to whom sie notable promises hes beine maid; or in whom they have beine
accomplished, but in her only. Wherefore if the Ministers will have ws to quyt
the place where we are, as being vnfytte for our salvation, because the
qualities whilk we allege are not to be fond in her, they man schaw ws an other
where we shall find them, seeing they are altogather necessaire to be found in the
spouse of JESUS CHRIST: for otherwise ather will they travel in vain, or we
chenge lyk fools, changing for an worse, and leuing a kirk, whilk (as we are
surely persuaded) is sure and can not err, to follow a company that they
them selfs, wha inuiteth ws, assures ws to be unsure, affirming that it is
subject to error in so far, that God him self can not keip it therfra, at
leest hes not keiped it, not withstanding of his many fold promises. Doubtless
whasoeuer persuadeth ws that the house, where he wald have ws enter, is not
sure: consequently persuadeth ws (by presenting ws the danger whilk may
arryue) not to enter therein, except he be a fooll or think ws fools. It shall
not be needful here that the Ministers accuse or speek evil of any other man:
but rather speek good of them selfs, prouyding they prove it weall, schawing
that they have the kirk Dominam and matrem gentium endued with the notable and
excellent qualities required in the true kirk, and can not be found but among
them, and theirs. It will not content ws (if we be cairefull, as we should be, of
our salvation) to say that our kirk is evil, they man prove that their awin is
good. I say this because in place to prove themselfs to have the kirk* they
raill aganis the vice of the Catholics, as if our sins maid them a good
right, or they them selfs war without sin. Many hes left the Catholic kirk,
and yet hes not followed them, but hes taken an other party. Many also hes
fled from viciouse Catholics, and hes entered among maire viciouse
Protestants: for I hear of nein, as yet, wha ar become better men, for the
leuing of ws, or being out of our kirk. I call their conscience and our whole
contray to be witness. I am sure that Luther and Calvin first inuenters or
renewers of this religion, acknawledgeth that the world is become worse since
the coming of their new Euangell. I doubt not but they know what is Caluins
opinion here anent seeing the estimation they have of him. Luther speeketh
plainly. Mumdus indies ex hac doctrina fit peior: homines vno antea, nunc
septem diabolis obsidentu^, diabolus nunc plena cohorte homines inuadit, vt sub
clara Euangelij luce multo sint quam antea sub Papatu auariores, astutiores,
fraudulentiores, crudeliores, libidinosiores, procaciores ac peiores. The
vvordle becomes daily more wicked by this doctrine: before men war
besieged by one devil, now they are beseiged by seven. The devil now does
assail men with an hail band of devils, so that under the clear light of the
Euangell men ar become meakel maire couuetous, maire crafty, maire deceptfull,
maire cruel, maire lecherous, maire shamlesse and maire wicked, then before
under the Papistrie. An other of these good brethrine says almaist the same,
Vt totus mundus agnoscat eos Smidelinus
non esse Papistas, ne^ bonis operibus quicquam fidere, illorum operum nullum
exercent penitus; itiunij lo^^ comessationibus and perpota^ionibus nocte dieque
vacant* vbi pauperibus benign facere oportebat, eos deglutiunt and excoriant*
precationes vertunt in iuramenta, blasphemias and diuini nominis execrationes,
adque tam perdite, vt Christus ne ab ipsis quide^ Turcis hodie tantopere
blasphemetur. Demu^ pro humilitate regnat passim superbia, fastus, elatio;
atque hoc vniuersum vitae genus, ab illis Euangelicum dicitur institutum. That
all the vvarld may knavv them not to be Papists, nor trust in good works, they
exercise none at al of these works, in place of fasting they employ their tym
night and day in extraordinaire eating and drinking. where they should have
behaved the^ selfs liberally and bountefullie toward the poor, they
deuoore them, and as it war pluckes of the skin of them: they change their
prayers in oothes, blasphemies, and execrations of Gods name, and that so
desperately, that Christ is not this day so greatly blasphemed among the
Toorkes them selfs. finally in place of humility does regne through all,
pride, disdain, presumption. and they call all this sort and manner of life a trade
euangelik. If these men says true, the matter is evil mended, and we have
lytill occasion to change. I may truly say that they have maid our men worse,
and hes not mended their awin. That we may say with Tertulian that stantibus
ruinam non ia de proscriptionibus ad uersus haer.
centibus eleuationem operantur. If true pastors should be knawen by their
warks, I leave you to judge what shall be thought of these new Ecclesiastical
order and new kirk where so few good fructes ar to be found by their awin
confession. It is an evil breuing that is not good in the newing: I think the
Ministers of Scotland wald say als meikel of their flock, if they wald lay to
their conscience the hand, that they have laid to so meikell kirk gear so
wrangouslie. At this time I will say no mair, but (abiding their answer) pray
God grant to ws al, for his infinite mercies cause, his truth and grace that
we may know his verity and follow his command. And this meikell touching the
first head, and reasons whilk moves me to seek and cleame to the kirk and
offer to acknawledge the Ministers, if they have her. now to the nixt article.

SI IN VIRIDO QUID IN ARIDO



THE house of God, that is, the kirk being found, I must adresse my self to
them, wha hes the power and charge to let me in; wha hes the keys; wha may
not only schaw me the infinite treasures of Gods goodness toward ws with his
manyfold mercies and grace, but also will, and may by virtue of their charge
make me partaker thereof being impted in the tree of life by participation of the
holy sacraments and knawledge of the true faith, and receiving of the same,
that is, I must go to the true and lauful pastors and prelates, whom I man
know, not by the execution of that charge (albeet that be also required) but by
the power they have received to execute sic a charge. For it is not a certain
and solid proof, that any man is a lauful magistrate, if it may beschawe^
that he heth given out sindry sentences and decreates; or that he heth caused
execute sindly men to death (for those things ar done oftentimes by wrangouse
and tyranicall vsurpairs) but the power he hes to pronunce and execute
decreats, is required: otherwise the fact should make the magistrate, and not the
authority, whilk is contraire to al good reason; so I ask not now, wha takes
upon them the offices and functions of pastors, but whahes that power, that
is, wha hes the lauful power and mission, whilk is so necessaire in the
pastors of the kirk, that althoght any man should have the doctrine als pure as
the A postles them selfs, with lyk knawledge; yet should he not be received as a
pastor, except he have the vocation of them, wha heth the power to gif it him,
nemo potest in aliu^ confer quodipse non habet. I am assured that the
Ministers will not suffer within their jurisdiction any man to start wp at his
awin hand of his particulaire and private authority making assembles apart,
althoght he should preach the same doctrine, and administrat the sacraments in
the sam fashion grounded on the confession of faith, now received by the hail
Ministry of Scotland; whilk confession they force, or wald force al men to
subscribe. The purity of the doctrine wald not stope them to condemn him as a
seditious schismatik seeing he haid no authority, or (albeet he haid the
authority) if he laiketh the unity required in the kirk: for doubtless althoght
he haid the vocation als lauful, as they can gifhim, yet because of his
schism, he should be esteemed to have justly lossed it, albeet in other things
he keeps the sam doctrine in all respeckes; for the nature of the schism is
sic, that as the division of any member from the body, brings certain
death and privation of life (whilk can not be haid but in, and with the haill)
so does schism in the kirk, to him wha is devyded from the kirk. The
Donatists may serve for exemple, wha in the beginning war but schismatiks, yet
at last by there division did fall in corruption of doctrine and become
heretics; ewen as the member whilk is cut of, being deprived of the life (whilk
it haid in the whole body) of necessity at last man rote. Siclyk Lucifer
bishope, before catholic, by his schism did loss him self, althoght he did
approve the concel of Nice in all poinctes; how detestable is the crime of
schism before God, may easelie be judged by Core Dathan and Abiron, who is
punition was maire fearful and terrible, nor these, wha maid and adored the
golden calf, notwithstanding of their idolatry.

But to return to our propos, it is altogether requised, that the true
doctrine and lawful power be joined together in these, wha wald command and rule
in the house of God: the law makes ws al subject and equal: the power and
authority (whilk should be given by him, wha hes it) makes the distinction and
difference betwixt ws, and gives charge to an above the otheris: for what
domination or commandment haid S. Peter S. Paul and the rest of the Apostles
above the kirk of God, till they received that charge and authority of JESUS
CHRIST him self, to whom appertined the souuetaine domination. for all being
his, no man culd command except he haid received power and commission of him:
Nor yet any man obey to an other, onles he war assured of the commission. We
see that Princes punishes severely, but justly and necessairlie, sic as tak
on them to command without charge: for of these usurpations (if they be
suffered) comes oppen rebellion againist the prince, oppression of the
subjects, and wrak of the hail co^moune wealth. Al is not done at the first
instant, piece and piece men proceideth both in virtue and vice, nemo reprente
fit turpissimus. there be certain degrees to that high wark of plain
rebellion and outcasting of the lauful and souueraine magistrate: he wha makes
the first slope, gaueth the first blaw to his prince. Wherefor if the beginnar
should fill wp with his awen dead body the braich that he haid maid, he should find
few followers: the prince sparing the first inuiteth others, and at last is
constrained to punish many, wha wald not, at the beginning punish one: Crudelis
est humanitas, quae dum vni parcit, multos perdit.

In this general, I doubt not but the Ministers and I will agree very easily:
For I see Beza one of their brethring auoueth that none should command, or
denotis acclesiae
have charge in the house of God except sic as ar sent by God, whilk sending he
will have rueled according to the order whilk God him self hes estableshed in
his kirk, and thinks it nowayes lauful to any man to violat this order: yet
that our Lord and Master is not bound thereto, but may dispone on the house of
his father as he thinks best, notwithstanding of this order; if in case
confusion be entered in the place of order, that is, if the ordinaire vocation
established by him self in the persons of the Apostles and their successors,
shall faill and inlaik (whilk, as we have prouen before, can not be) for laick
of true pastors; he may send extraordinairly and immediately pastors to guyd
rule and gowerne his house and feed his flock. I will weal it be so (for
namasuld or can deny that souerane power to JESUS CHRIST, althoht it be brought
in here upon an absurd supposition, if true pastors inlaik) prouyding there be
no interruption in the gowernement of the kirk, that is, prouyding the kirk
never want lauful pastors necessaire for the edification of Christ's mystical
body, whilk is but one, and can not suffer so evident co^uulsion: for by
division it man be two bodies. whilk must be if the extraordinaire succed not
incontinent to the ordinaire, when he shall inlaik. For we have schawen before
that Christ's kingdom man be perpetual: it must also be granted of necessity
that the true kirk can no mait wat the lauful pastors, then she may want the
truth it self. For the true doctrine man be in the true doctors and pastors
or else it can not be haid in this world. S. Paul joins these two successions
together, as things whilk can not be separat the one from the other, to wit,
the word, of whilk comes faith, and the pastor wha is sent with charg to
preach the word how Romans 1014
shall they believe in him of vvho^ they have not hard? and hov shall they hear
without apreacher? but how shall they preach onles they be sent? we may see
the band and connection whilk S. Paull makes here, the faith be hearing of the
word proceeding from the preacher or pastor, wha hes gotten lauful power being
sent for that effect by him wha might send him. The first, to wit faith,
pertineth to the succession of doctrine whilkwear oblist to believe. The rest
appertineth to the succession of persons: the faith comes by hearing, whilk
can not be without speeking (I mean ordinairly) and specking requires a
preacher, wha can not be lauful without mission. wherefore as the kirk militant
is perpetual (for God never wants his kirk) so hes she perpetually true
and lauful pastors to gowerne her; because without them, there can be no kirk,
seeing that faith is requised, whilk comes by hearing, as said is.

Lat ws then speek of this vocation, seeing it is so necessaire that without it
the charge can not be weal done. I demand therefore wha sent the Ministers to
preach in the kirk of God? wha hes given them that power upon the Christian
people, to nurish the good and obedient by preaching, to punish and cut of the
wicked and disobedient by excommunication? I have said alreddy (and it is true)
that the law makes ws al equal: the commission or power meketh the difference,
in gauing authority to some to command, others remaining within the compass of
obedience to believe and do as they are teached and commanded.

This power and vocation, according de notis reclesiae and cpist. Theologic. 5.
to Bezais distinction, is ather ordinaire or extraordinaire. The ordinaire
lauful (says he) consists in certain rules ordinat by God, whilk ar three:
to wit Examination and trial of doctrine and manners: Election maid by the kirk:
And Impositio^ of hands or ordinatio^. Lat ws apply these three rules to the
vocation of Knox, Calvin or Luther: for if it be not found lauful and just in
the first author, in the rest it can not be better; Quod ab initio non valuit,
tractu temporis conualescere non potest. The langar that usurpation lesteth,
the worse. Now to say that any of them haid their calling of the Catholic and
Romainekirk (as some do is say, when they are pressed to schaw their halding) it
is no thing to the propos; for the Ministers, to lat the world understand that
they will not serve them selfs therewith, will have al men refuse and abjure al
right they may have by the Paip and kirk of Rome: as may be seine in their
confession of faith. And Calvin with the rest of the Ministers of Geneua wald
not suffer the Bishopes of Troy and Neuers (wha leesing the Catholic kirk flaid
to them) in any ways to preach til they haid abiured al power received before,
and taken of new their commission and authority of the Ministers, because in
their opinion the former was not lauful. And in verity the vocation coming of
the kirk of Rome can serve them to no propos. For ather it was good or not: If
it was good, doubles they have lost it by their schism and rebellion, seeing
they have left the kirk, of whom they haid their vocation. The life can not be
communicatted not extended to members separated from the whole body. No man
gaueth power to be abandonatted, nor to arm men and rebelle agains him self,
nor to be casse out of his a win place: Princes gaueth power to inferior
magistrates, but retineth ay full power to them selfs, to discharge or punish all
rebellious persons whatsoever degree or preheminance they have within the
realm. the higher place the greater fall, and greuouser pains to follow
thereupon. Potentes potenter torme^ta patientur. If it was not good it was null
of it self, of no valor in the gauer, and so null in the receauer on force they
man think so, if they will abyd at the first principe of their religion, to wit,
that the Paip is the great Antichrist: whilk ground if it war true (as it is
may false) it behoved their vocation to be null: for what comes of the
Antichrist (wha shall be as it war Satan's eldest son) must come of Satan: as
whatsoever comes of JESUS CHRIST comes of God, because he is Gods eldest
and only natural son. Wherefore having no ordinaire calling of the Catholic
Roman kirk, it follows that they have neane at al. for if they haid any of
the Catholic kirk (as in deed some of them haid being priests) they lost it by
their schism, and can have neane from any other, but from them selfs. And so I
may say of him whasoeuer shall be first amongs them, that whilk Optatus
Mileuitanus says of Victor first bishope of the Donatistes: Erat ibi filius
sine patre, tyro sine principe, discipulus sine magistro, sequens sine
antecedente, inquilinus sine domo, hospes sine hospitio, pastor sine grege.
Episcopus sine populo. There was there a son without a father, a new
soldier without a co^mander or ruler, a disciple vithout a master, a
follovver without any to go before, a tenant without an house, an host
without a lodging, a pastor without a flock, a Bishope without a people.
For the three conditions required by Beza in a lauful pastor and ordinair
calling can not be found in any of them, if they be considered out of the
Catholic Roman kirk. Lat wstak any of them, whatsoever he be, and we shall
see it to be so: For as to the examination and trial of doctrine, wha culd
exame him, seeing he haid no man above him, nor of higher power. And farther
that prove culd not be maid upon the first, seeing he was the finderout of the
doctrine, he preached: wherefore it was vnknawe^ to others, so they culd not
exame him there upon. sure I am that they will not ascribe this examination to
the people seeing the people should be teached and examinated, not teach and
examine: but of this schortlie at maire lenth. As to the manners, I find not
that a nie of them war angels, nather any of these wha hes followed after them,
I say no farther, I excuse not the faults and vice of the clergy; Judas might
tyn the Apostolat, he culd not defyl it, meekel less tak it away or make it
inutile in others.

The second is the libre and free election of the person examinat, maid with
consent and knawledge of the kirk where he fuld exercice that charge and
function. This can not be found in the first and ring leaders of this new kirk:
for what kirk culd choice them seeing they war before their kirk: for they wha
leued in those days knew no sie doctrine, nor doctors; and swa nather culd
exame the doctrine nor elect the persons, whois opinions war so new at that
time, that they war not yet hard of.

But ye will say that their doctrine was may ancient of it self, althoght not
knawe^ so publikly. I answer that it can not be ancient nor auld whilk
continues not fromethe beginning; for that whilk dies als son as it is borne,
mereth not the name of auld aage, quod nascens moritur, senectutis nomen non
meretur. ye may weal say it is lang since it hes beine (if perchance it hes
beine many years before our aage) but it is not lang since it is. for being
does include co^tinuation of a thing, whilk they acknawledge not to be in
their doctrine, at leest publicly and knawen to the world. but that whilk is
confirmed with one simple word, may sufficiently be refurted with an other. it
was, it was not.

The third quality to wit Imposition of hands (whilk Calvin acknawledgeth
Inst. lib. 4. cap. 14. sect. 20. and cap. 19 sect. 28. and 31.
for a sacrament) shall be less found in them: for who culd consecrat or ordain
them pastors by imposition of hands, and give them power to command and rule
the kirk of God, seeing they war the first them selfis? There culd be neene
before them, the ordinair succession (as they Calvin in the preface of hs
instit. and Beza epist. theologic. 5.
allege) being altogather perished and lost. Mairouer it is to be considerat
that in our contray the imposition of hands hes beine admitted within these sex
years only, to wit, the year of God 1598. and that not without great
difficulty and contention, and contraire to the opinion of sindry of the
ministry: where I wald glaidlie know of whom they received imposition of
hands, wha that year begane to impone the hands to others. As to the foolish
concept of these that thinks the commoune people to have that power, they are
maire worthy of punition exemplaire as trompettes of sedition subiecting al
sort of magistrates to a populair temerity and rage, then worthy of credet or
answer as honest and reasonable men. out of these factious boutiques agans the
authority of lauful Princes and their heritable right ar come Franco-Gallia,
Vindiciae contra tyrannos, the pestilent pa^phelet de iure regni apud Scotos,
the first blast of the trompette, and other sic lyk unhappy libelles very
cutthrottes of al Princes, that haith good and lauful right to any realm:
because sic jurisdictions ar, as it war, a strange and mighty bridle to
conteene within the compass of reasonal seditious and ambitious spirits, of
whilks our aage (to our great regrat) hes bein over plentiful and abondant,
somtym under one color sometym under an other. Lykwayes we have haid agains
the Ecclesiastical order within these 100. years, good store of these beasie
writters, and amo^gist other we have found some lytil touch in assertionibus
theologicis, aut verius, negationibus assertione 2
cacologicis cuiusdam Britanno-Scoti, qui inconditae plebi ordinationem
Ecclesiasticam (licet in eo parum sibi constet) committit. The Ministers (if I
be not deceived) will not authoriz these toys, yea no mair then Beza does
approve Ramus dreams in religion. Wherefor I will not enter farther therein,
but will retourn to these wha so vnreuerantlie does traict their princes, as he
does prelates. These men the^ must suffer me to say that the subject wha will have
no superior saui^g sic as he finds good and to his gust, or sic as he may
change when he list, should fear to find the gibbet to his superior or hell to
his habitacle, non other place justly resting for him wha will not content him
self with his awen place, that is, whilk he is borne to, or whilk his Prince of
his proper motive avanceth him to. shall the co^tentement or miscontenteme^t of
the unconstant multitude, or of any factious and seditious head be a rule in
so great and weghtie a matter? shall sic foolish brains be the square of al
good and lauful government? Their maxims set down to allure the people, ar to
destroy both the people and Princes, and comes of them, who beyond their
merit looks for ava^cement to honors, to the whilks otherwise they culd
not atteine; so whill they aspire thereto, they conspyre agains their Prince
and Master. Certainly as the inferior magistrate is answerable to his Prince
not to his inferior, so the Prince is answerable to God, and not to his
subject. Otherwise how often soever their tro^pettes of sedition should blaw, we
should be als often in pain of Prince and commoune wealth, and in place of one
pretended tyranne, we should have ten thousand, wha justly might be called
tyrannes. Their fyrbrands does rail and cry out agans the lauful Princes, to
put in that place many tribunes of the people, in hope to have their part, as
others, wha iniustlie ar entered there. for why may they not say with the
naghrie woman, nec mihi nec tibi, sed diuidatur, seeing they 3. Reg. 3. 26
have no just part therein? But the just possessour can not approve so
pernisious a division. If we laiketh exemples of our awin, there might be found
out ouermanie in other realms. But by what right (I pray you) shall the
seditious subject (for na other will usurp that place) be above his laufull
Prince, to sit as judge on his estait, life, and honor? Who is among ws that
wald willingly suffer to be commanded (what sal I say judged?) by his awe^
servant, by whom he war ignominiously accused? It is not lauful to the party
to sit as judge, nor to be witness in a private man's cause: what shall it be then
in Princes? We laugh and jest when we see any private man that thinks him
self monarche of the haill world, as being sick of a pleasant imagination and
fantasy, without any man's hourt or dommage. But it is na sport nor bourd to
see the furious multitude mel it self with the estait, life, and honor of their
Prince, where many thowsands ar oppressed under color of the comoune wealth
and liberty, whilks doubtless ar lost when they fall in the hands of the
multitude. If the Prince wald force ws to do any thing agains God and good
reason, we should arm our selfis with patience, and not with rebellion, that is,
we should follow Gods command; and if the Prince wald be so rigourous as to
punish ws therefore, we, to the exe^ple of the A postles and primitive kirk
suffer it, and not to tak arms against him: In patientia vestra possidebitis
animas Luc. 21 19.
vestras. In your patience you shall possess your saulles, says our Lord.
what good Christian wald not rather choice to be for the truth a martyr
before God, then as a traittour for rebellion execute by men? we may without
danger of conscience suffer a wrang, but not do a wrang without danger of
conscience: It is but by M. Fox new martyrologe that men become martyrs for
heresy and rebellion. In the kirk that honor is gifin only to them, wha dies
for the truth (as in the primitive kirk) without any spot of rebellion: causa
martyre^ facit, non poena. I will pas these opinions be cause they require a
maire scharpe manner of refutatio^, seeing they bring with the^ so many heaps of
miseries, if they be not speedily smored in the beginning. For to lay asyd the
commoune and publik calamities, wherein no man can be in surety, often tyms
choising a new, King we loss an auld kingdom. But to retourn to our propos:
this ordinatio^ of pastoures culd not com of the people, because at the
beginning of this new religion all the people was Catholic, and knew no sic
doctrine nor doctors, and so culd not make the^ pastors wha war first actors of
this tragedy. Mairouer Beza in his Epst. theolog. 83.
epistles seimeth nowayes to approve this populaire form of gowerneme^t in the
kirk. Wherefore seeing the first Ministers nather haid Examination, Election nor
Ordination, or Imposition of hands, it may be easelie concluded, that they haid
no lauful ordinaire calling, and so culd not gif any true vocation or calling
to others, because they haid it not them selfis.

Lat ws go forward. the Catholic kirk (say they) hes tynt the ordinaire
vocation, and they have found the extraordinaire. We have tynt one thing, and
they have found an other; it is justly reanco^tered with our tinsal. But seeing
they have not found our gear, we can pretend no right thereto: so as we pretend
no right to their extraordinaire calling, they can pretend no tytill to our
ordinaire, as said is.

They are called and sent extraordinairly (say they) to gowern the kirk of God:
if their vocation be extraordinair it passes the bounds of the order
Apostolik: For how can it be Apostolik without continuation since the Apostles,
not having beginning nor authority of their vocation. If the race and
succession of the Apostles be lossed, why waunt they them selfis to follow the
Apostles? at leest they follow them not in their vocation, and therefore: the
tytils and euidents of the Apostles can serve them for no thing. They must
schaw their new halding, seeing the ancient tytles ar expyred and rune out; if
there rests no man having the right of the Apostles the, Ministers can not
have it. We must see their new charters passed under the great seel of JESUS
CHRIST marcked with miracles wroght by the holy spirit: if they can schaw any
sic thing, it will put them out of trouble, and ws out of doubt, and tak away
al schadow of excuse, whilk otherwise we might justly pretend for our
disobedience.

But in good conscience may we credet them, wha with their simple word wald make
ws believe that the ancient succession of the Apostles is perished? Shall I not
think (if that be true) that the tribe of Leui was mair dear to God, then the
spiritual posterity of the Apostles, yea then the posterity of JESUS CHRIST
him self, out of who is seeds mouth, the verity should Isa. 59. 21.
never depart. shall it serve for nothing that that wynzard was planted with our
Masters awin hand, boght with his death, nurished by his Apostles, watered with
their blood, and with the blood of so many thousand martyrs, kept by the
assistence of the holy spirit, in the learned and Godly fathers, and in their
posterity? Shall the order of Aaron be so far preferred to the order of
Melchisedech? the body to the spirit, the figure to the verity, and man to
God? Shall the ministers have the honor to have restored the kirk, whilk the
holy spirit by his negligence haid tynt? their only hand hes halde^ our Lord
in his right: Weal, giving and not granting that our Master haid tynt his
inheritance in this world for a time through negligence of his officers, or
rather by their malice and knaverie: he hes cast them out: he hes placed in
their place and charge others, more worthy. Yet or I see their letters of
commission, I wald glaidlie know why they war given: for it culd not be a light
cause whilk moved God to give a new charge. They will say, perchance, to reform
the kirk, and tak away the manifold abuses that war both in the doctrine and
manners. A just reason truly and a charge worthy of eternal memory and
thanks, and may necessaire (if it be true) to be put in execution, for the
publik good, salvation of many saul's and (whilk is the principal) for Gods
glory, and he to be praised and loved wha does his duty in the execution of
the same: But with what sincerity and Godly dealling it hes bein fulfilled
and accomplished, the miserable estait of our contray may beire witness: where
many hes learned the science of Adam and Eua in eating of the forbidden tree,
knawing the good they have lost and evil they have found. and I fear that these
new pastors hes used als litill discretion in gowerning men's saul's as policy
in down casting the material kirks.

Jntempestiuas sed supprime Musa querelas.

Put the case that they war sent to reform the kirk in doctrine and manners.
These heauinly medicines then fand, a seik person before the^, but not dead, to
procure whais health they war sent. why have they rent this body in peaces, and
maid wp so many others, so different and contrarious every one to an other, lyk
the Cadmeia^ brethrin* This agrees not with their letter patent, if they have
any: they should not have passed the bounds of their legation. If they war sent
to reform the kirk, according to my judgment (I dar not be bald to pronunce
any farther for fear of offense) they should have remained in the kirk
(fugiendo non curantur aegri, sed medendo) and by virtue of their commission
taken away the causes of her seeknes and deformities. he wha gave the^ the
charg wald have given them the strenth, qui dat velle, dabit and perficere: he
wald not have left them in so notable and good interprise; they culd not have
laicked moyen nor wisdom having so mighty a master. If they feared the pest,
or rather the just punition, I excuse their flight, yet can not praise them,
that they choised rather to seall their doctrine with other men's blood nor with
their awin. But to pass this extraordinaire stoutnes (whilk hes moned them to
ryf the kirk in pieces by so many sindrie sects, rather then to suffer
martyrdom them selfis and so pass to heauin) why did they by their
commission? they discharged not them selfis in making an other kirk. To make a
kirk, and reform or heall a kirk ar diverse things. They must acknawledge a
double fault, whilk they have committed, the an in not doing that whilk they
war commanded, whilk was in reforming the kirk; the other in doing of that
whilk they war not commanded, in bulding a kirk. If there was no kirk at all,
when they come, their commission was in vain and served for nothing: they should
have passed bak and taken an other, to make wp and buld of new a kirk, and not
to reform that whilk was not: for reformation presupponeth a subject and matter
laicking something necessair to the perfection: so their procuration (if there
was no kirk) was null of it self, and can nather serve them nor their
successors for any warrant of this wark, they have taken in hand, how
beutiful and glorious a name soever they give it.

Aspiciunt oculis superi mortalia justice. Think ye it reasonable, that any man
should tak on him to cast down the house, whilk JESUS CHRIST him self heth
builded, because it seems to his vain imagination to have many deformities
and vncomlinesses, and build wp an other at his fantasy, alleging that the
Lord heth sent him? I can not believe that any man can be a better painter or
maisson then God, wha said tota pulchra es amica mea, and macula Can. 4. 7.
Matt. 16. 18.
non estinte, and wha builded his kirk upon a rock. weal I know that it is Gods
will that his house stand to the end of the world. But lat this be an error of
the secretaire, wha should have written formation of a kirk, or the fault of the
messenger, wha spak ouerlowlie in our first commisioners ear, where by, one
word was taken for an other. But whidder it should be Formation, Reformation or
Deformation, for the present I stand not, provyding the commission of this
extraordinaire calling be good. They war sent (say they) by God
extraordinairlie. I desyr they prove that: for simple and proueles saying, in
mattres of sa great consequence (as where it is question of eternal life and
death) can not be received, except by them, wha wald hazard their part of
paradise on a simple word, we must see the commission alleged, if it be good
and have the best and assured mark, that it may serve ws for our warrant, when
we shall be called to render count of our mailles and duties in commanding or
obeying. It is als dangerous to believe every ma, as to believe no man. I see the
Ministers hes dispossessed thois, wha war pastors by just succession (as
having received that charge from hand to hand since the Apostles) and hes
placed them selfis in their room desyring or rather commanding ws to
acknawledge them as true pastors, follow Knox appel lation 2.
and obey them, giving our saul's and conscience to be nurished by them in
truth and pietic, of the whilk they have the distribution delivered to them by
God him self, as they allege. Truly seeing that no man, no not of their may
zealous brethring will gif them a thousand pound on their word without good and
sufficient caution, should we not be great fools to give them our saulles not
asking of them any sufficient warrant but their word? The matter is so weaghtie
that they can not justly be offended with ws, if we desire to be assured that
we shall have no tinsal in believing them. Lat ws see the great seall and mark of
this extraordinair calling, that is miracles and winderful warks above nature,
whereby we may know that it is God wha sent them, and that it is his will we
receive them with due reverence and obedience. I know they will answer me here,
that they are not oblist to bring miracles, seeing they teach no new doctrine. I
pray al good and Godly Christians consider if this be a propre answer and to
the propos: For first they tak that for a proof, whilk is in controversy
betwixt the parties, as is over evidently knawen: for we say (as we shall be
hable to prove by them selfis) that the doctrine they teach now is new, at
leest in many heads of controversies, Secondly the propheres, wha brought
miracles, brought no new doctrine, other ways they culd not have bein received,
the law being so formell agains them. Thridlie it man be new to ws, seeing that
nather we, nor any of our forefathers before Knox ever hard of it in our
contray. Last of all, we seak miracles for their alleged extraordinair and
marveilous calling, and not for their doctrine, whilk can not be true, seeing it
is so new, the veritic being so auld. Our Master and Lord commands ws in
matters of religion to obey his kirk: and obey and acknawledge none other. Why
shall we now hear the Ministers without any assurence of their charge and
commission, ather ordinaire or extraordinaire? If any man wald ask of the
subjects of a noble man (wha war out of the contray) the mailles and duties,
alleging he haid commission of their master: Wald they not justly answer,
that their master before his parting out of the contray, haid put order to all
his affairs giving charge to certain men whom he haid choisen for that
effect and maid officers over his haill lands with full power to sete and raise,
tak wp duties and mailles, give quittances* fence and hald courts, and al
other things necessaire, with express command to acknawledge none other till
his retourning: wherefore if he haid any commission from their master, it
behoved to be co^municat and sein, yea assuredly knawen to be valable and
sufficient? Certainly it wald not serve nor move them (if they war weil
aduysed) to say that these things, whilk he requires war due and awing to
their master, and that he asks no thing, to whilk they war not oblished: Nor
yet to say that the officers haid neglecked their duty both in waisting
their masters gear and misgoverning his house, and also in oppressing his
subjects. wald they not answer, that they war sorry for sic men's misbehauiour,
yet because their master haid gauen them charge to obey only these officers,
whom he haid estableshed, they culd not pass the bounds of their masters
command; and therefore wald on na way acknawledge him, wha schew no commission,
nor power of their master? Shall poor men be maire wise and circu^spect in a
bol of meal or 40. shillings, then I in my saul? Shall they seak for good
warra^d in paying of their duties, and I shall gife my saul to the first that
craves it? It shall not be neadfull to tell me here, what I aw to my master,
what I should believe, what reverence I should bear to the scriptures and pastoures
of the kirk. I believe that maire is true, then any man can tell: I ask only
wherefra comes these extraordinaire officers, and what power they have? I wald
pray them to clear me of this subject. For in matters of faith, the authority
makes all, whilk can receive non other warrant, but God him self, or else sic
as ar sufficiently authorized by him. They will say that sindrie of the
prophets come without miracles, and therefore it can not be justly asked of
them, whilk hes not bein asked of others before them, coming with lyk calling.
I answer, that a great part of the Prophets brought miracles with them to
confirm, their sending, and principally, when their vocation was, or might be
called in doubt. Wherefor Moses schew miracles not only in the beginning, when
he was first received, but also againes Core Dathan and Abiron. Elias againes
the prophets of Bael in burning the sacrifice upon the Alter before the
people. And to pass under silence al other, JESUS CHRIST acknawledgeth the
miracles to be necessaire. If I (says he) haid not come and done works
among them, that no other man 10. 15. 24.
has done, they haid not haid sin. But now they both have sin, and
have hated both me and my father. To Sanct John the Baptist asking by two of
his disciples, if it was he wha was to come, he answers, the blind see, the
Matt. 11. 5.
crippel walk, the lepers ar maid clean, the Luc. 7. 19.
deaf here, the dead rise again, to the poor the Euangelle is preached.
Mairouer the prophets, wha war sent extraordinairelie never intermedleth them
selfis with the office of preasthaed and pastors (except they war of the Trib
of Leui) nor ever pat them out of their place. We never hard that any, because
he was sent extraordinairlie, tuik the place of the high preast: or tuik the
Ephod, or censeur out of the preasts hands: For the sacrifice was ay continued
by the preastes and by none other. So that the ancient prophets howsoever they
was called extraordinairlie (as said is) did never pretend thereby any charge
in the sacrifice as appertening to the priests only. For the prophets com as
a new succor and help sent by God to fortify and confort the ordinaire
officers, to waken them wp from negligence, to aduertish them of their duty,
to love honor and serve their God wprightlie. Lykwayes to admonish the Prince
and people of their office, reproach them their faults and sins, with
threatenings of punition and vengence thereupon to follow, except they did
prevent the wrath of God with speidy repente^ce. In whilk charges miracles war
not very necessaire, seeing they demanded but amedement of men's lyfes, and
Godis service to be done, by sic as haid the charge, not melling therewith,
notwithstanding of their extraordinaire sending by God him self. Even as if a
Prince or noble man absent wald gif charge to any man by mouth, to aduertish
his servants and subjects to be maire diligent in their office and duerie,
schawing them wherein their master war offended, and what punition he haid
deliberat to tak of sic as he fand culpable and guilty; it should not be
necessaire therefore to bring his masters great sealle. But if he wald enter to
go werne and ruelle, he wald not be received upon his simple word. Mairouer,
althoght there be no mention in the scriptures of the miracles of sindrie
Prophets, yet it is not to be concluded that they did no miracles: yea their
prophecies war sufficient warrands for their mission, they being, as it war,
the ordinaire posts and messengers in those days betwix God and his people, to
whom Gods will was to be schawen according to the peoples behavior and new
occurrantes. It can not be schawen where that any prophet is com to execute
any great interprise without miracles, ather present, precedent, or
subsequent. In S. John the Baptist there be many things very miraculous, his
mothers aage, his fathers domnes before his conception* and speech restored at
his birth, his education commanded by the angel, his life; and last of all the
testimony of JESUS CHRIST maire then all miracles, seeing he was the author of
all miracles, whilk at that time for just reason he haid keiped to him self:
whereby he might be knawen from others. Now there come never any prophet for
so weaghtie a matter as this, for whilk, they say, that they are come, to wit,
to restore the spouse to JESUS CHRIST, the body to the head, to make a new flock
to that heauinlie Pastor, to restore him to his auld and ancient heritage, to
buld wp the eternal house of God, to destroy the regne of Satan: to bring new
light to the world, to tak mankind out of the throt, as it war, of the devil:
to publish the verity so lang vnknawe^: to schaw the kirk so lang unseen and
invisible And to be schort, to do that wherefore our Master and Lord of his
infinite goodness come in earth, and tuik upon him our mortal nature, and
therein suffered death and passion, that is, to make wsimmortals, and of sons
of man, whilk we war, to make wssonnes of God, to be partakers with him of the
eternal inheritance, having nurished and brought ws wp in his a win house, the
whilk to govern if Luther, Calvin or Knox prete^des any right by new
extraordinaire charge, is it not may reasonable that they schaw an
authentic commission? Should not the great seall be here employed? Elias for
less cause maid the fyr come out of heauin. If a simple alledgence of
reformation be a sufficient varrand, we shall have in continent good store of
reformers and extraordinaire pastors to correct, or rather to corrupt, the
harl world. The Anabaptists and Libertines with many other siclyk pernisious
pestes should schortlie occupy all places: For their word is als good as the
others is, in matters of religion, if the word be inonch, and the saying a
sufficient proof. But if there be any other thing requisite to have and
procure credet, whateuer is necessair in one is necessaire in all, seeing there
can be no authority and power but in the ordinaire: because it only was
sufficiently authorized by JESUS CHRIST, and executed by his Apostles (wha
received it immediately of their Master) and by their successors to our days.
Otherwise the extraordinaire must have als good and solid proof as the
ordinaire. If it be sufficient to say that it was Gods will and pleasour, that
sie men should tak that wark of government and reformation on hand, when they
cotre the place, we shall ather answer or agree thereto. But JESUS CHRIST will
disavow sick extraordinaire reformers. The Prophets prophecy lees in my Ierem
14. 14.
name. I have not sent them, nather did I command them: nather spak I unto
them: but they prophecy unto youu a falls vision and divination and vanity and
deceatfulnes of their avvne heart. Let them schaw (if they have aniecharge) the
express and particulaire command they have of God to com: for the general and
ancient commandment without doubt appertineth to the ordinaire officers of the
house, who is commission is of lang tym both confirmed and acknawledged:
Novelty should be suspect to al men seeing, as said is, the verity is so auld.

Some answers that it is a great miracle and sufficient to prove Gods will and
pleasour, that in so schort a time they have drawn so many to them from the
kirk of Rome. If that war a sufficient reason and great miracle; then should
Mahomet and Arrius be holy men sent by God, and his weal beloved; for certain
it is that the impiety of Mahomet, or heresy of Arrius was maire myghtie then
al those, wha hes separat them selfis in their lait days from the Catholic
Roman kirk: yet I am assured that no man of judgment will think that Mahomet,
or Arrius did miracles by their seduction, or that sic revoltes war sufficient
to prove them to be sent by God with new commission. Therefore althoght Luther,
Calvin, Knox and their successors haid brangled the hail world (as they have
not done and the Antechrist will do) with their authority and doctrine, it
follows not that it is a work approved by God and his extraordinaire sending:
For albeet it be contraire to al ordinaire course it should not be concluded,
that it is good and proceeds from a power extraordinaire given by God: For we
fee many extraordinair actions, and punished extraordinairelie, as things
done with violence and contraire to all good order. I can not believe that the
Ministers them selfis wald now receive any man wha wald com with an
extraordinaire calling to reform them, notwithstand of their schort
possession: wherein there be many things thought (even by some of them selfis)
worthy of a good reformation. I doubt not but they wald allege their order
alreddie received, confirmed and estableshed. And in case he wald not desist, I
am assured, they wald employ the force of their excommunication and acts of
parliament, as a souueraine remeed agans al rebellious persons. If it was
lauful to a few unquiet spirits to rise agains the hail Catholic kirk being
in possession 1500. years estableshed, why shall it not be laufull to rise
againist a few new in come? might it not be justly said here Patere legem quam
ipse tuleris? The iurisco^sult says weal, quod quisque iuris in alterum
statuit, ipse eodem iure vti debet. Shall it be permitted to them to do what
they list againes whom they pleese in what matter and manner they will, and
shall be lauful to no man to gainsay them. O duram aliorum sortem ne dicam
seruitutem. They will allege perchance the scripturs for their warrant and that
they teach the verity contined therein. I answer, that every heretik says
the lik, and that al our dispute, for the present, is of their power and
calling: and that it is an other debate betwixt ws and them touching the
scriptures and verity. as we have said before. we grant the scriptures and the
verity should be received and imbrassed, and all good reason do teach ws that
there should be pastoures; but they give ws no assurance yea no appeerance that
Luther, Calvin or Knox, or any of their successors, can be these true
pastors, but rather the contraire, as we have prouen. Wald they then thus
argument? I have the bible, I say the truth, I am then a true and lauful
pastor and doctor of Godis kirk? I understand not this co^sequent, except
they wald say that all (be they men, we men or childring, learned or ignorant)
wha heth the bible and says the verity at true and lauful pastors, that is,
have lauful power and authority in the kirk of God to preach, teach, and
admistrat the sacraments, bind and loufe tak in and put out, excommunicate and
absolve, whilk I am assured, they will not say. What wald be thought of me, if I
should argument thus? I have the acts of parliament, I say no thing but
according to the kings M. lawis and ordinances, therefore I am a schiref or
lieutenent for his Majesty: that is, I have power to admistrat justice,
condemn and absolve, head and hang, banish and call bak etc. perchance this
vain imagination wald be tolerat and laughen at in me, as oftentimes sic
phrenetik spirits serves for other men's recreation: but if thereupon I should
tak any man wha haid committed a murder and (keepping the ordinaire form of
justice in all other things, except in the power whilk I haid not) should call in
15. or 20: honest men on his syes and by them, for the slaughter weal verifier,
and confessed, condemn him in the mouth of the dempster, and execute him by
the hangman, wald it be a sufficient warrant for me to schaw the acts of
parliament or laws of the contry and perpetual practice in lyk things? It
wald not be asked of me what the law ordains, but what power and authority I
haid to tak that man, call in a syes on him, condemn and execute him: my
commission wald be soght, and not the law. Yea for laick of a lawful commission
I should be found not only a manslayer with Syes, Dempster and Hangman (whom I
haid drawn in that cry me with me) but also an usurper of the King is
authority, without his knawledge or will, so I and all my adherentes should be
found in that action mair guilty and to have offended the Prince mair
greavouslie then the murderer, whom I haid execut: For besyd the slaughter,
in my action should be found usurpation, oppression and conjunction of so many
persons therein, whilk should augment my crime: For as in good things the maire
the better, so in evil things the maire the worse. Lykwayes we ask not at the
ministers, if there should be any lauful pastoures wha should preach, teach,
administrat the sacraments, exhort to virtue, reprove vice, cut off rotten and
rebellious members: we know these things may and should be done by them wha heth
the lauful power: But we demand wha geaue them that power to exercise these
charges and offices to enjoy that privilege? Shall not the usurper here be in
greatter danger, as the matter is greatter? Or shall kings and Princes, nobles
and gentilmen, conmoune wealths and brughes, private and simple men have order
and discipline, whereby some command and others obey without confusion, and God
shall have neene in his house? In the kirk shall be no thing, but disorder troble
and discord? that it may be said of her, whilk the poet says of the sea
waves;

Nescit cui domino pareat vnda maris. If every man will command (whilk man be
if the bible may make a pastor) wha shall not command? only they surely wha
wants ather moyen or will to have a bible. It is permitted to every man to
schaw the law and truth to any man: yea it is a wark of charity, to teach the
ignorant, principally in matters of salvation: but to tak on him the power and
jurisdiction to command above others as being a pastor or magistrate; not
having charg of them, wha has that power, nunqua^ licuit, nunquamque licebit.
it was not, is not, nor ever shall be lauful, The kirk is as Castrorum acies
ordinata: Not lyk to the Chaos of poets where Frigida pugnabant calidis,
hume^tia siccis, Mollia cum duris, sine pondere habentia pondus.

Sic co^fusions aggrees not with Gods infinite wisdom, quae attingit a fine
vsque ad finem fortiter, and disponit omnia suauiter. The qualities that S.
Paul requires in a Bishope, shaweth how cairful God is to have his house weal
governed. Men will not suffer every man to meddle with the keeping of their
beestes. I think not that God heth less regard to his kirk. It may be that
they say that there was na pastors in the kirk, when these new Evangelists
come, seeing they wha war in possession had tynt their right, because they haid
not done their duty: and therefore the ministers quasi in vacuum venerunt,
did occupy a place vacant. Althoght it be a thing very hard tobe believed,
yea altogether not to be believed, that God co^traire to his promise heth so
abandonat his awen inheritance, that he heth no man, wha with lauful authority
did his duty, or might give power to others to govern our Saluiors house,
yet I will pass it at this time. I tak only that pastoures hoth not tynt their
place by reason of non entry, in whilk case it behooves them to have recourse
to their master, all retourning bak agane to him. If they have failled because
they have neglegentlie and improperly done their office, as the crime was
personal, so should the pain and punitio^ be personal: seeing in felonies the
hairs or successoures be not persewed for the crime of their predecessoures,
except they be found socij criminis, or else that their predecessors have
commetted laes-maiestie. Now seeing the successor is nowayes debarred for
commoune crime committed by his predecessors: rests the crime of
laes-maiestie, by rebellion or treason agains the Princes person or estait,
consel taken with the enemy, aspyring to the croune, or other sic poinctes as
these. Now giving and not granting (for the Ministers can never be hable to
prove sic things, as we have schawen before) that the pastoures of the
Catholic kirk haith tynte their place by one of these crimes: what syn?
Follows it that the ministers heth the just title? Quo iure? By public
authority and form of justice the charge, power and office of pastors was
geuene to the Apostles and their successores til the warlds end. Yet if they
have failled so greavouslie, that God hes called bak the gift maid to his only
son, let them be accused, examinat, judged and condemned by public
authority and form of justice, and so discharged, dispossessed and cast out,
as men orderly convict and forfault: and lat others by lyk form and
authority be put in their place, by them wha heth the power thereto. The
offense makes men worthy of condemnation, but condemns no man. The sentence
and decreat of the judge must first be pronunced. Many men commits great
crimes, yet possesses their lands til they be forfaulted: and sindry gets
their remission before they be accused: and others, notwithstanding they be
justly accused of treason, yet because they are not condemned and forfault,
without any remission they stand still in possession and their heirs after
them.

Seeing the Kingis authority and public form of justice ar required to put
any man in just possession of his own, shall it be permitted to every man at
his phantasy to cast him out, wha is in possession? And when the act of
forfaultrie is passed and given out in due form, the lands or offices are not
abandonat to every one, wha will occupy them: but they return to the Prince or
ouerlord. So whasoeuer will justly brook and enjoy these lands or offices,
must have a new gift of the prince or ouerlord, new charters, evidentes,
infeftments, commissions weal maid, subscriued, and sealled, with all other
circumstances (better knawe^ to men of law nor to me) whilks ar necessair;
whereby he may be knawen to be the just possessour or lauful magistrate: for
the charters, evidentes, infeftments, co^missions or retours, or any other
tytles whilk war before, ar anulled, as appertining only to the person
forfault, and therefore invtile for all other men, except perchance to his
heirs, if the Prince wald have piety of the^: or if he wald suffer the
forfaultrie to be reduced of special grace and favor. Whasoeuer wald start to
at his awen hand, and occupy the place vacant without consent of the
superior, might think assuredly that his usurpation wald be als heavy a crime
as the others was, wha head tynt the place.

Lykwayes (as said is) if the pastors hes failled, let them be accused before
their lauful judge, where they are fond guilty, let them be condemned:
thereefter sic as shall be found maire qualifiet, and worthy of sic offices may
be choosen in their place and obtein a new commission of them, wha heth that
power in the kirk upon earth. If there be nein at al, wha heth that
jurisdiction, they must tak new halding of God in the sam form and manner as
the Apostles received it from JESUS CHRIST, the posterity and successors
having failled, as they allege, but not prouen. Now what form of justice heth
been keepped? Wha warned the pastoures? Before what judge war they accused? Wha
condemned the^? wha gave the new title to the Ministers? I see the lauful
pastores accused, or rather abused, with out law or reason or judge: condemned
without any form of justice; cast out with violence, and their places occupied
by others without, yea agains al right. I see their contrairie party make him
self judge, tak a commission of him self, and put it in execution on his private
authority.

Dune hunc ardorem me^tibus addunt Euryole? an sua cuiq. Deus fit dir a cupido?
If al things man be maid new before they have good right, it war best they maid
a new God to authoriz their new procedinges and practice of law: for if these
fashions war good and reasonable, wha culd be assured, I say not of his gear,
office or lands, but even of his very life, every man making himself party,
witness, judge and executour of any accusation he should forge aganist any man
it pleases him? I might insist here with many other reasons, if I fears not
to be tedious in urging a matter so clear of it self.

I know some, for defense of the Ministers, says that their vocation is
nather altogether ordinaire, nor altogether extraordinaire, partem capiens ab
vtroq. that is (when al is weal considered) nather the one nor the other. There
is not halflang religions, as there is halflang dogs. They wald serve them
selfis with the authority of the Catholic hirk to enter in Gods house with
order, and afterward without order, whilk they call extraordinairelie, guyd, or
rather misguyd all at their fantasy.

But is it possible that they will serve them with the kirk of Rome, seeing they
have taken for a ground of their religion and lauful cause of their separation,
that the Paipe is the great Antechrist? They man on force laying this ground,
acknawledge that they have their entry in the kirk from the Antechrist.
Truly if they have no better porter then Satan's eldest son to let them in,
I fear they shall not be vealcome to God, wha uses in his merciful warkis to
employ better servants. If that opinion war true, then should Satan be half
master, seeing that the half of the charge comes of him: yea he must have
(according to that doctrine) the may apperant part, seeing that the ordinaire,
whilk is weall authorized comes of him: where as the extraordinaire, whilk
they wald ascribe to God, comes without any avow, except of their bare
saying. I wald be mair ample in the refutation of this branded vocation, if I
thought not that few, or neene wald cleame thereto.

As to them, wha serves them selfis with the words of our Lord, where there
be tvva or three assembled in my Matthew. 18. 20.
name, there J am in the meddest of them. I answer schortlie, first, that it is
question there, of the assistance of our Lord to the prelates of the kirk or
people, and not of the calling of pastoures in particulair And who doubts but
holy and Godly men heth the assistance of God whidder theybe in small or great
number. Nixt, if that should be taken generally and for the vocation, whersoever
there be two or three gathered in Christ's name* there man be there power to make
a pastor. Sua where there be two or three in any house they must constitut a
a pastor to them self, and so change al private houses in kirkes, contraire to
that, whilk we see now in Scotland where kirks ar turned in private houses.
Mairouer if that war the sense of Christ's words, it should appertine to the
people to call the pastors, whilk the Ministers of Scotland very wyslie, as
yet hes never approved. And last of al, this culd make no thing for the first
Minister, wha being allone culd not be elected by two or three.

Notwithstanding of all this, I will give and suppon in this matter alse far as
I can without prejudice of the verity. I will so enter for the present to
receive the extraordinaire vocation (whilk with reason can not be received,
except it have a very good warrant) if it can serve ws to any use as I fear
it can not do: For if so many hondreth years union of the Catholic doctrine
can not serve to maintain ws in our ordinaire right, how shall so many hondreth
day lie confusions iustile maintain them in their extraordinaire usurpation?
But to what use can their extraordinair calling serve ws, althoght we wald
receive it? There be maire then a hondreth diverse religions (atleest opinions
usurping the name of religion) every one condemning an other, and ascriving to
it self that glorious title of true extraordinaire calling under pretense of
the pure and true word of God, and administration of the sacraments. What shall
I do in this great confused multitude, where neine can stand seure, except al
his compagno^s be declared usurpers and falls prophets? Ye will say perchance
that the Ministers of Scotland hes neene of these sects amongs them, where of
they are very glaid. I will not for the present contest thereupon. But sure I
am, that they wha hes not the Ministers of Scotlandis religion amongs them, ar
alse glaid, and sindrie, wha hes it, wald be glaid to be quyt thereof. I may
truly say with an ancient author speeking of the philosophers of his time,
that all these sects may be false, but sure I am there can be but one true. If
al can not be true, whom shall I credet? Whom shall I follow? I can not
credet nor follow them all, seeing they are co^traire, every one co^demning an
other. The choose muse be difficil, seeing that every one says stoutly that
he hes the truth. Every man pretends the verity, cites the scriptures,
confereth place with place, confirms his awen opinion (if ye will believe him)
solidlie and refuteth all others sufficiently. But if ye will credet all the
rest, he says nothing to the propos, except so far as he agrees with every
one of them in particulaire.

Swa whasoeuer will agree with any of them, must on force disagree with many.
And yet there can be but one truth: and if we will believe the greatest part of
them, neane of them hes the truth: because for one wha affirms he haith the
truth, there be an hondreth wha gainsayeth him. For every one of them
alleges that all the rest goes wrang, whilk is very easy to be believed,
because the Catholic kirk says the same of them all, she being, when they
war not to say the lyk of her. And how can any man of judgment think otherwise
of them? We see the scripture taken by them al for an ordinaire proof of their
extraordinaire calling: it speeketh (as they say) in all their favors. Yet can
we not be of so many religions: nor acknawledge or obey so many pastors of sa
extraordinair and contrary opinions. But ye will say that he should be received,
followed and obeyed, wha agrees best with the scripturs. That is may
reasonable, if it can be knawe^. But who is judgment shall be taken in the
matter? Neane will hear the Catholic kirk, because they have left her: and so
as rebellious subjects can abyd no thing but just co^de^nation of their
schism and error. If we will credit the parties, every man interpretes the
scriptures best. The craw thinks her awen bird fairest: and vain men
esteimeth may of the birth of their awe brain. So shall I be in lyk pain and
difficulty, as before, not knawing whom to follow, whom to flee. If they say
that I must read the scripturs and follow thois, wha stands best by the
verity co^tined therein. What? Man I be a profound theologue before I know my
pastoures? Man I be so deiplie learned before I know my masters school? shall
I be judge extraordinair to this extraordinair calling? Man I read al these wha
hes written, before I enter in Gods house or acknawledge any of his officers,
for Quistatuit aliquid part inaudita altera, aequum licet statuerit, haud
aequus fuit? Man I be sovereign magistrate in this matter to give out the final
decree? Man I be the interpreter of our master and Lords testament? Shall my
foolish brain be a square of his verity? Truly if I should stand to that
whilk I think best, I must be judge: and if my judgment be a rule to me to
obtine the verity, and consequently eternal life, al men should follow my
judgment: For there can be but one rule seeing there is but one verity, except
we wald think that the truth should be bowed to every man's fantasy; whilk we
see now is do^ne throghout al Europe wheresouer this extraordinaire calling hes
onie credit, whilk hes brought in this multitude of sects: For the judgment
being referred to the particulaire (wha for that cause is sent to the bible,
whilk he must have to consult with all, as if he war some profound doctor in
Israel) according as he shall find by his judgment, he pronunceth the sentence
of true and lauful extraordinaire calling in favor of his Minister. According
to this form, in Scotland the Ministers following the doctrine of Sir John
Knox, or friar John Crag ar thought to have a good calling. In England the
Brunistes, Puritains, and family of Luif, or any hid new invented fantasy,
thinks their pastors truly called. In France Calvin and Beza with their
adherentes ar thought to have a lauful vocation among the greatest part of
our simple Protesta^tes, except percha^ce Monsieur du Plessis hes drawn any
to a maire recent imagination. I say the simple protestants; for they wha
haith any good opinion of them selfis takes to them self the free will whilk
they refuse to others -- nullius iurant in verba magistri, they receive no
thing, but that whilk agrees with the scripturs, that is, with their judgment
and opinion, where their new holy fathers ar oftyms rejected by virtue of their
awen rule, that is of every private man's opinion.

In Almanie there be good store of these new extraordinair called me* the
freedom of the towns makes many free vocations: For there they have liberty
to think, say, and follow what every man pleases. There is no act of
parliament to keep their vnio^, nor force them to an accord, whilk can not be
haid by any otherway among them, wha will have the holy spirit speeking no
farther then he whispereth in their ear. True it is that where there is
Princes wha commands, the people must change their religion with their
master: Als lang as their master is Lutheria^, they must say with him: if he
changes opinion or dies, they must be reddie to receive some other faith.
This hes beine sindrie times experimented in that contray. But in free towns
as every man hes received of his Ministers preaching, he judges the
scriptures to say the same, where our comone proverb may justly be employed,
as the fool thinks, the bell clinketh. If their war public place in Scotland
for Ministers of other sects, I doubt not but they wald ava^ce their cause
also. For that license given to every man to be judge on the scriptures,
without any act of parliament to ty them to a certain confession of faith
(whilk in Almanie hes maid this multitude of extraordinair vocatio^s) wald do
the lyk among ws. How miserable be the estait of Almanie in that diversity
of religions, if not openly at leest priuatlie, I think every man knaweth, wha
hes beine there. It is may certain that in sindry towns there be publicly
professed ten, twelf, yea tuentie or 22. sindry faithes every one detesting an
other. As to the private opinions, I haid an evident experience my self in our
voyage of Italy, retourning to France through Almanie the year of God 1600. in
the month of December. For being in Ausburgh (where publik exercice is granted
only to Catholics and Lutheria^s) we war at the table a good number (I think
above 12) of honest, lyk men of diverse nations, but meakle maire diverse of
religions, where one of the company maire zealous then the rest (as it appeared)
taking occasion of our being at the Iubilee, did ask sindry curious questions
there anent. A French gentilman, wha was come from Rome with ws, picked with
the matter, mirrilie, and yet courteously, did pray the company, if it might
be without their offense to grant him a request, whilk being accorded, he should
answer to their questions according to his knawledg, if he fand it agreeable to
the^: this being proponed so discreatly and honestly (as that nation can do it
very weall) it was not only accepted and granted of all the company, but
also maid a great silence throghout all the table, every man being desirous to
know his request.

Then having thanked them all, I am desirous (says he) to know what
profession of religion now adays, every an of yowdoeth may approve, or what
man ye think may worthy of credit when it is question of any head of
religion called in controversy. And that no man may think I desyr of others
whilk I wald not do myself, I will speik for my co^pagnons and me (meaning of ws
three) we approve above all others the Catholic Apostolik Roman religion, and
esteimes the resolutions gevin be the siege Apostolik in Rome, pronunced by the
Paipe, to be preferred to all other, because we find so many solemn promises
maid by God to S. Peter's successoures. As I pray the company not to be
offended at my dema^d and judgment, so I promise not to tak in evil part when
it shall please any of you ather to ask at me any question, or freely to
pronunce what he means.

Skairslie haid he ended his propos, when an other (wha was a citizen of the
town) answered, that doubtless the true religion was contained in the
confession of Ausburghe, and that Luther haid beine one of the may notable
men of our aage in all his resolutions, provyding he be taken as he should be,
because as an other Elias he come to instruct the world in these latter days.
The town (as it appeared) gave him courage to speik so far to the praise of
Luther, and maid him tell his opinion so freely.

His nightbour (so far as we culd conjecture of his contenance) approved not
his judgment altogether, whilk, being required he did schaw by his words,
saying that he acknawledgeth Luther for a very notable man, yet wha haid not
seen al, whilk was necessair for the reformation of the kirk of God, and
cheeflie touching the Lords supper. His reformed supper maid ws al believe he
was ather a Zuinglian or Caluinist. The Lutherian wald have entered in defense
of his master, but being requested by the company, desisted, althoght with
difficulty.

Nixt to him was sitting a certain man very modestly cled, wha maid a great
owtward schaw of simplicity of mind, he with a law voice says thus: I think
na man should acknawledge any religion but that, whilk comes immediately of
the holy spirit, wha only can be received as a true master in that matter,
vnus est magister vester; and beatus homo quem tu erudieris psalm. 93. 12.
domine. His answer schew him to be of the Suentfeldien sect, wha will here no
thing but that, whilk their private spirit does teach them, having ay in their
mouth, audiam quid loquatur in Psalm. 84. ^.
me Dominus Deus.

He wha was joining with him, sayis with a laughing visage, that he haid never
been so curious, as to exame al other men's religions or devotion, but was
accustumed to tak thing is as he fand them, leeuing every man at his freedom,
thinking it very reasonable that every man should have the privilege whilk God
had gevin him. It was not difficill to conjecture that he was one of the
Libertins, wha in matters of religion thinks laufull to contrefait and
dissemble al things and believe, what they list, or rather believe no thing at
all.

Here we haid some lytill silence, because he, wha nixt follows maid
difficulty to tell his opinion, whilk nevertheless he did utter, saying he
did no ways approve discord among Christians, seeing our Lord and his
Apostles haid geven ws so notable exemples of union in making al things
commoune, whilk war propre and private before, whilk might easelie be put in use
again, if men wald tak away meum and tuum, mine and thyn. We understood by his
words that he was an Adamit, wha among other detestable errors, thinks
that women should be commoune als we all as other things. The haill rest of the
company, as it appeared, did abhor from that opinion. Yet one says; at
leest seeing it was lauful to the people of God in auld times to have many
wifes, why shall it now be forbidden? The Lutherian wha spak first, having
answered that sic laws war never in practice among the Christians, because
they war improued by JESUS CHRIST. Yet your Luther (says he) maid no
difficulty to preach, Si non vult vxor, veniat ancilla. This answer maid the
company to laugh, and remembered ws that some of our contray men, haid good
store of wyfis by a new form of partising, the party taking the crime one him
in espera^ce to have a new wife schortlie after.

He that was nixt wald glaidlie (as it seamed) have halden his peace, yet for
fear we should tak worse opinion of him, hydding his pernicious error the best
he culd, said that it haid pleased God in our days to schaw the light of his
verity in Pole, Lithuania, and Transsyluania, althoght other nations haid not,
as yet, received it. These words gave ws to understand that he was one of the
new Arrians whais errors war brought in by Grogorius Pauli Minister of
Cracouia, Valentinus Gentilis, Seruetus (wha was brunt at Geneua by Caluins
persuite) and some others of lyk stoofe, wha is doctrine is full of blasphemies.

The nixt following with a litill smylling, says, that he mervelled not of sa
many diverse opiniones whilk war entered in the world, seeing that men seeks
rather subtle interpretations, then the verity. As to my part (says he) I
bear my warrant about with me (schawing ws his bible he haid in his bosom)
whilk is may easy to be understand of it self, and therefore only to be
read, all other books ather being false, or invtill, whatsoever estimation
other men makes of their lang co^mentaires auld or new. If it haid beine in
England I wald have taken him for a Brunist. only culd I judge for the tym
that he approved no man's sentence that haid spoken before him.

To be schort their was neane at the table (except so many Catholics as we
war) wha agreed with an other. So every one having ather openly or couuertlic
schawen his opinion, we perceived an honest man (wha haid dyned with ws, and
for some affairs haid beine occupied in the town very lait) sitting at the
head of the table. his honest and homely behavior maid ws al cast our eyes
one him, and as it war, with our silence and looking desyr the lyk of him. He
being a man of judgment and doctrine, and wha was (as weal apeared by his
discourse) very weal traveled, after he haid hard the hail matter and what we
looked for, says in this sort.

Althoght the time and place (good sires) might justly excuse my silence, yet
that I seem not to be by my fellows, or refuse your desire, I will some what
say to the matter I hear hes bein among you, rather to end the dispute
vnfite for the table, then to continue it. Whilk I willabour to do by the
reciting of a notable history of a may noble and wise Prince.

Being in France during the regne of Charles the nynt, his brother Henry the
third being then our King (whereby we knew him to be a Polonian) I passing
through the contray chanced on a noble man of my auld acquentance at Rome, wha
(after he haid imbrassed me with great affection, and asked of my other voyages
sinceparting) invited me to his house whilk was hard by: whilk I did
willingly, not only because I looued him tenderly, but also because I haid
hope by his moyen to know the singularities and customs of the co^tray (whilk
was my principal eara^d there) by reason of his quality. Among many notable
things I hard of him, I remarked this history as he was reheirsing the
singularities of the court of parliament of Paris.

King Louis the 12. being earnestly requested and prayed by one of his fauorits
and greatest courtiers (wha haid an action of great importance before the court
of parliament) to speek the presidentes and chief consellers in his favor,
giving his M. to understand the great right he haid and what wrang he received
of his adverse party. The King on this information partly for justice cause
(of whilk he was very zealous, and therefore called the father of the people)
partly for the affection he bure to the gentilman, did promise him all
assistance, not only in speeking to his judges, but also with his awin
presence, if that might bring anic thing to his right. And so he did in deed.
For the day appointed for that procese, being cume, the king with princes, and
all other wha uses to assist his M. in sic actions, repared to the palace,
where being arryved he schew to the court of parliament that he was come there
to see them do good justice according to their charge and aith, and chiefly to
that gentilman, whais actio^ was in hand, and wha haid done him good seuice
sindry times wherein he yet continued. They on the other part promised (with all
submission and reverence) to do their duty. Every man according to his rank
having taken place, the aduocat, wha was for the gentilman, begane first, and
with great eloquence defended his parties cause, wherewith the King was very
glaid, not only in him self (as he schew by his continance) but also vtered the
same by words, saying to the first president (wha was sitting laigh under) il
ha gaigne, Hehes vvin. The president answered modestly, it will please your M.
to hear the other party, whilk the King granted the mair willingly that he
thought his favorite haid alredie win his cause. The other aduocat having
entered in the matter with alse great eloquence, but meakle better right, maid
the king first to doubt, nixt to incline sumwhat, and last of al to approve so
his title, that before he haid pleaded out the cause, the King bursted out with
these words, Monsieur le president, ils ont tous deux gaigne. They have vvin
both. Ye know by lang experience what is to be done in sic things, I leave it
to you and your company. And so before the last aduocat haid ended, he past
away. He haid beine versed in the greattest affairs of Europe during his time
both in peace and wears, and haid experimented both good and evil fortune
before, and in his regne, yet not being trained wp in matters of law and
judging of procese, he was easelie moved to both the syddes by eloquence
filled wp with appearand reasones. But as a may worthy and noble Prince he
did acknawledge his awin imperfection, leaving the judgment of sic affairs to
the ordinaire officers of justice, to judge as they thought may reasonable, as
wha by lang and daily experience, great knawledge of the law and examination
of many difficill actions passed by their hands, was sufficiently armed
aganes fraudful craft of the parties, wha easelie may circumvine a new judge.
My advyse is (good sirs) that we imitat and follow this noble king (wha being
so pote^t a monarche durst not rashly judge on earthly matters) in their
controversies of religion referring the judgment to the kirk, wha hes bein
these many hondreth years in possession of that office by Gods awin
commission, and wha with sick equity hes decided so many intricat and
difficil questions, where doubtless, if we haid beine constitute judges we wald
have pronunced the sentence for both the parties, seeing that many of ws hes
done weal worse having condemned the kirk the spouse of JESUS CHRIST unhard
her, following the first that hes accused her and praised him self.

This history was pronunced with sic grace and authority that it appeased our
dispute, and pleased very weal the hail company; and (if I be not deceived)
is not vnpropre to end our present discourse, whilk is of the same subject.
Wherefor without any farther, I will pray you and al good readers (if percha^ce
any man will bestow the time to read this rude discourse of mine) to excuse my
language considering my lang absence out of my native contray: and that the
verity does best appear, when it is leest painted, as the scripturs them self
do, using no eloquence, for simplex est veritatis oration. sure I am if this
subject haid fallen in an eloquent man's hand, that it might have beine traicted
mair quickly and maire plainly and with greatter contentemente of the reader.
I have done what I culd, and not what I wald, except that in party I have done
what I wald, seeing I have writtin to the simple and unlearned as I culd and
according to my possibility, I know not if according to their capacity.
Howsoever it be I will pray the good reader to tak my panes in good part.
Perchance some other sorry to see a good cause so unskillfully handled by me, will
tak occasion to do it, as it should be done. whilk will be very easy to many
learned me^, of whilks therbe guide no^bre (thanks be to God) in our Island, wha
may tak from me the victory of eloquence, but not the honor of guide will,
wherein every man may triomphe without prejudice of his co^pagnon.

Wherefor I pray the learned and Godly Catholic endeavor him self to traict
this subject as it mereteth in the name of God, wha bliss ws all.

AMEN.
ERRATA
page 36. kitk kirk. page 37. sutter suitor. page 68. co^uenticules
conuenticles page 70. mattres matters page 91. breuing. brevving page 88.
mumdus mundus. page 107. prove proof page 108. libre liber page 109. mereth
mereteth page 133. preisthaed preisthead page 155. hirk kirk


