A Kentishman of Maidstone, his own Arraignment, Confession, Condemnation,
and Judgment of Himself, whilst he lay Prisoner in the Kings Bench for the
Poisoning of Sir Thomas Ouerbury.
JAMES FRANKLIN


I Am Arraigned at the black dreadful Bar,
Where Sins (so red as Scarlet) Judges are;
All my Inditements are my horrid Crimes,
Whose Story will affright succeeding Times,
As (now) they drive the present into wonder,
Making Men tremble, as trees struck with Thunder.
If any asks what Evidence comes in,
O'tis my Conscience, which has ever bin
A thousand witnesses: and now it tells
A Tale, to cast me to ten thousand Hells.
The Jury are my Thoughts (upright in this,)
They sentence me to death for doing amiss:
Examinations more there need not then,
Than what is confessed here both to God and Men.
The Crier of the Court is my black Shame,
Which when it calls my Jury, does proclaim
Unless (as they are summoned) they appear,
To give true Verdict of the Prisoner,
They shall have heavy Fines upon them set,
Such, as may make them dye deep in Heavens debt.
^ About me round sit Innocence and Truth,
As Clerks to this high Court; and little Ruth
From Peoples eyes is cast upon my face,
Because my facts are barbarous, damned, and base.
The Serieants that about me (thick) are placed,
To guard me to my death, (when I am cast)
Are the black stings my speckled soul now feels,
Which like to Furies dog me close at heels.
The Hangman, that attends me is Despair,
And gnawing worms my Fellow Prisoners are.
His first Indictment for Murder.
THe first who (at this Sessions) loud does call me,
Is Murder, whose grim visage does appall me,
His eyes are fires, his voice rough winds out rores,
And on my head the Divine Vengeance scores;
So fast and fearfully I sink to grownd,
And wish I were in twenty Oceans drowned.
He says I have a bloody villain bin,
And (to prove this) ripe Evidence steps in,
Brow'd like my self: Justice so brings about,
That black sins still hunt one another out:
It Is like a rotten frame ready to fall,
For one maine Post being shaken, pulls down all.
To this Indictment, (holding up my hand,)
Fettered with Terrors more then Irons I stand,
And being asked what to the bill I say,
Guilty I cry. O dreadful Sessions-day!
His second Indictment for poisoning.
ANother, forthwith bids me come to the Bar,
(Poison) that Hel-borne cunning Sorcerer,
That winds himself into a thousand forms,
And when the day is brightest flings down storms,
This has an Angels face, a Mermaids tongue,
And notes of much destruction it has sung.
This, is the Coward Sin, which (like a Pill,)
When it is most gulded, is most sure to kill.
Whether this Hel-hownd strike at Morn or Night,
So treacherous, close, and speedy is his fight,
That Armors all-of-proofe, nor Towers of Stone,
Can bar his bloody Execution.
This Snake with the smooth skin hissed out my name
Among others more, and venomed me with shame
That rancles to the soul. It says that I
(For a poor golden handful) did defy
Heaven and Salvation, when I gave consent
To tear the bowels of an Innocent
With lingering poisons of themselves too strong,
But that their working God put off so long;
That darker deeds (by this) the light may try,
Which now perhaps in worser bosoms lie.
To this Indictment holding up my hand,
(Fettered with Terrors more then Irons I stand*)
And being askd what to the Bill I say,
Guilty I cry. O dreadful Sessions-Day!
His third for raising of Spirits etc.
IN rushes then a heap of Accusations,
For all those Godless damned Abominations:
Raised by the black Art, and a Coniurers spelles:
As to call Spirits even from the deepest Hells,
To fetch back thieves that with stolen goods are gone,
And calculate natiuities: such a one
Credulity of fools and women made me,
And to that glorious infamy betraide me.
A Cunning man, a Wise man were my style,
When I both played the Fool and Knave the while.
Art knew I none, nor did I ever reach
A bough of learnings tree; what I did teach
To others, or did practice, it was all
Cheating, false, apish, diabollicall.
To this being likewise asked, what I can say,
I guilty cry. O dreadful Sessions day!
This Devils coat to my body made I fit,
Brave was the out side, thrid-bare was the wit.
His Judgment.
FOr these thick Stygian streams in which thou have swo^
Thy guilt has on the laid this bitter doom;
Thy loathed life on a tree of shame must take
A leave compeld by Law, er'e old age make
Her signed passport ready. Thy offense,
No longer can for days on earth dispense
Time blot thy name out of this bloody roll,
And so the Lord have mercy on thy soul.
He was executed the 9. of December. 1615.
Imprinted at London for J. T.


