THE Third part of the Countess of Pembrokes Yuychurch. Entitled, Amyntas
Dale.

Wherein are the most conceited tales of the Pagan Gods in English Hexameters
together with their ancient descriptions and Philosophical explications.

By ABRAHAM FRANCE.

(...).

At LVNDON Printed, for Thomas Woodcocke, dwelling in Paul's Church-yeard, at
the sign of the black Bear. 1592.

Illustrissimae, atque ornatissimae Heroinae, piae, formosae, eruditae: Dominae
Mariae, Comitissae Pembrokiensi.
NYmpha Charis Chariton, morientis imago Philippi,
Accipe spirantem post funerarursus Amintam:
Accipe nobilium dulcissima dogmata vatum,
Delicias, Musas, mysteria; denique, quicquid
Graecia docta dedit, vel regia Roma reliquit,
Quod fructum flori, quod miscuit vtile dulci.
Deuotiss: Ab. Fr.

The Third part of the Countess of Pembrokes Yuychurche. Entitled, Amyntas
Dale.
NOw that solemn feast of murdered Amyntas aproached:
And by the late edict by Pembrokiana pronounced,
Yuychurches nymphs and pastors duly prepared
With fatal Garlands of newfound flower Amaranthus,
Down in Amyntas dale, on Amyntas day be asembled.
Pastymes ouerpast, and death's celebration ended,
Matchles Lady regent, for a further grace to Amyntas
Late transformd to a flower; wills every man to remember
Some one God transformd, or that transformed an other:
And enioynes each nymph to recount some tale of a Goddess
That was changd herself, or wrought some change in an other:
And that as every tale and history drew to an ending,
So sage Elpinus with due attention harckning,
Should his mind disclose, and learned opinion utter.
Thirsis turn was first: who after his humble obeissance
Made to the Lady regent, thus fram'de himself to be singing.
When noe fire, noe air, noe earth, noe water apeared,
Confusd fire, rude air, vast earth, dull water abyded.
Water, the earth and air and fire extremely defaced,
And fire, the earth and air and water fowly deformed.
For where water or earth, where air or fire was abiding,
Fire, air, earth, water were also jointly remaynyng.
Fire and air and earth with a shapeles water abounded,
And earth air and fire, that shapeles water aforded,
Eueryone was in all, and all was in every one thing,
So each one made all, made this rude All, to be nothing,
Nothing else but a heap, but a mass, but a lump, but a cluster;
Cluster, lump, mass, heap, where seeds of things disagreeing
Fire, air, earth, water lay all confusd in a corner.
Hoate things fled fro the cold, dry could not abide to be moystned,
Hard contemned soft, and light fro the heavy retired.
Noe peace, noe concord, noe good conformable order,
Naught but wars and iarrs, all strife, and all on an vproare.
Noe air transparent, noe Sun was cause of a daylight,
Noe nights-light Phoebe was a cheerful guide to the darcknes;
Earth was not yet firm, fire could not yield any sparkles,
Water would not flow: til sovereign God Demogorgon
Ends these broils, brings peace, setts every thing in an order.
Heaven fro the earth he dyuides, and earth fro the water he parts,
And pure Crystal sky from gross thick air he remoueth.
These things thus distinct, in seu'rall places he setleth,
Light fire mounteth aloft, and lyfts itself to the heaven,
Air next in lightness, next him was placed in highness,
Gross earth drew downward, and stayed herself by the center,
Water cleaues to the earth, and there as a border abides.
Fire, air, earth, water were every hour in an vproare,
Whilst they lay on a heap, and all dwelt jointly together;
Fire, air, earth, water were brought to a peacable order,
When they lodged apart, each one in several harbor.
Thus by a disioyning, Elements were mightily joined,
And by disunyting united fyrmely for ever.
Each part thus placed, round earth was cast in a compass
Like to a globe or a ball, that noe side might be unequal.
Then were swelling Seas powrd forth in places appointed
Here and there by the earth; whose branches duly dyuyded
Kingdoms from kingdoms: then first came springs fro the mountayns,
Pooles were pitched in moors, and lakes lay down by the valleys,
Ryuers flowd by the fyelds with a thousand slippery wyndings,
Some sucked up by the earth, some ran to the sea with a restles
race, his shore for a banck with billows mightyly beating.
Then fyelds stretched themselves, then meddowes began to be flowring,
Green leaves cou'red trees, and trees gave shade to the forests,
Mountayns mounted aloft, and dales drew speedyly downewarde.
Over sea and earth, the relenting air he reposed,
And there foggs and mystes and clustred clouds he appointed.
Thence come thunder-clapps, thence lightnings, there be the blustering
Wyndes, whose roaring blasts would tear this world in a thousand
Pieces, might they rage at randon: but the prefixed
Coasts are known, for these four brawling brethren appointed.
Eurus flew to the East, where Memnons mother arises,
Sweet Zephyrus to the Weast, where Suns revolution ends,
Cold Boreas to the North, whence frosts are daily proceeding,
Moist Auster to the South, where showers are ever abounding.
Next to the air, bright sky, as a royal throane he reposed,
And each part thereof with starrelight all to beesprinckled.
Thus was an ougly Chaos transformd at last to a brave world,
So brave, that it was a world so worthy a world to be seeing.
Every quarter of it with such live things was adorned,
As were conuenyent and seemly for every quarter.
Gods dwelt in bright skies, and Christall-mantled Olympus,
Fowls did fly by the air, and Fishes swam by the waters,
Mylde beasts fed by the fyelds, and wild beasts rangde by the Forests.
But man was wanting, who might be the absolut owner,
And have perfect rule and jurisdiction over
Mylde beasts and wild beasts, and Fowls and slippery fishes.
At length Man was made of mould by the crafty Prometheus,
Crafty Prometheus, who by degrees contrived a picture,
And gave life to the same with fire that he stole fro the heavens.
And, where other beasts lay poaring down to the grownd-wards,
Man with a greater state had a look lift up to Olympus,
Whence his better part was then but lately deryued.
Thiswas an age of gold, then was Saturnus an Emprour,
Sythe-bearing Saturn rul'de justly without any judges,
Noe laws, noe lawyers were then, yet noebody lawless,
Noe thieves and robbers were hanged, yet noebody robbed,
Noe bloody manqueller was kyld, yet noebody murdered.
Undissembled love and plain symplycyty ruled,
Uncorrupted faith and pure synceryty reigned.
Heart conceaud noe harm; tongue, hearts interpreter only,
Plainly without any gloss or dissimulation opened
Hearts harmeles conceits: hands, true and trusty to practyse,
Did, what his heart contryu'd, or tongue had truly delyu'red.
Pinetrees pitched upon hills, gave wonted grace to the hill-topp,
Not with gaping gulfs of Auernus daily bedashed,
But with trickling showers of Olympus sweetly bedeawed.
Every man kept home, and where he received a beginning,
There did he make his grave, and drew his days to an ending.
Noebodie was so mad by the ragged rocks to be ranging,
And with clouds, winds, seaes, nay heaven and hell to be stryuyng,
Only to spy and ly, and feed fools ears with a wonder,
How fro Geneua to Gaunt, from Gaunt he repaired to Vienna,
How fro the Turk to the Pope, fro the Pope to the Souldan of Aegipt,
And at last came back fro the newfound world as an old fool,
With four Dutch-french words, with a strange-cutt beard, or a Cassock.
Noe towns were walled, noe walls were loftyly towred,
Noe towers were planted with diu'ls invention ord'nance.
Every bush was a bower, and every rustical harbor
Was sort sufficient, where noe force was to be feared.
Deaths-forerunner Drum did sownd no dreadful Alarm;
Noe man-murdring man with a teare-flesh pyke, or a pollax,
Or blood-sucking sweard was known by the name of a Sowldyer.
Peace made every man secure, securyty careless,
Carelesnes causd mirth, mirth never dreeds any danger.
Fruytefull ground untorn, vntutcht, was free fro the plough snare,
And self-sufficient, of her own self yielded abundance.
Noe newfound dishes were sought, noe costly devises
Farr-fetcht and dear bought: men simple lived a simple
Life, vsd simple food, sloe, nutt, plum, strawbery, apple,
Ackorne falln fro the oak, and blackbery plucked fro the bramble.
Tigers were then tame, sharpe-tusked boar was obeissant,
Stoordy Lions lowted, noe woolf was known to be mankind,
Bears did bow at a beck, no serpent breathd any poison.
Spring was still-springing, whole year was wholly a spring-tyme,
Eue-shyning sun with clouds was never eclipsed,
Euer-flowring flowrs with frosts were never anoyed.
Lyfe-breathing Zephyrus with sweet blast charyly fostred
Every fruit, which the earth of her own free bounty aforded.
Yea good-natured ground at last gave plentiful harvest,
Never sowd, still mowd* not tyld, yet syld with abundance.
Then floods flowde with milk, each wel-spring then was a wyne-spring,
Every greene-hewde tree bare sweet and sugered honny.
H^ppy the age, and happy the men, that lyu'd in a happy
Age: age all of gold, where noe bad thing was abyd^ng,
All of gold indeed, where each good thing was abounding.
But when good Saturn by force was dryu'n to Auernus,
And usurping Jove did rule and reign in Olympus,
Golden days were gone, and silver time was aproaching,
New Lords made new laws: th'owld spring time Jupiter altered,
And changed it to a year, and new-made year he dyuyded
In four parts, each part with a seu'rall season appointed,
Warm Spring, hoate Summer, cold winter, changeable Autumn.
Then swelting doggstarre, then scalding breath of Apollo,
Then northern Boreas causd better bowres to be builded.
Then gro^^d began to rebel, from a mother changd to astepdame,
Naught but thorns and weeds of her own accord she aforded,
But by force constraind and by compulsion urged:
Now plow's chaynd to the yoke, and yoke bound fast to the oxen,
Now are furrows drawn, and seed cast into the furrows.
Jupiter of purpose made fruitful ground to be fruyteles,
And sowld naught for naught, and sweetenes mixed with a sowrenes,
Least that too much ease might make men still to be careless,
Whereas want breeds care, and care coins daily devises.
Next came brazen time, whose hoate and furius offspring
With bold brazen face was greedily geu'n to revenging,
Yet not past all grace. Lastage was named of Iron,
And her cursed brood in like sort framed of Iron,
Merciles, hard, unjust, unkind, intractable, hateful,
Ireful, of Ironful, yea too full of ire, full of Iron,
Faith, and truth, and shame, for shame lay down in a dungeon,
And in-came whooredome, pride, robbery, treachery, treason.
Grownd with ditch and hedge was now exactly dyuyded,
Ship with waves, and sails with wyndes were all to be tossed,
Sea scowrd with rouers, land scowrged daily by robbers,
Mine, not thine, came in; Mine and thine, quite was abandond.
Corn is now contemnd, and fruitful tree's but a tryfle,
Their minde's all on mines of brass, lead, copper, or Iron,
Or gold, gold far worse, then brass, lead, copper, or Iron.
Earth's very bowels now are torn even down to Auernus,
All for gold, gold worse then a thousand feends of Auernus.
First, was an age of gold, then golden goodness abounded,
Last, was an age for gold, for then gold only triumphed.
Weak are thrust to the wall, and strong men strive to be mighty,
Mighty men hope to be Kings, and Kings still look to be emprours,
Might rule's right, lust law, rage reason, worlde's at a world's end,
World runs all on wheels: guest fear's to be robbed as he sleeps,
Host can skarce trust guest; wife longs for death of her husband,
Husband loath's his w^fe, and brethren skarcely be brethren.
Infamous stepdames keep cups with poison abounding
For their sons in law: and sons (o viperus offspring)
Daily before their days wish fathers days to be ending,
All Is turned vpside down. At last Astraea departed,
And from damnable earth, to the spotles sky she removed.
Then came gryesly Giants, and needs would clymbe to Olympus
With mounts on mountains, till thundering Jove in a fury
Brake their scorched bones, and bullwarkes all to be battred:
Whose congealed blood transformd to a most bloody offspring
By the earth their mother that causd that desperate vproare,
Still contemned Gods, and heavens daily maligned.
Wherewith Jove incenst, and moved of late, by Lycaons
Owtrage, ouer-whelmd whole earth with a mightyly flowing
All ouer-flowing water: so that, not a man now,
But good Deucalion was living, and not a woeman,
But good Pyrrha remaynd, which mankind newly repaired,
And, by casting stones, brought forth so stoany an offspring.
THirsis having made an end of this tale to the content of the hearers
generally; Elpinus began thus to work upon it. Poets and Painters (men say)
may well go together, since pen and pencill be both alike free, and do equally
challeng the self same prerogative. Cicero reports, that Fabius a famous
Roman, thought it an especial commendation, to be surnamed Pictor. And,
Antiquissimum e doctis fuit poetarum genus, says the same Cicero. When I talk
of Painters, I mean not the ridiculous fraternity of silly Wall-washers:
neither do I ever once think of our lofty rimers, when I make mention of
Poets. Yet a wall may be colored by an elegant Painter, but the conceit and
elegancie is more then the color: and poets (seeking as well to please, as to
profit) have well made choice of verse, yet the making of a verse is no part of
Poetry: otherwise, the sweet and inimitable poem of Heliodorus, should be no
Poem, and every unreasonable rimer should wear a Laurel garland. Both
poetry, a speaking picture, and paynting, a dumb poetry, were like in this,
that the one and the other did under an amyable figure and delightsome veyle,
as it were, cover the most sacred mysteries of ancient philosophy. Nay,
Pythagoras himself by his symbolicall kind of teaching, as also Plato by his
conceited parables and allegorical discourses in his books called, Phoedrus,
Timoeus, and Symposium, may make any man believe, that as the learned Indians,
Aethiopians, and Egyptians kept their doctrine religiously secret for fear of
profanation, so the Grecians by their example, have wrapped up in tales, such
sweet inventions, as of the learned vnfolder may well be deemed vonderfull
though to a vulgar conceit, they seem but friuolus imaginations. Yea that song
of the most wise Solomon, called for the excellency thereof the song of songs,
is altogether mystical and allegorical, least any man think my speech but a
tale, in attributing so much to poetical tales: which, me thinks, may well
be compared to sweet grapes covered with leaves and branches, or to the old
Sileni, which being but ridiculous in show, did yet inwardly contain the
sacred image of some God. He that cannot conceive any sufficient cause which
might induce antiquity to deal thus warily in matters of such importance,
let him know, that rerum (...), the picturing, fashioning figuring, or, as it
were, personal representing of things in verse after this manner, is most
effectual and auayleable, to move men's minds, to stir up delight, to
confirm memory, and to allure and entice our cogitations by such familiar and
sensible discourses, to matters of more divine and higher contemplation.
Poetical songs are Galeries set forth with variety of pictures, to hold every
man's eyes, Gardens stored with flowers of sundry savors, to delight every man's
sense, orchyards furnished with all kinds of fruit, to please every man's
mouth. He that is but of a mean conceit, has a pleasant and plausible
narration, concerning the famous exploites of renowned Heroes, set forth in
most sweet and delightsome verse, to feed his rural humor. They, whose
capacity is such, as that they can reach somewhat further then the external
discourse and history, shall find a moral sense included therein, extolling
virtue, condemning vice, every way profitable for the institution of a
practical and common wealth man. The rest, that are better borne and of a more
noble spirit, shall meet with hidden mysteries of natural, astrologicall, or
divine and metaphysicall philosophy, to entertain their heavenly speculation.
That this is true, let us make trial, and first in Saturnus and Chaos, offered
unto us by Thirsis: whereof, before we speak, it shall not be amiss to note
this generally, for the better conceauing of ensuing particularities. Jupiter,
Juno, Neptune, Ceres, with the rest, are therefore called Gods and goddesses,
for that in the superior and fiery region of the air noted by Jupiter, in the
inferior, represented by Juno, in the bowels of the earth, figured by Ceres,
in the deapth of the Seaes, shadowed by Neptune, and so in others, there is,
(...), a certain celestial and divine power, so called by Hippocrates, and by
the ancient Poets more particularly expressed by the sundry titles of several
Deities proportionable thereunto. And, if the copulation or conjunction of
these deified elements observe the natural order of generation, it is called of
the Poets a marriage of such a god and goddess: if it swerve and degenerate
from the wonted course of nature, they term it adultery and libidinous love,
and the parties, lovers, not man and wife, as in the former kind of
copulation: so that, no man has cause to think it a ridiculous repugnancy and
impossibility, when as Poets in their songs make mention of the love, marriage,
procreation, affinity, offspring, pedegrees, and discents of their superior and
inferior gods.

Now for the transformation of Thirsis his Chaos, true it is, that Ovid much
after this manner discourses of the creation of the world, of the reducing of
the confused Chaos into distinct forms, of Prometheus his framing of man of
the very earth it self: which things, no doubt, as also the distinction of
times into four several ages, of gold, silver, brass, and iron, were taken,
(although in part mistaken) out of the sacred monuments of Moses. Leo
Hebraeus, ^^t of some ancient Poet, whom he calls Pronapides, reports
another history of the same matter, albeit not after the same manner.
Demogorgon, s^ith he, the great and terrible God of heaven and earth,
accompanied only with Aeternitie and Chaos, perceived on a time, an outrageous
uproar and tumult stirred up in the belly and bowels of the forenamed Chaos:
therefore, to ease her, he stretched forth his o^ne hand and opened her womb,
whence presently came forth a filthy and deformed offspring, called Litigiu^,
Strife: which no sooner apeared, but immediately it bred brabbles, made a foul
stir, stird up contentions, and strove to mount up toward heaven, but that by
Demogorgon he was ouerruled, and thrown down to the lower parts and
elementall regions. Chaos as yet had not ended her chile-bearing labor and
travail, but was troubled with heavy burdens, fainty sweats, languishing
groans, and fiery torme^ting agonies; so that Demogorgon could not for pity
withdraw his helping hand, till by his assistance, she had brought forth Pan,
with his three fatal sicters, and also Erebus, Ether, and Dies. Pan found
such favor, that Demogorgon committed unto him the whole charge of his
family, commanding his three sisters continually to wait and attend upon
him, as his handmaydes: And thus was Chaos at last delivered, and eas^d of her
childe-birth. By Demogorgon, or peradventure, Demiurgon, is here understood
that one and only creator of al, to whom Aeternitie is inseparably conjoined,
since himself is, was, and will be eternal and everlasting. Chaos, in his
eternal society obteineth the third place, because she is that common,
confused, and vndistinct matter, which the ancient Philosophers made Coeternall
with the Creator: calling the one, the Father, the other the mother of al
things formed; yet so, as they always esteemed Demogorgon the chief and
efficient, and Chaos only the subsequent and secondary cause in this
procreation. The reason why they joined Chaos with the Creator as a companion
from all eternity, was this: they thought it proceeded from him by a certain
eternal generation: so proceeding, as eternal, because always proceeding;
yet so eternal, as proceeding, because not of her self proceeding* but from
the procreator. And as they made Chaos proc^ede from Demogorgon eternally
without limitation of time, so they affirmed, that he af^erwards framed all
things of this unformed Chaos, not eternally, but in time. The tumult and
uproar styrd up in the bowels of Chaos is her natural inclination and desire
of bringing forth things variable and disagreeing. The hand of Demogorgon,
which opened her belly, is that celestial power, reducing the universal and
confused possibilities of Chaos, to distinct forms and actual
particularities, and gives us also to understand, that this first production
of things, was not usual and accustomed (as natural generation is, which
afterward succeeded this supernatural creation) but strange and wonderful, and
did therefore require the use of Demogorgons hand, that is, the most mighty and
effectual instrument of all others. Strife came first forth: for from prima
materia that first and general matter of all that was made, the division and
distinction of things, which before were confused and vndistinct, proceeded:
and this division is called strife; since it conuerseth among four striving and
contrary elements, the one always maligning and repugning the other. His face
was ougly and deformed: for discord and division causes defect, want, and
imperfection, as union and concord, are the authors of blessedness, beauty, and
perfection. Strife striving to get up to heaven, was thrown down to the earth
for in the celestial bodies there is noe discord, noe repugnancy, and therefore
consequently, noe destruction or mortalyty, effects thereof: but only in these
earthly and inferior matters, contynually subject to infynite decays and
dissolutions, caused by oppositions and contrarieties. The burdens, sweatings,
groanings, and agonies of Chaos, are the euer-strugling and contending natures
of the four elements, heavy earth, moist water, breathing air, and consumyng
fire: for pacification whereof, ^an was borne, which in Greek s^gnifieth, All:
and betokens that general and universal power of nature, ruling and
gouernyng whatsoever proceeded from Chaos; and quyeting those disagreeing
qualities of the repugnant elements. Whereupon it is here said, that after
Strife, came, Pan; sith after discord, comes concord, and succeeds in place
thereof. Together with Pan, the three fatal Ladies of Desteny, Clotho,
Lachesis, and Atropos were borne, attending on Pan, the God of vniuersa^l
nature. (...), so called of turnyng, notes the continual motion and
reuolutio^ of things present, and turns and spinneth the present threede of
life. (...) is the production and drawing forth of that which is to come,
preparing and keeping diligently the threede of life which yet remains to be
turned and spunne. (...), as if a man would say, irremeable, irreuocable, and
immutable, represents what is past, which never returns: and this last Lady
has d^spatched, finished, and cut of the threede committed to her charge to be
spunne. In Latin they are called Parcae a parce^do, of sparing, by the
contrary, as some think, because they spare not, as little John was called so
in jest, being a man of a wonderful great stature. Scaliger lyketh not this
co^ceipt, since they spare indeed rather the otherwise, one of the^ only cutting
of life, whereas the other two maynteyn and preserve it. Varro thought they
were in Latin called Parcae a pariendo of bringing forth, whereupon their
particular names were framed accordingly, of the times of birth, the one being
of the ancient Romans called Nona, the other Decima, of the nynth and tenth
month, in the which usually by course of nature the child is borne: yet,
because whosoever is borne, is borne to dye, the third was named Morta of the
Latyne Mors, which signifies Death, represented by the third fatal Lady.
Claudian in his Poem de raptu Proserpinae, makes them all attend on Pluto,
so does Fulgentius, because their dominion is most over these terrestrial and
inferior bodies, figured by Pluto and his infernal kingdom. Again, th^se
Ladies draw forth the threede of man's life, and man's life is long or short,
according as the body is framed of a strong or weak matter, which earthly
matter is subject to Pluto. The first has care of man's birth, the second of
his life, the third of death. The first is young, the second of myddle age, the
third very owlde: the young Lady holds the distaffe and draws the flax, the
myddle has a spyndle and windeth up the threede, the owld sister with her
Sheares snappeth the threede in two. Homer in his hymn to Mercury makes them
winged, for time flies, and death draws on. They are here said to be borne
of Chaos, since in that first distinction and separation of things out of that
confused heap and Mass, every particular matter had his peculier desteny
allotted unto it: others would have them to be borne of Erebus (the most hidden
and remote part of the earth) and of Darcknes: that, by the obscurity of the
father and mother, we may imagine how difficult, nay how impossible a thing it
is, to search out the hidden causes of Desteny. There be also some that make
them the daughters of Jupiter and Themis, the rulers and directers of fatal
justice and universal providence. ^he first ^^cture of (...) Desti. (...).


Plato in the tenth book of his common wealth, makes them the daughters of
inevitable Necessity, placing between their knees, the great Spindle of
adamant, reaching from the arctike to the antarctike Pole: they sit on a
throne, aequally distant one from an other, covered with white roabes, crowned
with diademes, singing proportionably to the heavens harmony, things that are
past, present and to come: they all jointly together with their mother
Necessity, turn this spindle, Clotho with the right hand, Lachesis with the
left, Atropos with both, as appears there in Plato more plentifully, in
imitation whereof, as should seem, Ovid in the last book of his
transformations, brings in Jupiter talking with Venus concerning the
immutable decrees of these inexorable Ladies, written in Iron, brass, and
Adamant.

Talibus hanc genitor: sola insuperabile fatum
Nata mouere paras? intres, licet, ipsa sororum
Tecta trium: cernes illic molimine vasto,
Ex aere, and solido rerum tabularia ferro:
Quae neque concussum caeli, neque fulminis iram,
Nec metuunt vllas tuta atque aeter^a ruinas.
Inuenies illic incisa Adamante perenni
Fata tui generis.
Hereupon does Capella call them Jove's scribes; for that they register his
decrees in these everlasting tables. Catullus in his wedding song of Peleus and
Thetis (which notes the generation of things, for (...) is slyme, and Thetis
water, where of all things are made, yet by an efficient; and therefore all the
gods were at that wedding, except Discord, the only cause of dissolution)
makes their heads to be bound with a white fillet or lawne: some others give
the^ garlands of Daffadil. ^he second ^^^ture of (...).


The sixth child that Chaos brought forth to Demogorgon, was named Erebus, a
certain natural power incident to every inferior thing, and, as it were,
cleaving and adhaerent thereunto: and this, in the terrestrial globe, is the
very matter it self, whereof things are made, the only cause of generation,
corruption and all other alterations in these inferior bodies: but in Man, the
(...), or little world, it signifies that natural appetite, and continual
desire, which man has to obtain new matters; whereupon the Poets have also
feigned, that this Erebus had many children, as Labor, Envy, Fear, Deceit,
Fraud, Obstinacy, Poverty, Mysery, Famyne, Lamentation, Sickness, Death, and
such like, whose mother they made Darkness, or Night, who bare to Erebus her
husband this loathsome brood, according to those verses of Claudian in his
first inuectiue against Rufinus.

Glomerantur in vnum
Innumerae pestes: Erebo quascunque, sinistro
Nox genuit foetu; nutrix discordia belli,
Imperiosa fames, laetho vicina senectus,
Impatiensque sui morbus, liuorque secundis
Anxius, and scisso moerens velamine luctus,
Et timor, et caeco praeceps audacia vultu,
Et luxus populator opum, cui semper adhaerens
Infaelix humili gressu comitatur egestas,
Faedaque auaritiae complexae pectora matris
Insomnes longo veniunt examine curae.
The two last children of Demogorgon, were Ether and Dies, the superirior
region of the air, and the brightness of the day: who, of brother and sister,
became man and wife, and begat Caelius or Caelus, the heaven: which name was
first attributed to Vranius, Father of Saturnus, king of Creete. This Vranius,
for his excellency, was deemed rather caelestiall, (as his name imports) then
any earthly creature: representing that aethereall purity by his divine
wisdom, and the caelestiall light and brightness, by his virtuous
conversation: this is the historical sense: now for the Allegorical conceit,
it is most manifest: for Caelus, the heaven, including and concluding every
thing, is therefore called the son of Ether and Dies, for that his nature is
aethereall by reason of his most subtle and spirit all perspicuity; and also
bright and lightsome by the plentiful and abundant light of those so many
radiant stars wherewith it is sweetly garnished. And as Vranius himself for
his virtue was called Caelus, heaven, so Vesta his wife, because she was a
fruitful and happy mother, was called Terra, the Earth. Of these two,
Saturnus was born, wholly addicted to husbandry and tilling of the earth, and of
nature slow and heavy, like the earth. Allegorically thus; Saturnus is Son
to Caelus, because he is the first Planete, and nearest to the highest heaven.
He is also son to the earth, as in most of his natural proprieties
resembling the earth. First his color is pale and leaden, like the earth:
Secondly, as the earth of all other Elements is most gross and beauy, so
Saturn among other Planets is most slow in finishing his revolution, as
requiring full thirty years for the accomplishing of the same; whereas Jupiter
ends his in twelve years, Mars in two, Sol, Venus, and Mercury in one, and
Luna, the Moon, in one month only. Thirdly Saturn by his influence works
such a constitution and temperature in men's bodies, as is altogether agreeable
with the qualities of the earth, to wette, cold and dry, making them in whom he
is predominant, sad, melancholicall, grave, heavy, pale, given to husbandry,
building, and such like exercises. Whereupon he is figured as an old man, sad,
euil-fauoured, musing, badly clothed, with a sith in his hand, a fit
instrument for his earthly practice. He afordeth a reaching wit, profound
cogitations, perfect knowledge, sage and grave advice, constancy of mind and
perseverance: by reason that the earthly nature of his mother is qualified and
tempered with that of his caelestiall Father. Lastly, as of his Father he
causes perfection and excellency of mind, so by his mother he is the author
of deformity and destruction of the body,

His wife was called Ops, his own sister, borne of the same Father and Mother.
Allegorically, Opis signifies help or assistance, noting the aid and
furtherance of the earth herself toward the tilling of fyldes, building of
howses, and founding of Cities. So is she worthily both sister to Saturn, as
borne of Caelus, whose influence is the best mainteyner both of husbandry and
earthly habitations: and also wife to Saturn, for that as he is the agent, so
herself is the patient in husbandry and fortification. Saturn bereft his
father Caelus of those instruments which are fit for generation: Cronos, that
is, Saturn, is time, time is the measurer of the worlds motion; therefore, as
one world, so one time, one Saturn; and Caelus can get no more like him, since
all is now spen^ and consumed upon him. Saturn fearing the prediction of
Oracles, that his own son should expel him out of his kingdom, consulting
with his brother Titan, resolved to devour all the sons, that his wife Opis
should bear unto him; and for that intent commanded her to show him every
child immediately after the birth thereof. She first brought forth Jupiter and
Juno: Juno being a girl, and therefore not to be devoured, was presented to
her Father: but Jupiter was preserved from his rage and fury by the noise of
Cymballs and Taburs, which so possessed Saturn his ears, that he heard not
the young infant Jupiter, cry. Saturn angrily and earnestly demanding where he
was, his wife gave him a Stone wrapped in a cloth, insteede of the boy, which
stone for haste and rage, he swallowed, and afterward vomited it up again,
even as he did all such of his other sons, whom he had devoured. The like
policy she used in preserving of Neptune, making his father believe, that it
was noe child, but a young colte, whereof she was then delivered, which Saturn
thinking to be true, glutted the colt accordingly, Next to these were Pluto and
his sister Glauca borne: but Glauca being only showed to Saturn, Pluto escaped
alive: all the rest of his sons he first devoured, and presently vomyted, as
before is mentioned Allegorically, Titan the Sun, and Saturn. Time, conspire
together and resolve, that all things in time borne, shall also dye in time.
For, as the devouring continuance of outwearing time consumes all things, so
the life-giuing influence of the quickening son, is the chief cause of
procreation: whereupon it is usually said that Sol and homo generant hominem,
The sun and man beget man. His daughters he devoured not: for, time consumes
indiuidua, this thing, and that thing, but not the root and ground of things,
figured by the femall sex. Juno the air, with Jupiter the fire, and Neptune
and Pluto the water and earth, are not devoured: for, the four elements
continue still: but the rest are still subject to continual corruption:
corruption I mean in part, which is alwais a generation, of some other
particularitie, not a total or general destruction: which is the cause, that
time cannot digest and utterly consume, but is enforced to vomit and restore
even those very bodies which he first devoured, according to that old ground
which gives us to learn, that, as nothing can be made of nothing* so nothing
can be made to be nothing, Gigni e nihilo nihil, in nihilum nil posse reuerti.

Homer calls Jupiter (...), for that be sucked Goats milk, the reason is
this, a Goat is ever climing and getting upward, as Jupiter is, noting the
fiery and highest part of the air. This ethereall and superior part of the
air, was thought of the Pythagoreans (by reason of the wonderful celeritie
and quick dispatch of his motion and revolution) to cause a most sweet and
melodious harmony: whereupon Jupiter was reported to be preserved by the
tinkeling of Cymballs and sounding of taburs.

Jupiter is placed immediately after Saturn in heaven, as Jupiter King of
Creete, succeeded his father Saturn in his kingdom. This Cr^etish King
Jupiter for his bountiful and liberal nature was called by the name of that
most good and beneficial planet Jupiter; even as his father, for the causes
rehearsed, was named Saturnus. He that has in his nativity Saturn
predominant over Jupiter, is like to be endued with no excellent qualities,
especially those that usually proceed from Jupiters influence, as Justice,
liberality magnificence, piety, favor, beauty, riches, promotion* love, and
such like: all which by the maligning nature of this damnifying planet Saturn
are altogether corrupted and depraved, as the Creetish Jupiter when he was but
a tender i^fant, was feign to be secretly conveyed away from his stern and
cruel father Saturn, who sought his destruction. Saturn being imprisoned and
chayned by the Titanes, was released by his dutiful and merciful son
Jupiter, who came with a mighty army to the succor of his father.
Allegorically when the good and beneficial Jupiter in any man's nativity
ouer-ruleth prejudicial Saturn, beholding the other planets with an amyable
and fortunat aspect, which confounds the dead looks and frowning face of
Saturn, then is that man freed from th^se, ^aturnian chains of calamity and
misery, which otherwise he were subject unto. These Titanes were the sons of
heaven and earth, signifying the four elements, which include in themselves a
certain terrene and earthly nature, and are therefore continually depressed
and beaten down by the power of the superior bodies: for, vapors by the heat
of the sun (the sun is called Titan) are drawn up, which when they
approach near the celestial region, are repelled and driven down again, or
else resolved into pure and subtle air, and this mounting up, and throwing
down is perpetual.

Jupiter, when he had thus enlarged his father, usurped his crown and royal
dignity bannishing Saturn into hell, or the infernal regions. Historically,
Jupiter having freed his father from thaldome, took upon himself the dignity
and regiment of Creete, enforcing Saturnus to fly into Italy; where he was
honored living and dying as a God: for, such was the custom of that age to
attribute divine honors and titles unto them as Gods, of whom they received any
goodness: as they did indeed of this Saturnus, who taught them how to till
and manure the ground, to coin money of mettale, which before was of leather,
to leave bushes and caves, and live more ciuily and orderly, and to observe
certain laws and constitutions by him invented, as appears by Virgil. S.
Aeneid. who therefore calls that time, the Golden age. Now in truth Italy was
then far inferior to Greece in Wealth and Dignity, and might therefore be
called the infernal region, or base and low country in respect of ^aturns
flourishing kingdom: as also, for that Italy is lower then Greece, as
inclining more to the west; and it is an usual thing, for men to call the
East, the superior or higher region, and the West, he lower, downecast, and
inferior; or lastly, as Varro will have it, quoth latet Italia inter praecipitia
Alpium and Apennini: because Italy does, as it were, lurk and lie hidden
between the abrupt and high tops of the Alps and the Mountain Apenninus.
That this is true which I report, of his being in Italy, besides the
testimony of Virgil in the place above alleged (where he says that Italy,
was named Latium, a Latendo, because Saturn did lurk and lie there, to hide
himself from his son Jupiter.) Ovid also will bear me witness, who in the
first of his Fasti, concluding this matter, says, that for an eternal
memorial of his arrival and good institutions, the Italian posterity in
their money of mettale, figured the ship wherein he came unto them.

At bona posteritas puppim formauit in aere,
Hospitis aduentum testificata dei.
Allegorically, as before; when in any man's action or nativity Jupiter is
predominant, then does he control Saturn, depriving him of his power and
dominion, and driving him out as his inferior. Sabinus thinks that Saturn
was therefore said to be driven into the infernal dungeons, for that he is of
all other Planets, the most remote and furthest from the earth, making that
infinite and unmeasurable height of Heaven, to be this Tartarus, this infernal
or strange and far removed region. But the most conceipted allegory for this
purpose, is that following: for although that in Saturns time and reign, that
is, by the in^luence and virtue of this Planet Saturn, the seed is preserved
in the bowels of the earth, and congcaled or thickened in the bodies of sensible
cretures at the first generation and conception; yet when these things are
brought forth and receive increase and augmentation, then does Jupiter show
himself to be King, and deals all in all, driving out old Saturn into
corners, and blind and obscure places, where the first seeds of things lie
hidden, which only are subject to Saturnus jurisdiction.

Time is swift and euerpassing without stay: which may be the cause why
Saturn is changed to a swift courser, when his wife took him dallying with
Philyra, of whom he begat Chiron the Centaure as hereafter will appear.

Thus have we the good old Saturn in his rags, with his four children
before him, his consuming sith in his right hand, and a stone covered with
cloth put to his mouth, with the left hand.

Out of Eusebius, he may be thus also figured: himself covered with a long
roabe: two eyes before, as many behind: of which four, two did ever watch,
whilst other two slept: four wings were fastened to his shoulders, two spread
forth, as though he were ready to fly, two plucked in, as though he meant to
stand still: he had also two wings at his head. The four eyes and wings note,
that Time, though it seem to sleep, yet always watches, and yet so
watches, as it seems still to sleep: and, as it stands, it flies away,
and yet in flying, after a manner stands still. The two wings at his head are
said to represent the intellectual faculty and reasonable power of man's
mind, the old Philosophers being of opinion, that the soul received from
Saturnes sphere, the gift of reason and intelligence. Saturnes two pictures.


Saturn his wife had diverse names. Rhea, (...) a fluendo: either because
every thing flows from the earth, as from a fountain, or that the flowing
reign is made of vapors and exhalations from the earth. Vesta she is also
called, because she is Vestita, that is, covered with corn and grass as with
a vesture: or, quia vistat, because she stands by her own force, quasi
vista, according to that of Ovid in his Fasti.

Stat vi terra sua, vistando vesta vocatur,
Causaque par graij nominis esse potest. Vt (...), d^catur.

The other Vesta, Caelius his wife, differs not much from this: but that she
seems to figure the very essence of the earth; and this, the fruitful
efficacy, operation, and assistance thereof, whereupon she was called Opis, as
I said before, of help or assistance: Cybele, of a Ph^igian Mountain so
called: or rather, as Festus Pompeius thinks, (...), signifying a Cube; since
in old time they did consecrate a Cube unto here the reason was for that a
Cube which way so ever it be thrown, stands always direct, representing
therefore, the not remoueable stability of the Earth. Lastly she was called
Magna matter, the great mother both of Gods and men, since as well the Paegan
Gods as men, being both mortal, must both acknowledge the earth their foundor
and benefactor, whereof more in Tassoes Messagiero. She is covered with a
Diadem bearing diverse turrets; the circuit of her Crown signifying the compass
of the Earth, and her turrets, the stately buildings of the same, according to
that of Lucretius lib. 1.

Muralique caput summum cinxere corona,
Eximijs munita locis quod sustinet vrbes.
Her garment is allwrought with flowers and bordered with branches, noting,
that all such things proceed from the Earth. Her Chariot is drawn by Lions,
o^ four wheels: the four wheels give us to understand, that although the
Earth be immouable, yet all earthly things are in continual motion and
alteration, according to the four several constitutions and seasons of the
year. The Lions note the mighty and Lyonlike operation of the celestial
bodies upon the earth: or, that husbandmens bodies must be strong like Lions:
or lastly, that the stoutest were tamed, and must live and dye on and in the
earth. Her scepter is a sign of earthly pomp and dignity. Round about her be
empty and vacant seats; either, for that the earth has always places of
habitation in store for succeeding people; or, for that houses, cities, and
countries become many times desolate by pestilence, famine, sword, fire, or
otherwise; or, because many regions were then thought to be uninhabitable.
Isidorus makes her hold a key in one hand; for that the earth is, as it were,
closed and shut up in the winter, fostring then and cherishing in her lap the
seed, till spring time come, and then she opens her self* and therefore is
April so called of Aperio, quasi Aperilis, the open, or opening month, as Ovid
does expound it, Aprilem memorant ab aperto tempore dictum. Coriba^tes her
priests stand round about her, al in armor: and so should every man, priest,
swain, or whatsoever, be ready with life and limme to defend his native soil.
The noise of Taburs had (as Ovid also testifies) his beginning from Jupiters
birth, who, as I said before, was by that means concealed from his father
Saturn: some refer the roundnes of the Taburs, to the roundnes of the earth,
and others there be who think that the Taburs and Cymballs did note the winds,
storms, clouds, and thunders; al which come of the exhalatio^s of the earth,
mounting upwards. Pinus is sacred unto Cybele, for that Atis a sweet young
youth who she loved, was by her transformed into the same for pity, seeing the
poor boy (being rejected of her for violating his vowed virginitte) plague his
own body, by cutting off those parts wherewith he had offended. This Atis
(says Eusebius) represents flowers which are fair in show, but fade and
fall away, before they bring forth any fruit, which is the cause, that he is
said to be deprived of his fructifying members, the tale is sweetly told by
Ovid in his books de Fastis. Another Vesta they made to be Saturns daughter,
signifying that vital heat, which, dispersed all over and through the bowels
of the Earth, gives life to all earthly things, On her service attended the
Vestall Virgins in Rome, so called of their Mistres Vesta, of whom also Ovid in
the same book has learnedly discoursed; among other things, adding this, Nec
tu aliud vestam, quam viuam intellige flammam. Cy^^^s pictu^^.


In Saturns time, the harmeles simplicity of his subjects gave name to the
golden age, as I said before; which by degrees declining to silver, and brass,
in the end became all of iron. Then did Astraea leave the polluted earth, and
settled her self between the Stars called Leo and Libra, the Lion, and the
Balance, covering her face in the clouds for grief to behold such impiety.
Allegorically, Astraea, of Astrum, a Star, is celestial and heavenly
Justice: a Judge must be stout and of good courage, as a Lion, least for fear
of menaces he spare the due execution of justice: yet he must also weigh each
thing in an upright balance, that affection or corruption do not pervert
judgment: Her face is covered with clouds: for, a Judge must not behold the
parties with affectionat and preiudicat eyes, seduced by wrath or drawn away
by Partiality.

Astraea thus gone, the Giants began to rebel: a bloody broad, borne of
Coelus his blood, falling on the earth, when Saturn his son deprived him of
his virility. Some other make them to be borne of Neptune and Iphimedea:
Neptunes brood is furious and unruly by reason of the superaboundant store of
unbridled humors: and Ihimedea, is nothing else but an obstinat and selfe-wild
conceit and desire grounded in the mind, and not remoueable. These
allegorically are seditious and rebellious subjects in a common wealth, or
schismatic and haereticall seducers in the Church. Jupiter, the King or
supreme governor: the Giants, rebels or heretics: the hills, their aspiring
deseignes and accursed stratagems: Jove's lightning, the just plague and
confusion of such attempts: their serpentine feet signify their permicious
and poysonable policies, and their monstrous and most degenerate deformity in
opposing themselves against the commonwealth. The battle was fought in
Phlaegra a sulphurus part of Thessalia, for (...) is to burn. There is yet
extant a fragment of Claudian, entitled, Gigantomachia, the bataile of the
Giants wherein many of their names are particularly set down, the historical
truth is extant in Theagenes and Eudoxus. Of the Giants blood came the
bloud-thirsting Lycaon; in truth a tyran of Arcadia, who first did violate the
l^^res of truce and league by killing and sacrificing unto Jupiter, a certain
hostage sent from the Molossi: whereon came the fable, that he set man's flesh
before Jupiter, to try, if he were a God or not. This Lycaon for his cruelty,
is here transformed into a wolf, which in Greek is called (...), agreeable to
his ancient name. That which follows of the general deluge or ^^^^dation, is
borrowed, by likelihood, out of Moses, by adding thereunto the conceit of
Deucalions and Pyrrhaes casting of stones behind their backs for the renewing
of our stony generation, For, both Lucian reports, that Deucalion entered an
arc, and beasts and fowls with him: and Plutarch, that he sent forth a Dove,
which returning, brought a sign of the decreasing waters, all which agree with
the history of Noe. As for Deucalion, he is said to have reigned sometime in
Thessalia, which being for the most part drowned by sudden waters, himself
and his wife Pyrrha assembled on Mount Parnassus all such as escaped: and by
their wisdom (figured by the oracle from Themis) brought them to be sociable
again, and multiply as they did in former times.

But all this while we forget the poor Prometheus, who yet lies groaning on
the mountain Caucasus, for stealing fire from heaven to make his image live:
and takes it very unkindly, that we have, in this creation of the world, made
noe mention of him, by whose bold enterprise, Man, the best part of the world,
was both framed first, and quickened afterward. Minerua, lyking Prometheus his
work, bad him ask what he would that was in heaven, to furnish his begun
woorkmanship: he aunswering, that, unless he were there to see what was in
heaven fit for his purpose, he could desire no certain thing, was brought up
thither by Minerua: where; seeing every thing quickened with fire, he dre^e
secretly near to the Chariot of the Sun, and thence kindled a stick, and
with that fire gave life to his image.

Historically, Prometheus is said to be the first who made any image of man, of
clay, whence this poetical imagination took his beginning, and by continuance
of time grew to this (by the accustomed policies of the old deceauing
serpent, who is ever ready to further Atheism and ^dolatry) that Prometheus
was honored as a God, and had Temples dedicated, and Altars erected for his
service accordingly. As apeareth by Pausanias, who reports, that in the
Academy of Athens, there was an altar consecrated unto Prometheus, and that at
certain times appointed for that purpose, diverse men came thither, and there
lighted a number of burning brands, running with them one after an other all in
a row to Athens, in such sort, that whosoever carried his fire brand burning
quite to the City, was reputed Victor: and if any man's brand were extinguished
or put out by the way, he gave place to his fellow following.

Allegorically, Prometheus is the foreseeing and fore-knowing of things
before they come to pass (for so the very word imports,) as Epimetheus is
the knowledge which we get by the end and event of things already past and
gone, whose daughter is Repentance. Prometheus was the son of Iapetus and
Themis: Iapetus is nothing else (says Proclus) but the most quick motion of
heaven, (...), of moving and flying: An Eagle consumes his heart, a wise man's
mind is euerfull of meditations: as much as by the day the Eagle deuoureth,
so much the night restores again; so, learned men's cogitations admit
intermissions, but noe interruptions: he was bound to a pillar, or column; The
mind is bound fast to the body, and there chained for a while: some make him
bound to the Mountain Caucasus, for that there he observed the revolution of
the heavens: The yielding and giving place to the succeeding fealowe or
companion that runs, means nothing else, but that the whole course of this
present life, is full of woe and misery, which when they are once ended, our
race is ended also, and they that come after us, take at our hands, as by
tradition, the like fire brands of calamities, as we our selves sustained
before. Remy Belleau brings in Prometheus lamenting in his Bergerie, Thus,
Noble race de dieux, semence Titannine,
Qui retires du ciel ta premiere origin,


And so forth, as follows there in that his complaint: so passionate, as that
I am sorry not to repeat it, and yet so copious as that I have no time to
rehearse it* especially having spent so much of the day about this outworn
Chaos, which, I hope, will therefore seem pardonable, because the understanding
of all other poetical tales and transformations by likelyhoode to be toulde,
must needs receive great light from that which has been spoken. Here good
Elpinus pawsed awhile: and since Pan had been by him ef^ soones mentioned in
this his discourse, it was thought convenient by the Lady Regent, that Menal^as
his song should be spent on that subject: who thus began accordingly.

A Roadian Syrinx was a Nymph most noble, amongst all
Naiades and Dryades, that, in old times highly renowned
Arcadian fountains and mountains ever aforded.
Fleshly Satyrs, Fauni, Siluani daily desired
Brave bony Syrinx love, yet loueles brave bony Syrinx
Fleshly Satyrs, Fauni, Siluani daily deceived.
Syrinx took noe joy in joys of Queen Cytheraea,
But vowed life and love, and heart and hand to Diana.
Like to Diana she lyu'd, for a virgins life she professed,
Like to Diana she went, for in hunting roabes she delighted,
And with bow and shafts still practysd like to Diana;
Only the diffrence was, that, in-hunting-mighty Dianaes
Bow, was made of gowld, and Syrinx bow of a cornell:
Which noe great diffrence was not so greatly regarded,
But that Nymphs and Gods even so were daily deceived,
And hunting Syrinx for mighty Diana reputed,
So nere by Syrinx was mighty Diana resembled.
Pan, with a garland green of Pinetree gayly bedecked
Saw this Nymph on a time come back from lofty Lycaeus,
And his rural love in rural sort he bewraied.
Scarce had he said, Bony sweet: but away went brave bony Syrinx,
Went through hills and dales and woods: and lastly aryued,
Where gentle Ladon with mylde streams sweetly resounded,
Ladon stopped her course, Ladon too deep for a damsel.
Then, quod Syrinx, Help, dear sisters; let not a virgin,
Immaculate virgin by a rural Pan be defiled.
Rather let Syrinx be a mourning read by the river,
So that Syrinx may be a maiden read by the river.
By and by Syrinx was turned to a read by the river:
By and by came Pan, and snatched at a read for a Syrinx,
And there sight and sobd, that he found but a seade for a Syrinx.
Whilst Pan sighs and sobds, new tender reads by the whistling
Wyndes, did shake and quake, and yielded a heavy resounding,
Yielded a doleful note and murmur like to a playning.
Which Pan perceauing, and therewith greatly delighted,
Said, that he would thenceforth of those reads make him a Syrinx.
Then, when he had with wax, many reeds conjoined in order,
His breath gave them life: and so Pan framed a Pastors
Pipe, which of Syrinx is yet still called a Syrinx,
SHort and sweet, quod Elpinus; and I mean not my self herein to be ouer-long.
Pan therefore is said to have two horns on his forehead, reaching up even to the
heavens; a red and fiery face, a long beard hanging down on his breast, a staff
and a Pipe compact of seven reeds in his hand, a spotted and freckled skin
on his body, crooked, rough, and deformed lymmes, and legs like a Goat.
Cupid and Pan contending for superiority, Pan had the woorst, and the worst was
this, that he extremely loved Syrinx, who extremely hated him. Besides a
certain historical discourse of an Arcadian, called Siluanus, who to ease his
Loue-sittes, was much addicted to Music, and first (as is reported,) found out
the Pipe made of seven reeds, there is in this tale a more philosophical
conceit. Pan in Greek, as I said, signifies, All* and does both by name and
natural lineaments betoken that universal efficacy of nature, ruling and
governing all. The two horns on his forehead reaching up to heaven, represente
the Arctike and Antarclike poles. His spotted skin is the eight Sphere,
distinguished with those heavenly lights of innumerable stars. his fiery
face, containing two ears, two eyes, two nosethrills, and one mouth,
proportionably shadow the fiery and bright nature of the seven Planets, His
long bristled beard and bush, be the beams of the Sun, and other Planets and
Stars, whose influence is the cause of earthly generations. His crooked*
rough, and deformed lymmes, are the four Elements, and the bodies thereof
made, which, compared with those above, are altogether rude and homely. His
Goats feet and legs note out the crooked course of things terrestrial: for
even as Goats go never straight, nor continue any settled and direct co^rse* but
wander and skipp here and there; so, what soever is under the Sphere of the
Moon, observes no constant and immutable proceeding, but confusedly changes
from this, to that, from that, to an other, without any intermission. Pan was
in love with a spotles and pure virgin^ universal nature affects and
earnestly desires a celestial and perpetual constancy in these inferior
bodies. Syrinx runs from Pan; so does immutable constancy forsake these
inferior matters, which are daily tossed to and fro, and continually subject to
tenthousand alterations. Syrinx in her maine flight is stopped and stayed by
the River Ladon: in like sort, the heavens and caelestiall bodies (which by
reason of their continual motion are like to a River) do stay and bridle
that wandering and inconstant constancy of inferior bodies: and though the
heavens themselves, by reason of their perpetual motion seem somewhat varyable
and inconstant, yet this their instability is indeed most stable, and motion
immutable, noted by this spotles virgin transformed into reads, which being
moved and breathed upon by the life-inspiring Zephirus, yield this sweet
melody; as those celestial globes are said to do, by the impulsion and
direction of their intellectual guydes and Spyrites. Hereupon is Pans pipe
made of seven reads, figuring that heavenly harmony of the seven Planets,
caused by their neuer-ending circumduction and revolution. Pan lastly, besides
his pipe, has a staff also, Since by the stayed and settled motion of the
seven Planets, this universal efficacy of nature orders the proceedings of
these inferior bodies accordingly. The tale is told by Ovid, and Achilles
Statius. Pa^spi^ture.


Mydas the golden ass, and miserlike fool (who was feign to vnwish his wish
of transforming every thing into gold by his tutching thereof) preferred Pans
rural harmony before the heavenly skill of Apollo, and was therefore woorthily
rewarded with asses ears for his labor: which deformyty, though for a time he
concealed, by covering it with his purple bonnet, yet at last was discovered by
his Barber, who neither daring to tell it any body, nor being able to keep it
secret, dug a pit in the ground, and therein whispered, That his master
Mydas had asses ears: which pit being by him then filled up with earth again,
brought forth a number of reeds, which blown by the wind, repeated the buried
words, uttered by the Barber, to weet, That King Midas had asses ears. A
golden fool and a silken ass, may for the time be clad with purple, and
delude the gazers on, but when the reads grow, that is, when after his death
the learned begin to write, and lay him open to the world, then is his nakedness
discovered. Pan commonly has his garland of the leaves of a Pinetree: he was
accounted the God of Sheep and Shepherds, and kept in the woods. Such was
Siluanus, who therefore had his name of Silua, signifying a wood. Fauni and
Satyri may hither also be referred, whom Jupiter calls rusticall and
halfegods: Ovid 1. Metamorphose^n.

Sunt mihi semidei, sunt rustica numina Nymphae.
Faunique, Satyrique, et monticolae Siluani,
Quos quoniam caeli nondum dignamur honor,
Quas dedimus certe terras habitare sinamus.
These Satyrs are said to be little Dandiprats, with two horns, crooked noses
hayry and rough bodies, and goats feet. Plutarch writes in Syllaes life,
that there was one of them caught not far from Apollonia a city of Epirus,
and brought to Sylla: which being by many interpreters demanded who or what he
was, vttred a kind of voice, but such as no man understood, it being a sound
that resembled the neying of a horse together with the bleating of a Goat.

It is reported, that Antony the Eremite, saw and spoke with such a Satyr in
the Desert of Egypt: who confessed that himself and his fellows were but
mortal creatures, inhabiting the wilderness, although the Gentiles seduced and
blinded did honor them as Gods, calling them Fauni and Satyri: adding further,
that he came as sent from his companions, desiring Antony to make intercession
for them to his and their God, whom they did know and acknowledge, to have come
into the world to save the world. Besides these rural Gods, the ancient Poets
perceauing that there was a life-giuing moisture and efficacy of humor, in
trees, hills, seas, floods, lakes, wells, and such like, have appointed them
their several Nymphs and Deities, as Ladies of the same, hereof came these
names, Dryades, Hamadryades, Ephidryades, Oreades, Napeae, Naiades, Limniades,
and such others. The Satyrs above spoken of, by reason of their wanton and
lascivious nature, are made companions of Bacchus, the drunken God: but since by
talking of Pan, I have thought of them here, I mean to leave both him and them
to their forests and rural harbors.

Pan thus dispatched it was thought good, that Saturn his children should be
remembered in order: and first, Jupiter, by Damaetas, whose tale was much to
this effect.

Jove, as he looked down fro the skies, saw beautiful Io,
Saw, and said, well met, fair maid, well worthy the thundrer:
Toil not thy sweet self, it is too hoate, come fro the scorching
Sun, to the cooling shade: lo, here, and here is a harbor.
If thou dar^st not alone pass through these desolat harbors
Fo^e fear of wild beasts; let a God be thy guide by the forest,
And noe trifling God, but a God that welds the triumphant
Mace, and hurls lightnings, and thunderbolts from Olympus.
Io fled for fear, for love Jove hastened after;
And for a quick dispatch, both lands and seaes on a soddaine
Ouer-cast with a cloud, and so caught bewtiful Io.
In mean time Juno Jove's wife looks down fro the heavens,
(Seeing lightsome skies at myd-day so to be darkened,
Yet noe foggs or mystes from pooles or moors to be lyf^ed)
Meruailes much, and asks, if her husband were in Olympus,
Who transformd sometimes to a Bull, sometimes to a golden
Shower, was wont each where such slippery prancks to be playing,
Jove was not to be found; why then, quoth Juno, without doubt
Fowly deceived I am this day, or fowly abused.
Down straight way fro the skies in a jealous fury, she flingeth,
And those coosning clouds, and darcknes roundly remoueth.
Jove foresawe this gear: and fair white bewtiful Io,
Straight with a tryce transformde to a fair white bewtiful heyfar.
Juno geu's good words (although, God knows, with an ill will,)
And commends this Cow, and sais; o happy the Bullock
Who might once enjoy this fair white bewtiful Heyfar.
Then she begins to demand, who brought that Cow to the pasture,
Of what kind she came, and what man might be the owner.
Jove, that he might shyft off busy Juno, towld her a loud lie,
That naught else but the earth brought forth that bewtiful Heyfar.
Juno well acquainted with her husbands wyly devises,
Asked this Cow for a gift: Then Jove was brought to a mischif:
Wha^ shall he do? shall he give his loving Io to Juno?
That were too too hard: shall he not give Juno the Heyfar?
That would breed mystruste: shame spurrs on, Love is a bridle:
And shame-brydling love, noe doubt, had lastly prevailed,
But that, alas, if a wife, if a sister, a Lady, a Juno,
Even of a Jove, of a Lord, nay even of a brother, a husband
Should be denied a Cow, then might it seem to be noe Cow.
Thus gate Juno the Cow: but yet she feared a Bull still:
And, to be more secure, she delivered Io to Argus
For to be carefuly kept, whose waking head had an hundred
Eyes; two slept by course, and but two only; the other
Still kept watch and ward: Which way soever he looked,
Ever he looked to the Cow, Argus looked ever on Io.
In day time she feeds, yet feeds still watched of Argus,
Feeds on boughs and grass, (food too too sour for a sweet less)
Drincks of pitts and pooles, drinck noething fit for a damsel.
All night long she is tide by the ouer-dutiful Argus,
And on bare could ground her tender side she reposeth.
When she begins her grief, and woeful case to remember,
And would lift up her hands, to beseech unmerciful Argus,
Noe hands are left her, to beseech unmerciful Argus.
When she recounts her smart, and means her woe to be vttring,
Io lowes as a Cow, insteede of an heavy bewayling,
Io the lowing Cow frights Io the less, by the lowing.
When to the silver streams of fathers brook she repayreth,
Fathers silver streams show daughters head to be horned,
Io the horned Cow, with her horns fears Io the damsel.
Every water-nymph still looked and gazed on Io,
Never a water-nymph thought this same Cow to be Io,
Inachus her father still looked and gazed on Io,
Ioes own father did never thinck her his Io:
And yet poor Io went every day to the aged
Inachus: once himself plucked grass, and gave to the heyfar:
Io the gift for giuers sake, very kindly received,
And with streaming tears her fathers hand she besprinckled,
Lykt and kissed his hand: and would have gladly revealed
Her mischaunce; and this new transformation vttred,
But still, groans and lowes, insteede of words, she deliu'red.
At last, two letters with her hoof she prynts by the river,
I, and, O, for a sign of late transfigured Io.
Inachus howld when he read this doleful letter of Io.
Inachus howld, and cride, and clipped disfigured Io,
Hanged on her horns and neck: and art thou Io my daughter?
Io my daughter, alas, o most unfortunate Io.
Inachus every where has sought for beutiful Io,
And now finds her a Cow, insteede of a beutiful Io.
Io better lost then found: for I lost her a brave less,
But now have found her, not a less, not a wench, not a woman,
Found her a Cow, dumb Cow, whose language is but a lowing:
Whereas I, suspecting no such thing, sought for a husband
For my dear Io, and Io hoapte for a young son;
Io must have calves for sons, and bull for a husband.
Inachus and Io thus leaning either on others
Neck, complaind and wept: then coms illuminat Argus,
And drives father away from daughters sight, to the fountains,
And drives daughter away from fathers sight, to the mountains.
Jupiter impatient to behold disconsolat Io,
Commands Mercurius, to deceive intractable Argus.
Mercury putts on his hat, takes staff and wings in a moment,
Flies to the earth: where hat for a time, and wings he remoueth,
And th'inchaunted staff, as a sheepehooke, only reteigneth,
And so plods to the down with an oaten pipe as a pastor,
And still plays, as he plods, which strange mirth greatly delighted
Cow-keeping Argus: who could not rest, til he called
Mercury up to the mount. Now Mercury sits on a mountain
Hard by Argus side, and tells him there, of a purpose,
This tale, and that tale: how worthily Phoebus Apollo
Plagued proud Niobe, and Pallas scorneful Arachne;
And each tale had a song, and every song had a piping.
Argus twixt nodding and gaping lastly demanded
Who found out that pipe. Then Mercury gins to remember
Pan and Syrinx love: but or half was brought to an ending,
Argus his hundred lights were all obscured with a darcknes,
Al bade him good night. Here Mercury quickly repressed
Both his pipe and voice, and slumbring Argus he blessed
With th'inchaunted staff, that much more soundly he sleeped:
By and by, fro the neck, his nodding head he divided,
And so by one clowd, one hundred stars he eclipsed.
Juno was all in a chafe; and Argus death she bewailed,
And with self-same eyes her Peacocks train she be-painted:
And made poor Io, possessed with an hellish Erinnis,
Run fro the east to the west, and never find any resting:
Til by Jove's good means, fell Iunoe's fury relented,
Forgave poor Io, and gave her leave to be lightened,
And, for a further bliss, to be called Egyptian Isis.
DAn^aetas had now done: and Elpinus thus recontinued his intermitted labor.
Jupiter in latin, is quasi Iuuans pater, that is, a helping father. In greek
he is called (...), a viuendo, of living, as being the author and giver of life.
He reduced the old world from barbarism to civility, he builded temples for
the Gods, made laws for men, and having subdued most part of the earth,
divided the same among his brethren and kinsfolk, reserving to himself the
mountain Olympus, where he kept his court. Allegorically, these and the like
be the effects and operations of this beneficial planet Jupiter. Olympus, is
of it self most high, passing the clouds, the word is as much to say in
Greek, as, all and wholly light and bright, and so taken for heaven. Jupiter
is commonly pictured sitting, since the eternal Monarch of heaven, and earth,
is always immutable, one, and the same, and never subject to any alteration.
His upper parts are bare and naked, the lower, covered and concealed,
signifying, that those superior and celestial spirits conceive the hidden
mysteries of Jupiter, who will not disclose himself to mortal men, dwelling
on earth, and clogd with the heavy burden of a corruptible body. In his right
hand he holds an all-ruling scepter, in his left, a sin-correcting lightning,
and his Aeagle stands by. Iupite^s picture.


The scepter notes a temperate rule and moderate government, correspondent to
the mylde nature of that merciful planet: yet he wants not a lightning to
plague the wicked, which is therefore ascribed unto him, since he is middle
between Saturn and Mars, whose contrary and repugnant qualities concur both
together in Jupiter, as well the extremity of cold from the circle of Saturn,
as the furious heat from the spheere of Mars, whose conflict and struggling
together causes thunder and lightning: whereof there be three kinds. The
first, bright and clear, of a most wonderful piercing and subtle nature,
melting gold, silver, and brass in a purse, the purse never tutcht, destroying
the child in the mothers womb, the mother no way hurt, killing and spoiling a
man, his garments not so much as schorched. The second is that which burns,
and is red: the third is somewhat moist, and burns not, but makes black and
blew: which was the cause that his lightning was called Trisulcum. The Aegle is
his bird, as being, by report, never tutcht with thunder, but looks directly
on the burning beams of the sun, and is King of birds, as Jupiter is Monarch
among the Gods. Among trees, the oak is sacred unto him: because in old time,
the oak by her ackorns, is said to have given l^fe and food, and Jupiter
himself is the author of life. He married his sister Juno, so also called, a
Iuuando, of helping. Allegorically, Jupiter notes the celestial and fiery
region, Juno the ayrie and inferior; and because that celestial is immediately
conjoined with this terrestrial, (and either of them is light and yielding,
leuis and mobilis) they are called brother and sister: and since the celestial
by reason of his heat is the agent, and the inferior because of her moisture
the patient or recipient, they be therefore also Man and Wife, for without
heat and moisture no procreation. But of Jove's marriage it were fitter time to
speak, when Juno his Wife comes in place. Now therefore to his Mynions and
louetricks, which transformed him into sundry shapes of brute beasts: for this
immoderate lust and wantonness, is not only beastlike it self, but makes them
also beasts which give themselves over thereunto.

For the matter remembered by Damaetas, I have heard, that the Phaenicians did
vsualy sail to Argos in Greece: and being there on a time, when they had made
show of their merchandise, and diverse women of Argos (among which was also Io
daughter to Inachus their King) came thither of purpose to buie; the
Phaenicians took them away all to their ships, and brought them to Egypt;
where this Io was given in marriage to Osiris the Egyptian King, surnamed
Jupiter Ammon, as Diodorus Siculus makes mention: and Io herself was
afterward among them honored for a goddess, by the name of Isis. And because
the Egyptians, in respect of husbandry, did with divine service and
ceremonies honor a Cow, thereupon the fable took his ground, that Io being
stolen by Jupiter, was transformed to a Cow. The impression of a Cowes hoof,
resembles a greek o with an 1 in the middle: whereupon it is said, that Io
with her foo^e wrote her name on the bank of her fathers brook. Natalis Comes
makes this ethicall moralization of it. The celestial and heavenly power in
Man, called reason or understanding, figured by Mercurius, does moderate,
pacify, and temper all those inordinate motions and affections proceeding from
that other faculty of the mind, proucking to wrath and anger. This cholerike
and angry part of man's mi^de as long as it rests, may be called Argus, since
(...): signifies heavy and slow: but being once provoked and incensed, it
has an hundred eyes, looking to every corner for revenge, and cannot be quiet,
till Mercury dispatch him, that is, till Reason suppress and keep him under:
Pontanus expounds it physically, making Mercury to be the sun (by whose
beams he is ever lightened) the white Cow the Earth, Argus the Heaven, his
eyes the Stars, which glister by night, but by the suns approach, are all
dashed and extinguished.

Quin and Mercurium mutato nomine dicunt
Argum somnifero victum strauisse caduceo,
Insomnem, centumque oculos, ac lumina centum
Pandentem, and niueae seruantem pascua vaccae.
Argus enim Coelum est, vigilantia lumina flammae
Aetheriae, and vario labentia sydera mundo.
Quae passim multa sublustris noctis in vmbra
Collucent, sed mox phoebo exoriente perempta
Torpent luce noua, and candenti lampade victa
Emoriuntur, and obscuro conduntur Olympo.
Jupiter conveyed away Europa, Agenors daughter in a Ship called, The Bull,
which was the cause why he is said to ravish her by transforming himself
into a Bull. In that he was turned to a golden shower to obtain Danae: we
see, that gold ouerruleth, and that, as Cicero somewhere says, Asellus auro
onustus in castellum ascendere potest, an ass laden with gold will enter any
strong hold. Or else, Danae may represent man's soul, and Jupiters golden
shower, the celestial grace and influence derived into our minds from above.
Niobe, for her excessive pride and contempt of God, is worthily plagued, yea so
extremely plagued in those very things wherein she chiefly vaunted, that for
very anguish of heart and intolerable woe, she is said to be turned to a
dull and senceles marble stone. The like mischife befell Arachne, who being
endued with excellent qualities, thought scorn of the goddess which was her
good Mistress, and might have been her patroness; and was therefore
transformed to a spyder.

Elpinus having concluded this discourse, it was commanded by the Lady regent,
that because Juno was by nature and marriage conjoined with Jupiter, they should
also jointly be remembered, before any other of Saturns brood were meddled
withal. Fuluia therefore being appointed for this narration, for that she
could not readily call to mind any memorable tale of Juno herself, sang as
follows of the Nymph Echo, who was always taken to be Iunoes daughter.

TIresias, Iunoes and Jove's judge, blind, yet aseer,
Foretold Narcissus this destiny. This pretty young Boy
Shall Be a man many years; if he never look on his own face.
This seemde strange for a while, but the end proou'd all to be too true.
For, brave Narc^ssus (when he came at length to the sixteenth
Year of his age, and might seem either a boy, or a batchler)
Had so lovely a look, so sweet and cheareful a countnance,
That Nymphs and Ladies Narcissus daily desired:
Yet so loueles a look, so proud and scorneful a countnance,
That Nymphs and Ladies, Narcissus daily refused.
Echo once a day, the resounding Echo, that aunswers
Every question asked, and yet no question asks,
Saw this gallant youth, as he hunted a dear by the forest.
Echo the tatling Nymph was a true body then, not an only
Voice, as now: although even then that voice was abridged
Like as now: and this was done by Juno the Empress,
Mother, as it was thought, to the prating Dandiprat Echo.
For when Jove with Nymphs himself did mean to recomfort
Here and there by the woods, and fetch his flings by the forests,
She with a long discourse her mother Juno deteigned,
Till Nymphs all were gone, and Jove's devotion ended.
Juno perceauing these tricks, cut short the deluding
Tongue of prattling elf: yet prattling elf thus abridged
Of too much tatling and babbling in the beginning,
Uses her old custom, by redoubling words in an ending.
Therefore when she see's Narcissus go to the forest,
Step for step thither by a secret path she repayreth,
Burning still for love: and as she nearer aproacheth
Unto the loved boy, so she more mightily burns.
How-many thousand times, poor soul, she desirde a desiring
And entreating speech to the wandering boy to be vttring?
But fatal nature would noe-way grant a beginning.
And yet, what nature permits, she greedily listneth
For some sound, which may make her to be quickly resounding.
At last Narcissus from his hunting company straying
Wished and said, O God, that I could see, somebody coming.
Echo repeated again these last words, Some-bodie coming.
Some-bodie coming? Where? quoth wandering hunter amassed,
Come then apace: And, Come then apace, poor Echo replied.
Narcissus wonders, looks back, see's noe-body coming;
Why, quoth he, callst-thou me, and yet still runst fro my calling?
Cryest and fliest? And, Cryest and flyest? were dolefuly doobled.
Then, quoth Narcissus, let us meet, and both be together:
Echo, these last words with most affection hearing,
Answered him five times, Let Us meet, and both be together,
And so runs to the boy, in a fond conceit, fro the bushes,
Clips him fast by the neck, and offers friendly to kiss him.
But proud boy, as proud as fair, disdainfuly frowning,
Flies from her embracements, and says, Let greedy devouring
Boares and bears be my grave, if I ever yield to thy pleasure.
Echo said nothing, but, I ever yield to thy pleasure.
And, for grief and shame to be too too proudly repulsed,
Hides her-selfe in woods and caves, and dwells by the deserts,
And yet loves him still, still pines with unhappily loving.
Careful love, and sleeples cares brought Echo to nothing,
Nothing but bare bones with an hollow heavy resounding.
For flesh was clean gone, and quite consumed to a powder,
And life-giuing blood went all to an air from a vapor.
Yea, very bones at last, were made to be stones: the resounding
Voice, and only the voice of forelorne Echo remains:
Echo remains a voice, in deserts Echo remains,
Echo noc-where seen, heard every where by the deserts.
Juno laughed no less, then when she saw in Auernus
Proud Ixions wheel turn with revolution endless.
But th'ouer-weening princox, was justly rewarded;
Who, for not loving others so loved his owne-self,
That self-will, self-love, as he saw himself in a fountain,
Made him loose himself, for a fading shade of his owne-self.
THis tale being thus told by Fuluia, Elpinus took occasion thereby to
discourse of Juno much after this manner. Juno, Jove's wife and sister, as I
said before, is the Lady of marriage, and gouernesse of childbirth, called
therefore Lucina, a Luce, since she, as a celestial midwife, helps to bring
forward the children in lucem, into light. These proprieties are assigned unto
her, for that she resembles the virtue and efficacy of the air, and all this
inferior composition, as I have already told. Oceanus and Thetis brought her
up: the air is made of water rarefied and subtiled. She brought forth Vulcan
unto Jupiter: the air incensed and made hoate, breeds fire. Homer makes
Jupiter bind Juno with a golden chain, hanging two great masses of Iron at
her heels, and that she thus tied, could be loosed by none, but by himself:
Juno is the air; the two weights of Iron, be the earth and water, between
which two and the superior bodies she hangs chayned: and this golden chain
is the cohoerent concatenation and depending of things united so in order, as
none but only the almighty Jupiter can dissolve the same. The Peacock is Iunoes
bird, and draws her chariot: Juno is the goddess of riches and honor, which
are as glorious in show, and as transitory in truth, as the Peacoks spotted
train, and make men as proud and insolent, as a Peacocke, which in a vaunting
and bragging conceit* displayeth to the beholders, her feathers bespprinckled
with Argus his eyes. Her Nymphs and handmayds express the variable change and
alteration of the air* portending either fair or foul weather, winds,
storms, rain, hayle and such like: of whom Virgil makes mention, 1. Aeneid.
where Juno offreth Aeolus the fairest less of all her fourteen damsels.

Sunt mihi bis septem praestanti corpore Nymphae;
Quarum, quae forma pulcherrima, Deiopeiam,
Connubio iungam stabili, propriamque dicabo,
Omnes vt tecum meritis pro talibus annos
Exigat, and pulchra faciat te prole parentem.
Juno might well command Aeolus, the king of winds, since wind is nothing else
but the air stirred, or an exhalation blustering in the air: therefore in that
place Virgil makes him thus answer Juno.

Tuus o regina, quid optes,
Explorare labor; mihi iussa capessere fas est.
Tu mihi quodcunque est regni, tu sceptra, Iouemque
Concilias, tu das epulis accumbere diuum
Nymborumque facis tempestatumque potentem.
Historically, Aeolus dwelling in a very hilly and windy country, perceived
and foretold the mariners, by the flowing and reflowing of the seas, and such
other Physical observations, what weather they should expect, noting and
declaring unto them before hand the sure and infallible tokens of the rising
winds and tempests, whereupon he was called the king of winds, and his
kingdom Aeolia, of his name: where he with his regal mace in his hand,
pinneth up those blustering brethren in his dungeons, barred with huge hills and
mountains, as there Virgil also bears witness.

Talia flammato secum dea cord volutans
Nymborum in patriam, loca foeta furentibus auftris,
Aeoliam venit: hic vasto rex Aeolus antro
Luctantes ventos tempestatesque sonoras
Imperio premit, ac vinclis and carcere frenat.
Illi indignantes magno cum murmr, montis
Circum claustra fremunt: celsa sedet Aeolus arce,
Sceptra tenens, mollitque animos, ac temperat iras,
Ni faciat, maria ac terras coelumque profundum
Quippe ferant rapidi secum verrantque per auras.
The winds are painted winged, with swelling and puffing mouths and cheeks,
among the rest, Boreas has this peculiar, that his feet be serpentine,
according to his pinching and biting nature The pictures of the winds.


As Mercury is Jupiters messenger, so is Iris Iunoes. Iris has her name (...)
of speaking, for she speaks and tells when rain is toward. Iris is the
Rayn-bow, and Juno is the air, wherein those raynie clouds are cluttered
together. Iris is the daughter of Thaumas and Electra: Thaumas is the son of
Pontus, the sea, or water: and Electra is the daughter of heaven, or the sun.
Thaumas signifies wondering and admiration, of (...), and this bow, in truth,
is every way wonderful, by reason of those so many strange colors appearing
therein. Electra is perspicuitie, or serenitie; of (...), the sun, and (...),
bright and serene: so this bow proceeds from water and serenitie, to weete
from the reflection of the suns beams, in a watery cloud. Juno her self
sits on a throne, with a scepter in her hand, a crown on her head, and her
Peacocke standing by her. Iunoes picture.


Jupiter jesting with Juno, whether man or woman had more pleasure, the matter
was referred to Tiresias, who had been both woman and man: but giving sentence
with Jupiter, was deprived of his sight by Juno. It is not good therefore to
judge between our betters. Tiresias was a sage and contemplative man: and such
are commonly blind to other matters, for that they scorn these inferior
things, as having vowed their whole souls to more heavenly cogitations. Echo
is Iunoes daughter, for she is nothing else, but the reuerberation and
reduplication of the air. Echo notes bragging and vaunting* which being
contemned and despised, turns to a bare voice, a wind, a blast, a thing of
nothing. Narcissus is a lover of himself, and so it falls out, that vaunting
and bragging loves self-loue: He is turned to a flower, flourishing to day, and
fading to morrow, as such ouerweeners always do.

Ixion graced by Jove, would needs dishonor Juno: Jupiter framed a
counterfeit Juno, intruth naught but a cloud: which Ixion using in stead of
Juno, begat the Centaures. This is a note of ambitious and aspiring love, And
these Centaures hereupon were called Nubigenae. Historically they lived in high
mountains in Thessalia, which gave occasion to this fiction. They were called
halfemen, for that being practiced in riding, they grew most expers therein,
sitting on horses continually, so that they seemed not men and horses distinct,
but a thing made of horse and man together. These rude fellows enraged with
wine and lust, set all on an uproar at Pyrithous his wedding.

But to return to Echo, I remember an odd conceited dialogue between her and
the affectionate lover, which as I heard it of late of a foreign Pastor, so here
for novelties sake, I repeat it: that some of our company may another time
either work on the same ground, or lay himself a new foundation.

VAlli, sassi, montagne, antri, herb, and piaggie,
Colli, selue, fontane, augelli, and fere,
Satyri, Fauni, and voi ninfe leggiadre,
Odite per pieta la pena mia.
Vdite come amor mi mena a morte
Legato in duro e indissolubil nodo? odo.
Voce odo; deh chi sei tu, che rispondi
A l'amaro and dolente pianger mio? Io.
Ninfa sei forse? di, se ninfa sei
Tu, che di questa voce formi il suono? Sono.
Ninfa sei dunque? deh dimmi anco il nome,
Ch'io sappia chi si move a pianger meco. Echo
Hora poi ch' Echo sei, porgimi orecchio,
Odimi, se l'udir non ti dispiace. Piace.
Tu vedi, com'io piango amaramente,
Deh mouati pieta del mio cordoglio? Doglio.
Se di me duolti, vuoi porger consiglio
Al profondo pensier in cui m'inuoglio? Voglio.
Ma che premio fia'l tuo, se'l mio tormento
In qualche part almen perte si annulla? Nulla.
I'ti ringratio. Hor dunque mi consiglia,
Poiche piu altro premio non richiedi. Chiedi.
Tu vedi, Ninfa, com'amor mi strugge
Chi'o corro a morte, e a pena me n'aueggio? Veggio.
Che mi consigli? che faro perch'io
Troui pieta la dou' amor mi chiama? Ama.
Vorrei saper che cosa e quest' amore,
Questo, che tutto m'arde, e che m'infiamma. Fiamma.
Che fiamma e questa? come non finisce
Di consumar, se may non si rallenta? Lenta.
In che loco s'annida? oue soggiorna?
Che part e quella, ou'arde a mio dispetto? Petto.
Com'entra dimmi? oue troua la via,
Perch'ella dentro al petto si trabocchi? Occhi.
Entra per gliocchi? parmi hauer inteso,
Che molti per vdir s'namoraro. Raro.
Dimmi, che cibo e'l suo, dove si pasce,
Che par che dicontinuo ella m'acore? Core.
Se m'arde 'lcor! debbo durare ancora
Al giogo, ou i'o mia liberta perdei? Dei.
Adunque vuoi, chi'o stia nel mio pensiero
Constante ancor, benche sia afflitto e stanco? Anco.
Tante lagrime spargo, e nulla gioua,
Dimmi, sarebbe forse il pianto in vano? Vano.
Che faro dunque accio al mio casto ardire,
Che m'arde, honesto premio si reserui? Serui.
Credi, che l'amor mio le sera grato,
Et ch'ella fia del mio seruir contenta? Tenta.
Ogni via tentaro, se credi, ch'io
Possa allcun premio riportarne poi. Poi.
Hor qual esser deuro, se pur talhora
Il dolor mi fara tremante infermo? Fermo.
Ma che faro, s'egli cosi mi strugge,
Ch'in pianto la mia vita si distempra? Tempra.
Com'io la temprero, s'amor non cessa
Di saettarmi da la terza Spera? Spera.
Dunque, ninfa gentil, lo sperar, gioua,
E la mortale passion raffrena? Frena.
Qual sia la vita mia, se senza speme
Terrammi preso amor con man' accorta? Corta.
Se siano corti i giorni di mia vita,
Non saran lieti almen, benc'hor m'attristi? Tristi.
Che sperero? mi lice sperar forse
Che far mi debba un giorno amor felice? Lice.
Vorrei saper chi mi dara speranza,
Poich'a sperar la tua ra gion m'inuita? Vita.
Vita haura dunque? hauro poi altro s^o
Non mi las'io giamai mancar di Spene? Pene.
Pene? Sperando adonque che mi gioua?
Ma chi sia causa, che di pene i tema? Tema.
Tema la causa fia? deh dimmi il vero,
Dunque tema potra farmi mendico? Dico.
Ahi lasso, ahi discortese, empio timore,
Hor questo dunque il mio piacer conturba? Turba.
Pommi far peggio? dimmi se puo peggio
Seguir a queste membra afflitte e smorte? Morte.
Morte? se dunque il timor passa'l segno,
Talhor si more per souerchio amore? More.
Come lo scacciero? l'alma si strugge,
Che non lo vuole, piange, e si dispera. Spera.
Tu pur dici ch'io spera, speme forse
Credi, che sola sia, ch'altri consola? Sola.
Leuera tutto, o part del tormento,
Lasso, che mi consuma, e'l cor mi part? Part.
Adunque la speranza per se sola
Beato non potra far mi giamai? May.
Ma oltre amore seruitute, e speme,
Che ci vuol? dimmi'l tutto a part a part. Art.
Chi mi dara quest' art forsi, amore
Altri chi sia, se no' e amor istesso? Esso.
Insegna dunque amor, dunque a gli amanti,
Amor delver amor l'arte dimostra? Mostra.
Dimmi di gratia, scopriro la fiamma,
o mi consigli, ch'io non la discopri? Scopri.
A cui debbo scoprirla? ad ogn'un forse?
o bastera, che sol l'intenda alcuno? Vno.
Vuoi che ad un sol amico fia palese,
Celato a gli altri sia'l colpo mortale? Tale.
Sapremo soli tree dunque il mio ardore,
Se vuoi, che con un solo mi consoli. Soli.
Ma dimmi quale deue esser colui
a cui l'ardor secreto mio confido? Fido.
Trouerans'in amor fedeli amici
C'habbin riguardo poi d'amico algrado? Rado.
Come dunque faro perch lo troui
Che fia fedel, si come si ricerca? Cerca.
E s'io lo trouo, che potra giouarmi?
Forsi talhor la passion rileua? Leua.
Hor questo che mi detti, dimmi'l modo
Vero d'amor, dimmi di gratia'l vero? Vero.
Se questo e il vero modo, i'son felice,
Homai non temo, che'l dolor m'atterri. Erri.
Perch' erro? forsi anchor altro ci vuole?
Perch senz'ale il mio pensier non vuole? Vole.
Altrro ci vuol ancor? non basta questo?
Deh dimmi'l ver, non mi lasciar incerto? Certo.
Che ci vuol dunque di per cortesia,
Perch di gioia sia l'alma consorte? Sort.
Sort? hor altro ci vuol accioche in fine
Voglia, espeme in van no staro in sort? Sort.
In somma di, sopra tutto che gioua,
Hor resta in pace, ninfa, io ti ringratio,
Che co'l tuo ragionar par che mi auiui? Viui.
Philoueuia, being next by turn, was willed to remember what she could
concerning the watery Nymphs and Ladies of the seas; that thereby Elpinus might
show his conceit touching Neptune, the second heir of Saturnus. And this was
her song.

SCilla sat her down, then a maid, now changd to a monster,
Sat her down on a banck with sea-borne Dame Galathea,
Down on a flowring banck, not far from sulphurus Aetna.
And there began to recount ten thousand wily devises,
Wherewith poor young youths in scornful sort she deluded.
Yea, but alas, said then, with a far-fet sigh Galathea,
They that seek thy love, yet suffer daily repulses,
Bear men's face, men's heart, and so are safely repulsed.
But Galathea the wretch, (o woeful wretch Galathea)
Could not avoid leawd lust and rage of lout Polyphemus,
Capten of Aetna'es f^ends, but alas, but alas with a danger,
Nay with a death, o death: and there grief stopped Galathea.
At length, inward woe with weeping somewhat abated,
Thus, for Scillaes sake her dearlings death she remembered.
There was (woe worth was) was a fair boy, beautiful Acis,
Acis, Faunus boy, and boy of lovely Simethis,
Acis, Faunus joy, and joy of lovely Simethis,
Best boy of Faunus, best boy of lovely Simethis,
Most joy of Faunus, most joy of lovely Simethis:
And yet better boy, and greater joy by a thousand
Parts, to the blessed then, but now accursed Galathea,
Then to the sire Faunus, to the mother lovely Simethis,
As Galathea thus did love her beautiful Acis,
So Polyphemus alas did love his less Galathea,
And Galathea still did loath that lusk Polyphemus.
O dear Lady Venus, what a sovereign, mighty, triumphant,
And most imperious princess art thou in Olympus?
This rude ass, brute beast, foul monster, sidebely Cyclops,
This Polyphemus loves: this grim Polyphemus, a mocker
Of both Gods and men: this blunt Polyphemus, a terror
Unto the wildest beasts: this vast Polyphemus, a horror
Even to the horrible hills and dens, where no man abides,
This Polyphemus lou's, and doates, and wooes Galathea:
Forgoes his dungeons, forsakes his vnhospital harbors,
Leaves his sheep and Goats, and frames himself to be finish,
Learns to be brave, forsooth, and seeks thereby to be pleasing,
Cuts his bristled beard with a sith, and combs with an Iron
Rake, his staring bush, and viewes himself in a fishpond;
And there frames a face, and there composeth a countnance,
Face for a diu'ls good grace, and countnance fit for a hell-hound.
His bloodthirsting rage, for a while is somewhat abated,
His brutish wildenes transformd to a contrary mildenes:
Strangers come and go, sail-bearing Ships by the Cyclops
Pass and safely repasse, and never fear any danger;
This Polyphemus now, is changd from that Polyphemus.
Telemus in mean time, as he sayld by Sicilian Aetna,
(Telemus in birds-flight had a passing singular insight)
Came to the ougly Giant, and said, that he should be deprived
Of that his one broad eye (which stood there filthily glooming
In middle forehead) by crafts-contriuer Ulysses.
Blind fool, quoth Polypheme, can a blind man loose any eie-sight?
Poor Polypheme of his eye was by Galathea deprived
Long since, and cares not for crafts-contriuer Ulysses.
Thus contemning that which after proved a true-tale,
Either in hellish caves his diu'lish carkas he rouzeth,
Or, by the shaking shore and seaside lazily stalketh,
Or, very rocks themselves with a lubbers burden he crusheth.
There was a hill, that stretched with sharpened point to the sea-ward,
And had both his sides with Neptune daily bedashed:
Hither he climes, and here his cart-load lims he reposeth,
Here his fellow Goats, and Rams, and Sheep he beholds:
Then lays down his staff (his walking staff was a Pine Tree,
One whole huge Pine Tree, that might well serve for a main mast
Unto an Armado) and after, takes up a iarring
Pipe (fit for piper Polypheme, fit lute for a lowby)
Compact of fiue-score and fifteen reeds, with a clumsie
Fist, and scrapes, and blows, and makes so shameful an outcry.
That both lands and seas did groan with a deadly resounding,
Hearing this foul Swad such rustical harmony making;
For there under a rock, as I lay, and leaned in Acis
Lap, this song I did hear, and bear with a heavy remembrance.
More white then Lillies, then Primerose flower Galathea,
More fresh then green grass, more slyke and smooththe^ a cockle
Shell, that's washed and worn by the sea, more coy then a wanton
Kyd, more brigt then glass, more joy to the heart then a winters
Sun, or summers shade, more fair and seemly to look on
Then straight vp-mounting plante-tree, more clear then a Crystal
Stream all froz'n, more worth then a hoorde of melloed apples,
More sweet then ripe grapes, more soft then down of a cignet,
And, (so that thou could accept poor woorme Polyphemus)
More dear then Diamond to the loving woorme Polyphemus.
And yet more stubborn then an vntam'de Ox, Galathea,
More light then floating billows, more hard then an aged
Oak, more rude then a rock, more tough then twig of a Willow,
More violent then stream of a brook, more fierce then a wilde-fire,
More sharp and pricking then thorns, more proud then a Peacock,
More spiteful then a troaden snake, more cursed then a whelping
Bear, more deaf then seaes, and (which most greeues Polyphemus)
More swift-pac't then a Heart, then winged winds, Galathea.
O, but alas, run not, look back, and know Polyphemus.
My bower with maine rocks and mounts is mightily vawted,
That scalding sunbeames in summer never aproach it,
And blustering tempests in winter never anoy it:
My trees bend with fruit, my vines are ever abounding
With grapes, some like gold, some others like to the purple:
And both golden grapes, and purpled grapes be reserved
For my sweet purpled, my golden wench Galathea.
Thou with thine own hands may easily pluck fro the bushes
Blackbery, hipps, and hawes, and such fine knacks by the forest,
Damsons, sloes, and nutts: and if thou will be my wedded
Wife, each tree and twig, and bush shall bring thee a present,
Every bush, twig, tree, shall serve my wife Galathea.
All these sheep be my own, which quickly without any calling
Come and run to the pipe of their good Lord Polyphemus:
And many thousands more, which either range by the mountains,
Or feed in valleys, or keep their places appointed
And stalls hard by my bower: and if thou ask me the number
Of them, I know it not, for beggars use to be telling
How-many sheep they keep, my goods, Galathea, be endless,
My sheep nomberles: yet among these so-many thousand
Flocks of sheep, not a sheep did I ever prove to be fruitles.
Thou thy-self may see my goats and sheep to be stradling
With bagging vdders, thou may see how-many lambkins,
And young kyds I do keep, kyds and lambs both of a yeaning.
Milk I do never want, and part I reserve to be drunken,
Part in curds and cheese, with thrift I prepare to be eaten.
Neither shall my love Galathea be only presented
With birds neasts, kyds, doves, and such like paltery stale-stuffe,
And common loue-toyes, which easily may be aforded
By each carters swain: Polyphemus found on a mountain
Two brave young Beare-whelps, either so like to an other,
That who marks not well, will soon take one for an other:
These did I find of late, and these do I keep for a token,
For to be playfellowes for my bonilasse Galathea.
O then scorn not me, scorn not my guiftes, Galathea;
This body shall be thy spoil, and this blood shall be thy booty,
These sheep shall be thy goods, and these hills shall be thy dowry.
Sweet pig, scorn not me; for I know myself to be comely,
Often I look in a lake, and set my self by a fishpond,
Making mine own eyes of mine own eyes the beholders,
And when I see my face, I delight my face to be seeing.
Look how big I do look, how strong and stordily squared,
Mark how mighty I am: no thundering Jove in Olympus,
(You fools tell many tales of a thundering Jove in Olympus)
No great thundering Jove is greater then Polyphemus.
See what a swinging bush gives cou'ring unto my countnance,
And, as a thickset groaue, makes dreadful shade to my shoulders.
My Flesh's hard indeed, all ouer-grown with a bristled
Hyde, and rugged skin; but that is but a sign of a man's heart,
And is no-more shame to the strong and stowt Polyphemus,
Then broad leaves to a tree, then fair long mane to a foming
Steed, then sins to a fish, then feathers unto a flying
Foul, or woolle to a sheep. One eye stands steedily pitched
In my front: but an eye, yet an eye as broad as a buckler.
And what, I pray you, has this sun any more but his one eye?
And yet he sees all things, and all things only with one eye.
Lastly, my sire Neptune with threeforckt mace, as a sovereign
Rul's in Sea's: and so shall sea-borne dame Galathea
By taking Polypheme, best ympe of Seaes, for a husband,
Have also Neptune, chief Lord of Seaes, for a father,
Earth-shaking Neptune, that strove with mighty Minerua
For the renowned Athens (as he often towld me his own-selfe)
And raisd up Troy walls with threatening towers to the heavens:
With whose rage both Lands and seaes are fearefuly trembling,
At whose beck springs, wels, floods, brooks, pooles, lakes be obeying,
As soon as they hear his Triton mightily sounding.
Then, Galathea relent, and yield to thy own Polyphemus,
Since Polyphemus yields himself to his own Galathea,
Since Polyphemus yields: who cares not a rush for a thundering
Heu'n, and heavens King: thy frowning's worse then a thousand
Lightnings and thunders. Yet I could forbear thee the better.
If thou did as well scorn others, as Polyphemus.
But why should Galathea refuse well grown Polyphemus.
And yet like and love and woo, effoeminat Acis?
Whom if I catch, I Will make him know, that great Polyphemus
Arm's as strong as great. I Will paunce that paltery princox,
Trayle his gutts by the fields, and tear his flesh in a thousand
Gobbets, yea i will power his blood, hart-bloud to the waters:
Even thine own waters, if I ever take Galathea
Dealing with that boy, dwarf Acis, dandiprat Acis,
Elfe Acis: for I boil with most outragius anger
And most raging love: me thinks whole sulphurus Aetna.
Aetna with all his flames in my breast makes his abiding,
And yet neither love nor wrath can move Galathea.
Thus when he had this sweet loves lamentation ended,
Vp-gets the one eyde feende, and rangeth abroad by the forest,
Roaring out, as a bull, driu'n back with force from a heyfar:
And at length spies out us two there down in a valley,
Me and Acis alas unawares; and cries in a fury,
Endless grief and shame confound forelorne Polyphemus.
If that I make not now your love toys all, to be ended.
This did he roar, but he roarde this with so hellish an outcry,
That mount Aetna with echo resounds, and griesly Typhoeus
Groans for fear, and breaths forth flashing flames to the heauen^,
Vulcan starts fro the forge, and Brontes runs fro the Anuile,
And swelting Steropes, with barlegd ougly Pyracmon
Leave their Iron tools: yea Pluto the prince of Auernus
Heard this yelling feende, and feared, least that his own hound
Cerberus had broke loose with three-throate jaws to the heavens.
Here I alas for fear, dopt underneath the reflowing
Waves, and poor Acis fled back, and cride, Galathea,
Help, Galathea, help; and let thy boy be received
In thy watery boures, Polyphemus murdereth Acis.
Cyclops runs to a rock in a rage, and tears in a fury
One great piece, as big as a mount, and hurl's it at Acis:
And but a little piece thereof tutcht bewtiful Acis,
Yet that little piece orewhelmd whole bewtiful Acis.
Here I alas, poor wretch, wrought all that desteny suffered
For to be wrought, and causd his strength to be freshly renewed,
His life even by a death now more and more to be lengthned,
And his dearest name and fame to be daily remembered,
And my self and him, by a heavy divorce, to be joined.
His blood sprang fro the lump; his blood first cherefuly purpled,
Then by degrees it changd, and rednes somewhat abated,
And looked like to a poole troubled with rain from Olympus,
Afterward, it clearde: then lump cloaue, and fro the cleaving,
Flowring reads sprang forth, and bubling water abounded.
Beutiful Acis thus was then transformd to a horned
Brook; and yet this brook took name of bewtiful Acis.
Acis a loving stream, runs down with a lovely resounding,
Down to the great sovereign of seaes with speedy reflowing,
There, his yearly tribute to the three-forckt God to be paying*
And there, his Galathea for evermore to be meeting.
Here Galathea did end: and coy dame Scylla departed:
Whom sea-God Glaucus (new God, late made of a fisher)
Loved, but unhappily loved: and wept, when he saw her a monster.
THen, quoth Elpinus, Neptune was the second of the three brethren and sons of
Saturn, which had the whole frame of the world parted among them; Jove had the
heavens, Neptune the seaes all the rest was Plutoes. Historically, as some
think, Jove had the East, Pluto the West, Neptune the seacosts: howsoever,
Neptune is sovereign of the seas, who also many times shakes with his
imperial mace the very foundations of the earth, according to that of Ovid,
Ipse tridente suo terram percussit, at illa
Intremuit, motuque vias patefecit aquarum.
For, in coast adjoining to the sea, earthquakes and inundations of waters are
most usual. Homer for this cause calls Neptune (...), and (...),
Earth-shaker. And as Pallas was president of Towers, and Juno a gouernesse of
Gates, so Neptune had care of the groundworkes and foundations of buildings;
which are never said to be firm, unless they be laid as deep as the water.
Therefore as Neptune was hired by Laomedon to build those stately walls of
Troy, so in the subversion of the same, himself is as busy afterward, as
apeareth by that of Virgil 2. Aeneid.

Neptunus muros, magnoque emota tridente
Fundamenta quatit, totamque e sedibus vrbem
Eruit, etc.
For towers, Virgil 2. Aeglo.

Pallas quas condiditarces,
Ipsa colat.
And 2. Aeneid.

Iam summas arces Tritonia, respice, Pallas
Obsedit, nymbo effulgens, and gorgone saeua.
For gates, Virgil 2. Aeneid.

hic Juno Scaeas saeuissima portas
Prima tenet, sociumque furens a nauibus ignem
Ferro accincta, vocat.
Cymothoe, is Neptunes servant, signifying the swif^nes of the waves and
billows: for, (...), is a wave, and (...), is to run, as if a man would say, a
running wave. Triton is his trumpeter. Plyny reports that the Vlyssiponense^
sent ambassadors to Tiberius Caesar, giving him to understand, that in then
country, there was one of these Tritons seen and heard singing: being a
sea monster, resembling a man by his upper parts, and a fish by those below
this color was like the seawater; his skin hard with shells: and is called
Neptunes trumpeter, to sound the retreite, when his master would have the sea
to be calm; because when he is heard thus singing, or seen apearing in the
water, it is a sign of calm and fair weather. Neptunes mace is also Tridens,
threeforked, for that there is a triple and threefold virtue in waters, the
first in wells, which are sweet: the second in seaes, and they are salt: the
third in lakes, being unpleasant and unsavory: or rather, because every one of
the three brethren has somewhat to do in every part of the tripertite
kingdom: which may also be a cause why Jupiters lightning is also Trisulcum,
and Plutoes Scepter Tridens. For albeit Jupiter is especially predominant in
heaven, Neptune in the seaes, and Pluto in the lower regions; yet that almighty
and all-ouerruling power is indifferently aparant in every of these three
kingdoms, and in heaven is called Jupiter, in seaes Neptune, below Pluto,
whom therefore Virgil calls stigium Iouem, the stigian Jupiter.

Neptunes wife, is Amphitrite, the water it self, governed by Neptune, noting
the e^ficacie of nature ruling in seaes and deeps. She is called Amphitrite of
compassing, enuyroning, or turning about, as the sea embraces and incloseth
the earth. Neptune had an infinite number of sons and daughters: moisture is
fit for generation; which was the cause that Thales the Philosopher made water
to be the ground and beginning of every thing; and Virgil calls the sea, the
father of things, Oceanumque patrem rerum.

Oceanus of (...), swift, for so is the flowing of the sea. When Neptune was
kept from Saturnes devouring mouth, his mother showed a colt, insteede of him:
and when Pallas and Neptune contended, who, as most beneficial, should give
name to Athens, he with his mace stroke the earth, whence issued a horse:
either for that a horse is swift, and the sea is violent; or because Neptune
first taught how to ride a horse; or by reason that a horse loves plains and
large places, where free scope is to run, as is the sea, for that cause called,
aequor. Therefore the Roman sports called Ludi circenses, wherein the race of
horses was usual, were celebrated in honor of Neptune; and Horace makes
Ulysses his son speak thus to Menelaus, Non est aptus equis Ithacae locus,
vt neque planis
Porrectus spatijs, neque multae prodigus herbae,


Neptune, with his Queen Amphitrite, stands in a great shell as in a
chariot, drawn with two horses, whose hinder parts end in fishes, a Tridens
in his hand, a white and froathy crown on his head; with hair, beard, and
roabe, of color like the seawater. ^eptunes ^icture.


His Nymphs are called Nereides: of which kind, Theodorus Gaza says, that
himself saw one cast on a shore: fashioned like a woman in her upper parts,
but ended like a fish. Galathea is so called of whitenes, and notes the very
froath of the Sea. Humor and moisture be the chief causes of augmentation;
Neptune therefore, as he has many children, so has he some of them great
and monstrous; among others, Polyphemus: who, though vast and rude, yet loved,
(such is the force of love) but loved like a lowte, such is the home-borne
education of rural clownes. Polyphemus, as the rest of that rout, was called
Cyclops, of (...) and (...), as having but one round eye in his forehead; in
truth meaning a buckler, framed round like an eye, although Seruius do
otherwise expound it. He is reported to be a bloody and theeuish manqueller,
robbing and spoiling all along the Sicilian shore: from whom Ulysses wisely
esc^ped, and was therefore said to have bored out his great eye with a
firebrand. This tyran Polypheme loved a noble Lady named Galathea, but could
not obtain her: at last, using force for law, kept her violently: and
perceauing that she affected one Acis, more then himself, murdered the youth
Acis, and threw his body into a river, which thereof bare that name.
Allegorically, as some will have it, Polyphemus is a miserable and worldly
keeper of sheep and kine: he loves Galathea the Lady of milk: and, knowing
that moist places be best for milk, cannot abide, that Galathea should come
nere Acis, a river in Sicilia, whose natural propriety was said to be such,
as that it would dry up and consume milk.

Glaucus loved Scylla: but being rejected of her, he entreated Circe to make
her affectionate by charming. Circe at first sight falls in love with
Glaucus, who in like sort refuses her, whereupon she infecting the waters
where Scylla usually bathed herself, transformed her into a monster, which
afterward became a rock. This Glaucus, perceauing the fish which he had
caught, by tasting a certain herb, presently to leap again into the water,
himself, for trial, did pluck and eat, and by virtue thereof transformed,
threw himself also into the sea: where he was deified. The tale is reported by
Ovid in the end of the thir^eenth and beginning of the fourteenth of his
transformations, and expounded by Tasso in the second part of his dialogue,
entitled Gonzago, ouero del piacer honesto: where, by the deified Glaucus, he
understands the intellectual part and faculty of man: by the sea wherein he
fisheth, the body and all bodily matters, being the matter subject of natural
philosophy, and subject to continual alteration like the sea: by his fishing,
the discoursing and sylogisticall reasoning of Intellectus: by his netts: the
instruments of natural Logic: by the fish caught, those general maximaes*
and universal grounds, and true conclusions and consequences: by the herb
which he did bite, the heavenly delight of contemplation, whereby he was made a
God: by the casting of himself into the sea, his coming and descending from
the quiet rest of contemplation, to the variable sea of action and operation,
figured also by the double shape and twoforked tail of Glaucus and the other
sea-Gods. Thus does Tasso transform Glaucus to a God: and by a little turning
of his exposition, he turns him thus to a brute beast. Glaucus, by tasting
the herb, leapeth into the sea, together with his fishes: that is, by yielding
to the inchaunting force of pleasure, he so drowneth himself in the
Aphrodisian sea of sensuality, that he becomes altogether beastlike.

Historically, Scylla and Charibdis were two rocks in the Sicilian sea. Scylla
had that name (...), of spoiling; or (...), of vexing: or else (...), of whelps
or dogs, since the beating of the waves upon the rock, made a noise like the
barking of curs. Charibdis was so called (...), of gaping, and (...), to sup
up, or devour.

By Typhoeus, Sabinus understands the burning and flaming exhalations, cause
of that fire in Aetna: which clustred together, and wanting free p^ssage, shake
the earth, (...), is, to smoke* see Virgil 3. Aeneid. and Ovid. 5. Metam. It
seems, that the violent fury of the winds, is here also shadoed by Typhoeus:
for, his hands reach from East to West, and his head to heaven, agreeing with
the nature of the several winds blowing in every coast of Heaven. His body is
covered with feathers, noting the swiftnes of the winds: about his legs are
crawling adders, so the winds are oftentimes pestilent and hurtful, his eyes
are red as fire, and he breathes flames out of his mouth; for, the winds are
made of hoate and dry vapors. The picture of Typhoem


Acis made a river, is said to be horned: Horns are attributed unto rivers,
either because the crooked turnings and windings thereof resemble horns, or
for that the furious noise of roaring and raging waters is like the belowing of
a Bull, or lowing of an Ox or Cow. They are crowned with reads: reads grow
plentifully in watery places, they are figured with long hair and beard, like
a man, always lying, leaning on one elbow, or on some great vessel, whence
water issues abundantly. I need not make any explication hereof, all is so
manifest. The pi^tures of rivers and floods.


Among other sea-borne monsters the Mermaides must not be forgotten, they had
the face and proportion of women to the waste, and thence downwards, the
resemblance of fishes: some others give them wings, and scraping feet, like
the feet of hens: they were three, Parthenope, that is, Virgins face:
Leucosia, white and fair, and Ligia, which is, sounding. They were borne of
Achelous, noting moisture, and the muse Calliope, that is, fair spoken: the
one sang, the other sounded a trumpet, the third played on a lute, so sweetly,
that such as sailed, were enticed thereby to the dangerous rocks where they
frequented. Ulysses being to pass that way, commanded his companions to stop
their own ears with wax, and then fasten him to the mast of the ship, least
that inchaunting melody might be their bane: which policy did so confound the
Sirenes with shame and sorrow, that they thereupon threw themselves headlong
into the sea. Ovid makes them Proserpinaes companions, who losing their Lady
and Queen, were thus made birds in part, and yet reteigned their former face
and beauty. Suidas says, that in truth, they were certain blind and
dangerus rocks, which by the breaking and beating of the billows, did make
such a sweetly resounding murmur, that it allured the passengers thither, to
their own destruction. Whatsoever they were, Allegorically they signify the
cosning tricks of counterfeit strumpets, the undoubted shipwreck of all
affectionat yonkers: and therefore is it said by Virgil, that the Mermaydes
rocks are all over spread with bones of dead men, whose destruction their
deceaueable allurements had procured. Xenophon is of this mind, that the
Sirenes did learnedly and sweetly extol the famous acts of renowned men: and
that therefore Homer makes them entertain Ulysses with their pleasing voice,
who indeed was for politic stratagems the chief ornament of Greece: and no
doubt, these sweet and glorious commendations of great men's exploites, are the
most effectual charms, to work any impression in an heroical mind, and
with this conceit of Xenophon, Cicero does also agree. Besides these three
already named, some add five others, that is, Pisinoe of (...), to persuade,
and (...), the mind: Aglaope sweet of look: Thelxiope, lovely of look; for
(...), is to please and delight. Thelxinoe, delighting the mind: and
Aglaophone, with the pleasant voice. They were termed Sirenes, of drawing,
deteigning, and alluring men unto them, as the Greek word imports. The
Mermaides pictures.


Of the marine monsters, Proteus yet remains: who being King in Egypt, did
so wisely apply himself, and frame his wit to every particular accident, that
he was said to turn and transform himself to any kind of shape. Some
refer this to the custom observed of the Egyptian kings, who never came
abroad, but having some one or other ensign on their head, as a token of
their imperial majesty: and this they changed continually; sometimes using
the image of a Lion, sometimes of a Bull, sometimes this, and sometimes that,
which variety gave ground and occasion to this fable. It is reported, that he
reigned in the Isle Carpathus, whereof, the Carpathian sea by Egypt, had his
name: which because it had great store of sea-calues and other sea monsters,
Proteus himself was called Neptunes heardsman, keeping his seaish flocks.
Cornelius Gemma, in his book de diuinis naturae characterismis allegorically
expounds this tale out of the fourth of Virgils Georgicks, making Proteus, a
type of nature. Plato compares him to the wrangling of brabling sophisters:
and some there be that hereby understand, the truth of things obscured by so
many deceauable apparances: Lastly, there want not others, which mean hereby
the understanding and intellectual part of man's mind, which unless it
seriously and attentively bend it self to the contemplation of things, shall
never attain to the truth, as Proteus would never reveal his prophetical
knowledge, but first did turn and wind himself every way to escape, until
with bands he were enforced thereunto, as Homer (the first author of this
invention) in the fourth of his Odyssea discourses at large.

Lady Proserpina, with her mother Ceres, fell to Amaryllis, who by talking of
them, discoursed also of Pluto, and so made an end of the three mighty
Monarchs of the world.

PLuto the Duke of diu'ls, enraged with an hellish Erynnis,
Began to repyne and grudge, and move a rebellius uproar,
For that he wanted a wife: and now even all the detested
Infernal rablement, and loathsome brood of Auernus
Clustred on heaps and troops and threatened wars to Olympus.
But Lachesis, fearing lest laws laid down by the thundrer,
By the revenging rout of feends might chance to be broken,
Fate-spinning Lachesis cried out to the prince of Auernus.
Sovereign Lord of damned Ghosts, and mighty Monarcha
Of Stygian darkness, which give each thing a beginning,
And by thy dreadful doom, do draw each thing to an ending,
Ruling life and death with jurisdiction endless;
O let those decrees and fatal laws be obeyed,
Which we three sisters for you three brethren appointed:
Let that sacred league and peace last freely for ever;
Stay these more then civil wars, unnatural vprores,
And intestine broyls: ask Jove, and stay for an answer,
Jove shall give thee a wife. His rage was somewhat abated,
Though not well calmed, yet he yields at last to the fatal
Sisters entreating and tears; although with an ill will
And a repyning heart, and Mercury sends to Olympus
With this round message: Tell Jove that stately triumpher,
Pluto cannot abide to be thus controlled by a brother,
Imperius brother: who though that he makes a rumbling
With scar-crow thunders, and hurls his flames in a fury
On poor mortal men; yet he must not think that Auernus
Undaunted Capten, with buggs can so be deluded.
Is It not enough that I live in darksome dens of Auernus,
Where fire, smokes, and fogs, grief, plagues, and horror abounds,
Whilst usurping Jove keeps court in lightsom Olympus,
But that he must also forbid me the name of a husband,
And restrain those joys which nature freely afordeth?
Seas-sou'raigne Neptune embraces his Amphitrite,
And clowd-rolling Jove enioyes Saturnia Juno,
His wife and sister, (for I let slip slipperie by-blowes)
But scorned Pluto must still forsooth be a batchler,
Still be a wiueles boy and childeles: But, by the dreadful
Streams of sacred Styx I protest, if he yield not an answer
Unto my full content, I Will loose forth all the reuengful
Brood of damnable haggs and hel-hounds up to the heavens:
I Will confound heaven, hell, light, night, I Will cast on a cluster
Blisful Olympus bowres, with baleful dens of Auernus.
Plutoes tale scarce told, light-footed Mercury mounting
Up to the highest heavens, disclosed each word to the thundrer:
Who consulting long, at last thus fully resolved,
That Stygian brother, should take Proserpina, daughter
Unto the Lady Ceres, pereles Proserpina: matchles,
And yet fit for a match. Bloody Mars, and archer Apollo
Sought her a long while since; Mars big and framed for a buckler,
Phoebus fit for a bow, Mars active, learned Apollo:
Mars offered Rhodope, Phoebus would give her Amyclas,
And Clarian temples, and Delos fair for a dowry.
Lady Ceres cast off bloody Mars, and archer Apollo,
Contemning Rhodope, despising proffred Amyclas:
And fearing violence and rape, commends her only
Dearling and dear child to the dearest soil of a thousand
Lovely Cicil* from whence with watery cheeks she returned
Unto the towre-bearing Cybele, and loud Coribantes,
On Phrygian mountains: Where she no sooner aryued,
But Jove, spightful Jove took opportunity offered,
And by the secret sleights and wyles of false Cytheroea,
In mothers absence her daughter alas he betrayed.
Go, quoth he, my wanton, go now whilst mother is absent,
Bring her daughter abroad to the flowring fields of a purpose;
Atropos has decreed, that supreme Duke of Auernus
My brother Pluto, must have Proserpina, fatal
Orders must be obeyed: thy jurisdiction hereby
Shall Be the more enlarged, and fame fly daily the further,
If very hell feel hell, taste hellish pangs of a Lover.
She (for a word was enough) conveyed her away in a moment,
And (for so Jove would) Pallas with stately Diana
Joined as companions: all which three lastly aryued
There, where Lady Ceres her daughters bower had appointed.
Wyly Venus draws on simple Proserpina forthwith,
Unto the green medows: herself went first as a leader,
Next came fair Phoebe, and Ioue-borne Pallas Athene,
And she between them both, who both the^ rightly resembled,
Sweet yet sweetly severe Proserpina: even very Phoebe,
If that a bow were given, if a target, Pallas Athene.
And sweet water-Nymphs by the careful mother appointed,
Their maiden Princess with a princelike company guarded:
Chiefly of all others, Cyane there made her aparance,
Whom for her excelling conceit, and seemly behavior,
Chiefly of all other well-Nymphs Proserpina loved.
There was a Crystal brook by the fields, that joined on Aetna.
Called Pergusa, transparent down to the bottom;
Trembling leaves as a veyle, gave cooling shade to the water,
Trembling leaves of trees, that crowned this lake as a garland;
Every tree displayed his flowring boughs to the heaven,
Every bow had a bird which therein made her abiding,
Every bird on bow took joy to be cherefuly chirping,
Every chirp was a song, persuading all to be loving.
Fresh-colored meadows were ouer-spread with a mantle
Figured, and Diapred with such and so many thousand
Natures surpassing conceits, that maruelus Iris
Was no marvel at al, and spotted train, but a trifle,
Prowd-hart Peacocks spotted train, compared to the matchles
Art, which nature showed, in showing so-many strange shows.
Hither these Ladies are come, and every Lady
Plucketh at every flower; seeing each flower to be more fair,
More fresh, more radiant, more lovely, then every Lady.
In mean time Pluto wounded by wyly Cupido,
Intends his journey to Sicilia; Griesly Megoera,
And fell Alecto his foaming steedes be preparing,
Steedes, that drank on Lethes Lake, and fed by the ioyles
Bancks of Cocytus. Nycteus and sulphurus Aethon
Swift, as a shaft; fierce Orphnaeus with fearful Alastor,
Joined to the cole-black coach, drew near to Sicilian: Aetna;
And seeking passage, with strange and horrible earthquakes
Ouer-turnd whole towns, and turrets stately defaced.
Every Nymph heard, felt, and feared this deadly resounding,
And dreadful quaking, but of all this deadly resounding
And dreadful quaking, not a nymph there knew the beginning,
Saving only Venus; whose heart with terror amazed,
Yet with joy possessed, was party to all the proc^eding.
Duke of Ghosts, missing of a way, through so-many by-waies,
And all impatient with loves rage, brake with his Iron
Mace, the ^ebelling rocks, and piearst through the earth to the heavens,
Heavens all dismayed to behold so hellish an object.
Stars sled back for fear, Orions heart was apaled,
Charles-Wayne ran to the sea, that he evermore had abhorred,
And by the yrksome noyce, and neighing of the detested
And poysned palfrayes of Pluto, laesy Boots
Took himself to his heels, and lingering wayne did abandon.
Baleful breath of night-borne coursers darkened Olympus
Chereful light, and loathed foame distild fro the bleeding
Bits, infected the air: and the earth all torn by the trampling,
Shakte and quakte for dread, and yielded a heavy resounding.
Ladies al ran away; Proserpina lastly remained,
Whom Stygian coachman both sought and caught in a moment.
Pluto drove on apace, Proserpina woefuly wayling,
Called and cried, alas, to the Nymphs, to the maids, to the Ladies;
But Nymphs, Mayds, Ladies were all affrayd to be present,
And her mothers chance, ill chance, was then to be absent.
Now Stygian raptor those prayers lightly regarding
In respect of a pray and prise so worthy the taking,
Chears and calls his dreadful steedes, and shakes his out-worne
Bridle raynes, orecast with rust; and enters Auernus,
All unlike himself, and much more mild then a Pluto.
Ghosts and sprvtes came clustred on heaps, to behold the triumphant
Tartarean Capten, with so great glory returned:
Eu^ry one was pressed, some bent their care to the coursers,
Some to the coach, some strawd sweet flowr's, some looked to the bride-bed.
Elysian Ladies with a spotles company waited
On their new-come Queen, and carefuly sought to recomfort
Those her virgin fears and tears. Ghosts wont to be silent,
S^ng sweet wedding songs, and every nooke in Auernus
With banquets, meryments, and louelayes freely resounded,
And whole hell* for joy was speedily turned to a heaven.
Aeacus intermits his judgments; stearne Rhadamanthus,
And aus^ere Minos wax mild: all plagues be remitted:
Tantalus eats and drinks; Ixion's loost from his endless
And still-turning wheel, Tityus set free fro the Aegle,
Sisyphus extreme toil by the rolling stone is omitted,
And Danaus daughters from running tubbes be released.
P^le Sac^te Tisiphone, with snake-hayrd ougly Megaera,
And euer-grudging Alecto, fell to carousing,
And their burning brands embru'd with blood, did abandon.
Birds might easily pass by the poysned mouth of Auernus,
Men might safely behold, and look on stony Medusa;
No consuming flames were breathd by fyrie Chymera.
Howling Cocytus with wine mirth-maker abounded,
Lamenting Acheron hart-chearing honny aforded,
And boiling Phlegeton with new milk chearefuly streamed:
Cerberus held his peace, Lachesis left off to be spinning,
And gray-beard feriman forebare his boat to be rowing,
All took all pleasure, and all for joy of a wedding.
Lady Ceres all this mean time possessed with a thousand
Careful mothers thoughts, thought every hour to be twenty,
Till she returned homeward: and home at last she returned,
At last, but too late, to her house, but not to her household:
Court was a wilderness, forelorne walks, nobody walking,
Gates turned vpside down, hall desolat, every corner,
Every way left waste. But alas when lastly she entered
Persephone's chamber, seeing her curious hand-work,
And embroydred clothes, all ouer-growne by the copwebs,
But no Persephone; such inward anguish amassed
Her distressed sprites, that neither a word fro the speechles
Mothers mouth could once come forth, nor a tear fro the sightles
Eyes; eyes, mouth, sense, soul, were nothing else but a horror:
Only she clipped, embraced, and kissed, and only reserved
Her sweet daughters work, poor soul, instead of a daughter,
After long wandering, by chance she found in a corner
Her dear daughters nurse, Electra, wofuly wayling,
With rent roabes, scratcht face, and beaten breast, for her only
Harts-ioy Persephone: whom she as charily tendered,
As dearest mother could ever tender a dearest
Daughter: she, when grief and inward horror aforded
Time to reveal it self, this woeful story recounted
All at large: How Persephone was forced to be walking
Greatly against her mind, and mothers will, to the meddowes,
How four black coursers conuey'd her away on a sudden,
Nobody knew whither, nor what man might be the author:
How her companions were all gone: only the loving
And loved Cyane, for grief was lately resolved
Into a silver stream; and all those sweetly resounding
Sirens, made to be birds in part, in part to be maidens,
And she alone was left, left all forelorne in a corner,
Mourning Persephone and her so heavy departure.
Silly Ceres hearing these dead news, all in a fury
Rayled on heaven and earth, and ran to the sulphurus Aetna,
Lighted two Pine-trees, and day and night by the deserts,
Hills, dales, woods, waters, lands, seas, Proserpina searched,
Searched from The East to the Weast: at last, al weary with endless
Toyling and moyling, half dead for drink, she repaired
Unto a poor thatcht coat, and knocked, and meekly desired,
That to a schorched mouth some water might be aforded.
Th'ould Beldam coat-wife brought forth a domesticalHotchpot,
Her chief food, both meat and drink, and gave to the Gods.
Faintly Ceres feeding by the coat, was spied of a saucy
Crackrope boy, who mocked, and called her a greedy devouring
Out-come witch in scorn: Whereat this Lady agreeued,
And not forgetting Latonaes worthy reuengement
On Lician Lobcocks, (who since they rudely denied
Water, were made frogs always condemned to the water)
Threw in this boys face all that was left of her Hotchpot.
Mocking gallows thus by the Gods strangely besprinckled,
Was transformd to a Swyft; whose back grew al to be speckled,
And his spiteful breast with wonted poison abounded.
Through what lands and seas this Gods wofuly wandered,
Twere too long to report: each part of the earth she perused,
Vainly perused alas: and home at last she returned
Back to Sicil; cursing, banning, and daily reuiling
Every soil, but chiefly Sicil: Which now the detested
More, then before the desired: brake plowes, killed wearied oxen,
Blasted corn, bred weeds and tares, sent forth the devouring
Fowls, and too much drought, and too much rain from Olympus.
Fields for corn and grain of late so greatly renowned,
Are to a barren waste, and wild heath speedily changed.
Whilst childeles mother thus rages, fair Arethusa
(Who by the secret caves of the earth from Pisa to Aetna
Fetches a restles race) vp-lifted her head to the heavens,
And these first tidings to the forelorne Lady reported,
How herself of late taking her way by thefearfull,
Imperiured Styx, saw her lost child in Auernus,
Somewhat sad, yet a Prince and supreme Queen in Auernus;
Queen to the mighty Monarch and sovereign king of Auernus.
Mournful mother amas'd, for a while stood like to a senceles
Stock or stone: at length, when fury removed amasement,
Up to the heavens she flies, and makes her moan to the thundrer.
Lord and love, quoth she, vouchsafe at last to remember,
Take some care in time of poor Proserpina, think her
If not mine, yet thine, and if thine, not to be stolen:
But let pass what is past, let rape and rage be remitted,
So that thy daughter from his hellish dens be deliu'red.
It Were no disparaging, quoth Jove, if prince of a mighty
Empire, Jove's brother might have Proserpina, joined
By both our consents in wedlock: darksom Auernus
Should have no cause then to repine at lightsom Olympus.
Yet notwithstanding, if thou stand fully resolved,
And that my brother Pluto must needs be refused;
Then let Persephone both mine and thine be reduced,
If she be fasting yet: for so has Atropos ordered,
And fatal orders are neuermore to be altered.
Mother was full bent, to reduce her child from Auernus
Destiny did forbid: for that Proserpina walking
In Plutoes Orchard, by chance (worst chance of a thousand)
Sucked seven Pomegranate kernels: and nobody knew it,
Saving Ascalaphus, who made it known to Auernus,
And stayed Persephone: who then for a worthy requital,
Foule-tungd Ascalaphus, forthwith tra^sformd to a Scricheowle,
Foul and loathsome foul, whose neuer-luckily-sounding
Voice, brings baleful news, and certain signs of a vengeance.
Jove took pains, made peace: first justly the year he divided,
Then, to the husband half, and half to the mother appointed,
and by thease good means causd every part to be pleased.
Persephone six moonths with her husband dwells in Auernus,
And six other months does show her self to Olympus.
Lady Ceres all grief and all contention ended,
Sent forth Triptolemus with coach and corn to the people
Scattred in every coast, whose food was kernel of ackorne.
Triptolemus traueling through strange lands, lastly arrived
On Scythian borders: where Lyncus, falsely pretending
Life, intended death, and making show of a friendly
Host, his sleeping guest unawares had shamefuly murdered,
Had not Lady Ceres, his barbarus envy preventing,
Lyncus turned to a Lynx, and his vayn-glory repressed,
Who of an others fact first author would be reputed.
WEll, said Elpinus, since Amarillis is safely returned from hell, I hope
Elpinus may have the like success: otherwise, so many fearful monsters and
hellish apparitions might well have daunted a stouter heart then mine:

Pluto then, you see, the third brother, ravished Proserpina: the natural
e^ficacie and virtue of the earth (says Cicero, 2. de natura deorum) draws
unto it the roots of corn, growing and increasing in the bowels of the earth.
Ceres her mother seeks Proserpina, and mourns for her absence: the corn
pursues and follows the se^de: or, The earth seems to grieve, when the
corn springs not up in due time. Proserpina was ravished in Cicil, the
dearest soil to Ceres: that was a most fruitful and fertile Island. Arethusa
(signifying the natural power and virtue of the seed and root) is the first
that told Ceres tidings of Proserpina: In continuance and conueniencie of
time, by that natural efficacy and operation of the root and seed, the
grain and corn itself appears and springs up. Six months so lies with
her husba^dial the winter time, whilst the sun does soiourne in the
southern signs: six above with her mother, when the sun returns to the
northern signs, bringing corn to ripenes and maturitie. She had this name
Proserpina, of the latin word, Proserpo, which is to creep forwards, because
the roots creep along in the body of the earth. She was gathering flowers
when Pluto took her away, and kept her below; for then is that natural virtue
of the seed working, to produce afterward the fruit and flower accordingly.
Pluto was accounted the Lord of riches and treasure: Pluto is the earth, whence
al metals are dug. (...) in Greek, signifies riches: and in latin they
called him Ditem, to note, Diuitias, that is, Rich, alluding to riches. Some
make him blind, because he deals partially in distributing riches, not
according to desert. And they give him a key in his hand, since his hellish
gates are so surely locked, that the Ghostes once entering, can never possibly
return. He is called the God of Ghosts, as some think, because he first
instituted the funeral obsequies and solemnities used at men's burials. He
sits as a prince on a throne, with a crown on his head, a scepter in his
hand, and Cerberus, his dog, at his feet. Cupressus is sacred unto him, for
it is used in funerals, and being once cut, never buddeth or brancheth
afterward. ^lutoes ^icture.


Proserpina being in hell, did eat: and, as some others report the tale, did
eat poppie seeds; whose nature is to cause drowsines, sleep, staying and
resting. So Proserpina must stay below, till she have gotten root and be well
and sufficiently grounded. Her mother Ceres refused Mars and Apollo: for, wars,
and over much heat of the sun, are both bad for corn and plenty. Ceres, by
report, first found and taught the use of corn and grain, and thereby
brought men from that wild and savage wandering in woods and eating of
Ackornes, to a civil conuersing, and more orderly diet, and caused them to
inhabit towns, to live sociably, to observe certain la^es and institutions:
and for these causes was her self made a goddess, figured like a matron, with
a garland all ofthe ears of corn, having in one hand a little bundle of
Poppie, as signs of fertility: and in the other hand a fire brand, wherewith
she sought her daughter. For in summer, when the beams of the sun are hoate
and burning. the countrymen seek and gather the corn, then full ripe and
ready for the sickle. Her chariot was drawn by two serpents or flying dragons:
serpents are so called a serpendo, of creeping and crawling in and out, as the
roots of corn do: or, for that the turning and winding bodies of dragons,
resemble the crooked furrows of the earth. Ceres, the earth, great by Jove,
the temperat heat of the air, brought forth Proserpina, corn and grain: A
sow was sacrificed to Ceres, for she rooteth and spoyleth the corn: so was the
goat to Bacchus, for gnawing the vines: or, the sow is fruitful, so is the
earth; the sow ever walloweth in the mire and earth, and Ceres herself notes
the earth. The picture of Ceres.


Besides Ceres, there were other goddesses, that had care of the fruit of the
earth, as, Pales, that looked to the Pastures, and was the Pastors gods;
Pomona, the Lady of Apples, having her name of the latin Pomum, which
signifies an apple. Flora, the gods of flowers, and wife to Zephyrus: Bona
dea, the good gods, (otherwise called Fauna, a fauendo, of cherishing and
favoring) noting that quickening efficacy of the earth, which norisheth and
fostreth the seed cast into the same. Flora, they say, in truth was a Roman
strumpet, called Laurentia; who dying, left her wealth, which was excessive, to
the people of Rome, who for her honor, made her a gods of flowers, and called
her Flora, of the word Flos signifying, a flower.

Jupiter, by report of Plato, perceauing that the ancient edict, commanding
every man to be rewarded according to his desert, was not observed because men
being alive were judged by living judges: did enact, that none from thenceforth
should receive trial, but after death: when all external shows of birth,
bewty, strength, riches, nobility and such like, were altogether removed. And
that only his three sons, Aeacus, Minos, and Rhadamanthus (whereof the two
last were borne in Asia, the first in Europe) should after their death, repair
to a meadow, called The field of truth (where were two ways, the one leading
to the Elysian fields, the other to the place of torment) and there sit in
judgment of the spirits and ghosts of all, that had left their earthly
mansion and habitation. Rhadamanthus was appointed to give sentence of such as
came from Asia; Aeacus judged those of Europe: and Minos, if any doubt or
ambiguitie arose, was the discusser and determiner thereof. This was Jove's
decree, and thereupon, Rha^amanthus and Aeacus, with their rods in their hands,
sit in judgment, and Minos apart with his golden scepter, seriously inquiring
into every man's matter. Historically, Minos and Rhadamanthus were of Asia,
Aeacus of Europa, all three just and severe; hereof came this tale. The damned
ghosts are committed to the Furies to be plagued in Tartarus, so called,
because therein be many (...). Auernus, is the entry to hell: historically, it
was a place, whence proceeded so noisome an exhalation, as that birds could not
fly over it, whereof it had that name in greek so says Virgil. 6. Aeneid.

Spelunca alta fuit, vastoque immanis hiatu,
Scrupea, tuta lacu nigro, nemorumque tenebris:
Quam super, haud vllae poterant impune volantes
Tendere iter pennis, talis sese halitus atris
Faucibus effundens, supera ad conuexa ferebat:
Vnde locum Graij dixerunt nomine Auernum.
Cerberus is Plutoes dog, with three heads, watching that none go out, but
ready to let all in; fawning on these, devouring those, according to his name.
For (...), and, by a more easy contraction of the word, (...), is a deuowrer
of flesh, of (...), and (...): wherefore some understand by him, the
all-deuowring earth, eating and consuming all earthly bodies. Others, by
Cerberus, intend man's body, pressed and appliable to all sensual lust, but
repugning and abhoring virtue and contemplation. His three heads be taken of
some to represent those three necessary evils, which withdraw men from
contemplation, I mean, hunger, thirst, and sleep: to all which, we must offer
a morsel, as Sybilla taught Aeneas in Virgil, we must yield, but not too much;
so much only, as thereby nature may be sustained. Natalis Comes expounds it
thus: Cerberus is Covetousness: and a covetous man laughes when he sees gold
come in; but it greeues his heart to lay out one penie. His three heads note
the manifold guiles and deceites of covetous men, Qui omnes pecuniae vias
norunt, know all the ways in the world how to scrape coin. Cerberus lies in
an hellish dungeon: a myser lurketh in corners, turning his rustie groates,
without either profit to others, or pleasure to himself. Hercules drew him out
of Hell, for, who can be a Hercules, and accomplish great matters, without
money? Or thus, Hercules bound and brought out Cerberus, that is to say, he
bridled and kept under concupiscence, and therefore returned safe from Hell:
but Pyrithous going thither of purpose to ravish Plutoes Queen, and so to
satisfy sensuality, was devoured of Cerberus: or, lastly, Hercules is a
learned and absolute Philosopher: he draws the three-throated Cerberus out
of Hell, by bringing to light the tripertite mysteries of Philosophy,
natural, moral, and dialecticall. Cerberus, for spite and rage, struggling
with Hercules, did let his poisoned foame fall on the earth, whence proceeded
the deadly Aconitum, for, what but rancor, can come from a rancorous heart?
Historically, as Pausanias reports, there was in a dark dungeo^ in Taenarus,
leading to Hell, as the fame went, for the deepenes thereof, an hydeous and
terrible serpent, which for his deadly poison, and fearful aspect, was called
the Devils dog, and was by Hercules drawn forth, and brought to King
Euriftheus.

Acheron had his name, (...), because there flow the waves of misery. (...)
is the first river, that the Ghosts (having once tasted of Lethe's lake,) are
to pass over: for, death aproaching, acertaine terror of conscience tormenteth
us, and this is Acheron. Styx, (as it were, (...), odious and abhorred) is that
hate and detestation, which every man now dying, has against such faults, as
in his life time he committed. Styx arises out of Acheron; for, this
detestation proceeds from that grief. Styx does nine times compass Hell:
for, there is nothing but hateful grief, and woeful detestation.

Jupiter and the other Gods were wont to swear by the river Styx; which was
accounted the most religious oath; since, as I said, it notes hate and
detestation, a thing repugnant to the nature of the Gods. Some say, they used
to swear by water; because as water is the most ancient ground and beginning
of things, so an oath should be most strictly observed and religiously
honored, as a thing no less reverenced, then water, the foundation of all:
whatsoever was the cause, the matter is aparant by Homer and Virgil every
where, that they swear by Styx* which therefore was called the imperiured
river. Ovid in Ibin.

Quique per infernas horrendo murmr valles
Imperiuratae laberis amnis aquae.
Achilles Statius lib. 8. has a discourse of a well called Styx, much like
this.

The Platonists call the body a Hell, in respect of the mind, which being
thither thrust down, first, forgets all celestial conceits, drinks of
Lethe, and then passes over Acheron: for, being bereaft of celestial
ornaments, it soroweth and greeueth, and therefore compast with Stygian waves,
displeases itself, hates and abhors his own acts, howles, and makes
pitiful lamentation; and that is Cocytus, of (...), to howl and cry out, as
Plato expounds it.

Lethe above mentioned, signifies Oblivion; she was sister to Somnus, sleep:
whereof there were two gates, the one of horn, the other of Iuorie: from that,
came true dreams, false from this: for, as a candle enclosed in a lantern
made of horn, shines and gives light, because the matter is subtle and
transparent, but contrarily in one of Iuory, because the matter is thick and
condensate: so, if the body be temperate, the mind in dreams foreseeth the
truth, but if it be troubled with surfeting, or otherwise, the dreams be false
and confused. Phlegeton notes, the fiery and fretting darts of grief and
vexation, and is also called Pyryphlegeton, of fire and burning.

Charon has his name of joy and gladness: this gladness carries us over Acheron,
after we have lamented our own faults. Charon is old; so grave and sage
advice is that, which works this repenting lamentation in us. Boccace, by
Charon, understands time, and makes him the son of Night and Erebus. The
furies, so named of the latin word Furor, noting madness, be the Ministers of
Pluto, ready to execute his revenging wrath: the Athenians called them, (...),
the severe goddesses, the Sicyonians termed them, (...), mild and
wellwilling, by the contrary, meaning spiteful and cruel: or, simply mild,
because Orestes by Mineruaes advice, pacified them at last, and was released of
his rage and madness. Their hair was all of crawling snakes, their garment, a
long black gown, down to the anckles, girt with a snakie girdle, with
serpents in the one hand, and a firebrand in the other, their eyes, face, and
teeth, portending malice and vengeance: they were three, Tisiphone, of (...),
revenge, and (...), slaughter or murder Megoera, of (...), to envy: Alecto, of
(...), never ceasing, or never at rest. They are sometimes called Erynnae, of
(...), to be moved with great grudge and indignation: or, of this word (...),
which signifies cursing and banning, and (...), which is, to hear, for that
they are ever ready to give ^are to such, as curse and call for vengeance: or
else, of (...), that is, the earth, and (...) to dwell, because they dwell in
the darksome dens of the earth. Lactantius compares those three perturbations
which toss and turmoyle men's minds, to weet, Wrath, Couetise, and Leachery,
to these three furies. ^^e pic^^^es of the ^^ries.


Much like in nature to these furies, were the Harpyes, faced like Virgins*
winged like birds, with pale and hungry visages, and crooked scraping claws,
deciphring flatterers, or rather, covetous and snatching worldlings. Harpyae,
(says Natalis Comes, expounding it physically) have this name of (...): noting
the furious violence, and rage of the winds: the first was called Ocypete,
swiftly flying: the second, Aello, that is a storm or tempest: the third
Celaeno, the darkness of the clouds driven with winds. They were the daughters
of Thaumas and Electra, by reason of the strange and wonderful nature and
might of the winds, which are elevated and lifted up by the beams of the
sun from the purer and vpper-flowing water of the sea. Virgil describes
them, 3. aeneid. as the most detestable monsters, that ever issued out of the
Stygian lak. Hither may be added those Haggs* called Lamiae, who with their
sweet and maidenlike face, breast, and body, allure men unto them, but with
their serpentine claws destroy them afterward. ^^e pic^^^es of the ^^^pyes
and ^^ggs.


Chimera's upper part was like a Lion, the middle like a Goat, the lowest like
a Serpent, slain by Bellerophon. Historically, it was a mountain in Lycia,
breathing out fire, whose top Lions did haunt, in the middle were pastures,
where Goats fed, and the foot was frequented by Snakes and Serpents.
Bellerophon made it habitable, and was therefore said to have killed Chimera.
Chimera, the type of inordinate lust, (...) first inuadeth men fiercely like a
Lion, then want only and lasciuiously like a Goat, afterward brings poisoned
sorrow and repentance figured by snakes and serpents. Bellerophon solicited to
folly by Antia, wife to Praetus King of the Arigiui, constantly refused
whereupon she falsely accused him to her husband, of violence offered.
Bellerophon by these means banished, passing through diverse dangers and
perils, riding on the winged horse Pegasus, and bearing his terrible Gorgon,
at last slew Chimera. He was called Bellerophon, either of one Bellerus, a
Corinthian Prince, whom he vanquished; or, of (...), and (...), for that he
rooted out evils and mischiefs: or else, you may so term him, as (...), a
wise and prudent counsailer, or (...), as Homer speaks. Palaephatus
reports, that Pegasus was the ship that brought Bellerophon. Allegorically,
by Pegasus borne of the blood of Medusa, we may understand immortality and
everlasting fame. For, virtue ouer-comming all terrible things, figured by
Gorgon, breeds fame: and fame is eternised by the sounding voice of Poets:
which was the cause that the learned well, was said to be opened by the hoof
of Pegasus, striking the Parnassian mount. Medusaes hair (either for that
Neptune in Mineruaes temple used her irreligiously, as Ou^d reports the tale
4. Metam. or, for that she gloried so much in her golden locks, as that she
durst compare with goddesses) were turned into snakes, and the beholders
thereof into stones. Medusa herself notes lustful beawty and voluptuousnes,
turning men into stones; as making the greedy gazers thereon senceles and
amassed. None but Perseus, Jove's son, by Mineruaes help, overcame her:
celestial grace and wisdom are the only means, to repress this inordinate
affection. Some, by the three Gorgons, note the three faculties of the soul in
man: Medusa, of the three sisters, was only mortal, figuring the sensible and
living power, common to beasts, beheaded by Perseus, that is, kept under by the
good Genius or celestial grace. The second was Stheno, the reasonable faculty
of the soul, the third Euryale, the light infused and intellectual part. They
turn the beholders into stones; for we must kill Medusa, all perturbations,
and be in that respect, as dead as stones, else we cannot enjoy this
intellectual light. The borrowed and common eye, which all they use by course,
is this infused light, derived from one of them unto another. Perseus bears
Gorgon; he makes men wonder at his excellent prowess: Historically,
Athenaeus reports, that in Lybia there was a kind of beast like a calfe,
killing with the very sight: one of them was brought dead to Marius, to Rome,
his skin being so diversely colored that none there, could guess what beast it
was, and that Perseus, by likelihood, killed some of these, figured here by
Medusa. Diodorus says, that Gorgones were stout and warring women, the
captain whereof, Medusa, was slain by Perseus. Others understand the earth
and earthly affections by Gorgon, dashed and daunted by Perseus borne of Jove,
that is* assisted by his heavenly help and influence. But I see, that Chimera,
has brought me too far out of my way: Ixion therefore (to come back where I
was before) is as I said already, plagued in hell, for his ambitious and
aspyring arrogancy. The tale is notably well told by Kemy Belleau, 2. iournee,
de la bergeric, beginning thus.

Ie chante d'Ixion I'emprise audacieuse,
L'impudence, I'orgueil, and I'idole venteuse
De la feinte Iunon, gross de vent and d'aer,
Ouurage industrieux des mains de Jupiter etc.
Bartholomaeus Annulus in his picta poesi, hereby notes a polluted conscience,
which is ever his own persecutor and tormentor, still flying, and yet still
following himself, as Ixions wheel, that always turns about, but never turns
away. Sisiphus, being of Jove's counsel, revealed his secrets, and is
therefore thus punished. Lucretius expounds it otherwise, of him that
ambitiously gapeth after promotion, and is ever repulsed, toyling and moyling
himself, with an endless rolling of a neuer-standing stone.

Sisiphus in vita quoque nobis ante oculos est,
Qui petere a populo fasces, saeuasque secures
Imbibit, and semper victus tristisque recedit.
Nam, petere imperium, quod inane est, nec datur vnquam,
Atque in eo semper durum sufferre laborem:
Hoc est, aduerso nixantem trudere monte
Saxum, quod tamen a summo iam vertice rursum
Voluitur, and plani raptim petit ae quora campi.
Others expound it so, as meaning by the stone, the studies and endeavors of
mortal men: by the hill, the whole course of man's life: by the hill top, the
joy and tranquillity of the mind: by Hell, the earth, and men on earth: by
Sisiphus, the soul and mind of man, which included in this prison of the
body; strives and contendeth by all means possible, to attain to eternal
rest, and perfect felicity: which some repose in wealth, some in honor, some
in pleasure: all which, having once gotten what they sought, begin again as
fast, to covet new matters, and never make an end of desiring: so that, he who
first was wholly given to catch and snatch, being now grown to wealth, seeks
honor, and is as infinitely addicted to that vain humor, as ever he was to the
other miserable affection: this is the world, omnium rerum est vicissitudo:
neither is it possible for any man (whilst he is a man) to enjoy any settled
felicity in this life.

Tityus had his liver, or, as some say, his heart, all day long devoured by an
Aegle; or, as others report it, by a vultur: and, as much as was consumed in
the day, so much was restored in the night; so that his torment was perpetual.
The liver is the seat of lust and concupiscence, which in the night time
suborneth unchaste and wanton cogitations. Or physically thus, Tityus is the
stalk or blade of corn, of (...), one letter being taken away: he was horn
of Jupiter and Elara, the daughter of Orchomenus, a river of Thessalia. This
Elara, notes the natural humor and milke-white moisture in the seed of
corn: and without Jupiter, that is heat, and Elara, moisture, the corn can
never prosper. Jupiter therefore accompanying with Elara, when she had
conceived, and was great, hid her in the ground, for fear of Juno: she in the
ground was delivered of Tityus, who being borne by his mothers death, was
brought up and nursed of the earth. The sense hereof i^ this, the seed is
cast into the ground, for fear of the injury of the air, noted by Juno: the
mother dies, for the seed putrifieth: Tityus springs forth, being nursed by
the earth, and aspyreth up toward heaven, as though he were about to offer
violence to Latona, and is therefore thrown down and slain by the darts of
Diana and Apollo: that is to say, he is ripened, and brought to maturity, by
the heat of the sun, and moisture of the moon, that at length he may be
cut down by reapers. Vulturs consume his liver: for, the chafe and husk is
left to birds, as being not convenient for bread to be made thereof. He is
stretched forth in length, so as with his body he covers nine acres of land:
meaning that the corn thus sowed and springing up, possesses and
ouerspreadeth a great quantity of ground.

Tantalus, so named, as if a man would say, (...), most unfortunate and
unhappy, is the pattern of a miserable and covetous wretch, who as well
wants that which he has, as that which he has not: so Horace expounds it:
But Ovid says, he was thus tormented in Hell; to have apples and waters
always before him, yet always running from him, when he was about to reach
them, because of his blabbing tongue, Quaerit aquas in aquis, and poma fugacia
captat
Tantalus: hoc illi garrula lingua dedit.


Tantalus was Jupiters son, a man fully instructed with natural and celestial
Philosophy, and is therefore said to have eaten with the Gods, and to have
feasted and enterteigned them with a banquet; since his whole delight was
meditation and heavenly contemplation. In this banquet (to try whether the Gods
knew all secrets) he killed and cut in pieces his son Pelops, and set him
before them among other dishes: Ceres then present among the rest, did taste
and eat the showlder of Pelops. Philosophers and learned men, whilst they
wholly addict themselves to contemplation, neglecting their worldly and
domestical affairs, loose sometimes their goods, sometimes their children, or
wife, or otherwise. Ovid tells the tale in 6. Meta. adding further, that the
Gods then pitying Pelops, united his torn members, and insteede of the
shoulder devoured by Ceres, made one up of Iuory plaguing his father in Hell,
for his offense. Some others make a stone hang over his head, still like to
fall and break him to powder; to note out the continual labor and vexation of
spirit, incident to every man, that is seriously bent to earnest meditation. He
is said to have imparted unto men, Nectar and Ambrosia, the drink and meat
of the gods: because he did communicate among them, those hidden treasures of
heavenly philosophy: for (...) is immortal, and Nectar has in effect the
same signification, noting, that the gods are immortal, and cannot dye,
according to the verse, Jupiter Ambrosia satur est, and nectare viuit.

Belides, or Danaides, were the fifty daughters of Danaus, who killed their
husbands all in one night, saving only one; and are therefore enjoined to fill
broken tubs with water still running out. Lucretius hereby understands our
unthankful minds and insatiable desires, who still having, desire still to
have: so that nature powers her infinite blessings into us, as into broken
vessels, which are ever empty and ready for more. It may signify the whole
estate of man's life, never settled, never satisfied, ever doing and undoing,
and doing almost all, to no purpose at al. It may also note the exchecquer or
treasury of a prince, which like the sea, still receaueth, and is never full:
or lastly, the nature of a blab, that is like a broken tub, plenus rimarum,
full of slifies, flowing out here and there, keeping nothing secret, that is
imparted unto him. With these and such like monsters, and monstrous torments,
the poets have furnished their hell. Virgil 6. aeneid, sets down all most
plentifully, placing at the very entrance and gate of hell, a rabble of hellish
haggs, as woe, revenge, wrath, sickness, old age, fear, famine, penury, death,
labor, sleep, war, discord, and such others. The torments above rehearsed,
are appointed for the wicked and damned ghosts: the good and blessed spirits
enjoy everlasting happiness in the Elysian fields, a place severed from the
comfortles lodge of the damned.

The Sirenes (which I had almost forgotten) sought for, and followed after
Proserpina: strumpets and wanton huswiues follow riches and abundance, figured
by Proserpina, the Lady of fruit and corn, according to that old saying,
Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus.

The mocking boy made a Swift, Ascalaphus (borne of Orphne and Acheron) turned
to an Owl, the loutes of Lycia transformed to Frogs, and Lyncus, changed to a
Lynx, are all tokens of just plagues inflicted on such offenders.

Triptolemus, historically, in a ship bearing the name of the Dragon, brought
store of corn to Athens, being in his time miserably plagued with famine.

These discourses thus ended, the Nymphs were suffered to rest for a time, and
the Pastors enjoined freshly to pursue their interrupted narrations. Among
whom Alphesibaeus told this tale of his master Phoebus.

PHoebus too too proud for killing Pytho the serpent,
Saw young Lord of love, with a bended bow in Olympus:
And must boys bear bows, quoth Apollo? must a Cupido
Leave his mothers papps, and handle dangerus arrows?
Leave sharp tools, poor child, and take up a lamp or a firestick,
Kindle a foolish fire in a harebraine boy, or a frantic
Gyrle; or shoot at crows, if boys will needs be a shooting,
Such warlike weapons are far more meet for Apollo,
Who with a thousand shafts of late, confounded an ougly
Snake, whose poysned panch all overwhelmed a country.
Well, quoth winged boy, content: let mighty Apollo
Shoot at snakes: and Lord of Love at mighty Apollo:
And as much as a snake is less then mighty Apollo,
So much, Lord of Love is more then mighty Apollo.
This said, yielding air with fluttring wings he deuideth,
And Parnassus mount in a moment nymbly recou'reth:
There two feath'red shafts from painted quiver he plucketh,
Of strong, yet diverse operation: one with a golden
Sharp head, breeding love: and the other framed with a leaden
Blunt head, feeding hate: Loue-breeder wounds Apollo,
Hate-feeder Daphne: and even as much as Apollo
Lou's Daphne, so much this Daphne hates Apollo.
Daphne goes to the woods and vows herself to Diana;
Phoebus grows stark wood, for love and fancy to Daphne.
When that he looks on her hair, fair hair and sweetly beseeming,
Though undressed, vntrest, blown here and there by the shoulders:
Then does he think: o if these loose, yet sweetly beseeming
Locks, were dressed, and trest, and not left loose by the shoulders,
How-much more would they seem fair and sweetly beseeming?
When that he looks on her eyes, like sparkling stars in a frostie
Night: and lips, (yet lips to be kissed, not to be looked on)
And arms all naked, fro the milk-white wrist to the elbow:
Then does he think: If I joy these outward parts to be viewing,
O, what a heaven were it, those secret parts to be tutching?
O, what auailes it now, with scorneful words to be bragging,
And with winged boy, nay wicked boy, to be striving?
O, what auails it now to be Titan, Phoebus, Apollo,
Bright, burning, radiant, with sight, light, beauty abounding?
Thou, whose beams did burn heu'n, earth, and watery Empire,
Art now scorcht, nay burnt, yea burnt to the bones with a wilde-fire:
Thou, who should by right, be the due and daily beholder
Of both land and sea, do now look only on one thing,
Only upon Daphne: fixing those eyes on a Virgin,
Which thou owst to the world: and gerst up rath in a morning,
For to behold her face: and go down late in an eu'ning,
Sorry to leave her sight: sometimes thy beams be eclipsed,
Thy face discolored, thy countnance cheerful, apaled,
And makst mortal men with a soddayne terror amazed,
And all this for love: for, love makes strong to be weakened,
Love all-seeing sun, on a soddayne makes to be darkened:
Simple Daphne fears, and flies, for fear, from Apollo:
Lover Apollo runs, and thus complains as he runs.
O, stay dear Daphne, thy best friend hasteneth after,
Fly not away, sweet soul; for so sheep run fro the Woolu's-iawes,
Heart fro the greedy Lions, and fearful Dove fro the Aegle,
Every one from a foe: but Daphne flies from a faithful
Friend, from a wounded soul, from a constant lover Apollo.
Look to thy self, Daphne, take heed, for fear of a falling,
O, stay, haste makes waste, these thorns may chance to be pricking
Those thy tender legs, and all through fault of Apollo:
O, these ways are rough, and ouer-growne with a thousand
Briers, if Daphne needs will go, let her easily go on,
Easily go on before, and I Will haste easily after.
And yet let Daphne not scorn to regard, to remember,
And mark well, what he is, that bears such fancy to Daphne.
Noe brute mountain bird, no swayne, no rustical Hoblob,
No threed-bare pastor, with an hired flock by the forest,
Proud of a bawling curre, of a iarring pipe, or a sheep-hooke,
But burning Tytan, bright Phoebus, cheerful Apollo.
Delos mine Honor, my fame and glory denounces,
And Clarian temples do yield me duetiful offerings.
Simple wench, God knows, thou know not Phoebus Apollo,
And therefore thou runst as a simple wench, from Apollo,
Worlds sight, and worlds light, worlds comfort, Phoebus Apollo,
Soothsayer, singer, Jove's offspring, Phoebus Apollo,
Yea, and most steadfast, most cunning archer, Apollo,
Had not that vile boy more steadfast hand then Apollo.
Healing herbs, strange roots, sweet balmes, odoriferus ointments
Were found out, set forth, first taught by Phoebus Apollo,
And yet alas, not an herb, not a root, not a balm, not an ointment
Is to be found that can cure cureles wound of Apollo.
Phoebus spoke; and more by Phoebus was to be spoken,
Daphne breaks his speech, and runs for life fro the speaker.
Sweet winds encountering Daphne (as loath to be leaving
So brave less, and glad such tender lims to be tutching)
With mild blasts did blow her garments easily backward,
That bare skin, more white then snow vntroaden, apeared,
And wauing loose locks flew here and there by the shoulders.
Flight augments her form, and barest parts be the brauest:
Flight augments his love, and nearest joys be the dearest:
And as a nimble youth, as a youthful God, to the damsel
Straight with might and main, and all enraged he flies,
And leaves entreating and frames himself to a forcing.
Like as a light-foot hound, and trembling hare, in an open
Field, when as either runs, and either fears to be outrun,
Either runs for life, and either runs for a hares life,
Hare to prolong her life, and murdring hound to abridge it:
Hound thrusts forth his snowt, girds out, and greedily snatcheth:
Pressed to devour poor hare; poor hare scarce fully resolved
Whether she is yet caught or not caught, shrinkes fro the murdrers
Teeth all on water: so Daphne, so was Apollo.
Fear drives on Daphne, and love still lifts up Apollo:
Love so lifts lover, that near and nearer he urges
Poor fainting Daphne, now hard at her heels he aprocheth*
Even so hard at her heels, that Daphnes hair by Apollo,
Daphnes scattered hair was blow'n by the breath of Apollo.
Then weak and all spent, turning her face to the waters,
Poenaeus waters, there this last boon she desires.
Father Poenaeus, lend helping hand to thy daughter,
If you brooks are Gods, and have such grace from Olympus,
Let this gaping earth convey me down to Auernus,
Or, let this my face, too pleasing face, be defaced,
Let this form, which causd my former woe, be deformed,
And to an other shape by transformation altered.
Her words scarce vttred, lims al were starck in a moment,
And her tender breast, all ouer-grow'n with a tender
Barck, and locks were leaves, and bare arms grew to be branches:
Swift foot was slow root, and crown transformd to a tree-top;
In stead of Daphne by the river sprang up a Laurel,
Laurel fresh and fair, as fair and fresh as a Daphne.
Phoebus comes sweating and blowing unto the new tree,
And, for his old loves sake, bears endless love to the new tree:
Yet when he tutcht new tree, new tree was afraid of a tutching;
Under a bark of a tree, Daphne was felt to be panting;
Yea, when he offered a kiss to the tree, in stead of a Daphne,
Tree bent back fro the kiss, and started aside as a Daphne.
Well, quoth he, though Daphne shall neuermore be Apolloes
Wife, yet Daphnes tree shall evermore be Apolloes
Tree, and deck both head, and hair, and bow of Apollo.
Yea, those noble Dukes, great Lords, and martial Emprors.
Daphnes Laurel leaves at feasts and stately triumphings,
In sign of conquest, shall evermore be adorning:
And as Apolloes face is fresh and lively for ever,
So shall Daphnes leaves grow green and lovely for ever,
Thus did Apollo speak, and Laurel tree for a Daphne,
Bows her top for a head, and condiscends to Apollo.
Daphne thus transformd: Clymene was loved of Apollo,
Loved, and bare him a son; Phaeton; too youthful a yonker,
Whose ouer-weening was his overthrow, by presuming
Rashly beyond his reach, his fathers coach to be guiding:
Like to the foolish boy, who mounting up to Olympus,
Burnt his wings and wax, and so fell down to Auernus.
YOu are a good scholar of the best master, said Elpinus to Alphesibaeus: And
your masters mother, as I have heard say, was Thia, that is, Divine: and his
father, Hyperion, going over us, or above us, as the sun does. Some others
make his mother to be Euriphaessa, late Splendens, glistering far and near:
but the usual, and most received opinion is, that Jupiter begat both Sun and
Moon of Latona: who being great, could find no resting place, by reason of
Iunoes wrath: until at last she came to the wandering Delos, where she was
delivered of them both. The reason alleged by some, is this; after that
co^fused and vndistinct Chaos whereof alwas made, called Latona, (...), (as
Plato would have it) a Latendo, of lurking, and lying hid, and unknowen: Light
(which chiefly proceeds from Sun and Moon) was first framed by that
all-framing creator. They are said to be borne in Delos (an eminent and high
Island) because presently after the creation of light, things began to come to
light, to be seen, to be known, which first lay confused and not perceived,
in the darkesome bottom of that all-including Chaos. Hereof came the name
Delos, of (...), to show, or make plain and many fest.

Apollo has long yealow hair: noting his rays and beams, which heat and
hit, like darts, a far off; and therefore is he called of Homer (...). He is
young, fresh, and without any beard: for, his force never fades, and his heat
is always quickening. Therefore, the Tyran Dionisius did cut off Aesculapius
his golden beard, saying, It was no reason, that the son should have such a
long beard, when as his father Phoebus had none at all. This perpetual youth,
and never decaying nor declining validity of Phoebus and other the Gods, is
figured by Hebe: signifiyng the very flower of youth, whom Homer for the same
cause makes Jove's cup bearer. This Hebe was Iunoes daughter: for, of the
temperature of the air proceed all herbs and flowers: Jupiter is her father:
for, without the quickening heat of the ethereal region, no temperature can be
in the lower air: yet some there be that would have her borne of Juno without
any father: Hebe on a time, as she bare the cup to Jupiter, slipped, and in
falling, discovered those secrets, which maidens are not willing to reveal;
Whereupon she was by Jove deprived of her place, and Ganymedes prefer^ed
thereunto. The sense whereof is this: when the flowers and leaves fall from
trees, then does the youth and honor of the hearb^ and trees grow to deca^;
and Ganymedes, that is, winter, comes in place. Hebe, they say, mar^^d
Hercules; the fame of valyant and heroical personages, is ever flourishing.

Others, by the rauishing of Ganymede by Jupiter, understand the lifting up of
man's mind from these earthly toys, to heavenly conceits: that Ganymedes may
be derived of (...), to joy and rejoice, and (...), signifiyng advice and
counsel, as though man's soul thus ravished by Jove, might welbe said to
enjoy his heavenly comfort and counsel, (...). Hebe was framed like a sweet
less: her roabes figured and flowred, and her head also adorned with a garland
of sundry flowers. The Corinthians erected her a temple, in a certain grove
full of Cipresse trees: wherein such as escaped captivity and thraldom,
hanged up their gyues and fetters in honor of Hebe. Hebes ^^ctu^e*


Phoebus (so called, of the greek words, (...) and (...), light and life) is
not only young and fresh, but he is also the author of Physic, the founder
of music, the governor of the Muses, and father of Oracles, all which
excellencies proceed from the operation of the Sun. His beams be
pestiferous, if too hot, and therefore does Homer make him plague the Grecian
army: but healthful, if moderate and temperate. Of this moderate heat of the
Sun, comes the temperature of the air: of a temperate air grow wholesome
herbs and flowers, the simples and ingredients of every physical
composition, and therefore Phoebus the author of physic.

Phlegias is the heat of the Sun; for, (...), is to burn: his daughter was
Coronis, the air moderately moystned and heated, (...): of this Coronis and
Phoebus, Aesculapius, the temperature of the air, is borne: whose daughters
were two: (...), soundnes of body of good health; and (...), the efficacy of
physic in healing and curing men's bodies, (...), which is, to cure.
Aesculapius was slain by angry Jove's thunder: Phoebus sorry, and grieved for
his sons death, slew in like sort the Cyclopes, which made Jove's thunder: that
is, the beams of the Sun, by degrees, do consume that pestilent outrage of
these contagious vapors and exhalations, causers of mortality. Aesculapius,
being borne, was committed to Chiron, a most excellent Chirurgian, to be
brought up: Chiron was the son of Saturn, and the Nymph Philyra: for,
knowledge and excellency in physic, as in all other arts, is gotten by
continuance of time and long experience: whereof Saturn represents the one,
and Philyra the other; so called of the greek words (...) a lover: and (...),
experience, as a lover of experience (the mother without (...) Chirurgy) by
taking away the first letter (...), from (...), as if (...) (...), and, for the
moreeasie and smoother pronunciation, (...) (...) is said to be half a man,
and half a horse: since surgery (and in old times there was in effect no other
part of Physic known but surgery) is auayleable as well for horses and other
beasts, as it is for man: and thus much to show, that Phoebus is physical.
Now, he is also Musical; and therefore Mercury gave him a Lute; whereon he
plays; alluding to the harmony of the celestial Globes, and the constancy
and uniformity, which the Sun observes most strictly in his course, as ever
keeping the Eclipticall line: for which cause he is the master of the nine
Muses, ruling the concent and melody of the nine Sphaeres. The Muses are the
daughters of Jove (for all goodness comes of Jove) and of Mnemosyne, Memory.
Their nurse was Eupheme, Honor and Fame: for, Honos alit arts, honor and
commendation is a spur to a student. They were nine, proportionably to the
number of the Sphaeres, whose governing spirits the Platonists and
Pythagoreans would have them to be. (...), celestial, was the first, referred
to the immovable Sphaere, called (...). Polymnia, to Saturn, a great singer,
or singing much and of many matters. Cleio, to Mars, (...) is glory and
renown. Melpomene, to the Sun, singing, celebrating, extolling. Erato, to
Venus, loving and amiable. Euterpe, to Mercury, pleasant and delight some.
Thalia to the Moon, flourishing. These be the eight Muses, as it were, the
tunes of those eight Sphaeres, whereof is made the perfect concent and
melodious harmony, figured by the ninth, called Calliope, a sweet concent,
the chief and guide of all the Muses, as Ovid witnesses, 5. Metam: Dedimus
summam certaminis vni, meaning Calliope. and, Finierat doctos e nobis maxima
cantus: to weete, Calliope. They are called Musae, of the verb (...), which is,
to teach and instruct a man in those things, that are sacred and holy, divine
and mystical, whereof came the word mystery. They are also called Camenae, a
canendo, of singing: and, Pierides, of the mount Pierius, where they were
borne: They all, hand in hand, dance in a round, and Phoebus in the middle:
all liberal sciences are united and chayned together, the one depending on the
other; noting that absolute (...) and cohaerent concatenation and continuation
of all ingenuous erudition. Lastly, Phoebus is the father of Oracles and
prophecies, the eye of the world, seeing and hearing all things first* as Homer
was wont to say, and Ovid in imitation of Homer, Videt hic deus omnia primus.
Therefore Laurel is his tree, both for that it is always green, and never
touched with lightning (noting that the fame of virtue and learning is ever
flourishing, and never dies) as also hoate and odoriferous, and (as it is
reported) causes true dreams being applied to a man's head and temples: and
being cast into the fire, portendeth good luck, if it make a great noyce or
crackling: bad, if either none, or but a little. Coruus, the Crow is his bird:
whose different chirps and prognostications of rain, were observed of
soothsayers and diuiners, whose master is Apollo. Cicnus, the Swan, is also
his bird: the Swan is white and bright as the sun; a singer as Phoebus, a
foreteller of his own death, and so a diuiner as Apollo. Cicnus was king of
Liguria; he loved Music, and is therefore of Ovid turned to a Swanne. Lastly,
the cock is Apolloes bird, who dutifully saluteth him, and bids him good morrow
every morning. He is figured, a young fresh youth, having long hair, no beard,
a lute in the one hand, a bow in the other, in a chariot drawn with four
coursers, Pyroeis, Eous, Aethon, Phlegon, Ignitus, Matutinus, Ardens,
Comburens, being all Epithetes incident to the nature of the sun: whose
Palace and Chariot are described by Ovid: 2. Metam: In Latin he is called
Sol, quasi solus, alone and incomparable. The first picture of the Sun.


Hercules killed Gerion, and brought away his oxen: where, by Hercules, both
Pierius and Hesiodus his interpreter, understand the Sun, since he is the
glory and ornament of Juno, that is, the air: for, (...), is Juno, and (...),
is glory. And Gerion, they make to be winter, of (...), which signifies to
cry or roar, thereby noting the roaring and blustering tempests of winter,
which are calmed, and repressed by Hercules, that is to say, by the heat of
the Sun. The Oxen be the crashes of thunder, whose fearful sound resembles
the lowing of Oxen: and these thundrings are never lightly heard, but when
Hercules has slain Gerion; when winter is ouerpast by the heat of the Sun.

Apollo being banished from heaven for killing the Cyclopes, fed Admetus his
Sheep, Kine, and Oxen, by the river Amphrysus. Oxen set foreward husbandry,
and the vital heat and influence of the Sun, is the chief cause of
increase: so then, Apollo may well be called a pastor, because, as Pontanus
says, he feeds and maintayneth all that lives, Quod pascat quicquid sub
coeli nascitur oris.

The Assyrians (by report of Macrobius) especially honored one God above
others, whom they named Adad: which signifies one: to whom they joined a
Gods, for a companion, called Atargatis: attributing all to these two: by
whom they understand the Sun and the earth. The picture of Adad had his
beams and rays inclyning downewardes toward Atargatis, showing that the
heavens work on and in the earth, by influence from the sun. Atargatis was
so framed, as that her beams ascended vpwardes toward Adad: notyng, that
whatsoever the earth brought forth, it came by operation of the celestial
virtue. Under Atargatis was a Lion, signifying, that she was the great mother
of all things, Earth: who, a^ I showed before when I spoke of Cibele, had her
chariot drawn by Lions. The picture of Adad, and Atargatis.


Aesculapius was borne by the death of his mother, as Ovid tells the tale in
the second of his transformations: where, after that he had showed, how Apollo
in his fury slew Coronis, great with Aesculapius, he adds thus, Non tulit
in cineres labi sua Phoebus eosdem
Semina: sed natum flammis, vteroque parentis
Eripuit, geminique tulit Chironis in antrum. etc.


The virtue medicinable is hereby figured, drawn from the roots of herbs,
when the earth is pierced with the arrows, that is, parched by the hoate beams
of the Sun. This is delivered to Chiron, the learned and experienced
Physician, who thereof frames wonderful compositions.

Aesculapius is made sitting on a high seat, with a crown of Laurel on his
head, a long beard, a knotted staff in his right hand (it is a difficult and
hard matter to restore decayed health) and a Snake in his left hand: a serpent
is quick of sight, and watchful; so must a Physician be. A Snake may well be
taken for a sign of health; since, as she by casting her old skin, renueth
her self, so the sick and crased body restored to his former health, seems
to be young again. Aesculapius his picture.


The morning is the forerunner to the sun, yet caused of the sun. She is
called the daughter of Thia and Hyperion, she is ruddie like roses, she has
yellow hair golden roabes, and sits on a golden throne. Aurora loved
Tithonus, Laomedons son; because he fett his wife from the East; he being
extremely old, was turned to a Grasshopper: old men never cease tatling and
chirping. The distinctions of times called hours, Horae, (...), which
signifies to keep; do guide, conserve and keep in order all proceedings
whatsoever, and are the daughters of Jove and Themis, to weete, Eunomie, Dice,
Eirene: for, no way better shall a man perceive the good or bad dealing of men,
and the merciful or revenging power of the Gods, then by the change of times
and howrs: therefore they keep heaven gates, and attend on the Sun, causing
fair or foul weather, when they lust, for the profit or plague of mortal
men. The picture ^f Aurora.


Now to Alphesiboeus his tale. Phoebus killed Pytho: the heat of the Sun consumed
those pestilent vapors left after the deluge causing putrefaction, signified by
this word, (...), whereupon some think, he was called Apollo, of the verb
(...), to kill. Pontanus, Tum tellus grauis imbre and adhuc stagnantibus vndis
Humida, anhela, vagos tollebat ad aethera tortus,
Inuoluens caelum nube, and caligine opaca:
Hinc ille immanis Python, etc.


This made Phoebus vaunt: yet was he daunted by Cupid, and forced
affectionately to love Daphne, daughter to the river Penaeus: whereby is
understood, that natural and radical humor of the earth, proceeding from the
waters and rivers, that moysten her and make her fruitful. The sun coueteth
this moisture, sends down his attractiue beams to draw it up, resolves it
into vapors, and makes it fit for himself. On the other side, this moisture
flies and withdraws herself from the heat of the sun, as from her deadly
foe. Again, the violent and piercing beams of the sun, compel this
moisture to forsake the uppermost and superficial parts of the earth, retyring
backward into the deepest and remotest parts thereof. Which, being thither
come, and yet even thither and there, persecuted by the scalding and searching
rays of Phoebus, is at last, by the means of the celestial powers, and help
of the watery floods and rivers, defended from the violence of Apollo, and
converted into fruitful trees and plants. Daphne is transformed into a
laurel tree, rather then any other, for that, by reason of her excellency,
continuance flourishing greenenesse, odoriferous sent, and natural heat, she
above all other does show her constitution to be tempered with due and
proportionable commixtion of terrene moisture and celestial heat^. Daphne is
Penaeus his daughter: for, by the banks and meddowes adjoining thereunto, an
infinite number of laurel trees were growing. Apollo garnished his Lute and
Quiver with Laurel leaves: so should only famous poets, worthy of Apollos
Lute: and renowned conquerors figured by his Quiver, be crowned with Laurel, in
token of their neuer-dying glory. Laurel is long kept; so is the fame of
learned and valyant men: Laurel is always green: so is their praise eternal
and euer-florishing: Laurel is hoate and odoriferous: so does the
heauenly-inspired spirit of poets, and all-contemning courage of Heroical
minds, breath forth the sweet savor of virtues excellency: Lastly, Laurel
is never tutcht with lightning, and their names are never defaced by Oblivion.

The other tale of youthful Phaeton, and his father Phoebus, may first give us
warning, neither to wish unadvisedly, nor suddenly to yield to rash demands:
nor vnconsiderately to perform a promise foolishly made. Phaeton, Semele,
Theseus, and others, by their own wishes procured their own confusion.
Phaeton was the son of Phoebus and Clymene: toweet the heat and inflammation
procee^ing from the sun. For (...), is, to burn: and Clymene, is the water,
(...), to ouerflowe: and when these ouerflowing vapors elevated by the sun,
are once inflamed, then does this outrageous heat break out. Phaeton fell
down into the river Eridanus, after extraordinary drought, follow commonly,
inundations of waters.

Phaeton is beaten down with thunder: for, these vapors raised up by the
sun, and by the enuironing coldness of the middle region of the air, thrust
into a narrow strait; by struggling for passage, cause thunder and lightning,
til the outrage of that heat be so consumed. Phaetons sisters, Phaetusa and
Lampetie (noting heat and brightness) did so sorowfully lament their brothers
death, that, for pity, they were turned into poplar trees: that is, of this
humor, and exceeding heat of the sun, many kinds of trees and plants do
plentifully proceed. Lucian expounds it historically thus: Phaeton began
seriously to observe the course and revolution of the sun, but, prevented by
death, could not finish his attempted enterprise. The ethicall moralization,
(which Ovid himself tutcheth in his books de Tristibus) may be this: Phaeton,
a youth, and therefore unable to govern, will needs be a magistrate: but
alas, it is too great a burden for his weak shoulders.

Magna petis, Phaeton, and quae non viribus istis
Munera conueniunt, nec tam iuuenilibus annis.
The government and administration of a common wealth or kingdom, is a
heavenly charge.

Sors tua mortalis: non est mortale quod optas. It is also as heavy as
heavenly. The beginning and climing up, is hard and difficult: the top thereof
subject to a thousand perils and dangers, which make even the most
experienced, much to fear: and the descent or coming down is headlong.

Ardua prima via est, and qua vix mane recentes
Enituntur equi: medio est altissima caelo;
Vnde mare and terras ipsi mihi saepe videre
Sit timor, and pauida trepidet formidine pectus.
Vltima prona via est, and eget moderamine certo.
Besides this, in a common wealth, there be Bulls, Centaurs, Lions, Scorpions,
and such like; that is, savage and rude people, ungentle, cruel, crafty, and
envious; to whose open violence and secreate supplanting the gouerner is ever
subject.

Forsitan and lucos illic vrbesque deorum
Concipias animo, delubraque diti a donis
Esse: per insidias iter est, formasque ferarum,
Vtque viam teneas, nulloque errore traharis,
Per tainen aduersi gradieris cornua tauri,
Haemoniosque arcus, violentique ora Leonis
Saeuaque circuitu curuantem brachia longo
Scorpion, atque aliter curuantem brachia cancrum.
Again, the rude rablement of the vulgar sort, will hardly be maistred, or
brought to any conformity.

Nec tibi quadrupedes animosos ignibusillis
Quos in pectore habent, quos ore and naribus efflant,
In promptu regere est: vix me patiuntur, vbi acres
Incaluere animi, ceruixque repugnat habenis.
These and such other imminent mischiefs laid open by Apollo, he falls at
last to entreating and persuasions* and fearful cares of a loving father.

Pignora certa petis: do pignora certa timendo,
Et patrio pater esse metu probor, aspice vultus
Ecce meos: vtinamque oculos in pectora posses
Inserere, and patrias intus deprendere curas.
But ambition can hear no reason, and Phaeton will needs sit in his fathers
chariot.

dictis tamen ille repugnant*
Propositumque petit, flagratque cupidine currus.
This chariot is the glorious type of earthly honor and dignity: the axell
tree all of gold, golden buck, golden follies of the wheels, and silver
spokes: the collars, traces, and hownces glystred with Chrysolites, and other
precious stones, which ravish the mind of the yonker Phaeton.

Aureus axis erat, temo aureus, aurea summae
Curuatura rotae, radiorum argenteus ordo:
Per iuga Chrysolithi, positaeque ex ordine gemmae
Clara repercusso reddebant lumina Phoebo.
And again, Dumque ea magnanimus Phaeton miratur, and optat. etc.

Phoebus his horses note the vulgar people, as I said before, altogether fierce
and outrageous: the bridles are the stay of government. Phaeton thus being
obstinate, and resolved to be a ruler, is now instructed how to rule. Spare the
whip, reine them hard.

Parce puer stimulis, and fortius vtere loris. The whip notes a rigorous and
tyrannical kind of commanding and ouerruling: the reins, a moderate and
temperate kind of discipline. Mount not too high, fall not too low, keep
between both.

Altius egressus, caelestia tecta cremabis,
Inferius terras, medio tutissimus ibis.
These praecepts ended, the young headed officer, by the favor and countenance
of great men, is set aloft in his bravery.

Occupat ille leuem iuuenili corpore currum,
Statque super, manibusque datas contingere habenas
Gaudet, etc.
But when any tumult or sedition is stirred up among the people, then is he
nobody, and esteemed of nobody.

Sed leave pondus erat, nec quod cognoscere possent
Solis equi, solitaque iugum grauitate carebat.
Vtque labant curuae iusto sine pondere naues,
Perque mare instabiles nimia leuitate feruntur,
Sic onere insueto vacuos dat in acre saltus,
Succutiturque alte, similisque est currus inani.
This happens to al such magistrates as will not rule according to Apolloes
rule. The sun indeed has a contrary motion to that of the heaven: but he
trauerseth the heaven gently, not crosses it ouerthwartly: and so must a ruler
ouerrule the stubburne vulgar. Phaeton, poor youth, when all is on fire, all
on an vproare, is at his wits end.

Tum vero Phaeton cunctis e partibus orbem
Aspicit accensum; nec tantos sustinet aestus.
Then Jupiter, at the pitiful complaint of the earth, that is, the
commonwealth, coms to help.

Intonat, and dextra libratum fulmen ab aure
Mittit in aurigam. etc.
Where follows the miserable end of these lusty commanders, brought to utter
confusion.

Illic fraena iacent, illic temone reuulsus
Axis etc.
When all is come to al, Phaetons ambitious conceit, gains naught but this to
comfort his destruction, that when by his aspiring, he has procured his own
overthrow, men may say after his death, This fellow carried a brave mind, and
shot at mighty matters.

Hic situs est Phaeton, currus auriga paterni,
Quem si non tenuit, magnis tamen excidit ausis.
The like folly and fall was that of Icarus, who soared so high with his waxed
wings, that he gave name to the Icarian sea, wherein he was drowned. Ovid 8.
Metam. sweetly tells this tale, and in 3. de tristibus, as sweetly does
expound it.

Since Mercury and Apollo were reconciled and made good friends, it was
appointed, that Damon should join Mercury to his companion Phoebus: who did it
briefly, thus.

Lovely Coronis killed by the balefull darts of a lover,
And tale-telling Crow made black, for a worthy requital:
Young Aesculapius, by repenting hands of Apollo
Cut fro the mothers womb, was carefuly sent to the schoolehouse
Of Centaure Chiron to be taught: who made him a cunning
Surgeon; so cunning, that he dead men strangly revived.
Whereat Jove incenst, with thunder fram'de by the Cyclops,
Stroke him dead himself, who cured somany deaths-wounds.
Titan, sad to behold his son so spitefuly murdered,
On slaughtred Cyclops, his slaughter kindly revenged.
Thundering Jove much wroth, that such as fram'de him a thunder
Sold suffer violence, and not from death be protected,
Expelled Phoebus, for a certain time, from Olympus.
Phoebus in exile now, contents himself with a pastors
Poor estate, and feeds Admetus flock, by the river
Amphrisus: so sweet and so secure is a pastors
Harmeles life: life next to the matchles life in Olympus.
Once in an eu'ning-tide, whilst Phoebus lay in a valley,
And with rural pipe bestowd himself on a loues-lay,
His sheep (sheep indeed, that leant no ear to a loues-lay)
Through Pylian pastures chaunst here and there to be straying.
Mercury, Jove's pretty Page, fine-filcher Mercury, saw them,
Caught and brought them away, and kept them close in a thicker.
Phoebus knew nothing* for no-bodie saw, but an old churl,
One old canckred churl, which there kept Mares by the mountains,
Called bald Battus: whom Mercury friendly saluted,
Took him apart by the hand, and best persuasion used,
Gave him a lamb for a bribe, and prayed him so to be silent,
Fear not, alas, fair sir, quoth Battus: it is but a trifle,
It Is but a trick of youth, some straggling sheep to be taking:
Kings may spare, and lend to the poor: And this very senceles
Stone (and points to a stone) of this fact shall be reporter
As soon, as Battus: Jove's Nuntio gladly retired,
Yet, for a further proof, both face and fashion altered,
And, as a country clown, to a country lowt he returned.
Gaffer, I miss viue sgore vatt wedders: zawst any vilching
Harlot, rogue this way of late? can tell any tidings?
I^hill give the an eawe, with a vayre vatt lamb for a guerdon.
Battus perceauing his former bribe to be doobled,
Turned his tale with a trice, and theaft to the thief he revealed.
Under yonsame hill they were, year while, by the thicket,
And'cham zure they are there. Iste true, quoth Mercury smiling,
Is It tr'ue, thou false knave, and will thou needs be betraying
Me to myself? and then false Battus turned to a Tutch stone,
Tutch stone, yet true stone; which each thing truly bewraieth,
And no-man thenceforth for no bribe falsely betrayeth.
At last, all brabling and altercation ended,
Mercury and Phoebus made friends, gave one to another
Mutual embracements, and tokens: Pastor Apollo
Gave his charmed staff to the Nuntio Mercury: and the
Nuntio Mercury gave his Lute to the Pastor Apollo.
Thus they parted friends: to the flock went Pastor Apollo;
Mercury sored aloft, til he seas'd on bewtiful Hearse,
Sister of Aglauros possessed with damnable envy
And cursed Couetise, and worthily turnde to a black-stone,
Black-stone, sign of a mind all black and fowly defiled.
Not long after this, Phoebus with Mercury; joined
In faire-prowd Chione: Chione bare either a dearling:
Mercury, Autolicus did father, Apollo, Philammon;
The One well known for a these, and the other fit for a fiddle;
But faire-prowde Chione was killed at last by Diana.
ELpinus glad of so short a discourse, made as short work in explication of
the same. Mercury was Jove's messenger indeed, yet not used only by Jove, but
sometimes by other Gods also. His feet were winged, his hat winged, his face
beardles, his body bare but that he had a cloak cast over his shoulders, he
held in his hand a staff called Caduceus, which Phoebus gave him in exchange
for his Lute: the serpents, winding it about, are a sign of concord; and the
rod it self was borne of those who entreated of peace, called thereon
Caduceatores. His winged hat and feet show, that speech and words (whereof
Mercury is the best deliverer) once being vttred, fly without return,
according to that of Horace, Nescit vox missa reuerti.

And else where, Et semel emissum volatirrcuocabile verbum.

And Homer calls words, (...), winged words. Mercuries picture.


Mercury, according to his diverse aspects, works diverse influences in men's
minds: if he be predominant, he afordeth eloquence, elegancy, learning, and
especially mathematical knowledge. If he look on Jove luckily, he gives
skill in Philosophical and Theological speculations: if on Mars happily, he
makes good Physicians, if unhappily, he makes the^ either bad Physicians, or
stark thieves: whence came the fable, that Mercury begat on Chione a notable
thief, called Autolicus, as musical Phoebus by the same mother had fidling
Philammon. Mercury therefore is a plain turnecoate good with good, bad with
bad. Such as be Mercuriall, are commonly not very rich: yet they find out now
and then conceits and devises to draw money out of the chests of princes and
mighty men; since their crafty and cunning master Mercury, has made them fit
for the managing of princes affairs. And this was the meaning of the tale,
that makes Mercury steal Apolloes cattle: for, Apollo notes Kings and
potentates, and his flocks, are their wealth and riches, and the Mercuriall is
the fitcher. If, by chance, his Legierdumaine be perceived, he can so sinely
smooth up al by facility of discourse, that he never is utterly disgraced by
the mighty men. This their friendship and exchange notes that incomparable
union of Iouial intelligence with Mercuriall eloquence, the only flower of
Kings courts, and felicity of common wealths. The perjured Battus is as
worthyly plagued for his double tongue, as the blabbing clawback, and Brewbate
Crow* for his long tongue. Coronis killed by Apollo, notes the withered herbs,
by the withdrawing of the moisture to the roots; whereof already in Apollo.
Only this we may remember, that Phoebus killing Coronis, is a type of wrathful
iealosie, cause of present repentance. This tale (as also that of Hearse and
Aglauros) is in the second of Ouids transformations: and the other of Chione,
(signifying, that pride will have a fall) in the eleventh.

Mercuries reconciliation with Phoebus being thus briefly expounded, it was
thought good time, to talk of Mars, who, (as seemed by the late discourse) is
also diversely affected by or to the same Mercury. Coridon therefore, whose
courage was most martial, being hereunto apoyn^ed, and remembering no famous
transformation by him effected, did what he could, and sang thus of Mars, and
his Mistres Venus.

Whilst lymping Vulcan did lay on load on his anuile,
With sweating Steropes, and fram'de Gradiuus a breast-peece:
Gradiuus took pains; and sweet Cytheraea belabr'ing,
With like endeavor made horned Vulcan a head-peece.
Phoebus saw them first ( Phoebus see's every thing first)
Saw, and gree'ud very much, so shameful a sight to be seeing,
Ran to the forge straightway, and there told al to the blacksmith,
Iunoes fayrefac't child, Cytheraea'es bewtiful husband.
Mulciber astonished, stood starck horne-dead for a long while:
Down falls heart, down falls his head, down falls his hammer,
And no life, no soul, in senceles carkas apeareth.
At last, fine small nets, and chain, of wire he devised,
So small and so fine, that sight must needs be deceived;
Much more fine and small, then finest thread of a copweb:
And so craftily framed, and with such my sterie forged,
That, with a pluck they claspt, with a tutch they speedily cloased,
And held each thing fast, and each thing greedily grasped.
These with slight and art on adultrous couch he reposeth;
And, in a secreate place expects polluted adultresse,
And hoate raging Mars: who there lay lovely together,
Either on others breast, and either in arms of another.
When sweet tickling joys of tutching came to the highest
Point, when two were one, when moisture fully resolved
Sought for a freer scope, when pleasure came to a fulness,
When their dazeling eyes were ouer-cast with a sweet cloud,
And their fainting souls, in a sleep, in a swowne, in a loue-trance:
Then was Mars fast tide, fast tide was dame Cytheraea,
Then was Mars cooled, cooled was dame Cytheraea.
Mars the adulter lay entangled with Cytheraea,
And Cytheraea lay entangled with the adulter:
Vulcans wires hold fast, they lie unseemly together,
Either on others breast, and either in arms of another.
Mulciber in mean time causd chamber door to be open,
And called Gods, to behold so strange and lovely a wonder:
Some laughed, some smiled, some wished so to be shamed,
Nobody but Neptune could possibly pacify Vulcan.
Lady Venus let loose, was spitefuly wroth with Apollo,
And his brood with lust and rage she daily bewitched:
Sometimes Leucothoe with an endless love he desires,
And sometimes Clytie, and sometimes lovely Coronis.
Every day new love, new lust, new flames be prepared
By Cytheraeaes means, for this tale-teller Apollo.
Poor Vulcan, quoth Elpinus, was ouermatcht; and did therefore well to return to
his forge, and not sight with Mars, the God of sighting. Jove, they say* had
Minerua without a mother, and therefore Juno would needs have Mars without a
father. Mars is that hot and furious disposition, fit for wars. He was borne
in Thrace, a warlike and bloody country: his nurse was called, Thero,
signifiyng fiercenes and cruelty: he is figured g^im, ^ierce, and stern*
allarmed: his chariot is drawn by two horses, which Homer calls, Terror and
Fear: his companions be, Fear, Fury, and Violence, and Fame, with a trompet,
goes before, all eyed, winged, and clad with a thin and fine roabe^ she is
learnedly set forth by Virgil, 4. Aeneid: and sweetly by Ovid, 12. Metam. Mars
his picture.


Bellona. so called of Bellum, which is War, was a gods, that entermedled
whith Martial affairs also. She is painted like a furious woman, with a
whippe in the one hand, and a firebrand in the other. Bellonaes picture.


Victoria, Victory; was painted with a sweet Virgins face, winged, flying,
having a branch of Palm in the one hand, and of Laurel in the other; both
signs of Victory. The pi^ture of V^ct^^^a*


Now to the fable of Mars and Venus. Venus, that is to say, Wanto^nes, joined
with Mars, which notes hoate and furious rage, giving themselves over to
excessive and inordinate pleasure; are by Phoebus, figuring the light of
reason, accused to Vulcan, who represents natural heat; which is weakened by
this inordinate lust. Vulcan, by Phoebus his counsel, linketh them together
to their shame: for, when natural heat is quailed, then the rage of lust is
abated, yrkesome repentance and languishing debilitie ensuing thereupon. Vulcan
shows them both to be mocked of the Gods: the natural heat complayneth, as
it were, and shows to all the other faculties (called Gods by reason of their
heavenly frame and function) his decay and impotencie: whence follows of
necessity the impayring of all the other faculties: especially he calls
forth Neptune, Mercury, and Apollo; since Neptune by reason of moisture,
notes the nourishing power derived from the Liver: Mercury, the sensible part
proceeding from the brain: and Apollo the vital and quickening virtue coming
from the heart; which three are extremely prejudiced by immoderate lust. No man
could pacify Vulcan, saving only Neptune: nothing can restore the decay of
nature, but supply of moisture and nourishment. Venus incensed, persecutes with
deadly hate, the whole family of Phoebus, for this discovery: for lust is a
continual adversary to reason, ever maligning and opposing it self against
all her proceedings: the tale is briefly told by Ovid: 4. Metam: and more
largely by Homer, 8. Odyss: and otherwise expounded by Plutarch, in his
discourse of Homer. Ovid in the fourth of his transformations largely
discourses, how Leucothoe was turned to a sprig of franckencense, and Clytie to
an herb called Heliotropium: that noting the sweet and odoriferous influence
of the Sun, this expressing the nature and name of that herb, ever turning
toward the Sun.

The Nymphs were all this while behind hand in their songs: therefore the
pastors were now suffered to pawse for a season: Pallas, Diana, and Venus, being
referred to Licoris, Aresia, and Cassiopaea. Licoris the merry less, said as
follows.

WHen the rebelling brood of the earth laid siege to the heavens,
And Jove all in vain had wasted his ordinary thunder,
Fire-forging Vulcan contrived new darts of a wondrous
Mixture, more violent then Jove's first ordinary thunder.
When Gods thus victors were all secure in Olympus,
And newfound lightning had plagued the rebellius ofspring^
Jove bade fire-cunning black smith, for a friendly requital,
Ask and have, what he would, and most sincerely protested
By Stygian waters, that nothing should be denied.
Old limping Dottrel would needs ask Lady Minerua,
Of peace and of wars chief guide and Lady, Minerua,
Jove's joy, borne of Jove, Jove only without any Juno.
Well, quoth Jove, then speak and speed: if Lady Minerua
Yield her self to a smith, let a smith take Lady Minerua.
Vulcan limps on apace, proud of so lovely a Lady
And peareles Paragon: When he came at last to the Palace,
And there found Pallas, th'ould buzzard began to be bussing
Th'inuiolate Virgin: th'oulde fumbler began to be fingring
Th'immaculate maiden: who by and by with a stately
Frown, and austere look, his rashness boldly rebuked.
Black smith entreats, proud Pallas stoutly denies,
Gray-beard contendeth, but manly Minerua repelleth.
At last, with striving and struggling sti^ly, the sharp-set*
Old ^ornicator was now so thoroughly resolved,
Fully resolved now, and now so fowly resolved,
That the resolved blood contending long for a passage,
Powered it self at length on the earth, in steed of a Pallas.
Vulcan somewhat coolde, and seeing stately Minerua
Obstinat and peevish, conuey'd himself to his hammers.
But the resolved blood which Pallas prowdly refu^ed,
Was sucked up by the earth straight way, and gladly received;
Whereof Erichthonius was borne, fair boy to the middle,
But foul snake downward. Which monster, Lady Minerua
Gave to the three sisters to be kept, inclosd in a casket,
With strayte commaundment, that none look into the casket,
None peep in to the child, or see so fearful a monster.
Pandrosos and Hearse kept tutch with Lady Minerua,
Curious Aglauros would see what might be the matter,
And chest unclosed, disclosed a boy, with a serpent.
There was a chattring Chough, which spying down from an elmetree,
Saw all their dealings, and showed all unto Minerua:
Who in stead of thanks, this brew-bate crow did abandon,
And took Nyctimene transformd to an Owl, for her handmayd.
Thenceforth every Chough, for a mock, was called a Iack-dawe;
And each prating Jack, bears yet this name of a Iack-dawe.
PAllas, quoth Elpinus, was Jove's daughter, borne of his head, without any mother:
for, sapience and celestial wisdom is the gift of Jupiter: and her seat is
in the head: and women, though they have many times too much wit, yet have
they commonly as little wisdom. She was borne armed: wisdom is never
weaponles; or, wisdom is the synew of war. Vulcan, with an axe of Adamant,
did cut Jupiters head, whence Pallas proceeded, a pure and spotles Virgin. A
Virgin; for, wantonness and wisdom can never agree: Pure and spotles; for,
that superior part of the air, represented by Jupiters head, is pure and
incorruptible. Mercury and Minerua were figured both together in Universities;
he noting eloquence, she sapience: that without this, is commonly hurtful,
this without that, is seldom auayleable, both together are most excellent.
This was called (...), of (...), Mercury, and (...), Minerua. She had a manly
countenance and fierce: and glittering and flaming eyes. Her Helmet was of
gold: wisdom shines and is a glorius protection. Her head is therewith
covered: wise men conceal their devises and cogitations; which was the cause
also, why commonly there was on her helmet, the image of a Sphinx, betokening
silence and secrecy, having the head, face, and breast of a maiden, the wings
of a bird, and the rest of the body like a Lion: propounding obscure riddles,
and devouring those that could not unfold them. Her spear is long: Valor and
wisdom are mighty, and reach far. Her Shield is of Cristall: wisdom is
bright and clear. In her breast plate was Gorgons head: wisdom is wonderful
to the wise, and makes fools amazed. The picture of Pallas, called Palladium,
came down from heaven into Troy; and, till it was gone, Troy could not be
taken: wisdom is celestial, and the only safegarde of Cities, and common
wealths.

Pallas was so called because she slew Pallas a Giant: or, of shaking her
spear, (...). Minerua, a memoria, of memory, the treasury of wisdom: or, a
minuendo, of diminishing: for, strength is diminished and weakened by earnest
and continual meditations: or, a minando, of menacing: for she is warlike as
well as wise, and of Bellum, War, called also Bellona: though some
distinguish them, making Pallas to note policy in wars; and Bellona, blood
slaughter, murder, and destruction. Pallas bare away the name of the city of
Athens, by bringing forth the Olyue, noting fertility, more benef^cial to
Cities, then Neptunes horse, fit forwarres: or, because students spend much
oil in their Lamps, as Demosthenes did, who was reported in all his life time
not to have consumed so much wine, as oil: or, for that she first invented the
use of oil. The picture ^f Pa^las with Mer^^rie.


Minerua was also the Gods of spinning, weauing, and curious working of
cloth: and therefore was she figured sometimes with a distaffe in her hand.
She rejected the Crow for his tatling: blabs be no companions for wise men, who
use to think before they speak, and yet not utter all they think. In his place,
she admitted the Owl, who sees in darkness, and is solitary and silent: all
which properties are agreeable to the conditions of a Philosopher and wise man.
Athens was her chief delight: Athens was the most famous and learned
University in all Greece; and she is the Lady of learning. ^he picture (...)
Minerua ^ith a di^^^ff^.


Now for the explication of this wooing of Minerua, Vulcan must first be
described: for, as by Minerua, the learned and witty contriuing of any work is
intended; so Vulcan, that is ^ire, is the instrument to effect these
inventions: and, because all things cannot be effectually wrought, which are
cunningly devised, therefore wooing Vulcan can neu^r get Mineruaes good will.
His hatte was of a skiecolor, bright and clear, for, so is that celestial
^ire of it self, but his feet are lame, and so is our earthly fire, impure,
and not able to ascend upwards directly, but shakes and limpeth, this way, and
that way, by reason of the terrene corruption: Or, if you take Vulcan for the
natural heat of man's body, then he may be therefore said to be lame, because
this vital heat does increase, decrease, and alter, according to the
difference of men's ages, and diversity of the constitutions and complections of
their bodies, and is never one and the same, or long like it self. Jupiter
offended, to see this foul babe Vulcan take his mothers part, threw him out of
heaven: and he falling in the Isle Lemnos, brake his leg.

Historically, he reigned in Egypt, was a stout warrior, halted by a wound
received in battle, and first found out the way to make armor of Iron; which
gave cause to these poetical conceits, calling him the black smith, forger of
armor for all the Gods. Vulcan was married to Venus: for, without natural
heat, no procreation. Vulcan strugleth with Minerua, but to no purpose; for,
of that aether^al (...) fire, and subtle part of the sky* figured by Minerua,
nothing is produced: But Vulcan, that is, the gross and more earthly heat,
pouring himself on the earth, is the author of diverse and sundry procreations,
noted by the diverse shape of Ericthonius, signifiyng strife, and the earth.
Ericthonius, to cover his serpenti^e feet, invented chariots to ride in.
Historically, lame he was, and first author of chariots, by Virgils report: 3.
Georgic: Primus Ericthonius currus, and quatuor ausus
Iungere equos, rapidisque rotis insistere victor.


Vulcan was also called Mulciber, quasi Mulcifer, quia mulcet ferrum: because
the fire does mollify the hardness of Iron, and makes it malleable. He is
painted with a hat, as I said before, lame, black, swartie, filthy, for all the
world like a smith at his forge. Vul^ans pi^ture*


Next to Licoris followed Aresia, with a more pitiful song, and fitter for her
severe and maydenlike disposition, wholly vowed to Diana, of whom she sang:

LOng, and far wandering Cadmus, by the help of an earthborne
Serpents brood, and good advise of Lady Minerua,
Founded Thebes at last: but alas, no sooner he founded
Thebes, but unhappy nephew, made grand^ire Cadmus unhappy.
Luckles, unhappy nephew Acteon, ioyed in hunting,
Overmuch hunting, til his own hounds hunted his own-self.
And yet no mischief did he work, but suffered a mischaunce,
No fault, but Fortune, causd his poor head to be horned.
Acteon on a time from his house untimely departed,
And to the green wood went with his hounds and hunts-men about him.
Morning all was spent, and Phoebus loftily mounted
Just twixt East and Weast, drew every shade to be shortest.
Mates, said Acteon, it is now full time to be resting;
We have had good sport: now burning Phoebus on each side
Scalds us, take up toils, and cease any more to be toyling;
Next day, even by the break of day, we will back to the forest.
Acteons counsel was lik'te, his company rested,
Took up tools and toils, and ceas't for a while to be toyling.
There was a Dale, with Pine and Cypress daintily shaded,
Called Gargaphia, sacred to the Lady Diana.
In whose furthest end was a plain and natural harbor,
And yet so pleasant, so sweet, so cheerful a harbor,
That no art could stayne this plain and natural harbor:
Harbor vauted above with bending bows of a thousand
Tall trees: walled about wi^h stones wrought only by nature,
And (which gave most grace, and was to be chiefly regarded)
Watered sweetly within, with a bubling spring that abounded
with clear cristal streams: whose brim was cherefuly mantled
With grass, herbs, and f^owers: And here was lately arrived
Sovereign Lady regent o^ ^orrests, mighty Diana,
And her maiden troops; wi^h purpose there to be bathing
Their unspotted limbs, all weak and weary with hunting.
And no sooner was that Virgin Lady arrived,
But qviuer, sharp darts, and unbent bow she deliu'red
Unto her hand-mayd squire, who them with duty received.
Some pluck off buskins, some tuckt-vp roabes be removing:
Nyphe brings water: Crocale stands still by Diana,
Fine-fingred Crocale, her loose hair daintily tressing.
But whilst Lady regent with a naked company guarded,
Washed her self in spring, and no-mans company feared,
In comes Acteon, from sleeping company seu'red,
In comes Acteon, by chance, to the company naked.
Naked Nymphs seeing, that a man saw them to be naked,
Smote their naked breasts, and made so woeful an outcry,
That woods, wells, and caves in like sort yielded an outcry:
And with naked breasts gave cour'ing unto the naked
Gods their mistres, joined all in a round, in a compass.
But their matchles Queen, and Sovereign Lady Diana
Was too talle to be hid by that same company naked,
Ouer-lookt them quite, and so was seen to be naked:
And like scarlet clouds, where Tytans beams be reflected,
Was their Mistres face, when she was seen to be naked:
Red for shame, and red for grief: for shame to be naked,
And for grief much more, for grief to be taken unarmed.
Yet, though weaponles, she raught both hands to the wel-spring*
And Acteons ^ace with water deadly besprinkling;
Now, said she, go tell, that thou sawst Lady Diana
Naked, spare not a whit. This short narration ended,
Poor Acteons head with an old Hearts horns she adorned,
Made ears sharp, nose flat, neck long, made arms to be spindle
Shancks, and fingers feet, and covered al with a specled
Hyde: and least any part of a Heart should seem to be wanting,
Fearful thoughts, and fleeting legs are given to the hartles
New heart Acteon, who fears, and flies by the forest,
And, as he flies, wonders, that he flies so fast by the forest.
But when he came to a brook, and saw his head to be horned,
And mouth enlarged, poor Heart, with terror amassed
Whould have cried, Alas: but, alas, poor soul he deliu'red
Not so much as, Alas: sighs and brayes only remained
For to bewray his grief, and tears powered forth with abundance,
Trickling down his checks, not his own cheeks now, but a Hearts cheeks.
Of th'ould Acteon, th'ould mind now only remains;
And this same old mind is tossed and turned with a thousand
Conceits, cares, and fears. For, what shall he do? shall he go home
Unto the King and Queen, or wander alone by the desert?
Shame driu's Acteon fro the one; and fear fro the other:
Shame, on a King and Queen with a horned face, to be staring,
Fear, for a man forelorne by the desert still to be wandering.
As thus he stood doubting, his dogs espied his horned
Head, light Loelaps first, with nimble-footed Aello
Called alowd to the rest; and then whole kennel aproached:
Nebrophonos, Dorceus, Harpya, Lycisca, Melampus,
Pamphagus, Agriodos, Pterelas, Hylaeus, Hylactor:
These and as many more, through thick and thin, by the wayles
Ways, by the rocks and clyffes, by the hedge and ditch, by the desert
Run for a pray, and poor Acteon runs from his own hounds,
And is chac'te himself, who was so lately a chacer,
Hunted of hounds himself, who that same day was a hunter:
Acteon makes sport and play with his hounds in a morning,
And that self same day is a pray to his hounds by the eu'ning.
Oftentimes did he strain himself, and sought to be speaking
Unto his hounds, O leave, leave your unnatural outrage,
Let your master alone: But no words could be aforded:
And the redoubled cry in mean time rang by the forest.
Greedy Melanchaetes did pinch him first by the haunches,
Next came Theridamas: Oresitrophos hanged by the shoulder.
These last, though latest, by crossing over a hill top,
Gayne-coapte Acteon, and held him fast, til his other
Hounds came trolling in: Who all so greedily fastened
On poor Acteon, that he scarce had so many morse^s,
So many seu'ral bits, for so many hounds to be biting.
Acteon still plucked, still powered forth playnts to the forest,
Groaned at every gripe, and brayed at every biting,
Groand as a man, brayd out as a Heart, and playnd as a Hart-man*
And on bended knees, with doleful looks he beholdes his
Hounds, and would, if he could, entreat and humbly beseech them.
But merry hunts-men cheer their hounds, and never imagine*
This to be Acteon: but look each way by the forest
For their Acteon; and hallow al by the forest
For their Acteon, ( Acteon shaked his horned
Head, when he heard his name) and al complain, for his absence
From so goodly a sight, from so unlooked for a pastime;
Where poor Acteon, God knows, did wish to be absent,
But was forced, alas, to be too unluckily present,
And saw more then he sought, and felt much more the^ he looked for.
Cursed curres, Hell Hounds, their guts too greedily glutting,
Their Lord Acteon, instead of a stagge, be devouring.
So nothing but death, yea death by so many deaths-wounds
Pleased the revenging mind of too too stately Diana,
Yet not so austere, yet not so stately Diana,
But that her owld Mynion with a look more lovely regarding,
Beautiful Endymion she could find time to be kissing.
AResia had no sooner ended; but Elpinus, seeing the day well spent, began as
follows, without expectation of any further command. Diana was sister to
Phoebus, and daughter to Latona as I said before; Lady of hunting, regent of
woods. Diana is so called, as if a man would say Deuiana, a stragler or
wanderer: for, the Moon strayeth from the Eclipticall line, as hunts-men
wander in woods and forests, or else she may be called Diana, quia diem
praecedit, because she is, as it were, a forerunner to the day. She is also
called Luna, a luce, of her light: figured with a sweet and amiable look, and
maydenlike face, her garments tuckt up, her quiver on her back, a fire brand in
her hand: noting either the pinching torments of childbirth, whereof she also
(by reason of her moisture) in a Gods, or the light which she afordeth for
direction of men in the night season, whereof she is the gouernesse. Her chariot
is drawn by white Hearts; Hearts be swift, an^ the Moon does soonest dispatch
her revolution. She is sister to Phoebus, and therefore called Phoebe, for, she
boroweth light from him; and they two equally divide the time between them,
he ruling the d^y she the night. Her garment is changeable: the Moon has
diverse (...), and apparitions. Her daughter was Hearse, that is Deaw, whom she
conceived of Jupiter. Her shafles note her influence. ^anae, ^^ctu^e.


She is also called Heca^e. (...), signifies an hundred: which simple and
determinate number, is put for an infinite or great number: meaning, that the
Moon has many and infinite operations in and over these inferior bodies. She
had three faces, called for that, Triuia, Triformis, and Tergemina. For, in
heaven she is called Luna, in the woods Diana, under the earth Hecate, or
Proserpina. That of these three faces, which was on the right side, was the
face and head of a horse, figuring the swif^nes of the Moon in ending her
revolution. The left was of a dog, noting that when she hides her self from
us, she is then Proserpina with her hellish hounde: the middle was of a boar,
signifying her jurisdiction in fields and forests. When the Gods fled into
Egypt, for fear of Typhoeus, and every one transformed himself to some
uncouth shape, Luna turned herself into a cat; who sees in the night, as well
as in the day: and her sight does increase and decrease, accordingly and
proportionably to the Moon. The second picture of Diana triuia.


It is historically reported, that Cadmus vanquishing one Draco, King of
Beotia, established himself in his throne: and that afterward, being beset
with the friends of the dead King, who all combined themselves together to
revenge his death, he politikely, with seditious rumors, set them together by
the ears among themselves, and so distracting and seuering their forces,
easily overcame them: and this he did, by the advice of Pallas: it being a
part of wisdom, by these means to weaken the adversaries power, which
otherwise united would be more strong. Others, by the dragons teeth sowed by
Cadmus in Beotia, understand letters, which he first brought out of Egypt into
Greece: and, by the seditious and murdering brethren, they mean the men
learned and lettred, the one still confuting and oppugning the other.
Nazianzenus hereby notes them that abruptly climb up to honor and dignity,
from base and low degree, without either virtue or erudition.

Actaeon fed and maintained a number of idle and unthankful persons, noted by
his dogs. Others expound it thus: we ought not to be over curious and
inquisitiue in spying and prying into those matters, which be above our reach,
least we be rewarded as Actaeon was. Ovid. 2. de tristib.

Inscius Actaeon vidit sine vest dianam:
Praeda fuit canibus non minus ille suis.
Scilicet in superis, etiam fortuna luenda est,
Nec veniam laeso numine casus habet.
Or lastly, thus, a wiseman ought to refrain his eyes, from beholding sensible
and corporal bewty, figured by Diana: least, as Actaeon was devoured of his
own dogs, so he be distracted and torn in pieces with his own affections,
and perturbations. The names of his hounds are all fet from the natural
qualities and proprieties of dogs: Laelaps, Aello, Nebrophonos, Dorceus,
Harpya, Lycisca, Melampus, Pamphagus, Agriodos, Pterelas, Hylaeus, Hylactor,
Melanchaetes, Theridamas, Oresitrophos: signifying, Swift, Tempest, Killbuck,
Spy, Snatch, Woolfe, Blackefoote, Eateal, Savage, Lightfoote, Woodman,
Ringwood, Black* Kildeare, Hillebread.

Endymion watching in the night, to observe the course of the Moon in the Hill
Latmos, was said to be kissed of the Moon. Which may also be the cause why
they of Thessalia were said to force the Moon down from Heaven, with their
charms and incantations, for that they were very curious in noting her nature
and revolution. Endymion, by some others, is a figure of the soul of man,
kissed of Diana in the hill, that is, ravished by celestial contemplation.

Pan enticed the Moon into the woods, by giving her a fair fleece of white
wool: that is to say, nature does induce and persuade the soul, by the gift
of sensible bewty, to come down into this world of generation, and propagation
signified by the wood; Virgil has some such thing. 3. George^on.

Munere sic niueo lanae (si credere dignum est)
Pan deus Arcadiae captam, te, Luna, fefellit,
In nemora alta vocans; nec tu aspernata vocantem.
Fair Venus was now left for fair Cassiopaea: who thus discovered the love
between her and Adonis.

MYrrha, the fathers hoore, and brothers mother, a myrrhor
Of most monstrus lust, was late transformd to a Myrrh-tree:
O how could sweet Myrrh come from so sinful a Myrrha?
Myrrha made Myrrh-tree, brought forth incestuus offspring,
And yet most delicate, most sweet, most bewtiful offspring,
Dame Natur's dearling, heu'ns joy, worlds wonder, Adonis.
Either take wings, bow, and shafts from lovely Cupido,
Or give bow and shafts, and wings to the loved Adonis;
And let lovely Cupid stand hard by loved Adonis
Either on others side, and ask, who list, the beholders,
Which is lovely Cupid, which is this loved Adonis;
Every man will swear, that both are lovely Cupidoes,
Both are Lords of love, and neither loved Adonis,
So like every way were love and loved Adonis.
Yea such grace, such face, such eyes had loved Adonis,
That very Enuies eyes must needs praise loved Adonis.
Lord, how swift is time, and slideth away on a sudden
Vnperceaud, vnspide? That wretched, lewdly begotten,
Sisters, grandsires son, closd yesterday in a Myrrhe-tree,
Borne but yesterday, is now so lovely an infant,
Sweet child, tall springall, brave youth; that Queen Cytheraea
Loves natures dearling, heu'ns joy, worlds wonder Adonis.
Lord of love, by a chance, as he played with Queen Aphrodite
His loving mother, did raze her breast with an arrowe.
Hence, quoth Lady Venus, with this same paltery arrowe;
And putts back her son: but that same paltery arrow
Gave her a deeper wound indeed, then first she believed.
Now Cytheraean bowres and towers Cytheraea renounceth,
Fishy Cnidos, with watery Paphos Cytheraea refuses,
Yea leaves heaven it self for love, for love of Adonis.
Now she delites to be gay, and frames her looks to be lovely,
Trims and tricks her self, and all for love of Adonis.
Sometimes down by a well with Adonis sweetly she sits,
And on Adonis face in wellspring lovely she looks,
And then Adonis lips with her own lips kindly she kisseth,
Rolling tongue, moist mouth with her own mouth all to be sucking,
Mouth and tongue and lips, with Jove's drinck Nectar abounding.
Sometimes, lovely records for Adonis sake, she recites;
How Laeander did, as he swamme to the bewtiful Hero*
How great Alcides was brought from a club to a distaffe,
How Medea the witch causd golden fleece to be conquered,
What lost Euridice; who first came safely to Circe.
Sometimes unto the shade of a braunched beech she repaireth,
Where sweet bubling brook with streams of silver abounds,
And faire-feathred bird on tree-top cherefuly chirpeth;
There her voice, which makes even Jove himself to be ioying,
Unto the waters fall, and birds chirpe ioyfuly tuning.
Sometimes unto the woods, and pleasant parks she resorteth*
With tuckt-vp garments, and Quiver, like to Diana.
And there harmeles game pursu's with loved Adonis,
Trembling hare, swift heart, and Roebuck loftyly horned:
As for Bears, and Woolu's, and such wild beasts, she detested,
Lest any harm might chance, by the chase thereof, to Adonis.
Whilst that Lady Venus did thus converse with Adonis,
Making more account of a heauens-ioy, then a heaven,
Jove sent forth summons through purple-veiled Olympus,
Forthwith commanding all Gods and every gods,
There at a stately triumph, on a certain time to be present.
Then was Lady Venus compelld to return to Olympus
Greatly against her mind, and leave her loved Adonis:
And yet before she returned, she turned herself to Adonis,
And thus took her leave, last leave of loved Adonis.
Sweet boy, since that I must of force now go to Olympus,
(Never before did I so unwilling go to Olympus)
Make much of thyself, and i will make haste from Olympus.
Sweet boy, look to thyself, go not too often to the forest,
Where sharpe-tusked boares, and rau'nous woolus be resorting,
And strong stoordy Lions are each where fearefuly roaring.
Parks and launds are walks more meet for yonker Adonis,
Hearts and Hyndes are game more fit for gentle Adonis.
It Is no wit, sweet boy, with a greater foe to be striving,
It Is no wit, to be stout with strong, to be haughty with hardy:
Forbear for my sake, for my fear learn to be fearful,
Meddle not with beasts, whose every limme is a weapon,
Every stroke is death: least too stowtharted Adonis
Buy his praise too dear: thy face, years, bewty, behavior
Which possess my soul, will never move the devouring
Woolues, and bristled swine, will never find any favor
In blood-thirsting eyes of a rugged bare, or a raging
Ougly Lion, most ougly Lion; whose merciles offspring
Chiefly of all other wild beasts Cytheraea detesteth.
Then she begins to recount, how fair and swift Atalanta
Chaunst at length in race to be overcome, by the golden
Apples, which herself of her own grace, gave to the thanckles
Hippomenes, whose love was therefore turned to a lewd lust,
So lewd; that Cybeles temple was fowly defiled,
And themselves to Lions, for a just plague, speedily changed,
Drawing her chariot, whose church they lately profaned.
Then, quoth she, fly these; and not these only, but all those
Beasts, that will not fly. Such counsel gave she Adonis,
But no such counsel would serve too youthful Adonis.
For, no sooner was sweet sea-borne Nymph Aphrodite
Conveyed in chariot by silver swans to Olympus,
But to the wild wood went too wild and wilful Adonis:
Where, when his hounds on a time, by chance, had rowzed a wilde-boare,
Himself sets on first, and boar in a bravery wounds.
Boar enrag'de, runs forth, with foaming tusk, to Adonis,
And tears those very parts, those tendrest parts of Adonis,
Which were still most dear to Adonis dear Aphrodite,
Tears, and wounds, and kills Aphrodites loved Adonis.
And now, even just now, when wild Boar murdered Adonis,
Jove's great guests were gone, and all solemnities ended,
And sweet lovely Venus from Olympus newly departed;
Thinking every hour to be two, and two to be twenty,
Til she beheld her boy: but alas too soon, she beheld him:
Down fro the skies she beheld her long-lookt loved Adonis
Dismembered, wounded, with his own blood all to besprinckled.
Then to the doleful dale, where murdered Adonis abides,
Her milke-white coursers, with might and maine she directs,
Leaps down, rents her roabes, and poor breast all to bebeateth,
Tears hair, scratcheth face, and deathswound deadly bewaileth.
Hellish Fates, quoth she, though world be deprived of Adonis
Corpse, and loved lymmes, by you; yet world, to the worlds end,
In despite of you, shall yearly remember Adonis,
Yearly remember me, by remembering yearly Adonis.
Yea, this purpled blood will I speedily turn to a purple
Flower; which shall be a grace to the ground insteede of Adonis.
If that Apollo could transform his boy Hyacinthus
Into a flower for a fame, to the mourning flower Hyacinthus,
Which still bears, ay, ay, in leaves, in sign of a wailing:
If that Apollo could his doleful boy Cyparissus,
Turn to a doleful tree, to the ioyles deadly Cupressus,
Shall not Lady Venus do the like for loved Adonis?
Then with life-giuing Nectar, sweet blood she besprinkleth,
And the besprinkled blood, with a round top swells, as a buble:
Purpled round by degrees, is speedily changd to a purpled
Flower, that bears fair leaves, and frail leaves; every winde-puffe
Blows them away. So good things go, so dyed Adonis:
Flower fades, eye dazeleth, face wrinkleth, bewty decays.
CAssiopaea, said Elpinus, has so passionately discoursed of Venus and Adonis,
that I fear me, under these names, she mourns her own love, and vttreth her
own affection. Howsoever it be; Saturnus, that is, Time, with his sith, as I
said elsewhere, cut off his fathers manlike parts: of which, cast into the sea,
Venus was borne. So Saturn destroys, Venus brings forth; and both are
necessary for the continual propagation of these inferior bodies, since the
corruption of one, is the generation of another. Venus is fair, bewty enticeth
to lust. She is naked, love cannot be concealed. She is borne of the sea,
lovers are inconstant, like the troubled waves of the sea: Hereof was she also
called Aphrodite, of the froath of the sea, being like to Sperma. She is
called Venus, quoth ad omnia veniat, or else, a venustate: Swans and Doves draw
her chariot; Doves are wanton, and Swans are white and musical, both being
means to procure love and lust. Myrrha is sacred unto her, so is the rose
also: that, because it is thought to cause love; this, because it is fair and
frail, pleasant and pricking, having a thorn as well as a flower, as love
has. In Saxony, she was figured naked, in a chariot drawn with two Swannes
and two doves, her head bound with myrtle leaves, a burning star on her
breast, a globe representing the earth, in her right hand, and three golden
apples in her left: Behind her were the three graces, back to back, hand in
hand, and apples in their hand.

The first picture of Venus.

Now, for Venus her love to Adonis, and lamentation for his death: by Adonis,
is meant the sun, by Venus, the upper hemisphere of the earth (as by
Proserpina the lower) by the boar, winter: by the death of Adonis, the absence
of the sun for the six wintrie months; all which time, the earth lamenteth:
Adonis is wounded in those parts, which are the instruments of propagation:
for, in winter the son seems impotent, and the earth barren: neither that
being able to get, nor this to bear either fruit or flowers: and therefore
Venus sits, lamentably hanging down her head, leaning on her left hand, her
garments all over her face. ^he second ^icture of ^enus.


Pontanus expresses it thus, Terra etenim solemn queritur deserta cadentem,
Inuidit quem tristis hyems, cui saeuior apri
Horret cana gelu facies, cui plurimus imber
Crine madet, geminos and cum male contudit armos.
Ac veluti virgo absenti cum sola marito
Suspirat sterilem lecto traducere vitam,
Illius expectans amplexus anxia charos:
Cum grauidos aperitque sinus, and terra relaxat
Spiramenta, nouas veniat qua succus in herbas,
Diglomeratque niues, and grandine verberat auras.
Nam cum sol rebus praesit pater ipse creandis,
Vt sese ad manes brumae sub frigore transfert,
Tum tellus vidua sulcos oblimat in alno,
Et tandem complexa suum laetatur Adonim.


Adonis was turned to a fading flower; bewty decays, and lust leaves the Just
full, if they leave not it. Equicola, expounds it thus: Adonis was borne of
Myrrha; Myrrh provoke lust: Adonis was kilde by a boar, that is, he was
spent and weakened by old age: Venus lamenteth, lust decays.

The companions of Venus were the three Graces; virgins* free, merry, amiable,
all joining together. So good turns must be willingly aforded without
grudging. Some make Mercury their leader, because good turns ill bestowed, be
bad turns; benefacta male collocata malefacta arbitror, therefore wisdom and
discretion figured by Mercury, is here requisite. The first of them is
Euphrosyne, of (...), to make merry, to cheer and comfort: the second Aglaia of
(...), to bewtifie. The third Pithus, of (...), to persuade; or, Thalia*
flourishing, as others name her. Some make them winged, because a good turn is
little worth, unless it come quickly.

Gratia, quae tarda est, ingrata est gratia: namque
Cum properat fieri gratia, grata magis.
Two of them look toward us, and one fromwards us: we must yield double
thanks, and double requital for good turns. They be in greek called (...),
of mirth and joy. Natalis Comes refers it to the tilling and fertiltie of
the earth. The pictures of the Graces.


The one has in her hand a rose, the second a Dye the third a branch of
myrtle. The rose notes joy: the Dye is a token, that they ought to come in
course. The myrtle, that they should never be forgotten but always flourish and
continue fresh and green.

Before we leave Venus, we must remember her son Cupido, who, (to omit the
philosophical discourses of the Platonists concerning diverse loves) was
pictured, a boy; lovers are childish: blind; they see no reason: naked; they
cannot conceal their passions: winged; love soon flies into our eyes and
souls, and lovers are light, as feathers. His bow and arrows note, that he
hitteth a far off: his burning lamp, the quickening light, and yet consuming
heat of love, Dulcis amaror amor.

Venus having brought forth Cupid, and seeing that he did not thrive, and
grow; was told by Themis, that if Eros had Anteros, if Cupid had another Cupid
for his brother, who might contend in love with him, he would do well. Venus
hereupon, brought forth Anteros, and presently Eros revived, love was lusty:
and, as the one increased or decreased, so did the other, never deliting, but
either in others love and liking. Eros was figured with a branche of palm in
his hand: Anteros contended to wrest it from him, but could not. He that will
be loved, must love: vt ameris, amabilis esto. We must contend to overcome and
get the palm and victory, by loving more, then we be loved so shall we still
be loved more, Fomes amoris amor. The picture of E and Antros.


Many young waggs wait on great Cupido: they are borne of Nymphs; young, naked,
and have curled hair, and changeable colored wings: sometimes with a lamp or
a bow, sometimes without either bow or Lamp.

Moschus in his wandering and fugitive Cupid, makes him not blind, but having
bright and clear eyes. Tasso has the like in Italian, to that of Moschus in
greek.

The particular histories briefly tutcht in this tale, as by the way, may as
briefly be thus expounded. Leander and Heroes love is in every man's mouth: the
light of the lantern or lamp extinct (that is, natural heat failing) lust
decays, and Leander tossed with the cold storm of old age, is at last
drowned. Ovid in his epistles passionately sets it down, and Boscan has
made a whole volume of it in spanish, entitled Historia de Leandro y Hero,
beginning thus, Canta con voz suaue y dolorosa,
O musa, los amores lastimeros,
Que en suaue dolorfueron criados.
Canta tambien la tris^e mar in medio,
Y a Sesto de vna part, y d'otra Abido, etc.


Hercules was also called Alcides, of (...)* force and might: he was the sun of
Jupiter and Alemena: (...), is strength and prowes. So then, Hercules is the
type of a valiant, constant, and resolute Heroes, borne of Jupiter, that is,
endued with all heavenly qualities effected by Jove's influence, and so borne,
as to purchase himself eternal fame and glorious renown through the world by
his admirable adventures: which for that they were attempted and atcheeued by
the malicious instigation and provocation of Juno; himself was thereof in
Greek named accordingly: for, (...), is Juno; and (...), glory, or renown, as
I have already mentioned: others had rather derive the name, (...)* which
notes virtue and valor. In his infancy he strangled two snakes; the meaning
is, that he began even then to repress wantonness. Afterward he slew a Lion;
noting wrath, pride, and cruelty; and overcame Hydra, the almost invincible,
and still breeding beast, Envy. Hydra lurked in moors and fennes; Envy
creeps on the ground, in base and abject breasts. Troy could not be taken
without his arrows: his arrows are a figure of heroical fortitude. He
wrestled with Antaeus, who ever thrown down to the earth, received new
strength from the earth, till at last, he lifted him up, and strangled him in
the air: so the spirit still strives with the body, but never can overcome
it, till he lift it up so high from the ground, that with his feet, to weete
his affections, he receive no new assistance from his mother the earth.
Diomedes, who fed his mares with man's flesh, was by Hercules enforced to feed
them with his own body. By Diomedes mares, some understand his whoorish
daughters, who robbed and consumed all that came unto them. He killed the
mighty Heart, he freed men's hearts from fear. He was ever covered with the
Lions spoil: a valiant man uses open and Lionlike prowess, and not
treacherous and foxelike wiles. He brake one of the horns of the huge river
Achelous: he reduced one part of the said river into his woonted course, which
was the cause of great fertility to all the country: and therefore it is
said, that the horn was dekt with flowers, and called Cornucopiae, the Horn
of abundance. He fetched away the golden apples of the Hesperides, kept by the
watching Dragon: Hesperides, the daughters of Hesperus, are the stars: their
garden is in the weast, wherein grow golden apples: for such is the nature of
the stars, to glister like gold, and seem round in show like apples. They
grow in the weast, because the stars never appear, but when the sun sets,
and that is in the weast: for, all the day long they are obscured, by the
surpassing light of the sun. The neuer-sleeping Dragon, that watches these
apples and keeps the garden, is the cyrcle, called Signifer. Hercules brought
these into Greece, that is, he brought Astrology into his country. So was he,
for the same cause, feigned to bear the heavens on his shoulders, whilst Atlas
rested himself: because he learned Astrology of Atlas: who is therefore said
to hold up the heavens, because he continually observed the motions of the
heavens, and was thereof called Atlas, of ^ which here is a note of
augmentation, and (...), to bear and sustain. The Pleiades and Hyades be
called his daughters, because he first noted their course, and observed their
operation. Ovid in the fourth of his transformations makes this Atlas to be a
king of Mauritania, turned to a mountain of his own name, when Perseus had
showed him Gorgons head, for denying him entertainment. In truth, Atlas is a
most huge and high hill in Mauritania, so threatening the heavens, that it gave
beginning to this fiction. Sometimes Hercules is painted old and balde, with
his club, bow, and shafts, and small chains or wyres drawn from his tongue, to
othermens ears: signifiyng, that his sweet tongue wrought more, then his
strong body: and that the aged eloquence is most piercing and auayleable, as
Homer makes manifest under the person of old Duke Nestor. The pictu^^ of
Hercule^ Gallicus.


Thus did Hercules his searching and heroical heart leave nothing unattempted:
but by his reaching capacity, and inquisitiue speculation, pierced through
heaven and hell: yet alas he that overcame all, was at last overcome himself:
He that mastred men, was whipped by a woman, and enforced by her to spinne and
handle a distuffe in stead of an Iron clubbe: so does wantonness effeminate the
most warlike hearts, and so much harder it is* to resist pleasure, then not to
be overcome by pain. At length having passed through so many perils, and being
infected with a shirt sent him from Deianira, and polluted with the venymous
blood of the Centaure Nessus, he burnt himself on the mount Oeta: that is to
say, his terrestrial body being purged and purified, himself was afterward
de^fied and crowned with immortality.

Medea signifies counsel and advice; the daughter of Aeta, and Idya* for
(...), is knowledge or understanding, and knowledge is the mother of counsel.
Medea therefore (that is, such as are wise and advised) leaves her father, and
teareth in pieces her brother and children: to weete, all such affections as
might be a let unto her, and flies away with Jason, the physician and curer of
her infirmities, (...), to heal or cure. But when Jason gives himself over to
filthiness, then does Medea* good counsel, fly away in her chariot drawn with
winged Dragons, noting wisdom and policy. Jason was many ways endangered,
before he could atchieue the golden fleece: there is no man that can attain to
any excellency, without extraordinary labor. The golden fleece notes either
great riches and treasure, or fame and immortality.

Euridice, the wife of Orpheus, figureth Appetitum, the coveting and desiring
faculty in man. The serpent biting her heel, is affection and concupisence:
for, veins come from the heels to those parts which are the instruments of
lust. Therefore when Thetis washed her son Achilles in the Stygian waters, he
was inuiolate and vnwoundable in every part of his body, saving only his heel,
by the which she held him when she washed him, and in the same heel was he
wounded by Paris in the temple of Apollo, when he came to mary Polixena, that
is to say, affection and lust to Polixena drew on his confusion. In imitation
whereof, the good Thomalin in the new Shepherds Calendar, sings thus of the
winged boy.

Therewith afraid I ran away:
But he that erst seemed but to play,
a shaft in earnest snatched:
And hit me running in the heel;
For then, I little smart did feel,
but soon the sore increased:
And now it ranckleth more and more,
And inwardly it festreth sore,
ne wot I how to cease it.
Orpheus the husband of Euridice, an eloquent and wise man, so wrought the rude
people, that he made them sociable and conformable: when he obtained the
bringing back of his wife from Hell, he was enjoined not once to look back
toward her: A wise man ought not to be withdrawn from his contemplation, by
any passion or affection whatsoever.

Circe may be either physically or ethically expounded: physically thus, She
was called Circe, a miscendo, of mingling and tempring: for in the generation
of bodies, these four elements, as we call them, must needs be tempered:
which commixtion and composition is done by the influence and operation of the
Sun: and therefore Circe was borne of the Sun and Perseis, the daughter of
Occanus. Perseis or Perse is the humor and moisture of the Ocean, supplying the
place of the matter or the woman, as the sun is the efficient or the man.
Circe had four maidens, the four elements: they gathered herbs and flowers
for her witcherie; these elements are autors of all motions and alterations.
Circe herself is immortal; the generation of things is perpetual. She
transformed men into diverse shapes: for, as I said before, the corruption of
one is the generation of another, not the same, but altered and transformed. She
dwelt in the Isle Aeaea, so called of the groaning and wayling of mortal
bodies, which by reason of the decay and dissolution of this bodylie
composition, are subject to diseases and griefs: for, ae, ae, ai, ai,
signifies, alas, alas. She could not transform Ulysses: the soul cannot be
destroyed, though his companions, noting the elements cohaerent to the body,
were changed. She wrought many wonders by inchaunting, she darkened the Moon,
stayed the waters, dried the fountaynes, burnt grass and herbs, and so
forth; unorderly mixtion or composition, with abundance of vapors lifted up,
darken the moon, and work twenty such like inconveniences. Ethically thus,
lust is caused of heat and moisture, the Sun, and Perseis: If she over rule
us, she transformeth us into the shapes of several beasts, according to the
sundry beastly pleasures wherein we delight: unless some heavenly help be
aforded us, as was to Ulysses. so Homer fayneth some of Ulysses companions to
be devoured by Polypheme the Cyclops, some by the Lestrigones, and some
swallowed up of Scylla, and such as were not dismayed with perils and dangers,
did yet yield and give over themselves to pleasure and sensuality, whereof
diverse became effeminate with the delicacie of the wanton Phaeaces: and others
in the region of the Lothophagi, by tasting foreign fruit, did forget their own
country. The third sort, that resisted both pleasure and pain, was overcome
with couetise; and, whilst Ulysses slept, opened the bagg stuffed with wind
(which Aeolus shut up, and gave to Ulysses) hoping it had been stoared with
treasure. Lastly, a number of them drawn away with ambition and vayn-glorie,
would have yielded to the deceiptfull sweetness of the Syrenes, had not their
Capten stopped their ears with wax, as I said els-where, and caused himself
to be bound to the mast of the ship: only Ulysses escaped* by heavenly help
only, and lived with Circe familiarly. Horace, Rursus quid virtus, and quid
sapientia possit,
Vtile proposuit nobis exemplar Vlyssem,
Qui domitor Troiae, multorum prouidus vrbes,
Et mores hominum inspexit, latumque per aequor
Dum sibi, dum socijs reditum parat, aspera multa
Pertulit, aduersis rerum immersabilis vndis.
Sirenum voces, and Circes pocula nosti,
Quae, si cum socijs stultus cupidusque bibisset,
Sub domina meretrice fuisset turpis and excors,
Vixisset canis immundus, vel amica luto sus.
Nos numerus sumus, and fruges consumere nati,
Sponsi Penelopes, nebulones, Alcinoique
In cute curanda plus aequo operata inuentus,
Cui pulchrum fuit in medios dormire dies, and
Ad strepitum cytharae cessatum ducere curam.


Atalantaes swiftnes is stayed, and herself outrun by golden apples for, what
cannot gold effect? She and Hippomenes are turned to Lions: lust is furius. They
being made Lions, are afterward tamed, bridled, and enforced to draw Cybeles
chariot: by old age lust and love are calmed. Hyacinthus his death teaches us
not to toy; and Cyparissus, not to mourn too much for a thing of naught.

The Pastors being now overtaken by the Nymphs, began to bestirre themselves:
among others, Ergastus, whose course was then come, joined Hermaphroditus to
his mother Venus, much after this manner.

Loving Lady Venus, bare Mercury, Hermaphroditus,
Hermaphroditus, a youth so brave and like to the father,
Hermaphroditus, a boy so sweet and like to the mother,
That, whosoever knew Hermes and Aphrodite,
And looked on brave youth, on sweet boy Hermaphroditus,
Would say, Lady Venus bare Mercury Hermaphroditus.
Water-nymphs for a time brought up this yonker in Ida;
But when sixteen years were spent by the yonker in Ida,
Yonker could not abide, to abide any longer in Ida.
All his joy was now his fortune for to be trying,
And foreign countries with curious eye to be seeing,
And outlandish wells, and unknown springs to be knowing.
After much traueling, many strange sights, and many wonders;
At last, from Lycian borders his course he directed
Unto the neighbor coasts of Caria: where he arrived
Hard by a cristall poole, poole cristal-cleare to the bottom,
And so ^ransparent, that a man might easily number
Every smalest stone, from the utmost brim to the bottom.
There no barren reeke, no pricking reed was abounding,
There no sedge, no rush, no moorish weed had abiding:
But with fair green turfe pooles brinck was chearfuly bordred,
Green turfe with fresh flowers and sweet herbs daintily painted.
There no boys plucked flowers their gay nose gaies to be making,
Nor no nymphs: but a nymph: one nymph, and only but one nymph,
One and only but one; but no such one in a thousand.
For, neither cared she farre-wounding bow to be bearing,
Nor with quick-sent hounds by the green-hewd woods to be hunting,
Nor with water-nymphs by the smiling meades to be walking,
Nor to Dianaes court with tuckt-vp coat to be trudging.
Her feallow Fayries, still prayed, and daily desired;
Salmacis, either take thee a darte, or a feathered arrow,
And intermingle these idle toys, with a fruitful
And commendable act, and sport of mighty Diana.
Yet she neither took her a darte, nor a feathered arrow,
Nor would intermingle her idle toys, with a fruitful
And commendable act, and sport of mighty Diana:
But contents her self with daily domestical Harbor:
Bathes her loved limbs, fit for so louly a water,
Sits on flowring banck, and combs her sweetly beseeming
Hair, and looks to the lake, and guides her comb by the water.
Now her fairest self, with finest lawne she adorneth,
And fair self, fine lawne on tender grass she reposeth:
Now fro the paunce to the rose, fro the rose to the lilly she wandreth,
And herself with paunce, with rose, with lilly she paynteth.
Whilst she bepaynts her self with a paunce, with a rose, with a lilly,
Hard by the pearl-bright brook, she beheld fair Hermaphroditus,
Hermaphroditus a far; so like to a God, to a gods;
That she wished him a God, yet feared that he might be a Gods.
But when man-like roabes declared that he was not a woman,
Salmacis all on fire his divine beauty desired,
Salmacis all on thorns, for so sweet company longed,
Yet stayed, though on thorns, til her head, face, coat she had ordered,
And made all things fine, and then to the boy she repaired.
O sweet boy, whose more then mortal beauty deserves
For to be deemed a God, what God shall I call the my sweet boy?
If that thou be a God, thou seemst to be goodly Cupido:
If but a man, most happy the man, who might be thy father,
Happy the woman, whom thy sweet self made to be mother,
Happy the Nymph, whom so brave brother causd to be sister,
Happy the nurse, whose milk did feed so cheerful a suckling:
But much more blessed, but much more happy then all these,
Were that less indeed, who might be thy wife, be thy bed-make:
If thou have any wife, let me be thy love for a short time,
If thou have no wife, let me be thy friend for a long time:
Whether a husband bound, or whether free as a batchler,
Give me a lawful joy, or privily do me a pleasure.
Thus she bespake sweet boy; but alas, sweet boy was abashed,
Knew not what love was, but blushed, yet sweetly he blushed,
And well, too too well that blushing beauty beseemed.
Salmacis asked but a kiss, when naught else might be procured,
And fair Iuory neck with her Iuory hands she beclasped:
Either let me alone, or I go, said Hermaphroditus.
Nay, sweet friend, quoth she, stay here and play to thy pleasure,
Stay and play by the poole, I Will go: and so she retireth,
And draws back for a while, (yet looks back as she retyreth)
Draws back unto a bush; and there all closely she lurketh,
And through every creek, to the boy she craftily peepeth.
Boy, vnspi'd, as he thought, as boys are wont, was a wandering
Here and there by the meade; and comes at last to the water;
Puts of his hose and shoes, and dips his feet to the anckles
In the bedabling waves, that seemed his toes to be tickling.
By and by, draw'n on, by the cool and temperat humor
Ofth'alluring lake, himself stark naked he stripped.
But when Salmacis once had seen fair Hermaphroditu^
Stripped stark naked, alas her love was turned to a lusting,
Lust to a rage, and rage to a fire, and fire to a flaming.
Hardly she holds her hands, she desires him now to be ha^dling,
And all impatient his snow-white skin to be tutching.
Stripped boy leaps to the lake, lake serves as a veil to the stripped boy,
Bright transparent veil, as a glass to a rose, or a lilly.
Hid Nymph runs fro the bush, dispoyles her self in a moment,
Casts away her Lawnes, and flings her self to the water,
Takes hold, embraces, clips, colls, clasps Hermaphroditus,
(Striving and struggling and wrestling Hermaphroditus)
Feels his naked lims, and sweet lips all to be sucketh,
Sticks fast, spraules, and turns, and winds him about, as an Yuie
Creeps along on a tree, or a snake cleaues fast to an Egle,
Snake snatched up fro the ground, by the gryping claws of an Egle.
Fond boy still still strives, and still still Salmacis urges,
And bows her whole-selfe, bends her whole-selfe to the fond boy,
Weighs him down at last, and there lies all to be wrapped,
All entangled lies, all intermingled about him.
Peevish boy, quoth she, now wrythe and wrest the a thousand
Ways, no way shall serve, for thus will I hold the for ever.
O, would God, would God, that I might so hold the for ever.
Her boon was granted: they lived so jointly for ever;
They were one, not two: two coopled, yet not a coople,
Neither boy nor wench, but a wench-boy now, or a boy-wench,
Both, yet none of both; either, yet neither of either.
When poor youth perceau'd this transformation, and saw
Whereas he entered a man, that he turned back but a halfe-man:
Eyes, and heart, and hand, and voice, (but now not a man's voice)
Up to the heavens did he lift, effeminat Hermaphroditus:
Father, Mother, grant this fountain so to be charmed,
That who goes in a man, may thence come forth but a half-man.
Hermaphroditus chance, moude Hermes and Aphrodite:
And for a worthy revenge, that well they speedily charmed,
That who goes in a man, comes always forth but a halfe-man.
ELpinus was as brief, as Ergastus had been tedious in his tale of his two
wantons. If, quoth he, at any man's birth, there be a conjunction of Venus and
Mercury, it makes him neither man nor woman, both woman and man, given to
inordinate and unnatural lust, noted by Salmacis. For these two planets are so
repugnant, that they can never be well conjoined; since Venus is all for the
body, and Mercury only for the mind.

LA secreta intelligentia di questa fauola, secondo alcuni, e, che nelle
matrici delle done sono set le stanze che rioglieno il seem dell' huomo: tree
dalla part destra, che producono i maschi, e tree dalla sinistra, che producono
le femine, and vna nel mezzo, laquale ricogliendo il seem, ha forza di produrre
l'uno e l'altro sesso insieme. e per questa cagione, vogliono dire, che
Hermaphrodito nascesse di Mercurio, hauendo Venere raccolto il seem in quella
stanza del mezzo: e pero sono chiamati and sono Hermaphroditi tutti quelli che
sono concetti nella medesima stanza.

Meliboeus now lastly remained of all the Pastors: who thus sent lusting
Bacchus after wanton Venus.

CAdmeian Semele was great with child by the thundrer,
Great with child and quick. Whereat Saturnian Empres
Juno, frets and fumes; and brawles and scoldes with her husband,
At last, what boots it, quoth she, my wind to be wasting,
As though in fore-times Jove gave any ear to my scolding?
Nay nay, works, not words must plague that drabbe, that adultre^
What? shall Juno the Queen by a shameless queen be abused?
Juno the Sovereign Queen? shall I reign in skies with a golden
Mace and scepter in hand, and yet part stakes with a strumpet?
If that an outcome whore be my mistres, why am I called
Jove's wife and sister? Nay sister alone: for I bear this
Name of a wife for a show, Jove's secret scapes to be cou'ring.
Secret? nay she vaunts, and takes a delight in her open
Shame; she is bagd forsooth, and great with child with a vengeance;
And looks every day and hour to be called a mother
Of some brat, by a God, by a greatest God, by a thundering
Jove; which scarce has chaunc'te in so many years to a Juno,
But let my mistres no more take me for a Juno,
If that I make her not with her own mouth ask for her own death,
If that I make not Jove, yea Jove himself, to be author
Of this death. This said, inclosde in a cloud, she removed:
And to the huswifes house, in a ielous fury repaired.
Foltring tongue, hoare hair, sunck eyes, legs lasily limping,
Face plowde with wrinckles, did make her like to the old nurse,
Old Beldam Beroe, Semeles nurse. And, of a purpose,
After long tatling, at length she came to the name of
Jupiter, and then sight and said: Dear daughter, I pray God,
That this prove to be Jove; but I doubt: for, alas, many harlots
Under a fained name of Gods have foully deceived
Good-naturd damsels, and them with folly defiled.
But suppose he be Jove: yet that is not enough for a maidens
Mind, unless that he show himself to be truly the thundering
Jove: for, a disguisde Jove is no Jove: ask him a token,
Ask him a sign thereof, dear child: and surely, believe me,
No signe's sufficient, unless that he company with thee,
In that self-same sort as he does with Juno the Gods,
In that Princelike guise, in that maiestical order,
With Sovereign scepter, with fire and thunder about him.
Simple soul Semele, instructed thus by the Beldam,
Asked a boon of Jove, as soon as he came to the entry,
But told not what boon: Jove graunts, and swears by the sacred
Horror of hellish Stix, that he would perform what he granted.
Why then, quoth Semele, let me kiss Jove as a thundering
And bright lightning Jove, no less then Juno the Gods.
Jove would feign have stopped her foolish mouth: but a fools bolt
Was soon, too soon shot, which Jove extremely molested:
For, neither Semele could vnwish what she had once wished,
Nor lamenting Jove vnsweare that which he had once sworn.
Therefore sore displeased, he gets himself to Olympus,
And with a stearne countnance and grim look, heaps on a cluster
Thick clouds, blustering winds, black storms, fires fearfuly flashing,
And th'vndaunted dint of thunders mightily roaring:
And yet he makes himself as mild as he possibly may be,
And allayes his Sovereign force, and leaves the devouring
Fearful thunderbolt, that stroke down griefly Typhoeus.
There is an other kind of thunder: there is a lightning
Framed much more light, and of less might, by the Cyclops,
Called the second scepter: this he takes, and comes to the chamber
Of longing Semele: who proud and vain as a woman,
With fond self conceit drew self-destruction onwards.
For, mortal Semele was quite consumed in a moment
By the immortal strength, and matchles might of a thundrer.
Yet, th'imperfect fruit fro the mothers womb he removed,
And (so ran the report) in his own thigh strangely received it,
Til by continuance of time it grew to a ripenes,
And the appointed time by degrres was come to a fullnes.
Then by his aunt Ino, for a while was he charily fostred,
And soon after that, to the Nimphs of Nysa, deliu'red:
And good-natured Nymphs from Juno warily kept him
In bowres and harbors, and gave him milk for a season.
This same twice-borne babe at length was called Iacchus,
Sweet boy, pleasant impe, fair lad, brave yonker Iacchus,
Never sad, free-tongd, free-hart, free-handed Iacchus,
And, when he wants his horns, as mild as a maiden, Iacchus,
But, when he has on his horns, as fierce as a Tiger, Iacchus.
WHether Meliboeus be beholding to Bacchus, or Bacchus to Meliboeus, I mean
not to determine, said Elpinus: but this I have heard, that Bacchus, a mighty
warrior, overcame Lycurgus, Pentheus, and diverse others, and subdued India,
riding thence in triumphant manner, on an Elephant. Yet his greatest fame was
procured by his invention of wine, which has made him painted and described
accordingly, a young merry youth, naked, crowned with an yuy garland, having a
branch of a vine in his hand, riding in a chariot drawn by Tigers and
Panthers: First, Bacchus is merry, Wine moderately taken* makes men joyful; he
is also naked; for, in vino veritas: drunkards tell all, and sometimes more
then all. Tigers draw his chariot; drunken men are fierce and outrageous. Of
Venus and Bacchus, Priapus was borne: lust comes from wine and delicacie. The
pictu^^ of Ba^ch^^


He is Semeles son: that is, he is borne of the vine: for, Semele is so
c^lled, (...), of the shaking of boughs, her boughs being ever tossed and
still wavering with the wind. Jove was his father; for, wine has a kind of
heat naturally incident unto it: neither will vines grow in cold places. He
was sowed into Jove's thigh, and so borne again: for, wine is eftsoons pressed
and troaden with feet. He is a companion of the Muses: wine quickens the
wit. Women be his priests: women are sooner overcome with wine, then men. He
was, of the Egyptians called Osiris; and was torn in pieces by the Titanes,
and enterred, and yet revived, and had his severed limbs laid together again:
For, of every twig or branch or grift of the vinetree, cut off, and burieed in
the earth, whole vinetrees spring forth again. He has sometimes horns, then
is he intolerable, and fierce, like a Bull, being drunk immoderately. Satyrs,
and such wantons be his folowers; and among the rest, Silenus is his Tutor, a
fat, gross, stammering drunckard, balde, and flatnosde, with great cares,
short neck* and swelling belly, riding on an ass, as not able, for swelling, to
stand on his feet; all effects of beastly carowsing. The water-nymphs took
him from the burnt ashes of his mother, and brought him up: the vine-tree is
moist of nature: or rather, the burning fire of Bacchus, must be quenched, wine
must be allaied. He is called Bacchus, (...), of raging. Bromius, of (...), a
fremendo, of roaring and hurlyburly. Lyaeus, of (...) of freeing^ and thereof,
liber in latin, for wine freeth men from care and thought. Iacchus (...) of
crying and showting.

A strepitu Bromius, quoth vociferetur, Iacchus,
quoth curis soluat corda, Lyaeus erit.
Horace thus describes his operation.

Quid non ebrietas designat? operta recludit,
Spes iubet esse ratas, in praelia trudit inermem,
Sollicitis animis onus eximit, a^ddocet arts;
Faecundi calices quem non fecere disertum?
Contracta quem non in paupertate solutum?
Yu^ is sacred unto him: that being ever green; and he always young and
fresh.

The Pastors having all made an end; Syluia, Dieromena, and Daphne, had yet
said nothing. Syluia therefore remembered Pomona: and Dieromena in mean time,
made herself ready for Rhamnusia: as for good old Daphne, she was odd in
number, and as odd in conceit, and therefore very like, either to say nothing,
or nothing like to that which had been said before. Syluia spoke, as here
ensues.

IN King Procae's time, Pomona, the Lady of apples
Floorisht: ^aire Pomona, the brauest nymph of a thousand
Wood-nimphs: no wood-nimph was found so good for a garden,
None so circumspect, so cunning was, for an orchyarde.
No wells, no waters, no hills, no dales she frequented,
Fishing, and fouling, and hunting life she refused,
Fruit, and fruite-bearing branches Pomona desired,
Gardens were her joy, and all her care was her orchyard.
Insteede of keen darts, she arm's herself with a shredding
Hook, and therewith cutts and pares the super^luus ofsprings,
And rank spreading boughs, which waste that natural humor,
Which well sparde, makes stock to be strong, and fruit to be lovely.
Sometimes tender grifts from better tree she deriueth,
And to a baser stock commits them for to be noorrisht.
B^ser stock, full glad, so noble an impe to be fostring,
Giu^s it ^ap for suck, and it most charily tendreth,
And from nipping frosts, with her own barck daily defendes it.
Sometimes crumpled strings of thirsting root she bewatreth,
When raging dog star burnt fruite-yard all to be scorcheth;
And this is all her joy, and herein still she deliteth.
As for Lady Venus, no such pastime she desires,
But walls her gardens, and orchyards warily wardeth,
And men's sight shunneth, men's company daily detesteth,
Least by the rural folk, violence might chance to be offered
Unto her own sweeteself, or force and spoil to her orchyard.
What did not the Satyrs, that frisking lusty Iuuentus,
And Pan with pine-boughes on his horns, and fleshly Priapus*
And old Silenus, well stuffed with youthful Iacchus,
Old staggring Tospot Silenus, with many other
Rural Gods, t'obtaine so sweet and lovely a gods?
Yet more then the Satyrs, then Pan, then fleshly Priapus,
Then the old Silenus; Vertumnus faithfuly served her,
And more heartily loved, though no more luckily lou'dher.
Howmany thousand times did he turn himself to a reaper,
And in a reapers weeds, bare sheaues of corn in a bundell,
And when he so was dreast, each man would deem him a reaper?
How many thousand times did he change himself to a mower,
And with long-toothd rake, with crookt sith went to the meddowe,
And when he thus made hay, each man took him for a mower?
How many times did he then transform himself to a ploweman,
All in a leather pilch, with a goade in his hand, or a plowestaffe,
And so shapte, each man would swear that he were but a ploweman^
Yea how often did he frame and shape himself as a gardner,
Pressed with a shredding hook his vines and trees to be proyning,
And so dight, no-man did doubt, but he was but a gardner?
If that he met with a sweard, or a soldiers coat, or a cassock,
Cassock, coat, and sweard did make him march as a soldier.
And, when baits and hooks, and angling rods he received,
Fishers and anglers so well, so right he resembled,
That both Nymph and fish might well therewith be deceived.
So, and so did this Vertumnus, slippery turnecoate
Turn, and wind, transform, and change himself to a thousand
Shapes; and all, to behold Pomona the Lady of apples.
At last, with gray hears his wrinckled brows he bespreadeth,
Putts on a red thrumbd hat, with a staff goe's lasily hobling,
Like to an old Beldame: and thus she begins to be tatling.
O brave sweet apples, and o most bewtiful orchyard,
O paradise-garden, fit for so lovely a gardner:
And so giu's her a kiss; (too wanton a kiss for a Beldame.)
Then sits down on a banck, and casts her eyes to the garden
Stoarde with trees, and tree's with fruitful burden abounding.
Over against this banck, where these two fate, was a goodly
Elm, that leant herself, as a loving prop to a vine-tree,
Vine-tree inclining, with clustred grapes, on her elme-tree.
See, said the old Beldame, to the sweet fac'te Lady of apples,
See the loved sight, and mark there, how many thousand
Mutual imbracements, that vine-tree giu's to the elme-tree:
Vine giu's grace to the elm, and elm giu's strength to the vine-tree,
Either an others help, and either a joy to an other.
But yet alas, if th'elme stood single alone fro the vine-tree,
Or vine-tree be diuorct from her husbands company elmetree,
Elm should have nothing, but fruiteles leaves for a burden,
Vine should lie on ground, which now mounts up to the heavens,
Then let Pomona example take by the vine-tree,
Let Pomona love, and join herself to an elme-tree,
Join herself to a mate, or show herself to be willing
For to be joined to a mate. O how-many, how-many lovers
Should she have, if she once showed herself to be loving?
Yea even now (though now thou live here sole in an orchyard,
Sole in an orchyard here, and all inclosd as an anckresse)
Sileni, Fauni, Siluani, all the delightful
Crewe of rural Gods, still run to the Lady of apples.
But thou (if thou will have this thy match to be well made)
Take heed, learn in time, and leand thine ear to a Beldame,
Who, as a woman, must of right, wish well to a woman,
And as an old woman, must needs know more then a damsel,
Disdain these Demy-gods, that rome and range by the deserts,
Wood-gods, wooden gods, pide Pan, and filthy Priapus,
And take Vertumnus to thy mate, who, more then a thousand
Sileni* Fauni, Siluani, daily desires thee,
And therefore (since love craves love) more duly deseru's thee,
And take me for a pledge: for, I know, that nobody better
Know's him then myself: his secreates all he reuealeth
Unto me, and in me his surest trust he reposeth.
And take this for a truth, Vertumnus goes not a gadding,
Is not an out-come guest, but dwells hereby as a neighbor.
Neither tak's he delight, his fancies daily to alter,
Or seek for new loves, or choice once made to be changing:
Faithful Vertumnus loves with devotion endless
First love and last love, Pomona the Lady of apples:
And can so con^orme, and frame himself to be pleasing,
That, what form, or face, or shape Pomona desires,
Into the same himself Vertumnus speedily changes.
And, if like conceits are always cause of a liking,
You two love and like with like affection, one thing.
For, Pomona desires and loves fair plentiful orchyards,
And Vertumnus takes first fruits of plentiful orchyards.
And, though Vertumnus do receive these duetiful of^rings,
And take in good part Pomonae's bewtiful apples,
Plummes, and grapes, and herbs, and flowers: yet he chiefly desires
Not those fair apples, but this fair Lady of apples,
Not Pomonae's goods, but sweet Pomona the gods,
Not thine, but the alone. Therefore with mercy remember
Vertumnus torments, and think, that he mercy desires
With my mouth: think, that with these mine eyes he afordeth
Tears: fea^e lovely Venus, who wills each Nymph to be lovely,
Fear Nemesis, that plagues such girls, as love to be loueles.
Then she begins to recount many old wives tales to the Lady,
How that Anaxarete, for scorning bewtiful Iphis,
Was transformd to a stone: with a thousand more: of a purpose
For to procure her love: and bade her look to the fatal
Fall of Anaxarete, and learn thereby to be lovely;
So might budding fruit from nipping frosts be defended,
And halfe-ripe apples from blustering winds be protected.
But since the old trott's shifts, and tales were lightly regarded,
Turnecoate Vertumnus to a youth was speedily turned,
Brave youth, gallant youth, as bright and sheene, as Apollo
Seems, when burning beams, which clouds had lately eclipsed,
Have their streaming light, and blazing bewty recou'red.
Youthful Vertumnus to the chereful Lady aproached,
And now offered force: but no force needs to be offered:
Sweet face, and fair looks, causd castles keys to be yielded.
VErtumnus, quoth Elpinus, to end all in one word, notes the diverse seasons o^
the year: and is thus called of the Latin word, verto, which is, to turn,
and Annus, signifying the year, as if a man would say, vertannus, the turning
of the year. He is largely described and discoursed upon by Propertius in the
second Elegy of his fourth book. Vertumnus at last, by turning himself to a
youth, obteineth Pomona; that is, the spring coming on, the earth afordeth
variety of fruits and flowers. The like is that marriage of Zephyrus and
Flora, celebrated by Ovid in the fifth book of his Fasti. Vertumnus
transformde to an old woman, goes about to deceive Pomona: it is good to
abandon old bawdes, which corrupt the minds of tender girls.

The picture of Vertumnus.

Dieromena, hearing Syluia make mention of Iphis and Anaxarete, took occasion
offered: and, by discovering her pride and plague, did thereby in^inuate the
revenging might of the severe Lady Rhamnusia.

IPhis, a gentle youth (if a gentle mind be a gentry)
Poor, yet rich, but rich in pure affection only,
Loved a less of state, but alas unluckily loved,
Loved a noble dame (if a noble birth be a noblesse)
Loved Anaxarete, whom pride still causd to be loueles.
Oftentimes he retir'de; yet love still forced him onward,
Often did he strive with love, and yet love still was a victor,
And a triumpher still. Then poor disconsolat Iphis
Yields pe^force, and seeks his wounded soul to recomfort.
Sometimes unto the nurse his secreate smart he reuealeth,
And by the milk, by the pap, by the blessed breast, he beseeches.
Sometimes unto the friends of noble Dame he repaireth,
And their helping hand with streaming tears he desires.
Sometimes wooing words in loving letter he writes,
And ten thousand times his lordlike Lady saluteth.
Sometimes green garlands with deaw of tears he bemoystneth*
And on posts and gates, his garlands watery fixes.
Sometimes tender side on threshold hard he reposeth,
And there, locks and bars with curses vainly reuileth.
Scorneful Anaxarete, with a frowning face, with a hard heart,
Heart of flint, of steel, contemns him daily, for all this:
And to a disdaineful disgrace, to a surly behavior,
Adds a reproachful speech, and mocks him, least any smallest
Hearts ease, smallest hope might stay contemptible Iphis.
Iphis, unable now to endure these plagues any longer,
Coms all impatient, and all inragd, to the damned
Door of proud Mistres, there this last passion vttring.
Lady Anaxarete, o now, sing, io triumph,
Sing a triumphing song: thou shall no more be molested
With vile woorme Iphis, poor pasthope, desperate Iphis.
Vaunt thy self, and laugh, and let thy head be adorned
With fresh laurel leaves in joyful sign of a conquest;
Iphis yields, yields breath, last breath; sing, io triumph,
Feed that murdring sight with sight of murdered Iphis:
So shall Anaxarete, even in despite of her hard heart,
Hardest heart, confess, that I once yet wrought her a pleasure,
Blood-thirsting pleasure, when as Iphis murdered Iphis.
Yet let no man think, that I therefore leave to be loving
Fayre-prowd, louely-cruell, til I also leave to be living.
With double darkness mine eyes shall at once be eclipsed,
Of suns burning beams and light untimely bereaved,
And of Anaxarete's sweet sight unkindly deprived.
Neither needs any man these tidings for to be telling;
Iphis will be the news, and Iphis will be the bringer
Of that selfsame news: Iphis will surely be present,
And in presence die: so Iphis shall be reporter,
So this Anaxarete in like sort shall be beholder,
And feed murdring sight with sight of murdered Iphis.
Yet you gods (if men's affairs of gods be regarded,)
Vouchsafe forlorn wretch with some small grace to remember;
Let poor Iphis death, and cause of death be recorded:
And by how much now his living days be abridged,
Let, by so much more his name and fame be prolonged.
This said, brawne-falln arms, and eyes all watered, he lifted
Up to the posts, which erst with flowers he had often adorned,
And there fastened a cord. These, these be the crowns, be the garlands,
These be the flowers, which yield such pleasant sent to the scorneful
Lady Anaxarete: so thrust in his head: yet he turned
Head, and face, and eyes, even at last gasp, to the scorneful
Lady Anaxarete: and there hanged woefuly tottring,
With corde-strangled throat; his sprawling feet by the downfall
Knocked her door by chance; knocked door did yield a resounding,
Yielded a mourneful sound, and made herself to be open,
Wide open, to behold so strange and woeful an object.
Dead door, senceles door, ten thousand times to be praised
More then Anaxarete, who by no pains of a lover,
By no entreating, by no persuasion, opn'ed
Those dead ears, to receive last words of desperate Iphis,
Those cursed eyes, to behold last tears of desolat Iphis,
That proud heart, to bewail last fall of murdered Iphis.
Door once wide open, servants ran forth with an outcry,
Ran, but ran too late; took up disfigured Iphis,
Cold Iphis, palefact Iphis, nay, now not an Iphis,
And his poor mother with a sight so deadly presented,
Old mother, childles mother, nay, now not a mother.
Woeful woman, alas, clipped, kissed, embraced her Iphis,
Wept, cride out, hold, roard, performd al parts of a mother:
And to the grave at last with sollemne funeral honnors,
Brought through the open streets her sons dead corpse in a coffin.
Hard by the way, through which, this sad solemnity passed,
Lady Anaxaretes brave bower stood loftily mounted:
And, that doleful sound with mourning echo redoobled
Came to her ears at last (for now at last, the revenging
Gods began to requite) and forced her eyes to the window,
For to behold and see poor Iphis laid in a coffin:
Scarce she beheld and saw poor Iphis laid in a coffin,
^ut that sightles sight was starck and stiff on a sudden,
And her purpled blood to a palenes speedily changed.
Back she remou's her feet, her feet will not be removed,
Back she reflected her head, but her head would not be reflected;
Feet and head stock fast: and that same merciles hardness,
That same stone, which erst in her hard heart made his abiding,
Dwelled in every joint, and each where took up a lodging
And least noble dames might deem my tale, but a fable,
In town of Salamis, where famous Teucer abided,
(Whence this scorneful dame her noble gentry derived)
Stony Anaxarete, for a lasting sign of a stony
Heart, stands fram'de of stone, in church of dame Cytheraea.
Then let noble dames, let Ladies learn to be lovely,
And make more account of a gentle mind, then a gentry.
Love makes lowest high, and highest hearts to be lowly,
And by these means makes both high and low to be lovely.
THis revenging gods, quoth Elpinus, was called Nemesis: she punished the
insolency of such, as in prosperity bare themselves over arrogantly:
especially those, who for their beauty, were scornful and disdainefull. She
was also called Rhamnusia, of a place in Attica, where she had a most
sumptuous temple: and Adrastia, of one Adrastus, who was the first that ever
did consecrate any temple unto her. She was figured winged: for, punishment
comes quickly. She stood on a wheel, and stearne of a ship: for she rolleth
and rules all vpside down. She held a bridle, and a rule or measure: for, we
must temper our tongs, and deal justly, as the Greek Epigramme expounds it.

(...),
(...).
By Iphis we may learn, not to look too high: and by Anaxarete we are
taught, not to disdaigne the lowly.

The picture of Nemesis.

DAphne seeing every body silent; knew it was time for her to speak. Madame,
quoth she, I can neither sing nor say very well: but since I must needs tell
somewhat, it is good to begin betimes, that I may the ^ooner make an end. The
best is, I mean not to be so full of parables, as that Elpinus shall have need
to make any explication. I have heard my mother many times in good sobriety,
make a long discourse of certain scholars of Cambridge, who would needs
find out some way to mount up to heaven, and understand those mysteries which
be above the Moon. For this purpose they met together at Dawes cros^e: where,
after long debating of the matter, it was resolved by the full consent of the
learned assembly, that they should seek and search, pass and repasse, from
East to Weast, some by land, some by sea, till they had found the way to
heaven. O, it was a sweet sight, to behold so many sageheads and gentle
spirits thus united and assembled together. All being ready, they all made
haste: some embarked themselves, some traueled by land: others stayed in
villages adjoining, expecting some heavenly apparition or revelation from
above. They that were in the ship, began to consult of their attempt; when,
lo, on the sodayn, (such grace the heavens afforde to them that be heavenly
affected) there came a stranger, yet an Aca^emique, unto them: who perceauing
that their resolution was, not to intermit their labor, till they had found
the way how to go to heaven alive; toulde them, that peradventure, himself
could give them best directions for that purpose: and that, if they would give
him the hearing, he would discourse at large, both what himself was, and how
diverse of his companions had attempted the like voyage, and what had befallen
them in the same. They all thanked him, for his unexpected courtesy; willed
him to enter into the ship, and with this discourse help them to forget the
danger and yrksomenes of their travel: which done, he thus began.

I was borne and bred five miles beyond S. Michaels mount, four summers before
the green winter: Saturn was predominant at my nativity; my father, a man of
providence, perceauing my terrestrial disposition, would needs have me
admitted a scholar in the University, called the Garden, whereof we all were
named Gardiners: Our Convocation house was a Harbor sytuate directly under the
Arctike pole, where, every new Moon, my self and my fellow Gardiners
assembled together, and sang such compositions as we had severally framed of
the virtue of herbs, the pleasant liquor of the vine, the ^weetnes of fruits,
the profit of husbandry, and dressing of Gardens and Orchyards: in such sort
that our University became famous, by reason of diverse learned monuments,
daily there devised, and thence proceeding, to the public profit of the
common wealth, as, The vulgar Dioscorides, The Garden of Ladies, The
moralization of the Georgikes, with many such wondrous works. And as our
selves were delighted in dressing and keeping of Gardens, so did we choose us
distinct names and additions of several herbs accordingly: so that one was
called a Violet, an other a Thistle, this Lettuce, that Succorie; the rest,
either Borage, Hmlock, Pasnip, Cowslip, Rosemary, or some like. But so it fell
out on a day, as we were thus busied in our Harbor, we heard of a report
scattered abroad, that a general deluge and inundation of waters should happen
that year, as was foretold by some idle Prognosticators. This strange news
troubled the whole country; and, among others, us poor Gardiners: who, having
read this lewd Almanac, and considering the flourishing discourses of these
Astrologicall doctors (which threatened the Vines, Gardens, and Orchyards, with
blasts, frosts, caterpillars, and a thousand such fantastical dangers) laid
our heads together, and dealt, as I am about to tell you. First we offered
sacrifice to Bacchus and Priapus, and then concluded, to send some of our
University as ambassadors to heaven: who by this one journey, might do a
double service: the one, in seeing whether these tale-tell Astrologers had any
ground for their predictions; the other in obtaining grace and mercy of the
Gods, by granting plen^y and abundance. Among others, Succhory, a pleasant and
merry companion, had this conceit in his head, to get up to heaven. It were
good, me thinks, quoth he, to find out a great and mighty Egle, so strong, that
some two of us might mount on his back, and he bear us up to the skies: Mary,
we had need to look, that these 2 be not too heavy, or ouer-fat and corpulent,
lest the Egle be ouercharged. Therefore the Fennel, and the Violet, in my
fancy, be the fittest for this purpose, as being deft and nimble fellows, and
as light as may be. Nay, said Cowslip, there is no reason at all to use the
help of an Egle in this matter, because you know that Jupiter himself was once
transformed into an Egle, and carried up to heaven an other kind of burden,
the^ Fennel or Violet. Then out stepped Hemlock, with his fryse bonnet, and
said, that he had sound a better and more compendious way to heaven, then that.
It were not amiss, quoth he, if we had a cart; because the journey is long: and,
the ambassadors may by this means travel with greater ease and facility.
Besides this, they may therein convey to Olympus, some of the best fruits of
our Gardens, to present the Gods withal when they come thither. The grave
advice of this fore-casting Academike, was generally well liked of: saving that
they could not conceive, who should draw the Cart: and therefore this
invention, the more pity, came also to nothing. All the Academike Gardiners
devised and mused much, how it might be brought to pass. Some remembering
Lucians ship, thought it best to go by water: Others, rather by land, through
some great forest, as Dante did: at last, they all agreed, that the surest way
was, to make ladders of the poles that bare up their hoppes, and by the means
thereof, to build and raise up a tower that should ouer-looke the whole
world: and so might they in short time pierce the clouds: and by certain
engynes still draw up new stuff to increase the height of their fortification,
if occasion were. The tower begun, and half ended (^or many hands make light
work) we made choice of three, the most expert men in all our University, in
Astrology, Mathematikes, and Philosophy; to weete, Hemlocke, Pasnip, and the
Thistle, to be ambassadors. These three gathered diverse fruits, Raysons, and
herbs, to present the Lords and Ladies of heaven withal, and to request
diverse boones in the behalf of our University. So we brought and accompanied
them with great joy, even unto the Ladders, and saw them mount up chearefuly.
Hemlock was one Damoetas, of the Deareles parck, Fac-totu^ indeclinabile to the
Lady of the Lake. Pasnip was a brave piece of a man, about four and thirty
years old, fair, straight, and upright, so nimble and light, that he might
well have walked on the edge of a sword, or point of a spear. The Thistle was
more ancient, as having passed full forty years, and was wholly addicted to
contemplation.

After much mounting, when the learned Thistle was almost at the first heaven,
he began to observe and mark, whether Strabo, Ptolomaeus, and other measurers
of the world, had made a good survey thereof. He viewed the top of the mount
Parnassus, where Lactantius and Plutarchus appointed the limits of the deluge;
and perceauing that from thence, it was a thousand thousand miles up to heaven,
he laughed at their folly, and made a mock of Berosus, who would needs find
out the center of the earth, by the Arc of Noah. Thus jesting at their
ignorance, and having his head full of Cosmographicall Proclamations, he began
to discourse to his companions, of the situation and distance of kingdoms,
mountains, seas, rivers, and woods, of the elevation of the Poles, the rising
of the stars, and the names of every province, with their laws, statutes,
customs, and different kinds of discipline. He showed newfound worlds, never
known to Africa, Europe, or Asia. He made Aristotle an ass, who never thought
that all the Zone under the Zodiake was habitable. With these and the like
speculations and sweet sightes, they passed the time, and continued further on
their journey. And further let them continue a while, said the ruler of the
company that came from Dawes cross, in the mean time, whilst your Gardiners
are mounting up to heaven, let us learn of you, what became of the fearful
prediction of those Astrological masters. Content, quoth the stranger, and thus
it fell out. When these famous Astrologers with their numbers, points,
measures, Astrolabes, signs, and instruments had concluded for certain, that
this inundation should ensue, which would ouerflow and drown the whole world,
so that not one person should escape alive, publishing this their conceit
abroad, by printing of their Almanacks and Prognostications, showing from day
to day, in the houses of great men and palaces of princes, the signs, the
eclipses of the moon, the conjunction of the planets, and other such
fantasies, portending, as they said, this future inundation; they made every
man fear, and many run up to hills, that, if they must needs dye, they might
die last, and see others drowned before. Among the rest, the Prior of Saint
Bartholomews, removed from London to Harrow hill, and there bestowed an hundred
marks, in fortifiyng and furnishing himself against the flood. And now the
time was at hand, when all should come to naught: When (I know not by what
revolution or influence) the air on the sudden began to be black, clouds to
lowre, and rain to power down so fast, that every man verily believed, the
astrologicall predictions would prove true in the end, since they seemed so
likely in the beginning. This made men, women, and children, tag and rag, to
climb up to trees, to the tops of houses, castles, and steeples, to save their
lives. All the world being thus on an uproar, there came an odd Astronomer,
peradventure having less learning, but surely more wit then the others, who
seeing, what a pitiful howling and lamentation was made on every side, began
with bitter words and vehemency of speech to inueigh against the former
Astrologers, saying, they were seditious fellows, worthy to be clapped by the
heels, and that all was stark false which they had put down to the terror of
the poor people, who of all other deaths were most unwilling to be choakte
with water. This new doctor was for his labor, accounted a fool of wise and
fool: for, still as he thus preached, it rayned still. At last, about two or
three hours after, as God would, the air began to clear up, the rain
ceased, the storm was past, and all was well again. Then came forth the
amassed people, from trees, rocks, and Castles, distracted between hope and
fear, scarce resolved whether themselves were dead or alive, as if they had
come from the newfound world, or out of Trophonius den: and by degrees
coming to their former sense and wit, made great feasts and bonfires, for
joy that they had escaped a danger which never hanged over their heads. The
Astronomer that gave out this comfortable contradiction, seeing that all fell
out according to his speech (although peradventure himself thought as the rest
did) bare himself loftily, was made a doctor, and dubbed a knight for
learning, which was never in his head: and the rest were scorned for fools,
which had published the contrary Prognostications. Shortly after this, the
first Astrologers, seeing themselves foully ouerseene, and that this other
doctor, by some Seraphical instinct, had foretold the truth, came unto him,
reuere^ced him as a Demy-God, and desired him to imparte unto them, the ground
of this his knowledge, and conceit: which done, they would acknowledge him for
their only master and Capten in all their Astrological speculations. What
ground, quoth he? Mary* the surest ground, I assure you. For, are you such sottes,
to imagine, that in this my prediction, I had regard to any astrological
divination, and not rather to a most sure and infallible consequence of reason,
better then a thousand observations of signs and constellations? If this your
universal deluge had happened, my grand masters and doctors, who would then
have been left alive, to prove me a liar, all the world being drowned? If it
happened not, (as in truth it so falls out) I was sure of the general
applause of the people, for this my plausible Prognostication. All the
Congregatio sapientum laughed hereat: And now, ( quoth the chief of their
company) it is like that your fellow Gardners, are almost at heaven by this;
therefore, continue your discourse, as they, I hope, have continued their
journey. With a good will, quoth the stranger, and thus it came to pass. My
fellows at last came to a fair and plain cloud, which tutched the very top
of their tabernacle, thinking they had been at their iourneies end, and that
it had been an easy matter, to have dispatched the rest on foot: but they
missed their ma^ke, and came short of their account, which troubled them not a
little. And as they stood thus consulting with themselves, how they might
safely pass further, behold, there came on a sudden, a man and a woman,
riding on a little cloud, as though it had been a courser: who saluted them
courteously, and bade them welcome; demanding what they sought for, in so high
a place, where it was very difficult to mount up further, and more dangerous
to go down again. We are Academikes, quoth Pasnip, and being of late troubled
and perplexed with the repugnant conceits of Astrologers, and menaced and
threatened with their unhappy predictions, have traueled hither of purpose to
understand whether their diuinations be true or not: and if, as they say, the
Gods have determined to plague us, and our gardens with sterilitie and
inundations, then have we diverse petitions to be preferred to the immortal
Gods, on the behalf of our selves and our Orchyards: which being once perused,
and accordingly considered by their divine Majesty's, we have brought with us
such simple fruits, as our poor ability could afforde, to present their
celestial Deities withal. It is a strange thing, said the man on the
cloud, to see you here so high: but what contradiction find you among your
Astrologers? Me thinks you presume very much, in daring to reprehend great
clerks, and mount up to the skies, your selves being but Gardiners and
ignorant men. Though we be Gardiners, quoth the Thistle, yet let not that be
prejudicial unto us: for my self am a doctor of Astrology, and can yield you
an account of the opinions of the Chaldees, Egyptians, Indians, Mores,
Arabians, Jews, Grecians, Romans, modernes and ancients whatsoever: al whose
conceits I find as variable as the moon, and themselves altogether Lunatike*
Before I make answer hereunto, quoth the man that rode on the cloud, I will
tell you my name: I am called Intellectus, understanding, and this my sister is
named Fantasy, or Opinion. Our duty and function is, to guide and conduct to
heaven, all such persons as here ariue, but not as you have aryued: though
indeed, by reason of the small number of them that mount up hither, we are not
so pestred with business, but that we have leisure enough to confer with you.
Well then, my friends, you must know, that there be diverse ways here, all
which will bring you to one and the same end. True it is, that there is one
way, through which very few pass; because they see so many strange and most
myraculous apparitions, that when they return again to their companions below
on the earth, they can meet with nothing there, to the which they may fully
compare or resemble those heavenly miracles, when they seek to make report
thereof to their friends, or other company, desirous of their celestial
news. And in truth, for any one that comes hither with a commendable
desire, to reform the disorders of man's life, there be five thousand, that
ambitiously are driven forward by a foolish curiosity.

When we brought hither Plato, Aristotle, Proclus, Auerrois, and others that
have discoursed of the heavens, we conducted them by such a way, that they saw
but eight Sphaeres: Albertus magnus, I sake, and many others were guided
through an other passage, and found out nine Sphaeres; and thus have they ever
from time to time, repugned their fellows conceits. Without doubt, quoth
Hemlock, I believe it is, as you say: for, so among us below, if a man ask how
many miles it is from Tugford to Tasley; seven says one, eight says another;
nay, so many men, so many different numbers of miles: insomuch, that he which
would indeed know the truth, had need to bring a line with him, and measure
the miles himself.

These aspiring wits, quoth Intellectus, when they are thus elevated, roame
and wander about the incomprehensible quantity of the heavens, without my
company, and frame of their own invention, five hundred fooleries and
monstrous imaginations in the heavens. Here they paynt a Bull, there a Dog,
here a Goat, there a Lion, and such like, as bears, horses, and fishes:
whereupon well might the Philosopher Bi^n reprehend their preposterus
curiosity, who could not perceive a fish swimming in a brook, before their
eyes, and yet would find out fishes above the clouds: and Thales was as
worthylie mocked by his maid, for that, whilst he was tooting on the stars,
he fell into a ditch, not knowing what was before his feet, yet inquisitiue in
searching out the secrets of heaven without my assistance. Such fantastical
and frantic fellows, were for just cause banished the court, by the good and
learned Alphonsus, king of Arragon: for, it is truly said, that, The stars
rule fools, and wise men rule the stars. All these things, said the Thistle,
are to me very familiarly known, and I make no more account of these gessing
Astrologe^s, then of very Asses. Therefore, to let pass these Galaxiaes,
Epici^les, Centres, Motions, Retrogradations, Accesses, Recesses, and a
thousand such trumperies; if it please you to direct us in the plain way, we
shall follow you as our guides, and honor you as our mast^rs. You seem, quoth
Fantasy, to be men of ingenuous and great conceit, desiring Honor, and
aspiring to high matters: come therefore, we will aforde you all the help we
possibly may: mount on this cloud with us, which shall protect you from all
anoyance of heat or cold. Incontinently, the cloud was elevated up to
Olympus: and no sooner had they arrived in heaven, but Venus and Ganymedes (as
women and children use to do) ran to them to see their flowers and fruits.
Pasnip seeing Venus hold out her apron to receive some of their provision,
gave her leave to take her choice. Then came Lady Luna, who also took what
she would, and presently departed, as being enjoined every day twice, to cause
a flowing and reflowing in the Indian and Persian sea: besides a thousand other
matters, wherewith she is ever occupied. Ganymedes was as busy about Hemlocke,
who there so liberally bestowed the remnant of their fruits, that in the end
nothing remayne^.

Jupiter seeing these strangers aryued in heaven, in habit of ambassadors,
bade them draw near, himself then sitting in counsel. Where, the jolly
proloquutor Hemlock, in the name of the rest, began a brave oration* and when
he came to the point to use these words: Lo here, the present which Priapus,
the God of our earthly Garde^s, has sent to your celestial Majesty's: he
found nothing at all left in his pannyers. Jupiter moved hereat, whould hear
him no further; but catching him and Pasnip by the hair of the head, threw
them down from heaven, to their Gardens on earth again: With this
transformation, that they should both thencefoorth have the form and nature of
that root, and weed, whereof they bare the names. The Thistle being all this
while in heaven, and perceauing how rygorously his fellows were handled;
scratched off all his tender hair from his head, for very grief and anguish;
so that it never after grew up so firmly again, but that every year once (for
a memorial of this admyrable accident) every little blast of wind blewe it
all about the fields and Gardens.

Thus perplexed, heeintreates Intellectus, and humbly besecheth him, that he
would not forsake him in this extremity. Intellectus pitying his woeful
plight, excused him to the Gods, giving them to understand, that he had
neither in word nor deed offended their divine Majesty. Wherefore Jupiter,
Phoebus, and Mercury gave him this prerogative and pre-eminence, that he might
assign new names to his nephews and succeeding posterity, as Artichauks, and
such like; which should ever after be had in great estimation among other
fruits of the Garden, and served at mighty men's tables as a dish of great
dayntines and delicacie: and afterward gave Intellectus leave to lead him all
about heaven; and to peruse his petitions, that his Patent might be sealed
accordingly. As the Thistle was about to view the heavens; Stay, quoth
Intellectus, thou must first obtain the good will of Time; who must also have
a sight of these thy demaundes: therefore read them, and let me hear what
they are.

The petition of the Gardiners.
INprimis, that Hemlock never grow in Gardens; but only in ditches and such
like obscure and unpleasant places, fit for so unsavory and loathsome a
weed.

Item, That none under the degree of an Esquire, have his bed stuffed with the
down of a thistle.

Item, That whosoever eats buttered Pasnips without pepper, may dye without
Auricular confession.

Item, That no man, unless he may dispend four nobles by the year in good
free-holde, shall break his fast with an Artychauck pie.

Item, That none above the age of seven years, if he nettle his hand, shall
be rid of his pain by rubbing the place with a Dock, and saying, In Docke,
out Nettle.

Item, That if any married man use any nosegay, wherein the flowers be odd in
number, he may stand in danger of Acteons penalty.

Item, That whosoever drinks Claret wine without Borage, or Sack without a
sprig of Rosemary, may never be rid of his Rheum by drinking Muscadell
before he go to bed.

Item, That if a man be like to have a Fever quartane, for want of a fig, the
master of the Garden, by the advice of two Physicians, may give him leave to
pluck and eat.

Item, That: Nay, quoth Intellectus, no more That's; for, this is too much already.
These fooleries must not be any part of thy petition: thou shall only demand
a good stomach and taste, to the end, that every thing may be to thy good
content and liking.

So they passed on, toward the ancient palace of Time. Time was a great man
out of all measure, showing a kind of majesty in his forehead. His face had
three several semblances: his browe and eyes resembling middle age; his mouth
and cheeks, youth: his beard, old age. He had before him three great glasses,
looking now in one, now in an other: and, according to that which he saw in
them, he framed his countenance: sometimes ioyeus and merry, sometimes grave and
moderate, sometimes sad and heavy. On his left side, was Weeping; on his right
side, Laughing. His garment was of such a color, as the Thistle could not
possibly discern it, although, as he told me, he marked it seriously,
neither knew he how to term it. He saw about him an infinite number of
se^uitors; the Day and the Night, with their daughter Aurora, between them
both, and Hours and Minutes, their servants: he saw Peace, War^e, Plenty,
Dearth, Life, Death, Riches, Poverty, Love, Hate, and other mighty potentates,
ever looking on the face of Time, and conforming themselves to his countenance,
were it merry, or sad. When he made any sign unto them, they were all ready and
pressed to obey him; and at his command, wrought this or that impression in the
^arth. At the feet of Time, stood Desteny, with a book before her which
Fortune and Chance did toss and turn incessantly, sometimes ouerskipping
five leaves, sometimes ten, sometimes an hundred, sometimes a thousand, as they
thought good. Time caused Desteny to write and lay down al his decrees;
commanding four other personages to put the same in execution, toweet,
Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter: which four, command in like sort, the Day
and the Night: the Day and Night command the Hours; the Hours command the
Minutes: the Minute brings this or that to pass in the world: and so do
they govern the heavens, the earth, and all. Oftentimes there come messengers
to the Day and Night, saying, such an one has builded such a fortress against
the Maie^^ie and dominion of Time: another has erected an image: a third has
composed a book, all intending to be masters and triumphers over Time. Time,
perceauing this, looks in his glasses, held by Verity, and does but smile at
their attempts, willing Desteny to write his pleasure, and giving authority
unto Fortune. Fortune, taking delight in such toys for a time, commit^eth them
afterward to the power of fire or war, or else returns them again before
the feet of Time, where, as soon as they are once set down, they vanish away
presently, and never apeare again.

These last words were scarce uttered die the stranger Academike, but suddenly
there arose an outragius tempest of snow, hayle, rain, wind, thunder, and
lightning all together: that, unless by the good advice of the fore-casting
master, the double Canons, and all the great artillery of the ship, hab been
presently discharged into the air, to counterbeate and dismay, the roaring and
thundering clouds; no doubt, the poor ship had been beaten to powder, and
dashed to the bottom of the sea, with such like rage and violence, as if a man
would break with his fist, the shell of a nut, f^oating on the top of the
water. The Lady Regent smiling* willed Daphne to referthe pitiful description
of so woeful a shipwreck, to some other time, when they might there meet
again, for the like celebration of Amyntas death. In mean time, for a
conclusion of this days exercise (since it, seemed convenient to end with him,
with whom they began) Amarillis and Cassiopaea sang these verses, which
Amyntas living had made of the death of Phillis: which ended, they all departed.

Amyntas Phillidi consecrauit, mortuae moriturus.
HEu status instabilis, via deuia, (...),
Heu non parcentes parcae, redit orbis in orbem,
Et resoluta ruit perituri machina mundi.
Omnia, quae tellus, pontus, and ether habent,
Nil, nisi perpetuus terror and error, habet;
Vna dies struxit, destruet vna dies.
Effugit vmbra leuis: quid non fugit, vt leuis vmbra?
Efflu^t vnda grauis: quid non fluit, vt grauis vnda?
Euolat hora breuis: quid non volat, vt breuis hora?
Sic matura breui, sunt moritura breui:
Sic velut vmbra fugit, sic velut vnda fluit,
Plena labor dies, plena dolor dies.
Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede, magna, minora;
Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede? pulsat iniquo,
Semper inaequales quia sic pede proterit aequo.
Proterit illustrem, magnanimumque d^cem,
Praeterit exhaustum, decrepitumque senem,
Proterit illa bonum, praeterit illa malum.
Nullo delectu saeuit, discrimine nullo,
Sed pariter parui passim properamus and ampli,
Omnibus vna domus, laethi lex omnibus vna.
Flos* foenum, fumus, somnus, and vmbra sumus;
Quae viguere, cadunt, quae valuere, ruunt;
Et redit in cineres, quod suit ante cinis;
Quoth si delectu, quoth si discrimine saeuit,
Ipso delectu, dilectos saeuit in ipsos,
Alba ligustra cadunt, and deteriora supersunt.
Si peragant plures pessima quaeque dies,
Si meliora ruant, alba ligustra cadant;
Delectus valeat, gratior error erat.
Delectus valeat? fluitent mortalia casu?
Gratior error erat? Quid dixi? gratior error?
Ah valeat vox haec; hic ingratissimus error.
Ille deus certa lege peregit opus,
Perfectum certa lege mouetur opus,
Et motum certa lege peribit opus.
Rector adest rebus, nec adest sine numine rector,
Numen inest summis, complectitur infima numen,
Numen inest medijs, penetratque per omnia numen.
Et nihil est, casu quod perijsse putem;
Non est, cur casum rebus inesse putem;
Hoc est, cur casus nomen inane putem.
Crine quid est leuius? nec abest sine numine crinis:
Passere quid leuius? nec adest sine numine passer:
Vita quid gra^ius? periet sine numine vita?
Non est cur credam: numine vita venit:
Non est cur credam: numine vita fugit:
Numine natus homo, numine stratus homo.
Nascimur, and morimur, quia nascimur, vt moriamur*
Sed neque sort sati, neque casu morte perempti:
Jupiter hoc iussit, mors tantum iussa capessit.
Jupiter hoc iussit, sunt rata iussa Iouis:
Fatur, and est fatum: sufficit (...):
Dixit, and edictum tempus in omne manet.
Ergo vale Phillis: longum, formosa, valeto:
Digna Iouis solio, tauro Jove digna, velauro,
Digna minus misero, meliori digna marito.
Tindaridis facies, Penelopaea fides,
Faedere iuncta mihi, funere iuncta Ioui,
Semper amans salve, semper amanda vale.
Errata.
Fol. 1. b. for, in several harbor, read, in a several harbor. Fol. 8. b. for,
the stoutest were tamed, Read, the stoutest are tamed. Fol. 11. b. for, fore
fear, read, for fear. Fol. 15. E 2. a. for, sons beams, read, sons bright
beams. Fol. 21. b. for, sylogistical, read, syllogistical. Fol. 25. b.
faintly Ceres, read fainty Ceres. Fol. 26. b. for, natrea deorum, read,
natura deorum. 28. a. for, swear, read, swear. Pyryphlegeton, read,
Pyriphlegeton, 1.2 b. for, late, read, late. 1.3 ^. for, (...), read, (...),
36 a. lastword, for, these, read, the. 37. b last word, Jove, Jove. 42. a.
first line, homed, read, homed. 43. b. georgic^on, read, georgic^n. 44. b.
bare, read, bear. 51 a. 4. ^in. time, read, day. last line, swelling, read,
swilling. 54. b. rolleth and rules, read, rules and rolleth.


