A brief Confutation, of a Popish Discourse: Lately set forth, and presumptuou
sly dedicated to the Queens most excellent Majesty: by John Howlet, or some
other Bird of the night, under that name.

Containing certain Reasons, why Papists refuse to come to Church, which
Reasons are here inserted and set down at large, with their several answers.

By D. Fulke, Master of Penbroke Hall, in Cambridge.

Seen and allowed.

At London printed for George Bishop. 1581.

Abriefe con^tation of a Popish discourse.
THe Papists by long experience being learned, how little is gained to their
part, by writing such Treatises, in which they took upon them, either to
justify their own errors, or to condemn the truth of Gods Church, have now
of late taken an other course, and begun an other way of writing, which they
have thought more meet, both to cover the infirmity of their cause, and to
retain such as they have seduced in obstinacy of error. For not abiding to
prove, either that they are in the right, or we in the wrong, they content
them selves generally to inueigh, against Schism and Heresy, and to show
forth the danger of both, in which argument while they contain them selves,
they yield many good and substantial reasons, as is not hard for them to do,
which take a good cause in hand. But when they come to couple this argument of
Schism or Heresy, either by affirmation unto us, or by denial unto them
selves, (without which there can no conclusion be made, of the whole cause in
controversy) they bring nothing but a stale, unlearned, and miserable
beggerie, of the whole matter in question: namely that they are the Catholics,
and we the Schismatikes, they are the Church, and we the Heresy. Such is the
whole drift of Gregory Martinus vain Treatise of Schism, such is the scope
of Hides seditious Epistle Consolatorie unto Papists, and the same is the
policy of this blasphemous and traitorous discourse, co^teining the coulorable
reasons made for the Papists, that refuse to go to Church. The full and large
answer unto which infamous Libell, presumed to be dedicated even to her most
excellent Majesty, with the confutation of the same Epistle Dedicatorie,
because it requires larger time, and is to be expected from a man of singular
learning and diligence, as soon as it may be done conveniently, I have thought
good in the mean time, briefly to set forth unto the ignorant (for no man of
mean knowledge can be deceived by such petition of pri^ciples) the vanity and
insufficiency of al these ^ne reasons, that neither any one of them, nor they
al together, can be any excuse, much less a defense, for these obstinate
Recusantes, to withdraw their obedience from God and her Majesty's most godly
laws, decreed for going to Church.

The answer of a virtuous and learned man to a Gentleman in England, touching
the late im prisonment of Catholics there.
THE VIEW of your late Letters (my dear and woorshipfull friend) brought unto
me so^e sorrow and much comfort. The sorrow proceeded of the woeful and
afflicted case of my poor country so pitifully set down by your pen unto
mine eye, wherein (as you write) so many great Gentlemen of woorship are
imprisoned for their conscience and religion of late, so many good houses
broken up, so many ho^sholders dispersed and fled away, so many young Gentlemen
A pitiful description of Engl^de at this day.
and servants unprovided, so many poor people destitute, so many wives
disioyned from their husbands, so many children beref^ of their parents, such
flying, such running, such shutting up in prisons, such pitiful abiding
h^ger, thirst, and cold in prison, as you describe, doleful for us to hear
here, but more ruful for you to b^old there, and all this for different
opinions in religion, a misery not accustomed to fall in our fathers days,
upon that noble realm.

But as these were causes of some sorrow, so was it no mean comfort unto me,
to consider that in these wicked and loose times of ours, wherein there is no
feeling or sense of virtue left, but al men enwrapped in the love of Gods
professed enemy the world, following with all force, and full ^yle, the vanities
and ambition of the same: that there should be found in England so many
Gentlemen both for their years, liuinges, A rare (...) of (...).
and other habilities, as fit to be as vain as the rest, yet so precise in
matters of religion, and so respective to their consciences, as that they will
prefer their soul before their body, and Gods cause before their own ease,
nay, that they will rather venture both body and goods, life, lands, liberty,
and al, then they will do any thing contrary to their consciences, whereby
they must be judged at the last day. This is such a thing, as it must needs
bring comfort to al men, and can justly grieve none, except the common enemy
the Devil him self. For as for ^raungers, they must ^eedes be edefied
therewith: as for Englishmen, they must needs be encouraged thereby. And as
for the Princess her self, she cannot but be comforted therein, assuring
her self that if these men, do stick so firmly unto their consciences and
faith sworn unto God in their o^ of Baptism: then will they as firmly for the
same conscience, stick unto her Majesty, if occasion should serve, in keeping
their secondary faith and allegiance, sworn unto her Highness as to the
substitute of GOD. Their adversaries also and persecutors, it can not in any
reason mislike, for that the contrary religion were to have them as constant
and faithful in that, if it were possible to win them to the same.

But notwithstanding, seeing you write that there is both great dislike, and
displeasure also taken of it, as though their constancy were obstinacy, and
their conscience mere will: (which most of al greeueth (as you write) their
obedient and well meaning minds) albeeit otherwise the pressure it self be so
hea^ as the burden thereof is sore and grievous to bear: for these causes,
and for the giving of some more light to the whole matter, I will (as you seem
to desire) most briefly touch three things in this letter, whereby I doubt not
but that you shall account your self fully and sufficiently answered.

^ The first point shall be, what cause or reason the Catholics have to The
(...) of the whole Tr^tise.
stand, as they do, in the refusal of things offered them, and especially
of going to the Church. Secondly, what way or means they may use to remedy or
ease them selves of this affliction now laid upon them for their consciences.
Thirdly, if that way or means do not prevail, then how they ought to bear
and endure the same.
BEfore the nine reasons, is premised an answer to (a Letter (as is pretended)
of a gentleman in England, touching the late impriso^me^t of Catholics there:
the co^tents whereof are these. First a great sorrow conceived in this answerer,
for that pitiful description of England contained in the gentleman's letter,
wherein was written, that so many great Gentlemen of worship were prisoned, for
their consciences and religion of late. What great imprisonment I pray you has
been of late, of so great Gentlemen, as has not been and continued many
years before, except some intermission granted, to assay to win by clemency,
y^ which was not atteined by punishment. But it is not hard to guess, what
mark you shoot at, that would have conscience and religion, to be the only
cloak to cover whatsoever by secret conspiracy against the state, has been
of late attempted, by some of the Popish faction, whom you call Catholics.
Your treasonable practices, having not that success you promised to your
selves, and to your friends in England and Irelande, you would now move
connseration by persecution, for conscience, in them that deserve justly to be
suspected for conspiracy, yea and them also that are ma^ifestly detected of
treachery. And how I pray you is the state of England made miserable, that it
deserves your foolish of pity, by imprisonment of these Gentlemen? You
answer, So many good houses broken up, so many young Gentlemen and servants
unprovided, so many poor people destitute, as though al housekeeping,
maintenance of young Gentlemen and servants, and provision of the poor people,
depended upon a few obstinate Recusants, who if they were all with God, yet
none of these commodities should be wanting in y^ realm. And while they
remain in the world, who forbids them, although they be imprisoned, to
keep good houses, maintain servants, relieve ye poor? It is well known, how
great a gain they make of their imprisonment, and how glad some of them are,
when they may have the color of restraint, but even in their own houses, that
they may pretend imprisonment, for not keeping of good houses, mainteining of
servants, and relieuing of the poor. But let us hear more of this lamentable
description. So many wives disioyned from their husbands. But how many is
there, or what one is there? or ever has there been in her majesty's reign,
that being imprisoned for the only cause of religion, might not be suffered to
have his wife resort unto him, yea, and to remain with him if it were both
their pleasures so to live, and the wife to bear part of her husbands
trouble. If not one can be named, that can be proved (for Howlettes slander
of Master Dimmockes wife, has been openly confuted) there is no color in
the next complainte, Of so many children berefte of their parents, whose
Parents are living, and at liberty to provide for them, in all honest and
duetifull manner. As for the flying, running, dispersing, shutting up etc. It
is so great as hardly can be seen in any place worth the noting, and least
able to make a pitiful description of the floorishing estate of England,
which God of his mercy long continue, that envy of all her adversaries, may
break her bowels, with grief to behold it. But who can abide that
slanderous complaint of such pitiful abiding hunger, thirst, and cold in
prison described by the supposed Gentleman? repeated by this reason maker to
be a misery not accustomed to fall in our fathers days upon that noble
Realm, and all for different opinions in religion. You have been a great and
long stranger from this noble realm, that have not known in your own days
if you be of any years meet to make arguments for all Catholics, or in
your Fathers days of what years soever you be, that you have not heard of
greater misery, then hunger, thirste, and cold, in prison sustained,
accustomed to be laid upon Englishmen professors of the truth, by Papists
mainteiners of heresy, and all for difference of opinions in religion. But I
would I might reason a little with y^ gentleman describer (because you the
reporter, have devised to color a most destable s^under, by haere say, and
another man's description) I pray you Sir, in what prison, and what gentlemen
are they, that abide such pitiful hunger, thirste, and cold? how many have
pined for hunger, fainted for thirst, and starued for cold? Are not al these
great gentlemen which you say are imprisoned for their consciences, at liberty
to feed and cherish themselves with their own goods. Or if you will imp^dently
expound your saying, of any poor Papists, that are imprisoned for religion,
of whom you speak not any word, are not their friends suffered to minister
unto them al things necessary? what one person can be named that abides such
pitiful hunger, thirst, and cold? Are you not ashamed, without al color to
^aunder so noble a state, and the godly Magistrates of the same, with such
barbarus cruelty? But to say mine opinion, I think verily, that no gentleman
in England, has so vngentlemanlike conception, without al show of truth, to
avouch so loud a lie. But rather y^ this reason maker, faineth such a letter of
description, whereof he himself is the author, imagining by example of his
own faction, that the like tyranny is practiced in the Church of God, as is
usual to the cruelty of the Papists. The causes of his sorowing being thus set
forth, he comes to comfort himself, by consideration of so many Gentlemen,
so precise in matmatters of religion, and so respective of their consciences,
in these wicke^ and loose ^es, where there is no feeling or sense of ^ertue
left, but al men in wrapped in the love of gods professed enemy the world,
following with all* force and full sa^le, the vanities and ambition of the same.
Indeed sir, you have followed your shameless slander, with full sail, and have
had wind at will. What say you* is there no sense or feeling of virtue left,
but al m^n inwrapped in the love of gods en^ie, except those few gentlemen, ^he
matter of your rare comfort? In your famili^r letters we must suppose you write
as you think, and as to your ^eere and worshipful friend, wherefore
whatsoever you do in common writings, profess of your reverent opinion of her
majesty's singular virtues, and other of high estate that are under her,
executers of her Christian laws, al is but dissimulatio^ and hypocrisy,
fained glosing, and (...) flattery. For you acknowledge not only no virtue,
but not so much as any feeling or sense ofvertue, to be left in any other, then
those gentlemen recusants, al other men not allured, nor inta^gled, but
inwrapped, in the love even of gods professed enemy the world, not seduced
and drawn thereby, but following, and that not slowly, but with all force and
full sail, the vanities and ambition of the same. If this were true, it would
make a more miserable estate of England, then you before imagined, by
imprisonment of a few good houss keepers. And I would heartily wish, that you
^alfly say of all, might not be verified of some, But that there is no sense or
feeling of virtue, but al men inwrapped in the love of gods professed enemy,
and that in so extreme a degree: except a small number of obstinate and
wilfully blinded Papists* that is more then ever could ^e ^tly said, almost of
any Heathen or Turkish state, in which the sense and feeling of virtue was
never so wholly extinguished, but some remained even in them that knew not God,
nor served him aright. The king of Sodoma showed some sense and feeling Genesis 14.
of gratitude and equity, when he was content to yield to Abraham his
deliverer, the whole pray and spoil of the adversaries, so that he might
recover his captiu^d people. But let that pass, and consider the ground of
this comfort. So many gen^lemen en both for their years, lyuings, and
habilities, as (...) to be as vain as the rest (as though all other Gentlemen
were vain, but they) so precise* in matters of religion, and respective of
their consciences etc. To omit that which is ^e in secret, the manifest
covetousness, ^ppression, and wrong dealing, in some of their lives appearing,
declares small precisenes to be in their religion, or respect of their
conscience in their refusal. But admit that none of them might he touched in
conversation, as that were not sufficient to justify their religion, so it
should be small matter of comfort unto a christian man, to see so many
Gentlemen refusing to yield to the truth, and so few poor men (to whom the
Gospel properly pertains) Mat. 11. (...).
that dare withstand the Laws that are now made of religion. Whereas the true
religion has but few noble, in comparison of the multitude of the poor that
receive and embrace the Gospel: It is therefore but a small likelihood, that
Papistrie should be the true religion, which few or none, but Gentlemen dare
profess in England. Which argues y^ y^ greatest number of the^, being able by
wealth to bear out the greatest punishment that is laid upon them, suffer of
wilfulness, rather then of conscience: who if they were put to the same trial,
y^ the poor martyrs were in time of popish persecution, it is hard to say,
how many of these gentlemen that abide imprisonment, would endure to end
their lives (as those did) in fiery ^orme^ts. Experience we have in the days of
king Henry, and king Edward, when sharper punishment then now is practiced, was
executed upon offenders in some cases, how few there were and those y^ were
discovered by others, rather the^ by their own open profession, that endured
the severity of those laws. Yet were those times more likely to have yielded
thousands of martyrs, and confessors, when men were newly drawn from their
old inueterated opinions* if certeiutie of truth had been in papistrie, which
might have b^d a constant faith to have suffered death willingly and
faithfully, for the defense and testimony of gods religion, against heresy:
which error builded upon uncertain or false grounds, albeit it may work
wilful per^ in a few, yet never is able to give pa^ience and constancy in the
^ttermost a ^tions unto ma nie. The same thing the experience of these times
does confirm, in which only they suffer by their wills, to whom the suffering
is no great smart. But ye mener sort, although in heart they favor popery, yet
because they have no faith, but an uncertain opinion, they dare make no
confession, to bring them selves in greater trouble, then they are able without
great pain too suffer And (...) those of weal^h, that care not to be
imprisoned, rather then to (...) to Church: how many of them dare make
confession of that, which is the profession of all Pap^sts, that he
acknowledges the supreme authority of the Pope, and is by Bull, or other token
of pardon reconciled to the Sea of Rome. And wherefore are they so dangerous in
this matter rather then the o^ther* but because y^ law (...) shar^ in y^ point,
for acknowleging y^ popes authority the^ for going to church. Whereas if they
suffered of conscience grounded upon a Christian faith, they would never be
ashamed to confess him, who^ they think* in their erroneous persuasion, to be
the rock of the Church, y^ head and singular shepherd of the same, without
acknow legeing of whose authority they hold, y^ there is no church, no truth, no
salvation. I omit that there is apparent and probable suspicions in some of the
imprisoned, of hope of greater preferment, and worldly aduauntement in another
state, then they look to obtain in this, whereto does tend al their devilish
and traitorous machinations, against the Prince and present state, by Gods
goodness hitherto prevented, and I hope (if our sins which deserve the
contrary do not (...)) shall be finally and perpetually disapointed. But this
their obst^ is such a thing (says this discourser) as it must needs bring
comfort to all men. So that in his judgment, they are no me^, to whom the
wilful contempt of Papists brings no comfort. what more* It can justly grieve
none except the common enemy the dyuel himself* See (...) not, what (...) he
makes of her Majesty, and at her (...)* (...) of the Nobility and
Comminaltie? all whom it cannot but gr^ exceedingly, y^ any of her born
subjects, and there natural countriemen* should so obstinately refuse the
hearing of Gods word, and communication with his Church, without ye which
there is no hope of salvation, that they had rather be imprisoned, (...)
displeasure of God and them natural Prince, then be at large with (...) Christ;
and (...) li^ of their sovereign. Yet further (...) how not only in general,
but also in particular, he presu meth to ^rine of her Majesty. And as for the
Princes herself (says he) she cannot* but becomforted therein. Behold how
confidently he ^dereth her (...) Mais^ie* in bearing men in hand, not only
that she is (...) by ^he (...) of her subjects, but also that, it (...) but
that ^hee should be comforted by that, which even common sense abhors, that
the ruler should be comforted by disobedience, and a Christian ruler by
disobedience unto Christ's faith whereof she is a ^olous defendor, What other
thing therefore is meant by this supposed impossibility* but to ^nuat in most
s^anderous and infamous suggestion, y^ her Majesty favors the contempt of
her laws, likes well of disobedient subjects, yea is greatly conforted at
the obstinacy of them, whom, by public laws, and open profession, she has
declared, these 22. years, to be enemies of Gods truth, maintayners of
superstition, and defend^rs of heresy. But let us yet more nearly behold the
cause, which makes it impossible, but that she must needs be conforted
therein, She cannot but be conforted threin (says he) assuring her self,
that if these men, do stick so firmly unto their consciences and faith
sworn unto God, in their oath of baptism. Then will they as firmly for the
same consciences, stick unto her majesty, if occasion shall serve, in keeping
their secundary faith, and allegiance, sworn unto her heighnes, as to the
substitute of god. No doubt, but her majesty must take great comfort, y^ she
sets forth and executes laws, to defend such a faith and religion as men
cannot obey, but by breaking their faith, sworn unto God in their oath of
baptism. Or else her highness must think great dis^oyaltie (what speak I of
disloyalty?) yea open and manifest contumely, in such an impudent merchant, as
dare be bold to assure her subjects, y^ commanding them to join with her in
true religion, she commands them to break their first faith sworn to God
in baptism, and yet notwithstanding cannot but be comforted at their obstinate
contempt, to her most just and godly commandment. But let the matter of the
first faith remain in question. What assurance can her majesty have of the
keeping of their second faith, and alleadgeance sworn to her heighnes, as to ye
substitut of god? How many of those recusants presended for conscience and
keeping of their first faith sworn to go^, joined with the traiterous Earl^s of
Northumberland and Westmerland, in open and actual rebellion against her
majesty's person, her crown and dignity: Behold the bond of assurance, that
her heighnes has by their obstinate refusing, to yield unto her gracious and
godly proceedings. These be the linkes of loyalty, whereby papists are so
chained in obedience unto their god, yt they cannot be traitors against their
prince. This is the recognisance of their duty, y^ they will stick unto her
majesty, if occasion should serve, y^ so soon as any occasion is offered, to
show themselves in their right collors, stick not to make open war against her
majesty, even in her own realm, and their native country. I hart^ly beseech
almighty God, if it be his will, for Christ's sake, to illuminate their blind
eyes, that their hearts being truly converted unto God, they may be meet
instruments to serve the Prince. Which grace if it be not his majesty's
pleasure to grant unto them, sor causes known to his divine wisdom, I
beseech him for his mercy, that her highness never have need or use of their
aid, who are her secreete sworn ^imies, howsoever they pretend an outward
countenance of duty and faythful^esse: But to return to this our discourser,
if Papists could be ashamed of any thing, my think he should not for sh^me,
promise her majesty assurance of their fidellitie, who hauea received
principle, y^ to infidels, and such as they accounte herhighnesse to be, no
faith or promise of obedience, it is to be observed. And what talks he of a
secundarie faith, sworn unto her highness? as though either she or any
almost in England, were ignorant of the blasphemous bulls of Pius quintus and
Gregorius 13. given forth against her majesty, procured by the traitors on
that side the sea, by which al her subjects are assured to be discharged of
all oath of obedience, and loyalty unto their sovereign, and the Prince her
self (with more vile terms, then I in respect of her honor, and my duty
may express, as meet for the basph^mous mouth of Antichrist, as unworthy of
her most (...) and noble personage) discharged of y^ most lawful souer eigntie,
which by the ordinance of G^d and her most just title, by all law, righ and
equity, does appertain unto her. Will they stick to her Majesty in
conscience of anyoth, whose consciences the Pope has loosed from al duty of
alleadgeance? Have not all the Papists ^ne sense of this matter? or else where
is the unity they brag of? does not Bristo in his 40. motive affirm, that all the Papists in England be duly discharged from subjection, and the Prince
from dominion, by the sovereign authority of the common pastor of relygion?
Says he not in the same motive, that although they be discharged of their
fealty, yet they obey for common humanity? He might much more truly have
said, that being in their traitorous persuasion discharged of their fealty,
wherinsoeuer they obey, it is for fear of penalty. How can they that think
themselves discharged of their fealty, keep their second faith and
aleadgeaunce, ^worne to her highness, as to the substitute of God, whom they
wickedly imagine to be discharged from dominion, by the sovereign authority
of Gods vicar, in their term, but the dauilles dearling in very deed. But if
the rebellion in the North, the Bulls of their two last Popes, Feltons
execution, Brisues motives, and a great many other motives, inducing her
majesty to conceive of them, as of most dangerous persons, to the state were
all clean forgotten, or else had never gone before, are the attempts of Saunder
in Ireland, so obscure, or y^ Pope^ standerd thrown down so low, or his
garyson of soldiers so wholly discomfited, or his forte so througly rased and
made even with the ground, or Campions proud and foolish chaleng, and the
flocking of so many I^suits and Seminaristes, as so many trompets and bellows
of sedition into England, concurring with the hostile invasion of Ireland, so
clearly abolyshed, that no monumentes of popish sidelitie and alleadgeance to
their sovereign, remain to be gathered or considered of them? but that this
new discourser, dare assure her Majesty, that the disobedience of Papists, is
an argument of their loyalty, their obstinacy, a proof of their fidelity,
their cont^mpte of God and his truth, a conclusion of their alleageaunce and
sworn service to their Prince?

Yet is he so confident in defending their wilfulness, that he a^ouceth,
that their adversaries also and persecutors, cannot in any reason mislike it,
for that the contrary relygion, were to have them as constant and faithful in
that, if it were possible to win them to the same. In deed constancy, if
the cause be good wherein it is, deserves great commendation, but obstinacy
in an evil cause, as it has nothing y^ in reason can move wise men to like it,
so has it not a necessary consequence, that the obstinate being once
reclaymed to good religion, will al ways continue constant in the same. For
beside experience in some of the recusantes, who have reuoulted from the truth,
once professed, that constancy, whereby true religion is faithfully maintained,
is the gift of God, and diffreth as much from obstinacy, whereby an evil
matter is borne out, as truth differs from falsehood, and good relygion, from
heresy.

The last part of y^ answer to this pretended letter, is spent, in promising to
prove their obstin^cie to be constancy, and their wi^lnes to be conscience,
and in (...) his friends desire, briefly to touch three things. The first
point shall be, what cause (...) reason the Catholics have (says he) to
stand as they do^, in the refusal of things offered them, and especially of
going to church. The other two points, which are altogether omitted. I will
rehearse in the end, with a brief conjecture of the cause why the same were
given over. And now to the first part, and in deed The only matter, and
whole discourse of this treatise.

The first part.
THat the Queens most excellent majesty, the honorable Lords of her pryuy
Counsel, and other the learned and wise of England, may see that the refusal
of going to the Church of so many thousand Catholykes at this day in that
Realm, is not upon disloyalty or stubberne obstinacy, as their adversaries
give it out, but upon conscience and great reason, and for the avoiding of
manifest perryll of eternal damnation, which they should incur in yeeldyng
to that, which is demanded at their hands: I have put down some causes and
reasons here followyng, referring the Reader to more larger dyscourses, made
by diverse learned men of our time, in sundry parts of their works (this being
shuffled up in haste) and namely to apeculyar Treatise not long agone
publyshed touching this matter.

But first of all it is to be noted, that my reasons (to thend they may A
necessary Supposition.
conuynce) are to be supposed to proceed, from a catholyke mind, (that is)
from a man, which in his conscience is throughlye persuaded, that only the
Catholyke Romayne Relygyon is truth, and that all other new doctrynes and
relygions, are false relygions, as all new Gods are false Gods. Now, of these
Catholykes there are two Two Sorts of C^bolikes.
sorts, in England, the one which in their consciences do judge, that as all
other relygions besides their own are false, so all partycipation with them
either in deed, or in show, by oath, by Sacraments, by going unto their
prayers and service, or otherwise, is naught, forbidden and unlawful, and yet
either for fear, or favor or some other worldly cause, they are content to
communicate which them in all What a Si^e it is to do against a man's own
conscience.
or some of the foresaid things: and of those men (albeit they be very many
in England) I mean not to entreat, their case being apparauntly both to
themselves and to all other men, wicked, and out of all doubt damnable. For as
S. Austine says: He that knows the things August. in Psalm. 54.
to be ill that he does, and yet does the^, he goes down quick unto hell. As
though he would say: Albeit he be yet quick upon the earth, yet is he, in the
providence of God, dead and damned in hell. And S. Paul talking of this sin,
never lays less punishment upon it, then judgment and damnation, although
it be committed in things of themselves indifferent or lawful: for albeit (as
he says) meats offered to idols be of themselves lawful to Romans 14. 1. Cor.
8. vide expo. D. Tho. 1. 2. Q. 19. and a^. D D. ibi. Romans 14. Cap. 4. Romans 14.
be eaten, to him that knows an Idol to be nothing: Yet, If a man should
discern or judge it to be unlawful and yet eat of it, he is damned for it,
because he does not according to his conscience or knowledge. And the reason
is that which S. Paul has immediately following, saying. All that which is
done by us not according to our knowledge or conscience, is sin. And S. James
confirms the same, saying. He that knows good, and does it not, sins.
Wherefore S. Paul cries out a a little before, thus. Blessed is he that
judges not, or condemns not himself, in doing contrary to that he best
allowetb. And the cause why Mark this reason. ^ Three kinds of Sin.
this sin against a man's own conscience is so damnable, is this. Some do
sin of humane frailty, as did Peter, and this is called a sin against the
father, who is called Power. Some do sin of ignorance, as did Paul, Math.
26. 1. Tim. 1. Vide D. Tho. in 2. 2. Q. 14. and Creg. lib. 25. Mor. ca. 1^.
and this is called a sin against the son, who is called Wisdom. Some do
sin of mere will and malice, choosing to sin although they know it to be
sin, and this is the sin against the holy Ghost to whom is appropriated
particularly grace and goodness, the which a man most wickedly contemns and
rejects when he sins wilfully against his own conscience: and therefore
Christ says, that a man shall be forgeuen a sin against the father and against
the son, as we do see it was in Peter and Sin against it^ holy Ghost.
Paul. But he that sins against the holy Ghost shall never be forgeuen
neither in this world, neither in the world to come. As for example Mat. 12.
Mar. 3. Luke. 12. John. 15. Act. 9.
the Pharisees were not: which did many things against Christ, maliciously,
and contray to their own knowledge and consciences. If this be true (as it is,
if God be not untrue) the^ in what a miserable case stands many a man in
England, at this day which take oaths, receive sacraments, go to Church, and
commit many a like act directly against their own consciences, The pitiful
(...) of dissen^bling (...),
and against their own knowledge: nay, what a case do they stand in, which
know such things to be directly against other men's consciences, and yet do
compel them to do it: As to receive against their will, to swear against
their will, and the like: Surely, as I am now minded, I would not for ten
thousand worlds, compel a Jew, to swear that there were a blessed Trinity.
For albeit the thing be never so true, yet should^ ^e be damned for swearing
against his conscience, and I, for compelling him to commit so heinous and
grievous a sinue. But of this sort of Catholics, this is enough, and too much
except they were better. For they are to be accounted (according to Saint
Paul) damned me^ in this life, and therefore no christians, and much less,
Catholics.

There are another sort of Catholics, that albeit they do judge all other
religions besides their own, false and erroneous, and damnable: yet do they
not think, but that for some worldly respect, as for saving their offices,
dignities, liberties, credytes, or the like, they may in some of the former
things, at the leastwise in going to church (for as for swearing, and
receiving, I think no Catholic this day in Europe thinks it less then
damnable) show them selves conformable men to the proceedinges of them of the
contrary religion: and do also think others too scrupulous which do stand
in the refusal of the same. But to show that these men are in a wrong and
perilous persuasion, builded only on their own fantasy, and therefore to be
reformed: and that the other men are the only true Catholics, and bound to
do so much as they do, upon pain of the high displeasure of God, and
eternal damage of their own souls: I have put down here these reasons, that
follow, which may serve for the justifying of the one parties conscience, and
for the due reforming of the other

HE begins with a large Periode, and stately style, as though he were
endyting of a Proclamation, or an A^te of Parliament, with a long breath,
stretched Lunges and full mouth. That the Queens most excellent Majesty, the
Honorable Lords of her Privy Counsel and other the learned and wise of
E^glande may see- Quid tanto dignum feret hic Promissor hiatu? Parturiunt
montes nascetur ridiculus mus. What will this large promiser, bring forth
worthy of so wide a gaping? The Mountains are in travel a ridiculous Mouse
shall be borne anon: For what in Gods name, shall all the Learned and wise in
England see? Beside her Majesty and her honorable C^unsell. Forsooth. That
the refusal of going too the church of so many thousand Catholics at this
day, in that realm is not upon d^oyaltie or stubborn obstinacy as their
adversaries give it out. A m^tter indeed worthy of so great a presence as
you summoned before you, to defend so ma^y thousand Catholics, as in that
realm make refusal to go to Church. ^ut advise your self well, whether your
Check roll do not deceive you, and by a Cyphar too much, make you insteede
of a se^e hundreds, too set down so many thousands. Or if your friend,
more woorshipfull then true of his word, in certifiyng you of many
thousands of Gentlemen imprisoned whose defense you take in hand ^oo make,
has deceived you, you seem to be a man altogether vnme^te, to speak in
the ears of her mo^e excellent Majesty, and the Honorable Lords of her
Privy Connsell (that I cleene omit, all the wise, and Learned of England)
which are so light of credit, too imagine that so many thousand Gentlemen
of this Realm, should profess such obstinacy, after so many years
teaching too refuse obedience too her Majesty's Laws touching Religion, when
so few of any calling, repugned at the first publishing of the same. Or if
you make a wilful Lie (because I cannot think so basely of your wit, too
be deceived in so plain a matter) not only her Majesty and Honorable
Counsel, but all the wise and Learned of England, may easily guess, what
truth they shall look for in the rest of your discourse, when so manifest a
fal^ood is contained in your first sentence: and what purpose you followed in
faygning the refusal of so many thousaundes, which if they were all
registered, will not much exceed the le^e number of hundereds.

Well, too omit the number, the cause you say of their refusal is not as
their Adversaries give out: But upon conscience and great reason, and for the
avoiding of manifest peril of eternal damnation, which they should incur
in yielding too that, which is demanded at their hands. And that all the
wise and learned of the Land, with the Prince and her Counsel, may see this
to be so, I (says he) have put down some causes and reasons here following.

^erily yo^ have taken a great piece of work in hand, and ^hosen no mean^,
Judges, therefore it stands you in hand, to bring substantial proves.

Let us hear therefore how you begin. Your Margent notes A necessary
suppositio^, your text runs in these words. But first o^ all, it is to be
noted, that my reasons (to the end they may convince) are to be supposed to
proceed from a Catholic mind, that is from a man which in his conscience is
thoroughly persuaded, that only the catholic Roman religion is truth, and
that all other new doctrines, and religions are false religions, as al new
Gods, are false Gods. Certaynely it is a necessary supposition, without the
which, al your reasons are not worth a ^igge, and it is such a supposition, as
if it might have been allowed unto Arius, Macedonius, or Eutyches etc. Their
reasons might have convinced all their adversaries. Suppose an He^etike to be
a Catholic, and heresy to be truth, and Arius was a good Priest, Macedonius
was an holy Bishop, E^yches was a reverend Abbot. Truly I was deceived, when I
Prognosticated in y^ beginning that the travel of the mountanes would bring
forth a little mouse. For behold they have brought ^oorth a great Monster, a
necessary supposition, y^ this writers reasons (to the end they may convince,
are to be supposed to proceed from a Catholic mind. No marvel, though you
blewe the Trumpet, and made a loud noise: That the Queens most excellent
Majesty, the Honorable Lords of her privy Counsel, and all other the
learned, and wise of England might see, that all your niene reasons, to the
end they may convince, must be supposed to proceed from a man that is
persuaded, that only the Catholic Romayne religion is truth, and all other
new doctrines and religions are false. But why do you oppose the Catholic
Romayne Religion, to all other new doctrines? When by the Catholic Romayne
religion, you mean the present Popish religion, and not the ancient Romayne
religion, which was the Catholic religion of all true Christians. I see well,
as we must first of all suppose you to be a true Catholic, so we must secondly
suppose, the present Popish Heresy, to be the ancient Romayne and universal
religion, of all the Catholic Church of Christ. These suppositions will do you
great pleasure, to the end (as you say) that your reasons may convince. But
by such suppositions, the thief that stands at the bar, with as good
reason may be acquitted, and the I^dge that (...) on the benche, by the (...)
be cond^ned. After this necessary supposition, follows a profitable
division, of Catholics, whereof there are two sorts in England: One of them
which although they judge that all participation, with all other Religions is
naught, yet for fear, or favor, or for some worldly cause they are content
to communicate with them, in all, or some things, by him named, As in deed,
or in show, by oath, by Sacraments, by going to their prayers and service, or
otherwise. These he pronounces t^ be out of all doubt, in a damnable case,
for this he all^adgeth Augustine, Saint Paul, Thomas of Aquine etc. And it is
very true, that whosoever does contrary to his conscience, ^ee it justly or
falsely persuaded. sins damnablye, but when he proceeds further, to
charge such with sin against the holy Ghost, whereof our Savior Christ
says, that it shall ne^r be forgeuen in this world, nor in the world to
come, he pronounces not only a fals^, but also an vnle^ed Judgment, Math.
12. Mark. 3. Luk^. 12.
and even contrary too himself, and those principles which he allows: For
although he sin very grievously which sins wilfully against his own
Conscience, yet he sins not always irremisibly: For he that knows
M^ther, Adultery, and such like (...) offenses too ^ee damnable, and yet
wilfully, his conscience reclaiming, being overcome of ire or lust, or
suchother wicked affection, does commit them, does not by and by commit
sin against the holy Ghost: but by the grace of GOD, may be renewed by
repentance. The same is too be said of them, that dissemble their profession,
and outwardly communicate with Idolaters and Heretics, but not worse then
the^s, nor half so ill, is the case of dissembling Papists, which beside
their ignorance and false persuasion which rests in supposition, this manne
himself confesses, for fear or favor, or other worldly cause, too do that
which is contrary too their corrupt Conscience and erroneous persuasion.
Which is the sin of humane ^railtie, and not of malicious contumely, and
blas^mie against the grace and spirit of GOD. Neither does Augustine who^ he
cyteth upon the fifty four Psalm, maintain his cruel and desperate
Censure: who^ w^Wrdes (...). then he (...). (...): Cum (...) esse! qu^ (...),
(...), nonne vi^us discendis (...) inferos? If thou did descend, when thou
werte dead, thou should not know what thou (...). (...) when the know
that too be evil which tho^doest, (...) not (...) quick (...) This (...)
the (...) in the third Person. He that knows the things too be ill that
he does, and yer does them, he goes dow^ quick into Hell. Which he would
have us to suppose, (...) Augus^ had spoken, of all sinn^ which is a^ (...),
of the Princes and (...) of the (...) of the Do^atistes, whom therefore he
says to have gone quick into Hell, because they wilfully and mali^iously
against their knowledge, and of (...) a (...) and (...) in the (...) of (...)
As (...) in the providence of God (...) in Hell.

For this (...) (...) makes be^weene the followers and the (...) the (...) of
that (...) (...) a (...). etc. (...) ^ded to (...) come upon them; which
(...) conse^ted (...). And what those Capraynes and (...)? Let them go down
quick (...) hell; because they handle the Scriptures, and know w^l by reading
daily; how the Catholic (...) is (...) all the whole world, that all
Contiadiction (...) be found ^or their Schism* ^y (...) it well* and
therefore they go down quick unto Hell etc.By this it is evident, that
Augustine spe^keth not of all them* that sin against knowledge, but of (...),
(...): (...) of (...) and not of infirm^tio (...) although the sin against
the holy Ghost be ^death, death, and denied to be pardoned, yet it follows
not (as (...) discourser concludes) that all dissem^ Papists in England,
(...) he terms dissembling ^ (...) (...), (...) in that (...) receive (...)
to (...) like (...) against the (...) and (...) of knowledge, which (...)
nothing (...) an (...) and (...). (...) in (...) able (...) (although (...),
(...) too make yt a more heinous case:) which (as he says) Know (...) to
be directly against other men's consci^ces, and yet do (...) them to do it.
As to (...) ^aynst they^ will, to (...) they* (...) But (...) ^gaynst their
will? She we have now a new Paradore y^ will may* be compelled? Sure I am
that no man (...) compelled to receive or (...), that will not, although mea^es
are used to make them (...), that (...) not* And who that (...), of (...) that
are not willing ^eth that they are directly against their Consci^ce w^n they
do them, or rather may not saf^lye think their C^nscience is no (...) that
they may do them, when (...) and (...) so much (...) But (...) it, that they
(...) and that (...) is (...) cause for (...), that they receive, (...) and
^weare, all in (...) shall cre^ of Godly laws cease, because Hypocrites will
not obey them, but with dissimulation? yet it we may believe this Patr^ne of
our Re^usantes, he prot^steth, saying.

Surely as I am now minded, I would not for ten thousand words, compel a
Jew to swear that there were a Blessed Trinity. For albeeyt the thing be
never so true, yet should he be damned, for swearing against his conscience*
and I for compelling (...) too commit s^ heinous and grievous a sin. You do
well to (...) of (...), that you may (...) to (...), when you (...) better
(...). And sure I am, that either you are a (...) from all your fellow
Papists, or if the law were in your hand, (...) we a p^ctise contrary to
this protestation, for less then (...). But I pray (...), that have so (...)
other (...) that you (...) not compel (...) ^oe (...) the same (...) it (...),
(...) and godly, have you not the same scrupulosttie, in forbidding them to do
any thing which in their conscience, they are persuaded, they ought to do? I
think you would not for ten thousand worlds, (...) a (...) to be
circumcised, ^or a (...) to woorship (...), (...) a Moabit^ to offer his (...)
in Sacrifice, nor any (...) from d^yng any th^g, which in their conscience
they think they are bounds to do. If you would compel them to omit that
which they believe to be good, because you (...) it (...) evil* why will you
not compel them to do that which you (...) to (...) good, although they
think (...) to be evil? But if (...) a sin not o^lye of it self, deser^ng
da^ation, but (...) excluded from all hope of remission, to compel men to do
^nye thing against their conscience, although their consciences be naught,
and the thing never so good, how^ ca^e you exc^ise the general practice of
Papists, which compel Prote^auntes with more grie^s pains, then any are
compelled of us* ^oo swear obedience to the Pope, too hear Mass, too
acknowledge transubstantiation, and other (...) which you know, ^s (...) too
be directly against their con^nce, as (...) know, or can know that any of
such (...) where^ Papists are compelled, is against their conscience? But I
perceive, that if you continue as you are now minded, and that all Papists
would reform their judgment according to your mind, we should have a
my^der gou^rnement of Papists wher^soeuer they rule, then hitherto was ever
known too be, since Papistrie had her first beginning. And as you are now
minded, you would condemn the great manne, who made the great Supper, Luke.
14: Because he commanded his servants to compel (...) come (...) him, and
Augustine which hereof gathers, that it was the du^tie of Magistrates to
compel Heretics too the hearing of Gods word in the Church, and
communicating with the faithful. You would con^ Josiah, who caused all that
were ^ounde in Jerusalem, and Beniam^ to stand to the (...), that he made, ^ith
(...) Lord, and compe^ed that were (...) in (...), to (...) the (...) their God
2. (...). 34. Among which multitude, it is not like, (...) many did in their
censciences better like of Idolatre, then of Gods worship, and that the word of
compulsion plainly declares: for it appertains to them that are unwilling,
and not to them that are prompt and ready to obey.

But let us weigh the cause, why you would not for so many thousand worlds,
compel a Jew to swear to the blessed trinity, you say, because he should be
damned for swearing against his conscience, although the thing be never so
true. And what if he swear not, but continue still obstinate in his Iudaisme,
shall he escape damnation? But if after he have been instructed in the faith of
the holy trinity, or have had instruction offered him, and yet still conte^neth
y^ same, is not y^ magistrate bound to compel him, either to acknowledge
Christ, or to punish him for his obstinarie? By which punishment, if he be
compelled to hear the doctrine, which before he dispysed, there is hope he
may be won to believe it, or if aster long teaching he be further urged
too confess it, experience (as Augustine testifies, of many Donatistes)
does show, that although he did first profess it by compulsion, he may by
Gods grace, woorking in him, afterward embrace it willingly.

Wherefore the compulsion pretended to be used, is neither so dangerous to
them that are compelled, nor so hurtefull to them that must use it, being the
last refuge to bring ungodly persons to repentance, by threatening and
executingof punishment, which contemn and despise all gentle and fatherly
admonishment. Which, if it will not prevail, but that of some, it is borne out
with obstinacy, of other pretended by hypocricis, the Magistrate has
discharged his duty, the offender has not found damnation, which he should
have ^raped. Albeit by contumacie, or dissimulation, he have ^creased the
same. Now follows the other part of the division, for the first, and the
persons contained therein our discourser refuses to deal with all, as of
whom, there is no ho^e, because they are damned in this life, they are no
christians, and much ^sse catholics.

But there are another sor^e of catholyes, which (...) they judge as the former
(...), that alother religious beside their own (...), and (...) ^able, yet do
they not think, but that for some world^ (...) for (...) their offices, (...),
(...), and other like, they may in some of the former things a^ lest wise in
going to church show themselves conformable, to the (...) of them of the
(...), (...). For reformi^g of thos^ men's wrong, and perrillo^ (...) a^ons,
these nine reasons following, under the necessary supposition before said, are
franied.

The first Reason:
THe first reason why I being a Catholyke in mind, may not go to the
churches or service of the contrary relygion; is, because I persuading myself
their doctrine to be false doctrine, and consequently venomous (...). P^rill of
i^fection.
unto the ^earer, I may not venture my soul to be infected with the (...). For
us it is damnable for a man to kill him self* and consequently deadly si^ne
(without (...) cause) to put his body in probable danger of death* so is it
much more offens^ to God, to put my soul ten thousand times Note the Simili^.
of more valewe then my body, in danger to the deadly stroke of fals^ doctrine
and heresy, especially seeing I (...) ^o warrant of (...) ^ping, but rather I
hear God crying to the contrary. He that* ^eth danger shall per^ in the
same. Neither is it sufficient for me to think Eccle. 3.
that I am sure inoughe from being infected, for that I am grounded enough, I
am learned sufficiently. For what if God take his grace from thee, and let thee
fall, because thou have not followed his (...) which is, If thou will not be
bi^ten with the (...) not do sleep ^gh the hedg^. If thou will not be spo^ed,
then not to touch the Pitch. Wherefore 8. Paul to as good a man as learned, as
strong, as I am, gave a general rule Eccle. 3. Eccle. 3.
to avoid and fly an he^ticall man. The like precepte he gave to Timothy
being a By sho^, to avoid a certain heretyque by name Alexander: (...) yet
he (...) as it we^e the Thessalon (...) in the name of Jesus Christ's, that
they should (...) Tit. 3. 2. Tim. 4. 2. These. 3. Romans 16. 1. Tim. 2. Romans 16.
draw them selves (...) like fellows. The sa^e he repeateth again to the
(...) beseechyng them to note and to de^yne from (...) The reason of this ^.
(...) utters (...) Ty^thye: Because their speech creeps like a canker, and
they (...). (...) to the (...) of the same men: By sweet words and gay
blessings they s^uce the hearts of the Innocent. And S. Peter says of them,
that they do allure unto them unconstant souls. Here now I see the
scripture carefully counsayling, 2. Pet. 2*
and commannding me to avoid the company, and speech of fall teachers, it
puts down also the perrill, if I do it not, which is as great as the death
of my soul. And on the contrary ^de, I have no warrant of scripture, or
example of good men to adventure the same. For I do read this written of
far my betters. The Apostles and their scholars were so wary and
circumspect in this case (in a^yding heretics) Nicep. li. 3. Ca. 30
that they would not so much as once reason the matter with any of them who
endeavored by their lyings or new devices, to corrupt the truth. (...) I am
sure, I can never take good by hearing them, but I am in great possibility to
take evil, as many more learned men then I, in old time have done. As
Dionisius Alexandrinus, confesses of himself: (...). his. (...). (...). cap.
6.
and of Origin and Tertulian it is known, and many men in England can be
witnesses, which both to thems^ues and also to other (...)* (...) (the time
was) so firm and grounded in religion, as nothing could move them: and yet
now they have proved otherwise. Wherefore it cannot be but great sin in me
(notwithstanding all this) if I shall put my soul in such danger, by
aduenturing to their company, to their serui^e, to their sermons, to reading
their boo^es, or the like, whereby in any wise I may be corrupted. The which
adventure, what a (...) it was counted in the primative church, it may appear
by the seven laws made both by the clergy and temporaltie, for the
prohibiting, and punishing of the same in that time, as is to be seen in the
councels, and fathers, and in the decrees of the good christian Emperors
Martian and Vide Gre. li. 5. ep. 64. Sozo. li. 2. ca. 31. and li. 1. cap. 20.
(...), and especially of the noble and zealous first christian Emperor
Constantine, which made it death, after the condemnation of Arius by the
general council of Nyce, for any man more to read his books and thereby to
adventure to be poisoned with his heresies: And reason, For if Da^ had not
ventured to behold Be^abe, he had not been entrapped wi^h her lone, and so had
not committed those horrible sins that ensewed. 2. Reg. 11 Gene. 3.
And if Dame Eua had not presumed to hear the serpent talk, she had not been
beguiled, and if when Luther first began to teach new doctrine, the catholics,
at that time had not vouchsa^ed to give him the hering, but had avoided his
prechings and preuy co^uenticles, the^ had not bin now in world, either
Lutheran, Swinglian, Caluenist, Puritan, Anabaptist, Trinetarie, Family of
love, Adamite, or the like: whereof now there are so many thousands abroad, al
springing of that first sect, and troubling at this day the whole world, with
the eternal damnation of infinite souls, the which souls at the day of
judgment shall be scuselesse, and receive that heavy sentence of everlasting
fire, for that they had not a^oyded the danger of infection.

The first reason.
THe first reason why a Papist may not go to church, is y^ perril of infectio^:
which is as good a reason, as y^ a foul toad may not come into a clear
spring, to wash her, and spewe out her venom, for fear of infection, not of
the well (of which there is greater danger) but of her own body, unto whose
poisoned complexion, nothing almost may be added. Or that a man infected with
the pestilence, pockes, or other contagious disease, may not come near the
place where physic and surgerie is ministered, least he should be further
infected. So that if a fool or a mad man, be persuaded that the Physician
will kill him, by this main reason, he must avoid him. For what other force
is in this argument, except truth be confessed to be falshoode, and true
physic dangerous infection? but mark the argument. Al danger of infection
is to be avoided: in going to Church and service, there is danger of
infection: therefore it is to be avoided. The first part of this reason, our
discourser proves by similitude, by authority of scripture, of Doctors, by
examples, and by experience. Which was altogether needelesse, except it were
for young children, that learn to speak, for all men of mean capacity, and
small discretion, will confess, that all peril of infection is to be avoided,
of them that desire to live in health: but the proof of the second part of
the argument, which is, that in going to Church and service, there is any
danger of insection, he brings not one word, beside his bare affyrmation.
A worthy reason, to the hearing whereof the Prince, with her counsel, the
learned, with the wise, of all England are called.

He that could obtain a privilege thus to reason, that al which he
affirms must be taken for truth, and that his adversary shall not be
admitted to deny any thing that he says, may easily prove to be an
^rrefragable Doctor. If this kind of resoning had been used among Papists
only, which are professed to believe what soever you will teach them, it might
have gained you some credit, when it should have had no controlling, but when
you publish your arguments, that the Queen and her Counsel (which al deny
your principles) and the wise and learned of this land (of which the most part
refuse your doctrine as heretical) may see that your Clients refusal is upon
great reason, you declare that as in pride you lack measure, so in judgment
you want discretion, in reasoning, you want learning, in defending, you want
truth in taking the cause in hand of obstinate contemners to justify it. you
have showed neither wisdom, discretion, truth nor honesty. But this seems
strange that you cite out of Nicephorus lib. 3 cap. 30. That the Apostles and
their scholars, were so wary and circumspect in this case (of auoidyng
Heretics) that they would not so much as once reason the matter with any of
them, who endeavored by their lying, or new devises to corrupt the truth.
Have you set out your champion, to challendge the combat, and will you now
give over the battle? must you follow the example of the Apostles and their
scholars, not so much as once to reason the matter with us, whom you account
for here^kes? very well. The Devil ought the Papists a shame to make so
proud an offer of disputation, which they never meant should hold, as
appears not only by the present flight of the challenger, notwithstanding
he prosesteth that he was prepared to suffer any torment, that should be
laid on his body, for his constant confession, but also by the plain
attestation of this his associate, whereby it is evidently bewrayed, that such
bold provocation was nothing else but a traitorous and seditious device, to
erect the peoples minds in eexpctation, of some change in religion, while
other diuilishe practices were in working in Irelande and the like attempted in
England. But howesoeuer you be affected toward disputation, you slander the
Apostles and their scholars, and Nicephorus the reporter of this sentence, and
Irenaeus the author of it, in saying they would not so much as once reason
the matter with any heretic. For Saint. Paul whose doctrine and example, the
other Apostles, and their scholars used and followed, allows unto every
heretic two solemn admonitions at the least, before he be avoided, before
which might be many reasonings, and after also though not with any certain
hope to win them, yet with certain profit unto Tit 3.
the hearers, when they see their heresies borne down with the strength of
truth, and falsehood maintained by obstinate will, and not by might of reasons,
when they see the sutle ^eightes of Heretics laid open to their shame, and
the plain truth of the Gospel have the victory, to the glory of God, So did
the Apostles dispute against the obstinate Jews, so did their scholars with
Heretics, as is manifest by the concertation of Augustine with the Donatistes,
Manichees, and Arrians, and that often in hearing of the people, the records
whereof are extant, as the disputation of Germanus and Lupus with the Pelagians
testified by Beda in the first of his English history. Neither does Ireneus
say, that the Apostles and their scholars, would not once reason the matter
with any Heretics, but showing how Polycarpus the scholar of Saint John,
being saluted by Marcion the Heretic, who desired to be acquainted with him,
answered, that he knew him already to be the eldest child of the Devil:
he declares, that ye Apostles and their scholars, were so circumspect, that
they would not communicate in any word or familiar speech with any, that had
corrupted the sincerity of the Gospel, with lying and false devises. And this
circumspection Polycarpus Irene. lib. 3. Cap. 3.
learned indeed of Saint John, who says in his second Epistle, That if any
man come unto you and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house,
nor salute you him, for he that saluteth him is partaker of his wicked works.

Finally, where you say, that out of the first sect of Luther did spring
Lutherans and Zwinglians, Caluinistes, Puritanes, Anabaptists Trinitaries,
Family of love, Adamites and such like, you bewray not only your malice, but
also your ignorance. For besides that out of the doctrine of Luther so far as
it was consonant too the word of GOD, no heresy could spring, more then out
of the word of God it self: the Anabaptists and Family of love, are old
sects springing out of the Enthusiastes, Pelagians, Donatistes, Valentinians,
and other ancient heresies, The Trinitaries are a brood of the Arrians,
Nestorians, Macedonians, and such like Monsters. The Adamites, were both
sprung up and suppressed by the reformed Churches of the Bohemians and
Morauians, many years before Luther was borne. The rest whom you name, when
you can convince them of heresy, by the authority of the holy Scriptures, you
may refer their beginning to what head you please. In the mean time, you
must learn to reason better, against your adversaries, then by challenging the
whole cause, without trial or proof, otherwise your victory shall be as
glorious, as your arguments be forcible, meet to be answered with hoopes
and hisses of Sophisters, not worthy the hearing of such as be wise, and
learned in England, much less too be regarded of her most excellent
Majesty, and the honorable Lords of her pri^ie Counsel, to all whom you do
not blush, not by begging, but by extorting as you call it a necessary
supposition, to offer a clear demonstration.

The second Reason
2. (...).
THe second reason why a Catholic cannot yield to go to Church, is, because
he cannot go without scandale, which is a sin more Leu. 4. Nu. 31 2. Reg.
12. 1. Esd. 8. Pro. 18. 2. Match. 6. Math. 17. and 18 Mar. 9. Luke 17. Romans 14.
15. 1. Cor. 8. and 10. 2. Cor. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 5. Math. 18. Ibid.
mentioned, more forewarned, more forbidden, more detested, more threatened in
the Scripture, then any sin else mentioned in the same, except it be
Idolatry. But in the new Testament nothing so much exaggerated, or with such
vehement speeches prohibited: Christ signifiyng, that the most part of the
world were to be damned for this sin, when he cries out with that
co^passionable voice of his, saying. Woe be to the world by reason of scandales.
Wherefore pronoucing as pitiful a sentence, upon the author of these
scandales he says. Woe be to that man by whom come these scandales. And
devising with himself (as it were) how to express unto our capacities, the
intollerablegreatnes of this man's torment in Hell, for scandalizing of other
men: he utters it in this sort. It were better for that man that a millstone
were hanged about his Mark. 9.
neck, and that he were so cast into the Sea. Which saying so terrified Saint
Paul that rather then he would scandalize any man in eating a 2. Cor. 8.
piece of meat (a thing of it self lawful as he says) he protested that he
would never eat flesh in his life.

Now this heinous sin of sca^dale consists properly in these three points.
First to induce another man by any means to sin: whether it be by life or
Three points wherein scandale is committed.
doctrine: and this was the sca^dale of the Priests in the old law, by their
naughty life, alluring the people to commit the same sins. This was the
scandale of the daughters of Moabe, who by their speeches and examples brought
the Israelits to sacrifice with the^ to Idols. Whereof also (as of the Leu. 4.
Nu. 25. and. 31 Apoc. 2
like to them) Christ spoke against with great disdain in the Apocalipse,
saying, Thou have their certain which hold the doctrine of Balaa^, who taught
Balaac how to give a scandale, (that is an occasion) for the children of Israel
to sin. I will fight against those men with the sword of my mouth. And in
this point is the proper signification of ( Scandalum) The proper signification
of scan^lum.
seen, which imports as much, as a stumbling block, whereby a man makes
another to fall, especially the fall of deadly sin: whereby a man breaks the
neck of his soul. As if a man should induce another by his example, or
otherwise, to commit adultery, to take an oath against his conscience, or the
like: and as Jeroboam did by his example, make the ten tribes forsake the
unity of the Church of Jerusalem, which sin of his, is so much noted in the
scripture, with this title of scandale, ( For that he 3. Reg. 12. Amos 7. 3.
Reg. 25.
made Israel to sin) as nothing more. And in revenge of the same God
foretold him by Amos the Prophet, that he would destroy his whole house, and
so afterward performed the same, as it appears in the third book of the
kings. And this first point of scandale, which is to induce other men to
sin, is so large and reaches so far, (because it may be done, by life,
example, words, works, omission, permission, and the like) as men had need to
look better about the^ then they do. It were too long to give examples in all:
one out of the ancient D. and martyr of christ S. Cyprian shall serve for all:
for by that, the rest may be gessed. He talks of parents, which either by
their evil examples had drawn their children to heresy or schism, or at the
leastwise had not sufficiently in structed the^, of the true church, and of the
sacraments and true service of (...) example for (...) in (...) to note.
GOD in the same. Whereupon these children, being damned, shall most
pitifully bewail their misery (says Saint Cyprian) and the cruelty of
their parents at the day of judgment saying thus. We have done nothing of
our selves, neither for saking the meat and the cup of our Lord (the blessed
Sacrament) have we of our own Ciprian, de lapsis.
accord hastened to profane coutagions (of schism or heresy.) The
perfidiousnesse or infidelity of other men ^ath undone us, we have felt our
own parents to be murderers unto us. They have denied unto us. the Church,
which is our mother, and God which is our father, and we being young and not
foreseeing the danger of so heynousan offense, were content to join our selves
with others in the soc^etie or participation of the crime, and so by other men's
fraud we were deceived. This that S. Cyprian affirms of children, in respect
of their parents, we may apply to wives, brethren, sisters, kinsfolks,
acquaintance, scholars, servants, subjects, tenantes, or the like: in respect
of any whose words, life, or example, has, or shall do them hurt, by giving
them a scandale, that is, by inducing them to sin.

The second point of scandale is, not only if I do induce an other man The
second poi^ of Scandale.
to sin by doing or saying naught my self, but further, if I do offend an
other man's conscience, in a thing of it self lawful: that is, if I do make an
other man think that I do an unlawful thing, albeit either I do it not, or
that the thing be lawful in it self, yet I commit scandale. As for example, if
a Priest should haunt dishonest or suspected houses, albeit he meant never so
honestly. And this is, that great scandale wherabout saint Paul makes Romans
14. 15. 1. Cor. (...). 10.
so much ado, as concerning the eating of meats offered to Idols: the which,
albeit it be lawful in it self (as saint Paul discourses) to him that has
knowledge, and thereby can judge that no meat, of his own nature is unclean
before God: and that an Idol is nothing: and consequently, that such meats
offered to Idols are nothing spotted or made unlawful thereby. Yet to eat it
in such place or presence as the lookers on, being weak and simple, may
think that thou art an idolater, because thou eatest the flesh offered up to
the idols: ^r that they by thine example be edefied or induced to eat the
same meats with an e^il conscience: this is dar^nable says S. Paul, and a
most horrible sin against Christ himself, and 1. Cor. 8.
such a sin as S. Paul himself says, That he would never (...) flesh while
he lived, rather then by eating, so to scandalize any man. Upon the which
discourse of S. Paul, the learned father S. ^sten, says thus. By this, Aug.
ep. 154.
it is evident, that we are not only forbidden, to use any thing in the honor
of strange Gods (as the eating of meats offered to them might seem to be)
but also to do any thing whereby we may be thought to honor them, doing it in
such sort, as that although in heart we despise them yet we edefie or induce
those that know not our hearts, in deed, to honor the same. This was also the
scandale that the worthy old Eleazarus in the book of Machabies so much
detested and resisted, that he (...). Match. 6.
chose rather to dye most cruelly, then to commit it. For whereas the Tyrant
did command him to ^ate of the sacrifized meats, and he refused the same, the
under officers of the Tyrant being moved with unjust compassion (as the
scripture terms it) offered him secretly other flesh not A notable example
of a plain and vndissembling conscience.
offered to Idols, and of the which he was not forbidden by his law to eat:
meaning thereby to deliver him, and to give out that he had now satisfied the
Prince his commandment. But the good old man considering 2. Match. 6.
what other men might think of it, and what Scandale there might ensue of it,
answered thus, as the Scripture says: That he would first b^ sent down unto
hell, before he would do it: for (says he) it is not convenient for our age
to feign, whereby perchance many young men, thinking that El^azarus, now of
ninety years old has past over to the life of the Gentiles, may through my
dissimulation be deceived. This therefore is the second point of scandale which
S. Paul forbids when he says. Keep your self from all show of evil.

The third point of seandale is, in respect of the enemy, that is, when The
third point of Scandale.
although I do not induce any man to sin, or offend any man's conscience, yet I
do disedefie the enemy, and do that thing whereby the enemy is scandalized, and
takes an occasion to blaspheme God his truth, his cause, his law, or the
like. Whereof S. Paul speaks to the Corinthians. Be 1. Cor. 10.
you without offense or scandale to the Jews, and also to the Gentiles. And in
an other place. Giving offense or scandale to no man, to the end 2. Cor. 6.
that our function or ministry be not blamed thereby. And this is that great
scandale that David being a King and a Prophet, gave to Gods enemies 2. Reg. 12.
by his fall, and for the which he was sore punished, as it appears by the
words of the scripture, which are these. And David said to Nathan the Prophet:
I have sinned against my Lord: and Nathan said to David, God has taken away
thy sin: but yet because thou have made the enemies of God to blaspheme: for
this cause, the son which is borne to thee, shall dye the death. This also is
the scandale that Esdras coming out of Persia, toward Jerusalem with his
countrymen the Jews, was afraid (...). Esd. (...).
to give to the king of Persia, by causing him to think basely of God, as not
able to help and defend his servants, if he should have asked him aid to
conduct himself and his company to Jerusalem: for so he says. I was ashamed
to ask of the King aid and horsemen to defend us from our enemies in the way:
because we had said to the king before, that the hand or defense of our God
is over all them that seek him in honesty, and that his Empire, and strength,
and (...), is upon all them that forsake him. Finally, of this scandalement S.
Paul and S. Peter also when Romans 2. 1. Tim. 6. 2. Pet. 2.
they said, that the word of God was blasphemed or spoken evil of by the
adversary part, for the evil life of certain noughtie Christians. Now, that
a Catholic going to the Churches, service, or prayers of them of the A
Catholic by going to Church fallen into all (...) three poi^tes of Scand^.
contrary religion, cannot but commit this great sin of scandale in the
highest degree, that is, in all these three points before rehearsed, it is
evident to all the world. For touching the first point: if he be a man of
any calling, his example shall induce some other, as wife, children, friends,
servants, or the like, to do the same. And howsoever ^ee escape himself,
they may be infected and so damned, and their blood laid upon his soul: but
much more if he exhort or constrain any man to do the same: as commonly many
Schismatiques do use. And touching the second point, he cannot b^t offend
many men's consciences: for they that do know him inwardly to be a Catholic,
will think him to sin against his own conscience, and perhaps be induced to
do the like. And they who know him not, must needs presume him to go of
conscience, and as a favorer of that religion, and so be brought to like the
better of that religion, and the worse of the Catholic, by his example. And as
concerning Mark this po^*
the third and last point, their is no enemy of the Catholic religion in the
world, whether he be Gentile, Turk, Jew, or Heretic, but that he must both
think, and speak the worst of the said religion, seeing the professors of
the same, are content for worldly policy to dissemble it, and leaving their
own Churches, to present them selves to the Churches of their open and
professed enemies.

To conclude, in this matter of scandale: men must not flatter and An impor^
admonition.
deceive them selves, thinking that they walk in a net and are not seen, when
they give scandale to all the world, which fixes his eyes upon them, if not
for their own cause, yet for the religions sake. God is not Gala. 6. Ambros.
epist. 30.
to be mocked. The godly and learned Father Saint Ambrose did accuse
Valentinian the Emperor for giving a public scandale to the word, because
he did but permit certain a^lters to the Gentiles: saying, that men would
think that he privily favored them. And his scholar Saint Augustine
thinks it a scandale, if a man should hear a Donatist but Aug. Li. de
pasto* ca. 7.
speak, and he to hold his peace: for that the hearer might think that if
this were evil which the Donatist says, the other would reprove him. But if
saint Ambrose had seen the Emperor to have gone to the Panims Temples, or S.
Augustine the other to frequent the Donatistes Churches, what then would they
have said? What excuse then would they have received? and this is our very
case.

The second reason.
THe second reason (says he) why a Catholic can not yield to go to church,
is because he cannot go without scandale, which is a sin more mentioned, more
forwarned, more forbidden, more detested, more threatened in the scripture,
then any sin else mentioned in the same, except it be Idolatry. I will not
stand to examine the comparison, but certain it is, that the wilful giving
of offense, or as he calls it newly, scandale, is in scripture often and
greatly detested, and very damnable and abominable, a thing well known to
them, that are wise and learned in the scriptures, and therefore needed not the
one quarter of quotations and textes, that are cited for it. There are also
diverse kinds thereof, and never a good of them all. Whether it be by inducing
other men to sin, by false doctrine, or wicked example, by offending the
weak conscience of our brethren in a thing of it self lawful, which our
reasoner sets down absolutely, without regard of such circumstances. If I
do offend an other man's conscience in a thing of it self lawful. As though
our savior Mat. 15. 5. 12.
Christ might be accused for neglecting the offense of the obstinate Pharisees.
Or whether it be by giving occasion to the enemy to blaspheme, when a man does
wickedly, which also our Advocate of the Recusantes does set down so nakedly,
that he would make a Christian man afraid to glorify Christ before a Jew,
who^ both he is sure to offend, and that he will take occasion, either in
heart or mouth, to blaspheme our Savior. The third point (says he) is in
respect of the enemy, that is, when although I do not induce any man to sin
or offend any man's conscience, yet I do disedisie the enemy, and do that
thing whereby the enemy is scandalized, and takes an occasion to blaspheme
God, his truth, his law, or the like. For except the thing, which I do is
wicked, as the adultery of David, which he brings for an example, though the
enemy is scandalized, as the Pharisees were at Christ, and takes an occasion
to ^aspheme God, his truth, or his word, (...). It is no (...) and (...), by
me lewdly given, but by him wickedly taken. But clear it is, that offense by
no means may be given either to the Jews or to the Gentiles, or to the
Church of God. But how is the second part of the argument proved, which (...)
al y^ proof. A Catholic (says he) by going to Church, service, or prayers of
them of the contrary religion, can not but commit this great Scandale in the
highest degree, that is in all those three points, before rehearsed. This is
boldly said, but what is the reason to show, that it is truly said.
Touching the first point (says he) If he be a man of any calling, his
example shall induce some other as wife, etc. This is as good Logike, as the
necessary supposition, to pr^us an universal proposition, by a particular.
Every Catholic gives offense, because some that is of any calling, induces
by his example. So that he which is a mere private man, whose example can not
induce, or authority constrain, is exempt from this point of giving offense.
But why should any man, of what estate so ever he is, be charged with
offense giving: when the thing which he does is not disprooued, but by a
vain supposition, to be godly and honest.

And touching the second point, when it is not a thing indifferent, but
either a necessary duty, as we judge, or a thing altogether unlawful, as
he holds, to come to the Church, how can any man be said touching that
point, to commit offense, which is contrary to his own determination, of that
point. But by a marginall note, he commands us to mark the third point,
and that is this. There is no enemy of the Catholic religion in the world,
whether he be Gentile, Jew, Turk, or heretic, but that he must both
think and speak, the worse of the said religion, seeing the professors of
the same, are content for worldly policy to dissemble it: and leaving their
own Churches, to present them selves to the Churches of their open and
professed enemies.

This man reasons altogether of necessities, and impossibilities, the
strongest Cheynes that are to hold any reasons, if they were surely linked and
riueted, into the causes, that he would bind with them. But how proves
he, that it is necessary for every enemy of the Catholic religion in the
world to think worse of it, for the dissembling of some of the professors
of the same? The world is wide, and the true Catholic religion, has many
enemies, that are wise, which when they know, that every religion, and their
own, what ever it be, has many dissemblers, when it is persecuted, will not
for the only point of dissembling, think worse of the Catholic religion,
then they think of their own, for the same cause. But not withstanding the
Cheyne is no better locked to the cause of all the enemies, yet the off^nce of
dissi^ulation is carefully to be a^yded, in respect of some part of them.
But until going to the Church, where the word of God is read and taught,
the Sacrament ministered, and prayers conceived, according to the (...) of the
holy scriptures, can be condemned of wickedness, there is no offense to be
feared in frequenting the same. But that the go^rs to Church offend not God
by hypo^sie and dissimulation, let them take heed of all sorts, at their
uttermost perrill, for as Galat. 6.
you cite it, albeeit (you wrongly apply it) they shall find one day, that God
is not mocked.

The third Reason
THe third reason why a Catholic may not come to church, is, ^. A (...)
be^vvixt religion and religion.
for that going or not going to the church, is made a sign now in England
distinctiue, betwixt religion, and religion, that is, betwixt a Catholic, and
a Schismatike. So that a catholic by going thither, does directly deny his
religion. For the better understanding whereof, we must note that the
Professor of any religion may be known by three ways: first, by words:
professing him self to be of that (...). (...) of prosessing a man's ^eligion.
religion: secondly, by works, or deeds proper to that religion: thirdly, by
some sign or mark appointed to signify that religion. As for example, In
Italy a Jew may be known, First, by his words, if he would profess him
self to be of that religion. Secondly, by works proper to Iudaysme, as by
keeping the Saturday, holy day, by circumcysing his children, and the like.
Thirdly, by a notorious sign appointed to distinguishe that religion from all
others, which is, to wear on his head a yeallow ^ppe. Now, as these three,
are ways to profess this religion, so if a man of an other religion, (for
example) a Christian, should yield to use any of these things, he should
sin grievously, and in effect deny his faith. And as for the first, if he
should profess him self to be a Jew, it is evident that he denies thereby
his Christianity. And as for the other two ways, it cannot be denied: for the
circum^ysing of thy children, and the wearing of a yeallowe cappe, does as
plainly in that country tell men that thou art a Jew, as if thou did
proclaim it at the market: even as (...) this example.
the bush at the Tavern door, does tell the goers by, that there is wine to
be sold within.

But now, that the going to Church is in the realm of England a plain and
an apparent sign of a Schismatike, that is to say, of a conformable man (as
they call him) to the Protestants proceedinges: it is manifestly Why going
(...) the Church is a denying of the Catholic religion.
to be proved. First, by the commandment to go to Church every Holiday, to
hear service, and by the exaction of the same commandment. For (that it is
the commanders meaning, by that act, as by a proper sign, to have men show
them selves conformable to that religion) it cannot be denied. For otherwise,
to what end are they commanded upon such days, and at such a certain
time, and for such a purpose to go thither. Again, it is proved by the
exaction of this law: For when a catholic does come before the
Commissioners, there is nothing asked of him, but when he was at church, and
if he will promis^ to go to church, commonly they account him a sufficient
conformable man, (that is to have yielded sufficiently unto them.) Furthermore,
the multitude of them, which have of long time abidden imprisonment, and now
in greater number do for this only thing, in the sight and knowledge, not only
of England, but also of al Christendom, and of the enemies of the same in the
world besides, does make this abstaining from church to be a proper and
peculiar sign of a true catholic, now, if it were not before: and the
yielding in the same, (especially if a man be called to public trial about it)
to be a flat and ^uident denying of God, and of his (...) this reason.
faith. For what does make a thing to be a proper and peculiar sign, but the
judgment and opinion of men? The bush of the Tavern, is a sign of wine,
because m^n commonly take it so. In like manner the yea^ow bonet of a Jew: the
yealow torbant, of a Turk: and the like. Even so, seeing the whole world, at
this day, does take the absteming from Protestants Churches, to be the only
external sign of a true catholic: and seeing the Protestants them selves do^
make it so: also, seeing that the going to Church is the contrary sign, it
follows, that if going to church were of it self before lawful, it were now
made by this, a peculier sign distinctiue betwixt religion and religion, and
so, utterly unlawful.

I will put an example of the Primative church, wherein the wearing of a garland
was lawful for all soldiers, until the Emperors, and the common opinion of
men, had abridged it only to infidel sould^ers, to distinguish them thereby,
in honor, from christian soldiers. And then, after that (as Tertullian
proo^eth) it was no longer lawful for christian soldiers Tert. lib. de Cor.
mili.
to wear them, for that the wearing thereof, was a denial of the christian An
example to ^he Purpose.
faith. Whereupon, we read that a certain christian souldie^ offered him
self rather to suffer death, then to wear one of them: as appears in the
same book of Tertullian. But now, much more is the thing unlawful in our
case. For that the going to the Protestants churches (which is a catholic
must presume to be heretical) was never a thing of it self lawful, (as I will
hereafter prove) which the wearing of a garland was: and therefore much less
now to be tolerated, seeing besides this, it is also made a sign distinctiue,
as I have already proved.

The third reason.
THe third reason is not unlike his brethren, that went before, which all hold
of a necessary supposition, or else they enforce no necessary conclusion. This
third reason is for that going or not going to the Church is made a sign, now
in England, and a distinctiue note betwixt religion and religion, betwixt a
Catholic and a schismatike, as the wearing of a yellow Cappe, is the mark of
a Jew in Italy. I yield it is so, and therefore going to Church, is the
external note of a Catholic, and not going to Church, is the mark of a
Schismatike and Heretic. But what go I about to break, the adamantine
necessity of the former supposition? Then let it stand, and see how it is
fastened to the cause, in controversy.

That the going to Church is the plain and apparent sign of a Schismatike,
that is to say, of a conformable man (as they call him) to the Protestants
proceedinges, it is manifestly to be proved. In deed it is necessary to be
proved, if you will have the argument, of avoiding the distinct mark of
Schismatikes, to agree with Protestants. How then do you prove it? First by
the commandment and exaction of the same, for going to Church. In deed this
proves the meaning of the co^manders to be, y^ they would have all true
Christians, who^ you call the Protestants to be discerned from heretics and
schismatikes by this mark. But that all Protestants are hereby proved to be
schismatikes, it is as far of as ever it was, and as near as ever it shall be.
But the reason of exaction, mightily does prove it. For when a Catholic
does come before the Commissioners, there is nothing asked of him, but when
he was at Church, and if he will promise to go to Church, commonly they
account him a sufficient conformable man, (that is to have yielded sufficiently
unto them) It were (I guess) hard to prove, that every Papist which comes
before the Commissioners, is examined of that one Article of coming to
Church. And if it were granted, that to be one question which is asked of
him when he was at Church? yet that nothing else is asked of any that comes
before them, I think there is no man will believe you, though you would swear
it. And if some of whose conformity there is hope, by promising to go to the
Church. where they may be instructed, are for a season urged no further: yet
that they are commonly accounted to be conformable men, and thought to have
yielded sufficiently unto the Commissioners: I dare say, neither the
Commissioners who best know their own thoughts will acknowledge so much: and
their contrary practice, is often seen in many, and you your self complain
of it, that they exact of many to communicate, and to take the oath, which is
more then only going to Church. But the long imprisonment of many, does make
this absteining from the Church to be a proper and peculiar sign of a true
Catholic. No verily: but of an obstinate herctike. For not y^ imprisonment,
but the cause for which they suffer, must argue them to be true Catholics,
which cause seeing it is left without defense or proof, sau^ only a poor,
naked and beggarly supposition to stand upon, it follows not that going to
Church is the note of a Schismatike, but not going to Church rather argues a
Schistike or an Heretic.

The fourth Reason.
THE fourth cause, why a Catholic may not go to the Church, is 4. ^. (...)
because it is Schism, and breaking of the unity of the Catholic Church,
the which how perrillous and dreadsul a thing it is, all catholics do
sufficiently know. For as they firmly believe, that to oppugn Vide Aug. tom.
de Fi. and simb. ca. 10.
the visible known Church of Christ (as all Heretics tontinually do) is a
very wicked and damnable sin: Even so in like manner they believe that to
break the unity of the same Church, and to make any rent or disuion in the
same (which is the proper fault of schismatikes,) is also damnable. For the
which cause Saint Paul does so diligently request the Corinthians too avoid
Schisms, saying. ( beseech 1. Cor. 1.
you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you al say one thing
and that there be no schisms amongst you, And to the Ephesians, Be you
careful to ke^pe vnit^e of spirit in the Ephesians. 4.
bond of peace. The which unity, Christ himself expresses more
particularly, and more distinctly, when he requesteth of his Father, That his
Christians might be one, as he and his father were one: that is to Joan. 17.
say, that as he, and his father, did agree in all their actions: and
whatsoever the one did, the other also did: So in his church there should be
one only form of belief, one form of service, one form of Sacraments,
Ephesians. 2. 4. 1. Cor. 10. 12. 1. Timo. 2.
and the like: even as there is (according to Paul) one Baptism one bread,
one faith, one church, one Christ, one Lord, one body, one heaven, one hope
of reward, the breaking of which unity of the church of God, has been
always accounted a most grievous, and damnable offense. For as Irenaeus a most
ancient and godly father says, They which cut and disseuer the unity of the
Church, shall have the same punishment Irene. li. 4. ca. 43.
that (...) had. This punishment, we know to have been the utter destruction
and ex^yrpation of him and all his name. But other Fathers do exaggerate this
sin farther: For Saint Augustine in his 3. Reg 4.
book which he made of the unity of the Church, says thus. Whosoever do
agree, to all the holy Scriptures touching the head of the August. de Unit.
Eccle. cap 4.
Church ( ^hiche is Christ) and yet do not communicate with the unity of
the Church, they are not in the Church. And a little after, he expounds
what he means by communicating with the How grievous the sin of (...) is
unity of the church, which is. That their communion be with the whole
body of Christ his Church, dispearsed over the whole world, and not with any
one part separate, or else it is manifest, that they are not ( says he) in the
catholic church.

Now S. Cyprian in his book of the simplicity of Prelates, or unity Cyp.
de. simpli. Prel.
of the church, goes further, for he proves that if a man did live never so
virtuously otherwise, nay, if he should give his life, and shed his blood,
for Christ: yet if he were out of the unity of the church, he could not be
saved: for that as he says. This spot or sin ( the breaking of the unity of
the church) cannot be washed away with any blood. The which saying of S.
Cyprian, the learned father Chrysostom after Cyprians Chris. ho. II. in epist
ad. Ephesians.
death, does repeat and confirm. Adding these words.

There is nothing does so provoke GOD as the division of the Church. And
albeit we should do innumerable good deeds, yet notwithstanding we shall be
punished as grievously as they were which did rende Chri^te his own flesh and
body, if we disseuer in pieces the full (...) and unity of the Church. And
finally he concludes thus. I do here, say, and protest, that it is no less
sin to cut and break the Sea more of (...) greatne^ of (...) sin.
unity of the Church, then it is to fall into heresy. And thus much I
thought good too say, (leaving infinite other things that might be Aug. ep.
50. 152. Ser. 181. de Tem. in Psalm. 88. Fulg. li. de, F^. ca. 3^ 38. 39. Greg.
lib. 14. Mor.
said) touching the greenousnesse of this sin of schism, whereby many of
our bad catholics in England, may see in some part, the miserable dangerous
case wherein they stand, by sleeping so careless as they do, in this sin,

But now that this act of going to the Protestants churches and prayers, is a
schismatic act, and such a one, as divides from the unity of the church:
it is easy too be proved for that schism is according That going to church
is (...).
too Saint Augustine, A separation of them that think the same thing. That
is, a different kind of service of God in those Lib. 2. cont. Cresco. ca. 3.
men that do not differ in opinion in religion. The which thing, he expresses
more plainly in an other place, putting the difference betwixt heretics The
definition of Scisme.
and sehismatikes, saying. Schismatikes are made, not by difference in Aug. q.
11. in Mat.
faith, or belief, but by the breaking of the society, or unity of
Communion. Now the Communion or unity of the church, consists in these The
difference betwixt an her^tike and a s^smatike. Unity of the Church stander^
in three things especially.
three things: to wit, that al Christians have one sacrifice: one and the
self same Sacraments: also one and the self same service of God. But they
which go to the Protestants churches, have no sacrifice at al: neither have
they any more then two of seven sacraments: and those two also so mang^d, that
of the two, scarce one is a sacrament, as they use them. And as for their
service, it has no part of the catholic service, as I will show hereafter.
He therefore that goes to this service, and willingly separateth himself from
the catholic service and Communion breaks the unity of Communion of the
church, and consequently, commits schism,

But some man perhaps will say, I do it not willingly, but I go to An
objection of cold Catholics, with the answer
Church by constrainte of the publiquela was of my Realm? I answer, that
here is some kind of constraint external, but not so much Aristo. lib. 3.
Ethico.
as may take away the liberty of thy will, which is internal, as the
Philosopher wisely discourses. For, this constraint, is but conditinall, That
is, either to do that which is commanded: (for example, to go to the
Church) or else to abide this or that punishmente that the Law appoints. The
which penalty. if thou will suffer, thy will is free, to do what thou will.
Neither can any ^ortall power constrain it further. So that such an action as
I have talked of (for example, going Actions extor ted by fear are simply
free actions, and only violent in part.
to the church for the avoiding of temporal loss) is called both the
Philosophers and Divines. Inuoluntaria secundum quid, simpliciter autem
voluntaria. That is: in part or in some respect, vnuoluntarie. But absolutely,
and simply it is to be accounted voluntary. And therefore, they are to be
esteemed good or bad, punishable or rewardable, even as other free actions are:
for otherwise, no sin should be punishable. Seeing every naughty action
commonly has some kind Mark "these absurdities.
of compulsion in it, but yet it may not be excused thereby. As for example,
the murderer may say that he did it not willingly, for that he was compelled
thereunto by rage of anger. And the Lecherer may say, his flesh compelled him
to sin: and to take fitter example for our purpose: all those that denied
Christ in time of persecution for fear of torments, might by your
objection, say that they did it not willingly but by compulsion of torments,
and therefore were not to be damned for it. But yet Christ said, that he
would take it as done voluntarily, and therefore damn them for it, by
deniyng them openly before his Father, and his Angels, at the day of
judgment. Mat. 10. Luc. 12. lo. 12.
And yet to give an other example nearer to our matter: Saint John says of
the noble men and Gentlemen of Jury in his time. Many of the principal men
did believe in Christ, but they did not confess him outwardly for fear of
the Pharisees least they should be cast out of the Sinagogue, for they did
love more the glory of men then the glory of God.

Here we see the act of these noble men and Gentlemen: also the compulsion to
the act, the cause of their compulsion, and lastly Saint John's judgment upon
the act. The act whereof they are accused is only holding their peace, and not
confessing Christ openly, according as they did inward ly believe of him: The
cause or excuse that they had to lay for themselves, was the fear of the
Pharisees or Magistrates which compelled them against their will so to do. Now,
what punishment they feared at the Pharisees What a great matter it is amongst
the (...) to be cast out of the (...).
hands S. John expresses, saying, that it was. Least they should be cast out
of their Synagogue. The which punishment was then, and is now at this day,
amongst the Jews, the greatest punishment, besides death, that can be devised.
For he loses thereby al offices, dignities, and credit whatsoever: no man may
buy or sell with him: noe man may visit him, or talk with him, or salute him
in the streates. Fynallye, it is a death upon earth (a great and suffycient
excuse a man would think) to answer for a man's silence only. For I see many
a one in England, not only to conceal their own consciences, but also to
speak against the same for a less cause. But what is Saint John's judgment
upon the matter? for sooth he excepteth not the excuse, but condemns them in
a damnable mortal sin, against the first commandment, for doing the same,
saying: That by this silence of theirs they did put the glory of God behind
the glory of men, and thereby showed, that they loved men better then God, Noe
doubt but to their everlasting damnation, except they A (...) given by S. John
against dissembles^ for the time.
heartily repented them. The which I would have those unwise and fond noble men
and gentle men in England to consider, which persuade both themselves and
other men that in these troublesome times, a man may without offense keep his
conscience to him self: but especially those that do not only hold their
peace, but also do against their conscience, what soever is commanded them,
saying, that all which is A bad shift of dissemblers.
done amiss shall not belayde upon them, at the day of judgment, but upon the
Prince and the Magistrates, which compel the^ to do the same against their
own wills. But what compulsion this is, and how furre it shall excuse their
doings, I have now declared. Wherefore hereafter let no man say, that he goes
to church against his will, thinking thereby to excuse him self from schism.

Besides this, to prove it schism, yea and that obstinate and rebellyous
schism, it were sufficient to know that the meaning, will, and commandment,
of the general and universal Catholyke Church at this day, is, that
catholyke men should not present them selves to Protestants churches, or
conuenticles, seeing they are denounced open enemies to the aforsayd church,
and their relygion has been as orderly condemned in the lastgeneral counsel
of Trent, As the doctrine of Arrius was, in the first general counsel of
Nyce. And albeit the council of Trent made no particular decree of this
matter, yet is there no cause, why any Can. Apost. 63. 44 45. apud Eus li. 7.
cap. 9.
man should take any hold thereat: seeing the reason thereof was because
such a decree was needelesse: for the church having already condemned from
the beginning all praying with Heretics, or repayring to their conuenticles:
it was sufficient for the counsel only to condemn the Protestants for such
men, without any further particular prohibiting of others to come to their
churches, and seru^ce, seeing their conuenticles being once pronounced to be
heretical, the other was to be presupposed. And this is the true meaning of
the counsel, whatsoever What the council of Tr^t determined against going to
Church.
other say, to shadow their imperfections.

Howbeit, some doubt being at that time, moved by certain of the Nobility of
England: whether they might not lawfully without offense go to church to do
some mere temporal act (as, to bear the sword before her Majesty or the
like) it was debated by xij. learned men there, at the counselles appoyntement*
and determination then given, that only for such a cause, they might go to
church. As for example, if her Majesty should appoint certain catholics, to
meet at Poules, to intrea^ of matters of the state, and that at such time as
service were said there: 4. Reg. 5.
and this was Naaman Syrus his case flat: who was permitted (as most The case
of Noaman Sirus.
men take it) for a time, to go with his King and hold him upon his
shoulder, when he went to the temples of the Idolles. Now, that there Can.
Apost. 63.
has been a general custom, rule, and canon of the church, prohibiting to
go to the churches and conuenticles of heretics, it is plain, by the
testimony of all antiquity. The Apostles themselves in their threescore and
third canon, say thus. If any man either of the clergy, or lai^e, do go
into the Synagoge of the Jews or into conuenticles of heretics The old Canon
for bidding to go to heretical churches
to pray, let him be deposed, and excomunicated. This canon of the church, was
exactly afterward kept, and is mentioned very often, by the Fathers and
counselles, by occasion of the like matter. As for The example of Origin.
example, when Origin was by a certain necessity, compelled to dwell in house
together with one Paul, an heretic, to whom there resorted often, not only
heretics, but some simple Catholics also for the fame of his excellent
eloquence: yet they write of O^igen. That h^ Eusebius. li. 6. hist. cap. 3.
Niceph. li. 5. cap. 4.
could never be induced, by any means to be present at prayers where Paul
was. And the reason is put down by them to be this. For that Orygen even from
his youth had kept and observed most diligently the Canon of the Church.

Here we see what account was made in those days, of this Canon of the
church.

Furthermore S. Dionysius Alexandrinus a learned Father, talkinge The (...) H^.
of one Heraclas Bishop of Alexandria, and scholar of the aforesaid Origin,
and showing how the said Heraclas, had excommunicated and cast out of the
church certain christians, for that they were accused Eusebius. (...). 6. cap.
12. and (...) cap. 9.
to have used much company of a certain heretic: he adds this saying,
This Canon, and this example have I re^aued of our holy Father Heraclas. The
like observation of this Canon is noted in Athanasius: who coming to Antioche,
fled the common and public Churches which were usurped then, by one
Leontius, an Arian Bishop, and his clergy: and seeking out the Catholyques
that were in the city, which then by contempt were called Eusta^hians,
because they held of the communion of their catholic deposed Bishop, named
Eustathius (as catholyques now in England are contemptiouslye Sozo. li. 3*
cap. 9. Theol. li. 1. cap. 14.
called Papists, for holding of the communion of the Bishop of Rome) and
finding them out, did secreetelye communicate with them, as says the
history. Conuen^uin aedibus priuatis peracto. That is. Making their assembly
or Chnrche, in their private houses. Howelyke is this case, to our state now
adays in England? The like respect to this canon The example of (...).
of the church, had Alexander by shop of Constantinople, who wished rather
to die, then to remain in the church, when Arius the heretic, should come
to the same. To this canon had also respect, the people of Alexandria, so much
commended by Athanasius him self, who The example of the ^ople of Alexandria.
would rather pray together by them selves in the church yard without co^r,
the enter into the church to pray, where George the Aryan Theo. li. 2. cap. 14.
bishop was. The like consideration had also the people of Samosatum, who
after the deprivation of their virtuous and catho^ke The people of ^mosatum.
bishop Eusebius, and the thrusting into his place, by the Aryans of an
heretical bishop called Ennomius: they would no more come at the church of
whom (...) writes thus. None of the inhabitants there poor Theo. li. (...).
cap. 14.
or rich, servant or artificer, husbandman or grafter man or woman, young or
old, would come to the Church, but the Bishop was there alone, for no man
would either come to his sight, or talk with him, albeit he was reported to
have used him self very modestlye, amongst The example of the people of Rome.
them. Nay yet further then this, the people of Rome having their true
catholic bishop deposed by the Aryans, and an other called Felix, thruste
upon them, not an heretic, but a schismatique, (for the history says, that
he was sound in faith and held soundlye the relygion set down in Theo. li. 2.
capit. 17.
the counsel of Nyce,) yet because he was a schismatique, and was content to
take holy orders of the Arian Bishops, and to communicate with them: the
whole people (as I said) did fly him, and as the history says. None of the
inhabytants of Rome, would enter into the church, so long, as he was within.
Thus we see, the scrupulositie of chrystian Catholykes in those days, and
that, (as they thought) upon good cause, for the avoiding of schysme. If any
man can show me a warrant since that time, for the enlarging of our
consciences now a days, I would gladly see it.

You have heard in the beginning of this reason, the opinions of our
forefathers, in the primative church, what a great and heinous sin it is, to
break the unity of the church, or to disobey the same. Again, it is
certain, that the church tells us, (if the voices of all the Bishops and
learned men in christendom and of the supreme Pastor too, be the voice of
the church) that goeing to Protestants churches, is forbidden The conclusion
of this reason.
us, what excuse then, shall those men have from obstinate schism, that
notwithstanding all this, will yet think it lawefull: especially, the Mat. 18.
Aug. li. 1. con tra aduers. leg, and prophe. ca. 17. Math. 16.
thing being now in practice, and so many men suffering for the same?
Assuredlye ^hey can look for no other account to be made of them, but as
Christ wills us. If he hear not the Church, let him be to thee as an
heathen, and as a Publican. The which words S. Austen says. Are more grieous
and terrible, then if he had said: let him be strooken with a sword, let him
be consumed with the flames of fire, let The dreadful (...) of (...).
him be devoured of wild beasts.

And a little while after, talking of the band wherewith the church may^ bind
a man's sins by authority given unto her of Christ, he says. A man is
bound more bitterlye, and more infortunately, by the keys of the Church,
then by any other most gr^uous and barde bands, albeit they were of iron, or
of adamant stone. Le^ cold catholykes in Englandemarke this, and not think
they are free, when they are in these bands: nor think they are christians,
when in deed they are Heathens, and Publycans. It is a natural infirmity of
ours, to think willingly to well of our own case: and passion permits us
not to judge indifferently in these matters. Let us therefore consider of other
men's cases, and by them conie^ure of An (...) for (...)*
our own. If in Saint John Chrysostom his time, when there was an Arrian
church, and a catholic Church, known in Constantinople, and both of these
churches, calling people unto them, and the Emperor favoring more the Arrians
then the catholics: if (I say) in that case, some catholics leaving Saint
Chrisostomes church, should have gone to Note this (...)*
the Arrians churches to service, upon obedience to the Emperor: what would
we think of them now? would we esteem them damned schismatikes or not, If
they had dyed so, considering their disobedience to the Bishop, and their
perfideous betraying of Gods catholic cause in that time of trial? I think
yes. Then let us not deceive our selves, for this is our ease now. And if in
all men's judgments, that act would have seemed Schism (for disobeying one
particular and private Bishop, and breaking from his commnnion) what shall we
say for disobeying the General Pastor of all? and breaking from his
communion? Of whom, the noble Martyr of Christ Saint Cyprian, above thirteen
hundred years agone, said thus. Heresies and Schisms have sprung of none
other (...). ep. 55. ad Cornel.
cause, then for that men do not obey Gods Priest, and for that they do not
think or consider that there is one only Priest who is judge in A notable
discourse of S. Cipryan for obeying one general Pastor.
Christ's steed for the time. Unto whom if all the universal brotherhood
would obey in divine functions, no man would move any thing against the
College of Priests, neither after the judgment of God, the suffrage of the
people, the Bishops consent once put down, in any matter, would any man dare
to make himself a judge of the Bishop, and consequently of GOD: nor by
breaking Unity, tear and rent the Church of Christ.

The fourth Reason.
THE fourth cause why a catholic may not go to the church (says he) is
because it is sin, and breaking of the unity of the catholic church. And
then discourses at large, how perilous it is to break the Unity of the
Church, and how needful to keep it, in which Argument he has all true
Christians to take his part, saving that he seems to urge this unity so
far, that in the Church of Christ, there should be not alone one only form
of belief, but also One form of service, one form of Sacraments. For which
he quoteth. Ephesians. 2. 4. If he mean of one essential and substantial form
of Sacraments and Service, I do willingly admit that he says, but if he
speak of one external ^orme in words and ceremonies, as for example, that
which the Popish Church does use. Saint Paul neither in the place by him
noted, nor any^ where else, teaches that it is necessary to be in the whole
Church of Christ, neither was it in ancient times, but every Church^ used
such form of prayers and administration of the Sacraments, as they thought
most convenient, whereof not only so many differing forms of Ly^urgies, yet
extant, but almost all the Ancient Writers are witnesses. Neither at this day
is there in all Churches of Christ, one form of service and Sacraments, no
not in the Popish Church, wherein how many diversities of services, there
are in other places, it is to be gathered by so many differing forms, as were
here in England, according to the use of Sarum, of York, of Rome, or of
Hereforde. Neither did Gregory, when he sent Augustine into England, to
plant the faith and religion that was at Rome, think it expedient Bid. lib.
1. cap. 27.
to bind the Saxons to the form of Ceremonies and service, used in the Church
Romayne, but willed him to choose out of every Church what he thought
convenient, for the new Church of the English Saxons.

But proceeding to show how grievous the sin of Schism is De unit. eccl.
cap. 4.
out of Augustine, our reasoner puts us in mind, what Augustine means by
communicating with the unity of the Church, in these words, That their
Communion be with the whole body of Christ's Church dispersed over the whole
world, and not with any one part separate, or else it is manifest, that they
are not (says he) in the Catholic Church. Uerely, these words of Saint
Augustine, with many other that he has to the same effect against the
Donatistes, do clear us of Schism, who willingly communicate with all the
whole body of Christ's Church dispersed over the world, and charge the
Popish faction both of Schism and heresy: Of Schism, because they
maintain the Church to be only in a part of Europa. As the Donatists did in
Asia, which heresy* because they differ not only in the body of Christ,
which is his Church, as the Ephe. 5. etc.
Donatistes did, but also in the head thereof, which is none but Christ borne,
suffered, risen again, and ascended in heaven, that he might be the only head
Savior, Redeemer, of his spouse and Advocate of his Church with GOD his
Father. But now that this act of going to the Protestants Churches and
prayers is a Schismatical act and such a one as deuideth from the unity of the
church, it is easy (says he) to be proved. If you have such facility in
proving, I trust you will no more charge us with your necessary suppositions.
Then let us see what you say. Schism according to Saint Augustine, is a
separation of them that think the same thing. That is a Lib. 2. cont. Creson.
ca. 3.
different kind of service of GOD in those men that do not differ in
opinion of religion. Once again a little more Logic would do you good, too
teach you too expound things uttered generally by speech as general, and
not as you dee hear by particular: For Augustines general term of
separation, you restreine to a different kind of service of GOD, as though
there might not be scisme, where there is one, and the same kind of service
of GOD acknowledged. But let us see the difference also that Augustine makes
betwixt an here^ike and a scismatike, Scismatikes are made, not by differing in
faith or belief, but by the breaking of the society or unity of the
communion. Hitherto we dissent not in the matter for we allow both the
description and the difference, being understood according to Augustines
meaning, which every wise and good man, will think to be such, that the crime
of scisme and name of Scismatiks, Aug. quest. 11. in Mat.
must be appropried not to every one that departs from any sect but to them
only, which depart from the Church of the living GOD. How then does our
discourser prove, that we are not in the Communion of the Church of God? The
communion or unity of the church (says he) consists in these three things,
To wit that all Christians have one Sacrifice, one and the self same
Sacraments also one and the self same service of God. Let us search the ground
of this foundation. First, if he mean that all Christians have one Sacrifice
Heb 10. (...)*
Propitiatory, it is true. For by one Sacrifice once offered, he has made
perfect for ever them that are sanctified. With which only Sacrifice and once
oblation thereof, seeing the Papists are not content by this rule, they are
^ounde too be without the compass of true Christians, and the Communion of
Gods Church. But if by one Sacrifice, he means but one sacrifice in all, the
principle is false, for Christians beside ye only propitiatory sacrifice of
Christ's death, have y^ sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving of with there are
many kinds. That al Christians must have (...) sel^ame* sacraments, it is
cleerer, then that it need any probation.

But concerning the third thing which is one and the self same service of God,
if it be understood of the substance, either of the internal and proper
woorship of God, which is in spirit and verity, or of the external manner of
serving of God, which must be directed John. 4.
according to the holy Scriptures, it is very true, and thereby our Church may
be discerned, to be the company of true Christians, which detest the
intolerable multitude of bodily ceremonies and shadows, wh^with the popish
service is full fraught and in a manner only consists of them, and admits
in the whole order of ministration and prayers nothing as necessary to the
service of GOD, but that which it finds warrant^d by the holy Scriptures.

Whereas ye popish service is pa^ched of profane Lege^ds, and Fabulus reports
of prayers to creatures, not meet for the service of the Creator, and if it be
divided into ten parts, bestows seven at the least in the service of
creatures* rather then the Creator which is to be woorshipped for ever,
directly contrary to the Law of God, and commandment of Christ: Thou shall
worship the Lord thy Deuteronomy. (...). Math. 4. 10.
God, and him only shall thou serve. Otherwise if by one and the selfsame
service of God he mean the external form of prayers and administration of
the sacraments necessary for all christians I have showed the vanity of his
assertion before. The principles thus vewed, let us behold the application. But
they which go to the protestants churches, have no sacrifice at all: neither
have they any more then two of seven sacraments, and those two also so mangled,
that of the two scarce one is a sacrament, as they use the^. And as for their
service it has no part of the catholic service as I will show herafter. If this
assu^ptio^ be true, they ye go to ye Protestants service, break ye unity of
ye communion of the Church, and commit schism. But if this be showed to be
utterly false, what harm is it to go to the Protestants service? First
concerning the Sacrifice which he affirms they have none at all, It is a
manifest untruth, for they have the daily sacrifice of praise and
thankesgeuing, which Malachie prophecieth, should be offered among the
Gentiles, from the rising of the sun, unto the going down of the same,
which Sacrifice of I^stinus Deuteronomy. cum Tryphon. cont. Indeos.
praise and thankesgeuing, as Justinius Martyr testifies, are the only
sacrifices which Christians have received to offer. Wherefore the Papists which
pretend to offer another sacrifice* and of an other kind, namely,
Propitiatory, by Justinius his judgment, agreeyng with the holy Scriptures,
are no true Christians. That we have but two Sacraments, it is sufficient,
seeing two only are left into the Church by Christ, as is necessarily
collected out of Saint Paul. 1. Cor. 10. Where intending to prove that the
Israelites were equal unto Christians in the external tokens of Gods favor,
he names only baptism, and the Lords supper wherein he had reasoned very
unskillfully, if of seven he should have left out but five. The fewest number
of Sacraments, is allowed also by S. Augustine, and the church in his Aug.
Ep^. 118. I^.
time, which he names to be baptism and the Lords Supper, which only are
found in the scriptures. And where he charge us with mangling of the
sacraments, which we have, so that of two, we have scarce one, it proceeds
of meruellous impudency, seeing we say and do whatsoever Christ and his
Apostles said and did, and commanded to be said, and done, in the
administration of them. Whereas the Papists with most horrible sacrilege, by
confession of Gelasius bishop of Rome, cited in their Cannon law, do mangle
one and the same mystery, as he speaks, depriving the lay people, clean of
the cup of Christ's blood, Mat. 26.
which he in express words, commands to he drunk of all men. And
Saint Paul by his authority charge every man after due examination, as
well to drink of that cup 1. Cor. 11. (...).
as to eat of that bread of the Lord woorthily. As for our service when he
brings any arguments (as he promises) to prove that it has no part of
the Catholic service, he shall receive his answer and our defense
accordingly. Hitherto therefore, although with many whot words, he has
concluded nothing against us, at length he comes to answer an objection of
cold Catholics, as he calls them, which are, that they go not too the
Church willingly, but by constraynt of the Public Laws of the Realm.

And here out of Aristotle's Ethickes Lib. 3. The Act of going to Church, is
proved voluntarye because the constraynt is conditional, either to do that
is commanded, or too bear that punishment that the Law appoynteth. Where is
then the sore charge against them, that compel men against their wills, to
swear to go to Church etc: contained in his Preamble before the first
reason? It is a great force of cunning, of one and the same matter to give a
contrary judgment, as it serves best for your advantage? Now therefore you
would have these unwise and fond noble men and Gentlemen too consider I use
your own terms, that it is a badde shifte of dissemblers To say that he
goes to church against his will, thinking thereby to excuse himself of
Schism.

But beside this to prove it schism, yea and that obstinate and rebellious
Schism it were sufficient to know that the meaning, will and commandment of
the general and universal catholic church at this day, is, that catholic
men should not present themselves at Protestants churches. UUhy Sir, is not
the Pope by your reed the best Interpreter of the Catholic Churches meaning?
And has not he granted diverse dispensations, for Papists to present
themselves in Protestants Churches? But they have been denounced open enemies
(say you) by the Council of Trent, as the doctrine of Arius was condemned in
in the first general Council of Nice. Nay rather as the Homousians were in ye
Council of Ariminium, and in many other Councels of the East. And as the
doctrine of the Catholics, was in the second of Ephesus, Nice the second,
and many other blasphemous and heretical councils: I pass over your slander
of the Nobility of England, by certain of which, you affirm, that the
heretical and schismatic co^uenticle of Trent, was moved, whether they might
not lawfully without offense go to Church, to do some mere temporal Act, as
to bear ye sword before her Majesty, etc. Except you mean of such of the
Nobility, as have openly declared their disloyalty, by entering into rebellion
or otherwise.

But as touching ye forbidding to go to heretical churches, which you labor
so vehemently to prove, yt you father it upon a Cannon of the Apostles
themselves, which must needs be observed. Can. 63 You should have done more
wisely, to have confirmed it, by their Canonical writings, rather then by
those Apocriphall Canons, which if we should receive the^ as authentical, will
prove eue^ your popish churches to be heretical, and your selves to be
Heretics, because you go against many things decreed in those Canons. As ye
you admit no married persons to the office of a priest, or bishop, against the
6. Cano^. That you forbidd any that is maimed or imperfect in body to be a
bishop against the canon, 77. y^ your bishops, priests, deacons, and clergy
are often present at the celebratio^, and yet do not communicate, al which, by
the 8. Canon are excommunicated. But that it is not lawful to pray in the
Conuenticles of heretics, Tit. ^.
it is more clear by the Scriptures, then y^ it needed to be proved by the
example of Origin, of Heraclas, of Athanasius or any other. The example also
of the people of Rome, which refused to communicate with Felix might have
heene spared, but that under color of certain words of Theodoret, you would
have it seem* as though not one of the Inhabitants of Rome, was infected with
Aurianisme. UUheras ye matter is other wise, seeing that Felix, although
himself of the Catholic religion, was chosen bishop by the more part of the
Clergy, and people of Rome, which were of the faction of the Arrians. And
therefore where Theodoret says, that none of the Inhabitants of Rome would
enter into the church so long as Felix was within, it must of necessity be
understood, of the Catholic Inhabitants. For that there was never an Arrian
dwelling at Rome, at such time as Constantius came thither, I think no man but
lightely acquaynted with the hystory of that time, that can be persuaded. But
after that Liberius himself had In Catal.
subscribed to the Arrians, as Saint Hierom writes, and returned after he
had consented too Constantius the Heretic, as Pope In lib. yonti^ cus.
Damasus himself writes, by whom Pope Felix which was a Catholic was
deposed, and great persecution followed: This I say declares, that neither the
head nor the body of the Church of Rome, was in that time free from the here^e
of the Arrians. Insomuche that Constantius held there a counsel with
Heretics, together with Vrsutius and Valens, as the same Damasus writes, and
cast o^t Felix o^t of his Bishopric, which was a Catholic and called back
Liberius. Now come we to the conclusion of this reason, where he gathers by
the opinions of the Forefathers, how great a sin it is, to break the unity
of the Church, or to disobey the same. But not content with this conclusion,
which is true, he adds a false position, without proof, saying It is
certain that the Church tells us, (if the voices of all the Bishops and
Learned men in Christendom and of the supreme pa^our to, be the voice of
the church,) that the going to Protestants churches, is forbidden us. The
certeyntie of this Assertion, depends upon the necessity of truth, in his
first supposition. But he adds an exception, if the voices of all the Bi^ops
and learned men in Christendom, etc, be the voice of the Church. But I
suppose that all the bishops in Christendom have not given their voices y^
way. For none of the Bishops, of the Protestants, would give their voices,
to condemn their own Church. And many hundredth Bishops of the Oriental
Churches in Europe, Africa and Asia, never heard of the controversy between
the Papists an^ Protestants, wherefore they could never give their voices to
condemn them, whose cause they never understood of. But let it be another
supposition that there are noe bishops, but such as are members of the
Antichristian Church of Rome: except you will add the third necessary
supposition, that al learned men be Papists, or that no Protestants are
learned men, you have not proved, that the going to the Protestants Church is
forbidden by the Church. And because you speak of the voice of the Supreme
Pastor of the Church, except you bring the voice of Christ, your argument is
to weak, to condemn the Protestants Church. For Saint Peter teaches us,
that Christ is (...) the Supreme Pastor of his Church which has no fellows
in office: but that the Pope should be the general Pastor of all, whose
Communion it is not lawful to break He cyteth a place out of Cyprian. epi.
55. ad Cornel. Heresies and Schisms have sprung of none other cause, the^ for
that men do not obey Gods Priest. And for that they do not think or con^der,
y^ there is one only priest, who is judge in Christ's steed for ye time: Unto
whom if all the universal brotherhood would obey, in divine functions no man
would move any thing against the Colle^ge, of priests, neither after ye
judgment of God, the suffrage of the people, y^ bishops consent once put down
in any matter, would any man dare to make himself a Judge of the Bishop, and
consequently of God: nor by breaking vnit^e, tear or re^t the Church of
Christ. To this authority I answer, that except you will add a fourth
supposition: that Cyprian speaks of one bishop in all the world, which
he says of one bishop in every Dioces, it makes as much for the Bishop of
Rochester, as for the Bishop of Rome. For the whole argument of the Epistle
declares, that he speaks of herelickes and scismatikes, that in scisme were
made bishops in his own Church, and in other men's Churches, and when they were
of them rejected, or for their crimes deposed, sought approbation of the Bishop
of Rome, and other Prelates beyond the sea. As his words are manifest. Post
ista adhuc insuper, After these things, having made them a false Bishop by
heretics, they dare be bold to sail, beyond the Sea, and to carry profane
letters from Schismatiks, unto the Chair of Peter, and that principal
Church, from whence the unity of priestood arose, and not to consider that
they are Romans, whose faith is praised by the commendation of the Apostle,
to whom false dealyng can have none access. Again, he says: Neque
rescindere, etc. Neither can it undo the ordination rightly made, that
Basilides after his crimes detected, and his conscience made bare by his own
confession, travailing to Rome, deceived our fellow Bishop Stephanus,
dwelling far off, and being ignorant of the matter, as it was done, and of
the truth that he should ambytiously seek to be restored into his
Bishopprick, from which he was justly deposed, etc. Finally, it is worth
nothing, for he falsifieth the words of S. Cyprian in translation, Post
Coepiscoporum consensum, which is after the consent of the fellow Bishops,
which he terms The Bishops consenrors once put down, as though Cyprian spoke
still of that one Bishop, which is to be obeyed in every Church, as this man
s^rmiseth in the whole Church.

The fifth Reason.
THe fyfte reason, wherefore a Catholyke may not go to the 5. (...).
church of those of the contrary relygion, is, for fear least his presence
may be interpreted by GOD to be consent unto their doing: and so he be
made partaker of their punishment. Concerning which we must understand,
that of all the enemies that GOD has in this world, there is none in so
heyghe displeasur^ with him, as he who once knoweing the truth, and beeinge
receau^ into his house (the catholic church) runs out again, and 1. Tim.
3. 2. Cro. 11* Ephesians. 5. 1. Cor. 12. Colos. 1.
by new devised doctrines, vexes and molesteth the same, being not only the
house (as I have said) of Christ, but also his spowse, nay, his own body.
Which sort of men, the scripture calls, Heretics: whose curse and
reprobation in this life is more grievous then any other sin whatsoever and
the damnation for the time to come more intolerable. How grievous a (...) is.
For that as S. Peter says, It had been better for them never to have known
the way of righteousness, then after they knew it, 2* Pet. 2.
to turn back again. And these are those men, of whom Christ said, that one
devil going forth in their first coming to the faith by Baptism, Luck. 11.
he afterward entered again with seven other diuelles worse then him self,
and so made the end of that man, worse then Tit. 3.
his beginning. And Saint Paul gives a maroeilous severe judgment upon them,
when he says, That Heretics, are subverted, and S. Paul's discrip^ion of an
Here^ke expounded.
do sin, and are damned by their own judgments. First he says, that
they are subverted, or overthrown, because they are blotted out of the book
of life: Secondlye, that their whole life, is sin upon sin: because they are
utterly deprived of God his grace, without the which we can do nothing but
sin. Thirdly he says, they are damned by their own judgments, either for
that they chose wittingly to leave the catholic church: (out of the which
they knew there was no salvation) or else because the most of them do know
that they do amiss, and yet for pride they will not come back. So that every
way, their case is very pitiful Uide Aug. inpsal. 54. Cyp. ep. 76. Amb. li.
de incar. ca. 2. Romans 16. Mat. 7. 2. Tim. 2. Aug. in psalm. 39. Aug. li. 2.
^ont. aduer, cap. 12.
and lamentable.

This point the holy Fathers of the Church do oftentimes handle very
seriously and grauelye, proving, that Heretics more offend God, and are
infarre worse state, then any offendour else in the world: and namely, more then
either Jew or Gentyle. For the which cause, they note that the new Testamente
byddeth us not to beware of Jews and Gentiles, but of Heretics in many
places. The reason is, for that they are those wolves, which Christ foretold
us should come in sheep skins: which as S. Augustine says, shall pretend to
be very good sheep, and friends to Christ and to his sheepefolde: and yet
with Christ his own words, they shall teach you to deny Christ, to tear
the sheepefold in pieces, and to disperse the sheep. Nay, they shall sleye
more souls with the word, then ever Tyrants did with the sword. Again, S.
Austine proves at large in a^ other place, that Heretics are those
Antichrists, of whom S. John spoke, when he said. That many Antichrists are
(...). John. 2.
now gone out: Meaning of Simon Magus, Cerinthus, and other Heretics of his
^yme. Of which Antichrists he says, that S. Paul did pronounce that
terrible saying, that they were. The men of sin, the 2. These. 2.
Children of destruction. As who would say, that albeit all other noughtie men
were in wrapped with the guilte of sin, and of their own destruction: yet
those men above all others, for their eminente wicked^es, were properly to be
called the men of sin: and in respect of their heinous sin of slayeing of
souls, and the heavy sentence abiding them for the same, they were peculiarlye
to be called, the children of perdition and damnation.

This therefore being so, that the deep displeasure of God, and his heavy
hand hangs moreover the heads of Heretics and Schismatickes, then over
any other people in the world: it is no small danger, for a man to join him
self with them, especially in the act, wherein Heretik^s off^ God most in
(...) service.
principally they offend God: which is, in their assemblyes, services, false
teachinges and preachinges: at which times GOD his curse is like Romans 1.
most abundantly to discende upon them, and upon thosealso that do assiste A
vain excuse of (...) confuted.
them. For as S. Paul says, They are worthy of death, not only that do
evil, but they also which do consent unto them. And that thou may not excuse
they self, and say: I am there in body, but I consent not to John. 2.
them in heart: S. John expresses farther, what it is to consent unto them, or
to communicate with them in their works, saying. He that says as much as
God speed them, does communicate ( or participate) with them in their
noughtie works. Which thing the Prophet David knew Psalm. 25.
well, and therefore said, that he would not so much as sit down with ^uch
men, and obiecteth the contrary fault to a wicked man saying: When Psalm. 49.
thou saw a thief, thou wast content to run with him: He does not
accuse him, you see for stealing with him, but for going or runninge with him,
and for keeping him company, albe it he consented not to his robbery. And S.
Paul commanded Timothy, not to consent to Alexander 2. Tim. 4. Romans 6.
the Heretic, but to avoid him. Likewise he commanded the Romans, not to
consent to other such like fellows, but to decline or turn away from them.
Finally, saint Paul's words are general and plain of Tit. 3.
al such men, when he says. Hereticum hominem deuita. Avoid an Heretical man:
He says not (go to church with him) but believe him not, o^ consent not to
him in thy heart. This is our interpretation foisted in, thereby to boulster up
our own dissimulation, wherein we presume farther, then we shall be able
one day to justify: As that foolish Prophet did 3. Reg. (...)
which being sent to preach in Schismatical Samaria (but not to eat with them)
ventred farther then his commission, and by persuasion did eat with one, who
said him self to be as good a Prophet of GOD, as the other (as the
Protestants do say them selves to be good Catholykes) but this venturous
Prophet was slain by God for his labor.

It is very perilous to be amongst the enemies of GOD. If Lot he had
stayed but two hours longer in Sodom, he had dyed with the rest. The
terrible death of al them which were in company with those three rebellyous
Schismatiques, Chore, Dathan, and Abyron, ought to move us much: of which
number, it is to be thought* many were simple and ignorant men and had
little part of m^lyce and noughtie meaning, Genesis 19.
of their ringeleaders: but yet for companyes sake, all peryshed The company of
Heretics (...) it is.
together. The which example, S. Cyprian applies to our purpose, asking of us,
if these men so peryshed for being only in company with Cyp. ep. 76.
those Schismatiques? Are not we affrayde to be much more punished A notable
saying against our Sc^ismatiques. S. (...) afraid of the* company of (...)
heretyque.
( says he) assisting and furthering ( by our presence) heretical
oblations, prayers, sermons, and errors. S. John the dearly beloved of our
Savior, had as much cause to presume of his masters favor, as we have, and
yet he durst not, so much as stay in the bath, to wash together with
Cerinthus the heretic. For so he says. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 22.
Let us flee from hence, least the bath fall upon us, in the which Cerinthus
the enemy of truth is. M^rke, how he was not only affrayd least the bath
would fall but also least that it should fall upon him for keeping the other
company. What if any Prince should have willed S. John to have come to
Cerinthus his service, prayers, and sermons? If the histories report that the
Apostles and their Disciples would not, so much as talk or reason the matter
with any of the heretics of their time, but fled their company for fear,
least some part of their punishment, should light upon them: what wise man
now, will dare to (...) this (...).
go to their prayers and assemblies? To conclude, I would wish every man to
consider the admonition of the Angel of God to christians, Niceph. li. 3. cap.
30. Ap^. 18.
talking of all wicked congregations under the name of Babylon. And I heard an
other voice from heaven, saying, go out my people from her, to the end that
you be not partakers of her sins: and to the end you do not receive of her
scourges: because her sins are come up to heaven, and God has now remembered
her wickedness. Mark how he says. To the end that you do not receive of her
scourges. And yet, it is certain, that the people of God did not consent in
heart, to the wickedness of this place, which they are bidden h^reto flee, but
on ly were present there, and yet we see, how dangerous it was to them to be
partakers (...) the punishment, (...) God of his goodness had not remo^ed them
out.

The fifth Reason.
THe fifth reason he calls in the Margent, participation, but in the text,
he sets it down in these words The fif^ reason wherefore a catholic may
not go to the church of those of the contrary religion, is for fear least
his presence may be interpreted of God, to be consent unto their doing: and so
he be made partaker of their punishmente, If the doings of the Protestants in
their Church were naught, the Papists coming to it, might be partakers of
their deserved punishment, not by interpretation of their presence to be
consent, which it is not, but by pretending and dissembling to give consent in
outward presence, which they give not in their inward conceit. For it is a
profane and ungodly imagination, (...) ascribe unto God, the interpretation of
a fact, to be other, then the mind of the doer means it: seeing the Lord
knows the thoughts of all men's hearts, and n^de not like men to interpret
their minds, by their outward appeara^ce. The rest of this reason, is spent,
altogether in showing how GOD detesteth Heretics, and punishes them that
have any society with them, which is all true, but that the Protestants are
those Heretics, Antichrists, or Babylon, out of which the faithful are
commanded to flee, it is not by one word attempted too be proved, but
stands wholly upon the first necessary supposition, that truth is falshoode,
and falsehoode is truth, For they cannot be those Heretical Antichrists of
which Saint John speaks, because they acknowledge 1. John. 2.
whole Christ, both in person and office* but the Papists which deny his
office, of only Redeemer, high Priest, lawegiuer, head of his Church,
Mediator, and Advocate for the same, are they of whom Saint John speaks. But
I do not a little muse, 2. These. 2.
why our discourser, (...) the text of Saint Paul in the plural number, The
men of sin, the children of destruction. Whereas the Apostle says, The man
of sin, the child of destruction, and the rest of the Papists, urge the
singular number so far, as that they will not admit the Apostle to speak of
a whole succession, or order of many, but of one only singular man. But hereof,
let him make account to his fellows, why he discenteth from them. Last of al,
concerning the charge, which is given to Gods people, To go out of Babylon,
etc. Least they be partakers of her punishments, which he cites, Apoc. 18. is
diligently to be considered. For if we may find in the Scripture, what is
Babylon, we know from whence to flee. The holy ghost therefore, before he gave
this charge, did first plamely describe the whore of Babylon, the mother of
all abominations of the earth, to be yt City which having seven kings Iren^.
lib. 5 Tertul. aduer Mar. lib. 3. Hier. in prefac. Didym de spiritu. sancto.
August de ciuit. Dei. li. 16. cap. 11. li. 18. ca. 2. etc.
or states of government in succession, is situated upon seven hills: to be
that great City, which in that time of the Revelation, had the kingdom over
the kings of the earth, which by all reason and consent of the most ancient
writers, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Hierome, Augustine, etc. Can be none other, but
the City of Rome, wherefore the spirit of God commanding his Saints to go
out of Babylon. does not bid the Romanistes to go from Protestants, but
contrariwise the Protestants, to go from the Romanistes

The sixth Reason.
THE sixth cause, why a Catholic may not come to church, is, because ^.
Dissimulation.
he cannot come without dissimulation. The which, in matters of conscience and
religion, is treachery to God Almighty, and a very dangerous matter. For as
the worthy father S. Ambrose says. It may be lawful sometimes in a money
matter, to hold thy peace, but in gods Ambro. lib. 2. ^ffi. cap. 24.
cause, where there is danger in communicating with his enemies, to dis semble
only, is no small sin. The reason whereof, is that sore saying of Christ's
own mouth. He that is not with me is against me As though Mat. 22.
he had said, He that dissembleth, and knowing me and my cause to be
oppressed, holds his peace, and defends me not, I will hold him in the
number of my enemies, that are against me. According to the which rule of
Christ S. John (which well knew the inward and secret meaning John. 12.
of Christ) speaking of certain noble men and gentlemen of Jury. The which did
believe in Christ, but durst not confess him openly for fear of the Jews.
Condemns them of a great and damnable mortal sin against the first
commandment for the same saying, that by this act, they showed that they loved
the glory of men, more then the glory of God. By the which example, we see,
that we do wilfully dishonor God, and con sequently, commit damnable treason
against him, when we do for any fear or temporal respect, dissemble our
faith, and hold our peace against Dissemblinge in Religion is (...) against God.
our consciences. The which thing Saint Paul considering, he lays down unto
us a general rule. Ore fit confessio ad salutem, To be saved we must Romans 10.
Aug. de. Fi. and sim. ^ap. 1.
needs confess our faith by mouth, or open speech: upon the which words S.
Austen says. We cannot be saved out of this wicked and malignant world,
except we indeuouring to save our neighbors ( besides believing) do also
profess our faith by mouth, which we bear in our hearts, the which faith of
ours, we must provide by godly and wary watchfulness, that it be not in any
respect hurt or violated, by the craf tie subtlety of Heretics. Note his
admonition, let it not be in any respect The subtlety of Heretics.
violated with crafty subtlety. As for example, by causing a man to yield a
little against his conscience to go once to church, to stay but a little
there, to have service in his own house, or the like: In the which, if a man
might say (as commonly they do say in evil meats) that a little, will do but a
little hurt, it were more tolerable. But seeing the matter stands as it does,
in poisons, whereof every little dram will be thy bane: No marvel though men show
themselves more scrupulous. Hear the judgment of a whole clergy in the
Primative church, and alleged by S. Cyprian the Martyr of Christ, Whereas the
whole mystery of faith, is understood to Cler. Romans apud Cyp. epist. 31.
consist in the confessing of the name of Christ, he that has sought false
sleights for excuse thereof, has now denied it: and he that will seem to have
fulfilled such statutes and laws, as are set forth against the Gospel, in so
doing he has obeyed them in very deed: For as much, as he would have it seem
that he has obeyed them. Here you see now, all Who dissembleth his faith,
(...) it.
dissembling of our faith taken, for denying our faith: and al seeming to be
condemned for doing. The which that old valiant champion of God, Eliazarus, full
well knew, when he rather chose to die, then to seem to eat a peace of flesh
(albeit he did it not in deed) contrary to the law of god. And 2. Match* 6.
the reason he gives for it, is this, It is not fit for our age to feign. O
good Eliazarus, if it were not fit for thy age, to feign or dissemble in
matters of religion, what shall we say of our age, wherein, for many
respects, we are more bound too confess our Lord, and Master, and his
catholic Religion, then thou were? For that we have received more benefits
at his hands, and have seen Luc. 11.
how he confessed us before his enemies and ours, and could not be Bl^sbing
at Christ's ca^se is damnable.
brought by any fear or torment to deny us. Bu^ well, their will be wicked
men, and dissembling christians still: Yet notwithstanding, Gods law must
stand, set down by Christ his own mouth. He that shall blush or be ashamed
of me and my sayings, of him shall the son of man be ashamed, when he shall
come in his majesty, and in the majesty of his Father, and o^ his holy
angels. He does not only say, if we do deny him, but if we do blushe, or
be ashamed to confess him: which consideration made the Apostles, and other
servants of Christ, so peremptorily to proceed in confessing openly their
faith, with what danger soever it were. And S. Paul gives a reason of it, when
he says, (...) be unto me except* I do preach the gospel. That is, except I
confess it, except I set it forth 1. Cor. 9.
what danger bodily soever come thereof. And in the Acts of the Apostles, the
high Priests and Magistrates commanded not the Apostles to Act. 4.
be of their religion, nor yet to come to their service, in their sinagogues,
but only to hold their peace. And that they should not speak or teach any
more in the name of Jesus. But the apostles utterly denied to obey that
co^andement, and in the chapter following, being taken again for not obeying,
were asked in open judgment by the Magistrates thus. We commanded you
straightly to teach no more in this name, and how Act. 5.
chanseth it, that you have filled all Jerusalem with this doctrine. And Peter
answered with the rest of the Apostles, We must rather obey God, then men. As
who should s^y, that if they should have granted to dissemble and not to
speak openly, they should have denied God in obeiyng men more then him.

What if the high Priests and Magistrates should have said unto ^arke this
suppo sition and apply it (...) our time.
them: well, we are content that you live with your conscience, so you keep it
to your selves, and trouble not the state, and so that you will (for obedience
sake) sometime come to our s^agogues showing your selves conformable men to our
proceedings. Nay, what if they should have said: Some of you also, for
outward show, (keeping always your consciences to your selves) must flee this
odious name of Christians, and seem to communicate now and then with us, in
our sacrifices and ceremonies: The manner of dissembling schismat^es lively
expressed.
we are content also, that some of you shall be our officers and Justices of
peace, counselors and the like, so that you will sometimes, (for orders sake)
punish some of those indiscreet fellows of your religion, which cannot be
content to keep their consciences to themselves: so you will also give some
pretty sharp charge in your circuites, sessions, O (...) ^ssembling. this is
done by many in England. Lining to a man's own conscience, by leaving hi^
^eife no conscience.
and assemblies, (always keeping your consciences to your selves) and if some
of you also will some times step up into the Pulpet, and speak three or four
earnest words against this religion, it shall be very grateful unto us,
especially if you will affirm i^ with an oath which we have devised for the
same purpose: and this doing, we assure you, that you shall live quietly to
your own consciences, and we shall account you for good subjects. If, I say,
the Magistrates of Jury at that time should have given to the Apostles and
other Christians this sweet charm: do you think that they could have
abidden to hear it al out, whose hearts did rise and swel at two words only
that they spoke, for the entreating of them to hold their peace? And yet many
a thousand now in England, being as thoroughly persuaded in heart of the truth
of the catholic religion as the Apostles and other Christians at that time
were of theirs, are content notwithstanding, to hear, digest, admit, and
execute, al, or most part of these things recited, contrary to the said
religion. And yet besides all this (which is more to be wondered at) they are not
ashamed to persuade them selves that they shall one day come to that glory
wherein the Apostles now are. But this is desperate presumption. And therefore
we see what Desperate presumption*
a just cause this is, for a catholic to refuse to come to the churches of the
contrary religion.

The sixth reason.
THe sixth cause (he says) why a catholic may not come to church, is because
he cannot come without dissimulation. Therefore, let the Popish Catholic
leave his dissimulation, and become a good Christian, rather then to leave the
Church, and become an obstinate Schismatike. In this reason, as in the rest,
certain leaves are spent in showing, that God abhors dissembling and will
not hold them guiltless, which hold their peace when he is ^ishonoured, and
are ashamed clearly to confess Christ and his truth before men, etc. But
that the going to Protestants Churches, is a denial of Christ, a
dissimulation of his truth, or any such matter, there is nothing at all brought
to prove it. But see I pray you, his ^ditious insinuation, which he makes in
his fond supposition, which he would have to be applied to our time: what if
the high Priests and Magistrates, should have said to Peter and the Astles:
Well we are content that you live with your consciences, so you keep it to
your selves and trouble not the state, and so that you will for obedience sake
sometime come to our Synagogues, showing your selves conformable men to our
proceedinges. Nay, what if they should have said, Some of you also, for
outward show (keeping always your consciences to your selves) must be this
odious name of Christians, and seem to communicate now and then with us, in
our sacrifices, and ceremonies: We are content also that some of you shall be
our Officers and Justices of peace, Councellers and the like, so that you will
sometimes (for order sake) punish some of those indiscreete fellows of your
religion, which cannot be content to keep their consciences to them selves: so
you will also give some pretty sharp charge, in your Circuites, Sessions, and
assemblies (always keeping your consciences to your selves) and if some of you
also wilsometimes step up into the Pulpet, and speak three or four earnest
words against this religion, It shall be very grateful unto us, especially,
if you will affirm it with an oath, which we have devised for the same purpose:
and this doing we assure you, that you shall live quietly to your own
consciences, and we shall account you for good subjects. This traiterous
supposition, which you will us to apply to our time, and note in the Margent,
to be the manner of dissembling Schismatikes, lively expressed, to be done, by
many in England: declares how reverently you think and speak, and would
have ignorant persons to conceive of her Majesty, and the principal Officers
and Magistrates of the realm, that she with them, not only exhorts men to
dissimulation, false meaning and perjury, but also that her Majesty is
content, to have such hypocrites, and false forsworn persons, to be her
Officers, and Justices, yea her Councellers and Prelates of the Church. No
marvel, if you protest of your duetifulnesse, and obedience, which thus
villainously conceive and write of her excellent Majesty, and call her to the
reading of it, which were too intolerable to be judged, of any person of
wisdom and honesty, of how low degree and calling soever he were. It is
hard therefore to sustain a counterfeit person long. For even while you
declayme against dissimulation, you have discovered your self to be an
horrible dissembler.

The seventh reason.
THE seventh reason, why a Catholic may not yield to come to the Naughty
(...).
Protestants churches is, because the service which they use, is naught and
dishonorable to God, and therefore, no man can come to it, or hear it, or
seem to allow of it by his presence, without great offense to God. Neither is
it sufficient to say (as commonly they use to say to beguile simple people
withal) that it is the Scripture, taken out of the Gospels, Epistles, Psalms,
and the like. For by that argument, the Jews service were good at this day,
which is taken out of the old Testament: and al Heretics service that ever
was, seemed to be nothing but Scriptures. For, as Aug. to. 6. cont. Max. li. 1.
initio. and iter. verse. fi.
S. Austen in diverse places notes, it was always the fashion of heretics to
have Scripture in their mouth, and to cleave only to scriptures, and to refuse
traditions as inventions of men. And we read of the Arrian Heretics, All
b^tikes vaunt scripture.
how they were wont to sing Psalms in the streets of Constantinople, thereby
to allure the people to them. And yet we may not say, that Mat. 4.
their service was good: like as we cannot say that the devils talk was good
with Christ albeit it were decked with allegation of scripture, and other
sweet words. Although therefore their service be full of scripture, it is Hier.
in ca. 4 and 8. Osee.
no good argument that it is therefore infallible good. For as S. Ierom says
of al heretics. Whatsoever they speak, or think that they do speak in the
praise of God, it is the howling of Woolues, and the bellowing noise of mad
bullockes: The reason whereof is that, which the scholar of the Apostles S*
Ignatius says, No man can call him good, or say he does well, that does Ignat.
ep. 2.
mingle evil with good. Wherefore S. Augustine says of the Donatistes,
Schismatikes, and Heretics, of his time, that albeit they did sound out
Alleluia with as lusty a voice as the Catholics did, and in many things Aug.
in ps. 54 A little evil, marreth a great deal of good.
else did agree in service with them (more then now the Protestants do with
us) yet their service was impious, and auailed them nothing* And a little after,
upon the words of God, uttered by the Prophet, saying. In many things they
were with me, etc. S. Austen says thus. God grants In psalm. 54.
that Heretics in many things are with him, as in Sacraments, ceremonies, and
the like: But yet for all that they are not with me (says God in all things.
For in that they are in schism, they are not with me: in that they are in
heresy, they are not with me: and therefore, for these few things in the
which they are not with me, those other many things in the which they are
with me, shall profit them nothing. To come nearer to our purpose, their own
Apostle, and second I^thers opinion of our (...) s^ruice.
Elias (as they call him) Luther, condemns al their whole service, for the
denying only of the real presence, saying. The Sacramentaries do in vain
believe in God the Father, in God the Son, and in the holy Ghost, and Cop.
d^l. 6. ca. 15.
in Christ our Savior: all this does avail them nothing, seeing they do deny
this one Article, as false, of the real presence. Where as Christ does say,
This is my body. Lo here this Prophet with the same spirit wherewith he
condemns the Popes, he condemns the Protestants, why should we bel^ue him
more in the one, then in the other.

But now to show wherein the Protestants service is evil, it were sufficient
Wherein the ^rotestantes service is evil, in particular. 1. Devised by them
selves (...) from the rest.
to say, that it is devised of them selves, and altogether different from all the service of christendom besides: and therefore not to be received by
catholics, with whom they deal too childishly, when they say, their service
differs in nothing from the old catholics service, but only because it is in
English: thereby thinking to make the simple people, to have the less scruple
to come to it. The which how false it is, it shall appear by 2 Condemned by the
Puritaines.
that which I will say hereafter. I might also bring the opinion of all the
hotter sort of Protestants, called the Puritaines, who in writing, sermons, and
private speech, do utterly condemn, the service which now Protestants have,
and thereupon do refrain from it, as much as catholics. But I will give more
particular reasons, as follows.

First the scripture is read there in false and shameless translations,
containing 3. Fal^e translations of scripture.
manifest and wilful corruptions, to draw it to their own purposes, as has
bin showed in particular, by many learned men in their works: and is like to be
(shortly) more plainly by the grace of God. As for example, throughout the
scripture, where Idols are forbidden, they translate 1 Ioh. 5.
it Images, as in Saint John they read. Children keep your selves from Images.

Whereas the Scripture says Idols: and this is, to make simple men believe,
that Idols and Images are al one, which is absurd. For then, where Moses
says: That God made man according to his own Image. We Genesis 1. 3.
should consequently say: God made man according to his own Idol. Again,
where in contrary manner S. Paul says. That a covetous man E^he. 5.
makes his money his Idol. We should say, that he makes it, his image. The
which how foolish it is, every man sees, and it can not stand with any sense
of the Scripture. The like absurd translations they have, in infinite other
things, which I cannot stand to rehearse. Let some man read the latter end
of the xii. Chapter of the second book of the Machabies, where he shall see
what labor their English translator takes to shift over the words of the
scripture, which talk of oblatio^s and prayers for the dead: 2. Macha 12.
and by that one place, let every man judge of his fidelity in the rest. For
See the English Bible dedicated to King (...).
I am sure, that if a Boy should so corrupt Tullies Epistles, in translating
them in a Grammar School, he should be breeched for his labor. The scripture
therefore, being read there, in false translations, it must needs seem to be
false, which is blasphemy against the holy Ghost the inditer of them. So that
by this, it appears, that, that part of their service which they pretend to
be scripture, is no scripture, because it is by the malice of the interpretor
false, the which scripture can not be. 4. Said by la^* men.


Secondly, the service that Christians ought only to go to, should be Ig. ad
Hier. Chri. li. 3. and 6. de. Sacer. and hom. 60. Hier. ep. ad Helio. and ep.
85. ad Eua. Ambro. in Ephesians. 4. Hebr. 5. 1. Tim. 5. Con. 4. Cai. can. 6. and
Con cil. Laod. can. 24. Igna. ep. ad Anti. Areo. ca. 3. Can. Ap. 1. and 2. and
68.
said, as also the Sacraments administered, by Priests and such as have
received the Sacrament of holy orders, as all the general Councels and fathers
of the Church, show unto us. And S. Paul when he says. That no man may take
unto him this honor, but he that is called as Aaron was. Wherefore the same
Paul advises the Bishop Timothy, not to give this dignity unto any man but
upon great consideration, saying. Do not lay thy hands rashly upon any man. But
now that either al, or the most part of Ministers of England, be mere lay
men, and no Priests, and consequently have no authority in these things, it
is evident for many causes: as well for that they have not received the under
Orders, which they should have done before Priesthood, (as appears by the
ancient Council of Carthage, wherein S. Augusten was himself,) and by all the
Fathers both before and since: as also because they are not ordained by such a
Bishop and Priest, as the catholic church has put in that authority: which
admits no man for Bishop, which is not ordained by imposition of three or
two catholic Bishops hands at the least. Of al which things none are to be
found amongst the Protestants.

Thirdly, their service is naught, because they have diverse false, and
blasphemous things therein: and that which is yet worse, they so place those
things, as they may seem to the simple, to be very scripture. As for 5.
Fals^d and (...) in their service. In the end of their Geneua Psalter.
example, In the end of a certain Geneua Psalm. They pray to GOD to keep
them, from Pope, Turk, and Papistrie, which is blasphemous. First, for
joining the supreme Minister and substitute of Christ, with the known and
professed enemy of Christ, and speaking so contumeliouslye of him, of whom
all antiquity in Christ his church, has thought, and spoken so reverently,
calling him. The high Priest of the Church, The Bishop of the Universal Church.
The Pastor of the Cyp. de (...) pre. and Chry. li. 2. de Sa. Cyp. ep. 46. Chr.
li. 2. de sa. Inno. ep. 93. ap Au. and Leo. ep. 84. Sy. Alex. 4. apud ^ba.
Theod. li. 2. hist. cap. 4. Cy. ep. ep. 55. Lack of necessary things vvh^ch
it should have in it.
Church. The Judge of matters of faith The repurger of heresies. The examiner
of all Bishops causes And finally the great Priest, in obeying whom al unity
consists, and b^ disobeying of whom, all Heresies and Schisms arise.

Secondly, it is blasphemous, for that they pray to be delivered from
Papistrie: meaning thereby, the catholic and only true religion, by the which
all men are to be saved,

Thirdly, beca^se they sing it, and make other simple men to sing it, in the
beginning of Sermons, and otherwise: as though it were scripture it self, and
one of David's Psalms. Dion* Ariop. hier. ca. 3. Ign. ep. ad Smyrn. Justin.
dial. tripho. Ter. li. de orat. Au. li. 20. c^ntr. Faust. ca. 23. Chr. hom. 17
ad Heb. Gre. li. 4. di. ca. 57. Hiero. ep. 1. ad Helio. Chry. li. 2. de Sacerd.
Cyp. ep. 54. and li. 1. ep. 2. Au. ser. 25. 2. de tempo. Optat. li. 6. cont.
Dona.


Fourthly, albeit the Protestants service had not all this evil in it, as it
has: yet were it naught, because it has not in it, those good things which
Christian service should have. For service may be evil, as well for having too
little, as for having too much. As the service of the Arrians was, for singing,
Glory to the Father, and not singing the same to the Son: And as if a man
should recyte his Creed, and leave out one article (as in effect the
Protestants do the article of discention into hell) all the whole Creed were
naught thereby. Now, how many things do want in the Protestants service,
which should be in Christian service, it were too long in every point to
rehearse: yet will I (for examples sake) name two or three things. First
therefore, they have left out the chiefest, and highest things of all: which
is the blessed Sacrifice of Christ his Body and Blood appointed by Christ, to
be offered up every day for thanks giving to God, for obteyning of grace,
and avoiding of all evil, and for the remission of sins both o^ quick and
dead: as with one consent the Fathers of the Primative Church do affirm. The
which sacrifice being away, no Christian service can be said to be there:
For so much as, for this cause were ordained Priests, neither can there any be
called Priest but in respect of this sacrifice: also in respect of this
sacrifice were christian churches called Temples, for this sacrifice were made
Aulters: for an Altar is the place of sacrifice, even as an armorie is the
place where armor is. For this sacrifice was Priests apparel made.
Vestments, Sensors, Frankensence, and the like, in the Primative Church. Au in
Psa. 113. conci. 2. and Posid. in vita Au. ca. 24 Council. flor. and constant.
sessio 15 Six Sacraments. (...). 19. con^. faust. cap. 11. and 16. Au^.
su^euit. que. 84.
Whereof all the Fathers, Councelles, and histories do speak so much.

The second thing, which the Protestants service leaves out, is, no less
then six, of the seven sacraments, which the catholic service of God does
use: (for as for their communion it can be no sacrament as they do use it.)
The commodity of which Sacraments, in the church saint Augustine says. That
it is greater, then can be expressed, and therefore the contempt of them is no
less then sacrilege, because (says he) that, can not be contemned without
impiety, without the help of Ceremonies.
which, no man c^n have piety. And for this cause in an other place he Ter^
de coro^a. Bas. li. do sp. 5. cap. 27. ^phipha. h^resi. 71. Council t^id. ca. 7.
and 13. Cip. ep. 66. Chry. ho. 41. vide Aug. li. 2. doct. christ. Cyp. ser. de.
ora. dom. Isodo. li. de. diu. off. Council. Tol. 4. cap. 2. Bed. li. hist.
capit. 1.
says. That the contemners of visible Sacraments, can by no means, inuisibly
be sanctified. The third thing that the Protestants service leaves out, is,
all the ceremonies of the catholic church, of the which the old ancient
Fathers and Councels do say these three things. First, that that they are to
be had in great reverence, and to be contemned of no man. Secondly, that they
are to be learned by tradition, and that many of them are received by the
tradition of the Apostles. Lastly, that they which do either condemn,
despise, or wilfully omyt these ceremonies, are excommunicated. I might here
add many other things, as leaving out prayers for the dead, being (as the
Fathers hold) one of the chiefest functions of a Priest. Also for having their
service in an other order and language then the universal church uses: But
this is sufficient. For if they leave out of their service, both Sacrifice,
Sacraments, and all Ecclesiastical ceremonies: I know not what good thing
they have left, besides a few bare words of scripture, evil translated, and
worse applied, which they read there. Seeing therefore their service is such,
it is a sufficient cause to make all catholics to avoid it.

The seventh reason.
In which Au^hors you shall sec in what tongue service was in their days in
(...) countries.
HE tells us, that the seventh reason, why a catholic may not yield to come
to the Protestants churches is, because the service which they use is naught,
and dishonorable to God: and therefore no man can come to it, or hear it, or
seem to allow of it, by his presence, without great offense to God. We hear
that it is naught and dishonorable to God. But let us hear the cause, why it
is so termed. First, it is not sufficient (he says) to defend it, y^ it is
taken out of the scripture, the Gospels, Epistles, Psalms, and such like: ^or
by that argument, the service of the Jews and Heretics, which is taken out of
the Scriptures, might like wise be made good. I aunsweare, if the (...) and
Heretykes, have nothing in their service but taken out of the Scripture, their
service is not evil in the matter thereof, and no more can ours be, but by that
only argument, I confess, that our service cannot be proved to be simply
good, although it were taken ^uerie word out of the Scriptures, except it be
good also in form and end, that it be referred to the woorship of the only
true God, and in the name of Christ, and unity of this Church, as in deed it
is, and therefore not like the service of Jews and Heretics, or Schismatikes,
but least the Protestants service, should not be deemed naught thoroughly:
Luthers opinion thereof is cited out of Copes Dialoges Dia. 6. ca. 15.
(a sufficient witness of so weighty a matter) saying, That the
Sacramentaries do in vain believe in God the Father, in God the Son, in the
holy Ghost, and in Christ our Savior: all this does avail them nothing,
seeing they do deny this one article, as false, of the real presence, whereas
Christ does say this is my body. Suppose that Cope cites this saying truly,
out of Luther, and that those whom he calls Sacramentaries, did deny this
one article of the real presence, according to the meaning of Christ's words.
This is my body, as false, as though Christ were a liar: It were true, that
all other articles of faith, could not profit them unto salvation: But what
word is here to show Luthers opinion of the Protestants service, which
might be good, although they were naught which used it.

But whereas he has gone hitherto, upon mere suppositions, now we shall have
his assumption confirmed by weight of arguments, and authorities. First
therefore, to show that the Protestants service is evil, he says, it were
sufficient to say. That it is devised of themselves and altogether different
from all the service of Christendom. Concerning the matter it was confessed
before, that it is taken out of the scriptures, the Gospels, Epistles and
Psalms, and therefore not devised by us. Touching ye form and ceremony
thereof, it has always bin free, and lawful for every particular Church, to
devise whatsoever is most meet for edification, order, and cumlinesse, as I
have showed before, even out of the authority of Gregory Bishop of Rome, and
therefore may be different from the form and ceremonies of all other churches
in Christendom, so the substance of doctrine and Sacraments be the same. I will
set down his words: The interogation of Augustine. Cum vna sit fides, etc.
when there Bed. lib. 1* cap 27.
is but one faith, why are there diverse customs of the Churches, and one custom
of Masses (so they called the celebration of the Lords Supper) in the holy
Roman Church, and an other in the Church of France? Gregory the Pope
answers, (every Bishop was called Pope in his time). Your brotherhood knows
the custom of the Church of Rome, in which you remember that you have been
brought up. But it pleases me, that whether in the Church of Rome, or of
France, or of any other church, you have found any other thing, which may
more please Almighty GOD, you choose it forth carefully, and in the church of
Englishmen, which yet is new, unto the faith, you plant by principal
institution, those things which you could gather out of many churches. For
things are not to be loved for the places sake, but the places for good
things sake, Wherefore choose you out of every church, such things as are
godly, as are religious, as are right: and these things being gathered as it
were into a bundell, lay them down for a custom, in the minds of the English
men.

As for the childish saying of them, which tell you that our service differs
but in language from yours, we mislike as much as you The second reason is,
that you affirm the hotter sort of Protestants called the Puritanes, in
writing, sermons, and private speech, utterly to condemn the service which
now protestants have, and thereupon do refrain from it as much as Catholics.
That any of the hottest protestants, although they would wish some things
therein, to be other wise, do utterly condemn the service, and refrain from
it, as much as Papists, it is altogether untrue, in them that are wise and
learned. If a few, froward, schismatic fools, do refrain from it, there
is small reason why it should be judged naught, except you would prefer their
judgment before al y^ be wise and learned of the protestants in England.
Which as with no equity you can do, so the cause which they pretend of their
condemning being for coming over near to your service, there is no reason why
you should flee to their opinion, that it is naught, except you will
acknowledge that your own is far worse. But you promise to give more
particular reasons in that which follows. The first reason particular, and
the third general, is false interpretation of Scripture, which you say is
read there in false and shamel^sse translations, containing manifest and wilful
corruptions, to draw it to their own purposes. That some error may be in
trandation (although by you it cannot be showed) I will not deny: but that any
shameless translations, or wilful corruptions, can b^e found of purpose to
draw the Scriptures to any herelicall opinion, all the Papists in the world
shall n^uer be able to make demonstration. Nevertheless you note such false
translations and wilful corruptions in two places. First in the latter ^.
John. ^.
end of Saint John^ Epistle. Children keep your selves from Images. It had
been good for you, before you had entered into such hay^ous accusations, to
have examined your grounds that they had ^ene true, For this text of Scripture
in those Bibles that are commanded and appointed to be read in the Church
service renders the word in otherwise. Namely thus: Babes keep your selves
from Idols, But admit that in^ome translation it be as you say, Children keep
your selves from Idols, what great crime of corruption is here committed? You
saythat it is to make simple men believe that Idols and Images are all one,
which is absurd. This is no more absurdity, than in steed of a Greek word,
to use a Latin of the same signification. But you reply, that then where Moses
says, That God made man according to his own Image we should consequently
say, GOD made man according to his own Idol. I answer, howsoever the name of
Idols, in the English tongue, for the great dishonor that is done to God in
worshipping of Images, is become so odious, that no Christian man would say,
that God made man according to his Idol. No more then a good subject, would
call his lawful prince a Tirant, yet according to the prop^rtie of the Greek
word (...) may be as truly translated an Image, as (...) a King witness
hereof Suidas Phauorinus in their dictionaries, beside all the new
Dictionaries, citing ancient Gretians that (...) may be taken for the same,
that (...) As where Homer in (...). uses the word (...). His ancient
interpreter expound^th the same by (...), an image, that serves only to be
seen. Hesychius joins together. (...). An Idol, a (...), an Image, a figure,
a sign, a shadowed shape. An other example you have, where Paul in contrary
manner says: That a covetous man makes Ephesians. 5*
his money his Idol, we should say that he makes it his Image. If you lack
corruptions of translations of ours, you will make corruptions of the text of
your own. Where read you in Saint Paul, that a co^etous man makes his money
his Idol? We read Saint ^aule saying, For a covetous person which is an
Idolater, and so we translate. And if any man should translate it a
worshipper of Images, he should not much err, either from the sig^ification
of the word, or from the meaning of the Apostle. For the cou^tous man trusts
in his riches, which of themselves cannot help him, even as the Idolater does
in his Images, which although he worship them never so devoutly, yet have no
power to do him any good. Finally your own Latin translation, reads,
Filioli custodite vos a simulachris: which is, Little sons keep your selves
from Images.

The second corruption which you note, is in the end of the twelfth Chapter
of the second Book of Machabees, which if it were as great as you feign it
to be, yet our service is nothing defiled with it, because those hooks are
never read publik^ly in our Church service. But how great I pray you is this
corruption? I am sure (says he) that if a boy should so corrupt Tullies
Epistles in translating them in a Gramer school, he should be breeched for
his labor. A sore matter, you bidd some man read the latter end of the
Chapter, concerning Oblations and prayers for the dead. The Abridger of Iasons
Cronicle in the Chapter by you quoted, thus writes.

(...), The^e words although it is manifest, that the place is so corrupted,
y^ according to perfect rules of Gramer, no sense can be given, yet as near as
may be, I would thus translate. And after he had made preparations, by a
collection of every man unto two thousand drachmes of silver, he sent unto
Jerusalem, to bring a sacrifice for sin, doing very well and ciuilly, in
thinking of the resurrection. For if he had not weighed, that they which
before were fallen should rise again, it had been a superfluous and trifling
matter, to pray for the dead. Then considering that to them that are fallen a
sleep, with godliness, there is laid up a most goodly free reward, holy and
godly is the consideration, when he made expiation for the dead to be loosed
from that sin Now let us see, what the English Bible dedicated to king Henry
differs from this. So he gathered of every one a certain, insomuch that he
brought together 2000. drachmes of silver, which he sent unto Jerusalem that
there might a sacrifice be offered for the misdeede, In the which place he
did well and right, for he had consideration and pondering of the life that is
after this time, for if he had not thought that they which were slain, did
yet live, it had been superfluous and vain to make any vow or sacrifice for
them that were dead. But forsomuche as he saw, that they which die in the
favor and belief of God, are in good rest and joy he thought it to be good
and honorable for a reconciling to do the same for those, which were slain
that the offense might be forgiven The difference as every indifferent man may
see is in words, and not in matter, but it seems, that our proud Censor
has not viewed any, but the vulgar Latin translation, which differs much
more from the Greek, then the later of the English Bible. The English of
which vulgar Latin, as well as I can translat it is thus. And a collection
being made, he sent twelve thousand drachmes of silver to Jerusalem that a
sacrifice might be offered for the sins of the dead, thinking well and
religiously of the resurrection. For except he had hoped that they which were
fallen, should rise again, it might seem superfluous and vain to pray for
the dead. And because he considered that they which with godliness had received
sleeping* have the best grace laid up. Holy therefore and wholesome is the
cogitation, to entreat for the departed, that they may be loosed from sins.

Although this translation seem more pregnante and full, for prayers and
sacrifices to the dead, yet is the same also contained in the former
translations: wherefore here is no wilful corruption, or false translation
proved, but the translation is more agreeabl^ to the original, then that which
our Censurer would have to be the only Authentical.

The second particular cause, and the fourth reason is, for that the service
and sacraments, which should be said and administered only by Priests,
are said and ministered only by lay men. For now all, or the most part of
the Ministers in England, are mere lay men. That the Sacraments and public
prayers should be said and ministered by Ministers lawefully ordained, it is a
thing out of question with us, saving that the Papists do allow baptism in
case of necessity by a lay man. But how is it proved, that our Ministers are
all, or the most part mere lay men? By two arguments brought forsoothe,
though he speak of many causes. First because they have not received the vnde^
orders, which they should have done before priesthood. That such under orders
are not needful, it is plain by the scriptures. For Stephen, and his fellows
were not first made L^ctors, dorekeepers, Erorcist^s, Acolyt^S, and Subdeacons:
but out of the whole number of the people, chosen immediately to be Deacons.
Paul Act. 6.
and Barnabas in like manner ordained by election, Elders in every Church of
Lystra, Iconium, and Antiochia. Neither are those under orders, prescribed in
any t^xte of the scripture. But the Councelles Act. 14.
of Carthage the 4. Canon. 6. and of Laodecea Canon 24. appoynte that these
orders should be received, before pri^sthood, as our reasoner affyrmeth, in
his quotation. But how truly, you shall perceive by reading the Canons. That
of Carthage is in these words. Acolythusquum ordinatur etc. When an Acolyte is
ordained, let him be ^avght of the Bishop, how he ought t^ do in his
office: but of the Archedacon, let him receive a candlestick, with a wax
candle, that he may know, that he is bound to kindle the lights of the
church. Also let him receive a little cruse emptye, to give wine for the
Euchariste of the blood of Christ Although this Canon, with a many of the
rest, be not of such antiquity as the council of Carthage the fourth, where
S. Augustine was present, seeing in diverse old copies, they have not the title
of the Carthage council, but generally: Statua Ecclesiae antiqua, Ancient
statutes of the Church: yet you see playnelye, that here is never a word to
show, that those under orders, either were or ought to be necesiarily
received, of every one, that shall be preferred to the order of Priesthood.
Now let us see the other Canon of Laodicea Quid non oporteat sacro ministerio
deditos, etc. That they which are dedicated to the holy ministry, from the
Priests unto the Deacons, and the rest of the Ecclesiastical order, that is
unto the Subdeacons, Readers, Singers, Exorcistes, and dorekeepers, nor any of
the number of Contayners, and Monks, ought not to come in any tauerns, or
common tippling houses Does not this Canon prove inuinc^blye trow you, that no
man ought to be made Priest, except he have received these under orders? It
follows, I think by any logique, that wheresoever these Officers are named,
there it is meant that they were all received, by every one that was advanced
to the order of Priesthood. Nay, the contrary is easy to be gathered, out
of the hystories, that many were ordained Chrisost. de sacerd. lib. 1.
Priests, which never had those under orders, and that many having those
under orders continued in them, al their life time, whereas no man takes them
all at this day, in the Popish Church, but with intent to be promoted by
them, as by steps unto Priesthood. For in the most ancient Church, where
they were first used, they were names of offices, to read in the Church, to
keep Church doors, from the entering of Gentiles or excommunicate persons, to
attend upon the Bishop as witnesses of his conversation, and exorcists, were
such as had a (...) to cast out devils, of them that were possessed, the
Subdeacons, to serve under the Deacons, in providing for the poor, etc. But in
the Popish Church, they have none but (...) offices about idie ceremonies, and
vain pageants of their Masses, consecrations, ordinations, and such like
theatricall pompes, and shows.

The second cause why our Ministers are said to be lay men, is, for that
they are not ordained by such a Bishop and Priest, as the catholyke church has
put in that authority. This cause depends altogether upon our old
supposition, that the Popish Church is the catholyke Church, which is not like
to be admitted by any, but by the Papists themselves. Otherwise the true
Catholic Church has allowed the ordination of our Ministers as lawful,
until by authority of the holy scriptures, it can be convinced to be
unlawful.

The third particular cause, and fifth general reason, why our service is
said to be naught, is: Because they have diverse false and blasphemous things
therein. God forbid that this saying should (...) proved true. And that which
is worse, they so place those things, as they may seem to the simple, to be
very scripture. A wonderful hard accusation: but let us hear the probation.
As for example, in the end of a certain Geneua Psalm. They pray to GOD to
keep them from Pope, Turk, and Papistrie, which is blasphemous. If it be
blasphemous, it is against y^ Popes triple crown, or the Turks torba^t, for
against God it is no blasphemy, nor against his truth, or any of his children.
But what an impudent slander is this, that the dittie, which plainly caryeth
before it, the name of the endighter. Robert Wisdom, is so placed, as it may
seem to be very scripture? And is called a Geneua Psalm, as though the
Church of Geneua had any thing to do with hymmes, and spiritual songs, used
in the Church of England? Or that the Church of England had received all such
ditties from Geneua. But the matter is taken greatly in snuff, that the Pope
is joined with the Turk, of whom al antiquity in Christ's church, has
thought and spoken so reverently, calling him the high Priest of the church,
With many other titles, which, if they might all be justified, of the ancient
Prelates of Rome, while they were Catholic Bishops, yet they would little
help, to defend that Antichrist, which now occupyeth the same place, but
holds not the same foundation of faith, and doctrine.

But let us see how many of these tytles were appropryed to the Bishop of
Rome in any time. For the first and chiefest is quoted Cyprian de simplicitate
Praelatorum, and also Chrysostom lib. 2. de sacerdotio. Concerning the former
treatise, there is in it, no word of the Bishop of Rome, more then of all
other Bishops, nor any such title of high Priest, given unto him, but
contrariwise the unity of the Church is showed to consist, in the obedience of
every particular Church to their own Bishop, which are all made of equal
authority and dignity There Cyprian sets forth the subtyltie of the
devil, which under the name of Christ, commends Antichriste, and showing
the cause of the deceit, he says, Hoc eo fit fratres dilectissimi. etc.
This comes hereof my most well-beloved brethren, while men return not to the
beginning of truth, neither is the head sought, nor the doctrine of the
heavenly master observed. Which things, if a man consider and examine, there
is no need of large treaty or arguments. The trial unto truth, is easy by
the compendiousnesse of truth: Our Lord speaks to Peter: I say to thee
(quoth he) that thou art Peter, and upon this stone, I will build my church,
and the gates of hell shall not overcome it. To thee I will give the keys of
the kingdom of heaven, and what things soever thou shall loose upon earth,
they shall be loosed also in heaven. And to the same man, after his
resurrection he says: feed my sheep. And although after his resurrection
he gives equal power to all his Apostles, and says: As my Father sent
me, so I also send you: receive the holy Ghost: whose sins you shall
forgive, they shall be forgiven: whose sins you shall retain, they shall
be retained: yet that he might make the unity manifest, he disposed the
original of that same unity by his authority, beginning of one man. Verilye
the rest of the Apostles were the ^ame thing that Peter was, endued with equal
fellowship, both of honor, and of power, but the beginning proceeds from
unity, that the church might be showed to be one And after a few lines,
entreating of the unity of the Church, he says: Quam unit atem, etc. which
unity most of all, we that rule as Bishops in the Church, ought to hold
fast, and mayntaine, that we might prove the Bishops office it self, to
be one, and undivided. Let no man deceive the brotherhoodde with a lie, Let
no man corrupt the truth of faith, by such preuarication, There is but one
byshopricke or bishops office, whereof a part is held of every one, in
solidum, thoroughly, or perfectly, or in the whole. You see that Cyprian says
nothing for his title, but against the Antichristian authority, pretended
thereby, very much and very effectuously. But what says Chrysostom in his 2.
book de sacerdotio, sounding to that purpose? I find nothing, but that he
admonishes Basil, that he had no injury in being taken by sorce, and made a
priest, seeing he was thereby made equal with Peter, even as Peter excelled all
the Apostles. Etiam ne nunc nobiscum, etc. Will thou then still contend with
us, that this fraud has not happened well and luckely to thee? Which by it, art
to be made ouerseer of all the goods of God almighty, especially when thou
do those things, which when Peter did, Christ would have him to be endued
with authority, and also far to excel the other apostles. These words
show, that every Priest when he does the same things which Peter did, is
endued with the same authority that Peter was, and far passes all other men.
And that Peter was not simply preferred in authority, but only when he did
execute his charge and therefore so preferred that every minister in teaching
and administering the sacraments, has the same authority and excellency.

The next title pretended to be given to the Pope, by all antiquity, is the
Bishop of the universal church, For which is quoted Cyprian Epist. 46. that of
Cyprian is no more, but that certain Confessors, which had joined with the
Nouatian Scismatikes, that made an other Bishop at Rome beside Cornelius,
returning to the Church, acknowledged that Cornelius was the right bishop of
the Catholic Church, and Nouatus, or Nouatianus a false bishop of a
scismaticall Church, The words of their confession are these, Nos inquiunt.
etc. We say they, do know that Cornelius is set up by God Almighty, and by
our Lord Jesus Christ, a bishop of the most holy Catholic church. We confess
our error. We have been circumuented, being carried out of our right mind by
factious loquacitie of falsehood, We seemed to have as it were a certain
communicating with a schismatic person: but our mind was always sincere in
the church, neither are we ignoraunte, that there is one GOD, and one
Christ, our Lord, whom we have confessed, one holy Ghost, that there ought
to be but one bishop in a catholic church. Meaning that in every Catholic
Church, there ought to be but one Bishop at once, not that there should
be but one bishop of all the Catholic Church, which were a monstrous
absurdity.

The third title, is The Pastor of the Church, for which is quoted
Chrysostom lib. 2. de Sacer. Where I find nothing that has any show of
such a matter, more then I have already declared.

The fourth, the Judge of matters of faith, for which is quoted, Innocentius
Epist. 93. apud August. and Leo Epist. 84, These are both bishops of Rome, and
partial witnesses, to depose of their own Prerogative, showing what they
claymed, and not what al antiquity gave unto them. The Roman Prelacie, as
Socrates testi^e in that time, although it were a thousand parts more modest
then it is at this day, yet was it then passed beyond the Lib. 7. ca. 14.
Con. Mile. can. 22. Aphrican. c. 92.
bonds of Priesthood into forayne Lordship: And oftentimes, the bishops of
Rome challenged more authority, then of other bishops would be granted, as
appears by many decrees of the Councels in Africa against appealing to the
bishop of Rome, and against his ambitious titles of high Prtest. etc. Which
this reasoner says was given him by all antiquity.

The fifth title is the repurger of heresies, for which is quoted: Sy Alex. 4.
apud Athanasium. But Athanasius allowed no such Conc. Carth. 3. ca. 26. Epist.
ad solit. vit agentes.
title to the Roman bishop, whom he confesses to have subscribed to the
Arrian heresy. Liberius deinde. etc. After Liberius had passed two years in
exile, he was turned, and through threats of death induced to subscription.

The sixth title is, The examiner of al bishops causes, for which is quoted.
Theodor. lib. 2. hist. cap. 4. UUhere there is no such matter, but that
Athanasius desired to have his cause examined and tried by Julius Bishop of
Rome, which when it proceeded not because his adversaries would not appear,
his cause was referred by the Emperor Constantius his commandment, to the
council of Sardica, when finding no help in Julius the Bishop he had first
appealed to the Emperor Constance.

The last title is, The great Priest in obeying whom all unity consists, and
by disobeying of whom, all heresies and Schisms arise. Cyp. Epist. 55. This
place is already answered, to pertain no more to the bishop of Rome, then
to any other Bishop.

A second cause he renders, why our service is blasphemous, because we pray
to be delivered from papistrie, which he says, is only true religion, but
that has need of many suppositions to prove it.

A third cause he yields, Because they sing it and make other simple men to
sing it, in the beginning of sermons and otherwise, as though it were scripture
it self, and one of David's Psalms. If men were as ignorant in the scriptures
and Psaimes of David, as the Papists would have them to be, this pretensed
cause could have but small collar, seeing the title of this hymme, in every
book plainly shows, that it is none of David's Psalms, and the prayer
conceived therein for the Queen and her Council, with diverse other requests,
pec^ier to our time and state, declare manifestly, that it cannot of any man
that has his five wits, be taken for the express words of the ancient
Canonical Scripture. Much less can it with any appearance of reason be gathered
that there is any purpose in them, that cause it to be song to induce any man
never so simple, into such a gross error, that he should think the same song
to be scripture it self, or one of David's Psalms.

The fourth reason in particular, why the Protestants must be deemed naught,
is, Albeit it had not all this evil in it, yet because it has not in it,
those good things, which christian service should have: for service (says he)
may be evil as well for having too little, as for having too much, as the
Arrians service, for singing glory to the father, and not singing the same to
the son. As if a man should recite his Creed, and leave out one article, as
in effect the Protestants do the article of discention into hell, all the
whole Creed were naught thereby. In deed whatsoever is defective in any
necessary part, cannot be perfectly good, in the whole, but that for want
of some good parts, all other good parts should be naught, that is a great
untruth: as also it is a senseless ^launder, that we leave out in effect,
the Article of Christ's descention intoo he^, for which he gives noe reason
but his bare word. He might as well say we leave out the whole Creed,
because we understand it otherwise then they do. But what our service
wants, which is necessary to be hadd, he will show in two or three
things. First therefore (says he) they have left out the chiefest and
highest things of all: which is the Blessed Sacrifice of Christ his body
and blood, appointed by Christ too be offered up every day for thankesgeuing
to GOD, for obteyning of grace, and avoiding of all evil, and for remission of
sins both of quick and dead, as with one consent the F^hers of the
Primitive Church do affirm. *That any sacrifice of Christ's body, and blood,
by Christ is appointed, not only the Apostles, and Evangelists, which set
forth the institution of the Lords supper make no mention: but also ye Apostle
to the Hebrews, plentifully shows, that the sacrifice of Christ was but once
offered, and found eternal redemption, and y^ he offered himself but once for
if he had, he must have suffered more then Heb. 9. 12. 22. and. 25.
once, seeing y^ without shedding of blood, there is no remission of sins.
Neither do the fathers of the Primitive church, w^o^ he quoteth, affirm the
contrary. He begins with Dionisius the counterfeite Areopagi^e, Hier. 3. Where
beside y^ the Author bears a wrong name being not so old as the Apostles
times, by 600. years and more, yet is not this imagined sacrifice, by him in
such order aduouched. The next of the old writers names, with whom the Margent
is painted, as Ignatius Epi. ad Smirnenses, which if we should receive for
Authentical, and not counterfeited, yet has it nothing to the purpose, but
the name of sacrifice. Proptereanon licet, etc. Therefore y^ is not lawful
without the Bishop, neither to offer nor to make sacrifice, nor to celebrate
Masses, as the Latin translation is of celebration of the communion. If this
were both a true antiquity, and to be observed, the Popish service were not
lawful, but where it is ministered by a bishopp for that also is affirmed in
the same Epistle. Thirdly, he comes to Justinius dial cum Triphone. A Reverend
Father indeed, whose words if he had set down, they would not only have
cleared our service of the supposed crime, but also have been sufficient to
expound whatsoever in any other ancient writer is improperly and figuratively
uttered, in the name of sacrifice, priest, and Altar, etc. The words of
Justinius are these. (...) etc. Even so we, which by the name of Jesus (as all
shall be one man in GOD the maker of all things,) having put of our filthy
garments, that is our sins; by the name of his first begotten son, and
being set on fire by the word of his calling are a right kind of high
priests of GOD, as God himself does witness, that in all places among the
Gentiles, acceptable and pure sacrifices are offered to him. But God receives
no sacrifices, but of his priests. Wherefore God before hand does teslifie,
that he does accept all them that offer by this name, the sacrifices which
Jesus Christ has delivered to be made, that is in the Euchariste or
thankesgeuing of the bread and the cup, which are done in every place of the
Christians. By which words it appears, that thankesgeuing was offered in the
Sacrament not that Christ's natural body and blood was offered therein: and
this not by the Priest alone, but by all Christians. And this more plainly
may be seen, by other words of his, that are in the same Dialogue. (...) etc.
As concerning those sacrifices which are offered to him of us Gentiles in
every place, that is, of the bread of thankesgeuing, and the cup likewise of
thankesgeuing, he foresheweth saying, that we do glorify his name, and that
you (meaning the Jews) do profane it.

In which words what other Sacrifice can we see, but the sacrifice of
thanksgeuing in the bread and in the cup. And to prove most inuincibly, that
the Church in his ^me, had none other sacrifice, but Eucharistical, of prayers
and thankesgeuing: This saying of his in the same Dialogue, against the Jews,
may serve abundantly. (...) etc. For I my self (saie^h I^inus) do aff^e, that
prayers and thanksgeuing made by worthy persons, are the only perfect and
acceptable Sacrifices to God. For these are the only sacrifices that
christians have received to make, to be put in mind by their dry and moist
nourishment, of the passion which God the son of God, is recorded to have
suffered for them. This place does not only show, what the only sacrifice of
Christians was in his time, but also teaches, that in the Sacrament is dry
and moist nourishment, that is bread and drink, and not bare accidents, as the
Transubstantiators affirm. Therefore how little Justinius makes for the
Sacrifice of the Mass, these places do sufficiently declare. And how untrue
it is that all the Fathers of the Primitive Church, with one consent do
affirm it. Declaring rather* how all the Fathers of the Primitive church, that
speak of the Sacrifice of the Church, are to be understood, of a Sacrifice
Eucharysticall, and not Propitiatory.

The next quotation is Tertullian de oratione. Where I find no such matter
spoken of, or once named. But in his book ad Scapulam, he shows, what was
the Sacrifice of Christians in his tinte. Itaque sacrificamus pro salute
imperatoris. etc. Therefore we offer sacrifice, for the Emperors safety, but
to our God, and his, but as God has commanded, with pure prayer, Likewise in
his book aduersus Iudeos, the Prophecy of Malachie, which the Papists wrest
to their masking propitiatory sacrifice, he expounds it. de spiritualibus
vero sacrifi^s. etc. Of spiritual sacrifices he adds saying; and in every
place clean sacrifices shall be offered unto my name, says the Lord. Likewise
against Martion. In omni loco sacrificium nomini meo. etc. In every place a
sacrifyce is offered to my name, and a clean sacrifyce, namely, glory,
renown, and blessing and praise and hymns. Other sacrifices then these
Tertullian does not mention in all his works.

The next author is quoted Augustine Lib. 20. contra Faust. Manich. cap. 23.
In which chapter, there is never a word of the sacrament or sacrifice, or any
thing that tends thereunto: But in the. 21. chapter of the same book S.
Augustine she weth his judgment, not to dissent from Justinius and Tertullian,
concerning the S^ifice of the Church howesoeuer he often uses else where the
term improperly. Sed quid agam and tantae. etc. But what shall I do, and when
shall I show to the blindenes of these heretics, what force that has which is
song in the Psalms: The sacrifyce of Praise shall glorify me, and there is the
way where I will show my saving health. The flesh and blood of this sacrisyce
before the coming of Christ, was promised by oblations of similitudes: In the
passion of Christ it was given up by the very truth. After the Ascension of
Christ, it is celebrated by a sacra meant of remembrance Go your ways now,
and charge Augustine, to affirm a sacrifice in proper speech, to be offered of
the body and blood of Christ, which he himself affirms, to be a me morie
of the only sacrifice of Christ, once offered, as the legale oblations, were
promises of the same sacrifice before it was performed.

Unto Augustine is ^oyned Chrysostom Hom. 17. ad Heb. Will you hear his
judgment, after he has made the obi^ction, how we offer that sacrifice every
day, which the Apostle and he before had directly and often affirmed to have
been but once offered, and might not be repeated, Hoc autem quod fa^mus. etc.
But this that we do (says Christ) is done truly, in remembrance of that
which was done. For do ye this (says he) in remembrance of me. We do not
make an other sacrifice, as the high priest, but we make the self same always,
but rather we make the remembrance of a sacrifice. See you not by this
correction, that the name of sacrifice, was improperly applied to the
celebration of the Lords Supper, which properly is no sacrifice of Christ's
body and blood, but a remembrance of his Sacrifice once offered for all, and
never to be repeated: ^eeing as Augustine calls it, ^he only true, and
vnsacrificable sacrifice, and the Lords Supper a similitude of that Sacrifice.

As for Gregory who lived almost two hundred years after Augustine, as he
she weth many uncertain miracles in those Dialogues, which are next quoted,
so he was too deeply plunged in the superstition of his time, that we should
look for the right and ancient use of the celebration of the Lords S^pper,
being the next Bishop of Rome save one, before Boniface, that openly took
2. These. *.
upon him the Antichristian authority, which long before, was in breaking out
the mystery of iniquity, that wrought even in the Apostles times.

The rest of quotations, that serve to prove that Priests were orvayned in
respect of this Sacrifice, I shall not need to stand upon them, seeing I have
she wed by the consent of the most aunciente and best approved fathers, that
the sacrifice where of they speak, was of another kind, then this where unto
he would draw their authorities Ierom. unto Heliodorus. whom this author
quoteth speaks not a word to show, that Priests were ordained, for this
sacrifyce, but says God for bid that I should speak any thing amiss of them
which succeeding to the degree Apostolic, do make the body of Christ, with
their holy mouth, by whom we also are Christians: Where calling the sacrament
of y^ Lords supper, y^ body of Christ, he says no more, then Christ says of
it, nor in any other sense. Whatsoever Chrysostom says in his 2, book de
sacer. which is next quoted, must be expounded by his saying even now
rehearsed. Hom. 17. in Epist. ad Heb. That which Cyprian the third man says,
Lib. 1. Epist. 2, makes nothing in the world for the Popish Sacrifice.
Episcopatus nostri honor etc. The honor of our Bishopric and glory is very
great, that we have granted peace to Martyrs, that we which are priests
which do celebrate the sacrifices of GOD daily, should prepare oblations and
sacrifices to GOD. In the first place he speaks of the spiritual
Sacrifices of praise and thankesgeuing, and therefore uses the Plural number
Sacrifices, in the latter, he means those which since their fall, being
restored too the Church, did afterward, give over their bodies too
Martyrdom. De verb. do. in Ioh. Ser. 46. Epest. 50.
In the 252. Sermon de tempore except the name of Altar which in Saint
Augustines time, was a table made of Boordes, and stood in the midst of the
Church, there is nothing but an exhortation for men, not to receive the
Communion unworthily. Optatus lib. 6. contra donat: which is the next
quotation, sharply inuayeth against the donatists, for breaking in pieces and
scraping the Aultars, which are manifestly affirmed of him to have been of
wood, for he says, they warmed their Wine with the broken pieces of the
Aultars. Wherefore what Aultars and Sacrifices he speaks of it is manifest
by Augustine, who was his Countrieman and makes ye same complaint of the
Donatists, Epis. 50. But the same Augustine is quoted in Psalm. 113. concione 2.
toproue that for this popi^ sacrifice was priests apparel made, vestiments,
censors, srankincence, and the like in the Primitive church. So he says, but
Augustine inueighing greatly against the use of images set up in solemn places,
and to be woorshipped which are but gold and silver, as the Prophet says,
makes this objection. Sed enim and nos pleraque instrument a and vasa etc. But
we also have many instruments and vesels made of such matter or metal, for
the use of the celebration of the sacraments, which being consecrated in the
very mysterye it self, are called holy, in honor of him who is served
thereof, for our salvation. And what other thing truly, are these instruments
and vessels, but the works of men's hands? But yet have they a mouth and shall
not speak? Have they eyes and shall not see? Whether do we pray unto them,
because we pray to God by the^^ etc. We see here instruments and vessels made
of silver or gold, for the use of the ministration of the Sacraments: but for
the use of Sacrifice there is no word. Beside this we may easily gather, that
the Curch in Augustines time, had no Images, for then he would have taken away
the objection of them, which have a mouth, and speak not, eyes, and see not,
then of the vessels and instruments, as cups, and dishes, fontes and such
like things, used in the celebration of the Sacrament. The last quotation is
Possidonius de vita Augustini. Cap. 24. Whose words are these. Nam and de
vasis domi^is, etc. For he commanded some of the Lords vessels to be
broken, and ^lted, and distributed to the poor, by reason of captives, and
very many needy persons. You see the boldness of this man, in his
quotations, and yet he is not a^hamed to affirm that all the Fathers,
counselles, and historyes do speak so much of Priests apparel, and
vestimentes, sensors, frankincense, and such like; made in the primative church
for this sacrifice.

The second thing, which he complayneth to be left out of the Protestants
service, is no less then six of the seven Sacraments. That we have the two
Sacraments, which only were instituted by Christ, I have showed before
sufficiently, And seeing he will needs take one of them from us perforce, I
will show that in accounte of Papists them selves, we have one more then
those two. For except they did acknowledge us to have the Sacrament of
Matrimony (albeit we account it none) they would make it as free, for
persons married in our Church to depart one from the other, that is willing to
depart, as the Apostle makes it for them, that being married in paganism,
were forsaken of the unfaithful party, and no more bound unto them. The
places that he quoteth out of Augustine, to show that the Sacraments are not
to be contemned, might well have been spared, except he could have brought
somewhat to prove those sieve, wherein they exceed us, to be Sacraments of
Christ's institution. But the supposition first protested of, is the best
proof he has for that point. The third thing that he accuses the
Protestants service, to leave out, is all the ceremonies of the catholyke
church, of which, the old ancient Fathers and councelles do say these three
things. first, that they are to be had in great reverence, and not to be
contemned of no man. Secondly, that they are to be learned by tradition, and
that many of them are received by the tradition of the Apostles. Lastly, that
they which do either conte^e, despise, or wilfullye omit these ceremonies, are
excommunicated. And here again the margent is daw^ed with quotations, for the
proof, which when they be ^ramined, will make as little in a manner, as they
did before for the Pope, and the sacrifice. First Tertullian de corona militis
names in deed many ceremonies to have been used in the Church by tradition,
whereof many are neither used of us, nor of the Papists themselves. As in
Baptism beside thrice dipping, to taste of milk and honey. To abstain from
washing by a whole week after. To receive the communion in the meetinges that
were before day. To make oblations for the death of men, and for the birth on
the yearly day. At every step and going forward, at every coming in, and
going out, at putting on of garments, at putting on of shows, at washing, at
tables, at lights, at beds, at seats, or any thing that they occupied, to
make a cross on their foreheades, which they did to testify that they were
Christians, against the Paganes.

How many of these things, do the Papists observe more then we? If they
may be discharged for omitting some of these aunciente Ceremonies, why is not
the same equity granted to us, against which nothing can be brought, but the
stale supposition, that they may do what they list, because they are the
only Catholykes.

The next Doctor quoted, is Basil de spiritu sancto. Who refers unto
tradition, these Ceremonies following. To mark them with the sign of the
Cross, which believe in Christ, and are baptized. To pray toward the East.
The words of invocation while the Bread of thanksgiving, and the Cup of
blessing is showed. The blessing of the water of Baptism, and the oil where
with the baptized is anointed. The dypping thrice in baptism, the renouncing
of Satan and his Angels. What great Ceremonies are here, that are omitted in
our service. Epiphanius is quoted. Her, 71. Which is against the Plotiniones,
in which chapter there is no word of Ceremonies or traditions: it may be an
error in the number: for Hier. 61. contra Apostolicos, he speaks of some
things received by tradition, as that it is sin to mary after virginity
professed: but of ceremonies he says nothing at all. As for the Tridentine
council, which is next quoted, I will not vou^afe to answer it, being of
none antiquity, but holden within these few ye^res by the Papists.

Then follows Cyprian epist* 66. Which I know not wherefore it is alleged:
for there is nothing in it, for Ceremo^es or the contempt of them, but against
the Nouasianes, and anerroneous opinion of his, that none can baptize, but he
that has the holy Ghost.

After Cyprian we are bidden to look in Augustine de doctrina christiana,
without quoting the Chapter, but for what, I know not: for there are not in
him rehearsed any Ceremonies, which we omit, for any thing that I can find.
The like I say for Cyprian sermon de oratione dominica. As for Isidorus, who
lived more then 600. years after Christ, in ceremonial age, is no meet
Author to control our want of Ceremonies, by such as were used in the
Spanishe Church, in his time, which yet are not all the same that the Papists
use.

Then solloweth the fourth Toletane council cap. 2. Which appoynteth that
there should be an uniform order of ministration of the Sacram^ntes, and
public prayers in the Churches of Spain and Gallicia: because they were
contained in one faith and kingdom.

What pertayneth this unto the church of England, which has as great authority
to appoint her own Ceremonies, as the church of Spain then had for theirs

The last quotation is Bid. lib. Hist. cap. 1. omytting the number of the
Book: but having perused all the first Chapters of every book, I find
nothing for any Ceremonies. And whatsoever their should be found in Beda so
late a writer, should be no prejudice unto the authority of our Church in
this time. For as I showed before, that Augustine out of every Church, wa^
willed to choose what ceremonies he thought most conueniente, so his
posterity was not bound to his choice, but as they thought good, some they
added, some they abrogated. But where he notes in the margent, that in these
Authors we may see (...) what tongue service was in they: days, in all
countries. I mar^ayle at his im^udencie, seeing neither in any place by him
quoted (except the last Trid^tine counsel perhaps) there is any word
spoken touching the tongue, wherein service was in their countries, nor in all
their works, is there any thing to prove the contrary, but that every nation
had their service in such tongue as they understood.

As for the leaving out of the prayer for the dead, which is in deed an error
of great antiquity, seeing he quoteth none authority for the justifying of
it. I will refer the Reader to other treatises that I have written against
it: namelye to my confutation of Allens book of Purgatory, and to my
reioynder lately ^ritten to Bristoes reply. So that for any thing which is
brought or quoted, in this reason the service of the Protestants is proved to
be good enough.

The eight Reason.
THe eight reason of refusal which may now be yeleded, why a ^. Loosing the
^enefit of catholic religion.
Catholic may not come to the Protestants churches, is, because by going
thither, he shall loose all the benefit of his own relygion, neither shall he
take any more commodity thereby, then if he were not of that relygion at al.
This is a very great, weighty, and most sufficient reason to be yielded by
catholyckes in England to their Princes for their refusal of coming to
church, and such a one as being sufficiently conceived by her Majesty, cannot
but satisfy her highness, and greatly (...) pitiful (...).
draw her to compassion of the pitiful case of so many thousands of her
loving subjects, who being, as I have said catholics in hearts by going to
Protestants churches, must needs be brought either to flat athisme, that is, to
leave of al conscience, and to care for no religion at al (as many thousan^
seem to b^ resolved to do^) or else to live in continual torment of mind, and
almost desperation, considering that by their going to these Churches, they
loose utterly all use and practice of their own relygion, being held as
Schismatickes, and excommunicate persons of the same: and their case (...),
that if they should die in the same state, they were sure to receive no ^rt of
benefit of that religion no more then if they had been Protestants. The which,
what a danger it is, all true Christian men do both know, and fear.

But yet that the simpler sort, may better understand it, and the wiser,
better consider of it: I will in particular repeat some of the abouesaide
dommages.

First therefore a Catholic, by going to the Protestants Churches, loses
all participation of that blessed sacrifice, of the body and blood of The loss
of (...) cipation of the sacrifice how great a loss.
our Savior, appointed by the said Savior (as I have showed before) to be
offered up daily in the oblation of the Mass, for the commodity of the whole
world, quick and dead, and for that cause (as the godly and learned, Saint
John Chrysostom says.) Called the common sacrifice of Chryso. hom. 47. in ep.
1. ad cor.
the whole world. The which action of offering of this sacred Host, (the
son of God to his father) is of such dignity, excellency and merit, not
only to the Priest, but also to the standers by assisting him: as all the other
good works which a man can do in his life, are not to be compared with it,
seeing that the very angels of heaven do come down at that time, to adore
(after the consecration) that sacred body, and to offer the same up with The
Angels pr^sent at the ^leuation.
us to God the Father of the whole world. As all the holy Fathers of the
Primative church did both believe and teach. Of the which, it shall be enough
at this time, to allege one or two. S. Gregory therefore the first, says
thus What faithful man can doubt but that in the Gre. li. 4. dial cap. 58.
very hour of immolation or sacrifice, the heavens do open at the Priests
voice, and that the quires of Angels, be present there, in that mystery of
jesus Christ? And Saint Chrysostom, handeling the same, Chryso. lib. 6. de
sacerdo.
says. At that time, (the time of consecration in the Mass) the Angels stand
by the Priest, and the universal orders of the celestial powers do cry out,
and the place ^igh to the Altar, is full of quires of Angels in the honor of
him who is there sacrificed. And immediately Two visions at the presence of
(...) gels at the Mass.
after, he tells two visions of holy men, whose eyes were by the power of
God (as he says) opened, and they in those visions saw the Angels present
at the time of consecration. And in an other place, he yet more at large
explicateth the same, saying. At that time dear Chrysostom. hom. 3. cont Ano.
brot^er (at the time of consecration and elevation) not only men do give out
that dreadful cry,) saying we adore thee O Lord etc.) but also the Angels
do bow their knees to our Lord, and the Archangels do beseech him: for they
account that a fit time, having that sacred oblatio^ in their favor. And
therefore as men are wont to move princes the A fit similitude of S* Chrysostom.
more, if they bear olive bows in their hands: (because by ^earing that kind
of wood they bring into the Princes minds, mercy and gentleness:) so, the
angels at that time, (holding out in their hands, the very self same body of
our Lord) they do entreat for all mankind, as though they What plainer
testimony can ther^ be then this.
said: We do entreat O Lord, for the men of the world, whom thou have so
loved, that for their salvation thou wast content to die, and in the Cross, to
breath out thine own soul. For these men we make sup plication, for the which
thou have given thy own blood: for these men we pray, for the which thou have
sacrificed this body of thine. If this be so, then the hearing of Mass, is
not only worth the venturing of an hundred The bearing of a Mass how well
^orth a hundred marks.
marks, or six months imprisonment, but also of an hundred thousand lives, if
a man could loose every one for that cause six times. And an hundred times
miserable is that man, which for any worldly respect does deprive him self
of so great a benefit, as the participation of this sacrifice is.

Secondly, they loose by going to church, the fruit and grace of six sa The
loss of the grace of 6. sacraments what a loss.
craments: as the grace of confirmation by the Bishop, whereby the holy Ghost
was given in the primative church, (as S. Luke says) and now (...) our time,
as S. Cyprian proves) are bestowed upon us by the same, the seven Act. 8. and.
19. Cypr. lib. de vnct. Chry. Esaias. 11. 2. Tim. 1.
gifts of the holy Ghost, set out by Esaias the Prophet in his xi. chapter. They
loose also the grace of Priesthood, so greatly commended by saint Paul to
Timothy, when he charge him so earnestly, not to neglect the said grace.
Also the grace of Matrimony, which S. Paul so much extolleth when he calls
this sacrament, a great sacrament. Also the grace of extreme unction, which is
so great, as S. James says, besides the healing ma Ephesians. 5. Jacob. 5.
ny times of the body, it also remitteth the sick man's sins: And so in like
manner the grace of the other two sacraments, of Penance, and the Altar
whereof I will say a word or two immediately. All these graces they loose,
being cut of (by their going to the Protestants churches) from these
sacraments, which are nothing else, but conduits of grace. The which loss, of
what value it is, a man may guess by that, which all divines with The value of
grace
on accord do prove, that one drop of grace is more worth, then all the
world esteemed in it self besides.

Thirdly, they loose by going to church all the benefi^e of the keys of What
the benefit of the keys of the Church is.
the church, or of the authority of binding and loosing of sins, granted by
Christ to the governors of the same church. For the explication of the
which, we must understand, that Christ having newly made the marriag^ betwixt
his dear spouse and himself,) I mean the church): and having now sealed the
same, with his own blood: and being enforced to depart from the said new
married spouse of his, touching his visible presence for a time: he devised
how to show unto her, how greatly he loved her, and to leave some notable
pledge and testimony of his singular great affection toward her. The which he
finally resolved, could be by no other means better ex pressed, then if he
should leave al his authority with her, the which he Joan. 20.
had received of his father, which making public proclamation to all the A
proclamation of the tribunal for ^inne in eart^.
world, that What soever she should forgive in earth, touching sin, the same
should be forgiven in heaven: and what soever sin, the Church Joan. 6. Mat.
18. Aug. ho. 49. and. 50. and. ho. 41. ibid. Cip. li. 1. ep. 2. Amb. li. 1. ca.
2. de P^. and in Psalm. 38. Atha. sermon. cont. her. Chry. lib. 3. d^ sacer. Hill.
in ca. 18. Mat. H^e. in cap. 18 Mat. Actor. 19. Aug. hom. 41 49. 50. cap. 10.
11. 16. ex. 50. hom. Joan. 20. Aug. li. 2. de Uisita. infir. cap. 4. Leui. 13.
14*
should retain or not forgive in earth, the same should never be forgiven
in heaven. And again: that with what authority GOD his father sent him, with
the same he sent her governors, the Apostles, and their successors. And
again, he that should not hear and obey the Church should be accounted as a
Heathen and Publicane. By the which speeches of Christ, our forefathers have
always vnderst^ode, that Christ gave unto the church a visible tribunal seat
in earth, for the forgiving or retaining of sins, unto the which al
christians must reso^t by submission and humble confession of their sins, if
they think ever to receive forgiveness of the same at Christ his hands in
heaven. For so we read, that in the primative church they confessed their
fins unto the Apostles: of whom S. Luke writes thus. Many of the faith full
came (to the Apostles) confessing and revealing their own acts. And four
hundred years after that, S. Austen testifies of his time, saying, Do you
such penance as is wont to be done in the Church, that the Church may pray
for you. Let no man say, I do it secretly, I do it with God alone, God which
has to pardon me, knows well how that I do repent in my heart. What
therefore, without cause was it said (to the Priests) that which you loose in
earth, shall be loosed in heaven? therefore in vain were the keys given to the
Church? And in an other place again more nearly touching the humor of our men
now a days, he says, There are some which think it sufficient foe their
salvation, if they do confess their sins only to God, to whom nothing is
hidden, and to who^ no man's conscience is unknown. For they will not, or else
they are ashamed, or else they disdain, to show them selves unto the Priests,
whom notwithstanding GOD (by Moses his Law giver) did appointe to discern or
judge between Leprie and Leprie. But I would not that thou should be
deceived, with that opinion, in such The necessity of confession.
sort, that thou should either by naughty shame, or ob^inate (...),
refrain to confess, before the substitute, or Vicegerent of our Lord. For
whom our Lord did not disdain to make his (...), his judgment must thou be
content also to stand to. This benefit therefore of the keys of the church,
and of receiving remission of (...) sins by the same, (which catholics do
think to be the greatest benefit of their religion) do they loose, that go
to the Protestants churches, besides all the good instructions, wholesome
counsels, and virtuous admonitions, which catholics do receive in confession,
at their ghost^y Fathers hands then the which things, they find nothing more
forcible to bring them to good life: especially, if they frequent it often, as
al zealous catholics in the world now do.

Fourthly, they loose the infinite benefit of receiving the blessed sacrament
The loss of not receiving the blessed Sacramet.
of the Altar (the precious body and blood of Christ) being the food of our
souls, and as Christ says. The bread that came down from Joan. 6. Ibidem.
heaven to give life unto the world: To the worthy eating of which heavenly
bread, Christ promises infinite reward, saying. He that eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, has life ever lasting, and I will raise him again at the
last day. And again: He that eatetb me, shall live through Vide Cyril. li. 3.
in Joan. ca. 37. Basil. ad Ce sar. patric. Amb. li. 5. de Sacra. ca. 4. Chrysostom.
ho. 61. ad pop. Antio.
me. Upon which promises of Christ, our forefathers of the Primative church,
have always most earnestly exhorted al men, to the often receiving of this
blessed sacrament, alleging innumerable commodities of the same, and proving
by experience, that the frequenting of this sacrament, is the chiefest means
to come to all grace zeal, feeling, and life in spiritual matters. And on the
contrary part, that the abstayning from the same, is the right way to al
spiritual misery, and for the soul of man to wither away, dry up, and starve:
even as the plant does, that lacks moisture. The which we see now by
experience, in many a thousand, who for lack of the food, of this blessed
Fountain of grace, are as dead, in all spiritual cogitations, and deeds, as a
starued stake in the hedge, from beating of The ^tate of a car^all man.
flowers: and their minds so ouergrowen, with the ^anke weeds of carna^lite,
that there is no differenc betwixt them, and a brute bullock: for, as much
the one follows his passions, as the other. Whereby we see what a loss it is,
to dep^iue themselves from the use of this sacrament. The loss of al merit^
for good works.


Fifthly, they loose all the merit of their good deeds whatsoever. For as S.
Grego^ie says, Even as, none received their penny in the Gospel, Mat. 20.
Greg. li. 35. Mor. ca. 5.
but they only which had labored within the compass of the Vinyarde: so no
man shall receive any reward, for any good deed of his, except he have done it,
within the unity of the Church. So that, if a man should do never so many
good deeds, give never so many alms, nay, Cip. de simprel. Chri. ho. 11. ad.
Ephesians. Vi. D. Tho. 1. 2. and omnes D D. 15. qu. 119.
as saint Cyprian proves, if a man should suffer never so many things for
Christ, yea death it self, yet if he were out of the unity of the catholic
church, he shall have no reward therefore. And not only this, but if a man be
in any mortal sin whatsoever, as long as he abides in the same without
repentance, and confession, al deuines hold, that he loses the reward of al
his good deeds. And the reason is, because no work can be meritorious of it
self, but only by reason of the grace from whence it proceeds: but by every
mortal sin which a man commits, he loo^eth grace, and much more by going
out of the unity of the church. And therefore, in such men until they repent,
there can be no hope of any reward, for any good work which they shall do.

Sixthly, they lose the benefit of Communion of Saints, which we The loss of
the (...) of Saints.
protest to believe in our ^eede. That is, they have no part of the sacrifices,
oblations, prayers, fastings, alms, and other good works, done within the
(...) church, which al other catholics have. Finally, they being Note this
similitude.
cut off, and divided from the unity of the other members, they take part of
no influence, which comes from the head to the body, that is, from Christ to
the church: no more, then a man's hand once cut off, does take blood,
nourishment, spirit, or life, from the arm, from which it is now separated,
as most learnedly saint Austen does discourse. Wherefore Aug. Epist. 50. ad
Bonifacium.
they must needs wither away, and make dry wood for hell fire: and as good
for them it were, in effect, to be of any other religion, as of that, whereof
they take not one jot of commodity. And to al these miseries they are driven,
only by going to the Protestants churches.

The eight Reason
THe eight reason of refusal, why a catholic may net come to y^ (...) churches,
is because by going t^ither, he shall lose all the benefit of his own religion.
This is called a very great, weighty, and most sufficient reason ye^lded by
catholics in England to their Princes, for their refusal of coming to church,
and such a one, as being conceived of her Majesty, cannot but satisfy her
Highness, and greatly draw her to compassion of the pi^iful case of so many
thousands of her loving subjects. Here be words of great importance, but all
the reason hangs upon our loathsome supposition, which if it be denied, as it
cannot be proved, the P^pists ^se nothing by coming to our churches, but
receive inestimable benefit, if as they be present in bodies, so they be
truly converted in mind. But see I pray you, how honorably he thinks of her
Majesty's both wisdom and conscience, y^ he presumes to affirm, she cannot
but be satissied by this reason, which is nothing but a bear s^ppositio^, and
whereas she knows most assuredly, y^ religion which she by law mainteineth to
be y^ only true religion, that she would think any benefit to be lost ^her
loving subjects, by departing from the contrary error And once again, he
ratleth in his many thousa^ds of her loving subjects, by who^ he means ye
obstinate Papists. God forbid her Majesty should have many hu^dreds of such
louinge subjects, as in their heart have received this traitorous and
Antichristian persuasio^, that they are by y^ Popes bull, duly discharged of
all obedience and oath of allegiance, if any they have made to her. But that the
simpler ^ort may better understand this reason, and the wiser better consider
of it, he will in particular, repeat some of the abouesaid damages. The first
loss is, of the participation of the sac^fice of the body and blood of our
Savior, appointed by him to be offered up daily in the oblation of the Mass,
etc. Nay he that is truly converted from Papistry, then first receives ye
benefit of that only sacrifice, which Christ offered for y^ redemption of al
his el^ct, and is discharged of the sacrilegious blasphemy, whereby ye same is
pretended to be often repeted, in the Popish Mass. But Chrysostom is affirmed
for that cause, to call it the common sacrifice of the whole world. I have
showed before how Chrysostom calls the celebration of the Communion, Hom.
17. ad Heb.
a sacrifice, which is rather a remembrance of the singular sacrifice once
offered by Christ him self never to be rei^erated. But the action of offering
of this sacred Host (says he) the Son of God to his Father, is of such
dignity, excellency, and merit, not only to the Priest, but also to the
standers by assisting him: as all the other good works which a man can do, in
his life, are not to be compared with it. Nay of all other blasphemies it is
the most horrible, that a wretched caitife, should presume to offer the Sanne
of God, to his Father, which no creature in heaven or earth, could do, but he
him self by his eternal spirit. But of the sacrifices which the Church does
offer. Irenaeus says: Non sanctificant hominem, etc. They do not sanctify
Heb. 9. L^. 4. ca. 34.
a man, for God has no need of sacrifice, but the conscience of him that
offers, does sanctify the sacrifice, if it be pure, and causes God to
accept it as of a friend This he speaks even of the sacrifice offered in the
Lords Supper, which if it were any other, then of praise and thanksgiving it
were extreme blasphemy, that Irenaeus says of it. Yet let us see what reason
he brings, that not only saying, but also hearing of Mass, should be a
work so mere^orious. The very Angels of heaven (says he) do come down at
that time, to adore that sacred body, and to offer the same up with us to God
the Father, for the whole world: as all the holy Fathers of the primative
church did both believe and teach. Then the Angels also are Priests, if they
offer this sacrifice. But which of all the holy Fathers so does teach, that
we may know they did be^ue. First he cyteth Gregory, Lib. 4. dia. cap. 58.
Whose words are these. What faithful man can doubt, but in the very hour of
immolation or sacrifice, the heavens do open at the Priests voice, and that
the quyers of Angels be present there, in that mystery of Jesus Christ? What
is there in these words to prove, that the Angels do ador^ that sacred
body, or offer up the same to GOD the Father with us* Otherwise we doubt not,
but the Angels of GOD which are present with the faithful, to defend them and
keep them in all their ways, are present also in all holy actions* and
especially in the administration of the holy Sacraments. The same thing, and
in the same words almost, says Chrysostom de sac^rd. Lib. 6. At that time
the Angels stand by the Priest, and the universal orders of the celestial
powers, do cry out, and the place nigh to the A^lter is full of quyres of
Angels in the honor of him who is sacrificed. For the presence of the Angels,
I answer as unto Gregory, for the sacrifice and him that is sacrificed, I
said Chrysostom is the best expounder of himself. Hom. 17. in Epist. ad Hebr.
In the same work, de sacerdo^o. Lib. 3. He says the like hyperbolicall
speech. Nam dum conspicis dominum immolatum, etc.

For while thou see the Lord sacrificed, the Priest leaning over the
Sacrifice, and pouring forth Prayers, the people also that stand about to be
dyed and made read, with that precious blood, do thou think that thou art
still conversant among men, and that thou stand on the earth? Art thou not
rather immediately tr^ted into heaven? Do thou not cast off all cogitation
of flesh, and with naked mind and pure understanding look round about on
those things that are in heaven* etc. These words of his do show that he
speaks of a spiritual presence of Christ's body and blood by faith, which
ascends into heaven, and beholds those things, which the outward eye of
the body cannot atteine to see. As for the visions of Angels that Chrysostom
speaks of in the place by him quoted, prove nothing, but the presence of
them. But Hom. 3. contra Anomaeos, He explicateth the same more at large,
says our Reasoner. At that time my dear brother, not only men do give out
that dreadful cry. Here our Reasoner adds a parenthesis of his own, which
is not in Chrysostom, (saying we adore thee O Lord) etc. But also the Angels
do bow their knees to our Lord, and-the Archangels do beseech him. For they
account that a fit time, having that sacred oblation in their favor. And
therefore as men are wont to move Princes the more if they bear Olive bows in
their hands (because by bearing that kind of wood, they bring into the
Princes mind, mercy and gentleness) so the Angels at that time (proramis
oleagenis in steed of Olive branches he leaves out) ^octom says not in
their hands Co^s domini ipsum portenden^.
holding out in their hands the very self same body of our Lord they do
entreat for all mankind, although they said we do entreat O Lord for the
men of the world, whom thou have so loved, that for their salvation thou wast
content to dye, and on the cross to breath out thine own soul. For these men
we make supplication, for the which thou have given thine own blood: for these
men we pray, for the which thou have sacrificed this body of thine. What
playner testimony can there be then this (says our discourser.) In deed it is
plain enough, to show that Chrysostom calls that thing the very body of
Christ, which in proper speech, was a Sacrament and pledge of the same. And
that the similitude of Olive branches which are a sign of peace, do show.
Again, their holding out of the body of Christ, and entreating God for
mankind by y^ memorial, shows, that they did not hold out Christ, for then
they would have prayed to that which they (...) in their hands: and not to
Christ by contemplation of that. The sense is therefore, in this hyper^olicall
supposition, that the Angels by showing the (...) sacrament of his body once
truly off^ed, which Sacrament was instituted for a remembrance, of that
Sacrifice, to entreat our Savior Christ by that token of remembrance, as men
that carry Olive branches in their hands to (...) Princes. But that the
Angels do^ adore that body in the Host, and offered to God, for us, and with
us, for which purposes this place is cyted, here is nothing said neither of
consecration and ^uation, at which time this supplication of the Angels is
affirmed to be.

The second loss is pretended to be, of the grace of six Sacraments, for
which he brings small reasons, but repeating them says, That by the grace
of confirmation, the holy Ghost was given. Act. 8. 19. In which Chapters is
nothing but of the miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost, wherewith the Pri^e
church was garnished, but are long since ceased. But Cyprian in lib. de ^ct.
Christi, aduoucheth the same. It is true that the Author of that work, de
cardinalibus Christi operibus, Whosoever it was, makes mention of that
Ceremony of anointing used in his time, as also the Ceremony of washing of
feet after the example of Christ, which he makes of as great importance, as
the other. The grace that Timothy had by imposition of hands. 2. Timothy,
which the Apostle wills him not to neglect, was extraordinary, and
miraculous, and therefore makes nothing for the Ceremony of unction, neither
is there any word of unction there uttered. That Saint Paul* calls
Matrimony a Sacrament in the Popish Ephe. (...).
translation, it can not make it a Sacrament of the new Testament, which is,
and was ever before Christ* A great mystery of the spiritual coniun^ion of
Christ and his Church: although the Apostle do not say expressly that
Matrimony is a Mystery thereof, but says the conjunction of Christ and his
Church is a great Mystery.

The unction whereof Saint James speaks* cannot be understood of extreme
^tion of the Papists, seeing he promises health and recovery unto the
diseased, whereas the Papists never ministered it but unto them, of whose
bodily health it is dispaired, although our Reasoner say, that many times it
heals the body. Therefore it is manifest that Saint James speaks of an
extraordinary gift of healing, which was in the Church by anointing M^rke*
(...).
with ^yle, as the Evangelist also does witness.

The third benefit that is said to be lost by going to Church, is all the
benefit of the keys of the church, or of the authority of binding or losing.
But this is nothing so, for by going to Church, where they may hear the
Gospel truly preached, they may be made partakers of the keys, wherewith
heaven is opened, and of remission of sins at the hands of God by the
ministry of his word. As for consession of their sins, such as the
Scriptures requires, and the Primitive Church practiced, they shall make daily:
But Popish ^hrift no Scripture requires, neither did the ancient Church
practice it. They that confessed their dooinges. Acts the 19. m^de open, and
not auricular confession. But for proof of Popish auricular confession (as I
think) Augustine is quoted in many Homelies, not (...) whereof, saying, Do
you such penance, as is wont to be done in the Church, that the Church may
pray for you. Let no man say, I do it secretly, I do it with God alone, etc.
These words are manifest that he speaks of open confession of such as had
openly offended the Church, and were to make open satisfaction for the same.
But more nearly touching the humor of our men, he says, etc. And so cites
a long saying out of the book de visitatione infirmorum, lib. 2. Cap. 4. Which
was never written by Augustine, nor by any other man of wit or learning. S^che
counterfeite stuff is meet to defend such false doctrine, as that:
Wherefore although we urge not auricular confession, neither make we a
Sacrament of repentance, because it has no visible sign proper unto it, yet
the benefit of the keys of the Church is not lost, but of such as be truly
converted from Papistrie, with an inestimable comfort to be found in our Church.

The fourth loss is laid to be of receiving the blessed Sacrament of the
Altar, the precious body and blood of Christ) being the food of our souls.
There is no reason brought for this loss, but the only tedious supposition
that the body and blood of Christ is received only in the Popish Church. And
whereas he commends the often receiving of the Sacrament, it is well that
the Papists who within time of men's remembrance made small account of often
receiving, as appears by their infinite private Masses, now at length have
found out, that the Sacrament is ^ot ordained to be looked on, but to be often
received.

Fifthly, they loose (says he) all the merit of their good deeds Lib. 35.
Mor. Cap. ^
whatsoever, for which he^ cites Gregory, even as none receives their penny
in the Gospel, but they only which had labored within the compass of the
Vineyarde, so no man shall receive any reward, for any good deed of his,
except he have done it, within the unity of the Church. To this saying I
agree, which speaks of the reward and not of the merit: but that they which
come to our Church, may not be members of the true Church of Christ, there is
not a (...) or letter brought for proof.

Sixthly, they loose the benefit of the Communion of Saints says he, and
finally, being cut off and ^ut from the other members, they take no part of
influence, which comes from the head to the body, etc. Here except we
grant that vile supposition, that the Popish Sinag^gue is the only Catholic
Church of Christ, there can be no consequence, but to prove that point which
is the whole matter in debate, we hear never a word.

The ninthe Reason.
The ninthe reason which catholics may yield, for their refusal of Examp^e of
I^fidels and ^ikes.
going to the church, may be, the example of all men, from the beginning,
which have had any care or conscience toward their own religion: not only good
men, (of whom I have given diverse examples before) but also al others, how
false and erroneous soever their religion were, yet did they always procure to
separate them selves, from them of the contrary religion, in the act of
prayer: and from the Temples, Sinagogues, churches, Lact. li. 4. and 5. (...).
(...). Cur. Sec. de. hist. Maho. Chro. Wolfan. Dris^. Eus. lib. 3. and 4. Aug.
lib. de Unit. Eccle. and lib. 2. con. P^til.
Oratories, and conuenticies of the same. So we read of the Gentiles which
thought it to be a great sin and pollution, to enter into the Jews
Synagogues, or Christians churches. The like we read also, of the Turks at
this day. So all heretics from the beginning, as soon as they had framed any
new religion: eftsoons they e^ected new Oratories to them selves, and
refused to come to those of other religions, as the Arians, Donatistes, and the
rest, had their churches and places of prayer distinct from the catholics,
whose churches they (...) and avoided, together with their doctrine. And so the
Anabaptists at this day, refuse to go to the Lutherans church, and the
Lutherans to the Trinitaries. In like wise the Puritans of our ^ime in England
refuse to come to the Protestants churches. And the Protestants in other The
(...) are R^cusants also in other countries.
countri^s, do utterly deny to present themselves to catholic Churches:
alleging their conscience for the same, and affirming it to be damnable
hypocrisy, in them that for fear, or for any other temporal re^pect, do yield
to do the same against their faith and conscience. Whereby it appears, that
they go quite against their own doctrine and example in England, which object
the same to Catholics as disobedience, obstinacy, and rebellious dealing,
which in other countries they them selves both teach and practice. I will for
more manifestation of this matter, put down here the very words of one of
them, translated out of French, and An. Dom. 1578. Art. 86.
printed in England, and dedicated to the Lord Treasurer, by John Brook, The
Authors name is John Gardener, a Protestant, who in his Cathechisme, or, as he
calls it, Confession of his faith, makes it a great he^ous sin, for
Protestants to present them selves to our catholic churches, which he
(according to their blasphemous spirit,) calls, idolatrous. His words are
these.

I believe and confess, that it is not lawful, for any Christian, to be
assistant, neither in spirit nor body, at the Sacrifices of idolators, nor also
to enter in^o their Temples whilst they are doing their idolatries, and
Sacrifices, except it be to rebuke them, in showing them their abuses, and to
teach them the truth, as the holy Apostles and Prophets have done, and not for
to dissemble as hypocrites. For if the body bre a creature of God, ( as it is)
as the soul is the temple of the holy Ghost, and member of the mystical body
of Christ: and if it must one day r^se again, and possess the eternal life
with the soul: It must also necessarily be, that it be altogether given unto
the service of God, in this world with the soul and spirit ^ otherwise they
can not be joined together after the general resurrection: but being separated,
the one should be in heaven with God, whom he loved, and the other in hell,
with the devil whom he served, the which is an impossible thing. Therefore I
say, al those dissimulations to be a very renouncing of Christ, and of his
Gospel. And in like manner: I believe and confess, that all those feigned and
false shows, by which, the verity of the Gospel is hidden, and the word of
God despised, or by which, the ignorant and infidel is confirmed in his error,
or by which the weak is offended, are not of Cod, but of Satan, altogether
contrary unto the truth of the word. Therefore, we must not halt of both
sides, but go uprightly before that great God, which sees, beholds, and
knows, all things, even before they are begun.

Lo here, We see the sentence of their Doctors to the contrary, who press
us so much to go to their Churches, against our consciences. Iferrour find
such zeal, what zeal ought truth to have: If these fellows, each of them,
for the defense of their private fond fancies, be content most willi^gly, to
adventure any danger or extremity whatsoever, rather then to come to the true
catholic church, wherein they were borne, and to the which in Baptism they
swore obedience: why should such blame be laid upon us, for standing in
defense of our consciences, We, not born nor bred up in the pro testants
church.
and for refusing to go to their churches, wherein, we were neither borne, nor
bread up, nor ever persuaded that they had any truth, or holiness in them?
This reason only, may suffice any reasonableman especially the Protestant,
except he will mislike with his own doctrine, which condemns me of
hypocrisy, dissimulation, and renouncing of Christ, and his Gospel. If I
present but my only body to the churches of them, whose Religion I am not
persuaded to be true: The which saying of his in a sense, has good reason:
albeit the works and meaning (...) wicked. For if One onl^ religion true, and
(...) false.
there be no man either so foolish, or impious in the world, but must needs
think that one only religion amongst christians, is true, and al other false:
And if every man which has any religion, and is resolved therein, must needs
presuppose this only truth, to be in his own religion then ^t follows
necessarily, that he must likewise persuade himself that all other religions
besides his own, are false and erroneous, and consequently a^l assemblies,
conuenticles, and public acts of the same, to be wicked, damnable,
dishonorable to God, contumelious to Christ, and therefore to his conscience
(which thinks so) detestable. Now then suppose the case thus.

I know in E^gland certain places, where at certain times and days No^ this
(...).
assemblies are made, by certain men, in show, to honor and commend, but in
my conceit, to dishonor, dispraise, and impugn, the majesty of my most dread
Sovereign Lady the Queen: And I am invited thither to hear the fame by my
parents, kinsmen, and acquaintance: nay I am enforced thither by the greatest
authority, that under her Majesty may command me: Tell me now: If I
should go thither under any pretense whatsoever, of gratifying my friends, or
by commandment of any her inferior powers: can her Majesty take it well, or
account of me, better then of a tratierous catiue, for yielding my self to
stay there, to hear them: to countenance their doings with my presence: to
hold my peace when they speak evil of her: to hold my hands whiles they
slander her: and A very certai^ (...)*
finally, to say nothing whiles they induce other men to forsake her, and her
cause? And if her Majesty, or any other prince in the world, could not bear
at their subjects hands, any such dissimulation, treachery, or treason: how
much less shall the omnipotent Majesty of God, (who requires, and deserves
much more exact service at our hands,) bear this dissimulation, and
traitorous dealing of ours, if we be content, for temporal respects, and for
satisfaction of any mortal power, less then himself to present our selves to
such places and assemblies, where we shall The things that a man must hear at
Church.
hear his Majesty dishonored, his son slaundered, his word falsified, his
church impugned, his Saints and Martyrs discredited, his Bishops and
Pastors reviled: and all the whole Ecclesiastical Ierarchie rent, broken,
disseuered, and turned vpside down: and his people (purchased with his blood,
and dearer unto him then his own life) excited and stirred up against him and
his Ministers: and by sweet words, and gay benedictions, Rom 16.
flocked away to the slaughter house of heresy?

What noble man is there in the world, which could take it well, if he
should see his friend, and much more his son, in the company of his
professed enemy, at such time principally as he knows that his enemy Averie
fit comparison.
abuses him in speech, and seeks most his discredit and dishonor: but
especially, if he should see him come in open assembly of the world, to the
bar, against him, in company with his adversary, when his said adversary
comes of set purpose to deface him, (as Heretics do to their Churches and
Pulpettes to dishonor GOD,) I think (I say (he could hardly bear it. And
shall such disdain be taken by a mortal man, for a little injury and
discurtesie showed: and shall not the justice of God, be revenged upon our
treachery and dissimulation in his cause?

If I give my servant but forty shillinges a year, yet I think him (...)
example to confound us.
bound to defend me in all points and causes, to be friend to my friends,
enemy to my adversaries, to uphold my credit, maintain my honor, to resist
my detractours, and to revenge himself upon my evil willers: and if he can
be content to hold his peace hearing me spoken of, and to put up my slander
without opening his mouth: I will account him unworthy to wear my cloth: how
much more inexcusable shall we be, at the dreadful day of judgment, if we,
receiving at our Lord and masters hands, such extraordinary pay for our
service in this life, and expecting The great pay in God his service.
further and above this, all that himself is worth, for the eternity of the
life to come: his kingdom, his glory, and his everlasting joy, with his riches
and treasures unspeakable, which neither ear ever heard, nor eye 1. Cor. 2.
saw, nor heart of man conceived, how great they are: how (...) (I say) shall
we be, at that terrible rekoning day, and how confounded, by the examples of
servants in this life, (so zealous for their masters, upon so small wages) if
we, notwithstanding al our rewards both present and to come, shall be yet key
cold in our master his service, present at his injuries and silent at his
slanders? An (...) to an objection.


Neither suffices it to say, that these suppositions are false, and that there
are not such things committed against God, at the Protestants chur ches and
services: for howesoeuer that be (whereof I dispute not now) yet I being in my
heart of an other religion, must needs think not only them, but also all
other religions whatsoever to commit the same, as I know, they do also think
of mine. Wherefore, how good and holy soever they were, yea if they were
Angels, yet should I be condemned for going amongst them: for that in my
sight, judgment, and conscience, (by which only I must be judged) they must
needs seem enemies to God, being of the contrary religion. By this it may
appear, how grievously Heinous (...) enforce an other man to do against his
conscience.
they sin daily in England, and cause other to sin with them, which
compelmen by terror, to do acts of religion against their consciences: as to
take oaths, receive sacraments, go to Churches, and the like, which being
done (as I have said) with repugnant consciences, is horrible mortal sin,
(as has been already proved) and consequently, dam nable both to the doers,
and to the enforcers thereof. The which, I beseech God to give his grace, both
to the one and the other part, duetifully to consider: that either these may
leave of to enforce, or those learn to sustain, as they ought, their
inforcement.

And thus now we may see what great and weighty reasons the Conclu^ons
drawn out of (...) premises.
Catholics have, to lay for their refusal of coming to the Churches of
Protestants The which if they were well conceived by the Prince, and
magistrates, it is not likely, that they would press them to the yielding too
such inconveniences against the health of their own souls: but if they
should, yet ought the other, to bear any pressure whatsoever, rather the^ to
sal into far^e worse dangers. And of this that I have said here before there
may be gathered these conclusions following, not unnecessary to be noted, for
better perspicuities sake, to the unlearned.

First it follows of the premises, that this going to the Protestants The
first co^sion.
churches, is forbidden not only by the possitiue laws of the church,
dispensable by the Church again: but also by Gods law, and the law of
nature, as the consideration of most of the reasons does declare. For albeit,
it be prohibited by the church, yet not only by the church: seeing that a
thing may be prohibited by the canons of the church (for more plain
explicatio^s sake) which was forbidden before by the law both of nature and of
God also: as Adultery, Violence, Simonie, and the like. Even so, albeit going
to heretical assemblies be prohibited by the church: yet because it has in
it, or necessarily annexed to it, diverse things which are prohibited by the
law of God and nature, (as peril of infection, Scandale, deniyng of our faith
when it is made a sign distinctiue, or commandment disse^bling in gods
cause, honoring gods enemies dishonoring the catholic church, and the like)
therefore, the whole act of going to church, is said to be prohibited also.
^ure diuino, and naturali. That is, by the law of God and nature. And hereof
it follows, that no power upon earth can dispense A notable devise.
with the same. Wherefore, that which has been given out (as is said by some
great men) that the Pope by his letters to her Majesty, did offer to confirm
the service of England, upon condition that the title of Supremacy might be
restored him again, is impossible to be so: so that, if any such letters came
to her Majesty's hands, they must needs be fained and false.

Secondly, it follows of premises, that this going to church is not The 2.
conclusion
only unlawful* Ratione Scandali, by reason of Scandal, (as some will have it.)
For albeit Scandal be one reason, why it is unlawful, and that in such sort,
as is almost impossible to be avoided: yet you see, that I have given diverse
other causes besides Scandal, which make it unlawful. Whereof it follows,
that a man cannot go to their churches, albeit he might go in such secret
manner, or otherwise have their service in his house so privily, as no Scandale
should follow thereof, or any man know thereof, (which is notwithstanding
impossible to do, but if it could be, yet were the thing unlawful,
especially for the 1, 4. 5. 6. 7. reasons before alleged.

Thirdly i^ follows, that a man may not go to church under any The 3.
conclusion.
vain pretense, as pretending that he goes only for obedieuce, and not for
any liking he has to their service: yea although he should protest the same
openly for that protestation should rather agrauate then diminishe the sin.
Seeing by this protestation, he should testify unto the whole world, that
he did a thing against his conscience. As if a man should proteste, that he
did think that to rail against the Pope, at A (...) not serve.
Paul's cross, were naught, and yet for obedience sake, (being so commanded)
would do it. The which was Pilates case, who protested Mat. 17.
first, that he thought Christ innocent, and therefore sought to Pilates (...).
deliver him: but in the end (fearing the displeasure of the Jews, and their
complaint to the Emperor) washed his hands, and so condemned him: thinking by
that protestation to have washed of the sin, and to have laid it on the
Jews necks, which compelled him thereto. But (I think) by this time he has
felt, that he was deceived. For when a Mark this objection, of going to the
material Church.
thing it self is naught, no protestation can make it lawefull, but rather
makes the doing of it a greater offense, by adding the vnlawefulnesse of the
thing the repugnaunce of the doers conscience. But you will perhaps say: to go
to the material church, is not a thing evil of it self. I answer and grant
that it is true. But you must not single out the matter so. For in this one
action of going to church, there be many things contained, whereof the whole
action is compounded. As for example, there is the material church: the
possession of the same by the enemy of the catholic religion: the service and
sermons in reproof of the same religion: the days and hours appointed for
the same: the bell ringing and publikly calling al men thither: the Princes
commandment for the Catholics to go to the same: the end of the
commandment in general, that they, by going, How many things (...) in going
to church
should pray with them, allow of their service, and by their presence, honor
it. Then is there the peril of infection: the scandal whereby I offend other
men's consciences: and perhaps bring diverse other to be corrupted by my means:
the dishonouring of God his case: the honoring of his enemies cause: hearing
God blasphemed, and holding my peace: Semblably there is the conscience of the
catholic, that thinks he does naught: the explication of the church, that is
not lawful: the matter now in trial: and the unlawfulness of it, defended
both by word and writings of learned men, ann by imprisonment of many other:
the controversy now known to all the world and many thousand men's eyes fixed
upon them, that are called in question for it: the Protestant, whereas he
esteemed nothing of goeing to Church before, yet now so desirous to obtain it,
that he thinks the yielding in that one point, to be a sufficient yielding
to all his desires: the which thing on the other side, is so detested of the
true catholics, that, whosoever yields to this, they think him a flat
Schismatike, and so abhor him. And by this means the matter is made a sign
distinctiue betwixt religion and religion: whereof again it follows, that if
the thing were much less then it is (as for example, the holding up of a
finger) yet because it is made, Tessera, a mark, token, or sign of yeeling to
their proceedings in religion, it were viterly unlawful. As if a man should
but lift up a straw to the devil, in token of obedience, it were as much, as
Note this simi^.
if he did, word by word, deny his Creed. These points, and many more that
might be thought of, being put together, and one entyre action made of them,
the question is, whether this enty^e action of going to church, with these
annexes, be of it self unlawful or no? And every wise man will think it is.
Neither, if you could by some device, pluck from this action one or two of
these things, must we think that by and by the action were lawful. As for
example, if by a protestation you could signify that your mind were not in
going thither, to consent to their service: as also, that the princess mind
to you in particular, were only that you should go for temporal obedience
sake, yet were not by this all the matter amended. For if a piece of meat were
venomous for ten causes concurring together, ifyou should take away two of
them, and so eat it, you might for all that be poisoned therewith.

One only thing there is, which as the Divines judge, might make going (...)
that sort a man may go to Church with 4* qualifications.
to church lawful: which is, if a man did go thither for some mere,
particular, known, ^emporal business: as to bear the sword before the Prince to
the chapel: to consult of matters of war at Poules by the Princes appointment:
albeit it were in time of service, and thelike. But here is to be noted, that I
say first, for mere temporal business, For if a man should go, partly for
service, and partly for temporal business, as to talk with the church warde^s
in the church after service, it will not serve. Secondly I say, for particular
The 1. qualificatio^
temporal business. For it is not enough for the Prince to say in general, I
The 2. qualificatio^
will have you go only for obedience, which is a temporal respect, without
assigning any particular business to be don. For that was the saying of
alprinces to the martyrs in the primitive church, that they would have the^
confoo^ them selves in exterior actions, to other men: and that for obedience
sake, howsoever they meant inwardly. Thirdly I say, for some known business:
(...) 3. qualificatio^
For if the business were not known, men might think that they went of
conscience to service: and therefore to take away this scandale, they ought
(...) 4. qualificatio^
to protest for what business they go. To these three qualificatio^s, add this
forth, which is, that a man that should thus go, might not give any sign of
reverence or honor to their service: as by kneeling, putting of his hat, o^
the like more then he would do, if the service were not there. And that it is
lawful to go to any church of theirs observing these four points, it is
evident. For this is as much to say, as not to go to church at all: seeing he
goes in this case, to their mere material church, that is, to that matterial
house or building, which is their church: neither goes he to it as to a
church, but as to a house to do his business in. And this was the case of
Naaman the Syria^, who being vpo^^ sudden converted from Idolatry, promised,
4. Reg. 5.
The case of (...)*
that he would never sacrifice or offer more to Idols: howbeit, because his
office was to stay up the king of Syria with his hands, when he went to adore
the Idolles in the temple of Remnon, and because he could not do that, except
he bowed himself down, when the king bowed down, who used to lean upon him:
for this cause he desired the Prophet Elizeus to pray to God for him, that it
might be pardoned him: and the Prophet answered him, depart in peace. Which
words can importe no more, but a granting to his request: which was, to pray
to God that he would pardon him, if he went so to chuch, or at the uttermost
(as some will enforce it) a tolleration with him, being yet a Proselite or a
new gotten man, to do this temporal service unto his king: (for he went not
upon commandment to show his religion as our men do) especially, it being
Act. 19. Gal. 5.
such a country, as no scandale could follow thereof. And that many things are
tolerated with nouices, which afterward are taken away, it appears by S.
Paul, who circumcised Timothy for satisfying the weak Jews, and yet afterward
he condemned in all menal circumcision. Neither makes it any matter although he
say. Si ador auero in templo Remnon, adora^te rege in eodemloco, vt ignoscat
mihi Dominus pro hacre. That is, If I shall adore in the temple Remnon, when
the king does adore in the same place, that God will pardon me for this thing.
As though he should ask pardon for to adore the Idols with the king. This
kind of speech (I say) imports Adoring i^ (...) in the scripture foe (...)
nothing. For neither does he ask pardon to commit Idolatry thereby, seeing
immediately before he said, that he would never omit it more:) nor if he had
asked such leave, could the Prophet have licenced him, or would Cod have
pardoned him: But his meaning was only, to have pardon for his serving theking
in that place, and bowing down with him for the better staying of him up, when
he did adore. For the same word which we translate here adore, does in Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin, signify often times only bowing down, without any divine
adoration. As when Iaoob Genesis 32.
adored his brother Esaw seven times, that is, bowed down to him seven times.
And David adored Ionathas king Saul his son three times. Abigaile also
adored David twice. And the like in other places of scripture, 1. Reg. (...).
1. Reg. 15.
where adoring, is taken for bowing down only, without any divine adoration at
al, as here it is in this place.

Fourthlye and lastly, it follows of that which is spoken before, The 4.
conclusion.
that seeing this going to church is so forbidden by Gods law, as it is, and
has so many great inconveniences in it as has been showed: that a man may not
yield in any one little point in the same: as for example, to come to church
once a year, to have service in his house, to show him self present at a
piece of service, or the like. For most certain it is, that if all be not
lawefull, then no part of it is lawefull. And Christ says, that Mat. 5.
he will not have one jot of his law to be past over vnkeept: and who soever
shall break one of the least of his commandments, shall have least part in
the kingdom of heaven. The which words of Christ, Jacob. 2.
Saint James explicating, says. He that keeps all the whole law, and
does offend but one thing only, yet is he guilty in all the rest. And Apoc.
2.
Christ himself in the Apocalipes commends much the Angel of Ephesus, for
his good works, labor, patience, and for many things besides, there recited:
but yet, for being imperfect in some things, (contrary to the will Mat. 5.
of Christ which would have us perfect) he is commanded to repent quickly,
under the pain of leesing his candlestick, that is, of leesing his vocation,
and his place in the book of life: so unspotted will God have our service God
will (...) ^s perfect.
to be. In prefiguration whereof, all Sacrifices of the old Testament, were
commanded to be of unspotted creatures, of one color, of one age, without
mayme or deformity, whereby is signified, that God accepts no Leui. 3. Number.
28. Ezech. 43.
partition, no maime in our service, but either all or none must be his. For a
little leven so wreth a great deal of do we, and a small spot disfygureth a
fair garment. Which S Paul urges far, by the example of Christ, when he
says. That Christ died for us, to the end we should exhibit 1. Cor. 5.
Colos. 1.
our selves holy and unspotted, and irreprechensible in his sight. As though he
should say: Christ spared nothing, no not his own life for us, that by his
example we might be provoked to give our selves wholly to him, and his service,
without limitation or reservation at all, and thereby show our selves
unspotted se^auntes and irreprehensible. Which thing the Noble champion of
Christ S. Basile well considered, when being required The noblecourage of Saint
Basil
by the Emperors leefetenaunte, to conform him self in some small Tho.
(...). 4. cap. 17.
things to the Emperors request, and thereby purchase quietness to the whole
church, rather then by obstinacy (as he termed it) to exasperate things
worse: he answered, that persuasion to be fit for children and not for him:
who was ready to suffer any kind of death or torment rather then to betray any
one syllable of Gods divine truth: adding further, that he esteemed much, and
desired the Emperors friendship if it might be joined with godliness, but
if not, he must needs contemn it, as pernicious. So resolute servants had
God in those days, and the like desires to have now.

Here of also follows an other thing which I had almost passed over We may
not procure others (...) say falsely for us.
untouched, that a Catholic, may not procure any other to affirm or swear
for him falsely, that he has been at Church, received the Communion, or the
like: nor accept the same, if any would offer such service: but if others did
it, without his procurement, he may hold his peace, and use their sin to his
own quietness, except Scandale should ensue thereof, and then were he bound
to disclose the truth. For as I have noted before, out of Saint Cyprian, he
which seeks sleightes in excuse of his faith denies the same, and the
seeming to obey laws, made and published In Epist. cler. romans apud Cyp. Epist.
31
against true religion, is taken by god for obeying indeed, and so punished for
the fact it self. The which most worthy and excellent saying of Christ his
holy Martyr God grant we may al well bear in mind, and execute, as Gods cause
and glory shall require: especially those, which are by peculiar prerogative,
called to the Public trial of the same. Whom God of his mercy so strengthen
with his grace, as his holy name may be glorified in them, and their
Persecutors molified, by their constant, mild, and sober behavior.

And thus (my dear good friend) I make an end of the first point, The
conclusion o^ this first part.
which I promised too handle, concerning the reasons which Catholics have, to
stand in the refusal, of going to the church against their consciences: having
said much less, then might be said in this matter, and yet more then I
purposed at the beginning. But I am to crave most earnestly at your hands, and
of al them that shall chance to see this Treatise, to have charitable
consideration of my great haste in writing of the same, which was such, as I
had not time to suruew, or read any part of it, over again. Wherefore, if any
thing be in it, whereby you may be edified, or any wayinructed: I am glad, and
to Gods glory only be it. If not, yet surely my meaning was good, and to no
man's offense: only coveting hereby to give some The first part of the Authors
meaning.
satisfaction to them in England, especially to her majesty and the Right
honorable her counsel, touching the principles which catholics have, to
refuse that conformity, which is demanded at their hands, the which as I have
proved they cannot admit, (remaining in conscience of the contrary Religion)
without evident danger of their own souls. Whereof if her Majesty, and their
honors may in time be made capable: then howesoeuer things pass otherwise,
yet shall catholics retain s^l, their deserved opinion, of honest and true
subjects, which they most desire, and the displeasure taken against the^, for
this refusal, be diminished, when it shall be manifest, that the same proceeds
not of will, but of conscience, and judgment in Religion, which is not in an
honest man's hands to frame at his own pleasure.

Moreover, my meaning was to give some information, touching the quality of
this sin of going to the church of a contrary Religion, and his The second
part of the Authors (...).
circumstances, for them, that either remained doubtful in the same, or not
rightly persuaded. Of the which two effects, if any one follow, I shall be most
glad: if not, yet I serve (as I trust) such a master, as rewards the affect,
as well as the effect, and the will, no less then the work it self. Wherefore,
to his holy hands I commit the whole: assuring my self, that, as this cause of
his catholic Church, imports him more, then it does us: so his peculiar care
of the same ^urre surmounteth any care of man, and therefore whatsoever shall
become of this, or any other labor taken for the same: yet he will never cease
to raise up men, for the defense of it, against all enemies to the worlds end.

The nienth Reason.
THe last reason is the example of Infidels and heretics, al which procure to
seperat themselves from the^ of the contrary religion, in ye act of prayer etc.
Which example of it self me think is a simple reason to teach true Christians
what they ought to do. And especially when it is brought to prove, y^ me^
ought not to join themselves with the congregation of the faithful, which by
none other reason is disproued to be ye true church, but by a lewd and
unlearned suppositio^. But the Procesta^ts themselves (says he) are recusants
also in other countries. Yea and very good cause why they should, seeing they
ought to absteyne from idolatry and superstition which is committed daily in
the popish churches. But thereby (says he) It appears: that they go quite
against their own doctrine and example in England, which object the same to
catholics, as disobedience, obstinacy, and rebellious dealing within other
countries, they themselves both teach and practice.* Alas poor Sophister, this
is sorry stuff. The true Christians teach and practice that they may not be
defiled with idolatry, therefore heretics be not disobedient, obstinate and
rebellious, when they refuse to communicate with the true church and submit
the^selnes to ye godly laws of a christian magistrate. Yet the mad man
pleases himself so much in this absurd conscience, y^ after he has alleged
a large cofession of one John Gardener to prove y^ Protestants refuse to
communicate with papists, he says. This Reason only may suffice any
reasonable man, especially, the Protestant, except he will mislike with his own
doctrine, which condemns me of hypocrisy, dissimulation, and renouncing of
Christ and his gospel, If I present but my only body, to the churches of the^,
whose religion, I am not persuaded to be true. As though the Prince and
Magistrates, y^ execute the laws for coming to church, would have the papists
to come like hypocrites, disse^blers, and counterfeiters, and not rather y^ they
may hear the word of God preached, be instructed, believe, and be saved. But
why may not this argument of example be retorted upon his own neck^. The
Protestants recusants in other countries are not allowed by the papists (but
against their will) to allege their conscience for their refusal, but are
either compelled to conform themselves to Popery, or else are cruelly put to
death. No more should the pretense of conscience excuse the papists, but that
they Apoc. 18*
should^ receive the same measure which they meat to others, and of ye cup
which they have mingled to other, be made to drink a double portion them
selves. After this he puts a case and question whether he might resort to
such assemblies, as should be pretended to be kept in her majesty's honor, but
indeed we greatly to her dishonor, upon any in^itation of friends, or
commandment of authority, and how her majesty might justly conceive of him,
in such resorting* in the end, He concludes, that in the assemblies of the
Protestants, in their church: he shall hear the majesty of God dishonored,
his son slaundered, his holy word falsefied. O monstrous invention, Is Gods
majesty dishonored, where he alone is taught to be honored served, obeyed,
glorified in all things? Is his son sta^dered, which is taught to be our only
spiritual king, prophet, and high priest, savior, redeemer, mediator, aduocat,
and head of his church? Is his holy word falsified, which is set forth to be
the only sufficient rule, direction and doctrine to instruct us in all truth.
As for y^ impugning of Gods church, d^screditing of his saints and martyrs*
reuiling of his bishops, and pastors, and seduction of his people into heresy,
are mere flaunders, as void of truth, as they are of proof. And therefore
the comparison and example which follows as they may serve where truth is
defended against heresy: so are they altogether preposterous, where heresy is
maintained against true religion. But now he makes an answer to an objection,
and says* Neither suffices it to say, that those suppositions are false, and
that there are not such things committed against God at the Protestants
churches and services: for howsoever that be (whereof I disput not, nor yet, I
being in heart of another Religion, must needs think, not only them, but also
al other Religions whatsoever to commit the same, as I know they do also
think of mine. The conclusion is, that they must not do anything against
their conscience, upon dissimulation etc. Whereto I yield, but it is the
Magistrates duty to provide, by doctrine and penalty, that their conscience
may be better instructed, especially seeing this their Patron, groundeth all
his reasons upon false suppositions, whereof he will not dispute, because he
knows he is not able to defend them. And therefore the Prince and Magistrates
can no more be mo ued with these niene Reasons, not to proceed in ex^cution of
the godly laws, then the Judge on the benche can be moved by as many
reasons, that show no more, but how heinous a thing it is to condemn an
innocent, to forbear pronouncing of sentence against one that is convicted at
the bar of felony. The reasons thus unreasonably discoursed, he gathers
out of the same, certain short conclusions, which because they are all
aunsweared before, I will not now stand to repeat the answers, only where any
new matter occurreth, I will briefly note it upon the first conclusion: he
aunsweareth another conclusion, that no power upon earth can dispense with
going too Church, which is prohibited by the law of GOD and nature. Here he
bids open war to the Canonists, which defend that the Pope may dispense
almost with all matters. And see we not in his dispensations for marriage, that
a man may marry his brother or sisters daughter, Leuit. 18.
which is contrary both to the law of God and nature, that the Pope does
dispense with such marriage, what the Pope did offer by his letters to her
Majesty, I never heard it reported which he says is given out by some great
men. But I have heard of them, which a^firmed that they have seen, the Popish
Dispensation, y^ for time of Schism, a Priest might go to Church and more the^
that.

In the 3. conclusion is contained a case with 4. qualifications, in which a
papist might lawfully go to Church, namely, for some mere, particular,
known, te^porall business, without giving any sign of reverence and honor to
their service. Which is nothing to y^ purpose or matter in question, which is,
whether Papists y^ are so obstinate ye they will not be taught, are to be
compelled either to yield too instruction, or too suffer punishment until
they shall be willing.

In the later end he shameth not to repeat, that his meaning was to give some
satisfaction to her Majesty, and the Right Honorable of her council, touching
the Principles (he should rather have said the petition of principles) which
catholics have, to refuse that conformity, which is demanded at their hands.
Nay rather her Majesty and Council, when they see that Papists have no
reasons to yield for their obstinacy, but such as stand upon so unreasonable
suppositions, as no man living, would grant against his cause and religion,
they may be better encouraged to proceed in punishing that contumacie, which
is not grounded upon any approved reason or authority of Gods word, but upon
the mere wilfulness and suppositions of wicked and ungodly men, which
howsoever being now disappointed of the intended massacres and treasonable
purposes, they would be taken for honest and true subjects, yet can they not
persuade any wise man, that they depending upon the oracle of Antichrist, who
has taken upon him, like a proud Instrument of Satan, to depose her Majesty
from her royal throne, and to discharg a^ her subjects of their duty and
obedience to her highness, may be true or faithful subject to their Prince,
except they do utterly renounce and defy the Pope.

The first part of this treatise being ended, I know not what friend of his,
makes his excuse for omission of the second and third part promised in the
beginning, whereof the one was, what way or means Papists may use too remedy
or ease themselves, of this affliction now laid upon them, for their
conscience. The other if that way or means do not prevail, then how they
ought too bear and endure the same, These parts the writer (says he) part ly
by evil disposition of body, and partly by other sudden business falling upon
him, he was enforced to leave out.

But the contents of the second part which is missing should be to show (as
he says) How the only way which catholics have of remedy or easement in
these their afflictions, is prayer and humble recoursevnto the good nature,
mercy, and wisdom of the Queens Majesty: confuting the custom of al
heretics, which in every country where they are contraried, seek to molest
and disturb by rebellion, their Lords and heads. What need the confutation
in writing, when we have seen it in practice of deeds. Let the rebellion in
the north serve for a good example, to confute all heretics that rebel
against their Princes. Let the procurement of invasion of the Queens dominions
by the Italians and Spaniards under the Popes banner displaied in field and
upon fort, declare, what humble recourse they make by petition, yea let a whole
hundredth (I think) of practices, within these. 22. years, (whereof her
majesty and her honorable council are privy, and by Gods grace have
prevented them) declare that the only remedy which Papists seek, is by
prayer to God. As for treasons, poisons, wilchcraftes, coniurations, and other
deuilish d^uises, have they not proceeded, from them y^ seek none other means
of remedy, but by instant prayer to God. And humble supplications to her
highness? But the Heretics (says he) teach the same to be Lawful, the one
of them saying: for which he quoteth Luther in assertione Artic. damn. in Bull.
Leon, 10. and Wickeliffe Counsel of Cons^antia Sess. 8. and lib. 4. Trial.
cap. 36. That Christians are bound to no Princes laws, and therefore it is
lawful for the subjects to rise against their Princes, and punish them at
their pleasures if they rule amiss.

This detestable slander indeed, is most unjustly laid upon Wickliffe in y^
wicked council of Constantia, 40. years after he was dead, which is manifestly
disproued* by his own works yet extant to be seen, in which he teaches the
contrary, but it is a slander, without all color, y^ Luther should so teach,
except it were when he was a Papist. The other for which he quoteth* Calvin.
lib. 4. institut. 10. part. 5.) is charged to say, That howsoever the prince
rules well or evil, yet his laws bind not the subjects to obey in
conscience, but only for fear of temporal punishment, so that if the subject
were of ability, to resist the prince, he might without sin do the same.
Let any man that will turn the book, and if he find in Calvin these words,
or in the doctrine of them, let him boldly condemn Calvin, not only for an
heretic, but also for a common enemy of mankind. That which Calvin
speaks, of the spiritual liberty of a Christian man's conscience, which
must be kept wholly in subjection unto God, how maliciously this lewd writer
draws to such seditious heresies, five hundredth places in Caluins woorks
directly condemning all rebellion, sedition, and murmuring against Magistrates,
and exacting obedience unto them, not only for fear, but also for conscience
sake, do most abundantly demonstrate. But what the doctrine of the Papists is
concerning obedience, to lawful Magistrates, let the Bull of Pius Quintus and
the same repeated by Gregorius 13. against her Majesty, sufficiently bear
witness. Except you will say these Popes, for giving such Bulls, and al Popes
for clayming and practicing such authority, are Heretics. If your popish
doctrine, and practice had been against rebellion, why did not your Pope
excommunicate the procurers and stirrers up of y^ rebellion in the North? or,
if he lacked time because it was suppressed before knowledge could come unto
him. Tell us I pray you, how many of the known rebels that fled over the
Sea, have been excommunicated for raising war against the Prince, in her own
dominions? Does not your open acceptance of them, without any penance or
satisfa^ion, declare that your church well liked of their traitorous fact? Yea,
from whence proceeded the whole traitorous attempt, but from the Popes
approbation and promises. You deceive your selves to much, when you think to
take the charge and crime of rebellion and treason from your own consciences,
and to lay it upon Luther and Caluines backs, and imagine you should find
credit among wise men. There were other secret causes why this second part
was omitted, as there be other means of easement, which you daily seek, and
therefore do allow, whatsoever you pretend to the contrary.

As for the third part of considerations and comfort were to small purpose,
except you did first prove the cause of your suffering to be good and godly:
for not the pain, but the cause makes a Martyr. Which seeing you are not able
to defend, you suffer not as Christians, but as evil doers, not as humble
Martyrs, but as obstinate and rebellious Heretics.

God be praised.
Imprinted at London by Thomas Dawson at the three Cranes in the Vinetree for
George Bishop.


