THE EVAPORATION OF THE APPLE of Palaestine: That is, The Sifting of the
Answers and Rescripts, lately given, in the Cause of the Restitution of the
Palatinate.

Together With a brief Demonstration of the Nullities of the clandestine
dispositions, by which, the Electourship and the Palatinate has been
transferred on the House of Bavaria.

Translated out of Latin.

LONDON, Printed by A G. for Joyce Norton, and Richard Whitaker, And are to be
sold at the Kings A^m^s i^ Paul's Churchyard. M.DC.XXXVII.

TO THE MOST HIGH and MIGHTY PRINCE, Charles Lodowicke, Count Palatine of the
Rhine, Archidapifer, and Prince Electour of the Sacred Empire, Duke of Bavaria,
etc.
THis, amongst other reasons (Most Illustrious Prince) which prevailed with me
for the publication of this book, was the prime and principal, that I might
give notice to the whole world, and to them, who either out of ignorance or
affection, will not judge aright of the truth of things; that the cause, why
that same solemn Embassage, which the most incomparable Peer, THOMAS HOWARD,
Earl of Arundell and Surry, lately performed in Germany, for the restitution
of peace, and of the Palatinate, both, with one commission to be dispatched,
came not to a happy conclusion; was, neither in the most renowned King CHARLES,
Your Uncle, nor in Your self: but in those only, who upon honest conditions
and demands, would not suffer any thing that is moderate, and, of it self,
equal and just, to be obtained. For Your part, the minds of all (that were
any way interessed in You) were ready and willing to accept of any tolerable
conditions: But of the other side, such things were prescribed and exacted, as
neither with honor and safety, nor with conscience and the good of the
Commonwealth, could either be granted or submitted unto: as it is evident by
the public Acts, and which we have showed in this Enodation.

That which concerned me in this business, I hope, and that not without some
diligence, I have discharged; that is to say, with our pen, style, writing,
as much as our ability would permit, We do vindicate, and maintain both the
justice of Your cause, and the innocence of Your person; and exhibit to the
world, how great injustice is done to Your self and Kindred. It is Your duty
now, since You have assaied all things (...) by fair means, and Your honest
endeavors have been frustrated; that You advise of other remedies, and
embrace such instruments as, You may, by just arms, recover and wrest from
those unjust usurpers and possessours that, which by violent force they have
extorted from You. But that neither the power and fortune of Your adversaries,
nor the diffidence of Your own abilities, nor the wars proving for the most
part unfortunate to King Frederick Your Father, and his Allies, should either
deter, procrastinate, or make You timorous; Tu ne cede malis, sed contra
audentior ito.
To evils do not you give way,
But forward go, with virtues sway.


The felicity of Your adversaries is so much the more slippery, by how much
the higher it is ascended: it is come to its height, and now stands tottering,
by and by ready to fall with his branches, if but once shaken with some sudden
violence of the North and South Wind. Things of moment are ruined in a moment,
and the dubious fortune of that injurious and ungrateful House, is wheeled
about. It will not long retain those things which, by violence, fraud and
injustice it has detained from Thee.

Quem Dies vidit veniens superbum,
Hunc Dies vidit fugiens jacentem.
Whom the Sun rising saw in honors place,
Him the Sun setting saw in great disgrace.
Go forward then (most Illustrious Prince) be bold, confident, adventure to
the utmost: You shall have God, and the winds to second your Sails with a
prosperous gale. A small Army, guided with Council and true valor, have many
times subdued great forces. How often have a little Company, by marching
forward and adventuring in warlike affairs, got the victory of a mighty host?

A Cane non magno saepe tenetur Aper.
Not seldom times, in open Field,
By little Dog, great Boar is held.
Even small Creatures have procured danger and destruction to greatest beasts.
Your cause is good, and You shall have Arms that will maintain Your cause.
The revenge of cruelty and injustice does pursue your enemies: put on, persist;
if that the Land denies a way, let the Sea prepare your passage to them: by
perverting and preventing (said that great King) by turning aside, and by going
forward are battles won. The first preparations of war are somewhat
difficult; but, once gone into the field, You shall have Councels, Associates,
Companions, Soldiers. A small Band, under the conduct of a courageous and
valiant Leader, in time will increase to a great Army. Observe the occasions,
and moments of times, actions, and men, as they offer themselves, and think
upon them. If You will associate Your self with any of Your friends, that do
war with You, You shall be a most welcome Companion, and receive sociable
assistance from them. The experience of many ages, and the Annals do
testify, that, in the beginning, all wars almost have gone against them, to
whom of right the victory appertained; but, in the end, the better cause have
always triumphed and prevailed. Fortune is not without its return; she has
a long while favored Your adversaries, and forsaken you: now the wheel is
turned, she may forsake them, and follow You. But whether am I carried? These
things are not for this place and time: Only, the God of Heaven make and keep
You (most Illustrious Prince) flourishing and in safety, and prosper all Your
Counsels, and designs to Your hearts desire. From the Vbij the Nones of
March, 1637.

VOLRADUS a TRUBACN.

To the Courteous Reader.
AS he who afar off beholds Brass or Tin, cannot easily distinguish the
one from Silver, or the other from Gold, unless he comes near them; And as
to one having the crystalline humors of his eyes darkened, or using spectacles,
the object beheld, appears lesser, or greater, than in truth it is: So, for
the most part, those, which are possessed with an over-weaning opinion and
conceit, or led away by ignorance, or a false persuasion, or stirred up with a
troublous passion or sudden motion of the mind, examine things slightly, not
prying into the more hidden secrets of the matter, and touching only (as I may
so speak) the shell, but not at all attaining the kernel; they judge and
determine far otherwise, of men's actions, counsels, intentions, opinions,
words and writings, than is lawful and agreeable to truth.

That fatal Palatine Cause, so generally known through the whole world,
affords a notable and lively example hereof. Cui non dictus Hylas? Where is the
man to whom this sad news has not been related? But who (I beseech you)
amongst so many thousands, does at this present, sincerely, and faithfully, and
uprightly judge thereof? who among so many does well know and understand it?
For who, according to truth and equity, without hatred or affection, does
rightly conceive, understand and judge of the proscription promulgated against
King Frederick the Electour? of intrenching upon, the taking away, the
alienation of the Electorall Palatine Dominions, and the Dignity and Offices
thereunto annexed, and an entire, total removal of these, unto the Bavarian
Family? of the Ordainances made by the Emperor, the Bavarian and the rest of
their Confederates, of their pronounced Opinions, Decrees, Rescripts,
Conditions made known, agreed on, Covenants drawn, and the like? It is
decreed in the Law, That every circumstance ought to be narrowly looked into,
before the proceeding to sentence: So also in things of so great consequence,
no sentence ought to be pronounced, until all things be exactly weighed,
as well for circumstances and reasons, quality of the times, conditions and
intentions of men, and finally with a full understanding of words, sentences
and causes, things being examined by construction and entreaty.

If we should deduce these things particularly, and one by one, as they ought
to be weighed and diligently examined, it would require large volumes; we
having reserved the greater part of those things until another time, and for
another labor and work, which (by Gods assistance) we shall shortly publish;
for the present, we thought it worth the labor, to bring into the light, and
expose to view, the intent and meaning of those answers, rescripts and decrees
only, which the Emperor Ferdinand the II. the last year (in which the most
Royal King Charles of great Britain, sent a solemn Embassage unto him, for
gaining the restitution of the Palatinate, and of His Nephews descended from
his only Sister the Queen Elizabeth) had determined and delivered: as also a
brief manifestation of injustice and the nullities, with which, those alleged
decrees of the Emperor, concerning the transferring and firm alienation of
the Electorall dignity, and revenues thereunto belonging granted to the
Bavarians, do (as it were) groan, and are stuffed; both because We were
commanded and required thereunto, by them who had authority to do it; as also,
that they may give some light, or at least open a gap, and prepare the way for
those my treatises which shall ensue: And to conclude, that out of these, some
conjecture and guess maybe had, what is to be thought of the other things
performed in this matter in question, by the adverse part, either violently or
fraudulently practiced. Perhaps some may say, that I ought to have been more
large and accurate concerning those dispositions, and in setting down the
nullities of them. But I would have them know, that I would willingly have done
that, and thoroughly have handled the particulars, if it might have been lawful
to have taken a view of those dispositions, as they were first penned, the
which (as it appears) never yet came to public light, but always were kept
privately and in secret, as, at the first they were composed. And concerning
the nullities of the urged pacification at Prague, whereby it is pretended that
those dispositions are ratified and confirmed, we thought it a matter of
incogitancie and indiscretion, to make a long and tedious discourse, not,
because we deemed it not so much appertaining to Our purpose, as that, because
we have found the same argument purposely handled by others, with exactness
of diligence, and no small commendation. Should I also have undertaken to have
made a strict search, and full discovery of the same matter, with my obscure
pen, what other thing should I have attempted, Than, Stellis nebulam spargere
candidis?
-- to over cast the Heavens most bright,
With exhalat'ons that obscure the light?


For Conclusion, Courteous Reader, I would entreat thee, to afford a favorable
interpretation to these my extemporarie labors, for so you may give
encouragement to my endeavors, that I may with cheerfulness accomplish
(which) I yet forbear) the Manifestation of things affected, and almost
effected by the adversaries, and expose them also speedily to thy judgment and
understanding. Farewell heartily. From the Vbit the Nones of March. 1637.

THE SIFTING OF THE IMPERIAL Answers, given in the PALATINE Cause.
With an annexed short Remonstrance of the Nullities of the dispositions in the
translation of the Electorall Dignity.
THe year last past, when the most Sovereign King of Great Britain sent his
Ambassador, Thomas Howard Earl of Arundell and Surrie, Earl Marshall of
England, to the Emperor Ferdinand the second, to treat in the cause of the
Prince Palatine and require Restitution for his Nephew Prince Elector, Charles
Lodowicke, and his Brethren, diverse people scattered diverse words, spent their
judgments and opinions thereupon; the actions of Princes (as it is customary)
being diversely construed by the vulgar.

Some averred, that the experience of so many years, so many Ambassagies, so
much interceeding already in the Cause of the Palatinate, was a sufficient
testimony, of a default in that advise, by slacknesse and haesitation; that
nothing could be expected by Treaty, nothing obtained by conference and
reasonable Conditions, nothing could be extorted by the transactions of the
moderate and just King. That the Austrians, Bavarian, and their Confederates,
having already destinated the Line of the Prince Palatine for death, would
never grant that it should rise again, and the exiled Palatine Princes more
careful of the ancient liberty and greater enemies to innovation then the
rest, now grown stronger, by a new alliance and friendship of foreign Kings,
being restored to their former estate, should return into their Country, and
be a terror to those families, and like thorns in their eyes. That the
Austrians, being grown more insolent by the timorousness of the adverse
Party, had already settled to their own affairs. That the Palatine business
did more and more decline, that the Prince his friends, Companions and
Assistants, suspended with fear and doubt, and often deluded with hope of
taking Arms in the Cause of the Palatinate, were compelled by necessity to
leave his Party, and enter into new Confoederacies. That the Swedes and the
French only were yet remaining, whose love and alliance was to be accepted,
with whom He should join in Arms, and Counsel, till with a potent and
victorious Army, they might weary the Austrians. That the occasion was not to
be neglected, that this Lethargy was to be shaken off; that to attempt the
negotiation again by Treaties, (which so often had prooved fruitless) and to
forbear Arms, in which the only hope of attaining the end consisted, was a
token of indiscretion or sluggishnesse. Have not the Kings of England by the
space of these 18. years bin deluded by the Austrians? will they still suffer
themselves to be gulled with words? Dare they not awake from sleep, and
remember their former injuries? These, and words to the same effect, were
spoken commonly by the military men, which breathed out war, and burned with
a desire thereunto.

Others, which would be accounted more moderate, and of a more peaceable
condition, commended the Kings Wisdom, Piety, and equanimity, granting
notwithstanding, that nothing has bin done hitherto by so many Legations and
Embassies in the Cause of the Palatinate, but that all that labor and
endeavor vanished into smoke: Yet that it was to be considered; That after the
death of the King Friderick, for whom especially it was interceded, whose
restitution, and reconciliation was chiefly aimed at; whom the Caesareans
styled the Author, and firebrand of all those troubles, and with whom only
they averred themselves to be offended. The state of things was not a little
altered, and therefore it was probable, that their hatred and wrath was
somewhat abated, that the Imperialists (as they pretended) would now become
more moderate men, and casting off their old rancour, the father being dead,
would not take vengeance of the guiltless children, and therefore concluded
the King did wisely, that by a solemn Legation in the name of his Nephews, He
attempted to make their composition, and procure the restitution upon
Conditions, and might try whether their adversaries were still as cruel and
insolent against them, as they had bin formerly against their father, seeing
there was far less cause for it, against them, then against him.

Besides, of the other side, the King had good hope to obtain their
restitution, that he was desired to come to a Parley, and to send an Embassy
with full power to Caesar, as soon as might be; and these concurrents promised
an happy issue. This hope if he had despised, or either relinquished the
business, as lost, or made war upon that occasion, the adversaries then,
might have had good cause, and pretense, to complain of his weakness or
rashness.

Besides, they said, there were some other causes that made the King demurre
upon the matter, holding it unfit to take Arms with unwashed hands, and before
he had better settled his own affairs; and that though it was to be feared,
that this Embassy would be also fruitless, and unhappy, and in the mean
season the fair occasion of war would be neglected; Yet the King
nevertheless, should thereby get this benefit; that not only the justice of
the cause, the innocence of his Nephews, the pride of their enemies, and the
injuries done by them, would more clearly appear; but that himself also must
be justly excused, and commended, if after all experiments, and this last
endeavor (which yet remained) of making a Peace by Treaties, he should be
unwillingly forced to attempt another way.

These, and the like reasons, moved the deservedly styled, most Wise and
Moderate King, to send His Ambassador Thomas Howard Earl of Arundel and
Sarri^, with all speed to Caesar, with perfect instructions for that
negotiation. At the Ambassadors first arrival in Germany, some things happened
beyond his expectation; from whence, the more curious sort of men, began to
divine forthwith of the success of his Embassy.

For, first, he was compelled to be an eyewitness of the cruelties,
practiced upon the bodies, and goods, of the miserable Citizens, and
inhabitants of Frankendale, for whom himself became an intercessor. Some were
clapped in prison, and constrained by threats, and famine, to pay their unjust
ransomes: others vexed with extorsions, tributes, burdens, and services, pined
away for sorrow: the more he complained, and entreated for them, the sharper
was their usage; No mercy could he obtain for them, by his suit and
entreaties either from Caesar, the King of Hungary their Ministers, or the
Spanish Ambassadors: no assurance that those Conditions which were granted them
at their yielding should be observed; but from the time that he first pleaded
for them, they were (as on purpose) used more hardly. And how then could he
hope to obtain the maine suit, when these trifles were denied him.

Again, when at Norimberg, he understood by John Tailor, who came from the
Emperors Court, that the King of Hungary, (who was then at Nordlingen, in
Swaben, and going to the Imperial Army) desired, that he would meet him upon
the way, (as he seemed desirous to speak with the Ambassador) he sent Tailor
before him, to appoint the time, and the place of their meeting, and to inform
him of what was done. But after some days waiting for an answer, he perceived
in the end, the King did either seem less careful of meeting him, then any
other business, or else to have merely forgot it; And yet more, neither by
Letters nor Agent (which is the custom, when the Ambassadors of Kings come to
the Provinces, and Dominions of other Princes) did he vouchsafe to greet him;
which was accounted, a token, either of pride, or contempt, or inurbanity.

At last, he found the King according to his fathers command and the writings
drawn up at Donawerth, (the very same time when they had appointed to meet)
giving, and delivering to the Jesuits, certain consecrated goods, lands,
revenues, and entire Monasteries, in the Lower Palatinate; which upon the
marriage of the Queen of Bohemia his Kings sister, were conveyed unto her
for her Iointure, which was no good token, of a will inclining to restitution,
when he showed himself more forward, to alienate, rend, and distract that
estate, then to restore it.

When he came to Lintz (a town of eminency in the upper Austria) where Caesar
then abode, being within few days after bound for Ratisbon, where the
Septemvirat Counsel was assembled; he was indeed entertained in great state,
and much complement, and had free and frequent access to Caesar and the
Empress; but about the Cause he came to treat of, for many days, he found a
still silence. Nevertheless, at last impatient of delay, he having more
importunately urged it, Caesar, as seeming desirous to treat of the business
seriously, appointed certain Counselors, who should confer with him; namely,
the Bishop of Vienna, Peter Henry Stralendorff Vice Chancellor of the Empire,
and Iustus Gebhard a Civilian. Once they met, and no more, to wit, upon the 14.
of the Kalends of August: for the Ambassador having perused the Commission
which the Emperor had given his Counselors, for treating about this
business, found amongst other instructions, this, That the King of Great
Britain, by John Tailor, had offered to enter into, and settle an offensive,
and defensive League, with his Imperial Majesty and the house of Austria,
against the common enemies and adversaries of that State.

The Ambassador knowing this to be false, and against the Kings repute,
credit, and integrity; accounted that by virtue of his office, he was bound to
vindicate the King, from this imputation, and to confute, and contradict it
both by word and writing; And this was the cause which then hindered him from
further discourse with them; And thus he began;

These things (said he) being so unworthy, and altogether from the meaning,
faith, and integrity of the Kings Majesty, I have conceived, that it wholly
appertains to my office, and the honor and dignity of his Royal Majesty, to
declare the sorrow, and grief of mind which I have hence received, both by
word and writing, to your Imperial Majesty; protesting publicly; That, it is
not only against the intention of my Sovereign the King, nor can it be spoken
without some note of ignominy, that He has of his own accord offered an
offensive and defensive Leagve, to your Imperial Majesty, and the whole house
of Austria, against the enemies of that family: which truly would tend both to
the offense of the rest of His Majesty's Confederates, who might thence take
just occasion of suspicion, and complaint, and might also oblige His Majesty to
what He cannot do, with His honor and conscience, without great cause given
by His Allies, to relinquish their necessitude, and so involve himself in a
perpetual necessity of war.

But, if John Tailor the Agent for the King, my Sovereign, has promised any
such thing, or ministered any hopes of it, as it is expressly set down, in the
words of that Commission: I must needs speak it, he has done it without
authority, and is bound to give an account, for that action. But if he be free
from that imputation, (as he protests he is, affirming that he never spoke
such words, appealing withal to his remembrances, delivered to the Imperial
Court,) what can I else infer, or say, But that there is a strange affront,
done both to the King, and me His Ambassador, when to my face, by a public
escript such dishonorable and strange things, are thrust upon us?

The case then being thus; I humbly beseech your Imperial Majesty, that your
wisdom would weigh, and so order this matter that no such thing, as may be
ignominous and dishonorable to the King, or my self, may be done, written,
or spoke: but that all delays and circumstances set apart, we may come
sincerely to the matter, and, as soon as may be, I may receive that answer
which may be welcome, acceptable, and satisfactory to his Royal Majesty, and
may also be a token that the business is handled seriously, and with hope of
good success.

Caesar replied hereunto, by a large writing, and full of words, both
explaining his own mind and opinion, and repeating out of the remembrances
what ever at any time had been done, said, written, and treated to, and fro,
concerning the matter, and form of the propounded league. And in the end
concluded thus.

All these things then being thus, as they are proved out of the Original
writings, which are alleged and may be seen; and seeing that by them, it may
easily appear to any one, that neither his Sacred Imperial Majesty, nor the
most Illustrious King of great Britain, had any intention to conclude an
offensive and defensive League of one side only, and only against the enemies
of one of them, but against the common adversaries of both Parties; seeing
also, that if the conclusion had been made only against the enemies of one
Party, it had been repugnant to the nature of such Confederacies; and since
otherwise the limitation and moderation of such agreements ought to depend upon
the treaties used in their confirmation; whereby is discovered what is agreeing
to reason, and honorable, and beseeming both Parties. And to conclude, when it
cannot be thought, that the equity, and good affection of his Sacred and
Imperial Majesty, toward the Illustrious King of Great Britain, would desire
any thing of him, that should be contrary to his reputation and dignity: His
Imperial Majesty does confidently believe, that there is no man who will blame
Him, that He would thus question this matter, and with all gentleness,
explain it; not denying nevertheless, but that there may be such moderation
used concerning the often mentioned clause, as by a common consent may be
thought fit, to take away all occasions of offense.

But for the principal matter, he wrote again to this effect,

That he remembered he had declared himself to the Agent of the said most
Illustrious King of Great Britain, in what sense, he desired that to sundry
his former decrees, and namely that of the xxiv. of February last past, there
might be added a new Condition, to wit, in respect of the causes and reasons
there alleged; that if the Count Palatine Charles Lodowick, should perform the
conditions contained in the said decree, then he would mercifully discharge
Him of the Imperial Ban, derived unto Him by his fathers trespass, that he
might be received into the state and degree of the Princes of the Sacred
Empire, and he would also restore him, into no despicable part of his ancient
dominions; and according to the agreement setle him in the same. Lastly, when
there should be a treaty thereon; he would observe such moderation, both
concerning the Electorall Dignity, and other things then required, and
propounded, that in those things, which might be granted upon terms of
justice, both the most Illustrious King of Great Britain, might see the good
affection of his Sacred Imperial Majesty toward him, and also the often named
Count Palatine, might easily apprehend the readiness of his favor toward
him. That his Sacred Imperial Majesty, does yet the more firmly continue the
same gracious intention, and stand to the said declaration, the rather, because
by the said Lord Ambassador, and former Letters, and Commissions, he has
been certified, of the good affection of the most Illustrious mentioned King,
(who had no other than a fair and sincere intention, in all former treaties,
and propositions toward himself and his Princely family:) to which will, and
intention, his Sacred Imperial Majesty affirms he will be answerable, and so
remain constantly, judging it fit, that the matter of which he had been
pleased, once to have made a Treaty, should now also remain established. And
yet moreover, seeing his often named Sacred Imperial Majesty, not bound by any
Law, but moved thereunto by his mere Grace and Imperial mercy, and especially
by his affection and love to the most Illustrious King of Great Britain, and
the desired sight of their hereafter mutual Confederacy, has already thus
far declared, and does yet declare Himself: And also, the forenamed Lord
Ambassador having opened himself, to this purpose, that it is not the
intention, of his most Sovereign King, that the foresaid total restitution,
should be made instantly; hence, his Sacred Majesty thought it fit, and
believed, it would ensue, that the said Lord Ambassador, would not be
unwilling to explain himself any further, than concerning the manner, of the
desired total restitution, and especially touching the Electorall dignity, as
also about those things, of which some hope was given to his said Sacred
Imperial Majesty; to wit, how far the said King of great Britain, would
engage Himself with his Imperial Majesty, and his whole Princely House of
Austria, and what he would, and might do for their benefit.

To this the Ambassador answered, That, it appeared plainly, out of his own
Imperial answer, that neither any of the Kings servants, nor the King
himself, in any of his writings, had made mention of such a league, no not so
much as by word, or familiar discourse, unless some such thing, might be
inferred, to have been spoken out of the bare Relation of the Count of
Schonburg, the Imperial Ambassador in Spain; which nevertheless, does not in
all things agree with the (pretended) offered co^federacy. And if any such
thing should have happened in their private conference, yet it is a new and
unheard of way of Treaty; that all things which in a familiar discourse, are
propounded by public ministers, should be inserted into public instruments
under the Seal, and afterward objected against them. But yet, what manner of
Confederacy, and under what Conditions it was offered, by His Royal Majesty,
it did plainly appear, both by the words and meaning of the writers and
speakers; to wit, that, If his Imperial Majesty, regarding the intercession of
His Royal Majesty, should restore the Electorall Palatinate, with the annexed
dignity and liberties, and by this means lay the foundation of a general
settled Peace in the Empire; then His Royal Majesty, would enter into a
Covenant with His Imperial Majesty, and the Famous House of Austria, and with
the Septemvirate and States of the Empire, for the obtaining of the Peace and
general tranquillity, and the settling of it upon equal Conditions on both
sides; and to defend it against all those, who should dare to impugn such a
sacred agreement. Wherefore, he did humbly beseech His Imperial Majesty, that
no such pretended League, might any more be objected to the most Illustrious
King, his most gracious Lord, or him His Ambassador; nor might it be any more
an hinderance, whereby the forementioned plenary restitution, might not
maturely be perfected, without further procrastination.

Next he refuteth, and opposes the proposition and offer made by Caesar, in
standing to his own Decree, or Declaration given to John Tailor, Febr. 24. Anno
1636. saying;

That he in his proposition, and first bill of remembrance, had plainly
showed, that the declaration was of such condition, as could give the King no
satisfaction, both because the things therein offered, were far inferior to
His hope and expectation; in that the restitution of the most Illustrious
Prince, the Electour, His Nephew was included and circumscribed within the
narrow compass of some one part of His Dominion (which nevertheless is not
yet named) as also, because it is said, that his Imperial Majesty would acquit
the Count Palatine Charles Lodowick of the Imperial Ban derived unto him by
reason of his Fathers trespass, to the end he might be received again
amongst the Princes of the Empire, if He should fulfill the Conditions
contained therein: When notwithstanding, it is manifest, that the most
Illustrious Electour, Charles Lodowick, is guiltless, and free from all
offense, and born a Prince of the Empire; that the right given by God, by
nature, and the law, appertains unto Him, and cannot be taken from Him, as
might be shown more largely, if need required. Moreover, as the most
Illustious King desires, thankfully to entertain the grace and clemency of His
Imperial Majesty; so it would be altogether unjust, and reproachful both ^o
Himself, and His Nephews, to forsake the equity and justice of the cause;
which is grounded upon the law of Nature and Nations, the Golden and other
Imperial Bulls, and the fundamental Laws of the Empire, as most plainly may
be proved in its proper time and place.

As concerning the manner of the desired restitution, He knows no other, than
that the most Illustrious Elector Charles Lodowick and his Brethren, by an
Imperial decree, real entrance, and solemn Investiture (customary in cases
of this nature) be speedily restored unto their ancient Dignities, Fees,
Possessions and Privileges: Then that they again should promise reciprocally,
and do really, what such homagers and Princes of the Empire, invested, and
admitted into possession, are bound and ought to do and perform, according to
the right, custom, and prescription of the Empire. But in the behalf of his
most Sovereign King, he does undertake, and promise, that, if for His sake,
this restitution be hastened, and done without delay; then His royal Majesty,
should willingly perform those things which may plainly testify, His royal,
and singular inclination toward his Imperial Majesty, the famous house of
Austria, and peace of Germany, and that He should seal to all this, and
confirm it, both in His own name, and the name of His Nephews, in public
writings, and conditions; to which end, he has already sent his Ambassador,
with a sufficient commission, and ample power, to his Imperial Majesty, and
the Princes of the Empire.

To this the Emperor replied first by writing, and afterward by his
Counselors, viva voce; by writing in these words:

That for the present, He held it needless to dispute of privileges; that,
the authority of the Imperial Majesty, is undoubtedly grounded not only upon
the common Laws, but the peculiar constitutions of the Empire, and the Decrees
of the Golden Bull, and confirmed by very many, both ancient, and late
presidents. That His Imperial Majesty, had used this liberty, for the free
disposing of the Dominions, and Dignities of the often named Palatine, which
disposals are since confirmed by the late Treaty at Prague, and consequently,
by all the Princes of the Sacred Roman Empire. From hence, if things he well
scanned it may easily appear, whether there be any and of what value that
amity is, which his Imperial Majesty has formerly offered, and does yet offer,
to the children of the Count Palatine, and how much it ought to be esteemed.

All which being truth, and seeing that his mentioned Imperial Majesty, has
declared himself both in respect of his affection, and inclination toward the
most Illustrious King of Great Britain; as also in respect of his clemency,
toward His Nephews, sometimes the children of Frederick Palatine, according
to the manner, and under the conditions contained, in the often mentioned
decree of the 24th of February: Therefore, he thinks it fit, and does in all
courtesy require it, that the said Lord Ambassador (if it stand with his
liking) would come to particulars, and more plainly either by writing, or (if
it please him) which his Imperial Majesty thinks more convenient) by
conferring with his Imperial Majesty's Commissioners, to explain what the
most Illustrious King of Great Britain would offer reciprocally, and intends
to perform to his Imperial Majesty, for these like proffers; that so, as the
custom is, in a fair equipage, it may be treated, agreed, and concluded, of
things required and to be done on both parties.

The Ambassador having received this answer, declared himself to be therewith
nothing satisfied; and therefore desired, that his Imperial Majesty would
express his mind more plainly and fully; and determinately and absolutely
declare whether he had resolved to do any thing in this case, and what; and
upon what Conditions he would restore in particular.

He therefore having called his Counsel, upon the Kalends of September,
commanded them to repair to the Ambassador, and speak unto him to this
effect;

That His Imperial Majesty, having weighed and considered all things, which
as well hitherto had been presented by the Ambassador, as also were necessarily
considerable in this case, he would fairly, and sincerely, deliver his mind in
this manner.

That the whole negotiation, consisted especially upon three heads; The first
is, for restitution of the Lower Palatinate; but it must be known, that the
King of Spain, hold one part thereof, as a pledge for his great expense, in
the execution committed to his trust; that the Bavarian hold the other part,
upon the like terms; and now it was agreeable to reason and justice, that
both these personages should receive satisfaction, before that they restored
their pledges, and gages: that His Imperial Majesty had dealt diligently with
them both, and so far prevailed with them, that they had consented to the
Restitution, but yet upon this condition, that some profits and emoluments
might be first assured, and performed to them, in right of compensation. And
that the Count Palatine, might safely, quietly, and without impeachment, enjoy
the things to be restored; His Imperial Majesty, of His mere favor, would
abrogate His proscription, and receive Him into the State, and Degree of the
Princes of the Empire.

The second head concerns the Electorall dignity. But because His Imperial
Majesty, has lately, freely, and absolutely disposed thereof, as a thing
divolved to His Majesty and the Empire the Electours consenting and approoving
the Act, according to the prescript of the Laws, and Imperial Constitutions,
and had transferred it upon the Duke of Bavaria (a man of high deservings with
Caesar, and the whole Empire,) and to the Line of William, both by Investiture
and other Obligations; so that the business is now established, confirmed, and
unalterable, nor is it lawful to Treat of the restoring thereof, so long as
any man of that Line shall be surviving.

The third head concerns the Upper Palatinate. And of this it must be
concluded, as of the Electorall Dignity; for those territories, and dominions
were already delivered up to the Duke of Bavaria, in part of payment of the
expenses, which that Duke had been at, in the Emperors behalf, for the
recovery of Bohemia. And now things being in this state, and His Imperial
Majesty, having thus sincerely, and plainly, disclosed his mind; it is very
requisite that the Anbassadour also should now declare what the King again
will do, for the behoof and benefit of his Imperial Majesty, in respect of
his Imperial grace, and good affection, and what manner of league, he
intends to make with him.

To this the Ammbassadour answered in few words:

That he returned thanks to Caesar, that He would so clearly explain His
meaning; for now it was sufficiently apparent, what the King (who did little
expect this answer) might, and ought to hope for in this whole negotiation;
but yet, he should have returned him more thanks, if this answer had come
sooner, and presently upon his arrival at the Imperial Court, or rather,
before he had come out of England, for then peradventure, there might have
been a sparing of time, and charge, and there should have been no need of so
full a Commission, and solemn Legation. That now his mouth was stopped, that
he might neither go further, nor make any larger declaration, that now there
was nothing remaining for him to do, but to certify his King of all the
proceedings, which he would do faithfully, and without affection; Caesar
having liberty to do the same by his own servants, if perhaps, he did
suspect that he would add to the truth, or diminish from it, by his relation.

Two days after, he spoke with Caesar himself, repeating the message
delivered unto him by his Agents, and his own answer, and that according to
his duty, he would inform the King of all passages, by a speedy Post. His
letters he dispatcheth to the King in England, feigning in the mean season
that he would not stay to expect the return of the Messenger: thinking, that
the preparation for his departure would move and incline the Caesareans (who
perhaps were unwilling that he should depart the business undone, and the
foil of the treaty broken off) to moderation and more reasonable terms: But
all was in vain, time slipped away, and the Post in the mean while returned,
bringing letters from the King to the Ambassador, by which he was commanded,
that seeing there was no hope of obtaining the restitution of the Electorall
Palatinate upon indifferent terms; to return home, and leave John Tailor in
the Caesarean Court. When the Imperialists saw the Ambassador ready to depart,
they used all means of industry and art, to detain him longer. And to this
end the King of Hungary, the son of Caesar, who was newly come to the Diet,
stayed the Ambassadors purpose of departing, by giving special hope, that he
would procure, that the treatise of restitution, should be brought to an happy
issue, and the Ambassador should have no cause of complaint or repentance, if
he attended upon it a while longer. The Ambassador therefore thought it a
point of discretion, to defer his departure for some days; as well, that he
might try whether Caesar would deliver any terms more indifferent and
moderate; as also, that he might not be justly charged, that he was too
hasty, and refused to hear those things which to be openly propounded would
be offered: But when the time was still delayed, the matter being transmitted
to the advice of the Electours, whose opinions (as it was given out) must first
be known, the Ambassador having twice or thrice called upon them for their
resolutions, and seeing himself to attend in vain, went to the Electours, the
King and Caesar, and bad them farewell, the 6th of the ides of November.

At his departure, a new promise and hope was given him, that before his going
out of Germany, letters should be transmitted to him, containing such an
answer, as should come nearer to his demands. At Noreimberg indeed he
received some letters, and amongst them, one to the Queen Elizabeth; but upon
the superscription, there was purposely omitted the title of Electresse, and
Princess Palatine, under a false pretext, that this title is not to be given
Her by reason of the offense of Her proscribed husband. The Ambassador
therefore with indignation, and words of anger, sent back those letters
thither from whence they came. And surely, it is a matter of cruelty and
injustice unheard of, never known amongst Barbarians, never practiced in those
bloody proscriptions of Sylla and Marius, nor under the Triumvirat, that an
innocent woman, for the crime of her husband, (how heinous and apparent soever)
should be deprived of the privileges, goods dignities, and titles, which she
had, and enjoyed before the offense done; according to the daily practice (so
it is presumed) of the Caesareans, against the Queen of Bohemia, whose dowry
is not only taken from her, by force and injury, but they attempt also to
deprive Her of her name, title, and dignity, which She had by marriage; when
nevertheless on the contrary part, it is alleged, that her husband was never
convicted of the crime laid to His charge: and yet, unheard by Caesar, (in his
own cause) undefended, not called, He is unlawfully, unjustly, and for no
cause, but hatred, and desire of revenge, proscribed. But to the purpose.

For a long time, there was no news of the answer promised to the English
Ambassador. At last a paper drawn up the 14th of the calends of February, (a
declaration or notification, ye may call it either) was sent over into England;
to this effect.

That his Imperial Majesty, as soon as He knew the chiefest difficulty which
hindered this negotiation, from the desired effect of their more near
alliance, and confederation, depended on this, that the most Illustrious King
desired some more ample satisfaction, concerning his Nephew in point of the
Electorall dignity, had not intermitted, with much care to seek, and find out
all those means, which were requisite for the passing of that difficulty, by
conferring of that business both with the Illustrious Electoral College, and
with them, who were more particularly intressed therein, and without whose
consent (His affairs being as they are) it stood not with the integrity of His
Imperial Majesty, to conclude. When therefore, some means were discovered,
which gave some hope that the foresaid difficulty concerning the Electorall
dignity (though the Line of William sometime Duke of Bavaria was still
remaining) might be over passed, and some more ample satisfaction given to the
most Illustrious King of Great Britain, his Roman royal Majesty would omit
no time to signify so much to John Tailor, Agent in that negotiation, for the
King of Great Britain, and lest there to that purpose, who should acquaint
his King therewit^ as soon as might be, and (...) knew how to provide, that a
sufficient Commission, to retreat, and conclude this business of restitution,
and confederation, might be transmitted to him with all speed, or given to some
other, who should be sent over for that dispatch.

And this is a brief and compendiary Relation of those things which have been
done, spoken, and written on both sides in this solemn Ambassie. But now for
the easier understanding of the consequents, it is first to be observed; That
the English Ambassador, in the beginning of his Legation, in the first
proposition, and again in another declaration to the Emperor, made an
exception against that Decree of Caesar (as they call it) of the 24. day of
February, both by rejecting it, as a nullity, and frivolous; as also by showing
that the Conditions therein prescribed, were, far beneath (...) hope and
expectation, which the most Illustr^^us King of England conceived, of the
entire restitution of the Palatinate; that is, as well of the Territories, as
the Electorall Office; and therefore might give just cause of doubt, and
diffidence of success in the business, and of superseding his endeavor by
dispatch of his Legation, unless that otherwise (and that by Tailor himself,
to whom that decree was delivered) a more ample, better seasoned, and firmer
hope and caution were given in the name of his Imperial Majesty, of a firm
and full satisfaction and gratification, concerning the restitution of the
Palatinate.

And surely it is not to be questioned, that the most wise and mighty King,
would ever have sent His Ambassador, for such jeiune and frothy Conditions; so
full of dishonor and prejudice, as were contained in that writing; for unless
He had a better and more certain foundation of His hope, and been induced by
other arguments and persuasions, he would have spared His expense in so
honorable a Legation.

Besides; it is to be considered, that the Emperor in his first answer which
he gave the Ambassador at Lintz, the 30. day of June did silently acknowledge;
that, that hope proceeded from himself; because, that then he neither
contradicted it, nor excepted against it; and further, by his silence allowed
that exception which the Ambassador, the 18 of June, had propounded against
the said Decree of the 24. of February, and acknowledged it to be grounded upon
truth and reason. But afterward, when he so confidently contradicted it,
adding withal that He wondered upon what ground the Ambassador supposed, that
he administered hope either of more ample grace or fuller restitution, than what
was contained in the often remembered Decree; It was a sign that he resolved
not to vary from his first determination, whatsoever any others might say, or
believe to the contrary.

And now it is worthy your labor to consider, and enquire what, and of what
quality, those offers made by Caesar were, which are so often repeated, and are
commanded to be esteemed at so high a rate, and to be reputed, for a singular
kindness, and then under what conditions, they were to be exhibited, and of
what quality those things are, which are again required to be performed, by
the King, and Charles Lodowicke the Electour, in acknowledgement of so great a
favor.

First, the Emperor offers to absolve Charles Lodowicke from the Imperial
outlawrie, which is derived upon him for his Fathers offense, to that end and
purpose, that he may be received to the state and degree of a Prince of the
sacred Roman Empire: A goodly favor (questionless) for him, who is a Prince
borne, and by the law of the Empire, his own privilege and right of
Primogeniture, an Electour; that not by his fathers favor, and the way of
inheritance, but provision of the Law, and Covenant of the first Atchievour,
and by the privilege of his family does succeed into the Electorate: If he
accept this offer of Caesar's, in that sense it is proffered, he is forced to
acknowledge, and confess first; that the over hastened (...) Ban against his
father, was lawful and just, and promulgated according to Law. Secondly, that
the same proscription stands also in force against him, no otherwise than if
he himself had been proclaimed a proscribed person, and had need of pardon.
Either of which he could not do, but with prejudice to his most manifest
right, and by branding both his blessed father, himself, and his, with a note
of ignominy: Nor could he do it with a good conscience, or without the crime of
greatest ingratitude; both because, he should wound the honor and estimation
of his father, whilst by his silence he should in a manner acknowledge and
confess him to have been a rebel, enemy, and traitor to his Imperial
Majesty, and therefore lawfully proscribed; as also because he is persuaded in
his conscience, that his father is wronged and the Ban denounced against him,
is unlawful and of no validity; and if it had been decreed, and pronounced
legally, yet it cannot reach his own person, as being innocent, and was borne
long before the proscription published, having attained to a right that was
acquired and not succeeding his father as the last possessor, but the first
purchaser, by the feudall and fundamental law. For a proscription, as,
Andraeas Gailius (a great Civilian, and laterall Judge of the Imperial
Chamber, Counselor unto two Emperors, and sometimes advocate for the Duke of
Bavaria says, and proves, Lib. 2. de pace publica. obser. 15. number. 19. is
personal, and dies with the person. and obser. ultima. n. 32. the Ban (says
he) expires with the death of the outlawed, per L. the crime, or punishment of
the father can lay no blemish upon the son. 26. and ibi. Nor can he be made
successor of another man's offense. D. de poenis, and per L. defuncto. D. de
publicis judiciis. and per L. 1. and final. C. si reus vel accusatus morinus
fuerit add L. publica. 3. D. de publicis judiciis, and allegat. infr.
Secondly, he should be compelled to confess and acknowledge, that he is no
Prince of the Empire, because he has need to be admitted into that order. But
they who do not esteem him for a Prince of Germany, that is, of the Empire,
must needs praesuppose him, either to have been a bastard, or sprung of some
obscure Race, and that his Parents were not Princes, unless, they would call
him a Prince of England, or Spain, or France, or some other Empire: but this
is falfe (unless that he may be deservedly styled a Prince of England as
being a Prince of that royal blood) as the other is diabolical. The rights of
blood (inquit lex) cannot be taken away by any Civil Law, by which the
Outlawrie is brought in, L. jura. 8. D. de regul. juris. L. jus agnation. 34.
D. depactis. The son of the proscribed Prince of Anhalt, though taken
prisoner in the battle of Prague, never needed to be restored again to the
dignity of Princes; but ever, even in his captivity because himself was not
proscribed nor could the Ban of his Father, by any law, be of force against
him, he was always accounted, and called a Prince, even by Caesar, and the
Imperialists though, his Father was not yet discharged of his proscription; So
also, the sons of John Fredrick, Elector of Saxony, were accounted amongst
the Princes, and acknowledged for Dukes of Saxony, and so styled, though their
father, was then proscribed, and in captivity. And now, who can deny that the
children of King Frederick, the Counts Palatine, that is, Princes of the
Empire, should be acknowledged, for personages of that dignity? The Emperor
himself calls them by no other name, nor otherwise can he call them. But it
is sufficiently known, what it is to be a Count Palatine in the Empire, and
sprung from the Electorall house of the Palatine. This name and title belongs
to no other man, nor is given to any, but him only that is a Prince: To be
styled the Count Palatine, and reckoned amongst the Counts Palatine, is all one
as to be a Prince of the Empire, in such a rank, and degree as by the order of
the Empire is granted, to the Counts Palatine, which are the first and chief
amongst other Princes. The title of Count Palatine is of a higher esteem in
the Empire than that of Duke and Prince. And therefore in the marshaling of
their titles and dignities, the Princes Palatine prefer the name of Count
Palatine before the title of a Duke. Are not the Children of King Frederick,
sons to the Niece of the King of Denmark, by his Sister? Are they not
Princes of the royal blood of England? If they had nothing else to show, but
this prerogative of birth, and the splendor of their fathers lineage should
add no honor to them, who could deny that they were Princes? who durst
presume to dispute and take away this privilege from them, derived unto them
from their mother, their Grandmother, and their Great Grandmother, all, both
Queens themselves, and Kings daughters, for any sentence against their father?
And therefore, by what law, or ground is it ordered that Charles Lodowicke, the
Electour, borne Count Palatine, and that, little less than three years before
his father was proscribed, should need to be restored into the number and
degree of the Princes of the Empire? It is great cruelty, to compel the son
by his own confession, and acknowledgement, to judge and declare his own
father, whom in his soul and conscience he does conclude guiltless, for a
Rebel, Enemy, and Traitor to Caesar: but, more cruelty if he be constrained,
and enforced, to confess himself an offender, who is no way conscious, of any
offense, nor by reason of his infancy, could do any, and so deprive himself
of his privileges, dignity, and prerogative of his parentage.

But it being granted (which can never be proved) that the father was a most
heinous offender, and had committed rebellion, and treason, in the highest
degree, and was therefore justly condemned to banishment, and deprived of all
rights and privileges, yet this sentence ought to be no plea in bar, against
his children, conceived and borne before sentence of their fathers
proscription, especially, in those things, which concern that dignity, which
was borne with them, their privilege of nobility, and such things as descend
not from the person of the father, but are due unto the^ by right of blood, the
right of their family, by the covenant, and transmission of their forefathers,
and by the disposition of the Law; as are the Electorate, and the Principality
of the Empire, that is, the royal, ancient Fees, which come not by name of
inheritance, nor by succession of the father, but by right of the first and
Simultaneous investiture, and the grant of the first acquirer. c. 1.. postea
vero, and gloss. in. d c.. cum vero. Conradus in verbo. frater. lib. 1. de
fend. tit. 1. De his qui feudum dare possunt. Baldus ad Rubric. de succession.
feudi ad. Hoc quoque n. 4. The son, says he, comes not in as a common heir;
but by right of blood which is unchangeable. and in c. 1. finali. Evae fuit
prima causa benefic. amittendi. By birthright (says he) form of investiture
being set down by the Lord, from the tenor whereof there must be no variation)
the son succeeds in the fee. Julius Clarus prime Chancellor to the King of
Spain, and regent in the province of Millain lib. 4. sentent. feudum. q. 66.
proves that the crime of the Father does not exclude the son from the ancient
fee, and lib 5. sent. laesae Maiestatis. n. 10. that the punishment of the
Father for high treason is of no force, against the children, which are borne,
and conceived before their fathers trespass; upon which Baiardus notes, that
the Fathers punishment is praejudiciall to the children only in those things,
which descend to them from the person of their father, not in other things, as
namely those fees, to which they succeed by covenant and provisoes. Add
hereunto Boerius who decision. part. 1. q. 10. n. 6 affirms that the sons
for the Fathers offense cannot be deprived of the estate settled upon them
before the offense done, that the sentence has no force against them, which
are borne before, but only after the offense committed. Cynus in d. l.
Quisquis. Alciate who Consil. 467. n. by the common received opinion denies
that the sentence concerns those children, who are lawfully conceived, and
borne, before the trespass done, Add also Couarruvias, Grammaticus, Gailius,
Mynsingerus, Baldus, Bartolus, Isernias, Alvareta. Bartholm Camerarius,
Rolandinus de valle cons. 74 lib. 3. and infinite others of the same opinion
But these ensuing laws are most remarkable. l. 3. D. de interdictis,
relegatis and deportatis. Those estates which descend not from the father, but
are given by the Lineage, the State, and the nature of the things themselves,
remain undestayned to the children, though the father be banished or
proscribed. l. 2. c. de libertis, and eorum filiis, it is said expressly, that
the faults of the parents cannot impeach those children, which are known to
be borne, whilst their parents were at liberty. l. Emancipatum a patre 7.. l.
and 2.. D. de senate. ibi. If any one be conceived, before his father (for a
crime) be put out of the Senate, though he be not borne, till the father have
lost his dignity, (which is more) he shall be esteemed as the Son of a
Senator; for the time of conception is to be respected, and. 2. in d. l. it
is said, that the dignity of the Grandfather, does more avail, than the fall
of the Father can hinder the son; and l. filium familias. 9. D. eodem. An
acquired dignity, cannot be taken from children, for the fathers fault, though
he be thrust out of the senate l. qui ad tempus. 2.. 3. and 4. de decurionibus
and filiis eorum, where it is said, that though the father, after the
conception of the son, do lose his dignity, the son shall not lose his.
Also.. 4. That he who shall be borne after his fathers banishment, and
proscription, if he was conceived before it, shall be reputed the son of a
Senator. Feudall goods, says Andraeas Gailius l. 2. de pace public. observe.
25. n. 33. (the proscribed person being dead,) ought to be restored, to his
sons, and other kinsmen; because the offense of a father and a kinsman,
cannot praejudice the sons and kinsmen, in the ancient fee, which is by
covenant, and providence and n. 34. the proscribed party being dead, the
ancient fee, and belonging to the family, returns to the heirs of his blood,
for whom by the covenant, and promise of the first archievour, that liberty was
obtained; and against whom the offense of a father, or a kinsman, can be no
impediment. But of these things we have discoursed fully, at large, and
purposely, in our book Devindicius causae Palatinae, whether we refer the
reader; in the mean time it is to be detested, that every common person
promiscuously, though of the lowest rank, does enjoy the benefit, and may be
secured by these laws; yet the children of Princes shall be denied this
ordinary justice, and become of a more unhappy condition than others in that
respect. But to the matter.

Secondly, Caesar offers to restore the Count Palatine, into part of his
ancient dominions, not to be despised.

Now it is to be considered, that this part is not named, nor expressed, nor
intimated, of what quality, and quantity it shall be. It only depends upon
the interpretation, and judgment of the Imperalists, whether, it be such as
may not be esteemed to be despised. If they account of it, according to the
estimation of the condition, in which they place the Electour, they will
esteem a small portion to be a great one. But that peradventure, will be so
small, and contemptible, that it will be ignominious, and bring great
prejudice upon the King and the Electour, to accept it. Indeed, by the last
declaration, which was exhibited to the Ambassador, it appears, and is to be
plainly seen, that both the Electorall dignity, and office, the chiefest, and
greatest thing appertaining to this restitution; and also the upper Palatinate,
a portion, equal to that which is left to be restored in the lower Palatinate,
is divided, and separated from restitution, for, there it is said, that neither
of these must be mentioned, or hoped for, as long as any of the Bavarian Line
is surviving. Only, of that part, which the Bavarian, and Spaniard hold, on
the Lower Palatinate, by way of gage or pledge; some hope is given, that it may
be restored under certain conditions, when those Bankers are paid. But this
part, (if you take from thence the Signiories belonging to Lodowicke Phillip
Duke of Symmeren, the Electours fathers brother, and the goods assigned to the
Electresse Lodovica Countess Palatine his Grandmother, and the Queen
Elizabeth widows, for their dowries it would be very small, and of little
estimation. But if you also divide from thence the fields, grounds, Cities, and
towns given, granted, and delivered to Leopald of Austria, the Bishop of
Ments, Wormbes and Spiers, the Master of the Knights of the Teutonicke order,
the Landgrave of Darmstar, and others, it would be far less: for of these,
there is no mention made by Caesar, and therefore it can not be presumed, that
these shall be computed, in the restitution of that no despicable portion. And
now it is also to be observed, that it is not to be added and expressed, when,
and under what conditions, that epitomized portion ought to be delivered. This
ought first to have been agreed upon; for it might easily come to pass, that
such intolerable, unjust, and unlawful conditions might be prescribed him as
the Electour with his honor, and conscience, could not condescend unto, which
might as well impeach the received religion, the Church discipline, and state,
as the form of administering, and governing the Commonwealth, and restrain
them, to new and stricter laws. Questionless the Spaniards, and Bavarian will
never deliver up, what they hold by strength in the Palatinate, unless they
first receive in hand those emoluments, and profits, which they pretend, and
require for their rompensation, and satisfaction; the rates whereof, they well
know how to inhaunce, at their pleasure. The Spaniards indeed, as formerly they
have pretended, desire a promise, and performance of a league, and help from
the English against the Dutch, and French, and the protection, and convoy of
their own navy, threatening withal, that they will not, otherwise, restore
their part in the Palatinate, but upon these, and the like conditions. The
Bavarian, who (as Demosthenes speaks of one) regards nothing else, but how he
may still get more, will crave a sum of money, and that no small one.
Therefore this part, whatsoever it is, will cost dear, and a price not to be
spoken of, and yet if the present desolation and vastation of the fields in the
Palatinate, the depopulation of the Country, the ruin of their Villages and
Towns, and the dwelling houses burned to ashes be considered; it may be
accounted of no value, or estimation.

It is further also to be considered, that the Prince Electour, without
prejudice of his right, and the violation of the fundamental law, cannot
consent to any partition, or acceptance of some one part: because in the
Golden Bull, by a special decree, in diverse places, and in emphaticall words
often repeateds all division, distraction and dismembring is forbidden: and it
is also confirmed by a royal decree, that the Electorall dignity, shall be so
conjoined, and connexed to the Territory of the Palatinate, that the one by no
means may be ever severed from the other. If therefore now he should accept of
any part, by way of partition, and division, he must consent and also
acknowledge, that the Electorall dignity, may by some means, be separated
either from the whole, or part of the Palatinate, which yet he cannot do,
without prejudice of his title, and entire restitution, unless perhaps, some
integrall part; that is, the whole lower Palatinate, to which the dignity is
annexed, should be restored; nor that neither, but with this condition, that
his title and hope of obtaining the rest, may still abide entire and
uncontroverted. For, then the partition and division cannot be said to continue
perpetual, but rather a suspension of the entire restitution and
Confederation. But, the meaning and scope of the Emperor and Bavarian, and
their Subjects, is far from such a moderation and advice, as is most apparent;
not only by the last answer, but by other declarations and often experience.

Thirdly, the Emperor offers, That he, according as it shall be agreed, will
invest him. But, now it is to be understood, that this investiture is
restrained, only to that part which is promised to be restored, as Radoldus the
Internuncio for the Emperor into England, has plainly declared; but not to
be extended to the whole Palatinate, and the Office of Arch-Sewer thereunto
annexed. But the Prince Electour, cannot without his great prejudice, accept of
such an Investiture, as is limited and restrained to one part, because by that
act he should be excluded and passed over in the general, principal, and
simultaneous investiture, which of right belongs to all the males of that
Stock: in respect of the whole Palatinate, the coherent Dignity, and the
dependances c. nonne praesumt. He, that is not comprehended expressly in this
common Investiture, can pretend no Title of Succession and obtaining the
Palatinate and Electorall Office. There is none of the Counts Palatine, but may
ground his Title, and hope for succession in the Palatinate, and the Electorall
Dignity, upon this Investiture. For this Investiture does give a title, cause,
action, hope, and pretense of succeeding in the Fees. c. 1. Quibus modis feud.
constable. poss. c. 1. in princ. de success. fratrum. c. 1. in fine de f^udo
cognat. c. Si facta. Si de feud. defuncti controv. sit inter D. and agnatos
Vasalli. An Investiture is a kind of settling in possession. Mysing. cons. 64.
n. 10. and has the force of a Contract, or rather is a Contract of it self,
Menoch. cons. 101. n. 28. Consil. 103 n. 53. and thereby the sons and kindred
have a firm title and assurance, which, without their own act, cannot
afterward be made void, as Wesenbecius affirms, Cons. 41. n. 103. in fine.
Besides it confirms the title in ancient Fees, though the incumbent hold it
by an unjust possession. Vlcius Zazius cons. 1 l. 1. n. 24. Tiraquell in tract.
Le mort saisit le vit. declarat. 7. post. 5. n. 15. and 16. Wesenb. cons, 1.
vol. 1. n 49. ita citat Nicolaus Burgundus in lib. de Electoratu Bavarico.
Therefore, it behoovs the Prince Elector to deal warily, and circumspectly in
this business, by endeavoring to obtain the Investiture; that is, the
renovation of the ancient and common investiture, used in the Palatine family,
for himself, as the head of the family, and his brethren and kinsmen; no way
permitting that the Investiture may be omitted, or himself, or the rest which
are to be invested, be passed over.

Fourthly, the Emperor offers, that when it shall come to a Treaty, concerning
the Electorall Dignity, and the other postulates, he will observe such
moderation, that in those things which may be granted upon reasonable
Conditions, both the most Illustrious King, may know some signs of the good
affection of his Imperial Majesty toward Him, and the Count Palatine may
find the inclination of his favor toward him. But it is to be observed;
That, this Caesarean supposition, is already cancelled and abrogated by his
own two last answers. For, in them it is said plainly, That the Emperors
disposalls of the Dignities and dominions of the Electour Palatine, are
confirmed by the late Treaty of Prague, and consequently allowed of by all the
Princes of the Empire. And yet by those disposals, which in the records of that
Treaty they have provided always to be of force, all hope of ever attaining
the Electorate and the annexed Provinces, is taken away and cut off from the
children of King Frederick: it being plainly there expressed; that by those
disposals, the Electorate is conferred and delivered, not only to the Duke of
Bavaria, but also to the Line of William, that is, to the race of is Father (of
which there are five males yet remaining) for ever.

Which very thing is more plainly and clearly delivered in the other last
answer; where his Imperial Majesty does confess and most plainly show,
that he has granted, (not only to the Duke of Bavaria, but also to the Line
of William) as well the Electorall dignity, as the upper Palatinate, by an
hereditary right; and therefore no treaty concerning their restitution, so
long as any of that line survived, might be admitted. By this then it appears
plainly, that the hope of obtaining the Electorall dignity, and upper
Palatinate is not only cut off from ^he branches, but from the very stock?
With what confidence then, upon what ground, by what pretense, can the treaty
about the restitution of the Palatinate be continued? Indeed it was afterward
signified that upon advise with the Electorall College, which was interessed
in the matter, some means were discovered by which hopes were given, that
though the Bavarian line of William was yet in being, the difficulty,
concerning the Electorall dignity, might be over passed, and some more ample
satisfaction given to the most illustrious King of great Britain. But there is
none, that will use his reason, but may observe to what end, these reports were
raised, and devised. For they are grounded upon no probability, but tend
merely to ensnare and illaqueate with vain and empty speeches the King of
Great Britain, and all those who are interessed in the Palatine cause, that
they might not proclaim war, take hold of occasions, and so join with the
French, Swedes, and other enemies of the house of Austria. Such policies are
ordinary in the Courts of Caesar, and the Spaniard; as may be proved by many
examples. Indeed their Legates have learned this lesson so perfectly, that
amongst foreign Nations, they have not undeservedly gotten, the name and fame
of great politicians.

But (I pray tell me) what means can be found, that satisfaction may be given
to the right, and most just claim of Charles Lodowicke the Electour, his
brethren, and kinsmen on the one side; and the ambition, and insatiable desire
of the Bavarian on the other? Only one must be Electour, and keep that
dignity; two cannot sit in that seat of Justice, nor perform the office of
one man, nor speak with one tongue, nor give one vote. The seven Electours,
like seven pillars, support the state of the Germane Commonwealth. If there
be more or fewer, the Symmetrie and bulk of that building must needs fall. The
Golden Bull, which is the Royal fundamental law, and princely decree,
admits only of seven, and to each of them assigns, and prescribes his
office, principality, and power, to which the Electorate is annexed: hence
also, it styles them the seven candle-stickes, the number of which can neither
be augmented, nor diminished, without dismembring and subverting of the body of
the Republique. If there were more, as nine, or eleaven, (for the number must
naturally be uneven, lest the voices being even, there might happen a
division, and schism in the election of a king) what places, what preferments,
what offices, beseeming their high dignity, could be appointed to them? What
lands, and provinces for the settling the Electorate, could be assigned to them?
So great is the authority of the Golden Bull, that it cannot be altered and
violated by the Emperor, though with the consent of the Electours; unless by
overthrowing the laws, that is, by racing the foundation, he would pervert and
ruinate the state and constitution of the Commonwealth.

But if it should happen, that nine Electours should be created, how can they
be marshalled in their proper ranks and order? (the Palatine surely will not
suffer himself to be displaced, and put by of his right and possession,
confirmed, by the custom of many ages, by the fundamental Laws, and by the
consent of so many Emperors, and all the Princes; because he cannot do this,
without impeaching his honor, and wrong of his conscience, nor yet without
reproach and injury to his whole family. For, so he should acknowledge, and by
his giving place and example make it publicly appear, that He is justly
deprived of his ancient and acquired right, and prerogative which time out of
mind did appertain unto Him, among the Electours; and accept it as a great
favor, that he should be admitted as a new creature, and an Electour upon the
instance of entreaty: when yet with less disparagement and indignity He might
better renounce the whole Electorate, then consent unto so dishonorable a
change of precedence and order, into the lowest rank; which would be a sign
of a foolish and pusillaminous ambition. The Bavarian likewise, will by no
means suffer himself to be removed from the place, into which he has
ascended, with so great, and fervent desire, fury, and violence; with so much
labor, and sweat, with so much effusion of blood, and long continuation of
Arms; and which he has snatched away by force, and conferred upon his family.
Although a new Electour ought to sit in the lowest place, and not to be
esteemed of higher eminency, then any other; and yet such is his ambition, and
so high are the thoughts of his aspiring mind, that he makes no bones to
contend for principality, not only, with the Electours far more ancient then
himself, but with Caesar himself also, as appears, by the experience of many
former years, when he compelled Caesar, at the meeting at Ratisbone, to
discharge Wallinsten of his office, and to approve all the other things, which
he then demanded. Long before that the Bavarian was placed by Caesar among the
Electours, even in the times of the Emperors Rodolph, and Matthias, he
contended with the Archdukes of Austria, for the first and more honorable
place, he did ambitiously affect the title of sovereignty, as well as the
Austrians, and in fine constrained Ferdinand, who then wanted his assistance,
to give him that, title, before he was made a new Elector. It is true indeed,
that the Dukes of Bavaria possessed of the estate, and chief of their family,
made some scruple, to give place to the Archdukes of Austria, (which were not
advanced to regal, and Imperial dignity) in the assemblies, and parliaments
of the Empire, professing themselves to be more ancient Dukes, and that it was
unlawful, for the Emperors derived from the Austrian family, to prefer
their posterity before the Bavarian family, which long time had enjoyed the
privilege of the chief seat, (by making them Archdukes) because also, the
Duke of Bavaria (as the more worthy held the prime collateral place amongst
the secular Princes, and subscribed to, and signed the Decrees and Laws
propounded and confirmed in the Parliaments by the Princes; when the Austrians,
who disdained to be placed inferior to the Bavarian, did sit collaterally with
the Priors, Prelates and Ecclesiastical persons. But yet never any of the
Bavarians did stand so much upon it, and prevail so far in it, with such
eagerness, ambition, and better success, as this modern Duke; who above all
the rest, endeavors to preserve the ancient splendour and dignity of his Family.

But they say it is probable, and there is some hope, that the Bavarians my be
persuaded to consent to a covenant of alternation, on this wise; that after the
death of Maximilian the Bavarian, now possessing it, the Electorall Dignity and
Office, may be performed and held by exchange of turns, betwixt the first
borne sons and Nephews of him, and the first borne Sons and Nephews of King
Frederick Palatine: that for default of either of their issue, the whole
Electorate may be totally left, as by right of accrewment, to the longest
liver. But these are mushrumes and quillits, without root or ground, invented
only to circumvent and ensnare the minds of the credulous. For the Bavarians
now being powerful, and having their estate settled, and withal, of eminent
authority and grace in the Empire, are so far from condescending to such a
Covenant, that they will not connive and permit, that the controversy of the
Electorate should either be set apart, or left in suspense. The right of either
party being reserved, or that it be referred to a Treaty or a competent Judge,
as they have openly and with great earnestness published and declared; as at
other meetings, so more especially in the Diet at Ratisbone; and they have also
by their urgent importunity, pressed the Emperor so far, that the Palatines
of Rolerts Race shall still remain excluded from hope and possession of the
Electorate; nor shall it be permitted to them, to question their Title to it,
so long as any of the Bavarian Line of William survives, and is alive: but,
that they shall be compelled to renounce all their title, and give a caution,
that they will move no more for that cause hereafter in the Empire: which
unless they do, neither Germany, nor the Bavarians, can have any assurance of
peace and security. For (say they) if the Palatines have leave and liberty to
demand their right, then, so soon as occasion and supply of means shall
favor them (both which upon their re-entry and restitution to their dominions
they will provide and obtain) they will not be quiet again, till they have
chased the Bavarians from the Electorate, as the sons and Grandchildren of
Rodolph have done, who have broken the transaction, and covenant for their
alternall function of the Electorall office, concluded of in the Papian treaty,
and by force and fraud have thrust out the children, and posterity of Lodowicke
the Bavarian Emperor from their possession.

It is therefore necessary, that first, and before the Palatines be admitted
into the Empire, and restored to their Principalities this question be
determined, and transacted absolutely, which otherwise, would kindle the fire
of new troubles, in a fresh war, and by consequent, the empire, and the
Commonwealth, should enjoy no secure, and firm peace, but be disquieted with
perpetual fear. Thus they conclude, and (as they judge) determine, what they
had advised of, and decreed from the beginning. And hence it came to pass,
that with much subtlety, threats, and Oratory they have not only procured the
perpetual succession of the Bavarian Line in the Electorate, and the exclusion
of the Palatine family, to be recorded into the Instruments of Prague, amongst
the conditions of that dishonorable peace, but, have also compelled the
Emperor, with their importunity, to cut off from the Palatines, all hope of
obtaining the Electorate, and upper Palatinate, by proclaiming, and writing
confidently, and absolutely, that he may not permit, that, there should be any
demand or conference, or meeting, about their restitution, as long, as the male
Line of William the Bavarian, was in being. But, go to, let them say, and make
oath, that they would consent to this alternation, and successive execution by
turns; is it tolerable that Charles Lodowicke, an Electour borne by his own
birthright, and by the law, provision, and tradition of his Ancestors; and
that his brethren and kinsmen, for whom this right was procured, should
condescend to such a condition as would both bring scandal to Himself, and
his Country, and also infringe their ancient privileges, and prerogatives.
With what credit, with what honesty, with what pretense can he be induced
that he should enfeeble, lessen and divide his own Right and possession,
which has been ratified and established by the preterition of so many ages,
by the Confirmation of so many Emperors, in a word, by the approbation of all
states throughout the whole world (who have lived since the first time of
settling of a Commonwealth) and that for the favor of a most ungrateful and
dangerous Family? Who can endure, who would not stomach and storm, if he
should see the Palatine Princes, who formerly have been so careful to
preserve the ancient laws and ordinances of their Country, who have
adventured to undergo any hazard, though it were of life and state, for the
maintenance of their liberty of the Golden Bull, and other constitutions and
fundamental decrees now so dishonourably and unadvisedly to dissolve and
violate them? Has not this covenant of alternation, which the Bavarians, even
three Ages since, did presume to bring in, been abrogated by the Golden Bull of
Charles the fourth, by the Confirmation of succeeding Emperors, by the
inviolable custom of so many years, as an evil president, which might tend
to the decay and ruin of the Empire, would foster discord and difference
amongst the Princes, and be an occasion of continual broiles and tumults.

From these things (which yet have been but only touched) it does appear
what may be judged of those means which are propounded for the overcomming of
that difficulty, concerning the restitution of the Electorall dignity: for,
whether the succession and execution by interchangeable turns be propounded,
or whether two new ones, to be added to the seven Ancients be resolved on,
both the one and the other is not to be entertained, because it cannot be
effected and brought to pass with any reason, security and profit. Let them
therefore speak, promise, offer, or swear what they will, it is certain and
manifest, that Caesar, the Bavarians and their associates, will never receive
Charles Lodowicke the Electour, or his brethren, and kinsmen unto their ancient
state of dignity and fortunes; nor will they permit them to attain to any
power, which may be any ways formidable unto them, lest when occasion serves,
aid being sent them from every side, they should use it to revenge, and the
recovery of those things which are taken from them. Briefly, it is clear and
evident, that all labor and time is spent in vain, ^^^t this time, and so
long as the Bavarian is alive and the second Prince in the whole Empire; it be
yet hoped, that by friendly treaties it may be effected, that the Electorall
Palatinate, with the dignity and septemvirall Robes should be entirely restored
upon equal terms. Some other policy therefore must be thought of some other
course must be taken, some alteration of times is to be looked for, that so
these invincible spirits, puffed up with the success of their affairs, and
grown insolent with their long felicity, and inveterate authority, may at
length be made to know themselves, and brought to more mild and moderate
counsels.

And these are the proposalls which are offered by Caesar, and willed to be
accepted as a special grace and favor of the Emperor, and which are (by
them) esteemed to deserve a more near tyall of familiarity and league, with
other offices of love, betwixt the King of Great Britain and the House of
Austria. But now it is to be considered upon what Conditions this favor by
which the most Illustrious King, may apprehend the willing Inclination, and
benevolent affection of the Emperor toward Him, and his clemency toward his
Nephews; may be granted.

The Conditions, I warrant you, are expressly set down but all and those
likewise which are yet to be treated of, are shuffled together under the
Condition of making a League, as it is in the answer.

And indeed, the first Condition requires, that the Count Palatine do humbly
sue for the benefit of reconciliation, by humbling and submitting him self to
his sacred Imperial Majesty in a submissive manner as beseems him. Here the
Electour is enjoined to stand and confess himself to be guilty, and by his
own fact declare publicly, that he is not innocent, but that he has offended
his Imperial Majesty to whom he ought to be reconciled. A reconciliation
does presuppose an offense: But in what did he ever offend the Emperor?
Whether, because he came into the world? whether, because he lives? whether,
because he was in his minority and could injure no man by reason of his
infancy? whether, because he is descended of the ancient and Royal stock of
the Palatines, and borne of a Queen his mother? whether because he had a
father who was elected King of Bohemia? whether, because he was brought up at
Leyden, and applied himself to the studies of Arts? whether, because he was
quiet, and did forbear Arms? whether because he following the council of the
King his Uncle, was not a Party? whether because he humbly and submissively
desired his restitution and investiture of Caesar? Whether, because he has
tendered him all obsequie, and observance? Whether because the King his Uncle in
his behalf did send an Ambassador to the Emperor and his Electours? whether
because by the daughter, he is the Grandchild of King James, and by the
sister, the Nephew of King Charles, and the Nephews Son of the King of
Denmark, and kinsman to the King of France? Some such thing must be, which
has given the offense: But why is not the offense, and the cause thereof,
expressed, for which he must show such a kind of submission and humiliation, as
is not usually required, nor performed, but by delinquents and such as
acknowledge themselves to be great offenders? Wherefore is there not a word
mentioned why Caesar is so offended with him, that he must needs become a
Suppliant, by seeking with so much humility, the benefit of his reconciliation?

Secondly, He is bound to renounce all Leagues and Covenants whatsoever, which
either He Himself, or happily His Father, has made with any Kings or States
whatsoever, as well within, as without the Empire. Here he is enjoined to bid
farewell, for ever, to all Assistants and friends; and solely to rest upon the
mere favor of Caesar, and to lay the foundation of his hope and fortunes upon
those uncertain and doubtful propositions. But, by this means, he should not
only injure, and be extremely ungrateful toward his better friends and
acquaintance, who have entertained Him, his Father, Mother, Brethren and
Sisters exiled, and hitherto have preserved them safe, as in a Sanctuary, and
accumulated them with all kind of Courtesies and friendly offices; but also, he
should deprive himself ever hereafter, of the power and liberty of looking for
and contracting leagues and friendship, or entertaining Commerce and
familiarity with whom he pleases. It is neither wisdom nor safety to leave
certaineties with dishonor, and prejudice, both to Conscience and Credit; and
to turn unto uncertainties which are both hurtful and infamous, with disgrace
and ruin. How miserable would be the condition, I will not say of a Prince,
but of a Peasant, who must suffer himself to be bound to so hard and unjust
conditions, that he should quite disable himself of all hopes of using
occasions and favors of his friends? There is no example extant, in which, so
general, absolute, and indistinct renunciation of all leagues and covenants,
has been required of any Prince of Germany, who has hitherto been restored
unto favor.

Thirdly, there must be satisfaction also given in other things, of which it
shall be determined hereafter, in a future Treatise concerning a league, to be
made with His Imperial Majesty, the King of Spain, and the whole House of
Austria. Hence it is collected, that yet there are some other conditions to be
exacted of the Electour, and prescribed to him. In all those there must first
be satisfaction given in very deed, and a league confirmed by the King of great
Britain, with the whole House of Austria, and many other offices, emoluments,
and assistance to be granted according to the arbitrament and disposeall of
Caesar, and the Spaniard; and then, the Emperor promises He will perform his
propositions.

These are things which the Emperor offreth, and the conditions upon which
they are offered. And now if these offers be considered by themselves, and in
their own nature, without the conditions annexed, they are such as will not
only bring no honor, profit and benefit, but rather ignominy, loss, and
prejudice to him that accepts and consents unto them. They are also unbeseeming
the greatness of the Imperial Majesty, willingly and yet hardly, offering so
small things, with so great exaggeration, and as it were exprobation. Moreover
they are far unworthy of the honor of the King, who did require them, and
had deserved better; to whom it would be a dishonor, if so many intercessions,
and Ambassies, if so much expense of state in these attempts, if his great
kindness showed to the Austrians, his own friendship and confederation with
them, if the moderation, which Himself, and the King His Father, have
manifested in the behalf of Caesar, and the House of Austria, in the midst of
these combustions; if the continual profits, which the Spaniards get by
England, could procure, obtain, and merit no more than some one part of the
Palatinate, not to be contemned. Surely, these men either make small account
of the desert, league, society and friendship of the King, if they think it
may be recompensed with some shall portion of the Palatinate, already
exhausted, and utterly ruinated; or else, they value that portion, and the
favor of the Emperor at so high a rate, that the friendship of so potent a
King, and his assistance, may not be compared with, or preferred before it.
The whole Palatinate, with the Electorall dignity, and all the revenewes
therereof (especially in the estate that now it is, where there is nothing
beautiful or solid in it,) cannot be so profitable, either to the King, or the
Electour his Nephew, as at this time, that sole Friendship of the King, sitting
still, and carrying himself as a neutrall, is to the Austrians.

As the puissance of no King, Prince, and Empire in the world at this day, can
be compared with that, by which the most Glorious King of Great Britain at
this time excells and exceeds others; so there is none which is so formidable
and more to be feared than that is, which is alike fatal to the Austrians and
Spaniards. The Kings of England, from time to time have been very powerful,
and for their commodious Situation of the Island, and their command of the Sea
have been ever to be feared. But none of them did ever attain to that height
of power, to which King Charles has now ascended: who with one breath rules
and governes three, the most powerful, flourishing, and populous kingdoms,
abounding, in the superlative degree, with all things necessary for peace and
war; and (which is the chiefest, and of most importance) hemmed in with two
great Islands, not without great difficulty to be entered: who with an
unconquered, and continual Navy, is Admiral of the Sea, and by most strong
Garrisons keeps the channel, and as he thinks fitting, right, and
necessary, does either open or shut it as his pleasure: who has assigned
certain annual and continual revenewes and profits, to mainetaine a Navy,
and now and then to repair it with new supplies: at whose beck and will (if
he please to command, and use them) all the Navies in the Germane Ocean, in
both the Balticke-seas, in Denmark, about the coasts of the Neatherlands, and
Sweden, are ready, and will hoyse up sails: who enjoyes a most firm peace,
and encompassed about with a numerous Of spring, reply and rests upon many
proppes, and stays: who goevrnes a most obedient people, that accustom
themselves to observe his commands with a willing mind; who has the command
of a most warlike Nation, and most valiant in their undertakings of Arms both
by Sea and Land: who has in a readiness some Myriades of most skillful
Mariners, and approved Pilots; who is neither terrified by fear or suspicion
of sedition, contumacy, or disobedience, nor yet disturbed in His purposes, and
intentions: who safely, and that with his great advantuge, may invade his
enemies; but cannot be invaded without danger to the attempters: who can wage
war against other Princes, with profit, and without danger; and prevent and
suppress, in the very beginning a war that is made against him, before it
comes near him: But, as he is most observant of his covenants, and most
desirous of peace, and the greatest lover of justice, and equity: So does he
also desire no other man's right, provokes no man unadvisedly, but only
endeavors to keep and maintain that which is his own. For, such is the
justice, piety, and integrity of this great Monarch, (for he has these
graces, which are the supporters of his royal throne, amongst others, proper
and engraffed in his royal breast) that, he will keep his covenants,
conditions, and leagues, that are made with him, whether of peace or commerce,
wholly, punctually, and inviolably with all men; and not take up Arms for
profit, and by violence; but with necessity, and mature preparation; preferring
the security and safety of his people, before his own private revenge or
desires.

That the Spaniards, at this day, keep possession of Flanders and the
Netherlands; that they have free ingresse, and egresse, to their own shores,
bays, and havens; that they can trade and traffic with their so far distant
and remote Kingdoms; that they can send their money, by letters of exchange,
to maintain their Armies; that they can take up, and bring fresh soldiers and
supplies into the field: All this, is by the favor of King Charles: For had it
pleased him, at that time, when the French and Hollanders, with their joined
forces and Armies marched into Flanders, either to have given them a small
assistance, or have reached out his hand to the common prey; there is no man
doubts, but they had been turned out of the Netherlands, and been beaten by
Sea, and enforced to retire into their ancient Caves and Dens beyond the
Pyrenean mountains.

Hence then it is manifest, how needful and behoovefull it is, for the
Spaniards and the Austrians, to have for a friend (or at the least no enemy,
but a mediator both of Peace and War) so potent a Commander of the Sea. They
ought therefore carefully to take heed, that they do not alienate or estrange
Him from them; that they move Him not to wrath, displease Him, or stir Him up
against them. For if they should have the King their Foe, and Enemy (the truth
is) they would soon be reduced to order, and forbear their pillaging and
invasion of other Kingdoms and Empires; and be compelled to alter their
purpose of an universal Monarchy throughout Europe, being scarce safe in
their own houses and country; and altogether unable to maintain themselves.
If the King would, but at the least, prohibit, and hinder them from coming
upon the Seas, from using of traffic and navigation; their power and strength
would soon come to a straight: For He might, if He thought fit to undertake
it, in a short space of time, and within one year, chase them off from the
Ocean, like that great Pompey, who within the space of three years, scoured
the Sea of all Pirates through the whole Roman Empire. If any one do well
consider the particulars, he shall have cause enough to detest, either the
impudence, or obstinacy, or arrogance of the Austrians and Spaniards; in that,
in the Palatine Cause, they have not only, not given satisfaction to the most
reasonable and just demands of so mighty a King; (whose Peace affords them
safeguard and security) but also that they still hinder His Nephews from being
restored to the former state of their Dignity and fortune. But let them know,
That, as anger in heroic spirits is slow and tardy in the beginning, so it is
fell and vehement, if being overmuch provoked it shall move it self with a
just violence. Philip and Peucer. in Chronic. Carrion. At length (without doubt)
the just Nemesis will awake, and rise against them, requiring vengeance and
punishment of those arrogant oppressors of the innocent, and pillagers both of
Kingdoms and Provinces.

Now if Caesar's propositions be looked upon, as they are attired in the
vestments of the annexed Conditions; they are to be reputed still viler, baser
and more opprobrious. I pray you, what favor is this, which tends to trouble
and disgrace, and withal, is to be bought at so dear a ^ate? Briefly, every
man may see, that this is intended chiefly, That both the most Illustrious
Palatine family, most observant of their liberty, and the ancient Ordinances,
may be utterly oppressed, and continue in perpetual infamy, that it rise not
again; and that their friends and abettors may be circumvented and hindered
from taking of Arms; and that they may not, upon the occasions and moments of
time apprehended, associate themselves with the eneenemies of the Austrians.

Lastly; it must be given you to understand, that The Emperor, in his last
answer, which he did likewise in the former, pressed the Ambassador, to
descend to particulars; and more plainly, either by writing, or, if it pleased
him, (which his Imperial Majesty did judge more convenient) by vocal
conference, with his Imperial Majesty's Commissioners, to explain what the
most Illustrious King of Great Britain does offer, and intend to perform, to
His Imperial Majesty, in exchange of these fair offers; that each Party
proceeding in a fair equipage, (as the custom is) it may be treated, agreed,
and concluded concerning the Propositions demanded; and the Conditions to be
performed on both sides: which His Sacred Imperial Majesty thought consentany
and agreeable to reason.

But the Ambassador in his proposition, and afterward, declared, That his King,
if for His sake there should be a restitution, not only of one part, but of
the whole Palatinate, with the Electorate; and so the foundation of an
universal peace should be laid: Then He would make a league with the
Emperor, and the whole House of Austria, and the Princes of the Empire, to
begin, setle, and continue a peace.

A very good, and most fair requital! who could hope, and expect more? The
King offered more than enough; and yet the Caesareans, and Spaniards, were not
contented with it: They would have, that the Ambassador should remonstrate,
and show in particulars, with what covenants and conditions, the King of great
Britain, would make his league, with the House of Austria (for of the Empire,
and the Princes thereof, they made no mention, nor did they much care for it;
because the Austrians should get no great advantage, by such a conditioned
league with the Princes) or what, or how much assistance, either of Arms,
money, or shipping, He did intend to covenant, and perform. But the
Ambassador, as a wise, and circumspect man, thought it neither reasonable,
just, nor honest, to go further, in answer of things particularly, before the
Emperor would come nearer to his demandes, and plainly declare, whether he
would consent to the whole, and entire restitution, as it was required; or at
least, what part, and upon what terms, he determined to restore, giving hope,
and promise, that the remainder likewise in short time should be surrendered.

Those offers, which were made and propounded in the name of the King, were not
only honorable excellent, and beseeming such a magnanimous King, most
desirous of the public peace; but also most necessary for settling a peace in
the whole Empire: to this add that, the King (not bound thereunto by any
obligation) offered these things merely, in testimony of his good affection.
But those propositions obtruded and thrust, as it were, upon the King, by the
Emperor, are uncertain, dishonorable, unworthy, imperfect: such as are
neither answerable to the Kings demands, expectation and merits; and such as
are not expressions of a generous and free spirit, but testimonies of a
tenacious, covetous, and sordid disposition. To pass by that, the Caesarean
Majesty, both in respect of the innocence of the Princes, that are to be
restored, in respect of the justice of the cause, and in respect of the public
good; that would have ensued, was obliged to far greater conditions, namely,
to the entire restitution of the Electorall dignity, and dominions.

And yet, if he had come somewhat nearer to the just, reasonable, and so often
iterated demands of the Ambassador, and had passed over those ignominious
conditions which he prescribed to the Electour, by consenting to an honorable
restitution, which might have been accepted, without prejudice, and with
safety; and withal, had propounded noble, and honest conditions, upon which
he would have granted a restitution: then the Ambassador knowing how much the
favor, and benevolence of Caesar would merit, had been ready to proceed
further. But the drift of the Caesareans, was first to know, what they might
certainly and particularly expect from the King, whether any, and what
provision, of Arms, money, or shipping he would grant unto them: and all to
this end, that if they perceived, it would not answer and much conduce to
their purposes, then, it might be lawful for them to go back, and dismiss
the Ambassador, the treaty unconcluded. Those things which are objected
concerning the Dispositions, confirmed by the treaty of Prague, and ratified by
all the Princes of the Empire, and brought in only to excuse, and settle the
Emperors decrees in the Palatine cause, do sufficiently declare, what is to be
hoped for in the integrall restitution of the dominions and dignity. By the
decrees of Prague it appears plainly, that, there were certain private and
secret contracts, between the Bavarian, and the Emperor, by virtue whereof,
the Electorall dominions and dignities were not only given, granted, and
confirmed to the Duke of Bavaria, for term of life; but also to the whole
face of his father William, from whom it is called the Wilhelmian Line, to
endure for ever: for the decree runs in these words:

As much as concerns the Palatin cause: it is enacted, that thos^ things
which His Imperial Majesty has determined, both concerning the Electorate and
dominions thereof, in the behalf of the most Illustrious Duke of Bavaria, and
the Line of William, and otherwise; as also, what he has ordered, concerning
the goods of certain Palatine Administrators, they shall abide firm, and
ratified; yet so, as it shall be lawful, for the widow of Frederick the
fourth, sometimes, Count Palatine of the Rhine, to enjoy her dowry, so far,
as She can make it appear to appertain unto Her. But for the children of the
proscribed Palatine, when they shall submissely have humbled themselves (as it
beseemes them) to His Caesarean Majesty, some Princely allowance shall be
appointed to them, not as a due, but as a favor; not that they can claim it
as their Right, but as it proceeds from the grace of the Emperor.

In the dispute concerning the Septemvirate Palatine, transferred, by full
power, upon the Duke of Bavaria, it is often repeated ^^d affirmed, that the
Electorate is not only given to the Duke of Bavaria, but to the whole Line of
the Bavarians; and that the Duke of Ne^burg, and others, are mistaken, who
conceive the Investiture to be merely provisionall, and for term of life. The
most Augustine Emperor ( thus he writes Cap. 4. n. 24.) has cast the most
just and deserved thunderbolt of proscription of the Ban, upon the rebel
Frederick, and thereby declared him to have lost all his Privileges, Honors,
Goods, and particularly, the Electorall Dignity, with the Dominions thereunto
annexed. Secondly, that he has adjudged the said Electorate, for Felony done
by Frederick, to be devolved to himself, upon mature hearing and knowledge of
the Cause, examining withal, theaersons, allegations, and pretenses of the
Duke of Neuburg. Lastly, that he being moved with most weighty, and just
argument, has by consent, and approbation of the Electors of the Empire, and
persuasion of the Pope, really, and for ever transferred the said Electorate,
together with the Privileges thereunto annexed, unto the most Illustrious
Prince, Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, and the whole Bavarian Family
(notwithstanding the Duke of Neuburgs gainsaying of it) by a solemn and
wonted Investiture; so that His Electorall Highness having taken possession,
as well of the Right, Voice, Dignity, and Electorall power; as of the Goods,
Territories, Lands, Dominions, and other things thereunto annexed; or, as it
were, admitted into the Famous College of Electours, associated unto that
Fraternall union; and in all things, publicly enjoying the Office, Right,
Function, and Dignity of the former Electour Palatine; is thought worthy of,
and honored with that Title, as well by the Pope, College of Cardinals, his
Imperial Majesty, as the Kings of France, Spain, Poland, and Denmark. With
what face then, credit, or honesty, does the Relator write, that the
Investiture of the most Illustrious Duke Maximilian, concerning the Electorall
dignity, is only provisionall, and made, but upon certain conditions, to be
of force only, for te^rme of life? The Imperial (...) does convin^^ this
calumny, which the Relator himself (though unwilling) cannot but acknowledge.
Item fol. 15. cap. 5. n. 17. He has freely (says he) the cause being
maturely deliberated by the space of 2. years, and more, the purpose
communicated to the Electours, the Pope assenting, or rather, instantly
desiring it the Princes of the sacred Roman Empire, urging and approving it,
foreign Kings also, and Dukes, (the Duke of Newburge only excepted)
earnestly interceding for it, with the applause of all good men, translated the
Electorate upon the most illustrious, Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, and the whole
Bavarian line, the merits of his highness being known to the whole world, his
Agnation, and right from that ancient Family sueing for it, and other, most
weighty causes, moving the Emperor thereunto; as it appears more at large,
by the Charter of his Patent, and his Letters of Investiture: and a little
after, n. 175 nothing is granted provisionally, and for time of life; no title
is reserved for the Duke of Newburg and n. 182. For the Electorate Palatine,
was by the mere good will and arbitrament of the Emperor (other great, and
most just causes, moving him to it) tran^ferred upon the Duke of Bavaria, and
his Noble Family, without respect, or mention of his expense in war, and n.
184. the matter by the space of two years, and more, being thoroughly scanned,
examined, and advised of, he began to translate it upon Maximilian the Duke of
Bavaria, and his Family n. 188. that so (Justice dipsosing it) the Electorall
dignity, raked out of the Ashes, again might return to that Family, to which
of old it did belong; though contrary to right, law, and covenants confirmed by
oath it was taken from it. n. 190. of the Electorate Palatine, by reason of the
most heinous crime of rebellion, committed and perpetrated by the proscribed
Frederick, fully devolved to him, and justly and lawfully translated to the
Duke of Bavaria and his family.

But what needs many words? Have we not heard sufficiently already, that the
Emperor does no longer deny, but openly and publicly profess in the hearing
of all the world, that he has given, conferred, and by Investiture delivered,
the Palatine Septemvirate, to Duke Maximilian, and the whole Bavarian Line?
This Act indeed was, not long known among the Commons: Before the publication
of the Articles of Prague, no man ever heard of it, unless, perhaps, either by
divination, suspicion, or conjecture, he did smell it out. But these things, as
all other passages in this business of transferring the Electorall Dignity,
were ordered and ennacted privately, and by a compact plot, as it were, in
hugger-mugger, they being neither heard, nor called, without defense, and
absent whom it most concerned; without the privity and consent of the chief
Electours and Princes (except that some afterward enforced with fear did not
contradict them) against the Laws, Right, and faith given to the contrary.

But how do these things suit and agree with those of the Emperor and the
Duke of Bavaria? who when in the Diet at Ratisbone, he invested Maximilian into
the Electorate, both to the Electours and King James, did religiously assure,
promise and avow, engaging his inviolable faith, that he had translated and
conferred the Electorall Dignity to the Bavarian but upon certain Condions, as
namely, without prejudice to the right of the pretenders, and no longer than
for his life. For thus he expresses himself in his declaration solemnly made
to the Electours Feb. 23. An. 1623 That, the Investiture, was made without
prejudice of the sons of the Count Palatine, and his Brethren, as also of the
Duke Wolfgangus Willhelmus Count Palatine, and other his kinsmen, so that
nothing was detracted from any, of his right, but that it was expressly
reserved, to be decided, as soon as might be, either by a friendly
composition or by law: the controversy being decided, whatsoever was adjudged
for them, should be delivered them instantly, after the death of Maximilian the
Duke of Bavaria, and the Investiture, thereupon, to be granted.

The Electours also of Saxony, and Brandenburg, acknowledged the Duke of
Bavaria, but it was upon certain conditions, and no longer than he lived: for
when he died, the title was to be restored to those, to whom before the
Proscription and the translation of the Palatine (so the words run) by reason
of the simultaneous Investiture, the Electorall dignity did of right belong.

The Emperor, in his letters to King James the 5. of March, the same year,
writes in this manner: That he by his declaration would not in the least
derogate or prejudice any in their rights; but to the pretended succession in
the Electorall Dignity and dominions, a door of his Imperial grace and
equity should be always left open both to the children, brother, and kinsmen
of the Palatine. Furthermore, that it was expressly inserted in the Instrument
of Investiture, that by a friendly treaty, or if that would not prevail, by a
summarie or royal process, it should be pleaded and decided what of grace
might be given to the Nephews of the King, pretending a right of succession,
and what of equity to the Kindred in the Dignity and Electorall Privileges.
And the Bavarian himself also did aver and promise upon his faith, that he
would possess the Electorate upon Condition, and no otherwise, and that after
his death it should be restored to him, or them, to whom by Composition or
sentence of Judicature it should be adjudged. As it is more largely expressed
both in the Charter of the Investiture, and in the foresaid Declaration of the
Emperor, as also in Letters of the Electour of Saxony, to the Elector of
Mentz; and in the answer of the Electour of Brandenburg to the Ambassador of
Caesar, dated at Regiomontium in Borussia, the 12. of May 1627. All which
notwithstanding being violated, and cast by, the septemvirall dignity, with the
Country, by secret contracts and agreements, is granted, and conferred upon the
Line of William that is, upon all the Dukes of Bavaria, and their children.

In that Decree also made the 24. of February this year last past, to which
the Emperor does now and then, affirm that he will constantly adhere, he
has left some hope of regaining the Electorall Dignity: whilst he thus writes
again;

When it shall come to a Treaty, concerning the Electorall Dignity, and the
other demands, His Majesty will observe such moderation, that in those things
which may be granted, upon reasonable Conditions, both the most Illustrious
King of Great Britain, may thence discover the good will, and affection of
His Sacred Imperial Majesty toward Him; and, the often named Count Palatine,
may apprehend, the inclination of His Caesarean Grace toward Him: And this He
also repeated, word for word, in His Answer to the English Ambassador, the
30. day of June, of the forementioned year.

But it is to be observed, that these words were spoken, and rehearsed, long
after the agreement of Prague, and the translation made in facto, upon the Line
of William.

Quanto in pectore hanc rem meo magis voluto,
Tanto mihi aegritudo auctior est in animo,
Ad illum modum os sublitum esse.
To use the Plantine phrase, not only, to all the Counts Palatines, but to all
the Princes of the Empire and others, who favored the cause Palatine, being
persuaded, that the proscription, and hatred, of the Caesareans, was only
against Frederick, and not against his children; and that the Electorate
should be restored to them, after the Bavarians death; and yet deceived,
especially the two Electous of Saxony, and Brandenburg, who were so cautelous
of being deluded, and yet showed less care, when they seemed most careful.

But upon what ground, with what conscience, by what right, could such
clandestine, and prejudicial disposals be done, they being unheard, and
unconsulted whom it principally concerned.

Yet, as such grants, and disposals are nullities, and unjust, so they cannot
be confirmed by the covenants of Prague, nor by the Princes. That, they were
of no validity, it appears, by this; first because they were concluded
privately, betwixt Caesar, and the Bavarians, and point-blancke contrary to the
fundamental laws of the Empire; for in the golden Bull, the prime, and chief
fundamental law, cap. 7. and 20. and 24. and other constitutions, it is
decreed particularly, That the dignity, right, power, vote, vicariate, office,
and function of the Septemvirall eminency, with their Principalities, and
Dominions, (by virtue whereof, the secular Princes Electors, are known to have
their right, and vote in the Election of a Roman King, and his preferment to
the Imperial dignity,) should be so conjoined and indivisibly united for
ever, that no one part of the premises, ought to be so divided, or separated
from the other, at any time, or may be questioned in judgment, or out of
judgment severally, or adjudged, or divided by sentence, (because they ought
to be unseparable) nor shall any lay a claim to one part, without the other:
That, if by error, or otherwise, such a plaintiff have prevailed, or
process, judgment, or sentence, or any thing of the like return should issue
forth against this constitution, or otherwise happen, to be accepted, all that
which is already done, and all the consequents, and things thence succeeding,
shall be absolutely void in Law. Again, in the royal Capitulation, which is
the second fundamental Law of the Roman Empire, containing, the articles, and
covenants, which the Electours by way of contract, have made with the Emperor,
to the religious observation whereof, by giving a solemn oath he must bind
himself, these things, amongst others, are vowed, and promised by his
Imperial Majesty.

That, in the greater causes concerning the Empire, he would ask advice, and
give ear to the votes, and opinions of the Electours, and decree, and confirm
nothing, without their foregoing lawful knowledge, and consent. That, He
would authorize no mandate, rescript, or what ever else might be grievous to
others, against the golden Bull, and other constitutions, and covenants of the
Empire, nor would either himself make use of any such instrument, or suffer,
that any one, should purchase the like, or make use thereof. Also, that if he
have any controversy, or suite against any of the Princes, he shall try it by
law, but use no violence against them; especially, who are willing to stand, to
a lawful hearing. Also, that he will observe, and hinder, and neither by any
means nor upon any pretense, grant, that any of the Peers, and States,
whether an Electour, Prince, or other, may be proscribed, condemned, and
declared outlawed, but he will endeavor, that, it may be proceeded thereon,
according to the ordinary rule of Law, and the constitutions of the Empire, by
the prescript of the reformed chamber of ordinances. A clause is added in the
end. That if any thing should be undertaken and done contrary to this, and
other heads of the Capitulation, it ought to stand as a nullity, to be void
and of no validity.

Let all those things be considered, and examined, which hitherto have been
ordered, disposed, and done, de facto, in the Palatine cause, and decreed
against him, from the beginning to this day, and those especially, which
concerns the distribution of the Electorate, and division of the Palatine
Territories. Are not all, and each of them directly contrary to the golden
Bull, and the plain prescript of the Capitulation, and laws? Is not the
Electorall Palatinate torn in pieces, divided, and distracted, the greater
part, together with the office, being given to the Bavarian; an other part to
the Spaniard; the rest to others, directly against the prohibition? Where,
whether, and when, were the Electours called, assembled, consulted, and gave
their votes, according to the custom of their Ancestors, while these things
were done? Did not the Saxon, and Brandenburger constantly, and eagerly oppose
the King Frederickes proscription, the translation of the Electorate upon the
Bavarian, and the exclusion of the Kings children, and kinsmen from their
right? Let the suffrages (given up in the Senate of Princes) in February, anno
1623. Let sundry of their letters, to the Emperor, and their answers, given to
the Imperial Ambassadors be read. If they are now silent, it is because they
are compelled by violence, and fear. When the Electorate was translated, to
the Line of William the Bavarian, when those constitutions, were forged, and
anvil'd in a dark shop, when the pacification betwixt Caesar, and the Saxon,
was to be patched up by Ambassadors, at Prague, where then were the other
Electors and States? Did they then come in? Were they then present? Did they
then give in their Votes, according to the custom of their Ancestors? Did
their lawful consent, and Votes, precede it? Were they who were deprived of
the Electorate, their Right and States? Were others, (who were also
interessed,) cited, heard, and defended? Was this great negotiation determined,
upon the hearing of the Cause, and according to the prescribed Law? No such
thing was thought of, no such thing done, but the cognizance of the Electours,
States, and unsuspected Peers, was neglected, and rejected; and all things
determined, by arbitrament, by affection, hatred, and fullness of power;
against justice, the Laws, and Customs; the Royal Decrees, Covenants, and
Capitulations, against the customary, and due manner of proceeding; against the
absent, unheard, unaccused, guiltless, plain innocents: not in a public
assembly, but privately, in a chamber, and by a secret Party, these things were
done, spoken, decreed written and perfected.

Hence, the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg, not without cause, objected to
the Emperor, as by way of exprobration, That in a matter so weighty, and of
such moment, whereon the safety, or ruin of the Sacred Roman Empire (as
experience will witness) might depend, they were not called to Counsel, and
heard, according to the Rule of Capitulation, especially, when there was a
controversy, about an Electour, a principal member of the Empire: That this
business, concerned one of the Septemvirate, and the Electorall Dignity; and
therefore the Electours were not to be excluded from the cognizance thereof.
That it is sufficiently known, that the case and question betwixt the Lord,
and his Vassal, when it is controverted about the loss of a Fee, according to
the common feodall Law, is to be decided, and judged by the Peers of the
Court, who are of equal dignity, and estimation with the defendant, That, this
Ordinance ought to be better observed, when any thing is to be determined
against them, who are now Illustrious, and eminent: That by the Covenant of
Capitulation, those who are most intimate, and familiar Counselors to His
Caesarean Majesty, and who might equalize (him, that was to be punished, or
deprived of His Privileges) in State, Dignity, and fortune, should have been
called to Counsel: That they did openly, and to the face of the world,
protest; that this proscription, and the execution thereof, was decreed, and
promulgated without their counsel, and consent: That an other manner of
proceeding should have been observed, in this business: That in the foresaid
Capitulation, it is most plainly ordered, and decreed, that no Electour, or
other Prince of the Empire, may, without a full hearing, and ordinary process,
and judgment, be proscribed by the Emperor, and proclaimed an Outlaw: That
they understood not, by what law, and pretense, the Electors could be excluded
from advising, and understanding a matter of such weight, as might turn the
Scale of the safety, or destruction of the Empire. And being, that the form of
a judicial process, is one part of justice, which cannot be administered
better, than by the authorized, and prescribed Laws, it ought to have been
endeavored; That the Count Palatine, might have been heard before His
condemnation, according to the strict rule of the Law, and and the sacred
Capitulation; and that therefore an ordinary process should have been issued
out, according to the Constitutions of the Imperial Chamber, and many other
circumstances have been considered, before the sentence of Proscription had
been promulgated: And this the rather, in respect of the Count Palatines
Children, Brethren, and near kinsmen; all and each whereof, are accused of no
crime, much less convicted. That the translation of the Electorate, and the
Dominions thereunto annexed, are of no less consequence, and prejudice, than
the Proscription; and therefore of Right, they ought to have been advised and
consulted withal, in that point, according to the Decree of the Capitulation,
and not to entertain a bare intimation thereof, after it was done: That the
Septemvirate, and Princes of the Empire, are under His Imperial Majesty, but
withal, Electors, and States of the Empire, and the very pillars, and props
thereof; and therefore, it is not to be questioned, but that the examination of
this matter, appertained to them: That Caesar would not grant, and conveigh an
Imperial Fee, or Town, without their advice, and consent: How much more
needful was it, that He should have their Counsel, and approbation, when the
question was made about the translation of the Electorall Dignity, and such
noble, and Princely Fees of the Empire? That by this process, the other
Electours, Princes, and States, might receive a great, and irrecoverable loss,
if themselves unheard, and the Electours not called to Counsel, they, their
children, and near kinsmen, without examination of the cause, might be
deprived, and spoiled of their states and dignities entayled upon them, and all
these transferred to strangers, by arbitrament. That by this means, an
Electour, or Prince of the Empire, would be of a more unhappy condition, than
any ordinary noble personage of Poland, because, that he cannot be proscribed,
but in a full Parliament. That the estimation, and prerogative, by which the
Electors have been hitherto, of eminent note, within, and without the Empire,
would grow of small account, and that they, who formerly, in their presence
durst not put on their hatts, might hereafter make a question, whether, they
ought to stand uncovered before them. If the Electours ought not to be
consulted with, and know, when any Electour is to be proscribed, that then
indeed, they could not understand in what the prerogative, and authority of the
Electors does consist, or (the name only excepted) what difference there can
be, betwixt them, and the minor Princes of the Empire; nor, how they may be
secured from the danger, and prejudice to which themselves might be liable by
this manner of proceeding; that the proscription of the Prince, with the
following execution, and the ensuing translation of the Electorate, (which
ought not to have been without their advice, counsel, and consent) was done
without their knowledge; that the Electors, and Princes ought not to be of a
more unhappy condition, especially in regard of condemnation, and punishment,
than the meanest sort of men, against whom, unheard, and uncited, there can be
no proceeding, or sentence of condemnation pronounced, though their crimes be
most notorious.

All these arguments, which we have touched by way of Collection, following
the heads of things, and but a relish of; both those Electors, of most renowned
and eminent authority and estimation; who out of their own knowledge, have
testified, and in their public writings, and letters; in their speeches in
open Parliament; by most ample Embassies; have very often, and more than
sufficiently written and declared. And it is apparent from those things, though
but related, upon what foundation of truth, and credit, those things are
built, which were formerly urged out of the Author De Septemviratu in Ducem
Bavariae optimo jure translato; and what is to be thought of the translation
of the Electorate; done so privately, without the required solemnities, and the
lawful advice of the Electors assembled. But of this argument, there will be a
more convenient place, to speak hereafter. It shall now suffice, to bring in
this conclusion, out of those premises; that all those Dispositions, Decrees,
Covenants, Sentences and Executions, are of no force in Law, but void, unjust,
and of no consequence, or effect; as the Law, and Justice do pronounce them.
l. Si express 19. D. de appellationibus and relationibus. where it is said,
That the sentence is not to be pronounced if it be made directly against the
Laws or a Decree of the Senate, or Constitution.

Therefore, if any man shall appeal from such sentence and be discharged by
decree, the sentence is made of no force by that ordinance. c. 18. de regul in
6. l. ex stipendatione. l. probatam a praeside. c. de sont, and inte locut,
Novel 113.

And again, it is to be observed, that the agreements, and covenants of
private men, cannot derogate from the public right, the laws, and
constitutions of the Commonweal. l. nec ex praetorio, nec ex solemni jure
privatorum conventione quicquam immutandum est. 27. and l. neque pignus.
privatorum conventio jur publico non derogat. F. de regulis juris. l. juris
gentium. 7.. 16. ibi. pactum a iure communi remotum servari non oportet. and l.
contra iuris civilis regulas pacta conventa rata non habentur. 28. and l. ius
publicum privatorum pactis mutari non potest. 55. D. de Administr. rerum ad
civitat. l. nemo potest. 55. D. de legate. 1. l. pacta quae contra leges
constitutionesque vel contra bonos mores siunt nullam vim habere indubitati
juris est. 6. c. de pactis. M^re, no rescript of Caesar's, no royal decree, no
sacred observation, which appear contrary to the general rule of the law, are
of any validity, nor may be produced as proofs in a controversy, thus the
Emperor Anastatius has decreed, l. ultima c. si contra jus vel utilitatem
publicam.

Besides, those dispositions were concluded against faith, and caution given;
merely to deceive them, to whom the promise was made, as is abovesaid; where
it is showed that Caesar, and the Bavarian Lad religiously and often promised,
and warranted, that the Electorall dignity, was conferred upon Maximilian
alone, and to him too, only, for term of life, and that, after his death, the
children, and kindred of King Frederick, were again to be admitted. Moreover,
they whom it concerned, and which were grieved, were not called, and impleaded,
as we have heard; for in acts that may be prejudicial, all whom it concerns
ought to be cited. For so Divus Marcus l. 39. ibi. They also being present,
that would oppose the decree, that is, might be grieved by the ratification.
D. de adoption. where Gothofredus gives this rule, He is always to be cited
that may be injured. l. 47. Judgment in every matter ought to be given they
being present, whom the matter concerns. D. de rejudicat. l. etiamsi Patre.
29.9. si haere litate Patris. 2. ibi. non evocatis creditoribus minime id
praeiudicasse. D. de minoribus Ioachimus a Beust. in l. admonendi^n. 796. D. de
jurejurando B^t, whatsoever is ordered, decreed, ^one, and concluded against
the absent is nothing l. si ut proponis. 5. ibi. What is so carried against
thee, in thy absen e, ought not to be referred to the effect of the law. and l.
ea quae statuuntur adversus absentes. c. Quomodo and quando Index sentent.
When, says Symmachus, in a certain epistle, did things concluded of amongst
others, wrong those which were absent and ignorant? L. 1. ibi. It is often
decreed, That matters passed in private for the one party, can do no
prejudice to the other. And l. 2. ibi. This law is notoriously known, that a
transaction made amongst some in private cannot prejudice the absent, and ibi.
For neither, though they have made a division in thy absence can it derogate
from thy right. c. Inter alios acta, aliis non noceret. argt. l. transact.
matris. 26. c. de transact. and l. Imp. 3. ibi. Privatis pactionibus non dubium
est non laedi jus caeterorum. D. eodem.

Lastly, all these acts were drawn up, against such as were then in their
Minority, undefended, unheard, fatherless Orphans, and whose title came by
achievement. For when those contracts between the Bavarian and Caesar were
made, and the Covenants of Prague were peeced, Charles Lodowicke was yet as a
ward as the rest of his brethren are at this present day. He alone had then
attained the age of 18. years, the time prescribed by the Golden Bull, for the
full age of the Electors children. But the Emperors affirm, that whatsoever
is decreed against an Orphane, he is undefended, and under protection of a
Guardian it cannot endamage him at his riper years. 1. acta apud se. 45..
contra indefensos minores nulla sententia proferenda est. 3. and l. contra
pupillum indesensum, vel minorem xxv. annis, propositum nihil momenti habet,
which in English runs thus, Against Orphans undefended, or under the age of
25. years, a peremptory sentence is of no validity. 54 D. de reiudicata. No
man, (to use the Civilians Language) can be deprived of an achieved right,
no, not by Caesar using all his royal prerogative. To take any thing from
another violently, is more against nature, than Death, than pain, than
poverty, or what else may happen to the estate of the body, or of Fortune.
Cicer. lib. 3. Offic.

But concerning the confirmation, and approbation of those Disposals, it is to
be understood.

First, that a contract against the allowed customs, laws and liberties, is a
nullitie, nor can be confirmed, ratified, or allowed.

Secondly, that the approving thereof by the states (which is yet uncertain,
whether so or no) is unlawful, and of no validity; because they were not
present, nor called, and assembled together, that the cause being first heard,
they might then give their consents: and if any did so, and suffragated to
Caesar's propositions, they did it severally, and apart, which by law ought not
to be done. l. item si unut. 17. item si plures. 2. and l non distinguemns.
32.. Cum in plures. ibi. Non deb^t singulos separatim coge^e. D. de receptis
qui arbitrium. c. cum omnes. Extra. de consit. de constit. Hieronym. a Cavellis
in spicul. Co^ ^un opin. quaest. 476. Anton. Faber. in Cod. Decision. foren.
lib. 1. tit. 3. definit. 42. where he shows, that It is not to be reputed a
general Act, which is done by particular persons, though done by all, if they
be not assembled into one Company. and Flamin. de Rubeis consil. 69. n. 220.
lib. 1. says, the Record is of no power though all the parties consent, if
they agree severally, and the several persons are not lawfully congregated.

Besides, most of the Princes, especially the Protestants which assented to the
treaty of Prague, were enforced thereunto, and constrained by fear, menaces,
arms and peremptory Commands to approve it, if not they had bin proclaimed
open enemies, as it is expressed in the register: but the law teaches what
ought to be thought of such consents, and allowance. See l. velle non
creditur. D. de regulis iuris. and there Decium, and Dol. ibi. Necessitas
imposita contraria voluntati. D. quod metus causa. Cuiac. observe. ult. lib. 16.
Whatsoever is extorted and done by fear; is accounted as nothing, and cannot
be ratified. D. Quod metus causa. l. si donationis. 7. and l. ult. c. de his
quae vi metusve causa gesta sunt. where it is concluded, ratum haberi non
patietur and quae per potentiam extorta sunt, praecipimus infirmari, in English
thus, it must not be permitted, that such a conclusion may be ratified, and we
command, that whatsoever is wrested away violently, shall not be authorized.
Bartol in lib. 1.. quae veneranda in sin. D. Quarum rerum actio non. datur, and
de except. iurisiurand.

In fine, it is not to be said, and concluded instantly, that all they, which
complied themselves to the treaty of Prague, did allow, and ratify all, and
the several articles in that sense, as it is there expressed, and in
particular those Disposals of the Palatine Electorate, there mentioned, they
being such, as never came to their knowledge. Surely some, and amongst them the
Elector of Brandenburg, consented with an express reservation, and exception,
either general salvo uniuscuiusque iure, saving every man's right, or specialty
as the same Elector has done in this Palatine cause. And the rest are thought
to have subscribed under the same secret condition: For this clause, Salvo iure
tertii, though it be omitted, is always notwithstanding conceived to be
included in the writings. d. l ult. c. si contraius vel utilitat. public. 1. si
quando ult. x. de rescriptis c. super eo. x. de crim. falls. For none of them
would seem so unjust and partial, knowingly to confirm an unjust thing, and
a nullitie, by their consent, and require, that he should be deprived of his
right, whom they were persuaded, and knew to be an Innocent and much wronged.
Nor is it sufficient, to say, that those Disposals were confirmed by the
Princes of the Empire, unless that also it be openly showed, that the
confirmation was made with knowledge of the cause. For, this is necessary,
says Nicolaus Burgundus in his book of the Bavarian Electorate, written in
defense of Christophorus Gewoldus, fol. 284. that any one may be thrust out of
his possession; nor does a light, cursorie, and perfunctorie understanding of
the cause suffice. A full and exact knowledge is required, allegat. Jason. ad
l. iudices. n. 2. and 3. c. de iudic. Decius ad l. non videtur. qui iussit. D.
de. reg. juris. And this kind is not presupposed, but is to be prooved by
lawful witnesses, or ought to appear out of the Acts, as the same Burgundus
in the same place affirms, adding Panor. ad c. 2. n. 8. and 22. de sequest.
posses. Alciat. de praesump regul. 2. praesum. 9. Menochius remed. recuper. 8.
n. 26. and 27. and 15. n. 405. and lib. 2. praesumpt. 67. n. 12. 13. and
praesumpt. 75 n. 22. l. judices. c. 6. de iudiciis desumpta ex codice
Theodosian. lib. 2. c. 18. ibid. inprimis rei qualitatem plena inquistione
discutere c. iudicantem. 31. quest. 8. I forbear to prosecute, and bring to
light the other Nullities, and acts of violence and injustice, committed in
framing those disposals, and the Covenants of Prague, for translation of the
Electorate.

I shall here, only by way of imitation, transcribe some things making for this
purpose, out of that book formerly quoted, which Nicolaus Burgundus, a Lawyer,
Bavarian Advocate, and Professor in the University of Ingolstad, wrote
concerning the Bavarian Septemvirate, otherwise called the Apology for
Christopher Gewoldus. For what was lawful for him to speak and think, of the
Decree of Charles the 4th. by which it is declared, and ordained, That the
Electorate should be annexed to the County Palatine of the Rhyne, and not
belong to the Bavarians: That we may speak, and conclude more truly, and
justly, of those new, clandestine, and irregular Decrees of Ferdinand the
second, and the Treaty of Prague.

Will thou ( says he fol. 78) have this stand for the sentence of a Judge? It
can not be called so, where nothing is done orderly and legally. Ought not a
Court to be called, and the case pleaded, before sentence should be given? Here
was no examination, here was no controversy at all. The examination begins
with the Citation, if the Adversary be not called, there is no examination:
Where there has been no examination, there is no sentence. Who ever warned
Charles Lodowicke and His brethren to appear in Law? It is apparent, they were
not present, therefore the sentence fol. 79. is utterly void, because it was
pronounced, the Adversaries being neither cited, nor heard, l. 2. and ibid.
Bald. c. si. per vim. vel alio modo l. 1. 5. item cum ex edicto. D. de sentent.
quae sine appellat rescind. And consequently, by that sentence, no man can be
deprived of his right. c. 1. defeud. sine culpa non amittend. Anchor. conf. 33.
vol. 1.

Perhaps, you will say, It was lawful for the Emperor, ex officio, to enquire
for the truth: It is done usually in cases criminal, but not used in private
businesses. And yet by such inquiry, he could not condemn the Palatines,
without a lawful Citation; because, an hurtful testimony is not to be
credited, the party not being heard, elem. Pastor. de rejudicat. Roman. consil.
245. Many things, indeed are required, before the absent can be condemned, and
thrust from his possession. He is first to be impleaded at the Law, the Decree
is to be published, and he to be declared contumacious: otherwise, by the
Laws, Customs, and Ordinances of our Ancestors, it is not rightly brought to
sentence, though the Emperor himself adjudge it. d. elem. Pastoral. Abbas ad
c. 1. de cause propriat and posses. Baldus ad l. ultim. de legib. If you shall
speak of a Prerogative fol. 83. you ought to know, that the Emperor, with all
his authority, cannot by his Prerogative, take away any man's proper right,
without a just and public cause. What was the just cause, that the Electorate
should be violently plucked away from the Palatines? None. What was the public
cause? None. The whole negotiation, tended particularly for the advancement of
the Bavarians. The whole Scene was made and laid merely for their advantage.
What remains therefore, but that we may call that praerogative a nullity,
which does tend to the injury of the Palatines; which contrary to the rule of
the Law, does snatch away the Palatines right, and thrust them from their
possession? But you will say, fol. 94. the Emperor and the Electours, and the
States of the Empire, have confirmed it. I grant it. But what is the power of a
confirmation? If we believe those who are learned in the Law, it confirreth no
new Title, but only strengthens that which is already given, Molinaeus ad
consuet. Parisi. titulo. 1.. 8. gloss. 1. n. 88. and implies withal, this
condition, If the case be thus; Molinaeus loco ^tat. Rebuff. tractat. de decim.
13. n. 90. 91. But surely, you have no Charter, and therefore the confirmation
is vain, and frivolous. For where that which is confirmed, is nothing, there
the confirmation is nothing also: for that which is of no validity, is
accounted, as if it had not been done at all l. 1. haec autem D. quod quisq.
ius in alter. stat. And what is not, cannot be confirmed. Thus far I have
spoken in the words of Burgundus, save only, that the name of the Palatines,
is used in stead of the Bavarians.

But, if it be lawful for the Bavarians, to oppose the disposal of the
Emperor Charles the 4th. for settling the Palatine Electorate, and the golden
Bull, confirmed by all the Princes of the Empire, and by three ages observed,
and established, and to account it as a nullity in that behalf, and to say it
was wrested, and gotten surreptitiously, and fraudulently; and made by the
Emperor, in two much favor of the Palatines, and hate of the Bavarians, that
he might oppress them, under a show of Law: Why may it not now be lawful, for
the Palatines, by the same ground, and reason, to refute, and call, by the name
of a Nullity, that disposition of Ferdinand, concerning the granted Electorate,
to the Bavarians, and those written Covenants of Prague, confirming and
allowing it, made, and patched up together out of hate against the Palatines,
whose oppression, under color, and pretense of Law, Caesar, and the Bavarian
did endeavor to hasten, that they might the more easily attain to their own
ends?

Burgundus says further of the Emperor Charles, fol. 63. that he was in all
things respective of the Palatines, and displeased with the Bavarians, and
therefore having excluded these last, he gave, and adjudged the Electorate to
the former; what wonder? for he joined in Arms with Rupertus the Palatine, for
the ruin of the Bavarians. Henricus Rebdorff in annal. and afterward
miserably spoiled all Bavaria. When therefore he would give way to his own
desire, while he sought to please his own affection, foming with a most
burning hatred against the Bavarians, he greedily snatcheth at that occasion,
agreeing with his Genios, that he might take vengeance of his enemies, and
keep them (unable to resist him) below the dignity of their Ancestors. And
not much after fol. 72. these things being thus ordered, when the Electors were
preposessed, when Rupert the Count Palatine, did flourish in most eminent
grace, when the Bavarians were involved in the doubtful hazard of war;
briefly, when all things were brought to that pass, that the Bavarians were
accounted as enemies, and the Palatine stood as a favorite: Rupertus the Count
Palatine, in the year 1356. in the Diet at Norinberg, obtained a Charter of
Letters patents, by which the Electours affirm the office of Arch-Sewer, and
the Electorate, to be annexed to the County Palatine of the Rhine. Surely,
nothing at that time was more easy to be obtained than that. He had the
Emperor of his party, and the Emperor drew all the Electours unto his
sentence; for they all subscribed, according to the form which Charles had
prescribed them. They had severally concluded, what they ought all jointly to
have questioned fol. 232. You were better not speak of Charles the 4th and his
Bull: we know, we know what he intended; and now all men know, that we know it.
He sacrificed unto his wrath against all law and right, against the customs
of our Ancestors; he endeavored to confer the Electorate upon the
Palatines, whom he loved most dearly, that he might snatch it from the
Bavarians, whom he hated most deadly. This is that he would have, this is that
he intended, and aimed at; and how he might attain unto this end, he
summoned all his wits together. Speak now fol. 298. what, as much, and as
eloquently as you can; yet this is our Jewel, which Otho the third set into
Bavaria; by him we came into possession, and upon him we rest. Charles the
fourth labored in vain to take it thence, what ever he did, he could effect
nothing. It stood secure, and immoved above the top of power, the supreme hand
of puissance could not reach thither, nothing was done lawfully, nothing
orderly, nothing solemnly. It was no judiciary sentence, but violence. He cast
out the Bavarians by extreme injury; that, against all right he might bring in
the Palatines. Your beginning is wicked, the proceeding unjust, and to
conclude, the whole possession vicious. Thus far he.

But now, as before is done, place only the Palatines, and the Palatinate for
the Bavarians, and Bavaria; Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, for Rupertus;
Ferdinand, for Charles: the dispositions of the Electorate, and the treaty of
Prague, for the golden Bull; the Diet of Ratisbone, for that ^t Norimberg; you
will say (the persons only being changed) the same play is acted at this day,
which is feigned by Burgundus, to have been acted lnog since, and was first
showed upon the stage, by Christopherus Gewaldus, by an artificially contrived
tale.

These were the first which stood up, as the chief patrons of the Bavarian
cause, who have not feared to oppose, and accuse of falsitie, and nullity, the
sacred, and for so many ages inviolate, authority of the golden Bull. But if it
be lawful, for private men to vilefie, and make void the most sacred
decrees, the wisest ordinances, of our Ancestors the continual custom
observed by so many Ages, allowed, confirmed, and sealed with the imprinted
seals of the Emperors, and Electours: I will not say what confidence, but
what hope of settling the state remains? What can be safe, just, and inviolable
in the common society of men, in the succession, and possession of dignities,
and offices? woeful experience does testify, what miseries have attended this
opposall of the golden Bull, and usurpation of the Palatine Electorate: In one
word, deadly war, cruel slaughter, horrid proscriptions, and the most to be
lamented, distraction of the whole Empire, the chief and principal cause of
this continued, and renewed mortal war, being, the snatching away of the
Electorall dignity, which the most illustrious Electors, of Saxony, and
Brandenburg, foresaw immediately, and foretold from the beginni g: They
affirmed, that the translation of the Electorate, was not a means to stay the
war, but rather an occasion which might produce, and raise more bitterness of
mind schism and division among the Princes, and the universal distraction and
desolation of the Empire; that therefore they thought it needful, that the
Count Palatine should be restored; that a secure and true peace might be
settled, that by rigor there could be no course taken for the safety of the
Republique; which by that means was rather drawn into danger and involved in
a perpetual war. Again, that they adjudged the translation of the
Electorate, to be the principal cause of these troubles and war; because the
children of the Count Palatine, in regard of their known innocence, might by
no means be excluded from their dignity, and dominions, those especially, who
before the pretended crime of the Father had obtained the privileges achieved
by the providence and covenant of their forefathers in the Electorall
Palatinate Besides, that their nearest kinsmen of blood (to whom the right of
atchivement did likewise appertain, by the simultaneous Investiture) were
wronged, and deprived of their right. The same most Illustrious Princes, have
more then on e, and again complained openly, that their good, peaceable
counsels were not hearkened unto, but that those means were undertaken, which
in deed were causes of more stirs commotion and enmity; for experience it
self plainly showing that the state did still grow worse, in regard that
those courses, (from which they had used all arguments of disswasion, as being
the seeds of discord were nevertheless preferred, and put into execution with
all vehemence of spirit.

Besides, not only both those Electours by their own Ambassadors, but also
the rest of their colleagues, and the other Princes which were present at
Ratisbone, in the year 1623, when Caesar was about to have confirmed the
Electorall dignity upon the Bavarian, by a general consent testified, that
King Frederick was not the incendiary, and architect of the stirs in the
Empire, themselves affirming it, in these words. That the Count Palatine is a
young Prince, who being seduced by others, knows not how to advise himself:
and again, that he was not the author and beginner of those commotions in
Bohemia, but that they had their beginning, and proceedings before he was
engaged therein.

But, it is much to be admired at, and lamented, (that I may not say it is
worthy of blame, and reproof) that the Emperor, and Electours for so many
years, and in so many sundry Parliaments, and in these two last kept at
Ratisbone, in the years 1630, and 1636. neglected to hearken to the demands of
the King of great Britain, and by the granted and decreed restitution of the
Palatinate upon reasonable terms, to restore peace to the Empire, and their
Country, so shaken with civil dissension, and war. How can they excuse it
before God and men, of this present and the ensuing ages? Had they not causes
weighty, and urgent enough; to move them to prefer peace before war, that
those tumults being quieted, and some personages restored to their former
estates and fortunes, they might settle themselves, and the whole Empire, in
the tranquillity, safety, security, and honor? Ought not, both the present
common calamities of the Christian Commonweal, and other near approaching,
stir and rouse them up? ought not the mournful cries, intermingled with
tears, of their wasted, and desolate Country, move them, and prick them
forward, to an intimate commiseration? They might have learned, by the events,
and instructions of so many years, that the safety, liberty, Honor, and quiet
of the Commonweal, was contained in that restitution, and the Decree for
forgetfulness: but contrarily, that by the expulsion, and oppression, of the
most Illustrious Electorall Palatine House; this woeful war was not only,
not extenuated and abated, but grown more grievous, and raised to such a flame,
that thereby all Germany is set on fire, and the neighboring people and
nations are scorched. What fruit has this continuation of the war brought
forth? What profit and power has thereby accrued to the Commonweal, it is
known to the world: and the Victories themselves, must needs confess, what
small profit they have gotten by their victories; to wit, that they were never
the more secure, but have received more loss, and trouble; more ignominy, and
hatred, than profit, praise, and authority. Nor is it to be doubted, but that
greater mischiefs and inconveniences may ensue, if they shall suffer these
discords, and raging wars, to abide in their strength but little longer. For
it is not probable, that those princes who have bin disvested of their estates,
driven into exile, and brought to the point of despair, will ever be quiet, as
long as they can expect any relief, or help elsewhere; nay, they will leave
no stone unmoved, no means unassayed, but as it is in the proverb, will move
both Heaven and Hell; and to conclude, like the Serpents, whose head being
bruised, do last of all threaten with their tail; will leave no thing
unattempted, whereby they may be enabled to return into their Country, and
recover their lost estates. And this certainly will bring with it most
strange, and dangerous changes of state, minister fuel to a perpetual war,
torment and terrify the Princes of the Empire with continual fear, and at
last, hasten the utter ruin, and destruction of the Commonweal.

Besides, the forraigners, which either would abate the puissance, and
authority of the Caesarean Majesty, and the house of Austria, the foundations
whereof are thought to be laid in Germany, seek for profit in the rubbish of
the Empire, or revenge private injuries, or endeavor a change of government,
may always have an occasion to pursue their design, whilst under the show of
help, to which they will profess themselves bound, for the restitution of
their banished friends, and allies, they may dispatch their own intendments.
It is to be feared also, least the Turks using, and being moved with this
occasion, rise up, and with their whole power before they have any loss,
invade Germany already shaken and much weakened, to the conquest whereof they
have long time applied themselves, and yet attend the opportunity of the season.

All these, and other innumerable mischiefs might have long since been
prevented, if all private quarrels, enmities, and factions set apart; the
peace, and concord, and ancient consent, and harmony of affections had bin
reduced, and established amongst the Princes, and by a common, and public
accord, care had been taken, and provision made, for the safety, and security
of the Commonweal. And this surely had been easily done, if those counsels,
and remedies which availed to that purpose, and were in a readiness, had been
sooner taken, and applied; of which, these two alone are thought the most
convenient, and efficacious. First, if a general, and universal amnestie of
things past had been decreed; secondly every one, (no man excluded out of this
peace, and amnestie) who by war, and the injury of times, was cast down from
his fortunes, and honors, had bin entirely restored to the estate, which he
possessed before these stirs began. For this is most certain; that there can
be no firm ground found out for a concord in Germany; that no peace, no
leagues will endure long, which are not concluded with the consent, and will of
all who are interessed therein, and with restitution and satisfaction to the
banished persons. The other conditions, if any be remaining to be agreed upon,
and added would have passed without difficulty, or exception. For, out of
doubt, the strangers, who have engaged themselves in this war; by this
means, all pretense of the continuation thereof being taken from them, would
willingly have refrained Arms, and entertained peace.

Again, by restitution of the Palatinate, Charles Lodowicke the Electour being
received into his former degree, and dignity; the Emperor and Electours might
have gained this advantage, that they might have laid a far stronger, surer,
and settled foundation of an universal peace, than by the treaty of Prague;
all hope being taken from their enemies of invading, and oppressing the Germane
Commonwealth, and the other provinces (yet free) from the tyranny of war.
And withal as they might have purchased a most glorious and happy peace, and
security for the Roman-Germane Empire, themselves, their friends, allies, and
people: so to conclude, might they have delivered the youth of Germany (by so
many slaughters and miseries, reduced from so great a number, to such an
admired, and unheard of scarsitie) from famine, mourning, sorrow, and grief,
by which as by a gentle fire they were daily wasted, and destroyed. Besides, it
had been no small honor to the Emperor and Electours, if they had replaced,
and settled in their ancient honors and possessions, the Princes Palatine,
descended of such a Princely Race, joined in consanguinitie with the principal
families of the Kings and Princes of Europe, whose progenitors have so well
deserved of the Empire, (for the greatness, glory, liberty, and safety
whereof, they have been ever most careful constant defenders and abetters)
for whom also so many Kings, and Princes, whom the restitution did concern,
had interceded and briefly, who might be, an ornament and profit to the Empire.

By this action, they should not only have firmly obliged the Palatines to
them; and have found them ready and grateful, in the returning of all loving
offices, and good affection; but, also prevailed with the most illustrious King
of Great Britain, that in testimony of his grateful mind, out of his
singular good affection to the Germane Commonweal, he would have consented,
to have entered into covenants with his Imperial Majesty, and the Princes of
the Empire, as well for the settling of a general peace (the groundworke
thereof being first laid upon the restitution of the Palatinate) as for the
maintaining thereof, against all that durst oppose it. How great an advantage,
security, and glory might have accrewed to the Empire by the alliance, and
defensive Arms of this most puissant King, the Emperor and the Electours
might easily judge, if they would have taken into their consideration the
condition of their own estates, the present times and calamities of the
Country of Germany brought to the nearest step of ruin.

All this then being truth, you shall give me leave O ye men, Princes, Peers,
and free Denizons, that my speech may turn to you, before I come to a
conclusion. I Entreat and beseech you, by the everliving God, by all things
divine and humane, by the Ashes of your Ancestors, by the Genius of the
Country, to consider in what estate your affairs have been, and in what they
now are, what miseries you have suffered already, and what do yet surround,
and hang over you, if you shall yet neglect to advise speedily for your own
safety and estates. Observe you not that by the fortune of strangers affecting
soveraigntie, by their counsels, and supplies of money, the liberty, authority,
fortune, dignity, and glory are so shaken by these civil wars, that it is in
all probability to be feared, least your selves being brought to poverty, and
slavery, shall be forced to live under a perpetual yoke. Whom can you blame for
this, but your selves? If presently upon the beginning ye had seriously
undertaken the cause of Frederick (through whose sides ye were stricken)
either to defend it, or to compound it: If with joint courage, force, and
counsel, you had opposed your selves to this covetous desire of soveraigntie,
and the diligence used for the spoil of your liberty and religion, when it was
in the birth or moving from the cradle; things had gone far better with you,
and you should have gained a good report, for valor, constancy, and piety; in
place of the ignominy, blame cowardice and misery, which do now attend you.
But, with extreme shame, and dishonor, not without suspicion of betraying and
forsaking your friends, you have suffered one, to be lost, and devoured after
another, thinking that their case did not at all concern you. What? know you
not that always they whom cowardice and wicked subtlety has detained from
Arms, to the end they might be secured by other men's perils have suffered
most severely? Rex Mithridates ad Regem Ansacem apud Salustium, lib. 6. Hist.
you could have done nothing, that could be more grateful to your enemies, by
nothing have they had greater advantage against you, then that you did not
consult in common, that you did not join your forces, and Arms; and with one
consent oppose this danger, which hung over all promiscuously; therefore, while
each of you have fought singly, you have been overcome generally. Ex Tacito in
vita Agricolae. Again, either willingly you would, or have suffered your
selves to be deluded, and seduced with promises, and gifts; to be disjoined,
and severed each from other, to be deceived, and corrupted with a false gloss
of friendship or favor. Have you not observed, that it is customary with them
which take up Arms with a desire of Soveraigntie, for the settling of their
own authority, and the subversion of religion and liberty, to give out, that
they intend no offensive war against all in general, but against some in
particular, until those being vanquished, whom first they fell upon, they may
proceed by degrees against some others, and in the end against all. Iacobus
Zevecotius in observatis politicis ad Suetonii Tranquilli Iulium Caesarem, cap.
35. Thus you have been deceived, and deluded with the false colors of their
good affection, and grace, who have made war for your destruction, and the
engrossing of your wealth (the only end by them at first propounded) which
have fallen upon you singly, whilst you not thinking that you were the persons
aimed at, have been wanting both to your selves, and your Neighbors, engaging
them in a dangerous war, and hastening your own ruin. Fina ly, there have
happened discords, schisms, dissension, division of counsels, hatred, both
public and private, caused, raised, and increased by difference of religion,
and subtle suggestions of calumniators, envies, emulations, pride,
presumption, false conceits, of your own power, hope vainly placed, and
ungrounded; of foreign supplies, distrust, and malicious crafts in forbearing
to succor your friends, unthankfulness, breaking and voiding leagues, and
covenants; and many other things of that nature, which were then, and are yet
practiced amongst you, and these reduced the Germane Commonweal (once the most
flourishing state of the world) to mourning, desolation and extreme misery.
And now (but too late) you find and apprehend what manner of troubles surround
you, with what chains and fetters you are manacled, in what a Labyrinth, and
prison you are enclosed. Could you be ignorant, that they, who intended to lay
a yoke of slavery upon a free Nation, cast out many false mists, and seem
rather to do any thing, but what they do, and so long pretend the
preservation of liberty, and the observation of ancient customs, till they
have taken away all hope of their recovery, and abundantly assured themselves
of the means to sovereignty? Iacobus Zevecotius in observatis politicis ad
Suetonii Tranquilli Iulium Caesarem, ut supra citavimus. cap. 79 in sine.

Pardon me, I beseech you, you men, and Princes, if you think I have spoken
too freely, and boldly; Know, that I am also a Germane, and careful of the
Germane credit, honor, estimation, and liberty, that I am moved with the
calamities of our country, and racked betwixt anger and sorrow because I see
both it and you to perish so miserably; and so soon, and so dishonourably to
lose all the repute, credit, dignity, liberty, the Empire descended from our
Ancestors, and their gotten glories, and become a prey, scorn, and contempt
to strangers. To speak with the Orator, We pass no day without tears, nor
ever leave to bewail our Country, and lament this alteration.

(...). Isocr. These, these, are the causes of Our great sorrows.


FINIS.

