Franklins Farewell to the World, With his Christian Contrition in Prison,
before his Death.
Farewell vain World whose comforts all are Cares,
Whose gains are loss, whose liberty are Snares:
Whose Gold is Dross, whose wisdom is mere folly,
Whose wealth is woe, whose service is vnholly.
Whose Life is Death, whose Joy is Grief and Sadness:
And all that is in thee is a Map of Madness.
Who so (like me) long in the world has been,
And has so many alterations seen,
How some from Greatness fall, some Rise from little,
How man's foundation slip'ry is and brittle,
How Transitory things do mount and fall
At his Great pleasure, that Created all.
Who so does note, and bear these things in mind;
Shall see how Fortunes breath* like wau'ring wind
Does blow up men like bladders with Ambition,
And cast them headlong down to black Perdition.
That this is true, the world may plainly see,
And view a fearful spectacle in me:
For I that had enough of fading pelf,
And need not want (except I would my self)
I that had Sense, Discretion, Reason, Wit,
And could discern things fitting and unfit,
I whom my high Creator made a creature,
Adorning me with gifts of Art, and Nature
Yet of all this I made no further use
But Gods, Kings, Countries and my souls abuse.
From crime to crime still plundging further in,
With my continual adding sin to sin.
Till sin on sin, at last brought shame on shame,
And shame on shame, paid the desert of blame.
My thoughts surmis'd The Almighty's eyes were hid,
And that he saw not, what I secret did,
But he (whose sight eclipseth Moon and Sun)
Has brought to light the deeds in darkness done;
He in his Justice, Justly has revealed
My heinous faults which I had long concealed:
He has laid open my notorious crimes,
To be a warning to ensuing times;
That they shall never dare to do the like,
Least (like to me) his vengeance them do strike.
Then let a dying friend good counsel give,
To all Estates and Sexes how they live:
Oh let my ending of my loathed breath
Make all men care, to shun eternal death.
And though my life has bin polluted foul,
Yet Judge with charity my sinful soul;
For were the Sins of all the world in me,
Yet (with the eye of Faith) I clearly see
That Gods great mercy, like a boundles flood
Through my blessed Savior and Redeemers blood,
Has freely pardoned all that I have done,
(By th'intercession of his only Son,)
So that my steadfast faith does me persuade,
My peace for ever with my God is made.
He that Raisd Lazarus from out his Grave;
He that upon the Cross the Theife did save,
It Is he alone; and only none but he
Has raisd me up from Death, and saved me.
Yea, though I all my life time have lived evil,
A servant, and a slave unto the Devil:
Yet here is the Joy that makes my courage bold,
My Savior Christ has took me to his fold,
He, true Repentance unto me has given,
And for me (through his merits) purchased Heaven.
Then World, Flesh, Satan, and grim Death auaunt,
Do all your worst, my Faith you cannot daunt:
He, that for me has conquered Death and Hell,
Has granted me that I with him shall dwell.
And though my life Eternal fire did merit,
Yet God in mercy has received my Spirit.
Farewell my Country, by whose Justice I,
For mine unjust and bloody action dye.
Farewell most Sacred and Renowned King,
Whose equal Judgment through the world does ring:
Whose zeal to Right, and whose Impartial hand,
Are the maine prop on which this State does stand.
Long may he Reign, in his Maiestick-seate,
And as on Earth, be made in Heaven more great.
Let his Posterity, and Royal Race
Be all Inspired with the supernall Grace:
And of his seed let us have Always one
To sway the Scepter of Great Britains Throne.
Defend them Lord from soul and body harms,
From homebred Traitors, and from Foreigne Arms.
That in thy favor they may live and dye,
And dye to live with thee Immortally.
FINIS.
Printed at London for Henry Gosson.


