Ezras Pulpit. OR, A Sermon lately Preached in Southwarke, before a Worshipful
Assembly. Very necessary for these times.

BY WILLIAM FREAKE, Minister.

Luke 7. 4, 5. verses. And when they came to Jesus, they besought him
instantly, saying, that he was worthy for whom he should do this:
For, he loves our nation, and has built us a Synagogue.
LONDON, Printed by Tho. Harper for Richard Harper, and are to be sold at his
shop at the Bible and Harp in Smithfield, 1639.

To the right Worshipful, Sir Nicholas Rainton, Knight, President, the
Worshipful Martin Bond, Esquire, Treasurer, with the Governors of the
Hospital of little S Bartholomewes, W. F. wishes that Grace and Peace may be
multiplied.
WHat I studied for your private Chapel, and there delivered before some of
you, on Tuesday the 19. of June, last past, I have been importuned to make
public, as for a common good. If it be good, then quo communius, eo melius,
the more public it becomes, the more good it may do. I wished well in the
study and delivery of it to as many as desire the prosperity of our royal
foundation. In the publishing of it, I would gladly have it conceived that my
zeal is the same for the public welfare* If that memorable act of your
piety* which occasioned this Sermon, shall provoke some well minded ones to
imitate your example elsewhere, or incite the able handed to promote such
charitable undertakings for the comfort of so many sick and distressed souls
daily by your care refreshed: it may redound much to Gods glory, your own
comforts, and the happiness of those whom God shall move hereby to tread in
your steps. If no such thing succeed, yet it shall be your honor to have
lighted up the candle of so good an example for the times to come: as it is,
and shall be, for you all, that God may long continue to our Hospital, your
pious care for the happy and orderly government thereof, the daily prayer of

Your Hospitaler, William Freake.
From my Study in your Hospital the 12 day of Feb. 1639.
Ezras Pulpit.
Neh. 8. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. verses. And Ezra the Scribe stood upon a Pulpit of
wood, which they had made for the purpose, etc. to the end of the 8. verse.


BEloved: I find it to be the observation of a Father, that the two Cherubins,
which by Gods appointment were to be placed at the two ends of the Mercy-seat,
Exodus 25. 18. as they should be of beaten gold, so they should be so placed,
that they might face each other: as an instruction for all Ministers and
Preachers of the Word and Gospel, says the learned Zanche, to take this care
and course, that as their Doctrine should be purely the word of God, and not
their own, so they should be ever studious to make their Texts to suit with
the occasions of their Sermons, facing each other, as the Cherubins over the
Mercy-seat, that so being a word in due season, they may be like Apples of gold
in pictures of silver, Proverbs 25. 11. And this I confess* as it is my duty,
so it has been my study in the preparation of my meditations for this place
and occasion, to reconcile the text of Scripture, which (by Gods blessing) I
have made choice of, to the occasion of this day and our present meeting. A
work, which if you please to vouchsafe your favorable attention, will ask us
no great labor.

1 Because here is Ezra the Scribe, requested and appointed to bring forth the
book of the Law of Moses, which God commanded Israel, as ye have it in the
first verse of this chapter.

2 Because here is a Congregation lawfully assembled: for, all the people had
gathered themselves together as one man, in the street that was before the
Watergate, in the first part of the first verse of this chapter. And there was
a congregation both of men and women, even as many as could hear with unde
rstanding, in the second verse.

3 Because here is Ezra the Scribe reading in the book of the Law, before the
congregation, from the morning, even till midday, in the third verse.

4 Because here is the manner of this religious duty* with silence and
attention: for, the ears of all the people were attentive to the book of the
Law, as you may read in the last words of the third verse.

5 Because, here is the place and posture of the Minister. He stands upon a
Pulpit of wood, which they had made for the purpose (as our last translation
reads it) or, which they had prepared for the preaching, (as the former
transla^ion has it:) And Ezra the Scribe stood upon a Pulpit of wood, etc. So
that all things (you see) are fitted for the occasion of our present meeting,
except in this one thing there prove a defect, that now there be a want of a
learned Scribe to read unto you. And in this case, I beseech you, give me
leave to make my prayer, and I desire your charitable assistance therein. O
Lord God, etc. and so in a confident assurance of Gods gracious assistance, I
prepare to the words of my Text. And Ezra the Scribe, etc. And thus have I led
your understandings to the words of our Text, which before I enter upon, give
me leave I beseech you, to stoop and gather for you a flower or two that grow
in the way to our Text, by considering the context, and the coherence of these
words with the former verses of this chapter.

Wherein I observe thus much.

1 This people was newly returned out of captivity, into which they had been
delivered for the great and grievous sins of that nation in general, as you
may read in the last chapter of the second Book of the Chronicles, from the
14 verse to the end of the 16. And being now by the merciful hand of their
good God brought back to their own land and ruined City, they are setting a
new government among themselves by way of reformation, both in their
Ecclesiastical and civil State, being assisted in the one by Ezra the Scribe,
and in the other by Nehemiah, their religious and prudent Governor. Wherein that
they may procure directions from heaven, and conceive the fairer hopes of happy
success: they are assembled as one man, into a great and famous street of the
City, there by fasting and prayer to call upon God in humiliation of soul; and
there Ezra the Scribe stands upon a Pulpit of wood which they had made for
the purpose, and reads the Law unto them* Doubtless, if there had been this
true devotion in them, while their Temple was standing, and Jerusalem in her
prosperity, they might have esceped the fiery furnace of the Babilonish
captivity. But they have been cast into it, for the space of seventy years,
and are now but newly delivered out of it. And now, ye see, they are become
penitent, and we find them at their devotion in prayer and fasting, being
assembled for that purpose in a public street.

1 Point, That we may observe, the sweet benefit and comfort of affliction,
where it is sanctified to the Patient, and a right use made of it. This people
had been accustomed to find mercy at the hands of their God, how grievously
soever offended with them, so often as they did return unto him by repentance
and humiliation. Their fathers had trusted in him, and were delivered, as the
Psalmist truly sings, Psalm. 22. 4. and now their children take the same
course and prosper.

Use To show us, that affliction unto a child of God, is but a refining of him
from his dress, and a trying of him for his future good. According to that
remarkable speech of the Lord, by the ministry of his Prophet, Zachary the 13.
chap. the 8 and 9. verses, where, threatening the Jewish nation with utter
destruction by the sword of Titus Vespatian the Roman Emperor, he says, That
in that day it should come to pass, that throughout all the land, two third
parts thereof should be cut off and dye, but a third shall remain therein: and
I will bring that third part through the fire (says God) and I will refine
them as silver is refined, and try them as gold is tried: and then shall they
all call upon my Name, and I will hear them: then J will say, this is my
people, and they shall say it is the Lord my God. And thus was it with this
people at this time; they had been in the surnace of affliction, they were
humbled before God, and he heard them: he acknowledged them once more to be
his people, and they were in devotion before him, as before the Lord their God.
To teach us all what course we should take in this case, when by our finnes we
have brought our selves under the rod of God in what nature soever. Even to
seek God in his holy Ordinances in humility of soul for sin, who before we
call, is ready to answer, and while we pray is ready to hear, Isaiah 65. 24.
But I insist no longer upon this point, I pass to another.

2 Ob. In the second place therefore be pleased to observe with me, thus much.
This people in their great distress are compassionated by King Cyrus, in the
first year of his reign, who, according as Jeremy had prophesied, at the full
period of seventy years, did by public Proclamation, loose the bond of their
captivity, as you may read in the two last verses of the last chapter of the
second book of the Chronicles: and who according as the Lord had foretold of
him by Name, no less then one hundred and seventy years before he was borne)
performed all Gods pleasure, saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be built, and to
the Temple, thy foundation shall be laid, Isa. 44. verse the last.

To which end, leave is given by the King to Ezra the Scribe, and to Nehemiah
their Governor, to direct and assist them in the repair of their state, and
reformation of religion, a great comfort and encouragement to these distressed
Jews.

2 Point, Doubtless to teach us, by the example of these Jews, that such as
unfainedly turn to God by true repentance, as did these penitent people, shall
never want a seasonable and comfortable deliverance, how grievous soever their
sins have been. yea, rather then fail in such a case, God will raise up
help for them, where they look not for it. David in the days of Saul found
it thus full many a time: Elias found it thus in the wilderness, being fed by
Ravens, in the first book of the Kings, the 17. chap. at the 6 verse. Manasses
in the prison found it so, when upon his unfeigned humiliation for sin, God
wrought little less then a miracle for him, bringing him back to Jerusalem,
restoring him to his kingdom, and changing his iron fetters and chains into a
chain of gold and royal scepter, 2 Chro. 33. 13.

The people of God have found this true by frequent experience in all ages: and
that I may not look too far from home, the poor of this house and
foundation find it true: for whose emergent distresses, provision has been
made, and still is continued by those who never saw their faces, until that
hour wherein their necessities enforce them to seek unto us: meat and
medicine for their hunger and sicknesses, clothes for their nakedness, with
other necessary comforts. And that they may be instructed to make an happy use
of Gods mercies extended unto them in this case, care is had for the spiritual
food of their souls, by reading and expounding unto them the blessed word of
God; so that, I refer it to your consideration, whether they have not as just
cause ministered unto them to bless God for his gracious providence over them,
for souls and bodies, as had these Jews to give glory to the God of Jsrael,
in their particular: who foreseeing that in time they would cast themselves by
their sins into the fiery furnace of Babylons captivity, had foretold them of
a deliverer by the ministry of the Prophet Jsaiah, an hundred and seventy
years before hand: and now in his own time did perform his word punctually
by this Monarch of Persia, and his favor to his two servants, Ezra the Scribe,
and Nehemiah the Governor. And now as upon these grounds we find them
renewed, and have learned somewhat from thence,

3 Obser. So we may observe in the third place, that upon their return, they
make provision for the public exercise of true religion, as without which,
their State could have no firm or assured foundation. Therefore it is said in
the first verse of this chapter, that all the people assembled themselves
together, and spoke to Ezra the Scribe, that he would bring the Book of the
law of Moses, which he had commanded Israel. And Ezra the Scribe brought forth
the book of the law before the congregation both of men and women. ver. 2. And
if any would be sati^fied who this Ezra was, let him read Ezra 7. 6. and he
shall find that this Ezra came up from Babel, and was a Scribe prompt in the
law of Moses, which the Lord God of Israel had given: a man to whom the king
had granted all his request, and to whose sole direction this people had
referred themselves for the establishment of religion and the worship of God
among them. From whence we mayobserve thus much.

3. Point. That the public exercise of religion, and the establishment
thereof is the firmest ground whereupon the peace and happy government of any
State can possibly be built. The very heathens themselves knew this: And
therefore so soon as Romulus the first builder of Rome, had by force and arms
laid a foundation of that city, next after him succeeded Numa Pompilius, who by
an heathenish kind of religion brought that rude and barbarous people into some
order, vt quod vi et injuria occupaverat imperium, religione ac iustitia
gubernaret. says their own historian: that the command which they had
obtained by force and arms to the wrong of others, they might establish and
administer by a seeming practice of religion as in their own right. The devil
who was the founder of that Mo^archy could teach them thus much: having
observed some what doubtless from the practice of God himself, whose Ape he
has ever affected to be in imitation: because when the Lord had chosen to
himself a people of his own, and had brought them out of Egypt, he
established their government under Moses and Aaron: not only under Moses, as
their civil Magistrate to rule them by his love, but also under Aaron, as
their high Priest by God established to keep them in awe by religion. Fear
God and honor the King, says Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 2. 17. As if the honor due
to the king could never be given him in that State or kingdom where the fear
of God is not taught by a public exercise of religion. We find that these
Jews here are sensible of it, in that upon their return from captivity, in
their entrance to the reestablishment of their former government, they have
recourse to Ezra the scribe, as the only man in those times able to instruct
them in that form of religion, without which their civil estate could never
be able to subsist. To which only end Ezra purposing to instruct the people as
from Gods mouth, is here found in my text standing upon a pulpit of wood
prepared for the preaching.

4 Obs: But principally we may observe it in this their solemnity for the
establishment of religion, and in this particular: that as there stood at Ezras
right hand Mattithia, and Shemai, Anania, and Vrijah, Hilkiha, and Maasejah.
Qui quidem er ant seniores e levitico genere omnes, says Tremelius upon this
place, elders, all of them of the trbe of Levi; so there stood at his left
hand, as ready to assist him, Pedaiah, and Mishael, Malchia, and Hashum,
Hashbadona, Zecharia, and Meshullan, most probably the chief of their
Nobillity and Gentry: that their religion and civil estate might join hand in
hand to establish peace by a religious government, and true religion by peace.
And surely concerning that state whatsoever, wherein there is this sweet union
between the civil and ecclesiastical government founded upon the sacred and
revealed will of God, I may say truly as does the Psalmist, Psalm. 144. the last
verse. Happy are the people that be in such a case: yea, blessed are the people
that have the Lord for their God. Disunion, and discord in opinions or
practice, seldom produces any good in any soeiety of men whatsoever: but to a
settled Church it is ever troublesome and dangerous: in which regard it has
ever been the care and study of all good men, who unfainedly desire the
public good and prosperity of Sion, to advance and improve all good means
and motions conducing to the establishment of this harmoniousunion, and accord
on both sides betwixt the civil and ecclesiastical government: yea, in all
public societies and companies, the more prudent and discreet part thereof is
ever studious of public peace; as are these Jews here in the beginning of
their reformation, who to that purpose join the Church and State hand in hand,
the Clergy and the Laity: not separating them by factious and partiality, as
some in these days, or alienating their affections from each other, upon petty
differences, but by a mutual conjunction of the Clergy with the Nobility,
endeavoring as with one consent, the welfare of the public. In whose
proceedings in this case, this is furthermore worthy your observation.

5 Ob. That in their establishment of Gods public worship in the exercises of
religion, they are jointly careful to draw all the people to a public
conformity. Which to effect, though it was a work of much difficulty, because
of their strange matches, yet they conceived it to be a point of absolute
necessity, as without which their State would suddenly come to ruin. This ye
may observe in the words of our Text, where it is said in the 5 verse: That
when Ezra opened the Book in the sight of all the people, then all the people
stood up. They were not allowed (it seems) some to sit while the others stood,
according as every man's fancy led him, but all the people stood up, says the
Text. As also ye may observe it further in that which follows in the 6*
verse, where it is said, that when Ezra praised the Lord, the great God, then
all the people answered Amen, Amen: as with an unanimous consent, and with
lifting up their hands: and they bowed themselves, and worshipped the Lord with
their faces toward the ground. Here is a standing up all together at one time,
a lifting up their hands all together at another time, and a worshipping of the
Lord with their faces to the ground. in conclusion:

5 Point Let all things be done decently and in order, was S. Paul's rule, 1
Cor. 14. the last verse, as intimating that there is no decency without order,
in any public actions, in any public society. The want whereof is the bane
of the most hopeful undertakings, whether in peace or war, which, as
oftentimes it is the decay of a State, so it is the ruin of an Army. To him
that orders his ways aright, will I show my salvation, says God, Psalm. 50.
the last verse, as intimating that all such shall fall short of the sight
thereof, as delight to walk in the disorderly way. I wish that our factious
singularists, whose queazy stomachs rise against all conformity, would take
this into consideration. For my part, I freely profess my self a disciple to
conformity, so long as I find nothing against it in the sacred Scripture. And
I shall ever desire to join in the practice of it, had I none other ground for
it, but this in my Text: where I read, that this people in the
re-establishment of their State and religion, were studious of a public
conformity in the worship of God, standing up all together, saying Amen with
one voice, lifting up their hands, bowing, worshipping, as the public action
and reading of Ezra gave occasion.

6 Ob. Yea, and (which is yet more remarkable in their proceedings in this
kind) in making provision for the reading of the Law in public assemblies,
they are careful to have all decent accommodations for the same. Ezra the
Scribe has a Pulpit of wood, prepared for the preaching; and in or upon this
Pulpit, he stood, says my Text, and read the Law unto the people, verse 4.
Which Pulpit was so ordered, that standing therein, he was above all the
people, says the Text, verse 5. to the intent, that his voice might be the
better heard, as our English gloss upon that place expounds it.

6 Point A most pious and commendable care without question, that in the
public assemblies, all things might be done, not only decently and in order,
but profitably also* to the edification of the Auditory. Which last thing most
plainly appears in the two last verses of my Text, where care is taken, that
certain selected Levites, whose names are expressed in the seventh verse, should
cause the people to understand the Law. To which end an order was established,
that the Levites should read in the Law of the Lord distinctly, without
hudling up things together, as many do now adays: and not to content
themselves with bare reading, but they should also give the Sense thereof, and
cause the people to understand the reading, as you have it in the last words of
my Text. And now, I pray you, what pattern can be more plain, what warrant
more strong can the Scripture afford us for our order in our congregations, for
decent carriage in public assemblies, for our reading Pewes, our Pulpits, our
Sermons, our expositions of Scripture, after reading thereof, then this of this
people in the words of our Text? wherein Ezra the Scribe stands upon a Pulpit
of wood prepared for the preaching, with the Nobility and Clergy on his right
hand, and on his left, opening the Book in the sight of the people, and
reading the law unto them: at whose opening of the Book, the people stand up,
say Amen, bowing their heads, and worshipping. The Levites by exposition cause
the people to understand the Law; reading it distinctly, and giving the sense:
which when I think upon, I cannot but break into that patheticall wish of a
reverend Divine of our own upon an occasion not much unlike: O si Deus hoc
faceret nobis tam commodum, quam Ecclesia proposuit accommodum: O that the Lord
were pleased but so to persuade the hearts of men and women to an unity of
affections in their public devotions, as the holy Ghost has been careful
to set us a pattern in Scripture and the reformed Churches pious in
propounding us an uniformity, And so I have done with the explication of the
words of our Text; I now only crave your patience for a word or two of
application, and I will draw suddenly to a conclusion.

1 Our Text, you see, has acquainted us with a people, that by a right use of
affliction, are grown penitent and pious. A lesson for the Patients of this
house and foundation, to cha^ke them out a way to the happy use of Gods
corrections. That they may know that there is none other way so ready to
remission of sins, as humiliation and contrition of heart for the same,
wisely inured to piety in devotion.

2 It has acquainted us with their practice of joining the Church and State
together in an unanimous consent for the honor of God in his public service.
To lesson us in the necessity of a mutual accord this way, if we desire the
prosperity of our Jerusalem.

3 It has acquainted us with their study and practice of conformity in Gods
services that we might know that our God is a God of order, and that the
Church of God is truly represented by an Army well ordered, as being never*so
victorious over its enemies, as when it is terrible unto them as an Army with
banners, Canticles the 6. chapter the 4 verse.

4 It has acquainted us with their holy practice in accommodating all things
in their public assembly, as to Gods glory, so to the peoples edification.
Not only to instruct us that such should be the care of all good men, but to
show us what we owe to God for the happy endeavors of such religious spirits
as are raised up by God to perform such godly and christian works with a
study for the public good. The names of those noble Patriots, who were
sticklers in this reformation here in my Text, both Clergy and Nobility are
recorded to their everlasting honor, by the pen of the holy Ghost. We may
therefore by good warrant write up even in letters of gold, the names of such
pious Patrons as God blesses us withal in this depraved and degenerate age of
ours. And with this holy confidence upon just grouuds, that these names are
written in the book of eternal life, of whom GOD makes choice to be moved by
his holy Spirit, to works of this nature in this mutual life. Mistake me not
I beseech you: this is no place for flattery: we stand in the presence of the
Searcher of all our hearts. I do undoubtedly assure my self, that even they
whose hands have been deepest in the erection of this place, will be content
to say as David, when he had prepared all materials for the building of Gods
Temple, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. Lord, who am I? and what is my people, that we should
be able to offer so willingly after this sort? For, all things come of thee,
and of thine own have we given thee. God has given the means, God has
filled the hand, God has enlarged the heart to do this pious act in this
place, and to God only be all the glory for it.

And now what remains, but an earnest exhortation to a continnance in
well-doing, and that a course may be taken for an happy progress in Gods
favor to the royal foundation of our Hospital? And to this end as I propound
this people in our Text your pattern, and thereupon shall be bold to make a
request unto you; so I will conclude with an exhortation, and a prayer upon it.
The request I ground upon the practice of this people, in whom we find
unanimity for preservation of the public welfare, and the same in peace. And
this request I deliver in the words of Saint Paul, Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
verses. If there be any if consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if
any fellowship of the spirit, any bowels of mercy, verse 1. fulfill my joy,
(and not mine alone, but the joy of God, and of his holy Angels) by being
like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord, and of one mind, verse
2. And let nothing be done through strife or vainglory: but in humbleness of
mind, let each esteem other better then himself, verse 3. And let us not
look every man to his own things only, but every man also to the things of
another, verse 4. Let the same mind be in you that was in Christ Jesus, verse
5. This is the sum of my request. And now my prayer shall be for every
member of this royal foundation* as well Officers as Governors, none excepted,
that we may be not only like minded one toward another, according to Christ
Jesus, as Saint Paul prays for his Romans, Romans 15. 5. but that we may live
and dye in unity, peace, and concord: and herein, we beseech thee to hear us,
good Lord. That so performing our duties to God, and to the poor committed to
our charge in all sincerity and uprightness of hearts, when our general
account shall be called for, we may be received with an Eugee bone and fidelis
serve, well done good and faithful servant, Math. 25. 21. Thou have been
faithful over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many things, enter
into the joy of thy Lord.

Unto which joy, may he be pleased to bring us, who has most dearly bought
us, even Jesus Christ the righteous, to whom, etc.

FINIS.
Feb. 16. 1638.

Imprimatur.

Guil. Bray.


