AN ORATION Against the Unlawful Insurrections of the Protestants of our
time, under pretense to Refourme Religion.

Made and pronounced in Latin, in the Schole of Arts at Louaine, the.xiiij. of
December. Anno. 1565.

By Peter Frarin of Andwerp, M. of Art, and Bacheler of both laws. And now
translated into English, with the advice of the Author.

RESPICITE VOLATILIA COELI, ET PVLLOS CORVORVM.



ANTVERPIAE, Ex officina Ioannis Fouleri. M.D.LXVI.

Epist. Iudae. Hi carnem quide^ maculant, dominationem autem spernunt,
maiestatem autem blasphemant.

These, being deceived by dreams, defile the flesh, despise the Rulers, and
blaspheme the Majesty.

IBIDEM. Hi sunt murmuratores querulosi, secundum desideria sua ambulantes.

These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own will.

IBIDEM. Hi sunt qui segrega^t semetipsos, animales, spiritum non habentes.

These are makers of sects, fleshly, having no Spirit.

Proverb. 16. Homo peruersus suscitat lites, and verbosus separat Principes.

A froward body causes strife, and he that is full of words, makes division
among Princes.

The Extracte of the Privilege.
CAtholicae Maiestatis speciali gratia permissum est Petro Frarino
Antuerpiensi, vt per quem seu quos voluerit Typographorum admissorum impune ei
liceat imprimi curare et per omnes has suae Ditionis regiones distrahere
Orationem Anglice inscriptam: An Oration against the unlawful Insurrections of
the Protestants: Eiusdemque Maiestatis Priuilegio cautum express, ne quisquam
eandem Orationem proximis quinque annis absque predicti Petri consensu imprimat
vel alibi impressam distrahat. Si quis contra ha^c Regiam prohibitionem ausu
temerario committere vel ei fraudem facere attentauerit, sciat se non futurum
immunem a poena contenta in diplomate

dato in Regiae Maiestatis Concilio priuato Bruxellae 14. Martij. Anno. 1565.
stilo Brabantiae. Subsig. Bourgeois.

The Translatour to the Gentle Reader.
AMong many other laudable customs of ye noble University of Louaine, this
one is yearly observed there, that in ye month of December al ordinary
lessons cease for the space of one whole week, and in place thereof some
Learned man is chosen by common assent to be the President of certain
Disputations: wherein he proponeth, to such as are thereto appointed, diverse
fruitful questions in Divinity, Law, Physik Phylosophie, Humanity, and in
all probable matters, making arguments breefly for both parts of ye
questions, and then leaving to ye judgment of the Respondent to choose which
part he likes best (whereof those exercises have their name) and the next
day following in that place to handle the same Rhetoricallie the space of two
hours together without interruption, Disputationes Quodlibeticae.
in presence and hering of the whole University there then assembled. And in
this manner twice a day four hours are spente that week, with great profit
and utterance of many good and profitable matters of learning worth the hering
and bering away, though little thereof commonly afterward come forth in printe,
to the sight and vewe of the world.

Among diverse other, this last December there, a learned man toward the Law
called M. Peter Frarin borne in Andwerp made an Oration against the
Insurrections of the Protestants and Sects of our time, not without great
commendation, which, at the earnest request of his frindes, he suffered to be
afterward printed. Anh because I thought it no less profitable and fruteful,
that, as that Oration is in Latin, and like to be shortly in Doutch and
French, so it should be in English also to warn my dear Contremen of those
men's malice and cruelty: I conferred with him, and by his advise traslated it
into our Mother tongue, with such notes and farther additio^s as for lack of
time, when he pronounced it, were omitted and leafte out in the Latin.
Wherein I took such leave and liberty, as the Author, with whom I conferred,
might be bold to use him self in his own doings, or give an other man, and
as the Vain of our Englisshe tongue seemed best to bear in such kind of talk,
leaving sometimes the precise words of ye Latin, but never swaruing any whit
from the truth. And for the assurance and proof of ye matter of this whole
Treatise, the Author protests that he uttered nothing in all this oration
against any man, but that either he saw with his own eyes, or hard of
credible persons that were present at those matters, or read in approved
Writers, or in their own books whom he charge, or finally that is
notoriously known to whole Cities and Countries.

Take therefore, I beseech thee Gentill Reader, in good part this fair
warning thou haste here to take heed of these perilouse pretended Refourmers*
and weighe rather the matter, then my rude utterance in Englisshe. And if thou
be a Gentelman, learn here what these men's intent and practice is against all
noble Stocks. They mean utterly to root out ye Nobility and al noble
Blood, as they have done already at Geneua, and in those Ca^tons of
Suitzerland, where this fifte Gospel reigns. Remonstrances au Roy des
deputes des trois estats de Burgoigne sur l'edict de la pacification* part. 2.
The deputies that represented the three estates of Burgundy in their
Discourse upon the French Kings Edicte of pacification are my Authors of this
report. If thou be a Ruler and in authority, consider their conspiracies and
treasons against all Magistrates. If thou be a man of the Church, mark here
their malice and extreme cruelty against all Gods true Ministers and Virtuous
Priests. If thou be a faithful subject among the Commons, see their
robberies, their pouling and rifling, their unmerciful extorsions, their
insatiable greadines in gatheringe to them other men's goods. Finally, if thou
be a true Christian man, Abhor and deteste their Wickedness, Sacrilege,
horrible blasphemies, and impiety against God and all his holy Mysteries. To
be short, I trust no man will be offended with the reading of this Oration, but
only such as in their own consciences feel them selves guyltie of these
co^spiracies and treasons herein mentioned, and therefore seem to be touched
nere the quick. And yet perhaps, by Gods grace, this sour medicine, though
it smart, may work in some of them also, first shame, then repentance, and
last amendment of such ungodly pourposes and enterprises, and call them back
again thither, wherehence they fell, to do their former works, as the Spirit
of truth says, Apoca. 2.
in the fear of God, the unity of his Church, obedience of their Princes, and
charity with their neighbors. But sure I am, it will little please M. Jewel
and his Companio^s, who by writing, preaching and printing, First provoked with
great confidence and brags the Catholics to write their minds in matters of
controversy and questions about Religion, wisshing that the Queens grace,
(for whom we daily pray) would not only license them, but command them to
write: And now that diverse have written full learnedly to their confusion and
shame (meddling nothing with the affairs and politic Government of the
Realm, but only with points of Doctrine) they have none other way to answer
and make their party good, but to turn their tale, chainge their tune, and
report that the wrytinges of the Catholics are seditious, and tend to the
disquieting and disturbaunce of the Common weal, that the authors thereof are
unnatural and disordered subjects: and so by such false informations labor
to procure the means to stay and let to come into the Realm such Books as
detecte their Untruth, Falshode, and Heresies, and are most profitable for all
good Christians and true Subjects to read, in these dangerous days.

If they practice the like against this little discourse made against
Commotions for Religion, they shall declare plainly and make the world
understand, that they are not true Subjects to the Queens Majesty, nor yet
faithful to the Nobility, nor frindefull to the Commons of their own native
Country. For here is nothing but a Detection of false and wicked Treasons
against Princes and Rulers, and, as it were, a wholesome Triacle for
Magistrates and faithful Subjects, against the contagious infection and
dangerous pestilence of rebellion. Fare well Gentle reader, and with the
manners and behauioure thou see in our Ministers at home compare and lay
together these Strange doings of their Fellows and Companions abroad in
other Countries. So shall thou perceive, they are of one sprite and stamp,
Math. 7.
and (according to the Counsel of Christ the son of God) know them by their
works, as ye tree is known by his fruit, and by that means learn to avoid
them, and beware of them.

From Andwerp. Maij. 9. Anno. 1566. Ihon Fouler.

Against the unlawful insurrections of the Protestants of our time, under
prete^se to refourme Religion.
TWo principal things in every Common weal have at all times been
especially esteemed and taken for the chief. both which now in this our age
throughout al Christendom the desperate boldness of certain most wicked persons
has disturbed: I mean, Religion, and Peace.

The question of God almighty his true Religion profaned, I leave to those
men to handle, to whose custody and credit the holy Mysteries of Christian
Religion are, by the divine Authority of Gods ordinance, committed: whose
learning, wit, and eloquence may further much the defense of so weighty a
matter, whose Profession, Authority and virtue, ought to be always employed
about such Godly affairs.

The other argument, that is, of Peace broken by Seditions, of Public and good
Order troubled, of Magistrates, under pretense of refourmation, contemned, of
God and man's law offended and transgressed, yt cause and lamentable matter I
had also at this time gladly omitted, leaving it to the handling of the
eloquente and wise, that are practysed in Public affairs, grounded in
knowledge of the laws, and weighty Policies of Princes: had it not been, that
I was at this present first moved to take the ruefull Discourse thereof in hand
by the earnest request of such, to whom lightelie, without just excuse, I may
deny nothing: then, lead (as it were) thereto by hope and regard of your most
courteouse gentellnes and patience (right worshipful Audience) and finally
drawn and driven to speak by force of the hatred I bare to so vile and
villanouse a matter, least, perhaps as by mine, so by all other men's silence so
hainouse a thing should have escaped quite unspoken of.

For in very deed when I considered and weighed the matter with my self, mine
opinion told me thus, That this right worthy Seat wherein I now stand, was wo^t
always to be the place open only to most eloquent Orators, occupied most
commo^lie by most grave and ancient Doctors, whose accustomed manner has been
to bring hither, and to pour into your most learned cares nothing but such
stuf as was invented by great wit, framed with much diligence, archeiued and
finished with gravity, judgment, art and eloquence. And as for me, were it
so yt I had al other things requisite to such a one that worthily might
attempt this public exercise and entry of commendation in matters of
learning: yet (to say the very truth) I thought mine age scarce ripe enough
for the grave rome of this so worshipful a Place. And withal, besides these
defectes, this also did put me in very great fear, least as somtymes
Demosthenes, yt chief Pere of al Greek eloquence, framing him self to speak
in ye presence of Philip king of the Macedons, happened in the very beginning
of his Oration to stay, to lack utterance and words, being astonished with the
Royal Majesty of so great a personage: so in like sort I, addressing my self
to talk in this so great an assemble of most learned Audience, should have
peradventure the very same, or yt like chance and fortune.

But this needelesse doubt, and fear, proceeding of the fainte and bashful
shamefastness of youth, was at length somewhat dissolved by the comfortable
exhortations of my friends, and is now at last quite removed and put away by
the most cheerful sight of this your gentle presence and pleasant
countenances, wherewith I feel sensibly my self to be maruelously now refreshed
and provoked, as it were, to speak boldly and with good courage. For who would
be afraid to speak of Seditions in the presence of such quiet persons? Against
treasons, before most faithful Subjects? Who would doubt in the hearing of
Officers and Magistrates, to talk against tumultes, robbing, stealing,
co^spiracies, cutting of throtes, spoiling of Countries, burning of Cities,
sacking of Churches, wicked sacrilege, and most impiouse contempt of things
appertaining to God, and finally against the very bane and pestilence of all
commendable alliance and unity of Commonweals, and the utter ruin and
destruction of all Civil Policy and good Order? For what one man of you all
(right honorable and worshipful) would gladly or willingly allow and bear
such and so heinous enormities in any Realm or Country?

I will therefore go forward in my matter and speak: yea, and now having
gathered courage by ye assured hope of your gentle patience, I will say boldly,
that the Protestants of our time have not done well in putting them selves in
arms under color of refourming Religion: yt they have done therein against
all law, right and equity, not without intolerable injury, damage and wrong in
every respect to ye Public estate of Christendom. In this point consists ye
whole weight and co^trouersy of the question yt was yesterday (according to the
custom of this schole) proponed to be the argument of my talk at this time.

I will first open and declare unto you, yt there was no cause or just
occasion, why these men should rise and make insurrection.

Then, 1
that they took weapon in hand without any authority, contrary to law, and in
despite of al Magistrates and Rulers.

Last and finally, ^
yt they used themselves to cruelly, and handled their swerd to bloudily, to
the greatest damage, hyndrance and loss, that ever was felt in Christendom.

With these limits and bounds I make, as it were, a trauerse and close my
self within a circle, out of the cumpasse whereof the discourse and order of my
talk shall not straie: that by these means both I, out of infinite matter
that offreth it self in the ha^dling of this cause, may have certain special
points marked and chosen whereof I may treat, and also you, even now before
hand, may forsee and bear in mind, in hearing what things, your learned ears
are like to be employed during mine Oration.

I deny utterly, yt there was any good or reasonable cause, why the founders
and brokers of this new Gospel should be driven or provoked to put them selves
in arms against the Catholics. This is ye first point whereof I promised to
speak. Whiles in few words I declare and prove this unto you, I humbly
request you, with diligent attention to mark and give ear.

It behooves always, yt there be very great causes proved why, before chainge
of laws should be in any common weal procured: and in very deed it ought to be
a maruelouse occasion and the greatest cause of all causes, why the innovation
of Religion (being always ye very backebone of al Realms both Christian and
Heathen) should be attempted. But that either this or that should be don by
force and arms, by war and rebellion, by fire and swerd, by murder and
bloodshed of the good and faithful Subjects, there can never any reason or
sufficient cause be alleged or brought why and wherefore.

I remember, among many other notable laws, wherewith in times past the
Lorrenses ruled their common weal, it was with great policy and wisdom
ordained, yt if any man would go about to procure any thainge in the public
affairs of yt estate, he should stand up in a high place, and there hence
speak his mind freely to the people, being then there assembled about him: but
yet with this condition, that all the while he spoke, he should have a rope
tied with a riding knot loose enough about his neck, the which rope should be
so long, that the other end thereof might lie on the ground between their feet
that hard his discourse and devise: to this effect, that, if in yt end of his
tale ye people were persuaded that it was for their common commodity and profit,
to make that chainge and innovation as he had said, then he should come down
without any harm, and be dimissed with much commendation and favor: else the
Audience out of hand might pull the rope and revenge with present death the
rash attempt and seditious enterprise of such a one as without good cause,
bestowed his busy brain about chainges and alterations.

If it had pleased the Princes and Rulers of ye world in this our time to have
established and practiced this law, we should have no need now to sighe at the
sight of so miserable a confusion, disorder and troublous ruffling of all
things. We should not have seen of late, and yet see this so lamentable an
estate of the world. so many Wars, Tumultes, Slaughters, Ruins, so many
Churches suppressed, so many Towns ouerturned. finally we should not now rue
so many wicked Sacrileges committed in profaning of Gods Mysteries, and sacred
things appertaining to his Honor and Service.

But alas it was free, without any fear of the rope for these authors and
fosterers of Sects, frankly and boldly to persuade with the people, and
bestow their words as they list. And would God they had stayed there, and
had disbursed nothing but vernished words: they went further from Words to
Wounds and Blows. They had the Word in their mouths, the Sword in their
hands: their Word sounded peace, their Sword coined war: their peace served
for a guylful cloak to cover craft and deceyt, their war was employed to
execute violence, cruelty and murder. Was there none other means to plant
that bluddy Gospel, but to attempt Reformation in ye state of ye Church by
civil wars, insurrections and Rebellion? Put up thy sword in the sheth, said
Christ to S. Peter: Out with thy sword for the Gospel, says the new
Gospeller. There was a Company of desperate and wicked persons yt ran like
mad men up and down the streates of Paris with glistering naked swords in
their hands, Claud. de Saints du Saccagement des eglises. fol. 57.
and cried out, the Gospel, the Gospel: when they meant nothing else, but to
bring a sort of cursed Sects and wicked Heresies into the Realm.

It was not (I assure you honorable and worshipful) it was not the Gospel they
brought, except they hold it for a Gospel to cut in pecies, to sack, spoil
and quite to overthrow with blows and naked sword all ye ye Evangelists builded
we ye Word. It was not Gods quarrel at all: that bloody bickering was never
taken in hand for Gods sake. And in this behalf I call to wittnes even the self
same man, that was our most earnest and fierce adversary in this question, who
was ye occasion of al our cala^mitie, and was the Author and maker of this
lamentable Tragedy. In this matter, I say, I call thee, friar Luther to
witness. For out of whose mouth (I pray thee) fell yt worthy saying in the
noble assemble of ye learned and honorable at Lipsia: Luth. i^ disput. Lipsic.
1519. test. D. Empser. D. ^ck. and Legate. tum ibi praes.
Neither was this matter ever begone for Gods quarrel, another shall be ended for
Gods sake. O noble sentence, and worthy in deed to come out of his mouth, that
would be called ye heavenly Prophere, ye third Elias, ye fifth Eua^geliste. Was
this matter, say you, never begone for Gods sake? I believe it well. What was
then ye cause, I pray you good sir. yt ye made so cruel, so long, so deadly
war against ye Christians, yt ye sticked not to trouble al Christendom with
civil barayle, with insurrectio^s and vprores, with tumultes, sedition, and
rebellion? yt ye could find in your hearts, to fight against your own pare^tes,
and your own children, against your Rulers and magistrates, yea and against ye
church of christ?

War ought never to be made without most weighty occasion. For it is yt part of
a wise man to try all means and ways, rather the^ to lay hand on his weapon:
but yt me^ should fight at home in their own country against their own felows,
their own neighbors, their own parents, there is no reason nor cause yt ever ca^
be found for it: or surely if any be, it is this, that it be don by Commission
and lawful authority for Gods honor, for Gods sake only, and for none other
respect: and you, sir Luther, do flatly, (and yet most truly) deny, that these
your doings were for any such reipect at all.

If I were able to say nothing in this matter, but this yt thou thy self say
for me, yet out of doubt, by yt verdict and judgment of al honest, wise, and
indifferent men, I should preuail in this cause, and prove al your sect to be
seditious, rash, cruel, wicked, traitorous against God and man, for yt without
any just occasion, ye have so long and so cruelly troubled the whole estate of
Christendo^. But you say, y^ faith was well nigh quite quenched, and out of the
Church. It is a wondrous matter ye speak of. Christ prayed for S. Peter, that
his Faith should never fail. And will ye say, he praid in vain, lost his labor,
and could not obtain his prayer? that were injury and reproach to the son of
God. The holy Ghost came down from heaven into the Church here militant on
earth, to teach her al truth. Has he not taught her? you blaspheme the holy
Ghost, so to say.

But go to: let it be granted that, as you imagine all manner of fond and
absurd things, so you thought in this point with no less madness, that the
Christian Faith was lost, or at least that Christian Religion being nigh
outworne and spent before your happy days needed to be restored by such
excellent, grave, godly, and wise men as you were, replenished with all manner
of knowledge, virtue and heavenly gifts of the sprite.

To be short, your purpose was, ye say, to refourme the Christian Faith. How
then? When you could not therein preuail, nor persuade the people, that was
somewhat stubburn and stiffenecked perhaps as you judged, did you think it the
best way by and by with gonneshot, and bytels to beat and drive the faith into
their heads?

Who ever being in his right wit did think, that any thing might be persuaded
by force? Men use to persuade the mind and not the body: but it is most
certain, that the mind, as it may be bent, led, and induced by reason, so by
stripes, blows and buffets it can never be compelled and constrained. But it
was a carnal Religion yt these flesshly Gospellers brought and taught, and
therefore they did what they could to drive it into men's brains with strokes,
and to prick it into men's flessh with swords, dags, and daggers. It may be, ye
were much offended with the vitiouse manners and ill living of men now a days.
In good faith and so were we. there is no honest Catholic man that ever was
delighted therewith. But yet when we saw that it was very hard fully to cleanse
and purge any one family or how should from all manner of sins and sores, we
thought it a matter of far greater difficulty and importance, to amend the
faults and heal ye wondes of all the whole corpse of Christe^dom together.
therefore of necessity, be cause we could not remedy yt desperate case by reason
of the multitude, we bore with yt common and vulgar Deceases and vices of al
sorts of men, the cure whereof was more past hope, and did take them
patientlye, but yet surely not without great grief and sorrow to see them and
open preaching co^tinuallie against them. But you (sour Checkmasters and most
bitter Controllers of manners) went about, like Judges sent from heaven or
Physicians dropte out of the skies, to co^de^ne and cut of with sword, and burn
with fire and gunpowder all at a pushe ye faults and folies of the whole world
together.

If ye had been officers having Commission and authority so to do, yet your
Judgment and process could not be excused herein from exceeding cruelty and
raishnes: but where it appears ye were but flingbraynes and light Iackstrawes
having no authority at al, yt took upon you, without any examination, without
process of law, without any sentence, to condemn al Christendom, to rack it,
to punish it, and with most greuouse and painful torments to tear and turn
vpsyde down ye whole world: what shall I call this but a bloody Butcherie, a
heinous wickedness, a dyuelish dealing, an impiety never to be pardoned? O but
(say you) the Catholics did live vitiously, the Clergy were out of order,
the Princes and Rulers ruled not as they should: yea and there were many
ceremonies in ye Church yt we could not brook.

I assure you these be grievous and weighty Inditementes. Who laid them in, I
pray you? Who but you, the worst men, and naughtiest livers y^ ever trod on
earth? What blames the thief Verres his mate? Quid fur accusat Verrem,
homicida Milonem?
Or cutthrote falls with Miles at bate.

The third Elias him self did plainly confess, that the manners of men were
far more vicious under his Gospel, then ever they were before under ye Popedom.
He has said it. It is not lawful to gainsay ye same. Georg. Wicel. in retect.
Luth. and Luth. in sua postilla su. Do^: 1. adue^tus.
But if any of ye disciples dare deny that, which this their great master
Pythagoras said, the beds are yet warm wherein these gospellers lay with
other men's wives: the Towns and Cities smoke yet of the fire, wherewith they
burned houses: the earth is moiste at this hour with the blood of many good
subjects whom they have slain: their Purses do swel, and are yet at this
present puffed up with the goods they gathered, and gains they got by roberies,
Simonye, and Extortion.

Show forth thy brazen face, Martin Luther, and say if thou dare, that thou
art an honester and better man, then the virtuous and grave Fathers and
Prelates of the Catholic Church: Edict Worm. Carol. 5. contr. Luth. An. 1521.
Resp. Regis Ang. ad ep. Lut. ep. ad Duces Saxon. Lut. li. cont. R^ Angl. Edict.
Re. Polo con. Lutheranos
I will out of hand bring in against thee, the public Edict that the most
noble Charles the fifth our late foueraigne Emperor of happy memory, made
against thee at Worms: the witness of the great and mighty Henry the eight
King of England, whose sacred Royal crown (be it spoken here with leave)
thou, like a sluttish slave, vauntest, thou would anoint with dirt and donge
of thy dronken body: The decree of the most renoumed Sigismund king of Pole:
and by these evidences I will by and by convince thee, and prove that thou art
worthy to be cast, of Rebellion, Sedition, Sacrilege, Impiety, Heresy: Finally
of all manner of wicked vices and heinous offenses that can reign in a man.
What can thou lay against these witnesses, who were, at that time, the
noblest, the best, the worthiest of credit, of all that lived in our days?

These worthy Princes Proclamations and Public Edictes set out against
thy Wickedness and Naughtye behauioure, are every where in every man's hand
published in print to the vewe and sight of the whole world.

Come up again hither from hell, if thou can Ihon Calvin, and tell truth
seeing al ye world knows, yt thou did keep ye space of five years
together a Nun, who was a Renegate out of ye Nu^nerie called Veilmur: This is
written in a french book entitled Passauant Parisien printed at Paris in S.
James streat at the sign of the Elepha^t. A. 1559.
yt thou did pay two crowns a month for her board in the town out of yt
poor men's box of Geneua, upon condition she should come every day to make
thy bed and learn her lesson out of thy Gospel, and practice how to bear
ye burden of wedlock patiently: and at last, when she was great with child by
thee, and had now carried about ye burden of her bealie three or four months,
that thou did bestow upon an Apostate Chanon dwelling at Losanna thereby,
both the cow and the calf in marriage, a Gods name, as thou calleste it, but
honest me^ were ever wont to call it sacrilegiouse whoordome.

Deny, See the preface of Beza his confession.
if thou dare, Theodore Beza, y^, according to y^ Gospel of thy Apostle and
master Simo^ Magus, thou did sell twice to two diverse me^ for ready money
thy spiritual liuinges, whereof thou haddeste in France many more then thou
were worthy of, for the which thy lewd and duble dealing the buyers that bought
thy benefices, having now by the law lost them, procured thee to be denou^ced
excommunicate, and to be proclaimed for a notoriouse Excommunicate person by
the Erier, about all the market places of Paris: Deny, if thou canste for
shame, that now at this present in Losanna thou keep, under the false name
of pretensed marriage, in filthy adultery, the wife of a poor Tailor, who,
except he be lately dead, dwells yet in the Harpestreate at Paris: Mistress
beauty.
That when she (her name, as thou calleste her, is Mistres Candida) fled to
Hewlo the common Stews at Paris from her housbande (because, having taken her
in adultery he had given her a gaishe with a knyfe in the hip, and because she
had been put in prison, for that she fetchte a friscoll, when she was merrily
dawn^ing in a wine tavern with her customers, and said, hoighe one leap more
for all Christen souls) thou cammest thither to visy^ and comfort her, and to
currie favor, and when thou haddeste made a filthy book of vile and bawdie
verses and rimes in her praise, at length thou tokeste her away the rehence,
and having made a great purse of money, by Simonie, Sacrilege and spoilinge of
Churches, thou cariedst her away with thee to Geneua, where Calvin sollennized
a marriage between you. As for thy other most wicked doeinges afterward in
France I say nothing at this time.

What shall I here rekon up and open to your learned ears ye vile behavior,
the leacherous living, the abominable adulteries, the filthy whoordomes, the
dubblenes, the robberies, the cruelty, the Sacriledges, of other of the sam^
stamp, who under color of Religion and hypocritical name and Title of
Ministers and Gospellers deceive and beguyle the whole world? To make few
words, the abiects and outcastes, the most wicked and base of all sorts of
men are gone to this gospellysh Congregation like chaf winowed out of Gods
floor, or like as vile filth and ordure does run and flow in to a stinking
gutter or sink. But especially if we consider ye Patriarchs of this Synagog,
the chief Authors, the makers and Masters of these Sects: we shall plainly
see, as in part I have declared of the three forenamed Captains, yt there was
never in the Church of Christ such wedes sprung up, so lewd, so lecherous, so
proud, so arrogant, so spiteful, so malitiouse, so wicked. For they are so
clad with all manner of naughtines, that there is nor hand, nor foot voied of
vice, nor any one part of all their bodies unspotted, nor any wicked act
absent from their whole sinful carcasses.

O ye virtuous Refourmors, could ye bear with all these abominations in your
own manners, and could abide nothing amiss among Catholic me^? The flame of
your fyrie Charity was so hot, that ye did your best to burn up quite
other men's faults, yea, the men themselves, their Cities, houses, dwellinges
and all. But ye would not so much as sweale your own Coats with the least
sparkle of that consuminge fire.

If all they that had offended most, had first suffered punisheme^t
proportionable to their deserts, you had gone to the potere this: it had been
your lot, who every one of you have most wickedly transgressed God and man's
law, to have gone first to the gallows. Would God that order of justice had
been observed: there had been by this time not one of that your wicked pack
and Conspiracy left alive to punish the Catholics so cruelly with war,
fire, and sword, lived they well or ill.

But you can spare your selves well enough, and are in ye mean time so
straight laced, that ye cannot find in your cankered consciences to pardon any
offense in other men. Ye were so inflamed with the zeal of the Gospel and of
Gods house, that ye cried out against the Catholics and proclaimed them
Superstitiouse, Adulterers, Tirannes, Idolatres etc. If all be true, as you
say, indeed it is a weighty matter worthy to be sharply looked upon that ye
lay in against them. But if all these be but lies, fables, and false surmises
of your own malitiouse stomakes, as they be in deed, then you uncharitable
backbiters, you most impudent sclau^derers, have deserved to abide your selves
the just punishment due to those faults, Poena Talionis
ye falsely fathered upon other. But ye were wily foxes, ye escaped well enough.
Subscriptio in crimen.
For ye did not, I wara^t you, as y^ law ordains, put your names to the
inditeme^tes and accusations subscribed with your own hands to bind your
selves to be ready to receive the punishment of the faults ye laid against
other, if ye failed in your proofs. Yea, and ye behaved yourselues yet more
impudently the^ this, and more contrary to all order, process, and form of
lawful proceeding: for in this your monstrous judgment of Reformation, you were
the accusers your selves, and you, the self same men, the witnesses, the
judges, the hangmen, and most cruel boutchers to execute your own unlawful
and wicked sentence. It may be, this touched you near ye quick and caused you
to winche and strike, that because of your profession and vow of perpetual
chastity, wherein ye promised to live chaste during your lives, ye were not
suffered freely to mary, to beguile poor simple women, to bathe your filthy
bodies in the stinking puddle of carnal pleasures. What then? It had been your
part to stand to your own promise, Fides hosti seruanda.
though ye had made it to your mortal enemy: how much more had it becomme
you, to have kept the vow of Chastity ye made to God almighty? But twysshe:
you were werie of your vow, it repented you that ever you made it, ye did
set naught by it, ye were of that mind peradventure, that ye had rather be
damned for ever, then to tread for a short space the straight narowe way that
leads to heaven.

Well, if it were so that needs ye would to it, and cast your Vow on the
hedge: yea needed not straight ways to fight for the matter. For ye had the
common Stews and brothell houses open at all times, and every where at your
pleasure. Light women married, and unmarried, yea and Nuns that had professed
Virginity, as you had done, were ready by your lewd persuasions (more was the
pity) to serve your filthye lusts, to keep you company, to go to the
devil arm in arm with you.

But what if perhaps some of you dwelled among good men in such well ordered
Towns, where good Rule was so narowly looked to, that by no means they could
be suffered to have a Mistress Candida for a vessel of easement, It is
Couerdales Phrase.
as ye call it: was that a sufficient wrong and just quarrel for you to take
Pepper in the nose, and sword in the hand, and by and by bid Battle? Were
ye bound to stand so stoutly to Lady Lechery, Dame Venus, to maintain the
liberties of her Kingdom and Gospel so straightly, that if every one of you in
every place were not permitted freely and without check to cherishe his
carcass with a Whore, ye should for revenge of her quarrel trouble the Gospel
of Christ, divide with Scismes the Church of God, make such a seedition,
such a stir, such an uproar in all Christendom, as never any Barbarous,
Rude, Savage or Wild people made the like?

Some of your side suffered for ye Words sake, for so ye call y^ cursed gospel of
yours Yea and well worthy to, I assure you. For they never ceased to bark at
Prelates and Princes, to work al means to wring the sword out of their hands,
to trouble and disorder ye state of commonweals: Finally they never had their
full of their sundry wicked practices against God, of their raishe madness and
furiouse blasphemies against the blessed Sacrament of the Altar.

Yea, but you say it was the very true word of God they preached, they were
the men of God, the Martyrs of Jesus Christ, the Apostels of Christendom.
These be high Titles. Will they be any higher? I will speak for them, to set
the^ up one step more. They were those that labored to clyme up to the North,
to place their seats above ye clouds of the heavens, to be like Lucifer*
Checkmates with God himself. And what of all this? Was it meet that because
they could not freely and frankely preach the word, therefore by and by they
should lay hand on the sword?

The Apostles of Jesus Christ were wo^t to suffer, not to give blows: to take
not to do injury. S. Paul was content rather to leese his head, and patiently
to suffer the sword, then to strike or cause any to revenge his quarrel. S.
Peter was wrongfully crucified, and yet procured no man to be troubled for it.
Why do not the new Apostles follow the old Apostles example?

O Master Ministers, it is a very hard Word yt ye bring us. for ye speak
go^nestones, your Gospel is to hot, ye preach fire and powder, your Religion
is to cruel, it breeds blood and murder. Jesus Christ was contented to ride
on an Ass, the Apostles thought it no skorne to go barefoote: and we embrace
gladlye, with reverence their patience, humility, virtue, and mild manner in
planting the Gospel. But you ride to preach on barbd horses, and put on the
corselet not of faith, but of iron and steel, to set forward your strainge
Religion. All the world may see, that, as the manner and order of your
procedinges is contrary to Christ, so all the stuff ye utter, is likewise
contrary to his heavenly Doctrine. What? Could ye not suffer Martyrdom gladly
for the gospel? No forsooth: ye chose rather to slay the^ to be slain, and no
marvel. For ye looked for none other commodity by your Gospel, but a losenesse
and liberty to live at your pleasure. And therefore such Gospellers for such a
Gospel were very loath to leese their lives. The thief will never gladly suffer
death and spend his life in defense of theft: for he purposes to have none
other fruit and profit by theft, but his sweet life in this world maintained
at pleasure. He that loses his life, says Christ, preserves it into life
everlasting: Io. 12.
but you were loath to lose yours, for that ye had no hope to have any
everlasting life for it. Ye held it better to be Martyrmakers, the^ Martyrs: to
do, then to suffer injury: How be it, to say the truth, ye suffered no injury
when ye suffered death for heresy, for ye deserved no less. But, when ye
murdered other, ye did great injury, whether they deserved to die or no: For
that ye had no authority so to do.

Hold still your hands a little while, lay down your Swords and priuye
Daggers, let your fury cool, and harken to reason, and ye shall plainly
perceive, that there is great odds between the order and due Ministration of
Justice, that the Emperor and Christen Princes used to execute against your
wicked transgressions: and your impudent boldness, Traitorous Rebellion, and
Bloody Cruelty against Christendom. By the authority of God allmighty they
bear the sword, Romans 13.
and have power to punish the wicked: but, as for you, who made you, I pray
you, rulers and Judges in Israel? O unhappy days, O wicked manners of our
days, may we cry at this time with more just occasion, then in his age
Marcus Cicero did.

Bondslaues refuse to bear the yoke under their Masters: Subjects disdain
to obey the Commandments and Rule of their Magistrates, Thieves would be
Lords and reign over all. Who be robbers, if you be Refourmers? Yea, who then
shall be called Spoilers, Ennemies, Traitors, Tyrannes, and Cruel Bouchers, if
you be Giltlesse and Innocents?

To conclude in few words, what reasonable cause do ye allege for your
selves, why ye made wars so wicked and so abominable, why ye prepared fire
and faggot to burn the whole world? was it because ye were sometimes burned for
heresy? Truly ye suffered not so much nor so often as ye deserved: but if
perhaps, according to your deserts, y^ had gone oftener to the stake, yet ye
should have suffered it patiently for the Gospels sake, if ye were Gospellers
(for so were the Apostles wont to do) at least wise ye should not have
resisted with force of arms, because ye were subjects, and were punished by
an order of law at the commandment of the Magistrates and superior powers.
Could not the freedom of your Gospel florishe and purchase you the carnal
freedom and loose liberty of the flesh by no means without war? In good
soothe ye neded not to repine for lack of liberty. For every where ye were
wont to set the usual and accustomed fastes of y^ Church at naught, and fill
the Panche freely, to carry a sister wife about with you, to toule Nuns out of
Cloisters, and with filthy and sacrilegious Lechery to abuse them: yea and most
commonly every Apostate Monk had his Nun at his tail. And so it agreed well,
if god would have had it so: for,

Holy Kate her holy mate,
And like his like must love: Sanctum sancta docet, his artibus i^urad astra.

By holy trade, a brood is made,
To clime the Clouds above.
It was the Friar Apostles pleasure, that his Lady Venus Court should be frank
and free. If thy wife, says he, will not do it, Lutheri Ep ad Praepos. Luneburg.
let thy maid supply her place: the will of God commands, and necessity
binds as well to have carnal copulation, and as to eat and drink. Was it your
drift to redress the vicious living and loose manners of these days? It had
been your part first to amend your own selves, who were the worst in all ye
pack, and then hardely to lay to other men's charge what ye could. Or was
this your purpose to compel men to receive your Gospel, and to pour it into
their mouths spite of their teethe? So did never Christ plant his Religion,
but so Mahumet stablished his cursed sect. Ye labored in vain, when ye
travailed to bring the world to your Religion by Villainy, railing and dubble
Cannons, as easily as the Apostles did win men to the Gospel of Christ, by
their good living, preaching and miracles. Luther began his gospel for malice
against the Pope, as he confesses.
How be it in deed, it was neither Religion, nor Gospel, nor Gods quarrel that
ye meant to further: even he him self, who not for Gods sake, but formalice
against the Pope began this whole Tragedy, is a current witness in this point,
Ep. ad Arge^tin. impress. Hagan. 1521.
and has constantly so deposed.

Was it to restore the Christen Faith, (being as ye thought well nighe worn
out) that ye made so great stir? Your labor was needless: for the Church of
God, the Seat and sure Pillar of Truth, has allwaies, 1. Tim. 3.
without force and battle, most Reverently and charely kept the Faith that
was from the beginning committed to her Custody. This Christ obtained of his
Father: Io. 17.
this shall the Heavenly Comforter the holy Ghost perfourm for ever. Io. 14
How the^ good sirs? Was this well done so to turmoile and toss the quiet state
and public affairs of commonweals, to make a mixture and confusion of whot
and cold, high and low, to trouble and turn up and down all things
appertaining to God and man, so lightly, so rashly, so wickedly without any
just occasion, without any sufficient cause, without any good reason?

Men that professed Christianity, have sought cruelly and outragiously a long
time against Christen men, have sought their lives and goods, have bereaved
the^ of house and home; of Church and Chapel: welthy and rich Cities are
impouerished, sacked and spoiled, Church Vestries are voided, rifled and
robbed: And now if a man call them to accomptes, and ask the cause of al these
their tragical and cruel doings, he shall have a short answer with mum budget,
except they will peradventure allege this, yt the lofty Ambition, ye gredy
Avarice, the desperate boldness of certain w^to^ and lose friars have ministered
just occasion of so horrible, wicked, and heinous battle.

Now I come (most gentle Audience) to ye second part of this matter, 2
to ye point wherein I promised to make discourse of their co^spiracies and
treasons: to the end ye may plainly perceive, yt our Adversaries were not only
without cause offended and rashli moved to be^d their minds to fight, but that
also they took weapon in hand, and bad battle traitorously: and that as they
attempted war without justice and right, so they proclaimed and pursued the
same without Authority and Commission, to omit nothing that should help to fill
up the measure of their so great and execrable wickedness.

It is great pitye, 2.
in very deed it is much to be pitied, that Christen Princes do make war
one against another so often: yea and that, God wot, for light occasion, or well
nighe for none occasion at all. Desire of reign and sovereignty, and light
displeasure taken upon a word spoken, Glory, Hastiness, Emulation of Rulers,
have bread us many times long and cruel battle, so that a man might well now
sing as the Poet Horace did.

When Kings and Rulers keep ill rule,
The people paies for all: Quicquid dilirant Reges plectuntur Achiui.

Their ouersightes, the Commons sighs,
And feels their wanton fall.
The time shall come, Oh, I tremble when I speak it, the time shall come in
deed, when it shall repent them to late, that by their lightness and raish
panges, so much and so many men's blood has been shed. Yet to say the truth
in such wars, most commonly, the soldiers are excused for that their part
is rather to obey, fulfill and accomplisshe their lawful Princes and Capitains
commandment, then deliberate, dispute and reason of the equity of the cause
wherefore they fight. But in this domestical insurrection, in this mostruous
Tumulte, and Sedition, that has been sturred up these many years under
pretense of refourmation in matters of Religion, wherein nor Captain, nor
Magistrate, nor Prince, nor Emperor bids any man strike: Where without any
Lieutenant general, knight Martial, or deputy Captain all the whole host is
but an assemble of private men, of common soldiers, or rather of rouers,
cutthrotes and most cruel murderers, who is void of heinous offense? what
one is free from maliciouse treason? Who of all this company is able to say,
that he is in his conscience giltlesse, innocent and unspotted?

Private men that had no Authority ^t all, bad battaill them selves of their
own headdes, and styckte not, without their King and Sovereign his
commandment, to bring and receive into the Realm, forayners, straingers,
hired souldioures and enemies.

I will ask them now no more, what just Quarrel, what reasonable Cause they
had, to muster and to proclayme war. Be it, that the Cause was most just
and sufficient, because their pleasure was so: But this I ask them, what
lawefull Power, what law, what Statute, what Right, what Custom or common
Example of Antiquity, what Authority and Commission they had so to do?

Whereas they are but mere Private men and Subjects, called to no Office nor
Authority at all, nor placed in any room or Dignity in the Common weal:
yet they dare be so bold, as to Muster, to Camp, to pytche a Fylde, they take
upon them to mynister Justice, and right (right? Rather may I call it most
unmerciful wrong) they will needs be Rulers, yea and rule al Rulers and the
whole roste them selves alone.

If a man might be so bold as to ask you now, right Honorable Gospellinge
Capytaines (as the Renoumed Prince and most Reverend Father my Lord
Cardinal of Lorraine a few years ago asked the Ministers of that Deformed
Church in the Honorable Assemble at Poissie) wherehence came you? Who sent
you? By what Authority do ye all these things? either ye should be domme
without any thing to say (as they were then A long while) Or lie impudentlye,
Beza the after long deliberation answered, that his vocation was extraord^narie
as your accustomed manner is: Or be driven plainlye to confess and grant,
that ye are but private Subjects, of no Jurisdiction, of no Place or Degree,
called to no Office or power to meddle with the Publyke Affairs of
Christendom: Finally that (for all these your strainge, maruelouse, and
monsterouse Mysteries which ye profess and practice most impudently and
desperately, taking upon you to redress the state of all Christendom, and
to Reform matters of Religion) ye have no Authority at all, neither ordinary
power in earth, nor extraordinary Commission from heaven. For ye shall never be
able to prove either this by Miracles, or that by letters Patentes.

As for Martine Luther (or rather Luder, Luder in the German tongue is as much
to say as a slave or a knave.
but that for shame he changed that filthy name of his) borne at Islibium in
Saxony, Vide Bu^deriu^ in detect. Nugar. Luthe.
and begotten of a Sprite Incubus (as the common report goes) who is your
chief Apostell and Patriarche: We know him very well, what he was, whence he
came, and what authority he had. When he was a young man he studied the civil
law, and afterward when for his recreation he walked in the field nigh the
University of Erforde, Fonta li. 1. Histor. co^. Sleid
he was stryke^ down to yt ground with a sudden thunderclap and lighting, and
his companion, that walked then with him, was with y^ blow quite slain before
his face, whereat he was so astonished and put in such fear, that he determined
with him self to forsake the world, to enter into Religion: and so out of hand
made him self an Augustine Friere. At the last he was made Doctor in
Divinity with shame enough: for he came to that degree with the money that was
bequethed to an other man, whom, with the help of his Prior, he beguiled.
Luther. in ser* de destruct. Hierus. Luth. ad ver falso nominat stat. Eccl and
li co^tr Reg. An.
What other estate or degree he had in the common weal, or Apostleship in the
Church of God, beside this, we could never yet learn by any means. But in
deed he braggeth very often, that he is well assured, that his doctrine and
conclusions are from heaven, and that he was sent from heaven to the Germans to
be their first Apostle that should preach them the Gospel: for before his
days he said that they never had any true Religion or Christen doctrine. In
few words he makes more account of him self, then of S. Luthlide se^^l.
potest.
Augustine and all other holy and ancient Fathers of Christ's Church.

This bragginge Thraso tells many strainge matters of him self more
maruelouse then true. This is more like to be true as he reports of him
self, that he had many times familiar conference and talk with the Devil.
Luth. in de Miss. angu.
Yea and his Acts and doings during his reign, written and faithfully
regestred by Cocleus and other of his neighbors men of great learning and
credit, do most manifestly declare and prove, that from ye devil also his
familiar friend and Prince of this world he received authority and commission
to punissh all good and honest men, and to gainesay and withstand the holy
Mass.

Ihon Calvin borne at Nouiodunum in Picardie, Anton. Democ. de Missae sac. c.
2. Ioa^. Vaquerius lib de Tentat.
a man banished from his countreie for his wicked behauioure, and whiles he
lived in his countreie, the veriest unthrift and naughtiest verlet of al his
companions, first hid him self at Basile, then began to show his head at
Straseburge and preach to the Renegates and Apostles there: At last came to
Geneua, and put out the Deputy of the City, expelled the Bisshope and all the
Clergy that were honest and Catholic, Vide Lindani Dialogu^ inscript.
Dubita^t. Fol 139.
with all the virtuous and substantial Citysens, and so wanne Authority and
began to reign there like a Conqueror by the law of treason and force of
arms.

What need I here again bring you in mind of that Epicure Beza the Burgonion,
a Licentiate in law, who takes so much Poetical license, that in his bawdie
and fylthie Epigrammes he passes far the wanton Pagan Poets Martial, and
Tibullus? What shall I speak of Bernardinus Ochinus y^ Italiane, who laboreth
to plant the beastly Doctrine of Polygamie, that is, that more then one wife
at once may join with a man in ye state of lawful matrimony, willing therefore
and perswadinge men to be Manywiuers, as the Turks are.

What shall I tell you of Peter Martyr the Renegate Moncke, or of Bernarde
Rotman an unlearned Ass that began to profess learning, and by color of
only Scripture, which he understood not, expelled the Catholics out of the
City of Munster? Or of Ihon of Leid yt tailor, yt furiouse captain of the mad
Anabaptists, who, within a year after, got y^ upper hand of Rotman, drove out
y^ Lutherans, brought in yt Anabaptists began to reign in y^ very same Cit,
having won and conquered y^ field by y^ same craft and prete^se of scripture
only, as Rotma^ did before, and so gave him a fall in his own turn and served
him with his own sance? or of Osiander that Holy Man commonly called the
second Enoch, a Gods name, or of Carolostadius that rude married Archedeacon
of Wittemberge, who became afterward for mere folly a mad and unskillful
plowghman, to the wonder and laughinge game of all that country. Or of
Illyricus, Musculus, Farellus, Virettus? Or of Bucer, Morot and Malot, the
ringleaders and teachers of all mischefe? good God, what a rabble have we here,
what a noble rank of virtuous, grave and renoumed Fathers is here? such as I
assure you, no honest and discreet householder would ever suffer by his good
will to tarry within his doors.

Such Champions are they that profess them selves to be the Adversaries and
enemies of the Catholic Church: these be ye captains that stand against the
Bisshopes of Christ's Church, y^ kings of Christendom and Rulers of commonweals. Such are the Oratoures and Preachers that use to declaime, to rail, to
thunder against the blood and Shrines of Martyrs, against the Catholyke and
universal Religion of the Christians, against the mystical and holy Sacraments
of the Church: Yea and stick not, like mad dogs, to barcke and baye
against y^ very blessed and pretiouse body of our Lord Jesus Christ. These, yea
such fellows as these be, are they who now these many years, usurp a Lordly
authority over us, whom we are compelled to take for our masters, who take
upon them to controlle the doings and manners of all the whole world: And yet
can we learn by no means wherehence came this so Imperial a sovereignty, or
who gave them so great and princely Authority: except we say they had it of
Satan, and y^ they be the very undoubted prophets and Forerunners of Antichrist.

The Bysshoppes and Prelates of Christ's Church do excommunicate the^ out
their flock, and separate them from the mystical Society, felloship and
Communion of all Christian men. The Christen Princes and Rulers of the world
do bannissh them, do take them for outlawes, and both by proclamations and
force of arms travail with much care and diligence, to defend and save
themselves and their loving Subjects from them: God almighty the Omnipotent
Lord and Ruler of heaven and earth never signified to the world by any
miracle, Sign, or seely token, that we should take such as these are for his
Commissioners or Deputies: except a man will say, that this is a Miracle, y^
these fellows oftentimes (whiles in the presence of the People, they feign
that they are able, in the Virtue of the Gospel they preach, to restore the
dead to life) do make the live stark dead, ^s a certain Preacher did, one
Mathias in Polonia, and the like is credibly reported of Ihon Calvin at
Geneua.

How then* What shall we take them to be? In few words, they are thieves that
come in by the Window, they are Murderers, Traitors, Heretykes, Satan's
Ministers. For why, their doeinges declare no less. They do the Commons
wrong, they conspire against Princes, they divide the Church with Sects,
they provoke God him self with horrible Blasphemy. By flattery, and bearinge
themselves a lofte like grave bearded goats they currie favor with the simple
people, and study to be in credit with y^ Commons and basest sort, by clawing
them where they itche, and telling the^ fair tales of liberty, loosenes and
light burdens, such as they know the people are glad to hear. Otherwise in
very deed they have nothing to do with such affairs as they meddle wtal. They
can never bear out themselves by any law of God or man, for taking upon the^
the office and profession of Refourminge Religion, nor excuse them selves by
any means from having don to much amiss, and most greuouse wrong, in that
they took weapon in hand and made war.

For they, being but private me^, yea and y^ y^ most vile, base, and worste of
al men, in raging choler and furiouse madness, did stand up, gainsay and resist
the laws and magistrates, did stir the^ selves and others against their
Christian Emperors, kings, and rulers, did seperat themselves from the compani
of al honest and faithful subjects, did bid battle to their own native
country, did rejoice and triumph in their wicked and rouing theeuerie.

O God immortal, how many, how great and hainouse trespaces are here
couched together in this one wicked and cursed attempt? The native borne
fights against his own countreie, one fellow strikes at an other, the son
smites his Father, the subject assaulteth his Governor, the Soldier
turns the edge of his sword against his own Captain, one Christian pursues
an other Christian with deadly blows, with gunnepouder and fire: finallye
mortal man provoke euerliuinge God with mischife, wickedness and blasphemies.

O most merciful and highest Lord God of heaven, to what unhappy days have
thou brought and reserved us, that we should live and see this miserable time
and lamentable age? What case, what order, what state, what face of a Christian
common weal is this? Laws, Magistrates, right ca^ bear the sway no where, y^
Royal Scepter and Mace of the Empire lies done on the ground, the sacred
crowns of Christen kings are trodden under traitors feet: It is lawful and
right for every desperate shakebuckler to do what he list, and his list is
to do, that his bealy biddes him, that pride pricks him, that madness co^mandes
him.

He is taken to be the ioliest fellow and to have best profited in the liberty
of the Gospel, who fears nothing, who sets by no man, who thinks him
self bound to obey no law at all. What can be more tediouse and troblouse,
more unruly and outragiouse, more horrible, execrable, terrible, in that
Infernal deep Pyt of Satan, among the ugly diuelles of hell themselves then
this, that every body coueteth rule and to be master over other, and none can
abide obedience, and to be a quiet subject? That al things are done in a
confuse tumulte, nothing advisedly and in order? That the highest and lowest
without distinction are mingled and ruffled together? that cold and heat,
drowthe and moisture strive and contend with continual discord, and
contrariety one with an other?

Pardon me, I beseech you (most gentel Audience) pardon me, if perhaps this
quick and egree talk seem in your learned cares over bitter and loathsome. If
I speak home and more freely, the ^an well agree with your mild and gentle
natures, it may please your goodness to have me excused, Lu. glos. ad Edic.
Imperi. and in admoni. ad Germ. suos teu tonice script.
and lay the blame, as reason is, on them whose wicked demeanure compelled me
thus to speak: whose deep and festered wounds can not be healed with
lenitiues and temperate medicines: whose grievous sores and abominations ca^
not be declared with mild and gentle language.

For what can be or spoken to bitterly, or don to severely against the^, Luth.
ad uers. exe crab. Antichristi Bullam. Lib. co^t. praetens. stat. Ecc.
who with their wicked and cursed mouths do rail, rage, and call the most
renoumed and noble Christian Kings and Princes, slaves, ^ouchers, knaves, and
the Reverend Bi^shopes (Christ's most holy Vicars) Antichrists, bawdes, Iolde?
Who stick not to publishe in their writings, that the great Turk is ten times
beter, wiser, and honester man, Lu. cont. duo ma^dat. Ca^^.
the^ our Christian Rulers and Princes? Who (...) men earnestly in hand, y^ no
man, except he will be Sata^s own child, Lu. glos. ad Edic. Imper.
ought to obey y^ worthy and po^it^^ decree of y^ most noble Emperor Charles
the fifte y^ he proclaimed at Worms by y^ advise and consent of y^ Princes and
estates of Germany for ye app^asing of sedition, and y^ que^ching of
dangerouse contention in matters of Religion.

These be but trifles and light matters in comparison of y^ rest of this their
wicked and traiterouse co^spiracie. In the very honorable presence and hearing
of our Late sovereign Charles y^ fifte, and y^ estates of the Empire at
Worms, the worthy third Elias, out of those words of our Savior Christ in
the Gospel ( I came not to send peace, but the sword) concluded, Vide di^
secun. Dubita ^ij. p. 27^
that it o^ght to be a thing to be wi^shed for as most acceptable to Christen
men, and specially to him, that strife and conte^tion should rise and grow
about the Word of God. Yea, not long after, he did set out to the sight and
view of the whole world seditious and Heretical Books, wherein he did the best
he coul^e to abolishe all due obedience, to abrogate all Policy and Civil
government, to persuade the People to rebel and forsake their Spiritual and
Temporal Rulers and Masters, to provoke them to steelinge and robbinge, to
bludshed and murder, Refert Geor. Wicelius in ret. Lutheranismi.
to sacking and burning of houses, of Cities, of Churches.

He said, that men should waisshe their hands in y^ blood of y^ Romish
Clergy. He affirmed in his writings, that it was y^ very true nature and
co^plexio^ of y^ gospel to move and stir up war and sedition: Epist. ad Frat.
inf. Ger.
That there ought to be no Magistrate, no superior at all among Christian men:
That men ought to pray God earnestly, that it would please him to put in li.
de pot seculari.
the headdes of the vplandish men of Germany, not to obeie their Princes,
another to go to war with them against the Turk: lib. cont. duo edi.
Caesaris.
That men should contribute nothing toward the charges of the war against
the Turk: That it was not lawful for Christen men to war against the Turk,
li. de bell lo cont. Turcam.
but that they should suffer and bear patiently and with a good will all
violence, wrong, and injury that were done to them. Yea that it was so far
against the law of God to fight against the Turk, Luth. assert. articul. 24.
that if any man should be so hardy as to do it, it might be well said,
that he fought against God him self, and seemed to repine and resist
against his heavy hand and just punnishement: That neither man nor Angel of
heaven had any Authority at all to Lib. de capt. B^bil.
make any law or one syllable, whereto Christen men should be bound to obey,
more or longer then it pleased them. For we are, s^^ed he, franck and free from
all things. And in case any thing were decreed and laid on the neck of a
Christen man, whereto he should be of necessity constrained to obey against
his will and consent, that that proceeded of tyranny, and should be taken for
violence and cr^eltie: finally that there was no hope of redress and
refourmation, Then Luther being ch^if preacher of that Gospel would have been
king alone him self.
except the laws and decrees of all men were utterly abolisshed, and the free
Gospel of liberty called home again, according to the which all things
should be judged, ruled and governed.

With these strainge opinions and singular Paradoxes the fundation of the fifth
Gospel was laid, and hence consequently the springes and grasses of this
wicked conspiracy and treason, we talk of, began to budde.

When Thomas Muntzer, this Evangelists scholar, Touching this insurrection of
Muntzer read
had learned thies high Mysteries of his master, he began to preach apace, he
made many seditiouse sermons to the people, exhorted them to divide them
selves from y^ Catholic Church, Cocleus de act. Luth. Anno. 1525.
to forsake their Magistrates and Rulers, and to shrink away from them, sent
his letters about the countreie, gathered a great host of vplandysh Paisantes,
of most wicked persons, of desperate slaves, and out of hand bids
battaille. Who bids it? (good God) and against whom? will ye see who it
is? forsooth it is Thomas Muntzer the Apostle of Saxonies scholar, a man that
should have been bound in chains, according to ye counsel of the learned
physician Hypocrates, for his madness, a monstruouse, contagiouse and pestilent
beast, framed and made of all manner of stinkinge vices and fylthie ordure,
that bids war against his own countreie Germany (a noble Country
sometime and most florisshing) against Princes and Rulers, against y^ very
Church of God himself.

Oh wicked villain, oh pestilent monster* oh cursed Rakehell. Yea and the
impudent Caytif was not ashamed to call it also, the battaille of the lord. For
so h^ cried to his soldiers: fight good brethern, fight manfully the lords
battaille, sig^ Gods field. For he said, he had commission by Gods own mouth,
to bid battaille against all Princes and Kings. The very same said Luther
also, Mela^th. comme^t. ad Coll.
affirming y^ God him self did rife and stand against the estates of Germany
and their tyranny: That it was the living God of heaven his own proper
battaille, and not the poor Paisantes of ye countreie: and withal the lieng
Prophet assured most constantly before hand by his false sprite of Prophecy,
that the Rebels of the countreie should suerlie have the upper hand, and that
the Princes and Nobles should be undone, have y^ overthrow and utter
destruction.

Well now, Muntzer then goes forward very lustilie and desperately with
his Vplandyshe Souldioures, of whom he had a meruelouse great number
assembled about him, and laboreth tothe and nail what he could, to wring the
sword out of the magistrates hands, to deprive them of al authority, power
and rule, to degrade and depose them from all honor, dignity and Princely
estate.

Many a notable Castle and Palais, many a goodly Abbey and Church was quite
rased and overthrown by his wicked means and doing: yea in only Franconia,
as sum men write, n^ less then three hundred. Eras. Alberus and Conrad.
Wimp. lib. contra Suinglium.


Upon this at Franckford two noble Captains, a tailor and a shomaker, began
to strike up alarm to a fresh rebellion, to blow the trompet, to call their
soldiers to the field. They shut the town gates, appointed new companies
and Aldermen of the wards, made election of new Senators and counselors,
somoned a parliament, and ordained new laws, expelled thofficers and magistrates
out of the town, some they butcherly murdered, sent their statute books to
other Cities, to stir up other to sedition, and to take weapon by their
example.

Hereupon at Mogunce, at Rincauia, at Colen: Herevppon in all quarters of
Germany such a tumult, such an insurrection, such an uproar is sturred up,
such a terrible and traiterouse rebellion is by and by risen, as never the
traitor Catiline attempted the like in Rome. The whole world is set a fire
with the heat of this Gospel. many puissant, renoumed and notable persons
of the nobility are cruelly murdered, among whom the honorable Earl of
Helfensteine was one. Erasm^^ Alber: reporte^^ it.
who, as it is reported, was forced to run upon their pikes. All things, high
and low, are turned vpsidedown, deadly war rages on every side, horrible
fear reigns every where. For why? the lords and Rulers were now more
afraied of their own subjects and servants, then of their foraine enemies and
strangers. But yet at last by th'ayed mercy and benefit of God almighty, the
victory stood on the Nobles side: who overcame the Paisantes, took Muntzer
(who repented greuouflie his wicked and traiterouse doings and at last lost
his head) and flew in y^ space of three months a hundred and thyrtie thousand
of the Rebels.

What did our worthy Col Prophet then, who before by his false Prophecy gave
y^ overthrow and utter destruction to the Nobles, and gave the conqueste and
victory to his soldiers of the country? It is likely, that here the second
Ieremi^, (for he can quickly bear the person of which Prophet he list)
sat solitary, weeping and lamenting the calamity and miserable case of his
countreie. Verily and so he did. For then he cast away for very anguyshe of
mind his friars cote, and betakes himself to his nun Katherine Boore, Luthers
marriage, Anno. 1525.
one of those ix. which his bawd Leonard Knoppen stale out of y^ Nunnerie of
Nimyke on good friday, when Christen men use to celebrate the memory of
Christ's blessed and bitter passion.

This woman, after she had been well broken and framed two years with wa^ton
toys and lecherouse recreations among the scholars of wittenberge, the poor
seely sorry man takes in his arms, and for very heaviness and grief
embraces her patie^tlie, and kisseth her devoutly and full often with al his
heart. Yea he took it no scorn to dance and drink Carou^ and refuse not,
though he was a Friar to marie a Nun, which was a strainge matter and never
hard of before, and all for very penance and sorrow to see so great murder and
so much bloodshed: where of himself was the only cause and Author.

It is without fail a meritoryouse deed, as the Cannons say, to take a whore
out of the stews and marie her to make her an honest woman: and he took an
honest woman out of a Nunrie to marie her and make her a whore. So in doing
his penance he missed but a little, being ouerseen in taking quid pro quo one
thing for an other. And withal, this Apostolic point was to be noted in this
Holy Prophet, that out of hand, as the wind and flattering blast of fortune
turned, so he turned his sail, chainged his style, sung an other song, and
wrote bitterly against the poor vplandish men when he saw them ouercomme,
Luth. contra cohort. Rusti^.
yealded them to Satan, and committed them as gyltie and worthy to die to the
edges of the Magistrates swords. Yea he reviled them and railed at them,
ca^ling them di^elles of hell, and said that out of dout the Nobles might
easelie win heaven by shedding the blood of such traiterouse rebels.

See, I pray you, the Euangelical sprite of this Apostle, how dubble it is, how
expert and ready in false fayning and dissimulation. All this he wrote to
make the world believe, that he was none of that pack and wicked conspiracy of
rebels: whereas in deed he was y^ Author and Grand captain that did set them
on, and clapte his hands and egged them forward, Test Stolsio in somnio Luth.
and in defensione.
as long as they had any hope to have the upper hand.

We may thank this traiterouse Catiline of our time, for all these blouddie
tragedies. By such practizes he came in fa^^or with Solimam the great Turk,
in whose Books he was highelie esteemed: and well worthy so to be. For by
occasion of debate about y^ Lutheran Gospel, and so through Luthers means, he
conceived Good hope to ouerrunne and conquer all Germany, The Turks army was
then two hundred and fyftie thousand as it is reported by Gaspar Hed^ Hist.
Synop. ad Sabell.
when he came to that Keye of Christendom y^ noble City Vienna Austriae, with
such a huge great host, y^ he made all Europe quake. Yea Soliman wrote in
plain words that he wished Luther long life, that he hoped the day should
come, that Luther should find him his good master. And in very deed at that
time the terrible and mortal enemy of Christendom gave a great puyshe, and
missed but a little to subdue al Germany, whiles Christen men, being at debate
between them selves about the Gospel, Test^ Ioanne Manli^ in loc. co^mun. to.
3. Fo. 195.
drew curtisie very vncourteouslie, and were in doubt whether they should go
with the Emperor and fight against him or no, had not God of his infinite
mercy then especially helped his afflicted flock and spared his people.

I can not without great grief of heart remember, y^ by the wicked means and
procurement of this Gospeller, one of y^ best Christen Emperors y^ ever ruled
Christendom, was brought in trouble and great danger among his own subjects.
Is there any man alive, y^ ene^ saw, or can any of us all call to
remembrance, y^ we ever hard or read of such a Noble and worthy Prince for wit,
virtue* prowess, experience, courage, and for all other Princely graces,
honorable gifts, and renoumed acts, as was our late puissante and mighty
Emperor Charles the fifte? Ye^ this Princely man, this Lieutenant general,
Patron, and Defendor of all Christendom, this most renoumed Emperor was
assaulted and entrapped by this pestilent treason and Gospelissh conspiracy.
And whereas it should have becomme Germany especially to obey him at a beck:
certain Germans mustered, made a great host and all the power they could
against him, and pursued him in open war (which they call Smalcald Field)
though, Smalcald field.
(thanks be to God) they lost the field and prevailed not.

I could here tell you of the great Sedition and insurrection in Zuitzerla^d
which was sturred up by Zuinglius, The insurrection of the Helueri^n^ sturred
up up Zuinglius, Anno. 1531. Croni^ Germa.
the raging flame whereof was so fearce and great, that the blood of many
thousand men was scarce able to quench it.

I could declare unto you, how the traiterouse Gospellers of England gathered a
maine host against their most virtuous lady Queen Marie the rare
treasure, (...) Rebellion
y^ peerlesse Jewel y^ most perfect Pattern and Example of our dai^^. How
they shot arrows and ^a^tes against her Court gates, conspired her death,
devised to poison her, to kill her with a dagge at one time, ^nokes ^oke.
with a privy dagger at an other time, reviled her, called ^er bastard,
boutcher, printed seditiouse books against her, wherein they railed at her
like Hellhoundes, and named her traiterouse Marie, mischeuouse Marie.

It were to long to rehearse, how the noble Queen of Scotland that now
^aigneth, was driven a great while to live like a poor private woman in her own
realm, to obey her own subjects, and todoe no more then they gave her leave:
yea, and in the mean time was every day and every hour in great peril and
danger of her life among them.

I need not tell, that every man knows, how the Ge^tell men that were seduced
by thies new preachers rebelled against their Prince in Sucuia: nor how y^
Como^s made an uproar against their king in Denmarck.

But I can not omit, to speak of th^^ late treason and cruel conspiracy of
the Hugonoes in France, who could without weeping tears abide to tell, how
those naughty, false and wicked subjects were not ashamed, to stand in open
field against their own natural Sovereign in his own realm? To bid war and
fight against their lawful King, during his Nonage, to make a league and
confederacy with ye enemies of his croune, to sell his Cities and towns to
forayners and straingers for money? This holy bataille (for the Gospel a Gods
name) was fought against France by Frenchemen themselves: that is, first by
Calvin the Dictator and General of the field, then by Beza the Lieutenant, and
Othomannus and Spifamius the petie Captains. These were the chief doers in
deed, though as they took the color of Religion and pretense of refourmation
for cloak of their treason, so they used the names and service of certain of
y^ nobility of France whom they had seduced to bear out the brunte of the
Battaille, the smarte of the strokes, the envy, the infamy, and all the
outward face and po^^ of that busy matter. These were the ^naues that lay in y^
stock: as for other, they were but their trumping Cards.

The preface of their tragedy was very calm and peaceable. They would seem
to go very orderly to work. They got an edict to be made forsooth for the
furtherance of their Gospel, they got a law by force and extorsion against y^
king and Magistrates will and pleasure. Claud. D. Saint du Saccag. Fo. 58.
The high Court of Parliament of Paris made answer at the first, We can not,
we will not, we ought not. But afterward they were compelled to let the bill
pass, and the Edicte of January to be made, y^ these rakchels might preach
without y^ walls by permission, and as it were by virtue of a law: which law
to all honest good men never seemed worthy to have the name of a law, as the
which was obtained by force, was laid upon men's necks by the might and
violence of thieves and traitors that had taken and bound y^ Common weal hand
and foot, was written and penned against all reason and equity. But yet a
law they would needs have, were it never so unlawful, to be a cloak to cover
their outragiouse sedition.

And in deed at the first they made them selves very humble and meek. When
the King and the Honorables of France were assembled about weighty and great
affairs of ye Realm at Poissie, thither came the twelve Apostles of that
deformed Church, of which number eight or nine were Apostates, Munkes, and
friars that had cast of their habites, broken their vows, and forsaken their
profession: such smothe marchantes, y^ in outward talk and word, in the
presence of that honorable Audience, would speak of nothing, but of peace and
concord, of good faith and simple dealing: whereas in deed they meante, they
minded, they wrought nothing else, but wicked conspiracy and treason, but
sacking of ^^urches, burning of cities, murdring of Citisens, and the utter
ruin and destruction of that Realm. Yet that they were so earnest to have a
law for their side, and by public authority to be suffered to preach after
their cursed fashion, their intent and purpose therein was this: that under
pretense of a law they might undo the realm, and turn the King out of his
kingdom, as they did before under color of the word of God, expel the
Bisshops wellnighe out of the Church.

Would you have a law, that refuse to live under a law? Who is so blind y^ can
not plainly see, that your craft and practice is, to drive out (as it were)
one nail with an other: whiles under the shadow of Religion and law, ye labor
what ye can, to bannishe all law and Religion out of the world, to overthrow
the Church, to root all civil order and policy of te^porall affairs out of
all Christen Realms, countries and Cities?

But I pray you, Claud. D. Saints du saccag. Fo. 55.
by what law made you that wicked conspiracy, when ye agreed together to rob
and spoil in one night all y^ Churches in France at ones, if all things had
framed and fallen out according to your phansies and purpose every where, as
they did in Gascoine and diverse other places of France, where according to the
appointement the matter was put in practice in deed with mo^^ desperate
boldness, and wicked Sacrilege? By what Religion or law did a great company of
you flock together at Challon in Burgundy, The three estats of Burgundy do
report this in the second part of their Discourse upon the French Kings Edict.
and there in your Convocation house made a Synodalle decree, that every man
should endeavor to his power to drive three Vermines out of Christendom, the
Church of Rome, the Nobility, the public order of justice? If ye deny it,
your names are to be seen yet in the Records of the high Court of Parliament
at Paris, where many of you were accused for it by y^ Rulers and estates of
Burgundy.

When ye trauayled under a pretensed show of Gods word to dissanull and
abolishe the Supremacy of the chief Bishop of the Christians, who according
to y^ commission and charge given unto him by Christ's own mouth, used ever to
feed and rule both ye sheep and lambs of Gods flock: then were these words
ever in your months, Honor the king, obey the king as the highest: 1. Pet 3.
Tit. 3.
warn them to hearken and obey Princes and Rulers. But when ye conspired and
agreed together at Geneua like villains and traitors, to find privy means,
when time, place, and occasion might serve you, to rid out of the way and
murder the late virtuous and good king of France Frauncis the second, the
Queen his wife (who now, God be thanked, has gotten the upper hand over the
rebels and reigns in Scotland) the Queen Mother, her children, all the
nobles, and all the Catholic and good Officers of France: where was then your
scripture and that accustomed sentence of yours, Honor the King?

Out of all doubt you mean nothing else by these words, but to thruste your
sword through the Bisshoppes body in to the Kings heart. It was your Polycie
first to vanquish the Bishop by the word, that ye might the more easily
afterward kill the King with the sword.

But here perhaps some one will ask, how I know all this? To him I make
this answer, Defens. Reg. and Resig. Fol. 16.
that this is set out in printe in France under the Kings privilege: and
therefore seeing it is common in every man's hand, known to al men and set out
to the sight of the world in defense of the most Christian King and of the
Catholic Religion, it can not be unknown, also to me. Yea and may it please
him to understand, that I know this also that I read and saw with my own eyes
y^ last year at Orleans, I mean a libel printed in ye name of all y^
Hugonoes of France to their Souueraigne Lord and King, wherein was nothing
else from the beginning to the ending, but impudent boldness, desperate
threatninges, and shameful treason.

The subiettes were not afraid to write to their King, yt he could not reign
over the^, that they would suffer his yoke and obey his commandment no
longer, except he would be contented to rule his realm in such sort, and by
such laws and ordinances, as they should appointe him. That they played the
very fools, when by his commandment they laid down their weapons: that
they would surely take them in hand again, except he would look well to
him self, and put out of the Council of Paris certain noble and Honorable
men, who as they said, were thieves Rouers, Butchers: and place in their romes
certain of their brethren in Christ.

What could be spoken or invented more Proudelye, more Impudentely, more
seditiouslie, and maliciously, then that they uttered in this malaperte,
stubborn, and traiterouse Libell? The Printer of Orleans was kept and feasted
a few days with the Officers of that Town in their houses, in steed of a
Prison, for printinge this Oration: and y^ was all that was done to him then for
it.

With the like Sprite one Goodman an Englisshe man, Goodma^s book against y^
monstrous reign of women.
an earneste and hot Preacher of this Gospel, for a grudge and malice he
bore against his Sovereign Lady and Mystresse Marye the most high and
Honorable Queen of England, did set out a monstruouse Book in deed a
few years ago against the monstruouse Raygne of Women, as he said: yea,
the impudente, vile, and shameless villain Traitor called that most noble
and virtuous woman Proserpine (whom the Poets feign to be Queen of hell) and
for her sake gathering choler and stomach against all women, he railed at them
all, and reviled them, and like a common scolde would by his will set on a
cookinge stole, all the whole flock and generation of woman kind.

He said it was neither law, nor right, nor reason, that any woman should be a
Ruler and sit in the Princely Seat of any Common Weal: that it might well
seem a monstruouse rule, and contrary to nature, if men were compelled to
obey a woman: if women were suffered to bear the sway and govern the public
estate of any kingdom.

If he wrote thus especially for hatred and malice he bare against women, he
swarued much from the common and accustomed manner and fasshion of his
fellows, who do atribute so much to women, and are of such a fond and
filthy opinion, that they think it impossible for a man to live one day
without the company of a woman. Howbeit in deed they be naughty and lewd
women, fit and ready to the game only, that these fellows love so much: but as
for good women (among whom this virtuous Queen might be well Queen and
Princess in deed) they can not abide, but do utterly detest them, and hate
them as much as they hate all good men.

Out of doubt in one thing this Gospeller observed iumpe ye wonted practice and
beaten path of his companions: that under pretense of speaking against women
he endeavored to stir the people to rebellion, and the subjects to shrink
away and forsake their liege and lawful Sovereign. And this is even the very
daily and common custom of all the pack of such new Gospellers and
Refourmers, who cast their platte and are fully set, be it right or wrong, by
foraine battle abroad, or by rebellion at home, to trouble and disquiete the
peaceable state and good order of al commonweals, when it serves their turn
they are so skilful, yt they ca^ put in ure both these mysteries of their
Gospel at ones.

When the Emperor of worthy memory Charles the fifte was entangled and
troubled at Oeniponte with their tumulte and rebellinge, Soliman the Great
Turk was in the mean time requested in their behalf to make war, for the
furtherance and Defense of their fifte Gospel. Defens. Staphil. contr. Il. Et
Sleid. notat.
The great Turk, I say, (Oh horrible and most impious act) was sent for,
that whiles they assaulted the Emperor and kept him at a bay in Germany,
Budensis Bassa the Turks Deputy should set upon his brother Ferdinande in
Hungary. The letters of that Conspiracy were taken: so that their craft
herein is open, their falshode can not be denied, their wickedness and treason
can by no color be covered or cloked.

It were an infinite matter (gentell Audience) that might be here alleged, if I
would reckon up all these Gospellers traiterouse enterprises, and make full
discourse of every particular part of these haynouse Conspiracies. For in deed
they have left nothing undone that any cruel Robbers, false Traitors, or
wicked Heretics, could ever commit, attempt or devise, against all good
men, against Princes, against God almighty himself. They have injured and
traitorously offended the Royal majesty of all the Kings and Princes of
Christendom, they have disturbed, impaired, and broken all polityke order and
rule of all Commonweals. They have disquieted, vexed and disordered the high
Court of the Imperial Chamber, they have abolished ye ancient laws and
customs of the Emperors Supreme Consistorye, and have appointed new of their
own making, so that Justice and Right is bannisshed from thence: in such
sort that there remains scarce any Sign or token of Law and Equytie in
that renounted place, This writteth Brunus de Haero, lib. 2.
and Imperall benche. for it is their pleasure that all things be tried and
decided by fyere and and sword. Yea and what say ye by this, that many books
and Lybells of theyrs have been commonly found and seen abroad, wherein they
uttered their study and declared their attempt and travail to alter and
chainge al ye order of justice and judgments of the Empire, to take away and
abrogate all the Civil Laws, and to make a new Policy and Order of
government of their own fantastical devise.

And it was not enough in their opinion, nor sufficient for the absolute
perfection of their Gospel to betraie every particular Ruler, and to work
treson against every king in his own Realm: to fill up the measure of their
malice and wickedness they became Traitors against the Pope, the Emperor, the
Bisshops al at ones, and finally without any respect did violate and set at
naught the Magestie and estate of all Spiritual and Temporal Rulers assembled
together in the last General Council at Trent. They were not ashamed to
rail at that most high and honorable assemble of Christendom (the only name
whereof should have made them tremble, whose only beck all Christen men, ever
sythens Christen Religion begone, reverenced and followed) at Christ's
higheste Vycar in earth, at all the Reverend Fathers, the Bisshops and men of
God, at all the most high and excellent Christen Princes (among whom were the
renoumed Emperors, first Charles the fifth, then Ferdinande) and at a word to
call them all thieves.

At what time the Princes and temporal Rulers did set their heads together to
appear and set at concord the state of Christendom, and the Bishops did
purpose and study earnestly to expound and declare the Articles of Religion y^
were in controversy, when that most holy and high Parliament of al Christendom
was called and assembled together in one place: these new Gospellish Refourmers
were warned and warranted under Public assurance, to come thither, to tell
their minds, and then to depart safely without any harm or danger. The
general letters Patentes, the sufficient and lawful safeconduct of the Pope
and the general Council were Written, Prynted, and Proclaimed for their
behalf herein. No man appears, not one of them makes any word or mention of
Refourmation there: the matter touching the Refourmation of the Church is
disputed in the mean time, and debated among them in the camp, in the field,
in battle in France by force and might, by swords and daggers, by gonnes
and dubble Cannons.

And as for the General Council, which was of purpose called to redress and
refourme all that was amiss, where the lawful place, authority, and means of
Refourmation was to be found, they passed not for it: they were called, and
refused to come at it. They despised and contemned, they resisted and
assaulted, they mocked and reviled with most impudent scolding and railing
that General benche and Court of all the Church of Christ, that worthiest
and highest Consistory of Christendom. And the more to show their spite and
desperate malice, Montanus the German, Moline. Monta. Apolo. Eccl. Angl. and
caet.
and Molinaeus the French man, and many other accounted no small fools among
them, have set forth openly in Printe in the name of all these Gospellers
their cankred, malicious, wicked, and diuelishe defiance.

Whom shall we account for frantike, mad, and furious men, but such as are
so far beside them selves, so enraged, so Bedlemlike, that they know not
men, they know no Law, no Magistrate, no common Weal, no Church, no Religion,
no God?

Ye have hard (right learned audience) how these desperate and outrageous
castawaies and Rebels had no Authority at all to bid battle, but conspired
together like Thieves, Cutthrotes and Traitors: may it please you now to be
advertised of that, which is by order the third and last part of my talk, that
is, how little furtherance, fruit, or profit touching Refourmation, as they
call it, they got by fighting, how great and hurtful loss, injury, and
damage they did thereby to all the whole world, how fearcely, cruelly, and
Tyrannically they used themselves in handling their bloody weapons.

And in this point I assure you in good Faith I wot not what I may, nor what I
may not faye, nor where to begin, so many and so manifold losses and harms
Christendom has had every way, and on every side, by the occasion of this
wicked and cruel dissension which began first well nigh fifty years ago in
Saxony about certain Articles and questions concerning Religion: but since
y^ time it has been maruelously spread abroad and enlarged, and is now come to
this lamentable case, and tragical state as ye see.

It grieueth the very bottom of my heart to call to remembrance how
vnluckely, how miserably the world has gone with us, how pitifully the estate
of Christendom has fallen to wrack, sythens the first beginning of these
dismold and deadly discordes and battles set a broche and stirred at the
first under pretense and color of Religion.

I can scarce abstain from wepinge tears, when I remember and consider so
ruefull, heavy, and lamentable a case. And as for the blows, the wounds, the
smart, these Butchers bestowed on men's bodies: or the continuance of time may
ease them, or the diligence of cunning me^ may heal them, or the charitable
patience of Christian hearts may forget them. But that they have banished the
Christian Faith and Religion out of so many Realms, that they have with
deceit and craft, with fire and Sword, beaten and driven away all Justice,
Chastity, Devotion, all good learning and good nurture, all fear of God
almighty, all goodness and godliness from the hearts and minds of so many
thousands Christen men, that they have rooted up the Religion of Christ, and
planted in the steed thereof, the Turkish Sect of Machomet, the superstitious
doctrine of the Jews, or rather y^ Heathennish and insensible blindness of
those y^ believe in no God at all, in many countries that were sometimes the
most flourishing and noblest quarters of Christendom: these Isay, these
intolerable hurtes and da^mages are such, as neither may be amended easily,
nor restored quickly, nor ever be abolished and put out of men's remembrance
hereafter.

They have brought us instead of Religion innumerable errors and dreams,
accursed Sects of old doting heretics, and monstrous phansies of wicked and
devilish brains: their chief purpose and intent was quite to overthrow the
Ecclesiastical order of the Spiritualty, and to bring the temporal estate of
the Empire and royal power of Princes to ruin and decay. Pomera^ reports
this of Luther in oration ne fune. in exequiis Lu.
They were not ashamed most impudently to say it. They were not afraid most
desperately to attempt it. What was he that was wont whiles he was yet alive to
rehearse this verse, and to say it should be the Epitaph of his grave?

Thy foe, O Pope, I was alive, My Death thy Death shall eke contriue. Hostis
eram viuus, moriens tua mors ero Papa


Who was so impudent to write to the king of England and say: whiles I live I
will be the Popes enemy, and when I die, I will be his dubble enemy. Do what ye
can ye Hoggishe Thomistes, ye shall find Luther a Bear in your way, Luth.
li. contr. Re. Ang.
a Rampinge Lioness in your walkinge Pathe.

And touching their doings, who is able to express in words, what cost and
charges, what pains and trauayles, what anguish and care of mind the noble
Emperor Charles the fifth was put unto, by the occasion of these Pestilent
Sects and outrageous seditions? How many Cities? How many Fortresses and
Casteis? How many Abbeis? How many Hospitals for poor people? How many common
Schools and Colleges? How many honorable Palaices and Gentlemen's houses? How
many Religiouse places and Cloisters has this Gospellishe Rebellion quite
ouertourned and sacked?

These men's Religion is altogether Negative and denying: they deny in word
all things that appertain to Christian religion, to the furtherance of
godliness and virtue.

It is also destructive, and ever destroying: their deeds are always
employed in casting down and overthrowing. They build nothing, they affirm
nothing: the denying and marring of our Religion, is the foundation and making
of their Sects. The sacking and pulling down of our Churches, is the building
and setting up of their Synagoges.

They have their purpose, if they deny all and pull down all though they build
nothing, though they affirm nothing in place thereof. Their Religion were made
though they taught nothing, if all Christian Faith were banished. Their Temples
were ready builded, if all our Churches were down, though they laid never a
stone.

The mortal enemy of al Christen men the Turk, by furtherance and help of
these tumults, has gotten Hungary, no small portion of Christendom: has
killed the king there and many a thousand of his me^ with him. I pass over
with silence Alba Regia, and that noble Isle of Rhodes, which were lost also by
the same occasion: yea and now we might have sure hope to recover the Rhodes,
Hungary, I may say Constantinople, and well nigh al Greece again, to ye Christian
Empire, if the matter might be valia^tly pursued after the great fall and foil
our enemy had of late at Malta: but the rebellion and sedition of these
heretical sects does let us from this so Noble a victory, and does as it were
deprive Christendom once again of all these dominions and countries.

I may boldly say it, yt these domestical bickerings among our selves about
matters of Religion, and insurrections of seditiouse subjects that do pretend
Refourmation, are the only stay, hinderance, and let that stands between us
and conquering the Turk.

What shall I talk of Schole doors shut up, Luth. 75 propo. contra
Louanien, and de abrog miss. private.
of Universities (and namely this Noble University of Louain, the nurcerie of
al good learning) contemned, despised and called, stables of asses, steewes,
and Schools of the diuelles? What shall I say of the solitary nakedness, bare
walls, and lack of students at this time in those Universities, yt before
this refourmatio^ attempted, were much freque^ted, flourishing and most notable
for learning?

A man may now scarce see a hundred, students of law at Orleans, in steed of
many hundreds that were wont to be seen there in ye quiet time of y^ Catholic
Church. Angiers, Poictiers, Bourgys, Tolouse, worthy Cities which heretofore
have been always most Noble nurceries of law, are now so naked. (...) bare,
Why were the Schools in o^ford suffered to go down and the ordinary
disputations in Logike and Philosophy left of in King Edward his days? Answer.
D. Cor. Vide Coclaeu^ de Act. Luth. 1524. A preacher in master Jewels diocese
said it openly at a visitation, when he could not answer being asked what
case was Decenter.
y^ they have but a Reader or two, and fewer ^cholers to hear, then were wont
to be in a Grammar schole of the co^ntreie, before this new Gospel was set
ab^oche, and this gross manner of Refourmation with bows, bills, and gu^nes
attempted: and yet these impudent strialls are nothing a shamed thereof. It is
their doing, it was their meaning: they grant it, they rejoice at it, their
full purpose and intent is to bannish al good learning and knowledge. Yea they
have set their heddes together and fully agreed among themselves, to bannish
the Greek and Latin tongue quite and clean out of the countreie.

And some of them accounted earnest setters out of the Gospel and taken among
them for most eloque^t preachers, affirmed, that they were very glad, and
thanked God highelie, that they had never learned that Romish and Papistical
Latin tongue, as they called it: other, after they had done the best they could
to pull up all good learning by the root, and had every where robbed,
disturbed, and distroyed the Schools, Pedagogies and Universities, to excuse
the whole matter, they bore men in hand, that they had comprised and framed
the whole corpse and Treasure of al good learning and knowledge within the
compass of their own mother tongue. They took upon them to bring to pass,
that now a young Scholar of fifteen years of age might easylie in three years
space learn more, Luth. de erigend. Schol. ad Senate. Ger^
come to better and surer knowledge, and prove a greater clerk and better
learned, then ever his forefathers could in times paste with all their pains,
travail, and study, day and night, forty years together.

Luther caused the Cannon law to be burned openly in Wittenberge.
Carolostadius the Archedeacon of y^ town, and the very first married Priest
that ^uer appeared in the face of the world in our days, caused all
Philosophy books, all Historiographers and Cronicles, all Logike books, all
good Authors of humanity, Grammar and Rhetorike that could be fownd there, to
be set a fire and burned. In deed Luther was not there then present, he was in
his Pathmos solitary making his fifte Gospel, or his second and new
Reuelatio^s: and when he came home, he was very much offended with the
Archedeacon for it, and said that by such means the Papists only would be
learned, and Protestants should have no knowledge nor learning, to answer and
resist them.

Would God, these harishe peoples Gedlem madness had been satisfied with burning
of books only, had stayed there, had gone no further. Their raging fury
proceeded yet forward, even to the burning of Christian men, to cut their
throtes, to hew, to mangle, to tear and chop them in peecies. Read over from
the beginning to the ending ye Cronicles and Histories of all the blouddie
Tyrannes that ever were, weighe and consider all the most eruell and
unmerciful acts that ever any Hereti^es or barbarouse people committed, lay
before your eyes all y^ tragical fables, and horrible fictions of Poets: and
yet ye shall plainly see, that this Gospel war, this terrible fire and
flame of contensiouse Sects and Scismes, which has worn Christendom and made
it py^e and decay well nigh now fifty years, this barbarouse Cruelty of these
Gospellers, this rude, fearce, vunatural, and unspeakable tyranny of the
Protestants of our time far surmo^teth, passes and excedeth them all.

There were never found nor hard of among any wild and barbarouse people,
among brute beasts, bears, Tygres Lions, among the diuelles of bell
themselves, such unmerciful, such wonderful examples of cruelty and
bloody butcherie, as were showed commonly and very ryfe in these our
unlucky days, since the light of this Gospel was kendled first with fire
and gunpowder.

How say thou, Beza, I speak now to thee, that wast not only prosente and
privy, but a chief do^r, and a most cruel Captain in all these late
treasons and conspiracies that were devised and attempted to suppress and undo
France. Tell me, Beza^^ Audie^cie
I pray thee, when thou did commonly go up to the pulpite in Orleans
with thy sword by thy side, and thy Pistolet (not S. At Orleans reported this
Gospel, of his to the Author.
Paul's Epistles, nor S. Ihons Gospel) in thy hand, did commonly go up to
the pulpite in Orleans and exhorted the people, that they should rather show
their manhod and wreake their anger against y^ Papists who were the live
images of God, then against the dead and harmless images of stocks and
stones that stood in the Churches: When thou did train in and bring upon
that Realm all manner of mischief: when hou did murder the Magistrates and
Rulers, sell tounes and Cities, make hauoke of thine own native countreie, and
give the spoil and sacking thereof for a pray to forayners and straingers:
when thou did pull down and overthrow the temples and Churches of God and
all his Saints. and all ancient Monumentes of holy men of God: What Traitor
what Tyranne, what Lion, what Satan could then be equal match, or be compared
to thee in falsehodde, cruelty, rage and wickedness?

Christ's holy will and pleasure was, that his Church should be the place of
prayer, and of his heavenly and Divine Mysteries, Matt. ^1.
not a den of thieves, not a brothell house for hoores and queanes, not an
arinarie for artillarie and weapon, not a cover or camp for soldiers and men
of war. But thou never came within Church or Chapel, during all that
tumultuouse trouble, which thou could find in thye heart to leave whole
and standing, which thou did not defile and pollute with thy bawdie
pleasures, with thie mischeuouse villainy, with thie impiouse Sacrilege,
which thou did not at last rob rifle, spoil, raze, mangle, mar,
suppress, pull down and quite ouerturne.

In deed thou had learned that leasson long a go of thy master John Calvin
the Ringleader of al mischief, who when he was a young man and Student in law
at Orleans, Verse ^^nest and substantia^ men, who were then Caluin^
being chosen, as the fasshion is there, by his contremen ye students of
Picardie, to be y^ Proctor of his nation among them, and had, according to the
custom, the Chalice, Schole fellows in law reported this of him to the Author.
the Cross, the Vestimentes and all the Church ornaments that appertained to
that worshipful company of his countremen, committed to his charge, custody
and credit, to keep for their use and for the celebration of Gods service on
high feasts, and at their Ordinary assembles, and solemn days of Meting:
the false thief took his heels and ran away with all, offended God, robbed
y^ Chur^he, and deceived his own contremen that trusted him so much: thereby
even presently to give al Christendom an evident sign and token of the great
Sacrilege that he committed afterward in Christ's Church, and a lesson and
pattern for thee to follow.

When in Champaine, thou tokest many honest virtuous and learned Priests
prisonners, and did keep them as captives taken by the law of arms,
promising them their lives for their ransom, and ye^ afterward because they
and the people there would not agree and consent to thie wicked doctrine,
devilish heresies, and furiouse raging dreams, did sit upon them like a
Bedlem and cruel judge, and co^demnest some of them to prisonnes and dungeo^s,
some to be hanged, some to be burned, other to be beheaded, pronouncing most
wrongful and unmerciful sentence of death upon them: when thie impudent face
and wicked mouth then talking and preaching diuelishe doctrine, was in the
mean time sparkled and sprinkled with ye blood and brain of those that were
put to death and murdered at thie foot, what sprite possessed and ruled thee
then? What crumme of reason? what sparkel of pity? of mercy? of man's nature
had thou then left in thy heart or body?

How many virtuous men and honest Priests were slayen and murdered after most
cruel manner in that insurrection, by thy devise and counsel, by thy
persuasion, procuring and compulsion, by thyn own blouddie and butcherelie
hands and weapons?

At Orleans a good old man, called Guiset, parson of S. Paterns Church there,
and an Abbote also, one that was sometime of the French Kings council, two
Notable pillars and shining bright Theses things ar notoriously known at
Orleans.
examples of true Christian Religion and virtue were put to death and hanged
upon a galowes, that is yet to be seen in ye market place of that City.

An other old Religiouse man night four score years of age of the Abbey of S.
Euuerte there, when he had escaped out of Orleans, and gotten a mile or two
from the City, was taken by the soldiers of the Gospel in a certain
Village called Mareau, where he had received his maker that morning preparing
himself to die, and out of hand they strip him stark naked, and cast a rope
with a riding knot about his neck, and so pulled him and drew him a long the
streate. When they saw he was now at deaths door, and giving over struggling
gasped for breath they took away death from him least it should ease him to
sone of his pain, they untied and loosed ye cord, they took his feeble and now
well nighe dead carcass, bownd hit to a tree, and made hi^ their mark to
shoot at with their harquebuzes and gunnes, for exercise sake and practice of
their feats of war. An others bealy they opened, and wound out his guts
about a staff soft and fair, he being yet alive and looking on his own
entrayles.

They came to an other good parson of a Village in the country who lay sore
sick in his bed, so worn and spente with sickness, that for very weakness he
was not able to stand on his fete. They pluck him out of his bed by force,
they hale him in his sherte bare headed, barefoote and barelegd out into the
streate. and after they had sported and mocked like mad men about him a while,
they pull him in to y^ Church yt was there hard by, they hoyse him with a rope
up to the roode that stood a high over the quiere door, and there hanged him
up upon the crucifix.

I have yet fressh in my remembrance, yea my think I see yet now before my
eyes the tears of certain honest men in Orleans, who for weeping and snobbing
could scante abide to tell me, how miserably how cruelly, how unmercifully a
certain virtuous man a Priest, with whom they had been familiar^ and
acquainted in his life time) was handeled and murdered by these cruel butchers.
The poor honest man (as they told me) got on a beggars cloak, and a scripp
full of crustes of old vinowed bread, and scraps of meat such as beggars have,
and being so disguysed had escaped, as he thought, out of all gunneshot and
danger, when behold, sodenlie Caluines soldiers overtake him on the way
being now weerie and nighe out of breath. And, as these kind of people are
very suspiciouse, well practiced and expert in all mischief, they ask and
examine him very dilige^tlie, what he was, and whence he came. When by long
examination and much threatening they understood at length yt he was a Priest,
they brought the innocent poor man bound like a thief into the next Village,
and there in the open market they make an auction and sale of him, as if he had
been a bondsman, and ask, if any man would give ready money for him.

The inahbitants there flocked together and were marvelously amassed and
astonished at so strange a case, they begin to entreat for him, they pray
them, and holding up their hands to heaven they beseech them hartelye, that
they would dimisse and let go the innocent and harmless man, and do him no
more harm: that they would consider, that he was a Christian man, the image of
God and anointed priest. But it had been as good they had told a tale to a
tubbe, or whispered in a deaf man's ear. For all Heretics have stony hearts,
they can not be mollified. It is the nature and property of men, and not of
diuelles, to be moved with mercy and pity toward such, as are in misery.

To be short, first they pull out both his eyes, then they cut of ye tops of
his fingers which had been sometimes anointed with holy oil, and flea with a
knife the skin of y^ crown of his head which was shaven (according to the
ancient Custom and Cannons) Priestlike. After they had thus mangled him, to
the end the cruel butchers of the Gospel might have some more pastime in
mockinge and laughing at him, they lead him along the streat stark naked,
saving that he had a poor shurte on, to cover his black, blew and blouddie
body, and disioynted bones that were bruised and well nigh all crusshed with
buffets blows and wondes. At last when every man had his fill of this
unmerciful, cruel, and raging mad pastine, they bind the constant Martyr of
Christ, with a rope upright against a tree, and with their gunnes shot at him
so often, that they perced all his body through full of holes.

O God immortal, that thou see these so wonderful and strainge villauies,
so horrible and incredible cruel^ies, and do not out of hand strike down and
consume away Such mo^struouse men with fire and lightening from heaven, or
cause the earth to open and sodenlie swalowe them alive down headlong into the
bottomless pit of hell? O lord God most mighty and omnipotent King and
Emperor of al heaven and earth, suffrest thou thy servants to be thus
dismembered, hewed, and mangled?

But what talk I wretched, earthlye and mortal man so foolisshlie after the
manner of man with the everlasting, immortal, and almighty God, my lord and
maker?

It seemed best so to thy eternal wisdom, O merciful God, it stood so with
thy heavenly will and pleasure, that the might and power of us thy servants
the Christians, should be made perfect by weakness and infirmity, that such as
fought manfully, as they should do under thy banner, should be rewarded with a
heavenly croune, and be honored with an immortal garland of triumph and
victory, that thou would bring us through fire and water into a place of
rest and comfort, that such as would leese their lives for thy sake, should
be revived and restored into life everlasting. The only everlasting, and
immortal son of God our Captain lord and Emperor Jesus Christ taught us
first of all by his own example and Passion to tread this path, Since the
first hour that the cross was hallowed, adourned, and ^erked with his sacred and
blessed body as with a most pretiouse and celestial Margarite. His divine
providence made the Cross and all affliction in this world light and easy to
true Christian men, his example and imitiation has made al tribulation and
adversity pleasante and sweet.

This was ye chief reward that our Master Christ gave in this world to his
dear disciples, the noble Princes and worthy Prelates of his Church, to all the
most virtuous, holy and good men in all ages, that they should take pleasure
and be glad, y^ they were accounted worthy to suffer reproach and injuries for
his names sake, that they should willinglye and gladly take up their Cross
on their shoulders and follow him their master and guide that lead them the
way.

It is not therefore, O happy souls, it is not shame for you, to suffer y^
Christ suffered: nor glory for these bloody trayters, Apoc. 2.
to do that Judas did. To him that win^eth, Ma^na is given and a white Stone,
and a new name which no man knows, but he y^ receaueth it. Ye have wo^ne the
field, ye live, ye reign like Kings and Emperors. O ye happy and most
valiant soldiers of Christ. For this wages and for such recompense we are
contented gladly and pleased to suffer and abide the cruel torments and
butchery both of the Devil him self, and also at the hands of these his Guard
and waiting yeomen, his members and most wicked Ministers of hell.

O ye cruel Tyrans, Gospelspillers, and Messengers of all naughty and wicked
tydinges, go on and fill up the measure of your cruelty, and impiety. Ye
labor in vain against ye servants of God. they are yet alive, whom ye have
slaien. They had the upper hand over you, whom you thought ye had overthrown,
oppressed and vanquyshed.

They reign and rule, whom you contemned, despised, and trod under your fe^te.

The pity and compassion of this cruel act has lead me further then I
thought, out of my way. But whyther was I minded to travail being already
weary? I labor in vain if I travail to reckon up all the vilanouse deeds, ye
wonderful murders, ye cruel tyranny of these naughty villains. The rehersall
of all the Tyrannical and barbarous acts of these new Refourmers in this
last sedition in France, were able to make a good Orator weary, yea to drive
out of breath Fabius himself, were he never so well disposed to talk. And I
perceive (right worshipful and learned,) that it goes against your stomakes to
hear these horrible doings, and in very deed it goes against my heart also
to speak such things as the Gospellers and Protestants of our days do put
in practice gladly, and with all their hearts.

They thirst after blood, and can never have their fill of it, nor quench their
thirst with it. They would feign that all good men were rid out of the way and
dead. nor they think it sufficient to have them all dead: they would wish they
died a hundred times, if it were possible for a dead man to revive and live
again a hundred times. They invent and devise incredible fashions and means
of cruelty, such as never man hard of before, they are very witty and expert
in imagining new kinds of torments.

There was between Paris and Orleaus an honest man a Curate of a certain
village: this man the Hugono^es (as they call them) drew in by force and might
against his will into their Inn, where they lodged. When they had him there,
the most wicked butchers first cut of his privy membrers, then they open his
belly, he being yet then alive and loking on, and with their bloody hands pull
out his guts and all his bowels, and cast his entrails about all the house.

If any man suspect that I feign, and imagine of my own head this wonderful
cruel deed, and lie upon them: I am able to bring for witness of this
butchery yt I tell you, a substantial man both honest and worshipful, one of
the Prebendaries of the goodlye Cathedral Church of S. Cross in Orleans.
This man, (whom I would here name to his worship, if I could call his name
to my remembrance) all the while this vile and cruel murder was a doing, lay
hid in that house shut up in a cheast or benche, and so eskaped these Tyrannes
cruel hands, and saw this sorrowful and lamentable sight through the chinks of
the benche wherein he lay.

But what need I bring any witness for the proof of such things as are
notoriouse and manifest, as being committed in the presence and sight of all the country? Our adversaries are not ashamed to confess it them selves, they
rub their forheaddes, cast away all shame and honesty, and blusshe not a
whit to grant that they have done such things in deed, yea they laugh, and
ieste, and make a mocking game of it, and do rejoice and triumph in their
wicked cruelty. And some of the^ at their death (and God will) do comfort them
selves especially with such deeds of mercy and works of charity.

There was one of these Butchers at Paris the last year condemned to be
hanged for murder in the market place called Place Maubert, and when the halter
was about his neck, he began to rejoice in good earneste, and to brag that
sometimes he had worn about his neck a coler made of priests ears. and
wisshed that other of his brethren in the Lord would follow that notable
example of his: and because that, dying in so high degree he had no authority
by the law to make his testament, this exhortation and counsel stood in steed
of his last will and testament.

They broke and burned the cross, An. 1453. Vide Dubitantiu^ Lindani. page 298.
and mocked at it every where as the Turks did sometime at Constantinople,
neither were they satisfied with that: they took two innocent good Priests and
hanged them up on each side of the Crucifix like the two thieves for contempt
and reproach. Other had their faces and fingers fleied, their noses, ears, and
privy members cut of, their heads cloven with a sword at one stroke in two
parts. Some they burned alive, and yet most commonly they are wont to pull
up the dead out of their graves, yea and they took maruelouse delight and
pleasure to cut little children and babes in two at one stroke with a sword. And
these were the strainge and wonderful miracles that these Postles wrought at
S. Macaries.

Now what they did to a notable vertuose old man, a Religiouse Priest at Man's
the chief City of Cenomania in France, I am afraid, yea I tremble and quake
to rehearse. That horrible Act don among Christian men has defamed and
blemished the name, not only of all Christians, but also of Heathens, Turks,
and all mankind.

Many excellent and grave writers have put in writing many a time and often,
that there be in some parts of the world Anthropophagi, that is, such people
as do eat man's flesh. Du sacc. fo. 72.
But that any would compel a man to eat and swalow down the privy parts of
his own body, being cut of and broyled on a grediern, and the^ would open his
bealy being yet alive to see if man's stomach could brook, concocte and
digest such strainge kind of meat, such men having the face and likeness of
men, that would attempt and commit such a deed so strange, so abominable, so
devilish were never yet found or hard of before these our days of Reformation.
Such a detestable and brutish act was never done or practiced among any
desperate and wild people, among barbarous and rude nations, among most fierce
and cruel brute beasts before this our vnhapy time. And what was ye cause (I
pray you) of this so cruel and strainge punishment? What had this man offended?
what was his trespass?

In the old time he that had killed his own father should be sowed up in a
le^hern bag, Institut. de pub. iudi
and a dog, an adder, a cock, and an Ape wtin the bag with him: and being so
beset and accompanied with those ugly, ali^.
dismold and deadly mates packed about him, was cast alive into the sea, if it
were nigh, else into the next river. So yt being yet alive he lost the use and
service of al y^ four elements at ones, the aier, the fire, the earth, ye
water, because he had bereued that man of his life, by whose benifite he was
brought to the world, and to the use of all these.

And this strainge kind of most shameful and ignominious punishment and death,
was executed only upon those yt had killed their parents, for their unnatural,
vile and abominable offense. But this man, yt was put to so strainge, filthy,
and infamous kind of most cruel death, who was compelled against nature to eat
his own flesh, which every man spares and cherishes, have been of likelihood
guilty of such, so great, so vilanouse a trespace, that except he had been
rydde out of the way and put to the most cruel death that could be
invented, the whole frame of all the world must needs have fallen down and
perysshed. And yet to this miserable man, who shall be spoken of hereafter to y^
worlds end, and be peradventure the rufull argument and lamentable matter of
tragical stages, this only fault was laid, that he was a Christian man, a
Catholic, a Priest.

It was against their will that y^ Ministers of the Gospel punished him so
cruelly, but yet for Reformations sake they could not choose but of necessity do
it.

For reformations sake also I doubt not (as the Reformed brethren in Christ do
fondly believe) they sacked, The Author of this oration has seen all these
ruins.
spoiled and threw down to the ground the most Christian Kings house at
Orleans, and the goodly Temple of S. Anian that stood by it builded with
Princely work of yt kings charges, and all the fair and rich Churches of that
noble and renoumed City, except certain little Churches which they spared to
put in their Harness, Artiliary and provision for War, and the chief
Cathedral Church S. Cross, which they reserved standing (but yet all to
rifled, rased and mangled) to preach in and to be the place of their dailye
walk for recreation.

The English men, who by the law of arms, by manhood, princely prowess and
force of war had conquered and won well nigh all France, could never
overcome and get the strong, mighty, and most defensed walls and rampires of
Orleans. But this Gospellish Refourmation in this last Insurrection in France,
has filled up the Ditches with earth, stones, and rubbell, has thrown down
to the ground, the surest towers, the strongest Bulwarks, all the defense of
the Town, and all the strong holds and Fortresses round about, they have
made the Walls so flat and plain, that in sundry places Carts and Horses may
cas^y pass over, yea they have brought all the goodly streates, Suburbs and
Vines about the Town to a bare, barein, and naked field.

The most Christian king Lewys the eleventh his body was buried Honorably and
princely, in a goodly tumbe richly garnished, with his Image graven on the
outside, in our Lady Church at Clery, four leagues from Orleans. For
reformations sake they did hew the kings Image in pieces, cut of his arms,
feet and head: and when they thought they had sufficiently punished the
Image, they open the sumptuous and honorable grave, pluck up the kings body
out of the lead wherein it was enclosed, cast it into the fire and burn it,
and at last they spoil the goodly Church that was trimly builded with costly
and fair work, they uncovered the top of it, and cast it quite down.

For Refourmations sake the heart of good king Francis the second (who died
lately poisoned, Claud. d Saints fol. 70.
as it is thought, by the means of these Gospellers,) that was buried before
the high Aultare in the Church of S. Cross at Orleans, was dug out of the
ground, broyled on a grediern, and at last burned.

For Reformatio^s sake, Orlea^s, Roan, Lions, and many other rich Towns in
France, the which flourished sometime with great traficke of marchaundise, are
brought to extreme pouertye and miserable lack and scarcity of all things
necessary. And have fewer occupiers, porer Merchants, and are less hanted,
then ever they were before in any man's remembrance.

How many parents bereaved of their children, how many children benumbed of
their Parents, how many Widows weping for ye death of their husbands, how
many Burgises turned out of house and home, are now to be seen commonly in
France latelye reformed, and all for reformations sake?

S. Peter had neither gold nor silver, Act. 3.
nor yet passed upon the getting of any: he gave to y^ poor man that asked his
alms, health instead of money. But these new Postles the disciples of Judas
Iscarioth and Simon Magus, who trauail toth and nail not to alter and change,
but to abolishe and take quite and clean away both law and Priesthode, have
exceadinge great store of gold and silver which they scraped and gathered
together by robbinge and spoiling and sacrilegiouse ^acking of Churches, and
yet they give neither money, nor health to such as ask their alms: they feed
them with fair words, and give them sometimes stripes, blows, wondes and
most cruel death in steed of alms.

They say that the Clergy is to rich, and therefore they take away both from
them, and from the laietie also without respect or partiality, such hindrance
letles and impedimentes of piety, devotion, and perfection: And they them
selves in the mean time, good men, do bear patiently upon their necks the
sins of the people, and all this traish and mucke and heavy burdens. They
throw down towns and Cities, overthrow Temples and Churches, to get gold,
without the which their Gospel can not be planted, the world can not be
reformed, yea they go into y^ bowelles and bottom of the earth. They rob
the dead to fill their own purses, they open and break up sepulchers and
graves to have y^ very lead wherein dead men's bodies, bones and ashes are
wrapped.

What tongue is able to express in words the spoil, saccage and ruins, of
the Churches of Poictiers, Lions, and of other towns in all quarters of France?
This is most certain, that Beza and his companions, Thieves and curthrotes
like him self, stole out of the Churches and Vesteries at Tours two thousand
marks in silver, and a thousand mark in gold, besides pretiouse stones,
chains and other Jewels, and ornaments of great value, yea and that with
such a rage, such an unmeasurable desire and outragiouse covetousness, such a
furiouse affection and thyrste of stealing and having, that they scratched all
that ever they could by any means, and left not as much as a nail or piece
of iron behind them.

And bysydes all this, the Holy Beza dubbled this myscheuous robbery of his
with an other enormous outrage, so haynouse and great, that no condign and
worthy ponisshment can make sufficient amends for it. For he took away the
sacred Relyques of the blessed Archebysshoppe of Tours, the body and ashes of
S. Martyne the Great Confessor, that had been kept there, Diuus Martinus
Epis. Turonens. floruit An. Do. 384. Tempo. S Amb. and Chry. and caet.
with great reverence so many hundred years, notwithstanding the often war
and cruel persecutions of diverse enemies both heathen and Christian. And when
he had taken them out of the Shrine, he burnte them with fyere, and then
gathered up the holy and blessed ashes, and threw them into the ^yuer of
Loyer that runs thereby.

With the like impietye and furiuose rage at Lions the body of S. Ireneus
sometime Bishop there, S. Irenae. Epis. Lugdu. claruit. An. 185. S. Hilar.
Epis. Pictaui. claruit. An. 361
one that lived very nigh the Apostles time: at Poictiers the body of S.
Hylarie Bishop also there, were pulled out of their Graves, defiled,
Profaned, burnte with fire, and then cast into the Rivers.

O wonderful Impietye and madness of raginge Heretics, O beastly and more then
Barbarouse rudenes and cruelty. What Tyranne ever in any Land was so fierce
and cruel, that would persecute, tear and mangle all good men, not only in
their life time, but also after they were departed out of this world, and
buried in their graves? These cruel Graueroo^ers, that labor to bring a new
Religion into Christendom, can not abide, that good men should live any where
on the earth, nor yet suffer them to reaste under the earth in their graves
after their decease.

They cover with Sylke, and deck with veluettes their own filthy bodies, and
their Women's most vile and stynkinge carcasses, which (without the great
mercy of God) shallbe one day the stuff and matter of Helfyre, and carrayne
for death and damnation to feed on: And will they not suffer the blessed
bodies and* boues of Saints, that shallbe in the end placed in Heaven with
their blessed souls, (which are there before in peace, and reast, and joy
with Christ) to be in the mean time closed in lead, or covered with stone, or
laid under earth and claye?

It is happy, they can not pluck their holy Souls out of heaven to, as they
do al their endeavor to destroy and utterly rydde their bodies out of the
earth. For if they could get them thence, and set themselves in their places,
it appears here by this good will of theirs in ye one, what they would do in
the other: and that is no more, but even to follow their Grand Captain
Lucifer. For as he would have done to God himself, when he said in his heart,
he would clyme above al ye stars of God, and be Gods own fellow and sit
fast by his side: even so by all likelihod, these men would do to Gods fryndes
and servants. that is, rob them of all glory, and of their places both in
heaven and earth, if it lay in their power so to do. But though God give them
alitle leave on their bodies which is all that they, or the the devil has
any power upon (For the Serpent feeds on the earth and crepeth on his belie,
Genesis 3.
and can do no more) yet Sanctorum Animae in manu Dei sunt, Sap. 3.
and no^ tanger illos tormentum malitiae. The Souls of Saints are in Gods
own hand, and reast and reign with him, that all the malice of y^ diuelles in
hell, or their servants in earth cannot once touch, nor come nere them, what
ever they do in the mean time to their bodies.

I cannot let pass, but rehearse and note here unto you surely a notable
History out of Eusebius, of the persecutions of the very self same places in
France: Eusebius. Caes. E^. Hist. lib. 5. Cap. 3. (...) Martyr. apud Viennam and
Lug^un.
by which it may be thought in co^ferring the one with the other, that these
men now be of the same fervent and hot zeal (as themselves term it) of the
same mind and opinion in these like acts of theyrs, as ye cursed Paynyms were
then toward the Christen folk, whom they persequuted and put most cruelly to
death. For they, not content with all the terrible tourmentes, paynfull deaths
and Martyrdomes executed upon them, would not so much as suffer their bodies to
be buried, but threw them to dogs, and kept straight watch day and night, y^
noman should take them away, but that y^ dogs should devour them in deed.
And if the beasts, or the fire least any part of their bodies not confumed,
they took the bones and ashes, and the duste, and all together, and threw
into ye River: thinking thereby to overcome and conquer God himself, that
neither he should be able to gather their ashes together, and make their
bodies alive again, as they were before? nor they have any hope of
Resurrection, out of their graves, being out of all hope of grave, or any kind
of burial at all.

This does Eusebius write and report out of the very letters and Autentyke
wyttenesse of the Christen folk and Martyrs there at that time. Circiter An.
160. in qua pers^cutione passi sunt Irenaeus, Photinus, Bla^dina etc.
And if we shall compare together those myscreantes then, with these our
mysseshapen Christians now, I cannot see wherein they any thing differ from
them: but well may I sone see, that in some points these match them, and go
beyond them to. For the persons and holy Saints of God, against whom all
this cruelty and extremity of malice is showed, be all one, of the same
Catholic faith and Religion, and much about the same age and time, far within
six hundred years after Christ. And what else is the cause, that our new
Gospellers do so persecute, spette at, and abhor their bones and ashes now,
but for the hate they have both to them and their Catholic Religion, if they
durst so plainly for shame confess it, as by ye diuelles persuasion they do
in their hearts believe it.

The Paynyms would not only themselves not bury the dead bodies of the
Saints, but did also most cruelly forbid, and most straightly watch, that
none other man, nor Christen nor heathen moved with pity, should steal them
away and bury them. What else mean these Captain Protestants now, but y^
neither they, nor any good Christian man in deed, shall see any such holy
bodies reverently buried and laid in grave?

The heathen Infidelles cruelly killed the Christians, as their mortal enemies,
and threw their bodies to beasts to devour: These worse than Infidelles take
up the bodies that have so long lain still, spoil the graves and Sepulchers,
and profane all together most impiously.

The Infidelles, to wreake their present a^ger, forbid burial to their enemies,
being newly ^layen, their blood yet warm, and the tormentors wrath yet fressh
and fierce: these fell persecutors deny them burial, yea most violently
spoil them of their graves, which they had quietly kept and possessed so many
hundred years. Whom if they take for their fryndes, why order they so
cruelly: and if for their enemies, why have they not forgot all ire and malice
after so long time of so many hundred years?

The mysbeleuing Paynyms thought, Twelve hundred years and above.
that the Christen men ran wyllingly to suffer all kind of torment and death
for Christ's sake, because of the hope they had to live and rise again, and
enjoy a better life and croune of everlasting glory. And that therefore they
desired so much to be honestly buried, that their flesh and bodies might lie
together, and so the more easyly be raised up and made again by the power of
God. And to the end, that God might not come by their flesh, and synowes, and
bones, nor they have any hope at all of Resurrection, and thereby also be
driven from their constant and patient suffering for Christ's sake: they sought
the means not only not to bury them, but also that God should not any where
find and come by their flesh and bones, and ashes again: but took all, and
gave it to beasts to devour, and to the fire to consume. and then what the
beasts and fire had leafte, they threw earth and ashes and al togegether into
the River, to be utterly dispersed, and never to be recovered and got together
again.

Whether Beza and his fellows in their like deed of burning the Relics and
holy bodies of Saints, and throwing their bones and ashes into the River,
have also the like mind and opinion of Gods power and Resurrection: I commit
to the secret judgment of God, who most certainly both sees their thoughts,
and the most privy corners and secrets of their hearts, and shall reyse up
his holy Saints and Martyrs bodies to immortal life and glory, where ever ye
cruel Infidel, or impiouse Heretic scatter and flyng them abroad in ye wide
world.

But in the mean time well may we, (as Christen men did then in those grea
persecutions, when they could by no means be suffered to bury ye dead bodies)
lament to see and hear of this Heathen and Myscreant manner, this more then
Turkysh cruelty of such, as would be not only counted true Christians, but
also pretend and stoutly take upon them to be Refourmers of the Catholic
faith. Well may we rue, and be sorry to see this day. Well may I now and
worthily cry out, and make exclamation: O most merciful lord, O everlasting
God of heaven and earth: what a wicked and Barbarous Religion, or rather
Irreligion, what a strange and rude Reformation, or rather Deformation is this,
that pursues with famine, fire and sword all good men, every where, and
always, yea, after they are departed this life? that increases, gathers
force, and is strengthened with turmoyling and troubling all Commonweals and
good Order, with robbing and spoylinge their own contreemen and neighbors,
with contemning and profaning all holy and Spiritual things, with breaking
up and violating of Sepulchers, Schrines, and Graves, with kylling and
murdering all faithful Subjects, with dasshing and huddeling all the affairs
and good orders of the whole world together, with blasphemies, madness, fury,
rage, cruelty, butcherie far passing the Turks Tyranny?

What else shall we conjecture and deem to have been the mark and end, intent
and pourposes of such Refourmers as these be, if it were not to abolishe and
root out quite all Christian Religion out of the world? they have omitted no
kind of cruelty that could be devised, they have slain and murdered the
honorable and worshippull, the substantial and virtuous subjects, they have
spared noe state, nor age. The rage and furor of these savage and Barbarouse
wretches has extended it self and waxen fearce and cruel against children,
women and old men: who were so weak, that they were not able nor to hurt
other, nor yet to defend and save themselves.

There was a company of honest men's Children, This cruel deed was don in a
Village called Patte not far from Orleans.
who for fear of these madbraines passing by, ran to hyde themselves into a
Church. the villains did set a fire and burned both the Church, and the
children together, and when some of ye poor infantes lept out of ye fire to
save their lives, these cruel broilers and unmerciful murdrers far exceeding the
tyranny of the wicked Herod flong the seely innocents alive into the fire
again. They had no care, nor regard at all of honesty, shame or chastity.
They stripped an honest mayed stark naked as ever she was borne, in the mids
of the streate at Orleans. And when she stood so, openly among them, ye bawdie
ribaudes Sardanapalus soldiers feeled and groped her shamefullye, filthylie,
and against all the laws of nature, to search forsooth if she had hidden any
money, above the rate of the proclamation, to carry privily out of the town
about her.

The traitor by Angiers which kept a castle against his Souueraigne lord and
master the King, and took a Noble woman and hanged her in a basket by a rope
over the Castle wall for a bullwarke against ye force and short of the Kings
artillarie and battering pieces, did suerlie a more cruel and unmerciful
act: but yet not so durtie, filthye and bawdie, as this foul deed which
nature abhors.

Their full po^rpose and intent was, to pille, rob and spoil all they could
get, and to leave nothing untouched. Gabastone the master of y^ watch or
rather the master of misserule at Paris seemed plainly to confess and
proteste, that this was their mening, at what time he was in the company of
these Sacrilegiouse Refourmers at the spoiling of S. Medardes Church there in
the first beginning of the trouble, and rode on his horse into the quiere
before the high Altar, and there gabbled and cried to his mates in his
barbarouse Gascoigne French, Pilla tout, Pilla tout, that is, spoil all,
spoil all.

Is there any thing I pray you, more fearce, more cruel, more horrible, that
men should need to fear at the Turks hands, if he had been in place, then
that we have seen, to our great grief, smarte and damage, attempted and
committed by these vile Pages, and Pedlers of this new Gospel? Truly I
believe Soliman ye great Turk himself would never have suffered Virgins and
professed Nuns to be so filthylie defloured and forced by rape, the Priests
and servants of God to be so villanouslye and spitefullye handeled, all holy
things consecrate to Gods service and honor to be so wickedlie defiled and
profaned, finally the very blessed and pretiouse body of our lord and master
Christ himself to be with such furiouse and outragiouse impiety, cast on
the grownd, trod under foot, hurled into the fire and into the water, and so
desperately to be pricked with their swerdes, and carried upon the tops of
their spears.

Verylie thus I think, and thus my mind geues me (right worshipful and
learned) that except that only Noble man, the right honorable Duke of Guyse
had withstood their furiouse attempts, and defeated their most cruel assaults
and desperate enterprises, that most Noble part of Christendom the whole
common weal and Realm of France had been utterly undone and lost. And that
notable virtuous man, a person most famous for passing manhod, exceading
virtue, and peerlesse knowledge and co^mendacio^ for warfarre and feats of
arms, See the confession of Pultro the murderer.
the father and defender of his countreye, the glass and bright shining light
of al France whiles he went about to quench the flame, to part y^ strife, to
appeace y^ sedition of his contreie, was traiterouslie and cruelly murdered by
the means, counsel and unmerciful conspiracy of that vile Caytif Beza, the
inuenter and coyner of al these michiefes, and seruante and bondslaue of al
bawdie lust, fylthie concupiscence, and all detestable sin and vice.

I fear me least I seem to pass ye limits and compass of ye time appointed
for me to speak by y^ custom of this Schole, and to abuse your gentel
patience and suffrance (right worshipful) if I trauaille any further with
longer discourse and to long talk, to declare and rippe up y^ endless and
infinite desperatnes cruelty, and madness of these harishe Ministers,
traiterouse Refourmers and brutishe Heretics.

To be short, your wisdoms I doubt not do plainly now perceive, that this
their war for Religion against God and all true Religion, has been made,
another iustelie, another orderly, another to any good effect or furtherance of
Refourmation. Ye see now as clear as the bright shining son, that the
Protesta^tes of our time ran raisshelie together and took weapon in ^hand
without any just cause, reasonable occasion, or sufficient quarrel: that they
badde and proclaimed war against their country, against their Souueraignes,
against y^ Catholic Church of Christ without any commission, power or
Authority: yt they fought that battaille to fearcelie, to vnmercifullie, and
to cruelly, to the exceeding great injury, harm and wrong of all good men, to
the incredible hindrance, and damage of all Christendom, and such l^sse as
can never be repaired. Ye know now these new Gospellers, the wicked Captains
of these most traiterouse and dangerouse insurrections, ye understand what
manner of men they be, how vprightlye, how honestly they live and behave
themselves in the Church of God, and what they mean, what they go about, what
they attempt.

What say you, then by them? what p^nisshement, think you, have such
bloudsuckers, such cruel butchers deserved to suffer? what estimation, what
degree, what state among Christen men judge you such verlets to be worthy of,
whom neither shame could withdraw from dishonestie, neither fear keep of
from danger, another reason revoke from madness, nor Religion stop from
Sacrilege, nor pity stay from killing and murdering of their own neighbors?

At the first for a mess of potage certain loose friars and fained
dissemblers of Monastical profession fell out at debate between themselves,
and afterward, they were pricked, driven and drawn by avarice, ambition, and
wanton just of wicked liberty and pleasure to strike up a larme and to bid
battaille: and at length they fought in open field against their own
contremen, neighbors, and follows, against ye Magistrates, Kings and
Emperors, against the Bishops, against the Church, against the Christian
Religion, against all good men, against the Saints of heaven, and finally
against God almighty himself, as the Gya^tes did, of whom ye Poets in
their fables make mention, meaning in deed such desperate, raging and wicked
caytiffes, rebels and miscreants, as these were.

The false traitors and desperate cutthrotes brought into the Church of Christ
a cursed kind of Religion, framed, cast, and made of wicked whoredoms, and
bawdie bitcherie, of innocent blood and murder of true subjects, of all manner
of troublesome and seditious mischief and discord, and all loosenes and
liberty to embrace and f^llow vice and sin. They have called in, helped, and
maintained the enemies of Christendom, Forayners, Tyrans and Turks.

They have given to the Turk and added to his dominion and Empire many Noble
and goodly countreies and prouincies of Christendom. They have lead an
infinite number of Christen souls to eternal damnation, thrown them down
hedlong to the deep pit of everlasting fire, and betaken them to the tyranny
and fury, of the ugly finds and horrible diuelles of hell.

They made the holy font stones the couers of their iakes: yea the durtie
Helhowndes (Oh abominable act) were not ashamed to lay the excrementes of
their vile and wicked bealies even in the very sacred font and place where
Christen men were wont to receive their Baptism.

There were slayen in Germany with in three months space by the wicked
occasion and fault of these Refourmers an hundred and thirty thousand men,
and in France above a hundred thousand, among whom I reckon not the infinite
number of such as died of the plague there in ye mean time, of whom the
greatest part were these Cu^throtes themselves, specially they of Lions, who,
as it is reported, did poison the wells and common waters of their City for a
traiterouse and wicked intent: So that by the just judgment of God it is
brought to pass, that there scars remains now alive upon the earth y^
fourth part of those, who for a great number being but beardlesse young men
and most of them witless, and altogether desperate and destitute of y^ fear
of God, attempted to do such, so strainge and villainouse deeds.

I will not stay now to make an acco^pte and just reckening of al those that
through this cursed Refourmatio^ were carried to miserable captivity under the
Turk, or were slayen in the field in defense of Christendom against him and
these his adherents: and yet this I am bold to say, that if ye hard the even
tale and just account of them, ye would more wonder at it and pity it, then
ye do now at the rehearsal of this maruelouse number slayen and murdered in
France and Germany.

They have turned all laws out of y^ country, and sent all right and equity
into bannishement. devotion, true Religion, Chaste living can well nighe now
abide sa^e in no place: the Profession of Chastity is suspected, hated and
despised eueriewhere. Al things are besette, and turmoyled with madness, rage,
murder, fire and sword The desperate cry of furiouse heretics does make all
the world ring, the streates run of blood, the walls of Chapelles and
Churches are sprinkled and dawbed with the gore blood and brain of Christen
men: Al Europe, being weakened with the cruel war and long seditions of
heretics, cracks, and shakes and is even now ready to fall quite to the
ground.

And now when all this is done, after al these mischeifs and Tragical offenses,
yt these mad Bedlems, and cursed Caines have committed: they blame the
Catholics and lay cruelty to their charge, that have suffered all these
injuries, losses, da^mages, and murders at their hands. There came forth in
printe of late to the sight of the world a very fond foolish and peuyshe
little book out of England, written against the tyranny of the Papists: for
so it likes them in scorn to call the Catholics.

In these and such like dangers of tumultes and insurrections of subjects,
(right learned Audience) in these very same snares and trappes of treason and
co^spiracie we also ourselves have lived and stood now a long time. We
nourrish in our own lappes and bosoms Domestical enemies: who raging with
desperate boldness, and panting for very malice, do imagine and labor to
poison and undo their Country, and break out into such common talk and
daily communicatio^s, as abode add threaten the murder of all good men, and
the setting of the City a fire. This cruel, this horrible, this contagiouse
and deadly plague, we have by the benefit and mercy of God almighty, and
the diligent provision of grave and wise Rulers often times escaped.

If it were written in every man's forehead what he thought of the Common weal,
ye might read murder, blood, and burnings, the bane, wherling gulphes, and
overthwart rocks, prepared to poison, to swalow up, to overthrow ye City at
home within your own houses, abroad in the Churches, in the Schools, yea and
sometimes in this very auditorie where ye stand.

Learn by other men's dangers, loss and harm, what hangs over your own
headdes, what is like to fall on your City, your Churches and aulters, what is
like to become of your lives, your goods and substance: if (which God forbid)
this your country also should happen to be set a fire with this terrible
flame of discord and Rebellion.

There is no hope of forgeuenes, no looking for mercy, no place left for
pardon, where the rage of these Gospellers begins to get ye upper hand, or
their desperate fury to bear the swaie and rule. Another the regard of their
Cou^treie, nor of pare^tes, nor wines, children, nor friends shall be able any
whit to move or mollify the hard stony and more then Adamante hearts of
Protesta^tes. They will not set a russhe by the weeping, wayling, and tears of
their friends and acquaintance, they will cast away all fear, and set naught
by the love and friendship both of God and man, and break as much as ever they
may all God and man's laws, and most desperately cut the throat of every
Christen man thy meet, when they perceive y^ they have the stronger side.

Tread out therefore and quench the sparkles of this fire now whiles ye may.
Do not wink any longer at these Mo^stres to your own smarte and harm. Do
not nourisshe and cherishe in your howsen and by your fire side these venemouse
Esopicall adders to your own undoing especially, and to the destruction of all
good men.

Ye have heard, what they have don other where: you vudersta^d thereby what you
your selves also ought to fear. For which of you al, or what honest man in
all the world will they spare, think you, who are so malitiouse and spiteful
against all good men, that they can not find in their hearts, to let them
rest in their graves, nor pardon them when they are dead and buried?

There is no honest man, yea no Christen man (who at least remembers himself
to be a Christian) that can abide to see such villains, such Gospellers,
boutchers, traitors, madmen, wicked Church robbers, that can abide to hear of
them: whose heart rises not against them, and finally detesteth and abhors
not their cruelty, and trem^leth not at the very remembrance of their
Tyranny.

EGo Frater Ioannes Hentenius sacrae Theologia professor Louan. praesentibus
mea manu scriptis attestor, praedictam orationem in lingua primum Latina
editam, mea approbatione, nunc autem in linguam Britannicam versam nihil
continere, propter quod minus in luce^ edi debeat, imo plurimum vtilitatis ad
fidem Catholicam tuendam allaturam aduersus haereticos. Hoc autem quoad
versionem hanc idcirco audeo attestari, quanquam hoc idioma non calleam, quod
id certo mihi asserant Docti ac Catholici viri Anglicanae Nationis.

I0. HENTENIVS.

THE TABLE OF THIS BOOK SET OVT not by order of Alphabete or nu^bre, but by
express figure, to the eye and sight of the Christian Reader, and of him also
y^ canno tread.
The first note and story in this little book to skan,
The Gosplers in Paris streates thus in a rage ran,
With Gospel in their mon hes and sword in their hands:
I see not how these two together well stands.
Calvin in his chamber fiu^ years taught a Nonne
Till she was great with Gospel and swollen with a son.
Beza sold to two men his lininges of the Church,
And ran his way with all, and left them in the lurche.
His white M^ stresse Candita a tailors wife before,
Of her charit^e for all Christen souls fetchtone ^^iscol more.
Calvin bannisht France, Geuena did possess,
And all the lauful Magistrates did expel and oppress.
Rotman for the Lutherans drove the Catholics out,
John Leid for the Anabaptists, expeld the Lutheran rout.
Muntzer with his Gospellers and vplandish band,
The Princes and Magistrates does stoutly withstand.
Many Town and Castle and Palaice of renoune.
Many Church and Chapel is quite thrown down.
The Turk against Christen, by Christen is calde in,
With more then Turkishe treason and most horrible syn.
The Emperor in war is assayld on each side,
More peril in his life did he never abide.
No Queen in her kingdom can or ought to sit fast,
If Knokes or Goodmans books blow any true blast.
Many Kings in their Thrones this Gospel did shake,
And made many main lands full terribly to quake.
The Chief of Christ's Church sit in Council to advise:
Then al Prelates and Princes think ye yourselues more wise?
Universities, Colleges, and Schools be ouerturned,
These men spette at Learning, they will have al books burned.
Behold a good preachor, with a pistolet in his hand:
Against such pistle or Gospel it is to hot ^ to stand.
A pistolet in the Pulpit? what is the Church then?
A storehouse for your weapon, and a stews for your women.
Calvin being young, the Cross and Chalice stale,
Being old he did put greater things in his male.
Upon poor priests Beza in judgment does sit,
Him self to be judged and hanged up more fit.
An Abbot and a Priest at Orleans without pity,
They hanged up in the open Market place of the City.
A Religiouse old man escaped with care,
They took again, and stripped him all naked and bare,
With a rope about his neck along they him drew,
Bound him to a tree, and with handgons him slew,
An others belly was cut, and his guts taken out,
And wound soft and fair on a staff round about.
One out of his bed they pulde lying sore sick,
And in the Church, on the Roode they hanged him up quick.
An other that was fled like a beggar priuilye,
They took, and stripped, and set to sale with open outcry.
They flea his fingers and crown, and pull out both his eyes,
And kill him with their hand ^ons, for their warlike exercise.
And other at their bayt into their Inn they drew,
Ripped his belly, and his guts all about the house threw,
Many Priests had this man by like maimed and flayne,
Since he could of their ears make himself such a chain.
Two Priests thus they hanged by the Roode for their game:
With Christ so to hang do they think it a shame?
Some had their crowns and fingers pared skin and all away,
Some their noses and ears cut of by the barde head.
Some their privy members cut of in most shamfull play,
Some burnt up, some with a swerd at a stroke stricken dead.
Little children for their pastime, and trial of strong arm,
At a blow they cut asundre, without any more harm.
And some, that ran away into a Church, in their ire
They burnt up Church and all, lettinge none escape the fire.
Yet an other old Priest they took most cruelly,
And cut of his members most villanously,
And broyld them on the coals, and made him thereof eat,
And ripped his belie to see, how he could digest such meat.
King Lewys Tumbe and hearse his Image costly wrought,
His grave they spoyld and brake, and burned all to naught.
The holy Saints and Martyrs
That now in bliss rain,
These men would pull down
And martyr onse again.
Else why on their bodies
And bones that here rest,
Do they show so much malice,
As ye see here express?
For shame I both hyde from your ears, and your eyes,
How a maid was abused in most shameful wise.
If Noe cursed his son Cham for his shameless act,
More accursed shall these Chams be for their shameful fact.
One Traitor to save his Forte from gonshot and all,
A noble woman in a basket hangth out at the wall:
An other in the Church ryding armed cries out
In his gabbling Gascoine French,
Pilla tout, pilla tout.
The sacred holy Hosts kept for our most relief,
Of Christ's true body, O Lord with what mischief
These fellons so fell, so cursed and so vile,
Burn, styck, cast on ground, and under feet defile.
The traiterous murdring of The Duke of Guyse.
O noble Duke thy noble Death
Does well require of right
An other manner style and praise,
Then we can well endite.
The more those Acts and Death of thine
Deserves immortal fame.
The more those Traitors get themselves
Thereby eternal shame.
The Conclusion and Sum of the Table.
O Christ: If these the first fruits be
This Gospel does us give,
The same thy Gospel not to be
Full well we may believe.
Thy Gospel is of tydinges good,
Of love and peace the sede:
This Gospel does all tydinges ill,
All stryf and bloodshed bread.
PSALM. 138. Viri sanguinum declinate a me. O ye bloody men away from me.
