THE Comforter: OR A COMFORTAble Treatise, wherein are contained many reasons
taken out of the word, to assure the forgiunes of sins to the conscience that
is troubled with the feeling thereof. Together with the temptations of Satan
to the contrary, taken from experience: written by JOHN FREEMAN sometime
minister of the word, in JEWS in SUSSEX.

AT LONDON, Printed for Edw. White, and are to be sold at his shop at the
little North door of Paul's, at the sign of the Gun. 1606.

To the Worshipful and his very good friends, Master George Goring the elder,
M. George Goring the younger his son, M. Harbart Pelham, M. William Morley, M.
John Shurley, M. Robert Chester, M. Richard Shelley, M. Henry Bowyer, together
with the whole congregation of Lewis: John Freeman wishes grace and peace from
God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
TVllie having entreated much of old age, knew not what fitter man to choose, to
commit his writings unto, than Titus Pomponius Atticus, a man well stricken in
age. And having compiled a treatise of friend ship, he picked out the same
Atticus, a man full of friendship, to send the same unto: alwai^ choosing
pratrons according to the matter. Not much unlike unto Luke the Evangelist, who
writing of the things of God, chose out Theophilus (that is a fre^d of God) as
a most meet man to write unto: So I having according to my weakness written
something of comfort, have found none more meet unto who^e to dedicate my
writings, tha^ your worships, at whose hands my self have received, as I must
still acknowledge, exceeding much comfort. For who ought to have more interest
in comfort, than the comforters? And what fitter patrones of comfort can a man
imagine to find than the authors and fathers thereof? For this cause therefore
have I made choice of your Worships, and of your brethren beloved in the Lord,
as of all men most meet to commit these my writings unto. And this the rather
have I done, as on the one side in regard of my self, to whom there is nothing
more dear, or more due, than to recompense spiritual for temporal things:
that you which have sown temporal, might (if there be any in me) receive
from me spiritual comforts: that thus you seeing a harvest of your corn,
fruit of your labor, comforts to spring of your comfort, and mercies of your
mercies, that is, the riches of the treasures of the mercies of God, opened
unto you, for the merciful use of your riches, might not think, that either
you plowed the barren sand, or sowed in a reproved field, which bringing forth
nothing but thorns or briars, is therefore (as some thought) near to the fire:
so on the other side, in a more especial regard of your selves, to whom the
Lord has in a more plentiful manner opened the treasures of his hidden riches,
insomuch, that you are filled therewith. I therefore have labored (it lies in
you, that I may say) I hope not in vain, that you might also abound with
spiritual and inward comforts. That thus you being comforted in body, and
comforted in soul, comforted outwardly, and comforted inwardly, abounding in
heavenly and earthly comforts, in the honest comforts of the flesh, and the
glorious comforts of the spirit, might want nothing that might be for your
sound comfort, especially for your spiritual comfort, without the which all
earthly comforts are vain and fruitles. For what shall it profit a man to be
comforted in body, and afflicted in soul? To have the comforts of the flesh,
and to want the comforts of the spirit? To live as Dives deliciously, and be
clothed in purple, if after this life he should be tormented with Dives in
that flame? What should it benefit a man to eat the fat, and drink the sweet,
to be fed with the kidneis of the wheat, to eat the honey of the rock, the
calfe of the stall, the Lamb of the fold, to drink wine in bowls, to have
instruments of music like unto David, to stretch himself upon his Iuorie
beds, and after this life to have fire and brimstone, storm and tempest, for
to drink: and to have his portion in that lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death? What shall it profit a man to have Achabs
life, with Achabs death? Hamans glory with Ha^ans shame? David's music, with
Saules misery? Salomons prosperity, with Cains adversity? Darius his kingdoms,
with Judas hellish pains? Nay, how is it possible, that, that man should have
much comfort in body, that has none in soul? And what sound comfort can a
man take in this life, even in the midst of his cheer, his wife, and his
women, his vessels of gold and of silver, if he should with Baltasher, Dan. 7.
see the hand of God writing against him, that fearful sentence, Mean, Mean,
Tekel, Vphursin: that is, the Lord has weighed thee in the balance and has
found thee too light. And therefore should hea e, as the rich man in the
Gospel, that saying, of the Lord unto him; Thou fool, this night shall they
(that is the Devils) fetch away thy soul from thee, and then whose shall these
be that thou possessest? My labor therefore is, that with a good feast, you
might have a continual feast, that is, a good conscience: that in you^ good
cheer, you might be of good cheer in the Lord: that you might eat of the
fatted Calfe, that immaculate and paschall lamb Jesus Christ: that his blood
might be your drink, and his body your meat: that his righteousness may be put
upon you, as that armor of light, and that wedding garment full of glory:
that you might eat that hidden Manna, and drink those waters of life, of
which whosoever drinks, shall never hunger nor thirst more: that Christ that
knocks at the doors, be not shut out of the gates: but that he may come in,
and sup with you: so that you eating with him, of his mirrhe, with his spices,
of his honey comb with his honey, and drinking his wine, with his milk, may
hear those often cheerings and welcomes of the Lord, being at one table with
him, saying; Eat oh my friends, drink and be drunken, oh my beloved: That so
you may not see the hand writing against you upon the wall, but fastened on the
cross: and may not hear that fearful voice; Thou fool, this night shall
they fetch away thy soul from thee: but that comfortable saying of Christ;
Son, thy sins are forgiven thee. Without the f^ll persuasion whereof, I do
not a little mar^ell, how it is possible for any man to take pleasure and
comfort in any ea^thly thing. For even this one bone to gnaw upon, might occupy
them so, that they should have little pleasure or leisure, to eat of their
dainty dishes: and this one doubt of the mercy of God, might be like unto
Damacles sword, which hanging over their heads, as by a horse hair, might make
them to take little pleasure in the variety of their meats, in the points of
music, in the beauty of their boys, in the love of their women, in the
furniture of their table, and in all other things besides. And howsoever the
wicked are lulled asleep in security, that they are careless, and so come to
be past sorrow having a brawne over their hearts, and their consciences seared
with a hot burning iron: yet I am sure that the elect of God, and the vessels
of mercy, desire nothing so much as the assurance of his mercy. And therefore
even their life it self is unpleasant, without the taste hereof Insomuch, that
they cannot rest in peace, until by the peace of God reigning in their
consciences, and his love shed abroad into their hearts by the holy Ghost, they
are fully assured, that they are washed, they a e cleansed, they are iustifi^d,
in the name of Jesus Christ, and by the spirit of their God, and so the free
and full forgiveness of their sins, be fully and freely sealed unto their own
souls. For they are not ignorant, how loathsome a thing sin is in the face of
God, and how fearful a thing it is, to fall into the hands of the living
lord. Knowing therefore these things, and the fear and terror of the Lord, I
will not cease, during the time of my abode, to put you in mind (by those means
that I can) of these things: that you may not rest contented, as the world
does, with earthly, but may aspire higher, seeking for heavenly comforts in the
Lord, laboring alwaye^ for those things that are most excellent, according to
the excellency of your place: striving to increase in all fulness of God, and
of the holy Ghost, that you may be filled with comfort, and true joys, and
your joy no man might take away from you This because I could not otherwise do
but by writing, I have used the same, as that only mea^s which the Lord has
left unto me, and have according both to your deserts, and my debt, at the
last presumed (notwithstanding, that diverse reasons of no small importance,
which would be neither pleasant, nor profitable in their repeating, might have
persuaded me to the contrary) to dedicate this my labor (which what it is, I
refer to the judgment of others) unto your Worships, and the rest of the
Churches of God about you: to who^ I acknowledge my self a debtor also:
howsoever I acknowledge notwithstanding, my self not to have received, from
some, that experience of love (to speak no hardlier) that I looked for And
herein, as neither the mutterings of others, the suspicion of flattery, not the
opinion of pride, which might be by the malicious falsely couceiued against me,
have more prevailed with me than duty: so I doubt not, but that suspicion and
disdain, vices too great to reign in personages of worship, and professors of
the Gospel of God, shall find no place in your very raines. For both the good
opinion that my self have conceived, and the world received, concerning your
sincerity, will clear you hereof, and neither suffer you to entertain any
such affection nor me to admit any such suspicion. And now brethren,
worshipful, and beloved in the Lord, what remains, but that I should bow the
knees of my soul, to the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the God of all
mercy, the Father of al comfort and consolation, that according to the riches
of his mercy, he would make you feel, and fill you with all spiritual
comforts. That you may with glorying in the lord look for the hope of glory,
and the appearing of the mighty God, and our savior Jesus Christ; to whom with
the father, and the holy Ghost, three persons, and one God, immortal
invisible, and only wise, be all glory, power, praise, and dominion, now and
ever, Amen.

Yours always in the Lord, John Freeman.

The Epistle to the Reader.
A Son the one side (gentle Rea^er) I am not ignorant, either of the spee hes
of those that cry out against the comfortable opening of the prom ses of the
grace and Gospel of God, as that which will breed (as they think)
licentiousnes of life: or, of the corruption of man's har^, that makes his
liberty a cloak for the flesh, and turns the g^a^es of God into wantonness:
so on the other side, the aff^ict^ons of Satan in mine own soul, who have
been a man that have had good experience of infirmities, and the manifold and
like temptations that I have see^e to be accom^l shed in others my brethren in
the world, have been most profitable schoolemaisters to instruct me in the
fearful and miserable estate of the desperate man. I therefore comparing the
the danger that might grow by the manifestation of the comfortable promises of
God in Jesus Christ to the senseles, and such as are entangled in security,
with the danger that the ignorance of the same promises of mercy might bring
to them that are afflicted. The corrupt^ons of those that corrupt the promises
of God with the corruption, or ^ather the rottennes of the bones that cleaves
to them that are corrupted for want of the comfort of the promises: and finding
the one to be ready to pe^^sh for the abuse the other for lack of the use of
the comfo^ts of God: the one to pe^^sh with comfort, the other without comfort:
the one to be gorged or rather to be choked with plenty, the other ^o pine
away, and to starve for want of suffici^ncy, and so the estate of them both to
be dangerous, the one for want, the other for wantonness: I resolved in the end
to follow the example of Phisitio^s, who if they find two or more diseases
combined togethe^, labor first to take away that disease, that most
endangereth the life, or comes nerest unto the hea t. So I seeing the abuse
of true comfort to be dangerous to the abusers, but the want thereof to be
deadly to the^ that are afflicted in conscience, I have wholly employed my
self to take away this later, with the effect thereof, which is despair, a
disease that strikes imediatly against the life, both of body and soul: for
that it lies (as we use to say) at the heart. And that I might the be^^er do
this, I have applied cordials, that is, sa^ h things as are, or may be
co^fo^table for the h^r^, wherein I have followed the prescriptio^ of that
a^^ient of days, and that only wise, and Arch Phisit o^ of our souls who
gives co^ns^l, nay charge to comfort his people, yea, to ^omfort them at the
heart, which altho^gh pe chance by reason of mine own weakness, or weakness of
the patient, I have not fully attained: yet I doubt not, but that it will
appear, that I have faithfully attempted the perform^^e thereof: applying
according to the mesure of the understanding of God given unto me the co^forts
of the conscience to the b^oken and wounded heart: and that in such sort, as
that they may not only take away despair, but also by the blessing of God
security it self, and that liberty of sinning, that some think perthance will
ensue, by the setting abroch the full and undoubted assurance of the forgiveness
of sin, to the^ that commit sin. For howsoever the knowledge of the free grace
of God offered in Jesus Christ in the word of peace and truth, through the
corruption of man's heart, that turns (as the Spider) honey into poison, may,
whereas it should comfort the conscience, corrupt the affections: whereas it
should take away despair, increas senselesnes: and so while it should cure one
disease, procure another: yet such should be, and such is the power and profit
thereof, in such as are ordained to eternal life, and shall be saved, as that, as
it begets comfort in the mourners: so obedience eue^ in them that once were
disobedient: it does not only cheer, but sanctify the conscience, and purge
it from dead works. For the same word of grace, that contains the promises,
is not only hidden Manna to feed us, but immortal seed to regenerate and beget
us anew. This preaching therefore of the kingdom of God, and the riches of the
mercy of God offered unto sinners, should breed in the^ repentance as well as
says, and newnes of life as well as peace in conscience. According as the holy
Ghost bears witness, saying; dispisest thou the riches of this kindness and
patience, and long suffering, not knowing that the bou^tifulnes of God leads
thee to repentance? The end therefore of all the gra es of God, given, offered,
and re^eiued, is holiness of life, and godli^es of conversation. For we are
redeemed that we should be freed from evil, and freed unto righteousness We a^e
reconciled by the body of the flesh of Christ, that we should be without spot
and blame, before God we are mortified, that sin in the body thereof might be
abandoned, we are justified, that sin in the guiltines thereof might be
abolished to speak in a word, we are sanctified, that we might be saints by
calling That man therefore that labors not for the persuasion of the
forgiveness of his sin, to this end, that he may surcease to sin, labors in
vain: for he seeks not, and therefore attaineth not the end of his labor. He
laboreth therefore as the man that loses his hire: he strives as one that
ouer^e^meth not: he runs as one that gets not the garland: he trauaileth,
as one that attaineth not the end of his journey: he iourneieth, as one that
stands in the midst of his course. Alas brethren, what is this but to
fight, as one that beats the air? to strive, but now lawfully? to run, but
as one that gets not the garland? to labor, but in vain? So strive therefore
that you may ^e c^owned. What a persuasion were this I beseech you to think,
that therefore the Lord cle^sed us, that we should bewary your selves: washed us,
that we should defile our selves: purged us that like dogs we should ret^rn to
our vomit: took away our sins, that we should sin still: forgave our offenses,
that we should still offeed him: and destroyed and crucified sin in us, that we
should live in sin still? Alas, should the graces of God make us more
ungracious? his kindness, more unkind? his love more d ^sloi d? were this to
walk worthy of the Lord? Brethren, de^eiue not your selves: the same death of
Christ, that forgiueth your sins, destroys also your sins. For Christ by his
own death, and once offering up himself upon the Altar of his cross, has
destroyed the body as well as the soul: the being as well as the guiltines: the
power as well as the merit of sin: be died as well to sin, as for sin: to
destroy the old man, as well as to make thee a new man: as well to make thee
live purely, as in thy life to be purified. And therefore if thou art partaker
of the death of Chrst, thou must both attain the forgiveness of thy sin,
which is one fruit, and part thereof: and also the mortification and abolishing
of the body of thy sin, which is the other part and fruit thereof. As
therefore this is true, that there is no condemnation to the^ that are in
Christ: so this also is as true, that no man is in Christ, but he that walks
not after the flesh, but after the spirit: and again, if any man be in Christ
he is a new creature. In vain therefore do thou persuade thy self to be
partaker of the forgiveness of thy sin, if also thou do not deny sin, with
the power thereof. For assure thy self that the sam^ spirit that washes thee
sactifieth thee also: that cleanses thee renueth thee, that takes away thy
sin, destroys sin in thee. And learn this, that thy faith that apprehends
the forgiveness of sins, works always by love, which is the keeping of the
commandments of the Lord, and the fulfilling of the law. If faith therefore
purify thy heart from sin, thou will sease to sin. For the heart being clean,
the hands will not be vn^lean: a good tree will not bring forth evil fruit: a
sweet fountain, sour water: a good man, an evil life: a man cleansed from sin,
a life stained and corrupted with sin. I add hereunto that there is no
forgiveness of sin, where there is not a true repentance for sin: and
therefore the Lord lies always his turning from his wrath, to our turning
from our sins: and tells us plainly, that except we do repent, we shall all
perish. So that except thou leave sin, thou art left in thy sin: except thou
for go sin, God w^ll not forgive sin: except thou forsake thine offenses, thou
forsakest Gods mercy. How can thou look that the lord should forbear his
punishments, when thou will not forbear thy sin? and how do thou look, that
the Lord should repent him of his wrath, when thou will not repent thee of
thine offenses? Moreover know this, if thou mean not to surcease to sin, that
the promises of grace, and benefits of Christ appertains not unto thee. For as
there are 2. parts of the word of God, I mean the law and the Gospel: so there
are 2. kinds of men, to whom these 2. parts especially appertain. The law
belongs to the^ that are contemners of the law, and to the disobedient, to
the wicked, and sinners, to the ungodly and propha^e, to the killers of their
father, and of their mother, to manslayers, te whoremongers, to buggerers, to
theeus and liars, to perjured persons, and if there be any thing else that be
contrary unto wholesome doctrine. But the Gospel with the promises of grave
appertains unto the^ that are heavy laden, that mourn, and are oppressed with
their sins, which being truly humbled, are by the law as by a schoolmaster
brought unto, and so into Christ: in who^ whosoever is, he is not under the law
but under grace. If therefore thou he not in some regard of the number of this
latter sort, assure thy self, that the promise^ of mercy appertain not unto
thee. An^ therefore, if thou being an obstinate person, appropriate them unto
thy self, tho^ art but an Ammonite, that incrochest upon the possession of
Israel: and Esau, tha^ by sorce vsurpest the inheritance of Jacob: an Achab,
that oppressest Naboth with his vineyard: a thief, that take the goods of
other men: a dog, that eatest up the childrens bread. The curse of the law
together with the threatenings thereof, ar^ those things that are proper unto
thee First therefore cleanse thy hands thou hypocrit, and thy heart thou doble
minded man, and then come and talk with the Lord, an^ then though thy sins be
as the skarlet, the Lord will make the^ as the snow, though they be as the
purple, the Lord will make them as the wool, then shall thou find comfort in
the comforts of the Lord, and be comforted in deed. It lies therefore in thee,
that both that which thou read may b^ comfortable, and that, that which I
have written may be profitable. The framing of thy self to the obedience of
faith, together with the right use of these, and other the co^forts of the
Lord, may both stop the mouths o^ those that inueigh against overmuch comfort,
as that which will lay open, as they say, a gap to al sin and Epicurisme: and
also cause me not to repent my self of my labor, when I shall see thee
bettered, and the weak comforted: thee cast down, and the humble lifted up:
thee to be full of obedience, and the mourners full of comfort: when God shall
be glorified, and man shall have cause to glory in the living Lord. For these
causes, good brother, have I entered into this actio^, and contrived and
co^piled this discourse concerning the forgiveness of thy sins. A matter (though
plentiful, and full of comfort: insomuch, that it might in either regard have
excited many to have handled the same) yet either with such breuity, or with so
light a hand passed over, as that I feared not, least I should, as they say,
wash a tile, sow of another man's seed, if I wrote any thing thereof. I
therefore, (although I acknowledge my self to be the^ most unfit of many or
rather any other to wade in a matter of so great importance, yet not at the
least experie^ced percha^ce of all other) have undertaken this, whether labor
or loss, and have committed to the press, that which I have written here, not
preventing any man hereby, that meant to undertake the managing of the matter:
for I have left a sufficient, and large field, for any other the is better able
to exercise himself hauin^ only dilated at large, and that but rudel^ in this
discourse, but those few and principal reasons, that I delivered before i^ one
of my sermons upon the Colossians, from which, by reason of the length, I have
severed this discourse into a several book* as that which exceeds the length
of a sermon: but rather giving an example, by mine example to others of greater
gifts to wade in this argument, as that which requires, by reason of the
depth of satan and the weakness of many, the care of ^ saithfull, the pain of
a diligent, the gift of a learned, and the feelings of an experienced man,
until the performance whereof, accept of this my labor of love, using the same
as to the glory of God, so t^ thine own comfort: that this which is written for
thy comfort be not unto thy condemnation, either through the contempt or abuse
thereof. Now the God of al glory sanctify thy heart throughout, an^ make thee
to abound in all full and sound feelings of the manifold benefits, and graces
of God, in Jesus Christ our Savior and Redeemer.

John Freeman.

The first Chapter. Wherein it is declared, that there is lively hope of
comfort left unto all them that mourn under the burden of their sins.
As there is no estate, either in body or soul, more dangerous, or more
miserable, than that which is desperate. so there is no speech, either more
lamentable or less true, tha^ that which comes therefrom: which (in effect)
is, either the same that came from Cain, that cries out, that his sins are
greater than can be forgiven, or that which came from Jeremy, inferred as it
were upon the former, that concludes, that there is no hope left for him in
the lord. Wherein, albeit they speak according to the sight of their sins,
that seem to be monstrous, and therefore unpardonable: or according to the
feeling of the wrath of God, which seems unremovable, and therefore
intolerable: yet not according to the very truth it self. For it is not to
be denied, but that the blood of Christ, which is that price wherewith they
were redeemed from their sins, far excels the value of all sin whatsoever
in the sight of God: and that the holy ghost, which is that sanctifying spirit,
that washes us from all our sins, being God, and therefore of infinite power, is
able to cleanse us, and wipe away, as all tears from our eyes, so all sins from
our soul: and to make those offenses, that are as the skarlet (that is, the
most bloody, as the skarlet is mostred) to be like unto the snow: and them that
are as the purple, to be like unto the wool. For the Lord is rich in mercy to
all them that call upon him faithfully, and abundant in kindness. And therefore
as the Prophet David concludes: there is mercy with him that he may be feared:
and with the Lord there is plenteous redemption. It follows therefore, that
howsoever it appears not unto that soul: yet there is hope of comfort left
unto him, and so to all the^ that come unto the father, by Jesus Christ our
Lord. For even God the Father is called by the spirit, the God of all comfort,
and the Father of all mercy and consolation: and Jesus Christ is that fountain
of gardens (as the spouse calls him) in whom all fulness, yea, even of the
comforts of God, dwells without measure: and the spirit of God is called by
Christ himself the comforter. So that we being by the spirit, which is the
comforter, lead, through Christ the fountain of the gardens of the comforts of
the Lord, unto God the father, the father of all comfort and consolation, how
is it possible that we should want either comfort or spiritual consolation?
Ask them that have been heretofore as thy self afflicted, and therefore, for
the present, as thy self persuaded: ask them I say, whether (though they
spoke according to their present feeling,) yet, whether they spoke according to
the words of truth, yea, or no. They can tell thee, and that, both out of the
word, and by experience, that although sorrow lodge with thee for a night, yet
joy shall come in the morning: that they are al blessed that now weep, for they
rejoice: that they are blessed that mourn, for they shall be comforted: that a
broken and contrite heart, is a sacrifice sweet smelling unto God the Father,
and acceptable in Jesus Christ our Lord: and that both this thy sorrow, which
is for thy sins, if it be so great, as that it breed repentance, and so little,
as that it breed not despair, is that godly sorrow, which is a notable grace of
God, and a singular virtue (created in thee by the spirit) consisting between
two extremes, despair on the one side, and sencelesnesse on the other side:
and also, that even this thine (as it seems) servile fear, is that spirit of
bondage to fear, which is mentioned in the eight to the Romans. That is, that
fruit of the spirit of God, wrought in thee, to bring thee to the true fear of
God, which is, as the holy Ghost bears witness, the very fountain and
offspring of wisdom. And that therefore this sorrow, and fear, are but those
foundations or ground works, upon the which, the spirit of God (whose
worke-manship now thou art in Jesus Christ) will build the other graces of God,
even sanctification (that is, righteousness and true holiness, the fruit whereof,
as the Apostle James tells us, is sown in peace) and spiritual comfort,
with the fulness of God and of the holy Ghost, which being once felt after thy
sorrow, will make thee sing a Psalm of thanksgiving unto the Lord and make
thee to rejoice with joy unspeakable. For the end of godly sorrow, is joy in
the spirit, and comfort in the holy ghost. After Peter's tears ensued the
fulness of the holy Ghost. David that in one place complains, that his sins
are continually before his face, and gone over his head, as a burden too heavy
for him to bear: in another Psalm addresseth himself to sing of the mercy
and justice of the Lord: and to extol his long patience, and loving kindness.
The Jews, that by the preaching of Peter were pricked in conscience, were
afterward by the same Peter, baptized to the remission of their sins The Iaylor
that had drawn out his sword to kill himself withal, was after comforted by
Paul, and rejoiced, that he with his whole household believed in God. And to
conclude, what one man has there ever ben, that rightly sorowed for his sins,
that has not found his sorrow to be turned into joy, and his mourning into
comfort? Comfort thy self therefore with their comforts, and so make thy self
partaker of their comforts. Knowing this, that the Lord, that has given thee
wine to glad thy heart, oil to make thee have a cheerful countenance, sweet
flowers to delight thy senses, music to refresh thy mind, generally to speak
in a word, manifold comforts for thy body: is, as rich in the comforts of the
spirit, which he will as richly in his time appointed, shed into thy heart by
the holy Ghost: the knowledge whereof may be a good step to the attaining of
that spiritual comfort, that thou desire and thirstest after. For to a sick
man, it is even health it self to know that his disease is curable, and that
there is remedy enough for the same. But as it is not enough to know that
there is a salve for his sore, except he know the confection, and the same be
applied: so in this disease of the soul, I mean despair, it is not
sufficient to know that there is a remedy, except the same be applied
accordingly. The one which is to apply the remedy, I commit to the work of
the grace of God, and to thine own care, and desire of peace, and ease. The
other, which is to describe the comfort, I will (by the grace of God) labor
in. And herein I will describe those particulars only; which my self know to
have been profitable unto others, that have been, as thou art, afflicted.

The 2. Chapter. In the first part whereof are set down the express pomises of
God, concerning the free forgiveness of sins: and in the later is declared:
first, that the same promises of merry are delivered unto us in the word of
God, then that they are bound by his oath: thirdly that they are also bound by
his Indenture of covenants: and lastly, that they are confirmed by two visible
signs and tokens, in sted of wonders: to wit, Baptism, and the Supper of the
Lord.
The fi st Section.
FIrst therefore I will (that thou may not rely upon the uncertainty of
man, but the unchangeable truth of God) set thee down those express promises
of God concerning the free forgiveness of thy sins, that the Scriptures most
evidently, and plentifully for the most part, in every one of the Prophets,
afford. As namely in the 18. of Ezekiel, where the Lord expressly promises,
that if the wicked will return from his sins that he has committed, and
keep all his statutes, and do the thing that is lawful and right: that he
shall surely live, and shall not die: and that all his transgressions that he
has committed, shall not be mentioned unto him: but in his righteousness that
he has done, he shall live. And again in his 33 Chapter, the Lord by the
mouth of the same Prophet promises, that if the wicked turn from his sin,
none of his sins that he has committed, shall evermore be mentioned unto
him. And this is that also which is promised by the Lord (by the mouth of his
Prophet Jeremy in his 33 chap.) to all them that repent, who promises, that
he will cle^se them from all their iniquities, whereby they sinned against him,
yea, that he will pardon al their iniquities, whereby they have sinned against
him, and whereby they have rebelled against him. And this is yet further
confirmed by the mouth of the Prophet Esaias, who in his 43. chapter, brings in
the Lord himself speaking after the same manner, and saying: I, even I am he,
that puts away thine iniquity, for mine own sake, and will not remembe^
thy sins any more. And again in his 44. chapter he says: I have put away thy
transgressions like a cloud, and thy sins as a mist: turn unto me, for I have
redeemed thee Infinite are those promises of the Lord that are lively, and in
every one of the Prophets (even as many as have written from Moses, and from
thence forward) and that oftentimes expressed. All which it shall be needless
to repeat. These few, in stead of all the rest, may suffice to show unto thee,
that the Lord has passed his promise, to pass by thy sins, and to forgive
thine offenses and trasgressions. The consideration whereof, may be a strong
and infallible comfort unto thy conscience. Knowing that the Lord, that has
promised, is able, by reason of his power (to whom it only appertains to
forgive sins) and is willing, by reason of his promise to perform it. For we
are not to set the Lord before our eyes, ae those vain men of the world, that
promise more than they are able to accomplish. or as those deceitful men,
which being in the balance, are lighter than vanity it self, who make a
face, but have no heart, make an offer, but have no purpose to perform that
which they promise. For who has ever put his trust in the Lord, and went away
confounded? Who has ever relied upon the Lord, and the Lord lied upon him?
Who has ever depended upon him, and did not by experience find, that it is
better to trust in the Lord, than to put any confidence in man? yea, that it is
better to trust in the Lord, than to put any confidence in Princes? With whom
did the Lord ever make a covenant, and broke it? To whom did the Lord ever make
a promise, and fulfilled it not? Call to mind all the promises of God made in
former times, and in the ages that are past; and see if ever he failed in any
one jot of his promises. He promised to give unto Abraham a son, and by him a
seed, that should be multiplied as the stars, and as the sand by the sea
shore. How hard a matter was this, and in reason impossible to be performed?
For if we consider either the body of Abraham, it was dead, he being almost an
hundred years old: or the deadnes of Saraes womb, with whom it ceased to be
after the manner of women, we shall see the accomplishing hereof to be in the
judgment and opinion of flesh and blood, impossible. And therefore howsoever
Abraham being strong in faith, staggered not through unbelief at the promises
of God, but laughed for joy: yet Sa^a laughed them to scorn, as things not to
be hoped for: and thereby might through her unbelief, have deprived her self
of the blessing of God: yet the Lord would rather work miracles, and alter the
course of nature, than he would not accomplish that promised seed, that he
promised unto Abraham. Insomuch, that neither Abraham's dead body, nor Saraes
dead womb, no nor Saraes dead faith, (for so in this regard I may call it)
could make the promise of God of none effect. Again, he promised unto the same
Abraham, to give unto his seed after him the land of Canaan for their
possession. Now do but consider with thy self how many lets there might have
seemed, to have hindered this that was promised. Abraham himself had no
possession therein at all (as Stephen mentions) no not the breadth of a foot:
his seed consisted only in one Isack. Those that should be borne of him, must
be in bondage four hundred years to a strange nation, and there they must be
euilly entreated The Egyptians were more in number than they were, and
therefore able by violence to keep them in bondage still. Pharaoes heart was
hardened, so that he would not let them go. The red sea might have stopped
their passage: the long and barren wi^dernesse might have consumed them, and
been their grave: the fiery Serpents might have devoured them: the Amalakites
might have overcome them in battle: hunger and thirst might have pined them
away: their rebellion against Moses, their murmuring against Aaron, their
idolatry against God, their whoredom with the daughters of Moab, might have
razed them out of the face of the earth. The towns of the land of Canaan were
mighty, and walled up to the heavens. The people thereof were of the sons of
Ana^k, even giants, and of a tall stature. The people of the Jews were weak,
unarmed, not exercised in the wars, and that which is more, full of
unbelief, and of a hard heart. All these might have moved the Lord to have
broken his promise, if any thing possible could procure him thereunto: but none
of all these, neither the hardness of Pharaoes heart, nor the power of the
Egyptians, nor the depth of the sea, nor the barrenness of the wilderness,
nor the sting of the Serpents, nor the force of the Amalakites, nor the
strength of the Cities, nor the might of the Giants, no nor the sins of the
seed of Abraham, could make the Lord to change his promise, or alter that
which he had spoken with his lips. Moreover the Lord promised to send his
son into the world, made of a woman, of the seed of Abraham, and of the
stock of David, and by him to redeem mankind. Now, how many things might have
moved the Lord to have broked his promise? God himself must make himself
void and empty, as the Apostle speaks: he must take upon him the shape of a
servant, and be made the creature: he must be a man that should have good
experience of infirmities, and be counted so vile, that all his people should
hide their faces from him: he must be subject to cold, heat, hunger, thirst,
nakedness, and poverty: he must be tempted by Satan, despised of men,
tormented of God: he must be whipped and scorned, yea, he must be hanged
upon the cross, and die a most shameful death: he must be made sin, and the
curse of God for us: he much descend into hell, and have the portion of the
reprobate and damned soul, for to redeem us. All these might have moved the
father to have pitied, and so to have spared his only son: especially, they
might have moved God not so to have abased himself, but to have continued in
his own glory and blessedness. But most especially might that prayer, that
Christ the son of God made to his father in the garden, where he entreated
him in the bitterness of his soul, to remove if it were possible, that cup away
from him, that is, that he might not endure those torments, and suffer that
death, together with the contempt and infidelity of the Jews, have caused the
father, either for his sons request, or the peoples desert, to have repented
him, and so to have changed his promise with his purpose. But neither the
regard of Gods own glory, in his son, nor the abasing, nor the abusing, nor
the misery, nor the torments, nor the curse, nor the death, no nor the
damnation (as it were) I mean the portion of the damned, allotted unto his
son, nor yet his entreaty, nor man's infidelity could bring that to pass. What
should I stand in repeating of the promise of God made to Noah, which was no
more to destroy the world with water: although no doubt the sins since the
flood, have ouerpassed all that ever went before? The promise made to David,
which was, that he would give him the kingdom of Israel, which he brought to
pass: notwithstanding the might, the malice, and the rage of Saul. The
promise that he made to the Jews concerning their return out of the
captivity of Babylon: which when they saw effected, they were, as it wete one
that dreamed, and their mouth was filled with laughter. What shall I need to
repeat every one? when it is manifest that never a one ever failed or came to
naught. Let these suffice to assure thee, that, that Lord whose promises have
bin ever, even as himself, immutable, and unchangeable, notwithstanding all
lets and hindrances: will not now begin with thee, either by reason of the
monstrousnes, or multitude, or manner of thy sins, or weakness of thy
faith, to break his promises, and to retain thy sins, which he promised to
forgive. I do not deny, but that thy sins might be monstrous, and many, yea,
and malicious also: and therefore they might seem to be great reasons to stay
the accomplishment of these forenamed promises: but if thou compare them with
those mountains which the Lord ouerpassed, and those lets, which yet could not
let the performance of his promises, they will be little or none at all. Why
should that God that never was found to have broken his promise, be, by thee
accounted a truce-breaker? And how can thou think, that, that God that will
revenge with flaming fire, and eternal reprobation, from the face of his
glory, and brightness of his presence, all deceitfulness in man, suffer the
same to remain, and dwell in his own person.

Add hereunto, that these promises of mercy are delivered unto thee in the
word of God: the truth whereof is such, as that, as Christ testifies, heaven
and earth shall pass, but not one jot nor title of his word. And for this
cause has the spirit given unto the word most glorious titles, calling it
sometime the immortal seed of God, because it never dies: sometimes
incorruptible, because it never fades: sometimes the guiles milk, because it
never deceives: sometime the word of truth: because it never lies. Sometime he
compares it to silver, that has been tried seven times in the furnace, that
is without all dross; sometime to gold and precious stones, built upon the
foundation Jesus Christ, which when the fire comes, that shall try every
man's work, shall abide, and shall not perish. Sometimes he compares it with
the continuance and firmness of the heavens, and the earth, and prefers it
before all things whatsoever in the eternity, truth, and constancy thereof. And
therefore does not the Prophet David speak in vain, or untruly of the word of
God, when he frames, as it were a whole Book, I mean the hundredth and
nineteen Psalm for the most part in the extolling and magnifiing of the word
of God, where he is not afraid to say, and that according to the feeling of the
spirit, the same spirit bearing him record, that the word of God is true, yea,
that it is the truth it self. For this cause is Esaias bold to preach that which
the Lord commands him to publish concerning the truth of this his way,
saying, all flesh is grass, and all the beauty thereof, as the flower of the
field: the grass withers, and the flower fades away, but the word of God
indureth for ever. And no marvel, for it comes not from the chaungeable
brain of mortal and corruptible man, but from the spirit of truth and life,
which is not the author of lies, but the Father of light and of eternity. So
that now these promises being contained and made part of the word of God, are
also immortal, incorruptible, guiles, true, yea the truth it self; firmer
than the heavens, and the earth, more pure than fined gold, and unchangeable,
as the holy Ghost i^, who is the author thereof. Either therefore thou must
embrace and believe them, or else thou must account that to be immortal that
perishes; that which is guiles, to be deceitful; that which is more sure
than the heavens, and the earth to be moveable; that which is truth it self,
to be a lie. Thou must deny the word of God to be the word of God: and in flat
and express terms, tell the Lord and the holy Ghost, that he lies. For God
himself expressly, and his spirit avouches unto thee the forgiveness of thy
sin, in his own words. If therefore thou gaine-saiest, either secretly in
thy heart, or openly in thy mouth, thou give god the lie: for thou deniest
his words to be true. And therefore is it that John in his first Epistle tells
us, that he that receives not the witness and testimony of the Lord, has
made God a lier. And now do but think what villainy thou offerest unto God, and
what b^asphemy it is to his person, to account god to be a lier: and do but
think with thy self, whether it be more likely, that either thou or God should
lie. Conside^ with thy self that thou may err, lie, and be deceived, for
that is proper unto man. But give unto God his glory, and believe in him, as
thou protestest that thou do even in the entrance of the Creed, or else thou
shall be worse tha^ the devils: for the devils believe and tremble, as the
Apostle James bears witness. Let therefore God be true, and every man a her:
and therefore assure thy self, that this is a lie in thee, to say in thy
heart, that the Lord will no^ fo^giue thee thy sins, and thine offenses. For
the Lord who lies not, wit^ whom there is no change, nor shado^ change, has
promised, and said, that b^ will forgive thy sins and thy tran^gressions. And
this Lord (as the Prophet David tells thee) will not al^o that which he has
spoken with his lips neither will he lie against his truth.

I would willingly know of thee, whether thou beleeuest that which tho^ say
that thou do believe, if tho^ do not believe it, and yet say th^^ thou
do believe it, thou proouest the self to be a liar; and then what question
is it, but that thou may lie, when thou say in thy heart, that thy sins
ar^ greater than that they can be forgiven but if thou acknowledge thy self to
believe that indeed, which thou say thou do believe: how cast thou say
thy Creed, wherein thou make a confession of thy faith, professest that thou
beleeuest the holy Catholic Church, and the forgiveness of thy sins, except
withal thou ful^y believe and be persuaded that thy sins are forgiven:
either therefore thou must deny thy faith, and show thy self to be a Christian,
or thou must on the one side acknowledge thy self, and God himself to be a
liar: or else on the other side, thou must as^ure and fully persuade thy self,
that thy sins are forgiven thee, by Jesus Christ our Lord.

I doubt not, but that thou easily beleeuest the threatenings of God: and that,
that is true, which Christ says, that except thou repent, thou shall be
damned. And that also which Paul testifies, who says, that no adulterer, no
idolater, no thief, no murderer, nor such like, shall enter into the kingdom
of God, or Jesus Christ. If thou beleeuest the threatenings, why beleeuest thou
not the promises? are they not written all in one word? by one spirit? by one
God? did not the same God, that said, except thou repent, thou shall be damned:
and again, that no adulterer, idolater, thief, nor murderer, shall enter into
the Kingdom of God, or Christ, say also, that at what time soever a sinner
repents him of his sin from the bottom of his heart, that the Lord will
blot our all his offenses out of his remembrance? or what is the Lord true,
when he treatneth, ar^ a liar when he promises? do tho^ count him just in
the one, and false (...) the other? will he, think thou execu^^ his
judgments, and will he not perform^ his promises? are not his promises pa^^ of
his word, as well as his threatning^ And then why do thou believe o^^ part
of the word more than the other (...) are they not all alike the word of God is
not the one the word of god, as much as the other? If one part be true, then a^
is true: if one be false, the^ all is false* If thou believe one part, believe
als^ the other: if thou believe not the one^ believe not the other: but both in
hi^ time and place: if thou believe not his promises, despair not for his
threatenings

The second Section.
I add further, that the Lord considering our weakness, and how hardly w^ are
brought to believe the stablenes o^ his promise, and this grace of God in
Christ bestowed upon us; contenteth not himself thus barely to have promised,
but goes farther, and binds himself with an oath, to the performance, as of
his promises in genera l, so of the forgiveness of sins, which is one special
thereof, as plainly appears in the 22. Chapter of Genesis, where the Lo^d to
show unto Abraham, and unto the heirs of the promise, the stablenesse of his
counsel as the spirit bears witness, swore by himself, (than whom there is
none greater to swear by) that because Abraham had not spared his only son,
therefore the Lord would not spare his only son: or rather as there it
follows, that he would gi^e him a seed, wherein all the nations of the Earth
should be blessed, where we see that the Lord swears, not only to send into
the world his son: but to give the blessing unto all nations, in, and with
him. Now by the blessing he means not only after this life eternal life,
and salvation: but eue^ in this life the forgiveness of our sins, according
as David describes this blessing, saying, blessed is the man whose iniquities
are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is he to whom the Lord
imputes no sin. So that it is manifest, that the blessing that the lord
swore to give unto all nations, in one especial regard, concerns the
forgiveness of our sins: and that therefore the Lord has sworn to forgive us
our sins, in and through Jesus Christ our Lord. But yet that we might more
reverence the truth of this his promise, he swears the second time to
accomplish them. And that in the 54 chapter of the Prophecy of Esaias, where the
Lord speaks after this manner, saying. This thing is unto me as the waters of
Noah. For as I have sworn that the waters shall no more cover the whole earth:
so have I sworn, that I will not be angry with thee, nor rebuke thee: though
these hi^les should fall down, and these Mountains be moved, yet my
kindness shall not depart from thee, nor my league be removed. In which
words, as the Lord binds himself by outward sac^ame^ts: so by an absolute
oath, to the continuance of his love to his-ward: and also to the accomplishing
and fulfilling of the league of his peace, which is that league, or covenant
before mentioned, made with Abraham, or rather that which is expressed in the
31. of Ierem e: one special clause, or article whereof, as in the same place
appears, that the Lord will forgive our ^niquities, and think never any more
of our offenses: so that hereby it appears evidently, that the Lord has
sworn by himself, that God has sworn by God, and that not once, but twice,
even again and again, to perform his promise made unto us concerning the
free forgiveness of all our sins and our offenses. This therefore is that oath
of the Lord, which when thou art brought to doubt of the forgiveness of thy
sins, thou should set before thine eyes, still having rerourse thereunto,
to strengthen thy faith in the promises of God. And that after the example of
the Prophets, Apostles, and holy men of God; as Za^harie in the first of Luke,
who remembers (to assure himself of the mercy of God showed to his fathers,
his deliverance from the hands of all his spiritual enemies, as sin, hell, and
the devil, and the remission of sins afterward mentioned) the oath which he
swa^e to our forefather Abraham, which was that he would grant unto us, that we
being delivered o^t of the hands of our enemies, should serve him without fear,
in righteousness and true holiness all the days of our li^e. And also as the
Apostle to the Hebrews and 6. chapter, who to persuade them to be followers of
the^ that through faith and patience inherited the promises: alleged that
oath, with the which the Lord bound himself to Abraham, and the heirs of the
promises, to perform, and fulfill his promises, that thus thou having the same
oath that they had to confirm thy faith, should (as they) have strong
consolation: having thy refuge to lay hold upon that hope of mercy that is set
before thee, and so tarying patiently, enjoy the promises of mercy: which
therefore with a full persuasion of faith thou mais^ look for, because the Lord
has tied himself with an oath to accomplish the same. For an oath, as the
forementioned Apostle testifies, is with the Lord an immutable thing, that
is, such a thing as cannot be changed. The heavens as the Prophet David says,
shall wax old, and as a garment will the Lord change them. The Sun shall
loose her light, and the Moon shall be turned into blood, before the great
and fearful day of the Lord. The Hills shall remove, the foundations of the
earth shall shake. The earth it self shall perish with the works that are
therein: but the promises of the lord established by his oath, are immortal,
and cannot be changed. Until therefore thou see the earth consumed, and the
elements melt with fervent heat; nay, though, and when, thou see these things
dissolved, yet know, that the oath of the Lord is exceeding constant, and that
there is no end, nor change thereof. For it is immutable. Nay, as the same
Apostle farther in the same place adds, it is such a thing as it is
impossible, that the Lord should lie therein. So that that Lord, to whom al
things else are possible, who can by his word, at one instant, create all
things, make things that are seen, of those things that do not appear: give
life unto the dead: and again with a word consume all things whatsoever. That
God, I say, to whom all things else are possible, even to him this one thing is
impossible: which is to lie against his oath. And therefore if it shall come
into thy mind, that it may be that the Lord will not do as he promises, know
for a certainty that it may not, no, nor cannot be, that the Lord should
break his promise, or his oath. It is in possible for him, he cannot do it.
It is such a thing as is immutable, wherein it is impossible that the Lord
should lie The oath therefore of the Lord should bring an end to thy fear, and
to thy doubting. Especially, considering, that an oath for confirmation, is
among men an end of al controversy. For even in the s^spition of the wives
honesty, an oath must clear the woman, and satisfy the husbands jealousy.
In the matter of contract or hire, if the party that borrowed his neighbors
beast, swear that it perished not through his default, the lender ought, (and
that by the law of God) to give credit unto him, and to rest satisfied. How
much more then, not man but the Lord, having sworn to forgi e thy sins,
ought thou to rest satisfied. So that now even in reason, in conscience, in
equity, and in law, the forgiveness of thy sins ought to be a matter out of
all doubt, and cont^ouersie. If thou receiuest the witness of men, the
witness of God is greater. And yet even with men, if they have not cast of al
(I say not fear of God, but) humanity, there is such a religion of an oath,
as that rather than they will forswear themselves they will sustain any
inconvenience. Examples whereof we may have plenty, not only from daily
experience: but even out of the testimony of the word of truth. H^rod swore to
give to that dancing da^sell, even whatsoever she asked yea, though it were
the one half of hi^ kingdom: she dema^nded the head of John Baptist. The
scripture testifies, that albeit He^od feared the people, and so a civil
insurrection, that might have cost him his life, and kingdom also: yet for his
oaths sake he sent his executioners (I will not now dispute how lawfully) to
cut off his head.

Iephtha a Judge of Israel (if he returned with victory) vowed, to sacrifice
unto the Lord, the first living thing that he met withal, after his return.
The Lord so disposed of the matter, that his own daughter was the first, that
offered her self unto him. Neither the regard of nature, nor of the life of
his own daughter, nor of his sin against God, (although perchance he knew
not that he sinned therein) no nor any thing else, could make him to break his
(though, but vn-aduised) vow. But what shall I speak of these men, with whom a
show of religion might seem thus to have prevailed! when it is manifest, that
there have been amongst the heathen, many such, especially one Marcus Attilius
regulus, that would for their oaths sake, return again from their own
friends and country, where they might have rested i^ peace and safety, into
their enemies hands: notwithstanding that they knew that there were most
exquisit and picked torments the^e provided for them? how many have we known
with us, who being constrained by their oath, have laid open their own shame,
and secre^ie, to their greatest and uttermost pe^ill? If such be the reverence
of an oath taken but by God, what think we will be the reward thereof, when it
is taken of God? If man whose heart is above al things most deceit^ull, will
not be m^oued to break his oath; do we think, that the Lord, who is the
righteous judge of the whole earth can be moved to forswear himself? The Lord
will not suffer that man that swears to his neighbor, and disappointeth him,
to dwell within his tabernacle, nor to rest upon his holy hill: and then is it
likely that he will suffer the sin it self, for the which he reprooueth the
man, to have place in his own person? God forbid, that we should so conceue of
the Lord, acco nting him to be less constant, than inconstant man. If it were
possible that such an imagination should creep into our heads, as that we should
think that the Lord would lie: yet far be it from us, that we should think
that the Lord would forswear himself. Eue^ this one word therefore, which is,
that the Lord has sworn to forgive us our sins; should strike into our hearts
such a full assurance thereof, as that we should rest in peace, be fully
satisfied and resolved therein: no longer wavering as the unconstant and
doubtful minded man: but rather rejoice, be comforted, and glory in the Lord,
even as my self have known many of the elect of god to have done: who,
although before they were horribly afraid, and disquieted in their own souls:
yet so soon as they heard this once, that God has sworn to forgive their
sins, have been exceedingly comforted, and refreshed therewith, and have
presently shaken and cast off all fear, together with their doubting: so that
they neither feared nor doubted any longer.

The third Section.
But yet further, if we measuring the Lord by our own foot, shall not give
credit, either to his word, or to his oath, but shall, for better assurance,
require writings, and as we say, evidences thereof: behod herein the love of
God also, who has by his Indenture of couena^ts, bound himself to forgive our
sins, and all our offenses. The covenants (for the more assurance) you may
see drawn as it were by the Lords own hand, in the 31 chapter of the
prophecy of Jeremy, and set down very authentically, as in the very and right
form of an Indenture of covenants, in this manner following. This is the
covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, says the
Lord, I will put my la^^es in the r inward parts, and wr^te it in their ha^ts,
and I will be their God and they shall be my people. And they shall teach no more
e^e^y (...) neighbor, saying; Know the Lo^d^ for they shall all k^ow me from
the least of the^, unto the greatest of the sa th the ^or^ for I will forgive
their iniquities, and will remember their sins no mo^e. This is the Indenture of
the covenant of the Lord, d^awn eue^ by the singer of the Lord, the holy
Ghost. Wherein, in the very entrance thereof, thou may see. First, the very
style of an Indenture, contained in these words: Th^s is the covenant, and so
forth. Secondly, the parties themselves mentioned, between whom this coueuant
is made: the Lord of the one side, and the house of Israel, that is, the elect,
and household of God, which is the Church Catholic, on the other side contained
in these word^: That I will make with the house of Israel. Thirdly, the time,
the date, and as it were the term of those covenants, when they should enter
and begin; and that was especially at the time of the death of Christ,
comprised in these words; after those days. Fourthly, the articles and
co^enants themselves are set down, and specified: and they are three
principally. The first is, that he will instruct them inwardly in their souls
by his spirit: which should write his laws in their hearts. The second is, that
he would be their God and they should be his people. The third is, that he
would forgive their iniquity, and remember their offenses no more. So that here
we see the express Indenture of the Lord: by the which he has couenanted,
and granted to forgive us our sins, and our transgressions. And because that
in Indentures it is not enough to have but one, which is as the first draught:
but a pair, that they may be given interchangeably therefore the Lord has by
the hand of the Apostle to the Hebrews, in the eight chapter, draw^ the
counterpane of the former, word for word, as it is in the former, after this
manner; which I will also set down, that thou may conser them together,
saying: This ^s the covenant that I w^ll ma^e with the house of Israel after
those days, says the Lord. I will put my laws in there inward parts, and wr
te the^ ^n the r hearts. And I will be their God: and they shall be my people. And
they shall not teach every man his neighbor, saying; Know the Lord: for all shall
k^ow me from the least to the greatest of the^ For I will be merc^ful unto their
unrighteousness, and I will remember their sins and their iniquities no more. In
which words thou see the very cou^terpane of the former Inde^ture of the
Lords couena^ts almost word for word So that now thou have a pair of these
Inde^tures of couena^ts, to warrant thee forgiunes of thy sins. And least thou
should lose, or lay up that Indenture that is with thee at thy heels, and so
should not have it to show when need requires, behold the kindness of God to
thee ward: who has taken the pain to coppie out the sum of the covenants, in
the 10. to the Hebrews; in these words following. This is the covenant that I
will make unto them after those days, says the Lord. I will put my laws in
their hearts and in the r minds will I write them. And their si^s and iniquities
will I remember no more. So that thou see how faithfully the Lord, (as one
that meant not to deal deceitfully with thee) has dealt in this behalf. What
can he do more? Thou will not take his word nor his oath, he has entered into
covenants, and bound himself by his Indenture, to perform his covenants. And
this Indenture he has caused to be made interchangeably, and so a pair of
them to be drawn: one for the principal, on the behalf of the Lord; the other
for ever to remain with thee. And that which is more, he has given withal a
coppie thereof, if thou should forget where to find the Indenture it self.
And least thou should take some exception against the hand, or the scriuener
that wrote the same; the Lord, as before I said, drew the covenants, and
Indenture it self, with his own hand and finger, which is the holy Ghost, who
is with the father and the son, God, blessed for evermore As plainly appears
by the witness of the holy Ghost himself, who says, that no Scripture came
of any private motion, b^t holy men wrote, as they were moved, and g ^ded by
the holy Ghost. and therefore Christ, Peter, and Paul, with all the rest of the
Apostles, when they spoke of the writings of the Prophets, and their witness,
called it the witness and writings of the holy Ghost. So that these Indentures
were drawn and written by the holy Ghost, which is the hand and finger of God.
So that thou have the covenants of God drawn also with the Lords own hand,
for thy better and full assurance. And least that this Indenture should want
any thing of his full virtue power, and strength; the Lord has added his
Sacraments: which are fitly by Paul, in the fourth to the Roman (speaking of
circumcision, which was a Sacrament to Abraham, and the same that Baptism is
in the particular, or that the Supper of the Lord is in the general, unto us)
called the seals of the covenant of God. So that the Lord having added his
Sacraments to his covenants, has therein added his seal to his Indentures.
For his Sacraments a^e his seals. The matter whereof consists not as do the
seals of kings and princes of the earth either of yellow, or green or red
wax; but of the red blood, of the Imaculat and unspotted Lamb, the Son of God,
Jesus Christ; which is visibly exhibited in the Sacrament of the Supper of the
Lord. For which cause the Lord himself, and the Apostle Paul in the 11. of
the first to the Corin. calls the cup in the Lords supper the blo^d of the
new covenant: for that this new covenant before set down, is ratified,
established, confirmed, and therewith sealed as it were with a seal. Wherein also
least thou sho^ldst take some exception against this seal as if it were either
counter^ait or by stealth added and affi^ed thereunto thou art to understand,
first that it is the Lords broad seal. For even as in the kings broad seal,
there is imprinted, engraven, and so represented the person of his majesty: so
in this Sacrament of the Lords supper, which is his seal, is imprinted, in
graven, and so represented the very body and blood, and so the very and lively
person of the son of God, Jesus Christ, the bread representing his body, and
the wine representing his blood: and that in such a lively manner and form, as
that Christ himself calls the bread his body, and the wine his blood it
self. So that the person of the King is not so liue^y represented in his broad
seal, as the person of the Son of God is represented in his broad seal.
Secondly, thou art to know, that therein also is his seal of arms engraven.
For therein is showed forth the arms of Christ nailed to the cross (which is
the cognizance of a true Christian) his body broken, and his blood shed, for
the remission of thy sins. And this is in such a lively manner, by the
breaking of the bread, which is his body, and the shedding of the wine, which
is his blood showed forth unto the eyes of our body; as that we there behold
visibly as in a mirror, Christ crucified before our eyes: his body broken, and
his blood shed, for the forgiveness of our sins. So that our eyes may there
see the work of our redemption fulfilled, and so with all his seal of arms,
his arms being spread upon the cross, and his body wounded for our
transgressions. So that even as the broad seal of England has on the one side
the person of the Prince, and on the other side the arms of the land engraven:
so has this seal of God (fixed to his Indenture of covenants) the person of
the Lord on the one side, and his arms on the other side, lively, and
evidently imprinted Thirdly, thou must consider, that this is his seal, which
is usually affixed in such cases, and to such writings. For it has been
always the use of the Lord, to seal these and such like covenants of
spiritual graces, by the shedding of blood. As may appear in the 15 of
Genesis, where the Lord confirming and sealing his covenant of the land of
Canaan (which represented that heavenly Jerusalem unto them* which he promised
unto Ab^aham, and his seed; caused him to sl^y a calfe, a goat, and a ram, of
three years of age, and to cut them a sunder, according to the use of those
nations. So the Lord in the 17 of Genesis being to enter into a new covenant
with Abraham, concerning the child of promise, sealed the same with
circumcision, which was a Sacrament of blood. But most lively of all this
appears in the 24 of Exodus, where the Lord being to establish his first,
which is that old covenant with the Jews, in the hand of Moses, the Mediator
of the old Covenant, caused diverse beasts to be sacrificed, and their bloods to
be taken in two vessels, acco ding to the two persons: that is, God, and the
Jews with whom the Covenant was to be made: and the blood to be sprinkled upon
the pillars, erected for that purpose, the one representing the Lord, the
other, the people, which being accordingly performed by Moses, he added saying;
This is the blood of that covenant, which the Lord has made with you. That is
to say, this blood is that blood, by the which the Lord seals unto you the
covenant, that before he co^enanted with you. Thus as the Lord sealed his old
covenants with the blood of bullocks, goats, and rams, which were but tipes
of Christ, the body of all the shadows: So he sealed, according to his usual
manner, this his Indenture of the new covenant in like manner, with blood: and
that with the blood of his only begotten son. And the reason why the Lord
after this manner sealed his covenants, was this; for that unto those people, a
will, or a testament, and a covenant, were all of one nature. And therefore the
Apostle to the Hebrews, and the spirit of God in diverse places beside,
comprehends them both under one name or word, which is (...): which
signifies either a will or testament, and also a covenant. Now we know that a
testament or will, and so a covenant is never ratified until the death of the
testator: that is the man that made the will: but he being once dead, the will
cannot be altered, but must stand unchangeably. For a man that is dead, cannot
alter his will or covenant. The Lord therefore being immortal, and therefore
could not die: that he might by the same unchangeable manner, ratify and
confirm his promises, caused certain beasts, which represented his body as
tipes and figures of himself, to be slain for him, and in his stead: until
that Christ himself, who was above all things, God blessed for evermore,
should in his own person by his own death, and the shedding of his most
precious blood, estab ish and confirm this his own good will and testament,
that is, this new covenant before mentioned. And thereby seal sins, and purge
iniquity, and so bring in everlasting peace: as the Angel speaks to Daniel,
in his ninth Chapter. Christ therefore by his death and bloodshedding, has
established this new covenant of the forgiveness of our sins, in such sort, as
that it cannot be changed. For the man being dead, as the Apostle shows to
the Hebrews, the will is not to be altered. God therefore that he might assure
us, that he would not alter this his good will and covenant of grace, laid
down his own life: and so by his death, which was by the shedding of his
blood, he has so sealed this his covenant, as that it cannot be broken, nor
disanulled. And as hereby, he has inuincibly confirmed his covenants: so has
he herein, used no other seal to seal them withal, tha^ that which has been
always usual in the like cases. For as all his former covenants (especially
the old covenant) were confirmed by blood: so likewise is this his Indenture
sealed, and so ratified by the blood of Jesus Christ, which is therefore, as
before I said, very fitly called the blood of the new covenant, for that
thereby this covenant is ratified, sealed and unchangeably confirmed. Thus then
thou have the Lords Indenture, written with his own hand, and sealed with his
own blood: which is that broad seal, and that seal of Arms, that is usually
affixed unto such covenants and escripts. And herein, least thou should
think that this seal were a counterfeit, or added by stealth; thou art to
know, that the institution of this seal, or Sacrament, came not from man, but
from God himself, who the same night that he was betrayed, ordained the same,
and commanded it to be joined, and added unto the word of grace, and the
preaching of the forgiveness of sins, as infinite proofs might be alleged,
if it were a matter of any doubt. The truth therefore and the lawfulnes of the
seal, is a matter out of all doubt and controversy. What is there else then,
that thou requirest for the confirmation of this his, or rather thine evidence?
Desire thou witness? Behold the testimony of all the Prophets and Apostles,
who were the penmen and writers hereof: who therefore ought to stand for double
witnesses. Behold the witness of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost; the
witness of all the faithful of God, who with one mouth, as afterward in part
shall appear, do confess the same. But what shall thou need to be careful
hereof, when thou may be assured, that the lord, if thou show him his own
writings and scriptures, will never deny his own hand. Having therefore this
Indenture and writing of the Lords own hand follow herein the example of that
godly king Ezekiah: who, when he had received letters from Zenacherib, that
were blasphemous against God, entered into the temple of God, unfolded them, and
laid them open before God, to move the Lord, the rather thereby to bow down
his ears, and to hear his requests, that he powered out before him. So thou
having received, not from man, but from God himself, writing and euide^ces,
not of wrath, but of his free me^cie and the forgiveness of thy sins; enter
into thy chamber, take these evidences and covenants of the Lord with thee,
unfold them spread them, lay them open, and read them before the face of God.
And withal, after the example of Ezechiah, pour forth thy prayers and
supplications before the Lord: and say unto him, as follows.

OH most merciful God, the father o all comfort and consolation: thou that art
that strong God, that forgiuest offenses, and passest by iniquity in the
remnant of thy possession: thou that preparest the heart of the poor, and then
openest thine ear, to hearken thereunto. Incline, O Lord, thine ear, and
hear: open, O Lord, thine eyes, and see: behold O Lord, the word of thine own
lips, and the writings of thine own hand. Of a truth Lord, I have sinned, and
done exceedi^g wickedly in thy sight. I acknowledge it, and confess it before
the throne of thy grace, But thou, O Lord, according to the riches of thy mercy
and loving kindness, have promised to forgive mine offenses. Yea, the more to
show the stablenes of thy counsel, thou have tied thy self by an oath
thereunto. And that which is more, thou have couenanted and indented with me,
by thi^ thy covenant, to pass by mine iniquities, and to remember my sins no
more. And now Lord, regard, I beseech thee, thy gracious and free mercy; the
oath of thy holiness; and behold the words of thine own mouth, the works, and
the covenants of thine own hands, sealed with thine own most precious blood,
and confirmed by thy death upon the cross, wherein thou have promised to
forgive all my sins, and my transgressions. Be it unto me thy servant, I
beseech thee, according to thy free promise, and according to thy gracious
covenant. Oh let me feel, I pray thee, the accomplishing hereof in my own
soul. And as thou have written this covenant in thy word with thine own
finger, and sealed the same with thy blood: So gracious Father, vouchsafe to
write it in my heart by thy spirit, and to seal it unto my conscience, by the
powerful applying of the same thy blood thereunto: that it may wash me from all
my sins and my transgressions, and so create in me, that peace of God that
passes all understanding. Gracious God, thy free offer makes me freely to
offer these my requests unto thy name, and with a full confidence of hope to
have access unto the throne of thy grace; knowing that thou, O Lord, that have
promised, art able, and wilt, according to this thy scripture, and the writing
of thine own hands, perform it. This course if thou shall take, it is not to
be doubted, but that, as thy heart shall find faith, so thy soul shall receive
comfort, in, and from the living Lord: feeling according to his covenant of the
Lord, thy self to be washed, cleansed and justified, in the name of Jesus
Christ, and by the spirit of our God.

The Fourth Section.
But yet further, if with Gedeon we shall desire a token: or with Ezekiah, a
sign to confirm our faith? Behold, the Lord fitteth not in a Rainebow in the
clouds, as he did to Noah: he makes not the sun to go ten degrees
backward, as he did for Ezekiah: he makes not the fleece to be wet in the
dry flower, nor dry in the wet deaw, as he did for Gedeon: but he gives
thee, being but one man, even two signs: nay, more than signs, even two
Sacraments: the one of Baptism, the other of the Lords supper: both of them
being visible signs, to confirm unto thee, the invisible grace of the free
mercy of god in Jesus Christ: And therefore did the Lord himself in the
seventeenth of Genesis, when he first instituted the Sacrament of Circumcision,
call it a sign, saying unto Abraham, that it should be a sign of the covenant
that was between himself, and them: that is, that it should be that sign,
that the Lord would give unto him to assure and to approve unto him the
fulfilling and accomplishing of his covenant. Whereupon the Apostle Paul in
the fourth to the Romans, speaking of the same Sacrament, calls it in like
manner a sign: saying, that Abraham received the sign of Circumcision, that
it might seal the righteousness of faith, which was in his uncircumcision.
That is, that he received circumcision, which was an outward and an evident
sign, to confirm unto him his free justification by faith. Thus as one of the
Jewish Sacraments is called a sign: so likewise was the other, which was the
Paschall lamb, or Passover: as plainly appears in the twelfth of Exodus:
where it is said of the blood of the Paschall lamb, (which represented the
blood of Jesus Christ, the unspotted and undefiled lamb) that it should be unto
them for a sign upon their houses, that the Lord, when he destroyed the
Egyptians, their, and his enemies would pass over them, so that they should
live in peace and rest, when their enemies were consumed. So that hereby it
plainly appears, that both the Jewish Sacraments, were not only seals of
the covenants, but also given for signs and tokens unto them: which should be
continually before their eyes, to confirm unto them the graces of God, in
Jesus Christ. Whereupon it fo^loweth, that as their Sacraments, were unto them:
so are our Sacraments, that is, the Supper of the Lord, and Baptism, given for
signs unto us, to confirm, as all other the graces of God: so our free
forgiveness and pardon for all our offenses. For the same is Baptism unto us,
that Circumcision was unto them: as plainly appears in the second to the
Colonians, the eleventh and twelfth verses. And the same is the Supper of the
Lord unto us, that was the Paschall lamb unto them, as infinite places, and
the general consent of all men approoueth. The visible sign only, according
to the time, being altered into another, which is far more significant, and
more lively to signify: and so to confirm unto us this inward grace of God,
of which now we speak. And therefore is a Sacrament very fitly, according to
this their use, defined by Augustine, to be a visible sign of an invisible
grace. As therefore the sign of the Rainbow i^ the clouds, confirms unto
us, that promise of God, which he made with Noah that is, that he would
destroy no more the whole earth with waters: as the return of the Sun ten
degrees backward, was a sign unto Ezekias, that (...) should be recovered out
of that disease As the fleece of Gedeon being wet in the dry, and dry in the
wet, was unto him a sign, that he should overcome hi^ enemies: so is the
water in Baptism, wherewith we were washed, a sign and token unto us, that we
should be washed from all our sins, and our offenses. So likewise is the
breaking of the bread, and the pouring out of the wine, in the supper of the
Lord, another as evident a sign, that by the death of Jesus Christ, and by the
shedding of his blood, we are purged from all our sins. According to the saying
of John in his first epistle, who says, that the blood of Christ purges us
from all our offenses. And again in the Revelation, Christ says, he has
washed us by his blood from all our offenses. And again in the the 5. to the
Ephesians, the Apostle Paul speaking of Baptism says, that Christ sanctified
the Church, and purged it, by the lauacre of water in the word. So that now,
when thou see other, or remembrest that thy self was washed with water in
Baptism: And again, when thou see the body of Christ to be broken in the
Supper of the lord, and his blood to be powered out, and given unto thee: thou
art to consider with thy self that these are two signs and tokens, which are
showed and given to thee of the Lord, fully to assure and persuade thy
conscience that thy sins are forgiven thee: and that thou art washed, that
thou art sanctified, and that thou art justified, by the blood of Jesus Christ,
and by the spirit of our God. So that now, do thou seek with the Scribes
and Pharisees a sign? Behold, the Lord has given unto thee, not one, but two
tokens, in stead of other miracles and wonders: even two visible signs of this
invisible grace, even Sacraments to confirm thy faith, and yet doubtest thou?
The incredulous Jews said unto Christ, show us a sign, and we will believe
thee. See the Lord shows thee two, and yet will thou not believe him? One
rainbow was enough for Noah, one fleece for Gedeon: the s^nne once to go back
for Ezekiel ah: and will it not suffice thee, to have not once, b^t often, one
sign given; nay, to have not one, but two signs, to co^firm; nay, to perform
unto thee, the things that are promised; For the other were but signs
co^firming: but these are more, even signs confirming and conferring, (signa
confirmantia, and conferentia) For that which is signified, is given,
conferred, and so joined together with the sign it self. And therefore the
Lord, to teach this soundly unto us, calls the outward sign, by the very
name of the thing it self that is signified: ca^ling circumcision, the
covenant: the Paschall lamb, the Passover: the water in Baptism, the
fountain of regeneration: the bread in the Supper of the Lord, the body of
Christ: and the wine, the very blood of Christ: to teach us, that these signs
are not as the rainbow is, or the going backward of the sun, or the fleece of
Gedeon, which were bare signs that served only to confirm us: but that they
are more: even such, as always have the things themselus that are promised,
and signified, annexed, knit, and joined unto the^, in regard of the Lord. And
therefore, as verily, yea, and even then, when the water washes thy body in
Baptism: and even as veri^y, yea, and even then, when the bread is broken, and
the wine poured out in the supper of the Lord, and given unto thee: even so
verily, yea and even then, if thou be rightly prepared, does the spirit of God
wash thee, by the blood of Jesus Christ, from all thy sins and thine
offenses. For these signs are not only significant, but effectua^l also: they
do not only confirm, but give that which they should confirm thee in. I
mean not, that the Sacrament ex opere operato, that is, by the very bare
work thereof, gives this grace: but that the Lord gives with and by these
signs, his forepromised graces: even the forgiveness of thy sins. And so as
he gives the sign to confirm thy faith: so the thing signified to comfort
thy conscience, although perchance thou presently feel not the power thereof. So
that since the Lord is so gracious, as by two continual visible signs, which he
will have often showed unto thee, even as it were wonders, more precious, and
of greater power and force, than any signs or tokens, in heaven above, or in
the earth beneath, since the Lord I say, is so gracious, as by two such signs
to confirm unto thee, the forgiveness of thy sins: nay, to give thee
forgiveness of thy sins: with what reason can thou doubt thereof? For he
gives it unto thee verily, and indeed, if thou will receive it, together with
the sign it self: and then why doubtest thou whether thou shall have it, when
already thou have it? What could the Lord do more, or thou require more than
this? Thou desire forgiveness of thy sins, and assurance thereof: the Lord
promises, nay swears, nay indenteth to give it. He shows and gives thee
two signs, to assure thee thereof: and that which is more, with the signs he
offers the thing it self. And this is the first reason, taken from the
promises of God, confirmed by so many undoubted means.

The 3. Chapter. VVherin the forgiveness of sins is proved by the
consideration of Gods mercy, which is one part of his essence, substance, and
nature.
The first Section.
THe second reason, to prove unto us the forgiveness of our sins, is taken
from the consideration of the essence, and the substance, even the natures of
the Lord, which are part of the essence, the substance, and the being of God,
yea, God himself. For whatsoever is in God, is God: and in him there is no
accident, nor quality, but whatsoever is in him, is of his essence, and his
substance. And therefore his nature, as his mercy, patience, justice, and such
like, are of his essence, and are even very God. His mercy therefore is very
God, and God is mercy it self. He therefore that denies mercy unto God,
(which is to forgive our sins) denies God to be God, denies one special
nature, which the spirit of God ascribes unto God, and that very often in the
Scriptures, and the written word of God. As namely in the second of Joel, where
the Prophet speaks thus of the Lord, saying: The Lord your God is gracious
and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and such a one as repents
him of the evil. And again in the 34. of Exodus, the lord himself proclaims
his name before Moses, and all the children of Israel, saying, and crying: The
Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in
goodness, and truth, reserving mercy for thousa^ds, forgiving iniquity, sin, and
transgressio^, and so forth, as there follows more at large: and again in the
103. Psalm, the Prophet David says that the Lord is full of compassion and
mer^ie, slow to anger, and of great kindness. Many and manifest are those
proofs, that prove the Lord to be by name and nature merciful. Now we know that
the nature and work of mercy, is to respect, to pity, and to help our misery.
For even as the eye has colors, the tongue tastes, the ear sounds, the nose
the sauors, for his object to be busied in, to respect, and work upon: so the
mercy of God, has man's misery, and sin, the principal cause thereof, as
his object, to work upon, to cure, and to remedy: insomuch, as if there were
no misery, there could be no use of Gods mercy. And therefore the Lord shut
up all under unbelief, as Paul teaches in his epistle to the Romans, that he
might have mercy upon all: and so by that means made away for his mercy,
which else could not so evidently have manifested it self unto our
understanding: Herein therefore appeared the depth of the riches, both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God (so much admired of Paul in the same place) in
that he would rather have man fall, than his mercy fail: he would rather have
man cease to be righteous, than himself cease to be merciful: he would rather
have man cease to show obedience, than himself cease to show mercy: he would
that man should sin, that he might appear to be a gracious God, in the
forgiving of his sin. True it is, that there appeared a notable evidence of the
mercy of God in framing this beautiful world, out of that deformed Chaos, and
rude earth in the begi^ning, in making the Sun to rule the day, and the Moon
to govern the night, as the Prophet at large describes in the 136 Psalm. But
the Lord not contented therewith, as a sufficient manifestation of his mercy,
thought it not enough to create, except he did recreate man; to give life,
except he redeemed life; to give life to them that were not, except he gave
life to them that were dead; to make man righteous of nothing, except he made
him righteous of a sinner; to give him righteousness, except he did also forgive
him his unrighteousness, his disobedience, and sin committed against his
glorious majesty. So that it being the property of mercy, to respect
misery, and God being rich in mercy, even the God of al mercy, and the
father of all comfort and consolation, whose mercy reaches unto the heavens,
and his faithfulness unto the clouds; we may no less truly, then boldly
infer, that as it is natural for the fire to give heat, or the sun to give
light: so is it natural for God to forgive thy sins, and thy offenses. And
as the fire gives thee heat, and is not moved, as the sun gives thee light,
and is not vexed, and troubled therewith, fith it is his nature so to do: so
the Lord forgiueth thee thy sins, and is not (as Satan would persuade thy
conscience) either troubled, or vexed, or grieved, or unwilling therewith: and
why? because it is his nature so to do. And therefore as man does those things
cheerfully and willingly, which he does naturally: so God does forgive our
sins, and that with out any trouble or molestation to himself, because his
heart drives him thereunto, as the Prophet speaks. Thou come to the fire
for heat, and it is not painful for the same to give it: thou co^est to the
sun for light, and it is no offense for it to afford it: thou come to God for
mercy for thy sin, and it is not troublous for the Lord to yield it. No, he
takes a singular delight in forgiving thy sins: as Micah in his last chapter
plain^y shows. Where he says; Who is so strong a God as thou art? forgiving
sin, and passing by ^niquity, in the remna^t of thy possession which keeps
not his anger for ever, because he is delighted with mercy. And the Prophet
David in his 147, psalm. tells us painly, that the Lord delights in the^
that fear him, and come to him for mercy. So that the spirit speaks
evidently, that the Lord delights both in them that sue to him for mercy, and
also in showing of mercy, and therefore in forgiving our offenses. And no
marvel; for first his mercy being one part of himself, he must needs
delight in the use thereof. For a^ man desires and delights in the use of the
parts of his body, of his tongue to speak, his eyes to see, his ears to hear,
his hand^ to feel, his feet to walk withal insomuch, that the contrary
thereunto is painful: as for to have his tongue tied his eyes closed, his
ears stopped, his hand^ manacled, his feet chained, or fettered: so is it a
delight for the Lord to use the parts of himself, as of his justice to the
judgment of the obstinat: so of his mercy, to the forgiveness of the sin of
the humble, and the mourners: and the contrary thereunto, which is to be
debarred of the exercise and use of his me^cie, is rather troublesome and
painful unto the Lord, than is the f^rgiuenes of our sins. For the
forgiveness of sins is the use, and exercise of Gods mercy, which is one part
of God himself, yea God himself. For as this is true, God is love: so this
also i^ true God is ^ercie: and therefore God must needs delight in his being,
even in his being mercy, and in being merciful to his elect, though miserable,
both men, and sinners. And in this first regard, it is manifest, that God
takes a singular delight in the forgiveness of our sins. Secondly and lastly,
the forgiveness of our sins, turns to the praise of the glory of his grace.
For the Saints that taste and try the mercy of the Lord, sing praise in the
memorial and remembrance thereof, as David wills them: yea, and having felt
the mercy of God, in the forgiveness of their offenses with David they
acknowledge to the praise of the glory of God, that the Lord is very kind and
merciful also, and that in God compassion does plentifully flow. And with the
elect of God, they fall down before the throne of his grace, and give honor,
and glory, and power, and praise unto God, that has redeemed them from this
wicked world, and their offenses, and made them kings and priests unto the
Lord, a holy nation, and a royal priesthood. And as Scholars accept pardon
from their Tutors, servants from their masters, sons from their parents,
subjects from their princes, with all humble thanks: so the elect, accept with
all thanks unto the Lord, the cup of their salvation, the pardon for their sins
bowing the knees of their souls unto the God of all mercy, and the father of
all comfort, falling down upon their faces; and giving thanks to him that
lives for ever and ever, that washes them by his blood from all their sins
and transgressions. And therefore since it turns unto the adua^cing of the
glory of God, unto the magnifying of his mercy, and is also of the essence and
nature of God to forgive our sins: we may be assured, that as the Lord has a
singular delight therein, so a special readiness thereunto. For even men (we
see by experience) willingly do those things, wherein they are delighted. We
may therefore hereto conclude, that as the fire cannot choose but burn; since it
is his nature: so God cannot choose but forgive us our offenses, since it is
natural unto him. He is merciful, for he is mercy it self, and that
especially unto miserable sinners: for where there is no misery, there can be
no mercy.

The second Section.
The mercy of the Lord stretches it self even to the beasts of the field.
Thou Lord, says the prophet David in his 30 Psalm, does save both man and
beast. And again in his 147 Psalm the Lord, says the Psalmist, is good to
all, and his mercies are over all his works. Does the Lord show mercy to the
beasts of the field? and will he not extend the same to man, created according
to his own image? is he gracious unto senseless creatures? and will he not be
gracious unto reasonable creatures? Does his mercy stretch it self to the
baser works of his hands? and shall it think thou be shut up from thee, the
most excellent workma^ship of al other whatsoever creatures upon the earth?

Thou have had experience of the manifold mercies of God toward thy body. He
gave thee life when thou were not, he brought thee up unto man's estate, when
yet thou were but weak: thou were sick, and he healed thee; weak, and he
strengthened thee; hungry, and he fed thee; thirsty, and he satisfied thee;
naked, and he clothed thee; sorrowful, and he comforted theerin misery, and
he relieved thee: he is the God of thy body, and therefore good unto thy body:
so is he the father of spirits, and God of all mercy, and therefore will be
favorable unto thy spirit, I mean unto thy soul, as well as unto thy body.
For the father of all mercy, is the father of spirits, as well as he is the
God of thy body. And therefore thou may look for the same favor in healing
the infirmities, even the sins of thy soul, that thou foundest in curing the
sickness and weakness of thy body.

The Lord is merciful even toward his enemies, even to the froward and
ungodly man, he makes his rain to fall upon the good, and the bad, his sun to
shine upon the just and the unjust. He gives food even unto the godless and
vnrighte^us man, even to him that stubbornly opposes himself against his
majesty. If the Lord be so merciful to his enemies, how merciful will he be to
his friends? If to the reprobates, what mercy will he show to his elect? If to
his slaves, what to his sons? If to the vessels of wrath, what to the vessels
of mercy? If to the froward, what to the meek? If to the obstinate, what
mercy will he show to the mourners? especially since all the promises of God
are made, either only, or especially to them that are filled with sorrow for
their sins Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted Mat. 7.
Blessed are they that weep, for they shall laugh and rejoice. Luke 6. And
again, to whom shall I look says the Lord, Es. 66. even to him that is
poor, that is broken in spirit, and that trembles at my words: and for the
most part, all other the promises of God are made to the sick, to the sinners,
to the lost, and to them that are heavy laden. Thou therefore that mournest,
that tremblest, and art grieved with thy sins, may after a more especial
manner, assure thy self of Gods mercy, to relieve thy misery, even the
misery of thy soul, and thy sin.

Thou thy self show mercy, even unto thy brother: thy servant offends
thee, and thou pardonest him: thy son dishonoreth thee, and thou for bear
him: thy neighbor despises thee, and thou forgiuest him: yea, thy dog, and
thy beast resists thee, yea displeases thee, and yet thou passest by it: is
there more mercy in thee to thy neighbor, than is in thy God to thee? Art
thou more kind to thy se^uant, nay, to thy dog, than God is unto thee? Can,
and do thou forgive thy brother that offends thee and will not God forgive
thee offending his Majesty? Is there more mercy in man, than in God? Nay, is
not this mercy in man, an image of the mercy of God, according to the which
we were framed. So that thou may behold the mercy of God toward thee, in
the use of thy mercy toward thy brother. Does not Christ plainly teach us,
that if we forgive men that trespass against us, our heavenly Father will and
shall forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us?
If therefore thou being grieved for thy sins, desire to be assured that they
are forgiven, rejoice when thou see any man offend thee. Knowing, that
thereby the Lord has offered unto thee an outward sign, and an assured
argument, to prove the forgiveness of thy sins unto thy own soul, and
conscience. For if thou forgiuest thy brother, thy God also will forgive thee.
For the Lord will contend and strive with thee in the forgiveness of sins:
as whether thou shall forgive more offenses to thy brother, or thy God unto
thee, and the Lord will overcome and go before thee herein. For as he is
infinite: so his mercy is endless. And as in a line, one poi^t is continued to
another: so in the me^cies of God the end of one, is the beginning of a new
mercy from the Lord. It is therefore a very profitable way to feel the mercy
of the Lord, (...), eue^ to p^ouoke the Lord to mercy toward our selves, by
showing mercy toward our brethren. For if we shall contend with the Lord in
showing mercy, namely, whether we shall show more mercy to our brethren, or our
God to us, we shall be sure to be overcome, and the Lord will get the victory.
And herein it is both glorious and profitable, and also comfortable for us to
be overcome of the Lord: for his victory is our triumph.

The wicked, and those that are lulled asleep in the depth of their own sins,
can confess and acknowledge the truth of the mercy of the Lord, and can say,
though in the flattery of their own souls, that God is merciful, that God
is merciful. Can the Scorners to whom the mercy of the Lord does not
appertain, acknowledge the mercy of God, and the forgiveness of their sins?
And can not thou, to whom all the promises of me^cie do belong apply the same
unto thy self, and acknowledge with thy mouth and believe with thy heart, that
thy sins are forgiven? Why should not thou do that fruitf^lly, which those
men do unprofitably? Why not thou do that truly, which they do falsely? Why
not thou do that comfortably, which they do but flatteringly? Imitate the Be,
that sucketh honey out of that flower, out of the which the Spider draws
poison. This is the first reason, that is taken from the mercy of God, which
is natural unto him.

The 4. Chapter. VVherin the forgiveness of sins is proved by the ^onsideratio^
of Gods iusti^e (which is another nature essential unto him) by three special
ways First, by reason that the Lord both promised to forgive our sins, in
regard whe^eof, it stands with hi^ justice to perform the same. Secondly,
for that he has already punished Jesus Christ for our offenses, and therefore
cannot in iusti^e punish them in us also. And lastly, because he has already
punished our persons in Christ, and so cannot justly punish us again.
THe second kind of reason, is taken from the justice of God, which is another
nature essential to the Lord. From which also, as well as from his mercy,
there arises a necessary reason to persuade unto us the forgiveness of our
sins, and that many ways.

The first Section.
First, for that the Lord has promised to forgive our sins, as before has
been sufficiently proved: in regard whereof it stands with his justice to
perform the same. And that also in such a necessity, as that either he must
forgive us our offenses, according to his word, or else we must account him
unfaithful in the breach of his promises, or else, which were horrible to think
or judge him to be, an hypocrite, or a dissembler, in pretending one thing, and
intending another: or else inconstant in altering that which he has spoken
with his lips, he must be thought (which were monstrous) to be unjust, in lying
against his truth. For injustice does not consist only in works, but in
words also, and it appertains unto a just man to deal not only uprightly,
but truly also. This justice therefore of the Lord, either must flatly be
denied, which were to deny God to be God, or else the remission of our sins
must of necessity be both enforced, and inferred. And therefore John in his
first Epistle, and first Chapter, urges this especial reason, saying; If we
confess out sins, God is faithful, and just, to forgive our sins, and to
purge us from all iniquity. And David in his 103 Psalm, in effect uses the
same reason, to persuade the forgiveness of our sins, saying; The mercy of
the Lord endures from age to age: toward them that fear him, and his justice
(or as some translate it, his righteousness) toward Childrens children. And
again in his 116. Psalm, the Prophet gathers the saying health of the Lord,
not only from his mercy, but also from his justice: and therefore he joins
them both together, to approve the same, saying; The Lord is gracious and
just, our God I say is merciful, the Lord that saves the simple, when I am
brought low, shows his salvation unto me. Many other are those places that
urge the same reason, to confirm unto us the forgiveness of our sins, and
therefore in this first respect we may boldly and truly prove unto our selves,
the remission of our sins from the justice of God: for it is a just thing
with the Lord, according to his promises, to forgive us our offenses.

The second Section.
Secondly, the Lord has already punished Jesus Christ for our offenses, and
therefore cannot in justice punish them in us also. For as Esaias testifies in
his 73 chapter, he was punished for our sins, he was broken for our iniquity:
we all erred as a sheep, every one of us turned to his own way, and the Lord
made the punishment of us all to fall upon him. What could be spoken more
plainly for the proof hereof, than this which the Prophet he^e by the spirit
of God delivers unto us? For we offended, and Christ was punished; the
servant displeased his Lord, and the father beat his son for it: dealing herein
with us, as he did with David. David committed adultery, and the child that
was borne in adultery, died for it. David caused his subjects to be numbered,
and the people in great multitudes were slain therefore. Or rather as Tutors
unto Princes children, deal with their pupils, if they commit a fault, their
servants are beaten: but herein is the difference: there the servant is beaten
for the son, but here the son for the servant: the natural son for the
unnatural child: the only begotten, for the adopted son: the gracious son,
for the son by grace: the beloved, for his enemies. So Christ was punished,
and we are pardoned: Christ was charged with, and we discharged from our sins.
For the Lord took him for the offender, and punished him as the offender. It
stands not therefore with Gods justice, to punish those our sins in our
selves, that he already charged upon his son, and our Savior Jesus Christ.
But the equity of this shall the better appear, if we shall consider, that our
sins are called and are indeed those debts which we ought unto the Lord. For
the payment whereof, Christ entered into bonds, with this condition therein
^ndorsed, that if we in any part failed, he of his own substance would
satisfy the whole. Now such was our beggary, that we were not able to satisfy
the same, and such was the wisdom of God, that he would not seek by rigor of
law to recover the debt of us poor men, the best and richest of us, being but
beggarly mates, and therefore in no likelihood able to make payment thereof to
his Majesty, albeit he troubled and su^d us never so long. The lord therefore
seeing that it was but lost l^bor, that was spent upon us, commenced his action
in great wisdom against Christ, being fully as rich in glory, in graces and
righteousness as himself, and therefore every way able to satisfy the whole; who
accordingly of his own substance, even of the substance of his body and blood
paid unto God the Father, whatsoever in justice either he could demand, or we
ought. We ought to die, he satisfied the same: we ought to have born the heavy
wrath and displeasure of the father, he satisfied the same: we ought to have been cast into hell, and he satisfied also the same, as we believe in our Creed:
and generally whatsoever we ought, he fully contented and paid unto the Lord,
insomuch, that the father himself acknowledged, and confessed in thunder from
heaven, that in him he was well pleased, even fully satisfied and contented.
So that eue^ by the confession of the Father himself, (solemnly made from the
heavens by his own mouth, in the hearing of many witnesses, who have left the
same for a matter of record, for our selves, our heirs, and all posterity) it
plainly appears, that by Christ, he himself is fully satisfied, contented,
paid, and pleased: and we therefore, and thereby, are fully and freely acquitted
and discharged, from the beginning of the world, unto the end thereof, from all
whatsoever debt of sin we ought unto the Lord. And that even in the justice of
the Lord, who cannot demand that as debt of us, which Christ has so fully
satisfied for us: especially, having for ever this general quittance, written
by the Lords own finger, to show for our full discharge. So that even by law,
we have a discharge from law, and from all our offenses, and sins, which were
those debts, for the payment whereof we were bound unto the Lord. So that the
Lord cannot enter into judgment with us, nor by the rigor of the law, claim
any debt at our hands. For with what justice can the Lord demand any debt at
our hands, when Christ our surety, who stood bound for us, has by the Lords
own confession, satisfied whatsoever he could demand, and has cancelled the
hand writing that was against us? So that how, or by what means would the Lord
recover any debt from us? can be sue his band against us? why he has none,
for it is cancelled. Or be it that he has; why, yet we have both the Lords own
confession recorded, and also sufficient witnesses, yea, a general quittance
in these words mentioned, and fully set down, written by the Lords own hand,
for our full discharge. The Lord has quite claimed all interest in our debts
and therefore can claim no interest in them against us The law of nations, the
law of nature, the law of our land, and the law of God clear us of all: even
of all our debts, of all our sins, of all our transgressions, and offenses
whatsoever. Thus then it appears even by the justice of god, that our sins
are clean blotted out, and forgiven. And this is the second reason therfrom,
that argues the same.

The third Section.
Lastly, the Lord has al^eady punished not only our sins, but for, and with
them, our own persons in Christ. For Christ did not bear only the punishment
for our sins, but our sins themselves also. According as Esaias bears
witness in his 53 Chapter, where, he speaking of Christ, says, that he bare
our infirmities, and carried our griefs. And again in the same place: My just
servant, says he, shall justify many, whose sins he has taken upon
himself. And again, he carrying the sins of many, made intercession for
sinners. For he is that true Goat mentioned in the 16 of Leuiticus, upon whom
the sins of all the people of God were put, verily and indeed: which
therefore he carried with himself, into the desert into the hewn place, even
into the grave, or rather unto the cross: where he fastened them, abolished,
and crucified them, together with himself, and so crucified our old man, and
abolished the very body of sin. For he is the body, the goat was but the
shadow: he therefore had our sins put upon him, and bo^e them with himself,
verily and indeed: even as the Goat, who was but a type, or figure of Christ,
bore them but ceremonially, and in a shadow. And therefore the Apostle Peter in
his first Epistle and second chapter, giving, as it should seem, the true
sense hereof, is not afraid to say, that Christ himself bo^e our sins in
his own body, upon the tree. Whereby (as the Apostle Paul says, in his
second Epistle to the Corinthians, and the fifth chap.) the Lord made Christ
that knew no sin, to be sin for us: that he might be made the righteousness
of God in him. So that hereby it plainly appears, that our sins, and
therefore, and thereby, our sinful person it self also, were verily and
indeed, put upon Christ. Whereby it came to pass, that he notwithstanding,
being still, and even then, the righteousness of God unto us: the unspotted and
undefiled lamb of God, in whose mouth there was no guile, and in whose heart
no sin:) that he, I say, appeared before God, in our person, whose sins he
bore: and that as the monstrousnes of sin it self, which therefore was
punished, and condemned in him. And so sin was condemned in the flesh, as the
Apostle speaks. For he that puts upon him other men's practices, puts
withal upon himself other men's persons: and he that takes upon him other
actions, takes withal upon him another person. As plainly appears, both by
our common and usual phrase of speech, who use to say, that he that has left
his old sin, and taken upon him a new life, that he is another manner of
person, yea, and that he is not the same man: and also by the phrase and use of
the Scriptures, which call the putting off of our sins, the putting off of the
old man, and the putting upon us of righteousness and true holiness, the putting
on of the new man: (as Col. 3. verse. 10.) the hid man of the heart: (as 1. Pet.
3, verse. 4.) yea Jesus Christ himself, as in the 13 to the Romans, and last
verse. And therefore is it said of Saul, in the first book of Samuel, the tenth
chapter, and the sixth verse, that the spirit of God should rush upon him: so
that he should prophecy, and be turned into another man. So that hereby it
plainly appears, that the putting on of other actions, and practices, makes
us to put on, and that verily, and indeed, in our own sensible feeling, other
persons. Christ therefore putting upon him other actions, I mean sins; (not of
his own, for he never did sin, but of ours:) put therewith upon him another
person: and this person was our person, as those sins were our sins, that
he took upon him. For these our sinful actions being put upon him verily and
indeed: our sinful persons also were put upon him verelie and indeed. So that
our persons by this means were upon Christ: and so we in our persons, were in
and with Christ upon the cross. Insomuch, that it may be truly said, that I,
thou, the whole world, Solomon, David, Peter, and Paul himself, as he says of
himself ( Gal. 2. ver. 20.) were (eue^ in our own persons) crucified with
Christ. For Christ, as one says, was made that adultrous David, that
idolatrous Solomon, and that Apostata Peter. As Paul says, he was made sin:
that is, our old man, as Paul in another place calls sin, and so our old
man: and we thereby the old men were crucified with Christ. For this our old
man being put upon Christ; we the old men, or rather out person, (I speak not
after the flesh, for we know no man after the flesh, as Paul says) was also
put upon him. As therefore he that puts upon him new garments, is thereby, as
we say, made anew, and another man: as he that puts upon him the office of a
prince puts on the person of a prince: as he that puts on other
practices, puts on another shape as it were: as Jacob putting upon him the
garments of Esau, appeared so to his father, and was taken for Esau: and as we
putting upon us the righteousness of Christ, at the day of the lord, shall put on
withal the person of Christ himself: (for though it be but the quality and an
accident of Christ, that we shall put on: yet it shall seem to us, to be even
the very person of Christ, his flesh, body, and bone, that we shall stand in
before God) so Christ putting on our sins upon himself as a garment, put
withal our persons upon him, and so appeared in our very persons, as if it had
been we our selves before God: and so was taken by his father for us, and
punished for us: and so we in him were punished as verelie therefore, as thou
in the revelation of the glory of the sons of God, shall appear in the
righteousness of Christ; the same as a white garment, being f^ll of glory, put
upon thee, thou thereby being in the person of Christ, and so shall even then
appear as Christ, righteous before God and shall be sa^ed, and live thereby.
So verery did Jesus Christ in the day of his sor^ow, and the anguish of his
heart, in the day of his cross, and of his infirmity, appear before God, not
only in the person of Daui^, of Peter, of Solomon, and such like, but also in
thy puerson and in the person of the whole world, as John calls the world,
and died, and was slain, and punished in the same. So that hereby it appears,
that thou in thine own person (for as the Apostles speaks, as before we
said, 2. Cor 7. we know no man afte^ the flesh) have already ben punished for
thy sins, and that thou as well as Paul, have been crucified with Christ. So
that already in thine own person, thou have suffered temporal, and eternal,
earthly and hellish punishments. Thou for thy whoredoms thefts, murders, false
witness, disobedience to thy parents, evil lusts, and desires, for thy
blasphemy, for thy idolatry, for the profanation of the Sabbath, for the
contempt of God, and whatsoever sin else, have already in Christ been brought
to open shame in the world, have been evil spoken of, rebuked, and reviled,
have ben made an open gaping and gazing stock to men, and Angels, thou have
been brought before rulers and Judges, thou have been accused, whipped,
skorned, condemned, and hanged, yea, upon the tree of the cross. Thou have
been in an agony, and sweat water and blood, thou have felt the wrath of God,
and hell fire, thou have ben forsaken of God, and cried out therefore. My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? thou have descended, even gone down into
hell, and had the portion of the reprobate, and damned soul, thou have feet
whatsoever punishment God in justice could lay upon thee. And therefore the
Lord cannot in judgment, and justice, exact again the same rigor of the law
upon thee for thy sins. So that even by the justice of God, which does not
punish (I say not with two kinds of punishments) but not twice for one sin,
thou art for ever fully freed and discharged from all sins whatsoever,
whether in word, in work, or in thought, whether of knowledge, or of
ignorance, of weakness, or of wilfulness, thou have already been punished for
them in thine own person, and therefore can not in God, justice again be
condemned for the^, in the day of judgment: in that day I say, when the wrath
of God shall be revealed from heaven upon all unrighteousness and disobedience
of man. Thy punishment therefore and thy pain is already past, and therefore
fear it not: there remains for thee no more recompense of sin, nor
fearful looking for of vengeance to come, but altogether mercy, and glory,
and grace, and life, and righteousness, in, and by, and through, and with Jesus
Christ our Lord: to whom therefore be all glory, and praise, and power, and
majesty, and might, and dominion, for ever and ever, Amen,

These reasons are taken from God the Father, being considered in his promises,
and in the natures of his mercy and justice. Hereunto I might add diverse
other reasons, taken in part from the glory of his grace, mentioned in the
Epistle to the Ephesians, and the first chapter, and from his patience, his
long suffering, and other the natures of God: and in part from those titles,
that are by the spirit given unto God the Father, as that he is our father, our
husband, our prince, our friend, and such like; all which notwithstanding I
will let pass, and come to other more apparent reasons, because it is my
purpose to make, not a book, but a sermon.

The 5 Chapter. VVherin the forgiveness of sins is proved, by a reason taken
from the se o^d person in the Trin tie, to wit, the wo^d Incarnate, even Jesus
Christ, being considered, as he is the vine, and we the b^a^ches.
THE next kind of reasoni^g for the confirmation hereof, i^ taken from the
second person in the Trinity: I mean the word Incarnate, even Jesus Christ,
who is above all things, God blessed for evermore: who being in like manner as
the father was di^ersly considered, affords unto us diverse reasons for the
proof hereof. First therefore we will consider him as the vine, whereof we are
branches, as the stock whereof we are gtaftes, as the root whereof we are
boughs, as the body whereof we are members, as the second Adam, whereof we
are new born. For we are baptized into christ, and thereby by are borne of the
first Adam, and of the second Adam, the sons of men, and the sons of God,
of the seed of man, which is mortal, and of the immortal seed of God, which
abides in us, and makes us to cry Abba father. So that at one time we have
regeneration, and generation, we are borne, and new born, we are born of the
children of man, who fades and withers a^ the flower, and we are borne
again the sons of the eternal and everliving God. we are begotten of the
first Adam, who is from the earth, earthly, and of the second Adam, who is the
Lord from heaven, heavenly. And as this is true, that as we have borne the
Image of the earthly, so we shall bear the image of the heavenly: So this also
is true, that as we are partakers of the earthly sap, and sin, so are we
also partakers of the heavenly seed, and righteousness And as that which is
borne of unclean seed, no man can make clean: so that which is borne of clean
seed, must needs be cleansed from all corruption. And as man that is conceived
in sin, and borne in iniquity, must needs be full of iniquity, and a
sinner: so man that is newborn of water, and the holy Ghost, must needs be
washed, and purged from all his sins. For even as the wild Olive branch,
being grafted into the natural Olive tree, being made partaker of the fatnes,
and nourishment the eof, is purged, and purified from his wild and bitter taste
and sap: so we being grafted into Christ the true vine, are made partakers of
the heavenly nature, and so purged from the guiltines of all our sins and
offenses. And this reason is notably urged by Paul in the fifth to the Romans,
in these words, saying: But not as is the offense, so likewise is the gift. For
if by the offense of one, many died, much more the grace of God, and the gift,
which is by the grace of one man, even Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many.
Neither is that which entered by one sinning, like unto the gift: for the
judgment came by one unto condemnation, but the gift of many offenses, unto
justification. For if by the sin of one man, death reigned by one, much more
they which receive the abundance of the grace and gift of righteousness, shall
reign in life, by one, even by Jesus Christ. As therefore by one sin, sin
came over all men unto condemnation: so by one righteousness, righteousness
came upon all, to the righteousness of life. Therefore as by the disobedience of
one man, many are made sinners: so by the obedience of one man many are made
righteous. So that hereby the Apostles notably shows unto us, how that Christ
was as able to wash us, as Adam to defile us, Christ as able to purge us, as
Adam to corrupt us, Christ as able to take away death, and sin, as Adam was
to b ing both, even death, and sin. If therefore this be granted, which before
has been proved, namely, that we were borne of Christ, as we were of Adam: it
must also needs be infe^red, that by Christ we are purged, and pardoned of all
those sins, which we drew with, and from the sin of Adam. So that thus we see
how we may prove unto our selves the forgiveness of our sins, by considering
of Christ as the second Adam, into whom we are grafted and baptized, as the
Apostle speaks.

The 6. Chapter. VVherin the forgiveness of sins is proved, by conside^ing
Jesus Christ, as he is our advocate, and intercessor, and the mediator of the
new Testament.
1. SEcondly, this is proved unto us, by setting Christ before us, as that
mediator of the new Testament, a^ the Apostle calls him: as that high Priest,
which was signified by Aaron in the law of Moses, who entering once into the
holy place by his own blood, makes intercession for the sins of the whole
people: and as our Advocate, as John in his first Epistle calls him, who
lives for ever, to make intercession, and pray unto the Father for all, that
come unto the Father by him. So that we are to consider of Christ, as our
mediator, who, when the Father is ready to whip us, steppeth in between the
Lord, and the sinner, and keeps us, as the mother does her child, from the
fathers rod. Yea, as our aduocat, our days man, who is ready to make our
defense, for our offense against God: and by pleading our weakne^, ^our
infirmities, our childhood, and young years, to reconcile us to God, and move
his father to pardon us. Yea, as the bishop of our souls, and that faithful
high priest, which cease not day nor night, to pour out his prayers, with
all watchfulnes, and feruencie, even as he did upon the earth, as the holy
Ghost bears witness for us, unto God the Father. And this he does ((...))
continually: because we continually sinning, might continually be pardoned. For
if he ceased to make intercession for us, there would be an intermission of
remission of sins. But when he never cease to importune, and entreat the
father for us: we are fully assured, that al our sins are for ever washed away.
For the Father cannot, by reason of his merit, and will not, by reason of his
mercy, deny any thing unto his requests. Father (says Christ) I know thou
hear me in all things: and thereby we know, that he hears him, in the
continual intercession that he makes for the sons of men. And this so much
the rather may we assure our selves of: for that the son is more dear unto
the father than the servant; the mediator of the new Testament, which is
Christ, than the mediator of the old, which was Moses. And Moses, as we know,
stood in the gap, and stopped the wrath of the Lord, fell before the Lord on
his face, and fasted forty days, and forty nights, for the sins of the
people of Israel, and obtained pardon for the same: much more then Jesus
Christ, who for ever, and not forty days only, cease not to make request,
shall obtain pardon at the hands of the Father (himself being the Son) for all
the true Israelites, even Israel which is of God, as Paul speaks. What shall
I speak of Ezekiah? who when the people sinned in eating the Passover, being
not before sanctified, and hallowed, prayed unto the Lord, and the Lord healed
the people. What shall I speak of Iosuah? of Elias? of David? and other the
men of God? at whose intercession the Lord wrought wonders in heaven above, and
in the earth beneath. Do not every one of these prove unto us, that the son
of God making intercession for us, unto the forgiveness of our sins, shall
assuredly obtain the same at the hands of his father? And this is yet further
assured unto us, by considering on the one side the fathers gentleness and
kindness, who is not a chu^lish and cu^rish God rough, and full of
displeasure, but one in whom there is no anger, as the Father himself
protests in Esaias, who is therefore the slowest to conceive a wrath, and
readiest to forgive, as David sings in his 103. Psalm: and on the other
side, the son, who by reason it is his office to pray for us, will not be
negligent therein: who, because he has been tempted in all things like unto
us, sin only excepted, will be a faithful and a merciful high Priest, in
those things that are to be done with God, concerning his people, who, by
reason of the love he bears to us ward, in that he gave his life for us,
will be careful and mindful of us: who, by reason of the opportunity of the
place, in that he is in the heavens: at the fathers hand, even at his right
hand: of the time, in that he lives for ever: of his grace and favor, in
that he is the son of his love: of his merit, in that he has deserved it:
shall be heard in all whatsoever he shall crave at the Fathers hands, in our
behalf.

For here meet together, the sons readiness, the fathers willingness; the
sons carfulness, the fathers cheerfulness; the sons importunity, the
fathers facility; the sons merit, the fathers mercy; the sons
mindfulnesse, the fathers gentleness; the sons disposition, the fathers
inclination; the sons practice, the Fathers purpose; the sons grace, the
fathers graciousnesse; the favor of the son, the favor of the father; they
favoring the one the other and they both sauouring us: the one ready to
crave, the other as ready to give: the one p^esent in representi g our
prayers, the other presently presenting him with his requests: the one
watchful in asking, the other striving to bestow: the son being glorious for
asking: the father being gl^rified for bestowing: the father willing to
gratify the son in all things, and the son ready to crave all things
from the father: the one being not unwilling to grant, the other not unready
to ask, whatsoever we a ke, no though it be even his holy spirit, much less
if it be the forgiue-of our sins.

2 I add hereunto, that the blood (...) Christ cries unto God the Father, and
speaks unto the Lord for mercy, for them that are sanctified therewith. For
the sprinckling of the blood of Christ speaks far better things, than the
blood of Abel, as the Apostle testifies to the Hebrews. For the blood of Abel
spoke unto the Lord for justice, but the blood of Christ speaks unto the
father for mercy. The one cried for wrath, the other for peace: the one for
vengeance upon his brother, for shedding of innocent blood: the other for
pardon, either for shedding innocent blood, or murder, or theft, or whoredom,
or usury, or blasphemy, or for any other whatsoever sin. If therefore the
blood of Abel cried so loud in the ears of the Lord, that it moved him to
execute vengeance upon Cain: much more the blood of Jesus, which still cries in
the ears of the Lord, will move him to mercy, even to pardon our sins, and
our offenses. For the cry of the blood of the son of God, which cries unto
god for better things, shall not have worser entertainment tha^ the blood of
Abel had.

3 I add further, that even the spirit as the Apostle speaks in the eight to
the Romans) helps also our infirmity, and makes intercession for us with
groans unspeakable. So the spirit also of God entreats for us, God entreats
God, the spirit of God entreats God the father for us: and how then can God
deny any thing to God, God the Father to his spirit, which even with
vnspeakeble groans, cries within us unto his majesty, for pardon for our
offenses?

4 I add yet further, that the Saints of God, I say not which are in the
heavens (for as the Prophet says, Abraham knows us not, and Jacob remembers
us not) but the Saints of God which are on earth, pray also for the forgiveness
of thy sins. For Christ has taught them to say. Forgive us our trespasses, as
we forgive them that trespass against us: willing them thereby, to make
mention of thee also, as well as all other the elect of God in their prayers.
And therefore he teaches them to say, forgive us, and not forgive me only, but
forgive my brother also, yea, even thee, and all other, that are as thou art
afflicted, and pressed down with the sight of thy sins. So that the elect, the
holy, and the beloved of God, pour forth their prayers for thee, and that not
one of them a^one, although perchance some one more especially, but all of them
entreat the Lord for thy sin, even for the pa^don thereof. Now thou know,
that the prayer of the faithful avails much, as Saint James tells thee: it
caused the Sun to stand still: it stopped the heavens, it brought down plenty
of rain and is able also to bring down plenty of grace, of pardon and of
mercy for thy sins: to open the heavens, and to stay the wrath of God
against thee, deserved by the same.

5 Add lastly hereunto thine own prayers, which thou contin^est (with the
widow in the Gospel, un o the unrighteous Judge, and with the woman of Canaan
unto the righteous Christ) with all feruencie in the spirit, and importunitie^
so that thy continuance in prayer, strengthens thee against all length, thy
importunity, against all s^rength in temptation: the one against all delays
the other against all de^^ies: and assure thy self, that thou shall find the
Lo^d as gracio^s unto thee for thy importunity, as the widow sound the
unrighteous Judge, and as merciful, as the woman of Canaan found the righteous
Christ. For how can the Lord deny so many, so continual so importunate, so
gracious, and so earnest suitors in thy behalf; some of them having so well
deserved, that the father should gratify the^ herein? His son entreats for
thee, the blood of his son entreats for thee, his spirit entreats for
thee, his spouse, which is his Church, and all his dee^e and beloved servants
entreat for thee, thou thy self humblest thy self before God also for thy
sins, and how think thou can God say nay to a^l these suitors in thy
behalf? Imagine that thy servant had offended thee, and thy son ready to die,
if thou deniest him, did entreat thee, thy wife entreated thee, thy servant
entreated thee, and the offender himself entreated thee, how har^ly could
thou deny their requests? The v^righteous Judge could not deny the
i^portunitie of one poor widow: and therefore the righteous God, who is the
judge of all flesh, cannot deny not one but many petitioners, craving pardon at
his hands for thy transgressions. Thus the^fo^e thou may see, how by the
intercession of Christ, thou may assure thy self of the forgiveness of thy
sin. And this is the second reason, taken from the consideration of Christ,
that proves the same unto us, which is also the same reason that John in his
first Epistle and first chapter uses, saying: If any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the righteous.

The 7 Chapter. Wherein the forgiunes of sins is proved, by considering Jesus
Christ, as he is our king and spiritual prince.
THirdly, this is proved unto us, by condering of Christ, not only as the
Priest, but as the Princ of his church: not only as our Advocate, but as our
King: not only as our mediator, but as our Judge: for he bears both those
offices. As he bears the office of the mediator, he entreats for us: as he
bears the office of a Judge, we entreat him: as he bears office of the
mediator, we pray in his name: as he bears the office of the king, we pray
unto his name: as he is a Priest, he prays for us: as he is a prince we pray
unto him: as he is our advocate, he int^eateth the father to forgive us: as he
is our king, and governor, he himself with the father forgiueth us. For as
himself testifies of himself, all power is given unto him, both in heaven,
and in earth, and the father judges no man, but has commmitted a^l judgment
unto the son: that all men should honor the son, even as they honor the
Father. Yea, the son of man, as he testifyeth to the Jews, in the healing of
the man sick of the palsy, has power also to forgive sins. And thi^ as he
says, he would that they should know, and therefore also that we should
acknowledge and believe. For that the knowledge hereof is especially
profitable, and comfortable to the soul, that is burdened with the sight of
his sins. For what and be more for our comfort, than to know, that our Prin^e
is our Priest: our advocate i^ our king our judge is our Savior: and that he
that entreats for ^he forgiveness of our si^^, can of hi^ self forgive us our
sins? To speak in a word, what can be more comfortable, than to know, and to
believe, that Jesus Christ, has absolute power in himself to forgive us our
offenses? For when the soul once knows that, it hops easily to obtain the
same, and that for certain especial good reasons.

1 First for that it knows, that Jesus Christ to purchase the forgiveness of
our sins did lay down his own life, and therefore having now purchased the
same for us he will bestow it upon us. For having pu^chased the same so deerly,
he will not let it perish unprofitably: which yet notwithstanding it should
do, if it were not given unto us. For Christ gave his life unto death, that he
might give us the forgiveness of our sins: for, as for himself, he had no
need of the forgiveness of sins because he had no sin. It was therefore for
the forgiveness of our sins, that he paid the ransom of his blood. If
therefore he having purchased the same for us, should not (himself having no
use thereof,) bestow it upon us: in vain should he have died, in vain
should he have p^^chased the same with his own blood, in vain should he have
suffered the shame of the cross, and so the cross of Christ should be made
vain, if the forgiveness of our sins should not be by Christ given to us, for
the use thereof is in us, as the end thereof was for us. Now we know that
Christ would not lay down his life in vain, and tehrefore, that he will
readily and cheerfully forgive us our sins: And this so much the rather we do
belee^e, for that he gave his life, that he might give it unto us, and
therefore much more having it in his own power to give freely, he will most
willingly give it unto us The father that to purchase an inheritance to bestow
upon his son, will indaunger his life, would much more willingly, if it lay in
his hands, and his bands, to give the same freely, freely bestow it upon him.
The friend no doubt that to save the life of his friend, and to purchase his
pardon at the hands of the king, would give his life unto death, would much
more willingly bestow his pardon upon him, if he might do the ^ame with the
safety of his own life; if ^e had power in himself to forgive, and ^o pardon
his offense. So that Lord, that to pardon, and to procure the forgiveness of our
sins at the hands of his father, laid down his own life (much more having
power in his own hands to forgive us,) will give unto us the forgiveness of
our sins. Being therefore justified by his blood, much more being now
justified, shall we be saved from wrath by him. For if when we were his
enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his son: much more being
reconciled, shall we be saved by his life. As Paul reasons in the fifth to the
Romans. And therefore this first reason may persuade us, that Christ that has
power in his hands to forgive us our sins, will easily be moved to pardon
them.

2 Secondly, this is farther persuaded unto us, by the consideration of his
practice and behavior, being here upon the earth, which always was most full
of mercy, of kindness, of gentleness, and of meekness, who ever came unto
him for sight, and went away blind: for hearing, and went away deaf: for
speech, and went away dumb: for legs, and went away lame: for health, and
went away sick: for comfort, and went away sorrowful: for the forgiveness of
hi^ sins, and went away a sinner: who ever came to the Lord, and went away
confounded, and ashamed.

The sick of the Palsy unto him but for health of the body, and he gave him
also unsought for, the health of soul; saying unto him, son thy sins are
forgiven thee. The woman that was brought unto him for judgment, being taken
in adultery, found mercy at his hand, in stead of judgment, and life in stead
of death. Woman, quoth he, where are thine accusers, has no man condemned
thee? neither do I, go thy ways and sin no more. The Jews that crucified him,
and put him, being the Lord of life, unto death, believing and being baptized
into his name for the remission of their sins, were received to mercy: yea,
hanging upon the cross, he prayed for his persecutors, saying: Father, lay
not this sin unto their charge, for they know not what they do. His
disciples would, as Elias, have commanded fire to come down from heaven, and
consumed his enemies, but he reproved them, saying. Ye know not of what spirit
you are. Such a one is Christ still, he has changed his place, but not his
nature: his mercy is rather increased, with his honor: and his meekness,
with his glory. The heavens make him not more churlish, which were rather
hellish than heavenly: but more kind, and loving, to all that faithfully call
upon him. For we must not think the God of all glory, to be like unto
corrupt, and profane man, whom honor puffs up, and makes so much the more
proud, and scornful, by how much the more glorious he is: but we must rather
take him and measure him, by the farthest distance therefrom: even by the
clean contrary thereunto For therefore is the manner of Christ his life with
men described, that we may know how he lives with God. That we knowing his
meekness on the earth, might look for his mercy from the heavens. And this
i^ the second consideration that may induce us thereunto.

3 Lastly, this his mercy, and readiness to forgive us, may the rather
appear unto us, by the promises of mercy made unto all those that come unto
him. As namely, the^e where he says, come unto me all ye that are heavy
laden, and I will ease you. And again, standing in the temple, in the great
day of the feast, he cried a loud saying; If any man thirst, let him come to
me, and I will satisfy him. And again to the woman of Samaria, if thou know
who it were that says unto thee, give me water, thou worldest have asked of
him, and he would have given unto thee, waters of the well of life, of which,
whosoever drinks, shall never hunger, nor thirst more. So that by these
promises of Christ both to give, and to forgive; to give graces, and to forgive
our sins; we are most fully resolved in this point. Knowing that, that
Christ, that is able, is also w^ ling: that has power, has also promised:
that has full authority of himself, has also full will as himself, to
forgive us our offenses. So that Christ having full power of himself to
forgive our sins; and we being assured of his willingness thereunto, both by
his promise, his practice, and the blood of his cross, we may be fully hereby
persuaded of the forgiveness of our sins. Oh, if a thief had such assurance
of his Judge, or a traitor of his king, how would it che^^e his dying soul?
we have this strong assurance of our Judge, of Christ our Lord and King, and
why do we not cheer in the knowledge hereof? Oh, let no fear of death or
sin fear us, so long as the Lord of life, and ^ighteousnesse, is our King, and
governs us, it is the Lord that justifies, and who shall condemn us? it is
Christ that dyed, yea, which is risen from the dead, yea, which sits at the
right hand of God the Father, who also entreats for us. Who shall separate us
from the love of Christ? shall oppression, or nakedness, or danger, or sword?
no, we are more than Conquerours by him which has loved us; as the Apostle
teaches us in the eight to the Romans. This then is the third consideration
of Christ, that confirms unto us the forgiveness of our sins.

The 8. Chapter. Wherein the forgiveness of sins is proved by conside^ing
Christ, as he is our Physician, that with his own blood cures and heals all
our infirmities both corporal and spiritual.
FOurthly, the forgiveness of our sins is argued, by considering Christ as a
sacrifice for sin, sweet smelling, holy and acceptable unto God as a
peace offering. Yea, a sin offering; yea as that immaculate, and Paschall
lamb, by whose blood, we for ever attain the forgiveness of our sins: and that
in a double respect. First, for that Christ is that good Physician, who not by
the roots of China, or the trees of America, by Para^elsus his minerals, or
Gallens his simples, but by his own most precious blood, helps all our
infirmities. For the blood of Christ is that purgation, that cleanses and
purges away even from the very soul, and not from the body only, (which
were but small thing in respect of this,) all the corruption, infection, and
filth thereof. For as S. John says, the blood of Christ purges us from all
our sins: that therefore is the only purger of the soul, which works
according to the Dos, or gift of Christ, the physician of the soul, strongly
upon the corruptions thereof: and brings them, and expels them all quite
and clean out of the same. Oh if Galle or Hyppo^rates, or Paracelsus, or other
doctors of physic, had been consulted with: if they had been sent for to
practice upon the same: if they had ministered either pills, or potions, or
confections, or boles, or electuaries, if they had ministered Rubarbe, or
Cassia, or Tamarnidi, or the Greek pill, or any such like, perchance they
would have purged the body: only the blood of Christ, is that strange and
strong purgation, that works upon the very soul, and purges the same, even
as Rubarbe or any such like, purges the body from the filth thereof: yea the
blood of Christ is that water that washes away the matter of our festered
wounds, and cools all the heat that flasheth in our soul, being bred by the
fiery darts of the devil. For as John testifies in his Revelation, Christ
has washed us by his blood, it is that oil that heals all our wounds. For
as Esaias says, by his stripes are we healed: it is that Triacle or Cordial,
more precious than the confection of pearls, which makes a man sound, when he
is ready to swoune for weakness. It is that Antidorum, or preservative more
sovereign than the Unicorns horn, that defends the soul from the poison of
the old serpent. It is that restoratiue, that even then, when we are ready to
loose our life, even the life of the soul, which is faith and to die in
d^spaire, being taken into our soul, r^^^^ueth, cheareth and quickneth it,
and so makes us to live, when we die. For as Christ testifies, he that
eats his flesh, and drinks his blood, has eternal life abiding in him: so
that though he die, yet shall he live. It is that wine, that cheereth the
soul; and that meat that strengthens the same, being exceeding weak. To
speak in a word, it cures all the diseases of the soul; it cures the pockes
of the ^oule, that comes by adultery: the gout of the soul, that comes by
ease: the surfeting of the soul that comes by gluttony and drunkenness: the
dead palsy, that comes of the coldness in profession: the consumption of
the soul, that comes by decaying in religion, I mean by Apostacy the
burning ague of the soul, that comes by overmuch choler and anger: the
leprosy of the soul, which is sin. And that which all other physic cannot
do unto the body, this does unto the soul. For it cures them that are love
sick, even sick for the love of women, gold, silver, promotion and of
themselves: yea, it takes away old, inueterat, and confirmed diseases: though
they have been continued ten, twenty, forty, fourscore, a hundred years: yea,
our whole life: yea, it heals natural infirmities, and those which were
brought into the world, even original sin, which we had from our fathers
infection.

And that which is more, we are borne blind, so that we could not behold the
light of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, and yet this makes us
see: we were born deaf, so that our ears, a^ the ears of the Adder, were
stopped against the word, and this opens them: we were dumb, that we could
not speak to the glory of God, and this gives us speech: we were born lame,
so that we could not walk in the ways of the lord, and this makes us whole:
for the blood of Christ is as able to cure the lame legs of the soul, as the
name of Christ in the Apostles spirit, was able to cure him that was a cripple
borne, and lay begging at the beautiful gate of the temple: the blood of
Christ is as able to cure all the diseases whatsoever of the soul, as the word
of Christ was to cure all the infirmities of the body, whatsoever. And yet I
know not how, we account not of this medicine: either because it seems base
unto us, because we know not the strength and virtue thereof: or else because
we need it not. For as whole men care not for physic, and them that are
sound, account not of purgations, but cast the^ in the fire, or at their heels:
so they that are lusty in soul, that think themselves sound as the Pharisie,
that are not wounded at the heart, as the Jews in the second of the Acts,
contemn the blood of Christ, and make no reckoning thereof. But when they are
once wounded with the feeling of their sins, then they take it to the heart,
that before they set at their heels: and never does man know the profit of
this blood, until he have been sick in mind. All other medicines of the body
will not help some one disease thereof: but this being but one, helps all
infirmities of the soul. And if it were not for this remedy, surely we had
been dead long before thi^ time: for we could never have lived half so long.
But now having this, it is a present remedy: whereas otherwise every light
word, and every little fall, would have killed body and soul: but such is the
force of the blood of Christ, that having the same ready, the strongest poison
of the serpent cannot overcome us, the hottest fiery dart burn us, nor the
greatest wound kill us: we are presently whole, so soon as we apply it. Oh if
a man had such a medicine for the body, as would preserve him from the plague
in all infections, from the pocks after all adulteries, from the gout after all
ease, from danger after all surfets, from death in all sicknesses, and after
all wounds: that would cure old and confirmed diseases, and those also which
were natural: of what price, and that justly, would he value the same? But the
death of Ies^s christ, and the shedding of his blood, does (as before was
showed) bring present remedy for all diseases of the soul: which are the
sins thereof: (for the same is sin to the soul, that is sickness to the
body) what account then ought we to make of this death, which death overcame
death: which overcame hell, and sin it self? So that we may say, away death,
thou art ouercom by death: away death, thou art overcome by life: his weakness
is ouercom by his strength: our infirmity by his power: our sin by his
righteousness: his death brought our life: he was weak, to strengthen us: he
base, that we glorious: he sick, that we sound: he a banished man, that we
Citizens: he flesh, that we spiritual: he shed his blood, that we might be
healed. We may therefore conclude, that no sin can hurt us, since the death of
Christ and his blood, is a present remedy against all. And thus in this first
respect, the blood of Christ being the physic for the soul, argues the
forgiveness of our sins, in that it proves the c^ring of our infirmities.

The 9 Chapter. VVherin the forgiunes of sins is proved, by considering Christ
as he is our redeemer, who has with his own body purchased of his father the
pardon of our sins, and with hi^ own blood ra^somed us, and paid the price of
the redemption of our sins.
IN the second respect, the blood of Christ proves the forgiveness of our
sins, for that it is not only the Physic of the soul, which purges the
same from all corruptions, that is, the sins thereof: but also that price, by
the which, Christ purchased of his father, the pardon for our sins. For as
the Apostle teaches us (in this present verse) we have redemption by his
blood, the forgiveness of our sins. And Peter in his Epistle tells, that we
were redeemed from our vain conversation, not with corruptible things, as
gold, and silver, but with the most precious blood of the son of God. Whereby
the Apostle teaches us, that as the pardon of our sins from the hands of
God, is far more excellent than the Popes pardon (which may, whether it be
for murder or theft, or whordome, or any such like be purchased for gold, or
silver, or wool, or such like trash:) so it is to be purchased with a price
far more precious, even with the blood of the son of God, which only was
able to purchase our pardon for us. And therefore if the same had been wanting,
alas what had there been left in us, able to have procured the same? A man
would fast water, and bread, all the days of his life: yea, he would travel
to Rome, to Jerusalem, and farther, bare footed, and bare legged: yea, he would
whip himself with cords, wreathed with iron: yea, lance himself with
pennekniues, ^s the Priests of Baal: he would give abundance of gold and
silver: he would keep open house, give great doale: relieve many poor, by
many trentall of masses build Abbeys, Monasteries, Churches, Schools, and
Colleges, as the Papists do, for the Pardon of their sins: yea, he would (as
they) lay open their shame to the Priests ears, in auric^lar confession, if
that would purchase him pardon for his sin: yea he would with the Jews, come
into the courts of the Lords house, and offer many Bullocks, Rams, and Goats:
he would shed rivers of blood, and pour out streams of oil unto the Lord:
yea he would (as Micheas says) give the fruit of his womb, for the sin of
his soul: and as the Idolato^s did, make his sons to go through fire, and
offer them to devils, if all this would pr^cure unto him pardon for his sin.
Yea, what would not a wound^d conscience give, to be disburdened of the weight
of his sin, and to purchase unto himself a pardon, not from the Pope, but
from he Lord for his offenses? But it will cost to great a price for him to
redeem his own soul, or the sin thereof, with any thing in himself. He must
therefore set that alone for ever, and look for the pardon of his offenses, by
the blood of Jesus Chirst; which is that only price, by the which it might be
procured, which being accordingly offered unto God the Father, and that upon
the altar of the cross; he has with the value and price thereof, purchased
that, which all, both heaven and earth could not otherwise have procured: even
the forgiveness of our sins. And thereby has left unto us an assurance, for
the attaining of the pardon of our offenses. For far^e be it from us, that we
should account the Lord either a cosener, who would deceive us, or a^ oppressor,
or an extortioner, that would by violence keep from us any such thing, as we
had right unto by the way of purchase. Having therefore right unto the pardon of
our sins, because Christ has purchased the same with his blood: we are
assured, that our sins must and shall be for ever forgiven, and blotted out
That Lord, that gives more than we deserve, will not keep from us that which
is our due: and he that gives all things freely, will not debar us of
that, which is purchased for us so dearly, as with the blood of Jesus Christ.

The 10 Chapter. Wherein are touched two reasons taken from the spirit of God
(the holy Ghost, being the third person in the Trinity.) The first as the
spirit is considered, to work repentance and contrition in us, and so washes
us from our sin. The other as the spirit breeds and works peace in our
conscience, wherewith the forgiveness of our sins is sealed.
Unto those reasons taken from the Father and the Son: I might add two other
principal reasons taken from the spirit of God.

1 The first whereof is this: namely, that one and the self same spirit, that
is, called by Paul (Romans 8.) the spirit of bondage to fear, and also that
works godly sorrow in v^ unto repentance, mentioned (2. Cor. cap 7.) is also
that sanctifying spirit of God, which washes and cleanses us from all our
sinne^: and therefore it is compared to fire and water: because as fire it
purges, as water it cleanses us from all our s^nnes: and therefore is it that
the Apostle says ( Cor. 6.) that ye are washed, that ye are cleansed, that ye
are sanctified, in the name of Jesus Christ, and by the spirit of our God. So
that they that sorrow rightly for their sins, and are possessed with the
spirit of bondage to fear, even to fear hell, Gods wrath, the devil, and
their own estate, may be assured, that the same spirit that works the
sorrow, washes the soul: that breeds the fear, brings the favor of God:
that defiles their cheeks with tears, cleanses their souls from sin also:
for one spirit works all, and in all the elect of God. So that while we lay
open our sins, we lay them upon Christ, who bears them, and takes them away.
While we hide not our sins, the lord hides them. He that sorroweth rightly for
the^, loses all sorrow for them: and he that rightly sees them, loses the
sight of them for evermore.

2 The second reason, is taken from the peace of conscience, which the spirit
working in us, does seal the forgiveness of our sins, as the Apostle
plainly shows in the fifth to the Romans, where he says, being justified by
faith, we are at peace with God. So that if ever since we sinned, we felt the
peace of conscience, it was the work of the spirit that sealed our
justification, that is, the full forgiveness of our sins. And therefore having
once felt the same, we need not doubt, whether our sins be forgiven us, yea,
or no. But as I have breefly omitted the other reason: so I will defer this
unto a more proper place. And so concluding those reason; that arise from God
considered in his persons; I will come unto other reasons taken from man, being
considered in his sins.

The 11. Chapter. Wherein is contained the first argument or reason, which to
prove the forgiveness of sins, is taken from the c^eatu^e (the reasons being
before taken from the crea^o^) and that from man, considered in himself, with
his estate being naturally in lined to sin.
THe first whereof, is taken from the consideration of the natural inclination
of man unto sin. For as David says of himself, In sin was I conceived, and
in iniquity did my mother bring me forth. And Job demands, saying: Who can
make that clean, that is borne of unclean seed? And Paul plainly teaches
us, that by the sin of one man, sin reigned over all: and that in Adam all
sinned. So that as we drew from Adam our being, so our sinning: as our flesh
and bone, so our corruption: as our nature, so our sin naturally. And as
there is in the seed of our parents, whereof we are born, a natural
inclination, by the blessing of God to grow: so there is in the same also a
natural inclination, by the sin of Adam, unto sin. And as the crabbed stock,
sends forth his sower juice into his branches, which therefore naturally
b^ing forth crabs, for fruits: so Adam being that sinful stock whereof we are
the natural branches, sends forth his sin into us: who therefore
naturally bring forth fruit unto sin, in great plenty. So that look how
natural it is for man to grow, to eat, to laugh, to reason, or to speak: so
natural also is it for him to sin. Therefore is it that sin reigns over
all, in such sort, as that there was never heard of any such man, (besides
Christ, who was not begotten after the manner of men) as was void of sin. For
if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us.
Paul confesses concerning himself, that the evil which he would not do, he
does. Daniel confessed in his prayer unto the Lord, his own sins, and the
sins of the people. Noah, his drunkenness: Jobs cursing: David's adultery:
Salomons idolatry: Peter's apostacy: and Moses infidelity: are by the word,
manifested unto the whole world. And briefly, what man is he that may not
learn to pray, as Christ has taught him, saying: Forgive us our trespasses,
as we forgive them that trespass against us. True it is, that many there be,
who have prayed with Paul, to have the Messenger of Satan clean removed: yea,
and have striued to attain unto the power of the death, and resurrection of
Jesus Christ, and unto the resurrection of the dead: that even in this life,
they might be freed fully from sin. But never could either Paul, as him self
confesses, or any other therefore, attain thereunto. And no marvel: for
nature may well be corrected, but never by any labor clean rooted out. And
therefore as the Cat of the mountain cannot change her spots, nor the Ethyopian
his skin, since nature has made them such: so neither can man clean put away
his sin, since nature has made him a sinner. Which thing howsoever, it cannot
excuse the obstinat, yet it may comfort the weak: knowing that the Lord will be
more easily moved to pardon those our sins, which nature will we, nill we,
inforceth us to do. For when we sin, we do but our nature. And therefore in
reason, we the rather are to be pardoned. For even with reason, this is a good,
and therefore a common reason, why me should spare our brute beasts, behauing
themselves more brutishly: alas, say we, let them alone, they do but their
nature. And why should it not seem unto reason, as good reason, why the Lord
(in regard of whom, man is not so much, as a brute beast is unto a man) should
spare, and not for merit, but for pity pardon man, who when he sins, does
nothing else but his nature: for his own nature drives him unto sin. This
reason therefore seemed so good unto the holy Ghost, and so comfortable unto
David, that he especially uses the same in his 103. psalm, to show, that as a
father pitieth his own children, so the Lord (as mercy respects misery, so
pity respects frailty) pitieth them that fear him. For, says he, the
Lord knows our making, he remembers that we are but dust, and that the
days of mortal man, are but as the grass, and that he flourishes, but even
as the flower of the field, when the wind blows upon it, it is no longer,
neither is the place thereof known any more. This therefore is the first
reason, taken from the consideration of our selves, to whom being begotten in
sin, it is natural to sin.

The 12. Chapter. Wherein is contained the second reason, taken from man, to
prove the forgiveness of sins, by the consideration of our infancy, we never
being but newborn babes, so long as we live.
THe second reason is taken from the consideration of our infancy, which so
long continues as we live in this present world. For in regard both of God,
and also of that perfect aged man in Jesus Christ, we are no more, nor better
than newborn babes. And therefore does the Apostle Peter in his first Epistle
and second chapter, call us babes, saying: as newborn babes desire the
spiritual and guiltles milk of the word. So likewise does John in his first
Epistle, and last chapter, call us, saying: Babes keep your selves from Idols.
And for this cause does the Lord appoint unto his Church in this present life,
Kings and Queens, to be nursing fathers, and nursing mothers: and feeds it
as it were with pap, even with the sincere milk of the word. And in all other
actions deals so with us, as parents with their young infants. And no marvel:
for in every action of this present life, we show our selves to be more than
babes. Our weak knees, our babish reason, our childish imagination, our
dallying with God our Father, our unseasonable cries, our unseasonable
requests, our fathers rod, the blaspheming of his name, the defiling of our
selves, our beds, and our garments, and the often falls which we catch, as
children that are vnweaned, and cannot go alone, do more than convince the
same. Ad hereunto, how late it is since that we were newborn, and (as babes)
begotten by the immortal seed of the word: and this doctrine will shine as
clear as the sun, at the noone day. For what though we have been regenerate
an hundred years since: is it in regard either of God, with whom a thousand
years are but as one day: or in regard of immortality, and that long aged
life, that we, that are borne of the immortal seed of God, shall be
partakers of: is it, I say, in regard thereof, any more than yesterday? So that
it appears hereby, that the strongest Christian, and the perfectest man in
God, is scarce a child of one days age. And therefore are they sitly called by
Peter, (...), even now, not only newborn babes: as it were in their blood.
The full persuasion whereof, may breed in us a lively hope of the mercy and
favor of God to us ward. Knowing that our parents, after the flesh, could even
then, when we played the wantons, defiled our beds, and our garments, miscalled
our parents, yea disquieted them with our cries in the night season, be
contented not only to pardon us, but also to laugh at us, considering that as
yet we were but in our infancy. How much more then think we, will the Lord our
heavenly father, even when we live wantonly, walk weakly, speak foolishly,
think childishly, even when we defile our selves with blood, our beds with
sin, or our souls with blasphemy, and evil speaking, or with any other such
like sin, be ready (be it not spoken to the maintenance of any of these
sins) to forgive us? considering our childhood, our young and tender, and
therefore indiscreet years: wherein albeit we work foolishly, or speak
unseemly, yet we do according to our understanding, and speak, as they say of
children, as well as their wit serves them. Indeed, if after this present
life, when we shall come to the measure of the age of Christ, full grown,
even to a perfect man: if then I say, we should (as we are assured we shall not
(commit any of these sins, and slip into any of these falls, then there were no
such hope left unto us, by reason of our confirmed age: but now to sin, is
agreeable to our years: and to pardon sin, is agreeable to Gods wisdom,
who knows how childish we are. And these are those reasons taken from our
selves, to prove the same. Now let us consider those reasons, that are taken
from sin it self.

The 13. Chapter. VVherin is contained the first reason, taken from sin it
self, which is drawn from the name of sin, being called our debt.
THe first reason for the proof hereof taken from sin it self, is drawn
from that name, that the spirit of the Lord our GOD gives, as in other
places, so especially in the sixth of Matthew unto sin, where it is called our
debt, that we owe unto the Lord. For there the Lord teaches us to pray after
this manner, saying. Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. For so the
grek word? (...), and (...), do signify. Where it is manifest that by
comparing this place of Matthew with the 11 of Luke, and the 4. verse, that by
debts he means sins. For that which Matthew calls our debts, Luke calls
our sins, saying. Forgive us our sins, as we forgive every one that is indebted
unto us. So that hereby it is evident, that our sins are those debts of ours,
which we owe unto the Lord. Which being so, there arises unto us a notable
persuasion of the readiness of the Lord, thereby to pardon and forgive them. For
what do we think, that the Lord cares for such debts, that he will exact
them at our hands by the rigor of the law? That he will sue us, arrest us,
implead us, or imprison us for the same? Why is sin, which is our debt, so
dear, so precious, and of such account with the Lord, as that he will strain
us, and so constrain us to pay the same unto his majesty? Surely, if a man
ought us a box on the ear, We would scant strain him for such a debt. For
we had rather loose it, then law for it: such is our debt of sin, which we
owe unto the Lord. For sin is as it were a box, given to the Lord in his face,
striking immediately against the glory of his majesty; and then will the Lord,
think we, drive us by order of law to pay the same. Why, is the Lord so poor,
and beggarly, that he were undone, if we did not make payment of this one debt
unto him? Has he such need of sin, that he knew not what shift to make if he
had not this debt of our sin out of our hands? Why, would it so g^eatly
hinder the Lord, to forbear it, or to forgive it? No, no, it would turn
exceedingly to the advancing of the riches of the glory of his grace, to
forgive the same unto us, as before we proved. And therefore since to forgive us
our debts (as our Savior Christ calls our sins) is no means to diminish,
but rather to increase the riches of the glory of the grace of God: since the
treasury of his mercy is thereby more and more amplified, and enlarged: since
it turns to the Lords advantage: since he gets, while he gives, and
forgiueth: we may be fully assured, that the Lord, who is (if I may so speak)
covetous of his own glory, will easily and readily forgive us our offenses.
And this is the first reason, taken from the name of sin.

The 14 Chapter. Wherein is contained the second reason taken from sin it self
to prove forgiunes of sins; which arises from the effect of sin, serving to
set forth the abundance of the grace of god, and to magnify his power.
THe second reason taken from sin, arises from that effect, which sin
works, as we say, per accidens: that is, not from his own and proper effect,
but from the work of the Lord thereby. For it serves to the setting forth of
the abundance of the grace of God: and to the magnifying of the power of the
Lord. As plainly appears both by the testimony of Paul: who says, that
where sin abounds, there grace abounds also: and also by the answer of
the Lord made unto Paul, who said unto him (praying, as himself testifies
three times that the messenger of Satan, the prick of the flesh, might be
removed away from him) my grace is sufficient for thee. For by thy weakness is
my power made perfect: or, as some translate it, made strong. This answer of
the Lord unto Paul, I take to be spoken unto all men, and so especially unto
my self. For of a truth Lord, thy power is made strong indeed by my weakness.
For now I being (endued, though with some good gifts) overcome by Satan, do
know the power of the spirit that dwelt in thee, to be perfect, and powerful,
that never could be overcome by Satan's assault. Thus is thy power made perfect
by my weakness, by comparison. Again, O Lord when I am overcome, I feel the
power of thy death, to overcome Satan, hell, and condemnation: and of a weak
man to strengthen me so, that thy power is made strong by thy victory. For the
power of Satan, and of my sins, cannot ouercom the power of thy death which
is Satan's death, and of power against him. Again my God, I being weak, do
sometimes couercome, when before I was ouercom: by whose power was this but by
thy power? which is so much the greater, by how much I am the weaker. For
Satan is wonderful strong, and I wonderful weak. How then could I overcome
him being wonderful strong, except thy strength were wonderful in me, being
wonderful weak? Oh Christ be strong in me, for I am weak. Thy power O Christ,
is the greater, and thy grace so much the more abundant, by how much my sins
are the greater, that thou pardonest. To pardon small sins, is great grace: but
to pardon many sins, and those monstrous also, magnifieth the abundance of
thy grace to me ward: and not only unto me, but it commends the excellency
thereof, to all that taste thereof. Lord, I speak not these things to make them
a cloak for my sin, but a comfort to my soul: nothing doubtti^g but that I
doing that, which it is thy will I should do, and that for the glory of thy
grace, and the perfecting of thy power, shall easily obtian pardon for the same:
yea, though it be sin that I do. Thus have I by mine own practice, showed
the force of this reason, that thou may read it, know it, feel it, and
practice it at one time. To this reason, I might add one other from that name
of sin, where it is called our infirmity, or disease, and our phrenzie, and
madness, as the Philosopher calls it. Which might therefore seem the rather to
be pardoned, because it was done in our madness. But I will omit this reason,
and come to the consideration of other reasons, taken, not as these, from
every man in himself, being considered with his sins: but from others, even
men and devils.

The 15 Chapter. Wherein is ^ontained the first reason, taken from man, as he
is considered in others; which is drawn from the examples of other men, by
which the eternity of the forgiveness of sins, is further assurd unto us.
ANd first we will consider the examples of other men, by the which assurance
of the forgiveness of our sins, is yet further assured unto us. For what on
sin have we committed, which other the Saints of God have not either before or
after their calling committed? and yet, as the spirit testifies, received
pardon for the same. Have thou committed adultery? why so had the woman that
was brought unto Christ in the eight of John: so had the woman of Samaria in
the fourth of John: for Christ said unto her, thou have had five husbands, and
him whom now thou have, is not thy hu ba^d. So had David with Berseba, and yet
the Prophet said unto him, the Lord has taken away thy sin, that thou shall
not die therefore. Have thou been possessed with the devil? so was Mary
Magdalene who had seaue^ devils cast out of her. Have thou distrusted the Lord?
so did Moses at the waters of strife. Have thou as it were despaired? so almost
did Jeremy, who said in the third of his Lamentations, that he was a cast away,
and there was no hope for him in God So did David in his 77. Psalm, saying;
Will the Lord cast me off for ever? should he be no more entreated? should his
loving kindness fail for ever? and his promise from one generation to another,
come utterly to an end? Have thou murdered and slain thy brother? so did David
murder Vrias. So did the Jews put to death, and slay the Lord of life, as Peter
charge them in the second of the Acts, and yet they were by the same Apostle
baptized to the forgiveness of their sins. Have thou stolen and robbed thy
brother? So did the thief that was crucified with Christ, to whom
notwithstanding Christ said, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Have
thou been an oppressor, an extortioner, and an usurer? So was Zacheus, who
notwithstanding repenting, and making restitution, heard that comfortable
saying of Christ unto him, happy art thou Zacheus, this day is health come
unto thine house Have thou contended and fallen out with thy brother? So did
Paul and Barnabas: betwixt whom the contention was so hot, that they departed a
sunder, one taking Luke and the other John. But have thou (being but one man)
committed all these sins? Have thou been an Idolater? defiled the Temple of
God? beaten down his truth? erected Idolatry? have thou been a witch, a
coniurer, a southsayer? have thou shed abundance of innocent blood, so that the
streets flow therewith? have than committed more abominations, than the
Cananites, or the Emorites, whom for their filthiness the Lord cut out of the
land of the living? have thou offered thy sons and daughters, and sacrificed
them to devils in fire? All these things did Manasses, as it appears in the
21. chapter of the second book of the Kings: and yet he returned unto the
Lord, and found favor and mercy for all his sins: as it appears in the
33. chapter of the second book of the Chronicles. Are thy sins greater than
the sins of Manasses? or is the mercy, and the arm of the Lord shortened?
is the Lord a respecter of persons? did he forgive Manasses repenting him of
his sin? and will he not forgive thee, returning unto himself, and calling
upon his name? is not the Lord rich in mercy unto all them that call upon him
faithfully? whether they be Jews, or Gentiles, Greeks, or Barbarians, there
is no difference in the Lord. Are these things left unto us in the word, either
to follow, or to comfort us withal? Does not Paul teach us, that whatsoever
is written, is written for our learning, that through the patience, and comfort
of the Scriptures, we might have hope? even be comforted, while we hope, that
the same Lord, that has been thus merciful unto others, will as well be
merciful unto us also: that he will make our sins, that are in like manner as
red as skarlet, as white as snow: and that are like unto the purple, to be as
the wool: as himself has promised by the mouth of his Prophet Esaias. This is
the first reason, which is taken from other men.

The 16. Chapter. VVherin is contained the second reason, taken from man, being
considered in others: which is drawn from the testimony of others: as of the
Ministers of the word of God, of the Prophets, of Christ himself, of the
Apostles, and all other holy men of God, who as faithful witnesses announce and
confirm the forgiveness of sins.
THe second reason, is taken from the testimony of others, who affirm, and so
confirm this unto us. And herein we will first consider the testimony of the
faithful Ministers of the Gospel of God, to whom thou being afflicted,
ought to repair for comfort. And that, both by the express commandment of
the Lord himself, who by the mouth of his Prophet Malachy, says that the
Priests lips shall contain knowledge, and the people shall enquire the law at
his mouth. And also by the example of the Jews, in the second of the Acts: who
being wounded in conscience, came to Peter, and the rest of the Apostles,
saying; Men and brethren, what shall we do? For the Ministers are the Physicians
and Surgeons of the soul, to heal the same, as well as they are the Lords
warriors, and so by the force of his spiritual weapons, of power to cast down
every high hold, every strong thought, and every name that is exalted
against the name of God and Jesus Christ. And therefore, as by the armor of
God on the left hand, they can wound thy conscience: so by the armor of God on
the right hand, they can wound the spiritual enemy. As by the law, they can
kill thee; so by the Gospel they can quicken thee: as by the one they cast thee
down: so by the other they can lift thee up. For they are the dispensers of the
manifold graces of God, and the Lords stewards, to give to every one his
portion in due time. Judgment, to whom judgment appertains, and mercy unto
thee, unto whom mercy belongs. So that if thou repair to them for comfort,
and ^f they shall give thee comfort, thou may be comforted indeed. If they
shall give thee thy portion, in the forgiveness of sins, they give unto
thee, as unto the Lords servant, that thy portion therein which is due unto
thee. If they shall say unto thee, that thy sins are forgiven thee, it is all
one, as if the Lord himself had said so much unto thee. For they are the Lords
servants, not only as other men, to do their masters will, but his message
also: not only to serve him in doing, but with going also: not only to come
when they are called, but to run when they are sent. For they are as it were
the Lords footmen, which are sent by him to do his message, and to signify
his mind unto thee. And therefore is it that the Apostle asks in the tenth
to the Romans, how they shall hear without a Preacher, and how they shall
preach except they be sent? So that when the Minister comes unto thee, to
comfort thee, and to assure thee of the forgiveness of thy sins, thou must know
for a certainty, that he is sent unto thee by the Lord, to do this his message
unto thee, and to tell thee, even from the Lords own mouth, that thy sins
are forgiven thee. And this thou may and must assure thy self of, whether
he come unto thee, either voluntary without thy procurement (as Nathan did
unto David, who said unto him (hearing the confession of his sin) and the Lord
has taken away thy sin, that thou shall not die for it: and as Christ came
voluntarily unto the Jews, without their sending for him, the spirit of God
having anointed him, and sent him to preach the glad tidings of the Gospel,
even unto so many as were a far off:) or whether he come unto thee, being sent
for by thee, as Peter was by Cornelius, who although he came unto Cornelius,
being sent for by him, yet both was Peter by the vision which he saw, warned
by God himself to go: and also Cornelius commanded to send for him, by an
Angel: but thou by the spirit. And therefore when the Minister comes unto
thee to tell thee that thy sins are forgiven thee, assure thy self as the
truth is in Christ Jesus, that whether he come by thy procurement, or without
thy procureme^t, he was sent to thee by the Lord, to signify so much of his
gracious pleasure unto thee. For every faithful Minister is the servant of
the Lord, sent from the Lord himself to do his message: yea, he is the
Ambassador of the Lord. For as Paul shows, 2. Cor. 7.20. we are Christ^
ambassadors for you. As therefore the ambassador represents the person of the
Lord his king that sent him: so does the Minister of the gospel being the Lords
ambassador, represent the person of the Lord, and his Prince Christ Jesus: and
so ought to be taken, even as an earthly ambassador is, with the kings and
princes of the world. As therefore this is true, which Paul in the
forementioned place says, namely, that we come as Ambassadors in the name
of Christ, as though God himself entreated you by us, so we entreat you in the
name of Christ to be reconciled unto God: So likewise this is true, namely,
that we come as Ambassadors in the name of Christ, as though God himself
spoke unto you: so we say unto you in the name of Christ, that your sins are
forgiven you. And therefore when thou see the ambassador of the Lord, which
is his Minister, come unto thee, and tell thee, that thy sins are forgiven
thee, think with thy self, that the Lord as it were by his own mouth, has
now told thee, that he has pardoned thine offenses. Yea the Ministers of the
lord are the Angels of the Lord, and so are called in the third of Malachy, and
the first verse: in the second and third of the Revelation, and in diverse other
places. For there John Baptist, the forerunner of Christ, is called the Angel
of God: and again, the Minister of Ephesus, of Philadelphia, of Smyrna, of
Pargama, is called the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Philadelphia, Smyrna,
Pargama, and so forth: to teach us, that so we should account of the Ministers
of the Gospel, as of the Angels of God: and of their message in the name of
Christ, as if an Angel of glory from heaven, should have told us the same.
Now if an Angel should have spoken to thee, as he did unto Manoah, or unto Mary
the mother of Christ, at his conception, or unto Mary Magdalen at his grave, or
the Disciples at his ascension, or unto John in the Revelation, or as unto
Christ in his agony, thou would I hope be satisfied and comforted
therewith. And why then art thou not as well certified by the testimony of the
Ministers, which are in like manner (as thou know) as well the Angels of god,
as they: although indeed herein they differ: the one is an heavenly, the other
an earthly: the one a more glor^ous, the other a more baser Angel: yet they
are both the Angels of the Lord, both the one, and the other. And the^fore thou
ought in this message of God, to give as much credit to the one, as to the
other: as much unto Esaias, as unto Gab iel: unto Paul, as unto Michael: if we
may t^uely call him an Angel: as much unto Moses, and the Prophets, as to a man
rising from the dead: as much unto the earthly Angels, as unto the angels of
heaven For thou ought not to respect so much the messenger, as the Master:
the servant, as the Lord: the Ambassador, as the Prince: the beauty as the
officer of the Messenger: except thou will be an accepter of persons. But if
thou will needs respect the person, regard the person of God, which is common
to the Ministers, with the Angels of glory. For as well does the Minister of
god, as the angels of God, bear and represent the person of God. Thou must not
think the grace to be less gracious since the messe^ger is not so graced: nor
the treasure to be of less value, be^^se it is brought unto thee, by or in an
ca^^he^ vessel. For the word of the Lord, is the same in the mouth of a man
and of a throne: in the earthly, and in the heavenly Angel. Notwithstanding it
is more for thy profit, to have this message done unto thee by a man, than by
an Angel of glory. And that, both because such is the excellency of the glory
of an Angel o^ light, that thou can not endure the brightness of his
presence: and also, because thou neither can be so familiar with him, as
thou desire and should be, to deliver thine estate: nor yet can at al
times, when thou desire, being o^ the earth, have conference and recourse
unto the Angels, being in heaven. The Lord therefore ascending up on high, gave
among other gifts, this gift also of great value, unto his Church, and unto thy
self, even Pastors, and Doctors: th^^ is, the Ministers of the Gospel of God
(...) even the earthly Angels, that should b^ continually and familiarly
conversant, (...) dwelling with earthly men: that might after a more familiar,
and less fearful manner, declare unto the^ the secret counsel and hidden
mysteries of God. Give therefore credit unto the Lords ministers, an^ glory unto
God, that has given in hi^ great love this blessing, and grace unto thee, that
thou should continuall^ have abiding with thee, his Prophets, and his
Angels, at whose mouth thou mai^ be certified of the forgiveness of thy ^^ns.
Yea, the Lord has not given on^y this name unto his ministers, to con^inue
unto thee the forgiveness of thy sins: but he has further given unto them
power, and authority (us ministers of the word) to forgive thee thine
offenses. For is those keys of the kingdom of God, that the Lord gave in
Peter, unto the Church, saying: Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted: whose
sins ye retain, they are retained: whatsoever ye bind in earth, shall be bound
in heaven: whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. So that if
the Ministers of the Gospel of God, shall in the spirit of God, and power of
Christ, forgive thee thy sins: if they shall say unto thee, as Nathan did
unto David, The lord has taken away thy sin: or as Christ unto the sick of
the palsy, Son by sins are forgiven thee: assure thy self, that insomuch,
as they have loosed ^hee from thy sins on earth, the Lord ^ath loosed thee
from thy sins in heaven: insomuch, as they have remitted and forgiven thy
sins, they are re^^^^ed and forgiven indeed. And ta^^ heed that thou do not
as the most part of t^^ world does that deprive themselves o^ this comfort, and
other the like, by the contempt, and base account of the Ministers of the grace
of God: believe the Lord, and his Prophets says Iehosophat and thou shall
prosper. Despise not this gift which God has given thee: for it is one of the
principal gifts mentioned by Paul in the fourth of the Ephesians, that Christ
when he took his farewell from the earth, gave thereunto. I speak not these
things to maintain the Popes auricular confession, or usurped authority: but
the lawful power, given by God to his ministers: and the^fore herein must meet
together, (I mean in the forgiveness of thy sin by the minister) his
discretion, thy contrition: his faithfulness, thy faith: his wisdom, thy
repentance: hi^ calling, and thy calling: his calling must be lawful, thy
calling must be true: he must be faithful, thou must be penitent: he must be
faithful, thou must be faithf^ll: he faithful in his office, thou in thy
conversion unto the Lord. And then if these things be joined (...) ^ether in
thee, and in him, thou mai^ (...) assured, that the Lord in heaven ^^th
forgiven thy sins: as his ministers on the earth have pardoned them: and that
God has loosed thee in heaven, that art loosed in the earth from ^hy sins.
Thus from the testimony, and ^itnes of the ministers of the kingdom of God,
thou may approve unto thine own conscience, the forgiveness of thy ^ins. And
this shall be the more strongly confirmed unto thy soul, if thou shall
^erevnto add the testimony of Moses, David, Solomon, Esaias, Jeremy, Ezekiel,
Da^iel, and all the rest of the Prophets: the testimony of Christ, Peter,
Paul, James, John, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and all the other Apostles,
Evangelists, and holy men of God: who as it were out of the dead, being dead,
speak unto thee, auouching and confirming with one voice, one mouth and one
spirit, that thy sins are forgiven, and all in offenses clean blotted out: so
that being compassed about with such a cloud of witnesses, and those such as
are g^eater than all exception, we ought to rest peaceably in the forgiveness
of our sins, which these so many and so faithful witnesses, confirm unto us.
These are the testimonies of men, wstich confirm unto as the forgiveness of our
sins.

The 17 Chapter. VVherin is contained the third reason, taken from others,
which is derived from the Devil, he testifying, and in his own language
confirming unto us the forgiveness of our sins.
THe third reason, being taken from others, is taken from the testimony of the
devil: who very sufficiently in his natural language, if we rightly
understand the same, confirms unto us the forgiveness of our sins. And
therefore for the better understanding of his speech, and language, I will set
thee down but two precepts and rules, as it were characters, by the which thou
shall easily understand the darkest and hardest words in the devils tongue: and
so shall in short space become a good languager. The first rule shall show thee
when he speaks: the second what he speaks. Concerning the first, know for a
certain, that whenever thou receiuest any answer in thy conscience, contrary
to that which is promised, or spoken in the word, contrary to the forgiveness of
thy sin, to the receiving of the spirit of adoption, to the increase of the
graces of the holy Ghost, to the attaining of the inheritance of the Saints in
light, or the possession of eternal life, or any such like, that then the
devil tempts thee: and speaks that word, and makes that answer in thy
soul. For this persuasion, and this answer, and this word, that the Lord will
not forgive thy sin, or give thee his spirit, or eternal life, and salvation,
comes not from God. For the word of God says the clean contrary. And we
know that the Lord speaks not one thing in his word, and another thing in thy
conscience; one thing in his scriptures, and another thing in thy soul. Learn
therefore this for a true and an infallible precept, that whenever thou
receiuest an answer in thy self, contrary to that which the Lord has
promised, that then the devil speaks: and this thou must know to be true,
although the persuasion come from thine own concupiscence, and corrupt nature.
For the Apostle calls the prick of the flesh, which is the motion, and work
of original sin, the messenger of Satan (2. Cor. 12.) This then is the first
precept, by which thou may know when he speaks.

The second rule, which must make thee understand his words, must make thee
first understand his nature, which is to lie. For it is natural for the devil
to lie. For he is naturally a liar: as appears both by the testimony of
Christ in the eight of John, where he says, the devil was a murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth. There is no truth in him, as oftentimes
as he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own, because he is a lier, and the
father of a lie: and also, by the practice of the devil himself, who both lied
to our mother Eve, saying: that if she did eat of the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil, that she should be like unto the gods, in the knowledge of
good and evil, and that they should not die: and also was a lying spirit in
the mouth of the Prophets of Achab, and so deceived Achab, and his Prophets.
Out of this knowledge of the devils lying nature, thou shall presently pick
the meaning of his speeches, and words. For this rule is generally true, that a
lier speaks clean contrary unto the truth: and the clean contrary of that
which the devil speaks, is true. For in a lier, the clean contrary part
must be taken for the truth. If therefore it ever has been said unto thee in
thy soul, that thou should not be saved, or that thy sins should not be
pardoned, it has been as it were the message of the Lord unto thy soul, to
signify unto thee, thy election, and justification: that thou should be
saved, and that thy sins were forgiven. And look how often this has been
urged unto thy soul: so often has it been told unto thee by the Lord,
although by the message of the devil, if thou had rightly understood his
language. And therefore, when thou, fearing the forgiveness of thy sins,
receiuest an answer in thy soul, that in vain thou prayest, and that thou
shall not be pardoned, because thy sins are greater, as thou art persuaded then
that they can be forgiven: so often cheer thy self, and thank God for his
loving mercy, and message, that has told thee, and certified thy conscience,
though by the message of Satan, that thy sins are forgiven thee. For always
that which is clean contrary unto the speech of a lier, is the truth. And
therefore when Satan says, that they are not forgiven: the clean contrary
is true: and that is, that they are forgiven. If we have once learned this
lesson well, and shall put the same in practice in our souls, and consciences:
we shall find as much comfort in this reason, (I know what I speak) as in any
other reason whatsoever. For her by the mouth of the devil is stopped for
ever, and he goes away raging, not knowing what else to say. For if he did
flatter us with the forgiveness of our sins, we would not receive his
testimony: as Paul would not receive the testimony of the southsaier, or
Christ of the devil, that confessed him to be the son of the living God:
but we would believe that to be true, because the Lord in his word said it.
Again, if he did terrify the conscience, and deny the forgiveness of our
sins, we would believe it then most strongly, knowing that, in that a lier
did deny it, the truth it self did affirm it. Thus every way Satan should be
taken in a Dilemma: what argument soever he used, it would be turned upon his
own head: and we should be more wise, tha^ the devil was subtle: we should
have better skill in the truth of Logic, or reason, than he in Sophistry. If
he did flatter us, we would cheer upon it: if he did fear us we would cheer
also upon it: if he did persuade the forgiveness of our si^s, we should be
comforted: if he did dissuade the forgiveness of our sins, we should be
comforted also, and thus every way we should be strengthened, chea^ed, and
comforted.

The 18 Chapter. Wherein is contained the last reason, taken from others, to
p^oue the forgiveness of sins, which is drawn from the evil and dangerous
counsel of Satan.
THe last reason that we will at this time consider, is taken from that
devilish and dangerous counsel, which Satan gives to the soul: which
being troubled with the weight of sin, desires the forgiveness thereof.
For it is the fashion of Satan, when thou have sinned, to persuade thee to
kill thy self, to hang thy self, to drown thy self, or at the least to cast
off al confidence in hope, all use of faith, and fully to despair of the mercy
of God. Then the which what counsel can be more devilish for Satan to give? or
more dangerous for thee to follow? For despair is a sin of the first table,
against the first commandment, and against the highest God And therefore
without q^estion, it is the highest and greatest sin of all other (that great
sin only, which is the sin against the holy Ghost, excepted.) It is therefore
a worser, and a greater sin to despair, then it is to worship Idols, to
profane the Saboth, to blaspheme the name of the Lord, to dishonor thy
parents, to kill thy father, or thy brother to deflour thy neighbors daughter,
or wife, to rob thy neighbor, to bear false witness, and to forswear thy
self, or then it is to commit any other such like sin. And no doubt, but
that Caine sinned more grievously, in dispairing of Gods mercy, then in the
murdering of his brother Abel: and Judas sinned not so much in betraying, as in
distrusting Christ; his treason was not so grievous as his despair ^^s. And
the fore if according unto the counsel of the devil, thou should ad
despair to thy other sins: to thy whoredom, thy murder, thy blasphemy, or
thy robbery, thou should draw sin after sin as it were with cartropes:
add drunkenness unto thirst, and so heaping up of thy sins, should fulfill
the measure of thine iniquity, and purchase to thy self swift damnation
Beware therefore how thou follow this counsel of the devil who, as in all
other speeches he shows himself most znfaithfull: so in this his persuasion
to dtspaire, most, I know not whether I shall call him dangerous, or doltish.
For to persuade to despair after sin, to commit one sin after another, the
greater after the lesser: is as much, as if an unfaithful physician should
prescribe a man after he has taken cold, to take rats baue to drive it away:
or after he had caught the murre, to drink cicuta, or the juice of hemlock, to
drive it away: which being far colder then the former cold, would bring
sudden and speedy death: even such is the physic, which that good physician
of the soul, I mean the devil gives thee. For when thou have committed a
great sin against God, he would have thee commit a greater: to drive away the
fear of death, he prescribes the spedie death of body and soul: to drive
away the fear of hell fi^e, he would have thee presently to run to hell, and
to the devil: even as if a man that feared the water, should presently drown
himself: or if a man feared the fire he should presently go burn himself:
and so presently feel, that which he feared because he would sear no longer.
Then the which what can be more foolish, or contrary unto reason? And yet so
foolish thou art, as that thou art ready to execute his counsel, and to think
it the best course for thee to follow: yea although thou can hate other sins,
and cry out against the lothsomnes thereof yet thou can be ready to give
place to despair, which is the greatest sin, and to like that well enogh to
nourish it, and to think that thou might do well to despair, and to cast
off al hope of gods mercy. Is it not a strange thing, that thou should loath
whoredom, theft, murder, and such like sins: yea, and if thou were but moved
to them, he grieved thereat, and yet like of despair, a sin far greater
than all the rest? yea, and that thou being but moved thereunto, should give
place unto it immediately? If therefore other sins be loathsome unto thee,
for the monstrousnes thereof: let despair, which is the most monstrous sin
of al other, be most loathsome unto thee. If thou fear and fliest other
sins: fear, and fly especially despair: which is a sin far greater
than they all. And if thou having committed adultery, murder, or theft, or any
such like, art by Satan tempted to despair, answer him, and say thus unto
him: Satan, thou have tempted me to commit this sin, thou have tempted me to
lie, to dissemble, to commit adultrie, and such like: herein I have yielded to
thee. Is it not enough, nay, is it not too much, that I have thus far yielded
unto thee, except I should now ad despair unto the rest of my sins? If it were
now in my hand to undo that sin which I have committed, I would never surely
by the power of the lord, yield so much unto thee as I have done. And therefore
far be it from me, that I should again at thy procurement sin more
grievously, in falling to despair, of the grace and mercy of God. Indeed if
despair were any means to ease me of my sins, then parchance I might easily
be brought thereinto: but since it is a means to increase my sins, the
burden and grief of my soul, and the punishment of my sin: since it is a
means to bring a certain destruction, to a destruction that was but fea^ed:
certain, to an incertaine condemnation: death of body and soul to the death of
faith: eternal, to temporal grief: the pains of hell, to the pangs of
conscience: hell fi^e, to thy fiery darts that stick in my soul, I were
bewitched, and worse then mad, if I would yield thereunto. Thus thou must learn
to stop Satan's mouth, and to stay thine own faith, that it fall not into
despair: of which I would have thee to be most jealous, fearful, and
suspicious, knowing the danger, and unrecoverable evil thereof. If thou have
robbed God of his glory, in dishonoring of him: yet give glory unto him in
believing of him: so shall thou get as much glory to his name, by believing
him: as thou did rob him of, by disobeying him: and purchase as great, nay,
a fair more excellent righteousness by faith, then thou did loose by sin.
For as Paul testifies in the fourth to the Romans, to him that works not,
but believes in him, that justifies the wicked, his faith is imputed, and
accounted to him for righteousness. And this righteousness of faith, is, as
in another place the Apostle testifies, the righteousness of God: which is
far more excellent than the righteousness of man. And this righteousness
perchance thou would never have sought for, if thou had not seen thy
self naked, and destitute of all righteousness in thy self: and covered so
over with the shame of thine own nakedness, and filthiness, that thou were glad
to run unto Christ, for his righteousness to cover thee: and buy of him
eie-salue, and white garments, that thy nakedness might not be seen. If
therefore thou have lost righteousness, yet keep faith: if thou have lost the
breast plate of righteousness, yet keep the shield of faith, whereby thou
may quench all the fiery darts of the devil. If thou have lost the armor
of light, the cloth of my soul, yet defend and keep faith, which is the life
of the soul; for the just shall live by faith. Say unto thy soul with David.
Why art thou so vexed oh my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me? O
my soul, trust in the Lord, and wait upon him, for he will heal thee. Thou
see my soul, what comfort the Lord has left unto thee in his word, and what
lively hope of pardon; he has promised to forgive thy sins, and has sealed
the same unto thee by his word, his oath, his covenant, and by outward signs
that mine eyes have seen: his mercy, his justice, his son, his spirit,
confirm the same unto me: mine own nature, my young years in the Lord, and my
sin it self: the testimony of the ministers of the Lord, his servants,
Ambassadors, and his Angels: God, and man: my self, and others: Angels, and
devils: sin, and righteousness: wine, and water: heaven, and earth: yea, all
things affirm the same unto thee my soul. Behold therefore, and trust in the
Lord, and he shall satisfy thee with good things, and make the increase of thy
lips, and create peace within thee, and refresh thee with the waters of life,
and make thee see his saving health. The Lord will not lie, that has spoken it.

The 19 Chapter. Wherein is largely and particularly declared, how Satan
effectually to work an infidelity in us, and to make us mist^ust and
misdoubt, nay despair of the forgiveness of our sins, fetches reasons out of
every particular reason that we do, as we to persuade, so he to dissuade the
forgiunesse of sins.
I Stand the longer in proving of this one thing, because there is no one thing
more hardly persuaded unto the soul, than this is, and that by reason of the
subtlety of Satan, who has two general means to make us doubt hereof. The
one is, by blinding the eyes of our understanding in such a sort, as that the
light of the glorious Gospel of God cannot shine unto us. For he is that God of
the world, that works effectually in the hearts of many men: (yea of the best
men sometimes) and thereby so dapraueth and crooketh the right shape of their
understanding: as that the truth of the general promises of God, the force of
reason, neither any thing else for the present time, can make them to concern
and believe the mercy of God, and the forgiveness of their sins: because they
are so covered over with darkness, and as it were a thick cloud of mist. The
other is, by using our own corrupt nature, and infidelity, which when we have
said, and done what we can do will still stick in us, and doubt hereof, and
therefore will be ready to say, Well, for all this, I doubt whether the Lord
will forgive me, yea, or no, and be so good as his word. This our corruption
Satan uses to corrupt us withal: this our infidelity, to make us infidels
and this our doubting, to make us despair of the forgiveness of our sins. And
that he may work the same more effectually in us, he fetches reasons out of
every particular reason that we do, as we to persuade, so he to dissuade the
forgiveness of our sins. And first, as touching the promises of God, which is
our principal and first reason, he will labor to make us distrust them: either
by putting into us a fear, or else an evil suspicion of the lord: as to think
nay to say in our hearts, I but what if the lord will not be so good as his word:
who is stronger then the Lord, to compel him to it? or what law shall we have
against him? he is above all law; and therefore we can neither strain him
nor constrain him to fu fi^l his promise: we cannot sue him upon an
assumpsit. But be it that we could; he would find some one cause or other, he
would find some demurre, or pick some quarrel against us, and so would easily
find a staff to bear a dog as the proverb is. And herein he sets the
Lord before us, as it were a tyrant, who albeit he promise never so much, and
perform never a deal, yet no ^an is able by reason of his force, to enforce
him thereunto. And by this counter buffe, he so buffeteth us, that we are
rea^ie to stagge^ at the p^omises of God. But if this will not serve, he will
run with us to the second reason, which is taken from the mercy of God. And
he will grant it, yea, and say it is true: God is me cif^ll indeed: he gave
thee this and that blessing and benefit: thou were sick, and he healed thee:
poor, and he enriched thee: base, and he honored thee: miserable, and he
relieved thee: yea he gave thee of his spirit, the joys of the holy Ghost, the
peace of conscience: he lifted the light of his countenance upon thee, and
revealed unto thee himself, and his son Jesus Christ. These benefits (will
he say) as thou know, should have moved thee unto repentance: but thou,
according to the hardness of thine own heart, that cannot repent, have sinned
against the Lord: and so heaped and hoorded up wrath against the day of wrath,
and the revelation of the just judgment of God. Indeed (will he say) if thou
had never received these graces from God, then had there been left unto thee
some more hope: but now, after thou have received all these graces, to fall
away, to quench the spirit, and grieve the holy Ghost, whereby thou were sealed
unto the day of redemption: is such a sin as cannot be pardoned. And to this
purpose he will allege the saying of the Apostle to the Hebrews, in the sixth
Chapter, where he says, that it is impossible that they which have been once
enlightened, and have tasted the heavenly gift, and been partaker of the holy
Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to
come, if they fall away, to be renewed by repentance. And by this means, and
testimony of the spirit of God, he exceedingly terrifieth the conscience: and
will never suffer it to have peace, until it shall please the Lord, to give
thereunto the right use, and sense of this place: wherewith Satan being
repulsed, assaulteth them afresh, reasoning from the former mercy of God, to
the forgiveness of their sins, after this manner: saying, thou had
sinned before in the like manner, and in the same matter, and that not once or
twice, but oftentimes, and the Lord pardoned thee: and now do thou think
that he will pardon thee again? Why art thou not ashamed to come again unto
the Lord, and crave pardon for this sin? With what face (will he say) can
thou look upon the Lord? Why me thinks, that thou should be ashamed to
trouble the Lord so often, with thy prayers and requests. Indeed (will he say)
if it had been the first, or second time, then it had been more tolerable:
but now, after the fifth, or sixth time, or more, again to trouble the Lord with
thy requests, it is neither for thy honesty, nor for the Lords ease, to be
troubled so often, about one matter: and by this means he makes us sometime
for shame to ru^ From the Lord, and with Ad^m, being ashamed to hide our selves
in the woods from the presence of the Lord, and not to dare to crave pardon
again for our sins, until we have learned the nature of the Lords mercy,
and with the prodigal son, setting all sha^e aside, to retu^ne to our
father, and to confess, that we have sinned against heaven, and against our
God, and that we are not worthy to be call ed hi^ sons: and also, that shame and
confusion belongs to us: but mercy and forgiveness unto the Lord, If he see
that this reason will not serve the turn; he will turn over the leaf with
us, and come to the third reason, which is taken from the justice of God* And
from thence he will reason after this manner, saying: Thou know that the
Lord is a just God, a revenger of all disobedience offered unto his Majesty,
and such a one, as in the midst of his mercy thinks on justice, and
therefore he will not, no, nor cannot be appeared, until he has eased
himself of hi^ enemies, and avenged himself of thy sins. And the rather to
persuade this, he will tell us, that it is a fearful thing, to fall into the
hands of the living Lord: and that no adulterer, fornicator, covetous person,
murderer, or such like, shall enter into the kingdom of God, or Jesus Christ,
but shall have his portion in that lake that burns with fire and brimstone,
which is the second death: as the spirit testifies. And the more deeply to
persuade this unto the conscience: he will set before us the son of Gods love,
Jesus Christ, and tell us, that the Lord spared no not his own son, who had
put our sins upon him: and how then shall he spare us? yea, he will set
before our eyes the wrath of God poured upon Cain, for his murder; upon the
Beniaminites, for their adultery; upon Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, for their
rebellion; who went down quick into hell: and upon the Sodomits, whom the
Lord destroyed with fire and brimstone, from heaven, for their sin: yea, he
will set before our eyes the threatenings of God, who has threatened death, and
damnation, to all that shall transgress his laws: and those curses contained in
the law of God, denounced against the wicked. And as they which are in
security shall hear from Satan, nothing else but mercy, mercy: so they that
are afflicted, shall find nothing from Satan, but justice, justice, wrath,
vengeance, and displeasure. And by this means, it is incredible what fear and
trembling he breeds in the hearts of the mourners: and by that means, how
hardly they are brought that hear nothing, see nothing, feel nothing, but Gods
justice, to embrace, and believe his mercy. And by this reason, he continually
terrifieth the conscience, until it know, that both the wrath of God was
appeased in Christ Jesus, who in our person, and for our sin, was punished, and
so the justice of God was executed, in, and upon him: and also, that as the
law, with the threatenings thereof, appertains unto the obstinate: so the
promises, with the grace of God, and not the law, appertain unto them that
are truly humbled, and in Jesus Christ. For they that are in Christ, says the
Apostle, are not under the law, but under grace. Now if Satan see, that none
of these reasons from the Father, will serve his turn, he will run with us
unto Christ, and will tell us, that there was never any such man as Christ was:
or if there were, that he was but a deceiuer, a iugler, a false Christ, sent
into the ^orld to seduce the wicked, and them that are appointed to
reprobation: as shall more at large appear in another place. But if this will
not serve the turn; he will persuade us that Christ came to be a judge, to
condemn the world, and to leave them without excuse; as he did Martine Luther:
and so will he set him frowning upon us, as a Judge, that is displeased with
us. Or if this will not serve; he will tell us, that Christ came not to die
for us, but for Peter, Paul, David, and such like: but as for us, he knew us
not, we were not then: and therefore he could not then die for us. But yet, if
this will not suffice, he will even chide with the soul, and ask him whether
he will make Christ a bawd for his sins. And this especially he urges,
while we seeing our own nakedness, do seek and sue for the righteousness of
Christ to put upon us, as a white garment to cover us: so as our nakedness,
and the filthiness of our sins be not seen. For then he will still urge this
one thing, saying: Oh thou would have Christ to be a cover, a cloak, yea, a
bawd for thy sin: but all in vain, will he say. And for the proof hereof, he
will straight allege the saying of the Lord in the 70. psalm, which is to be
applied to the obstinate, and such as hate discipline, and cast the words of
God behind their back, as there plainly appears: where he says. As soon^ as
thou see a thief, thou consentest unto him, and thy portion is with the
adulterers. Thou openest thy mouth to evil, and with thy tongue thou framest
deceit. Thou sitting, speak against thy brother, and slaunderest thy mothers
son. While thou did these things, because I made my self as it were deaf:
thou think me to be such a one as thy self is: but I will reprove thee, and
set before thine eyes thy sins in order as they were done. And herby he
excedingly trobleth the conscience, and fills it with fear, and despair,
until such time as we feel our selves verily and indeed, to be covered over
with the righteousness of the son of God, Jesus Christ, who is made unto us of
God the Father, wisdom, holiness, righteousness, and redemption. If this reason
will not prevail against us, he will reason as well as we, from the holy Ghost:
and will tell us, that the fear that is bredde in our conscience for our
sins, is not the work of the spirit of God, to frame us unto repentance, and
to breed in us a godly sorrow, to amendment of life: but rather, that it is a
servile fear, such as James says, is in the devils; who fear, and tremble:
yea, a doubting such as is in the infidels: of whom the same James speaks,
saying; Let not the man that doubts, think he shall receiu^ any thing: yea,
that it is a fore-tast of the displeasure of God, and of the fearful estate
of the reprobat. And as touching the peace of conscience, albeit we have
abundantly felt the same, yet he will persuade us, that it was not the peace
of conscience, but rather an illusion of the devil, sent unto him by the Lord
to deceive him, and so to destroy him by a false flattering of himself. And
for the better persuasion hereof, he will tell us, that the devil can change
himself into the image of an Angel of light, and by that means so deceive
us, as that we cannot, as he will say, discern the work of the spirit, from
the illusion of the devil. To whom if we shall answer, that albeit he can
change himself into the image of an Angel of light: yet not into the like
working of the spirit of God: for that he cannot create, either joy, or peace
of conscience. or the spirit of adoption in us. For these are proper works of
the spirit: yea, even in them that have a temporary faith, and fall away
again unto perdition, his mouth is stopped, and he will leave this reason, and
come unto our natural inclination to sin, and from thence he will reason after
this manner, saying: Thou know that the Lord will forgive the sins only of
the penitent and them that do repent: that leave their sins, and never
commit them again: for that (will he say) is true repentance. But thou ceasest
not to sin: for as thou were conceived in sin, so thou continuest in sin:
and then continuing in thy sin, how do thou repent thee of thy sin? and
then, thou not repenting thee of thy sin, how can thou look that thy sin
should be pardoned? And thus by a false persuasion, that repentance consists
in a clean abolishing of sin, and not in the amendment of life, as the truth
is that it does: he deceives the conscience, and persuades it, that
therefore their sins are not pardoned, because they are not for ever
abandoned. And unto this persuasion, he adds diverse other reasons taken from
sin it self: and first, from the greatness thereof, which he amplifieth and
increases very artificially, showing himself herein a Grammarian, that can
frame of the positive, which is the lowest, the superlatiue, which is the
highest degree: a Rhethoritian, that has a notable facility and grace in
Hyperbole: a Logitian, that can reason from the lesser, to the greater: as
also, if occasion served, from the greater, to the lesser: an Arithmetitian,
that has skill in multiplying: a Musician, that can make the lowest cord,
accord, and sound equally with the highest: a Geometritian, who, as he can
describe the whole world, in a little paper: so infect much paper with the
description of a little country: and to speak in a word, a right devil, that
make a mountain of a moule hill. For these are the arts, or rather deceits of
Satan: whereby he can notably increase the greatness of our sin. If it be but
in consent, he will persuade us, that it is all one, as if it were done. And to
this purpose, he will allege the saying of Christ, in the fifth of Matthew,
where he says that the that looks on a woman to lust after her in his heart,
has committed adultery with her already. If it be committed after grace
received, and of knowledge: he will persuade us that it is the sin against the
holy Ghost, which shall never be pardoned in this world, nor in the world to
come. If it were committed before our calling, and gross also, he will tell us
that our sins are greater, then that they can be pardoned: as he persuaded Cain
that his were. And for the better persuasion hereof, he adds the testimony
of the law, which confirms, as he pretends, that which he himself
affirms. As for example: if a man have with Solomon committed idolatry, or
with David adultery, or with Peter apostacy: here the law says, that
adulterers, idolaters, fornicators, and such like, the lord will judge: Satan
says so: the conscience knows so. The law says, no idolater, nor
fornicator, nor unclean person, shall enter into the kingdom of God, or
Christ: the devil says so: the conscience says so. The law says, the Lord
hates such: the devil says, the Lord hates such: and the consciece fears,
that the Lord hates such: and it knows it self to be such. So that Satan
affirming, the law confirming, the conscience consenting sin is made out of
measure sinful, by the law, and the art of Satan. and so it seems to be so
great, and immeasurable, as that it exceeds the greatness of the mercy of
God, and the value of the blood of Jesus Christ. And yet further, the more to
increase the greatness of our sin: he wills us to weigh the weight thereof,
which we feel sensibly to lie very heavy on our souls, after we have committed
the same. And therefore is it, that David counts him happy, that is lighted
of his sin: and Christ wills the^ that are heavy laden to come unto him, and
he will case them. Now Satan by ^^e heavy weight of our sin, persuades the
h^inous work in sinning: and concludes, that because our fin is intolerable,
it is immeasurable: and therefore, that as it presses us unto the earth, so it
will into hell: as it casts us upon our face, so it will cast us from the
face and presence of the Lord. Unto this weight of sin, he adds the
monstrousnes that is in the same. For as righteousness is a most glorious
virtue: so is sin a most ugly, deformed, and monstrous thing; and so as it
is, Satan makes it appear to the soul. For howsoever before when Satan
inticeth us to sin, we are blinded, that we cannot behold the monstrousnes
thereof, because he covers it over with a pleasant and delightful cloak; yet
after that the fact is committed, he opens our eyes: to that the flithines
and monstrousnes thereof appears at large unto the soul. Out of which, as
Satan reasons, that therefore, since sin is a monster, it is monstrous: since
it is monstrous in shape, it is monstrous in show, and measure. So the soul
easily is resolved thereof: and that so much the rather, because it is an eye
witness of that which Satan says. And yet the more to increase the horror
and greatness of our sins: he adds the multitude thereof: which are more in
number, than either the hairs of our head, or the stars of the sky, or the
sands of the sea shore, which are innumerable: and that therefore, albeit our
sins were not mighty, as we would believe: yet in so much as they are so many,
he will easily infer, that they are exceeding great. For that which wanted in
the greatness, is ^ecompenced in the multitude: and that which wanted in the
weight, is repaired with the number: whereby our sins have been so exceedingly
multiplied: as that what with the greatness, and what with the multitude, our
measure of iniquity is fulfilled, our vial full, and the treasury and hoord
of our sins, filled to the top: and that therefore the wrath of God must
needs immediately smoke against us. And thus, partly by the law, partly by the
weight, partly by the monstrousnes, and partly by the multitude of our sins: he
by this his art so increases our sins, that he decreaseth our faith: and
makes them to be so great, that our faith is little, or none at all: he so
fills our Lord with sins, that he emptieth the heart of hope: and makes us
ready to think indeed with Cain, that our sins are greater than that they can
be forgiven. Thus, as Satan reasons from sin in the first place, from the
greatness thereof, to dissuade the forgiveness thereof: so in the second place he
reasons from the presence thereof, which by the force and work of Satan, even
after the forgiveness thereof, and the peace of conscience, and the
righteousness of Christ given unto the soul, is put in the memory, and
represented unto the soul: and that in such a lively shape, idea, and form,
as they are, and were in their own nature. And this made David complain in
his 51. psalm, that his sins were continually, before his eyes: yea, after that
the Prophet Nathan has told him, that his sins were taken away, and that he
should not die therefore. And this made the same Prophet count him happy,
whose sins were covered ( Psalm. 32) namely, that they were no longer present
before the eye of his conscience, as well as the eyes of the lord And this is
that, that makes the godly, at the hour of their death, or the day of their
trial, to doubt, to fear, and to tremble, because they see their sins still
before their face and fresh in their conscience: which of it self were enough
to make them doubt of the forgiveness of their sins. How much more? when Satan
shall reason from thence, and persuade them, that therefore their sins are not
done away: since they are still as fresh in their conscience, as if they were
but now done: that therefore they are not blotted out, since they are imprinted
in their consciences: that they are not defaced, since they are before their
face: and that they are not taken out of their soul, since they are still
therein. And whereas before they were covered, he will tell us, that that was but
with forgetfulness or with security, or hardness of heart, or pleasure, or some
other fancies, that crept into the soul, in stead the^of. But now when these
things were gone, he might see, as Satan will say, that the guiltines of his
sin, still gilded over his conscience: and the deformity, and filthiness
thereof, was but stubbered over with untempered mortar: and not washed clean
out, by the blood of Jesus Christ, and the spirit of our God. And by this
means, how he troubles, fears, casts down the soul, and beats down
faith, no man knows, but he that feels: and he that feels it, knows the
strenght of Satan, and of this reason, against the forgiveness of our sin. And
yet further, because he would leave no stone, as the Proverb is, unremoved: he
reasons from the name, as before he did from the nature of sin. And he
tells us, that our sins are our debts, which we must make payment of: for the
Lord will not, as Satan will tell us, be any looser by us. And here, when he
has told us. that we are not able to satisfy the debt: he will tell v^
withal, that he is the Lords attorney to arrest us, his man of law to wage the
law against us. his laylor to take us into hell, which is his prison And herein
indeed he will begin to execute his office, to lay the law to us, to sue us, to
implead us, and will bring the matter to an execution, or a Nisi prius. For if
we have not before a quittance to show, sealed, and written with his own
finger, against this debt: he will make us glad, to keep our houses, yea, our
beds, or else to run away (if we can) to hide us: or else to fly to some man to
succor us: or else to some privileged place: even to Christ, the sanctuary and
place of refuge, for them that fly, and dare not show their faces, for the
debt of sin, that they owe to their Lord. To whom, if they shall fly, Satan
will labor to outrun them, and will be there at the leastwise in show, before
them: and then, when they would step unto Christ, Satan would step up between
them, and Christ: and taking upon him the frowning person of Christ, as he is
man: he will make the conscience believe, that it is Christ that frowneth upon
him: and so if it be possible, he will make them to fly from Christ, and drive
them to David or Solomon, or Manasses, by their examples to comfort themselves:
where also he will be sure to meet with them: and tell the^, that as for
David, Solomon, Manasses, and such like, they were the elect vessels of God:
but as for themselves, they were no such, they were vessels of wrath, and
appointed by the Lord unto reprobatio^: and therefore, although no sin could
separate David from the Lord, yet some one, should for ever cast the^ off from
the love of the Lord: as one sin did the devils; as one offense did Saul; and
as one murder did Caine; and that therefore it is in vain to trust by their
examples to be pardoned. Now, if being dashed by this persuasion, we shall
leave David, Solomon, and the rest, and determie to have recourse unto the
Ministers of the Gospel, either he will labor to hinder us, that we shall not
manifest our estate to them; and that, either for fear, or for shame; that thus
our grief being not imparted, might not be impaired; and being not parted
with others, might not depart from our selves: but grow, as confirmed diseases,
to become incurable; or else if he cannot by the providence of God hinder this
purpose and practice in us; he will labor, either on the one side, to drive
us, as he has driven many to the popish reconcilers: to the priests of Baal:
and to Balam for counsel: and so to seek case from the devil, and from
Antichrist: from crosses, from crucifixes, from holy water, from Campions bones
f^o^ relics of Saints, from our own works, from the popes absolution, or
from his pardon, and not from Christ: and so bring us in a worse case, then we
were before: or else on the other side he will breed in us such a dislike of
the ministers of the gospel, for their contempt, for their poverty, for their
infirmities, or for some other such like cause, that he will make us thereby
out of conceit with them. And therwithall persuade us, that they are the false,
and not the true prophets of the Lord. And that, whereas they comfort them,
they do but flatter them. And therwithall, he will not stick to say to the
conscience: I, go to, flatter thy self: but thou shall find in the end my
words to be true: and that even as I told thee also: when thou shall see, that
thou criedst peace, peace, when sudden d^struction was at hand. And as for
absolution of the minister: he will either demand what authority he has to
forgive sins; or else he will cry out, that that is flat popery, and so
where as he hinders some from the truth, by a fear of popery: he draws
some other from the truth, unto popery: knowing, that his scope is to hinder us
from the true comfort of the Lord. And this, so that it be done, he cares not
whether it be by a face of popery: or by force, unto popery; so that we be
damned, whether it be by thy delusio^ or by despair, he is satisfied: but
despair in this case, is the most usual, and also the most perilous estate,
to the which, that he might fully draw us: he in our prayers, in our sights,
and groans, unto the Lord, will take upon him the person of the Lord, and will
even answer within, as if it were the spirit of God that spoke unto us, and
tell us, that in vain we pray, in vain we seek, in vain we call upon the
Lord, for he will never bear us, nor forgive us, nor never receive us again
unto favor. And this he will so constable ntly, and with such a fear, avouch
unto the soul: as that, if we do not rely upon the Lord in his word, we
shall be most grievously afflicted, and cast down: which if Satan once
perceive, and tee that we give ground unto him: he will follow us at the
heels, and not give us an inch respite: but will still lie upon us, so as we
shall scarce find a breathing time. And so giving us no rest, he will persuade
us to despair, to destroy ourselves, and that it were better for us to be out
of our lives, the^ to live in such garboils, such fears, such fightings, and
such trouble, and thereupon he will not stick to persuade us to destroy our
selves to kill our selves, to break our necks, to hang our selves, to drown our
selves, or to cut our own throats: as Judas, Achitophel, and many other with
us, most lamentably have done, being destitute of comfort, and deceived by
these and such like persuasions of the devil. Whom, that we might the better
resist, I have considered these reasons out of the word and committed them to
writing, that a^ Christian, that is to war and fight with Satan, might not be
unfurnished nor unprovided of spiritual armor: especially of the word of the
spirit, which is the word of God: a most forcible weapon to repulse and drive
back the devil withal: with the which, if we assault him, as wise warriors, we
shall be more then conquerors, by him that has loved us, and given himself for
us: and these comforts unto us in his sacred word. Which that we may rightly
profit by: let us read them with deliberation, and meditation. And withal let
us learn this one point against Satan: that is, out of the same reason that
he gathers matter of fear, and despair; out of the same, let us seek and
suck comfort. If he takes his reason from the merccie of God, or from his
justice: if from his promises, or from Christ: if from our nature, and sin it
self: if from the answers in our soul, or from despair it self: out of the
very same let us reason against him. And we shall be better able to answer,
than he to reply: or at the least, better able to reply, thn he to answer.
If he shall say that we can do nothing but sin: let us answer, it is
natural. If he shall say, that our sins are monstrous: let us say, that they
are our debts. If he shall say, that God is just: let us answer, that therefore
he must forgive our offenses, If he shall tell us, that it was answered us
within, that in vain we prayed: let us answer, that it was a lier that so
answered us: and so forth in the rest. And thus by this means we shall cut
the devils throat with his own sword: and (as a be) suck honey out of that
flower, out of the which he (as the spider) sucketh poison.

FINIS.
The Contents of the Chapters contained in this Book.
Chap. 1 Wherein it is declared, that there is lively hope of comfort left unto
all them that mourn under the burden of their sins. Fol. 1 Chap. 2 In the
first part whereof are set down the express promises of God, concerning the
free forgiveness of sins: and in the latter is declared: first, that the same
promises of mercy are delivered unto us in the word of God: then that they are
bound by his oath: thirdly, that they are also bound by his Indenture of
covenants: and lastly that they are confirmed by two visible signs and tokens
in stead of wonders. to wit, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord. Fol. 7 Chap.
3 Wherein the forgiveness of sins is proved by the consideration of Gods mercy,
which is one part of his essence, substance, and nature. Fol. 55 Chap. 4
VVherin the forgiunes of sins is proved by the consideration of gods justice
(which is another nature essential unto him) by three especial ways. First,
by reason that the Lord has promised to forgive our sins, in regard whereof it
stands with his justice to perform the same. Secondly for that he has
alreaddy punished Jesus Christ for our offenses, and therefore cannot in
justice punish them in us also. And lastly, because he has already punished
our persons in Christ, and so cannot justly punish us again. Fol. 69 Chap. 5
VVherin the forgiveness of sins is proved, by a reason taken from the se^ond
person in the Trinity, to wit, the wo^d Incarnate, even Jesus Christ, being
considered, as he is the vine, and the branches. Fol. 85 Chap. 6 Wherein the
forgiveness of sins is p^oued, by considering Jesus Christ, as he is our
advocate and intercessour, and the mediator of the new Testament. Fol 89 Chap.
7 VVherin the forgiveness of sins is proved, by considering Jesus Christ; as he
is our king and spiritual prince. Fol. 98 Chap. 8 Wherein the forgiveness of
sins is p^oued by considering Christ, as he is our Physician, that with his
blood cures and heals all our infirmities, both corporal and spiritual.
Fol. 107 Chap. 9 VVherin the forgiveness of sins is proved, by considering
christ as he is our redeemer, who has with his own body purchased of his
Father the pardon for our sins, and with his own blood ransomed us, and paid
the price of theredemption of our sins. Fol. 114 Chap. 10 VVherin are touched
two reason taken from the spirit of God (the holy Ghost, being the third person
in the Trinity.) The first as the spirit is considered, to work repentance
and contrition in us, and so washes us from our sin. The other, as the spirit
breeds and works peace in our conscience, wherewith the forgiveness of our
sins is sealed. Fol. 118 Chap. 11 VVhere^n is contained the first argument, or
reason, which to prove the forgiveness of sins, is taken from the creature (the
reasons being before taken from the creator) and that from man, considered in
himself, with his estate being naturally inclined to sin. Fol. 120 Chap. 12
VVherin is contained the second reason, taken from man, to prove the forgiveness
of sins, by the consideration of our infancy, we never being but newborn
babes, so long as we live. Fol. 125 Chap. 13 VVherin is contained the first
reason, taken from sin it self, which is drawn from the name of sin, being
called our debt. Fol. 128 Chap. 14 Wherein is contained the second reason,
taken from sin it self, to prove forgiveness of sins: which arises from the
effect of sin, serving to setforth the abundance of the grace of God, and to
magnify his power. Fol. 131 Chap. 15 VVherin is contained the first reason,
taken from man, as he is considered in others; which is drawn from the
examples of other men, by which the eternity of the forgiveness of sins, is
further assured unto us. Fol. 134 Chap. 16 VVherin is contained the second
reason, taken from man, being considered in others; which is drawn from the
testimony of others: as of the Ministers of the word of God, of the Prophets,
of Christ himself, of the Apostles, and all other holy men of God, who as
faithful witnesses announce, confirm the furgiuenesse
(...)
