THE STRATEGEMES, SLEYGHtes, and policies of war, gathered together, by S.
Julius Frontinus, and translated into English, by Richard Morysine.

ANNO. M. D. XXXIX.

TO THE MOST NOBLE VICTORIOVS AND redoubted prince, HENRY the. VIII. by the
grace of God, king of England, and of France, defendour of the faith, Lord
of Irelande, and in earth Supreme heed immediately under CHRIST, of the church
of England, Richard Morysine his most humble and faithful servant, wyssheth
all welthe, all honor, and triumphaunt victory over all his enemies.
MOST HYGE excellent, and mighty Prince, most dear and dradde sovereign
lord, if the love, which your highness bears unto this your noble empire,
stylle enforces your graces heart, not only to bestow the better part of
all days, but of all nyghtes alsoo, in deuysynge in time of peace most godly
laws, statutes, and proclamations, for the tranquillity and quietness of
your subjects sowles, in time of war, plattes, block howses, bulwarks,
walls, castelles, with other munitious, ingins, and fortresses, for the
safety and surenes of their bodies: if no so wernesse of pain can amoue
your gracis thoughts from contynuall travail, Can I without my great shame,
not be styred to work somewhat for my part? He has little will to
travail, little love to his country, that sees before his eyes, your
highness thus occupied: and yet is nothing pricked, to do that he thinks
may serve his country. Wise writers feyne, that fond love has wings, and
seldom abides long in a place, being hither and thither led by folly, and
phansy: I can not but also think, that discrete love has his wings, and
flies fast, where he sees good may be done. Love has no leaden heles, and as
he is quick, so is al labor light, where love hyreth the workman. The
feathers of his wings are so soft, that if they lie between our shulders, and
the burdeyn, the weight is little felt, though we bear never so heavy. Love
easily entertayneth all powers of the heart, and without force compels
them all, to do that, that duty may by any title challenge of them. Your
hyghnes well declares, that where occasion is, Love can not be ydell. Lord,
how may al englyshemen rejoice, that your grace neither spares, to vysite
with your own eyes, ye ruinous places of the sea quostes, by which our
enemies might suddenly invade us, neither yet lets, to work with your own
hands, continually manegynge tools, continually inuentyng new sorts of
weapons, new kinds of ships, of gunnes, of armure. As god help me, I can
not see, which way to wysshe greatter pleasure, greatter comfort, to all
english men, than that they all might se, how your grace spends all the
hole day. I have seen it, and now nothing wonder, though traitors, ennemies
to your hyghnes, have been at their departure, compellyd to say so much
honor by your grace, as they have said. I see, albeit Malice makes men in
their life time, to swerve, to say and do much otherwise, than Truth is,
that yet, the presence of death, fear of god, and force of conscience,
dryueth them to confess truth, when lies will serve no longer, when vices
appear to be as they are. Could sir Nycolas Carowe, have fallen into treason,
if he had thought well upon that in his life time, which he confessed to be
true, at his death? But I must by your gracis favor, leave of that, which
I am fallen into by the way, and entreat of that, which I purposed to speak
of. I have long sythens, been much desirous, to dedicate some thing of mine
to your highness, but finding all my tryfles, far to base, to mean, to
humyle, to go abroad, under the name of so noble and high a prince, I have
rather done that becommed me, than followed that I most desired. but now, not
withstanding, that this my labor is full like the rest, rude, imperfect,
and rather begun than fynyshed: yet perceiving your grace, even to thyrste
the safety of your people, the defense of this your moosle noble royalme, I
could not, but for a season, a courtayne drawn between my weak eyes, and
the resplendent beams of your most clear majesty, follow fervent desire, and
humblye offer unto your highness, this my rude translation, not doubting but
as noble Xerxes thankfully received an handful of water, of a poor manne,
that so your princely goodness, wolle take in good part, this mine, what so
ever be, borne, and brought up undoubtedly, in good wylles house.

It has been sometime moved, whether in war, Polycy of mind, or Strength of
body, should do more. but long experience, has put this thing so out of
question, that in all battayles, the specialle praise or disprayse remains to
the Captain. Yea some men are not affrayde to affirm, that it is much
better to have an army, where the Capitayn is a lion, and all the host
fearful dear, than to have a dear the captain, and all the host lions. Ajax
was strong, Ulysses wise: Homere gives much more praise to the last, than
to the first. Ajax was hardye and valyant in fight: but Ulisses knew the time
and place, where hardiness might prevail. Strength stryketh, but Policy
prouydeth, that the strong be not ouermatched, and that they bestow strokes
in a right place, and at time convenient. Many mo fields have been lost for
lack of polycie, than for want of strength. many towns won by sleightes,
which a long season easilye were kept against greattest might, strength, and
force. Wherefore saying present occasion requires martial feats to be known,
and strength of body to be armed and anymated with wit and polycie: I
entendynge here to serve my countreye, found nothing so fytte, for
thaccomplyshement of this my purpose, as to set out the Strategemes, sleightes,
and crafts, used by the noblest capytaynes, that all antyke hystories treat
of. By redyng and reasonynge whereof, your gracis capitaynes shall not only
increase and noryshe their imagination, invention, and derteritie, in using
like sleightes, but easily escape al trappes, gynnes, and imbushementes, laid
for them. They shall also hereby perceive, many sweet baytes to cover sour
hokes. They shall learn there to escape danger, where great advantage is offered.
The noble capitaynes of England, have often declared, that they little need any
instructions, any books, to teach them to towse their enemies: and yet it can
hurt no man, to see those things practysed, by ancient capitaynes, which
may give good occasions, both warely to inuente new polycies, and wisely to
use the old. Noble hearts, undoubtedly can not but desire, to here of noble
feats, and take pleasure in saying, how wit with small force, often times
works wonders, where exceeding greatte strength can not avail. If men be not
weary, to play a thousand times at one game, where either Fond pleasure, or
Uile gain, or (when it is best) health of body is sought: can any gentle man
be lothesome, to refreshe his mind, to help his memory, to kendle his courage
with honest delight, of redynge or herynge such things, as appertain to
thesafegarde of body and goods? to the purchasing of honorable victories,
fame, and renoume? The infirmity of man's nature is such, that both the
senses of our body, and also the powers of our mind decay, and go to ruin,
onles they be daily refresshed and helped. The eye is continually helped, with
clear light, with fresh and comely colors, the smell with wholesome air, and
odours delectable, the taste asks in his meats and drynkes, a dew
temperature. And as it is here, so is it in the better part of man, wit,
understanding, Memory, and Invention, with all the rest, qualities and
ornaments of the mind, must be helped with continuance of redynge, herynge,
and reasonynge of mattiers, without which, they wax rustye, they canker, and
decay. There is a time for all things, as Solomon wisely writes. When time
required peace, we talked little of war. New occasyons bring matters, not
thought upon, in place. Time makes evil things not only co^parable with
good, but good also. When time is to pull down, it is very folly to build.
When time byddeth slay, it is nothing so good, to heal the diseased, as to
kill them that be not sick. When time byddeth spend, sparynge is great waste.
Love is lewdenesse, when time bids hate. Peace is to be refused, wha^ time
forces men to war. Wherefore, I have besides this my translation, in an other
tryfle of mine, exhorted al my country me^, peace laid aside, to prepare for
war, yt if need constrein them to it, they may be ready to entertayne false
friends, worse tha^ enmies, according to their deserts. I keep your highness
to long with my rude talk, wherefore most noble prince, pardon craved, I
wolle make an end, most humbly besechynge your maiestic, to accept this
cup of troubled water, a time may comme, that good will, enstrengthned with
your hyghnes favor, may find some clerer vein, and so serve your gracis
thirst, with right delectable lyquour. Our lord long preserve your highness,
to the setting forth of his glory, to the comfort of all your subjects, to
the destruction, and death of al popery.

Ame^.
Here begins the Table of this present book.
The first book.
OF CONCEALYNGE and keeping close a purpose or counsel. Capit. pri. To
search out the secrets of ennemies. Cap. ii. The keeping of an order in war.
Capitulo. iii. To conducte an army, through places besette with enmies. Cap.
iiii. To escape out of dangerous places. Capit. v. Of layenge and making
traynes by the way. Cap. vi. How things that we want, may seem not to
lack, or how we may supplye the use of them. Capit. vii. To set ennemies at
diuisyon. Cap. viii. To pacifye the sedytion of Sowldyours. Capit. ix. How to
inhibyte the desire to fight at time inconvenient. Cap. x. How to encourage
and stomach an army to fight. Capit. xi. How to put away fear, that
soudiours conceive in all unlucky chances. ca. xii.
THE SECOND BOOK.
TO chose opportunity and time conuement to fight. Cap. primo. To chose a place
to fight in. Cap. ii. To order the array. Cap. iii. How to trouble and
disorder the arraye. Capit. iiii. Of traynes and disceytes. Cap. v. To let an
enemy escape, lest he being enclosed, should through despair, renew the
battle. Cap. vi. How to dissemble adversities. Cap. vii. How to order the
battle by constancye. Capit. viii. What things are to be done after the
battle, if the matter prosper, and to confirm and establysshe the residue of
the war. Capitu. ix. How in hard chances to ease adversities. Capit. x.
How to retain and keep wauerynge minds faythefull. Cap. xi. What things
are to be done before the camp, when men mystrust their puissaunce. Capit.
xii. Of fleinge away. Cap. xiii.
THE THIRD BOOK.
OF sodeyne assaute. Capit. i. How to deceive them that be besyeged. Capit.
ii. How to entise enmies to treason Ca. iii. By what means enemies may be
made nedy. Capit. iiii. How to persuade the syege to continue still. Cap. v.
How to destroy the garrisons of enemies. Cap. vi. Of deryuynge and tournyng
the course of ryuers an other way. Capit. vii. How to fear the^ that are
besiged. ca. viii. How to break out on that side, where we are not looked
for. Cap. ix. Of the traynes that are laid, to intyce out the besieged. Capit.
x. To dissemble retreat. Cap. xi. Now contrary wise, touching the safegarde
of the beseged, what diligent exercise they should use. Cap. xii. How to send
forth and receive in a messanger. Capit. xiii. How to introduce succors, and
to provide vyttayles. Cap. xiiii. How to make those things, which we want,
seem plentuouse. Cap. xv. What remedy ageynste traitors and runneawayes. Cap.
xvi. Of eruptions and breakynges out of ennemies. Cap. xvii. The constancy of
the besieged. Ca. xviii.
THE FOVRTHE BOOK.
OF discipline of war. Cap. i. The effect of discipline. Cap. ii. Of
continency and sober abstinence. ca. iii. Of Justice. Cap. iiii. Of constancye.
Cap. v. Affection and moderation. Cap. vi. Of diverse counsels. Capi. vii.
The generalle rules of war, taken out of Uegetius.

Thus ends the Table.
THE FIRST BOOK OF SEXTVS JULIUS FRONTINVS vvherin ar contained the sleightes
and policies exercised in war before the field be pyght.
Of concelynge and keeping close and purpose or counsill. Cap. 1.
AFTER THAT M. Portius Cato, had ouercom the cites of Spain, and thought that
in process of time they would rebel, through trust of their strong towns,
sent his letters to every one of the said cities, commandynge them by and by
to beat down their walls and bulwarks, thretening them war, onelesse they
forth with fulfilled his commandment. He caused his sundry letters in one day
to be delivered to all the cities, whereby each of them thought, that that
commandment was given to them alone, and so by fear obeyed his letters. Where
as if they had known like commandment given out to all the other cities,
they happyly by conspiracy would have rebelled.

Hamilcar capytayne of Carthage, to thentent he might pryuily and unlooked for,
aryue with his navy in Sicile, gave tables sealed to all the ship masters,
wherein he had written, whither he intended his vyage, gyuynge them in
commandment, not so hardy to open or read them, except that by force of
tempest they were driven from the course of the ammyrall ship.

Gaius Lelius sent in embassage unto Syphax, to thentent he might wisely espy
and search out the councyll and conueyaunce of his ennemies, took with him
under a color and pretense of slaves, certain of his chief capytaynes, of
which one called Lucius Statorius was half known of his ennemies, because
they had been often to gether in war, Lelius, to hide what he was, took a
staff, and corrected him like a slave.

Tarquinius superbus the father, supposing that it should make greatly for his
purpose, if the chief of the Gabiens were slain, because he would commit to no
man his mind, he answered nothing to the messanger sent from his son, but
walking by chance in his gardein, with a little rod struck of the heads of
the highest poppies, the messa^ger retornynge again without any answer, told the
young man Tarquinius, what he had seen his father do, and he understood,
that the chief of the city were so to be served.

. Caesar mistrustinge the Egiptians, made as though he had been sure of them,
passing the time there, in beholdynge the pleasures, the works, and
occupations of their City Alexandria, gyuynge him self to bankettynge and
feastynge, as one taken and enamoured with their commodities and pleasures,
falling from his old wont unto the manners and life of the Alexandrians. and
in the mean time, he prepared and conveyed in to the city a garrizon,
wherewith he held and kept the contray.

Uentidius in the war of the Parthenians, perceyuinge that one Pharncus a
Cirreslen borne, which were associate with the Romans, did utter unto the
Parthenians, all that was done in the host, by policye converted the
falsehode of the barbarouse stranger, unto his own greatte profit. for he
feigned him self to stand in dread, lest those things should happen, which
he most coueted: and wyshed for those things to chance, which he feared most
of all. Therefore he being pensive and not a littel afraid, lest the
Parthenians should come upon him, and pass over Euphra tes, before that his
legyons could repair unto him, which were in Cappadocia beyond Taurus, he
went ernestlye in hand with the traitor, that he should by some solemn and
accustomed point of falshode, entise the Parthenians to pass over their host
by Zeugma, for as much as it seemed to be the nerest wave, saying that if they
took that way, he would lightly delude and avoid their arowes by the
opportunity of the place and help of the hills. for if they did arange forth
their army into the open champion ground, he should there stand in utter
despair. The barbarouse host being by him brought into this opinion, left the
hills, and led about their army the lower way: and whiles they were
preparynge all things needful, and leyinge bridges over the broad water,
which was a very laboriouse and paynfull work, they spente and lost above.
xl. days: In the which time Uentidius had gathered his strength together, and
stood in a redynesse. iii. days before the Parthenians came, and so joined
with them in battle, and sleinge the better part of them, won the field.

Mithridates being enclosed by Pompeius, sought means to flee the morrow
following, and to cloak this his purpose, he sent forth his men a forraging,
even unto the valeys hard under his ennemies nosis. And furthermore to put
away all suspicion, he appointed with many his ennemies, to talk with them on
the morrow, and commanded many fyers to be made through all his army, And the
night following, at the sound of the trumpette, in the second time of watch,
he brought forth his hole army, even by the tents of his ennemies.

The emperor Domitian, called also Germanicus, seeking all means, how to
repress the Germayns, which kept them selfs in their armor, knew very
well, that if the Germaynes should perceive the coming of so great a
captain and emperor, that they would prepare them selfs to war, with
much more endeavor and greter enforcement, deceived them by a pretense of his
goinge into France. And so suddenly brake in upon that barbarous and fierce
nation, and vanquisshed them, to the great sauegarde and welthe of the
provinces.

What time Asdrubal and Anniball his brother, lay with their armies in son dry
placis, Claudius Nero, chosing and setlyng his camp, nigh unto Anniball,
forasmoche as the said Nero coueted to match and break the strength of
Asdruball, before his brother Annibals strength and his were joined together,
having also lyttelle confydence in his own power, made haste to his fellow
Liuius Salinator, that was appointed to war ayenste Asoruball: And to the end
Anniball should not perceive nor suspecte his departing, when he had picked
out ten thousand of the most valyant men of his host, he commanded the other,
that he left behind, to keep watch and ward, as they were wont to do,
kyndlynge as many fyres, and setting forth the same face and brag of the
army, as before when they lay all together, lest Anniball suspectynge
somewhat their small number, should set upon them. And so he departed privily,
and came to his fellow, and joined their armies in one, sufferynge in no wise
the camp to be enlarged, lest Asdruball, perceiving some token of his
coming, should have refused to fight: so with both their powers together,
they set upon him, and overcame him, and than he again with all speed possible
returned unto Anniball. Thus by one policy, he begyled the oone, and oppressed
the other, two of the most expert and skylfull capitaynes of Carthage.

Themistocles captain of Athenes, exhorting the cytezens to repair spedily
their walls, which they had cast down by the commandment of the
Lacedemoniens, made answer unto the ambassadors, sent from Lacedemon, to
interrupte that their purpose, that he him self would come, and put away
their suspicion. And thither he came, where faynynge him self sick, he drove
forth a certain space, and when he perceived, that his cautell and craft was
suspected, he ernestly contended, that the rumor was false, which they had
herd, requiryng them to send some of the noble men to Athens, which might
credibly inform them of the fortification of the City: and privily conveyed
letters to his friends, willing them to retayn these ambassadors, until they
had fully fynyshed their work, and thanne after to send word unto the
Lacedaemonians, that the city was well strengthened and defensed, and that their
ambassadors and noble men might in no wise return again, before that they
had sent Themistocles home. the which request the Lacedemoniens were feign
to fulfylle, lest the loss of one man should have been the death of many.

Metellus Pius in Spain, being demanded what he was minded to do the day
following, answered on this wise: If this cote on my back knew, and could
utter it, I would bourne it.

When a certain man axed Licinius Crassus, what time he would remove his
army, he answered, Art thou afraid, thou shalt not know that by the
trompette?

To search out the secrets of ennemies. Capit. ii.
SCIPIO Aphricanus, taking his occasion and time convenient, sent Lelius in
embassage to king Syphax, and with him certain of his chief capitaynes and
centurions in slaves apparel, whose charge was to view and mark, of what
strength the kings army was. They goinge about this, of purpose let go an
horse, and run nynge up and down after him, saw the place, where the
greattest part of all the kings provision lay, which when they had showed
Scipio, the war by fire was ended.

When the Carthaginenses perceived, that Alexanders riches and power was so
great, that he gaped also after Aphryke, they caused one of their cytyzens
Hamilchar, a quycke wytted man, and full of courage, fayninge him self
banyshed, to go unto the king, and by all endeavor and study to win his
favor, which at length obtained, he disclosed the kings secrets unto his
country men.

The same Carthaginenses sent certain men unto Rome, there to tarry for a long
time, under color of embassage, and so to espy from time to time, what they
intended.

M. Cato in Spain, because he could by no other means come to knowledge of the
councille of his enemies, commanded. iii. hundredth soldiers violent ly to
run al together upon the watch men, and to snappe up, and safelye to bring
one of them to him, which man Cato so racked and tormented, that he uttered
all the secrets of his company.

C. Marius cons. in the wars against the Cymbrians and the Almaynes, to the
entente to try, whither the french men and the Genowayes were his faithful
friends or no, sent them a letter, whereof the first part commanded, they
should in no wise open the later part being sealed, until a certain time:
Afterward, before the day appointed was come, he sent and required those
letters again, and when he perceived by the seal, that the letters had been
opened, he understood they were not his friends.

There is a another way, whereby capitaynes may perceive much them self, As
Aemilius Paulus, which in the war of the Hetrusciens at Colonia, suffering his
army to wander in to the plain, saw a far of a great flyghte of birds
rise and suddenly flushe out of the wodde, whereby he perceived, that there lay
embushementes covertly. wherefore he sent out straight way outriders, and found
that there lay. x. thousand of the Boyens, ready to receive the Romans. tha^
sent he forth his legions an other way, where they were not looked for, and on
al sides did discomfite them.

Likewise, when Thyamenes, the son of Horrestis, herd that his ennemies were
lodged on a mountain, very strong of natural situation, he sent his currors
before to know, and they making relation, it was not true, that was supposed,
he marched forward: and as he beheld, a great flight of fowls to fly
together from the hylle suspected, and in no wise to alight, he demed, that the
host of his ennemies lay there covertly, and so conductynge his army about
an another way, he begyled the deceyuours.

The keeping of an order in war. Capi. 3.
ALexander Macedo, having a vehement and fierce army, took ever this way in
war, to fight in plain battle.

Likewise C. Caesar in the civil war, having his army by long use perfect in
feats of arms, and knowing the army of his enemies to be young and
inexpert, always endeavored him self to try with his enemy in a pyght field.

Fabius Maximus, lyenge in war against Anniball, wanton and proud of his
great vyctories, determined not to fight, but only to defend and keep Italy,
and thereby deserved to be called Cunctator, a tarier, slow in fight, and yet
to be taken for the best and wysest captain.

The Byzantes against Philyp, eschewynge and avoiding all daungier of plain
fight, neglectyng the defense of their borders, kept them selfs within the
munimentes of their cities, and there by brought to pass, that Philyp being
soore agreued, and loathe to abide the long besiegyng and assaults of them,
went his way.

Has drubal son of Gisgon, at the se cond war of Carthage against Spain,
where as scipio laid hard to his charge, divided his army discomfited into
sondrye cities, and thereby brought to pass, that Scipio, because he would not
be troubled with the assaut of so many and diverse cities, withdrewe his army
into places of rest, for all the winter.

While Anniball tarried still with his army in Italy, Scipio conueyeng his into
Aphrike, made the Carthaginenses of necessity call him home to the defense of
his own country, and so drove the force of his ennemies out of Italy.

To conducte an army through places besette with enemies. Cap. 4.
EMilius Paulus cons. conductynge his army through a strayte, nyghe unto the sea side, the Tarentines laying wait for him with a navy, and setting upon his
company with Scorpions, covered the side of his hooste, passinge forth by,
with such as he had before taken prisoners, for regard of whom, his
ennemies forbear their shot.

When Agelilaus, capytayne of the Lacedaemonians, returned from Phrigia, laden
with pillage and spoil, his ennemies pursued him, and at all places apt for
battle, provoked him to fight, wherefore he set his prisoners and captyues on
both sides his army, and so whiles his ennemies favored them, the Lacedaemonians
at their commodity went away even by them.

Because the same Agesilaus could not pass with his host certain straightes,
defended and kept by the Thebans, he vaunced his banners toward their city of
Thebes, whereof, the Thebans being afraid, left the strayghtes, and went to
defend their city, and so Agesilaus came back, and went on the same way,
that he intended before, no man withstanding him.

Nicostratus, captain of the Aetolians against the Epirotes, seeing the
passages into their borders, were straytely kept ageynste him; he made a face,
as though he would break in by an other place: whither when all the multitude
of the Epirotes ran to defend, he leaving there a few to make a show, as
though the hole host tarried still, with the residue entered in that way, that
he was not looked for.

King Philip of Macedon, in his iourneye toward Greece, hard that the
straytes, called Thermopylas, were taken and kept of his ennemies, and that
the Ambassadors of the Aetolia^s were come to him, to entreat of peace,
keeping them surely, by great iourneys, hasted to the straytes, where they that
were set to defend them, being careless, and lokynge for the return of the
ambassadors, he passed the straytes.

When Iphicrates capytayne of Athenes, warrynge against Anaxibius of
Lacedemon, should conducte his army by places kept and defended of his
ennemies, his passage being on the one side let with cleues of hills, and on
the other side with the sea, taryenge stylle a season, there came a day much
colder than was wont, and therefore no man suspectynge him, he pycked out all
the strongest of body of his host, which being warmed with wine and oil,
commanded them to swymme so far by the sees side, till they were past the
rocks, and so unawares to set upon, and oppress the kepers of the straytes.

When Cn. Pompeius could not pass over a certain river, by reason of his
ennemies, which lay on the other side, he used this polycie, often times to
range out his hooste toward the river, and to recule again to his camp, at
length his enemy being persuaded, that he would do so stylle, he suddenly
rushed out, and so won the passage.

Alexander Macedo, being let of Porus king of Inde, to pass over the river
Hydaspes with his army, used this policy: First he made his soldiers to
range out busyly toward the water, and after that by this manner of exercise,
he had forced them to lie at their fence on the other side of the bank, he
suddenly sent over his army by the upper part of the river.

P. Claudius cons. in the first war of Carthage, because he could not
convey his army from Rhegio unto Messana, by reason that the Carthaginenses had
besette the narowe see, spread abroad a rumoure, that he could not continue the
war, because he had taken it in hand, without consent of the people, and
made a face, as though he would have sailed into Italye. The catthaginenses
beleuynge, that he would sail thither in deed, departed thens: and so he
turned about his ships, and arrived in Sicil.

When the capitayns of the Lacedemomens, had pourposed to sail over unto
Syracusa, and were in fear of the navy of the Carthaginenses, which lay
dekt and ready unto war, they caused. x. ships, which they had taken in
battle of the Carthagin. to go out before, as though they had come home
again with vyctorye, cowplynge their other ships unto them on both sides,
and at the styrne also: under the which color they deceived the Peneans, and
passed over.

When Philyp might not pass the narowe sees, called Cyanee, by reason that the
nauye of the Atheniens kept all the convenient passages there, he wryt unto
Antipater, that Tracia was up, and rebelled, the garrison, which he there left,
by disceyte taken and slain: wherefore his will was, that he should set all
other things aside, and follow him thither, and so he ordered the matter, that
the Atheniens took the messanger, that bare the letters, at the sight whereof,
supposing they had gotten knowledge of all the priuities of the Macedoniens,
depar ted with their navy, and tha^ passed Philyppe the straytes, no man
withstanding him.

When Chabrias of Athens could not enter the haven of the Samians, being kept
of by a garrison of his ennemies, that lave in ships before the haven, he
commanded a few of his ships to pass by the haven, coniecturynge, that
they, which lay there for defense, would make out after them, and they, by
this policy intised out, no man in manner resystynge, he opteyned the haven
with the rest of his nauye.

To escape out of dangerous places. Capit. v.
VUhan Q. Sertorius in Spain, should needs pass over a river, his ennemies
even at hand, pursuyng him, he cast out a trenche in manner of a crooked moan,
which when he had filled with wodde, and other such like things, he set
a fire, and thus excludynge his enmyes, freely passed over the fludde.

Likewise Pelopidas a Theban, in the war against the Thessalonians, sought
passage. for his camp containing a great ground on the river side, he made a
trenche with old house rafters, stakes, and other stuff mete to bourne, and
set it on syer, and thereby kept back his enemies, while he passed the river.

What time Luctatius Catulus was put to flight of the Cunbriens, this one hope
to save his army he had, if he might drive his ennemies from a flood, the
bank whereof was by them kept and defended: so he made a show of his army,
upon a hill not far of from the river, as though he would there have pyghte
his tents, commaundynge the host not to unload in any wise, another to lay
down pack ne burden, no man to break the array, or to part from his
standarde: and the better to deceive his enemies, he commanded to rear up in
their full syghte, certain tents, and to kendle fyers, some to make a
trenche, some other he sent a forragynge and to gather wodde, in such wise,
that they might be seen to go abroad. The Cunbrians supposyng, that they
intended al such things in very deed, chose them self a place also, and as soon as they were scatered abroad in the country, to pouruey all such
things, as were necessary for them that intended to tarry, Catulus got good
occasion, not only to pass over the river, but also to trouble and grieve his
ennemies.

When Cresus might in no wise wade over the river Halis, another yet could
make bote or bridge, he cast a dyche behind his army, and so turned the
course of the river that way.

When Cn. Pompeius lyinge at Brinduse, and purposynge now to depart out of
Italy, and so to dyffer and put of the battle, for as much as Caesar lay at
his back with an army, would take shyppynge, he stopped and closed up some
ways with walls, some he intercut with dyches, setting vpryghte in them
stakes, covered with hyrdels and earth, some ways toward the haven, he fensed
with great tres, laid overthwart, thycke together, in great quantity, which
thing done, under a color, as though he would have held and kept stylle the
city, he left a few archers, to keep the walls, conueyenge the rest of his
army unto ship, without any greatte noise or busynes, and anon after that
he had taken shyppynge, the archers followed him by ways well known in small
vessels, and ouertoke him.

When Herculeius, legate unto Sertorius, had brought a small army in
Spain, into a long way, that was very narow, between two stype hills, and
perceived, that a great company of his ennemies made toward him, he cast a
great dyche ouerthwarte the way, with a trenche meet to bourne, and set
fire thereon, and so kept of his enemies, and escaped.

When Caesar in the ciuyle war, had set his army in array against Afranius,
and could not recule back without danger, by stelthe brought back certain of
the first and second array, and cast a dyche of. xv. foot behynd them, and
thither after the son set, he received his army.

Pericles of Athens, being driven by them of Peloponesus into a place
inuyroned with stype hills, where was but two ways to escape out, before the
one way, where he intended to break out, he let cast a dyche of greatte
bredthe, under pretense to shut out his ennemies, and to the other side he
led his host, as though he would there have broken forth. Wherefore his
enemies, beleuynge that he could in no wise escape that way, where he him
self had cast the dyche, withstode him with all their power on the other
side, then did Pericles cast bridges, prepared for the nonce, over the
dyche, and that way conveyed out his army, where no man resisted him.

What time Cornelius Cossus consul, in the war against the Samnites, was
found of his enemies in an unequal and inconvenient place, P. Decius his
chief capitayn, counsayled him, to make out a small band of men, and to
prevent his ennemies, and so to take the hylle, proferynge him self to be
their guide, and by that polycie his enemy being provoked to stop him
from the hylle, the consul escaped, and he the same night being besieged of
his foes, brake out, and came again safe with his company to the consuls
army.

A. Sylla, being between certain straites at Esernta, sent unto the host of
his enmies, desiring the captain of communication, and so treated with him
of certain conditions of peace, entending no such thing indede. At length,
perceyuyng his ennemies to wax somewhat slack and negligent, by reason they
were entered into a treaty of peace, he brake out by night, leaving behind
him a trumpetter, to divide the watches of the night, that the host might be
thought to remain stylle there, commaundynge him, to tarry and give the fourth
watch, and than to follow after. And thus he conducted his army safely with all
their stuff and ordinance into a sure place.

The same man, in the war against Archelaus, lieutenaunt unto Mithridates in
Cappadocia, being in distress by reason of an inconvenient place and multitude
of his ennemies, fell to an entreaty of peace, and took a truce for a time:
whereby his ennemies took less head unto him, and so he escaped.

When Hasdrubal, Anniballes brother, might not conveniently escape out of a
certain thycke wodde, by reasone the high ways and those quarters were beset,
he fell to entreat with C. Nero, promisynge to depart out of Spain, so that
he would give him passage with his army. then after he findinge certain
cauillations at the conditions, drove forth much time, sendynge away every
day in the mean while, part of his army by narrow paths, that were nothing
regarded. And afterward he fled away him self easily with the other few
that tarried with him.

Spartacus by night slew his prisoners, and certain bestes, and with their
carcases filled up the dyche, where with Marcus Crassus had enclosed him, and
so he passed over.

The same man also, when he was beset in Lesbio, on that side, where the hill
was most daungerouse and pitchelong, and therefore not kept, let down his men
with scalynge ropes, made of certain wythes and twigs, and by that means he
not only escaped, but also on the other side so amassed them, that with
lxxiiii. swords, he put to flight certain great cohortes of his ennemies.

The same man also enclosed by L. Uarinus, proconsull, pitched up stakes here
and there before the entryng of his camp, and set thereon dead carkases, clad
and harneysed like men, to make a show unto them, that were afar of, that
watch and ward was diligently kept, leauyng also fyres in every quarter of the
camp, under the which deceytfull color, he deluded his enemies, and conveyed
away his host by night.

Brasidas, captain of the Lacedemoniens, brought in to the daungier of a
greater multitude of the Atheniens, tha^ he might make his party good with,
willyngly suffered his ennemies to enuiron him, to thentent that the host, by
rangynge them self round about in great length, garland wise, might be the
thinner, and so he brake out on that party, where he perceived fewest
withstode him.

When Iphicrates in Tracia had pyght his tents in a low place, and had
knowledge, that his enemies lay upon an hill nygh to him, and that there was
but one way to comme down, at night he commanded a small number, which he
left in the camp, to make many fyres, leadynge out the rest of his army, and
disposyng them on both sides of the foresaid way, suffered the barbarouse
alyens to pass by, bringing them even into the same places of danger, that
he alyttell before was in, with the one part of his army, he slew their
rerewarde, and with the other, he chase an apt place to pitche his tents.

Darius to disceyue the Scythes, at his departinge left dogs and asses in
his tents, whose barkynge and brayinge the ennemies heryng, thought Darius to
be there still.

By like error the Genowayes, blyndynge the Romans, tied buguls here and
there unto trees with wythes, the which with their often lowynge, made the
ennemies believe the host lay still.

Hanno enclosed of his enemies, made a greatte fire of such stuff, as
bourneth quickly and taryeth not long, in that place, where he saw he might
best break out: then his enemies fleing to stop the other passage, he
brought his army through the myddeste of the flame, coueryng their faces with
their shyldes, and their legs with clothes.

Anniball purposynge to flee, partly because of the inconuenyent places, and
partly for lack of vitaile, Fabius Martinus holding him hard, by night tied
little fagottes of small styckes to oxons horns, and fyrynge the fagottes, he
let the oxen go. and when the bestes were troubled with the fire, which
increased as they moved their heads, they runnynge hither and thither,
lyghtened all the hills where they became. The Romans at the first thought it
some monstrous token, but after they had showed unto Fabius all the matter, he
fearing some deceypte and gyle, kept still his camp, and so Anniball
departed without any resistance.

Of layinge and making traynes by the way. Cap. vi.
When Fuluius Nobilior should conduct his army from the Samnites unto the
Lucanians, and knew by traitors, that had left their own capitains, and come
to him, that his enemies would set upon the rerewarde, he caused his
strongest legion to go formoste, and his carriage to come behind, whereupon the
ennemies having occasion, began to ryfle their fardels and carriage. here
Fuluius appointed. v. cohortes of the foresaid legion on the right side of the
way, and. v. on the left, and so his ennemies being busy about their spoil,
he enclosed and slew them.

The same Fuluius, his ennemies following him at his back, camme unto a river,
the which not withstanding it could not stop him, yet by reasone of the
swyftenesse, sommewhat hyndred his purpose, he laid one of his legions privily
on this side the river, that his enemies contemnynge the small company, that
was with him, might the boldlyer follow after, this done, the legion that lay
in wait for the nonce, brake out of their embushement, and so discomfited
their enemies.

Iphicrates, for the inconueniencye of places, was feign to lead his army all
along into Thrace, and it was told him, that his ennemies would set upon the
vawarde: wherefore he commanded certain cohortes to goo and tarry on either
side, the resydue he had spedily to march forward. the hole army passing
forth, he retained with him a sort of the most pycked men: and so his ennemies
being occupied all about, in spoylynge, weary also, with his men fresh,
lusty, and well ordered, he set upon them, and after they were dyscomfyted, he
took away their pyllage.

The Boyens, knowing that the Romans host should pass through the wodde
called Litana, cut and hewed all the greatte trees in such wise, that they
had a very little hold to stand by, redye to fall at any impulsion, and
they hid them self at the vttermooste trees so cut. and as soon as the
Romans were entered the wodde, they throwynge down the trees next unto them,
ouerthrewe also those, that were farther of, by which means the ruin
growing or, they all to crushed a great number of their ennemies.

How things that we want, may seem not to lack, or how we may supplye the
use of them. Capit. 7.
L. Cecilius Metellus, because he lacked ships, to convey his elephantes over
the water, joined barrelles and tonnes together, and covered them with bourdes,
and thereon set his elephantes and so paste the sea at Sicile.

When Anniball could not compel his elephantes to take the stream of a deep
river, neither had any vessels to convey them in, he commanded one of the
fiercest elephantes to be wounded under the ear, and as soon as he that
struck him had so done, to swymme over the river, and then to run straight
forth. The elephante, being sore moved and grieved with the wound, swamme
after him over the river, to revenge his grief, and so gave all the other
stomach to do the like.

When the capitayns of carthage should tacle their nauye, and wanted stuff to
make ropes, they clipped women's hear, and made ropes thereof. Likewise did the
Masiliens and the Rhodiens.

M. Antonius gave his soldiers barks of trees instead of tergates. Spartacus
and his army used shildes of osyers, covered with beasts skynnes.

The noble deed of Alexander of Macedon I think worthy to be remembered in this
place. He leadynge his army through the deserts of Afryke, was grieved with
extreme thyrste. when one of his soldiers brought him water in a salet, he
poured it out in the syghte of all his army, countynge more profyt, in giuyng
them example of temperancy, than either to have drunk the water him self, or
to have bestowed it on some, the other remaining still thirsty.

To set ennemies at division. Cap. viii.
VUhat time Coriolanus by war would revenge the shame of his con demnation,
he commanded his men of arms in any wise to spare the senators lands,
burning and wasting all that longed to the common people, thereby intendinge,
discension sowed among them, to set the commons against the lords.

Anniball not able to match Fabius in strength and feats of war, thinking
to grieve him by some sclaunder, forbear to hurt Fabius lands and possessions,
and spoiled other men's. On the other side, Fabius, to the end the cytezens
should not mystruste his fydelitie, gave all his lands to the common welthe,
through which great noblenes of mind, his truth and loyalty was nothing
suspected.

Fabius Maximus, the fyft time that he was consul, because the army of the
Gaulles, the Umbrians, the Etruscians, and Samnites joined together against the
Romans, (which to withstand he fortified his field beyond the mountain
Apennine) wrote letters to Fuluius and Posthumous, that lay in garryson to
defend the city, that they should remove with their power to Sitium: which
things done, the Etruscians and Umbrians drew home to defend their own,
leaving behind them the Samnites and Gaulles, whom Fabius and his fellow
Decius did set upon, and overcame.

What time a huge nombre of the Sa bines left their own costs, and invaded
the borders of the Romans, Marcus Curious sent forth by secret ways a power
of men, to set fire here and there, on their vyllages and towns, and so
were the Sabines feign to return, and to rescue the wast and destruction at
home. Thus Curious without fight, drove back the great host, and grievously
assaulted their borders, now in manner vacant, fleing them that they caught
here and there scatered.

T. Didius mystrustynge his small nombre, sought means to prolonge the
battle, until the coming of certain legions, that he looked for: and when he
also perceived, that his ennemies went to mete, and keep back the legyons, he
called his soldiers together, commandynge them to be in a redynes to fight,
gyuynge them warning, neglygentely to keep their prisoners: of the which some
fled away, and brought word to their company, that Didius was prepared to
battle, the which thing hard, they left of to lay any longer wait for
the legions, and by that means they came safe without any resiste^ce unto
Didius.

In the war ayenste the Carthaginenses certain cities had purposed to fall
from the Romans unto them, but first they imagined, how to get home again
the hostages, which they had given unto the Romans: Therefore they feigned,
that there was a great sedytion among the borderers, the which could not be
aswaged and appeased, except the Romans sent over their ambassadors, and
when they were sent, and come, the cities kept them, as contrary hostages and
pledges, and would not suffer them to return home, until they had received
again their own.

The Romayne ambassadors, sent unto king Antiochus, which had now after the
conquest of the Carthaginens, Annibal in court with him, whose counsel he
much used against the Romans, brought to pass by their sundry talkynges with
Annyball, that the king suspected him, which before was greatly in his
favor, and worthy so to be, both for his wylynesse, and great experience in
war.

Q. Metellus, warrynge against Iugurth, corrupted the ambassadors sent to him,
that they should betray Iugurth. Also when other came, he did likewise. and even
so used them, that were the third time sent to him. But as for the taking
of Iugurth, the matter went slowely forward, for he would have him delivered
alive: but yet he wroughte a great feate by this polycie, for when the letters,
that he addressed to Iugurthes friends, were intercepte and taken, he slew
them all, and being spoiled of his counsaylours, he could afterward get
no friends.

When that C. Caesar had taken a certain water lagger, and had knowledge by him,
that Afranius and Petreius that night would remove their tents, he purposyng
to let his ennemies of their intent, without vexynge of his army, by and by
in the beginning of the night, made his men to cry and call for vessels, and
to drive mules with much noise against the camp of his adversaries, and to
continue that noise the most part of the night: and so made them believe, whi
che of purpose he caused to tarry still, that he him self had removed.

When the Affricanes passed the sees into Sicille, with a great host to assaut
Dionisius king of Siracusa, he fortyfyed Castelles in diverse places,
commaundynge the kepers never the less, to yield them to their enemies, and
when they were dysmissed, to return privily unto Syracusa, which castelles
of necessity the Aphricans were driven to furnyshe with garrisons. And by this
means, when Dionisius had brought the army of his ennemies, to a small
number, as his desire was, and had gathered his own strength together, setting
upon them, vanquished his ennemies.

Agesilaus of Lacedemon, making war ayenste Tysaphernes, feigned to conducte
his army into Caria, there to take the advantage of the hills against his
enemies, which were stronger than he in power of horsemen. by the which
brag and polycie, he entyced Tysaphernes into Caria, which done, he brake
into Lidia, the heed of the kyngedom of his ennemie, and oppressynge those that
he there found, gatte the kings tresure.

To pacifye the sedition of sowldyours. Capit. 9.
VUhan A. Manlius consule, had perceived, that his sowldiours grudged
against the men of Campania, where they were now lodged, conspyrynge
together to slay their hosts, and after to take away their goods, he spread
abroad this rumor, that they should lie there stylle all the winter. and thus
they of their purpose let and disturbed, he delivered Campania from great
peril, and as time and occasion served, punysshed them that were causers of
that sedition.

What time the legyons of the Romans were furiousely set and bente on
peryllous sedition, Lucius Sylla restored them from their rage unto a quietenes
by this policy: He commanded, that word should be brought hastily to the
hooste, that their enemies were at hand, and that they should raise up a
cry, and call them to harneys, and blow up the trumpettes, whereby he brake of
the sedition, they al together consenting, as need required, against their
enmies.

What time Pompeius hooste had slain the Senatoures of Millan, for fear of
trouble and busynes, that might have happened, if he should have callid the
offenders aloone to examination, he sent for them all together, as well for the
fautlesse, as the gyltie, so that they seemed to be sent for, for some other
purpose. and therefore appeared they that were fautie, with less fear, because
they came not alone: and they, whose conscience pleded them not gyltie, gave
good attendaunce, to keep them that were fautie, lest peradventure their
escape and flight, might have turned them to displeasure.

How to inhibit the desire to fight at time inconvenient. Cap. x.
Q. Sertorius had learned by expetyence, that he was not able to match with
the hole host of the Romans, therefore to instruct the barbarouse people,
that unadvisedly desired to fight with them, he brought forth two horses
before them all, the one lusty and strong, the other feeble and weke: and two
young me^ also of like condition, the one strong and lustye, the other lean and
feeble. and the strong fellow he commanded to pluck of the weak horses tail
all at ones, the feeble fellow to pluck of the lusty horses tail by little
and little. And when the weak man had done that he was commanded, the
mighty man of arms was still wrastlynge and tuggynge with the weak horse
tail, and all in vain. Now I have showed you (said Sertorius) by this
example, the power of the Romans army, he that sets on them all together,
shall find them vnuincyble, but he hat sets on them part by part, shall
easyly crop, and wear them to naught.

When Agesilaus, capytayne of the Lacedemonie^s in war against the Thebans,
had pyghte his tents alonge the river side, and perceynynge the power of his
ennemies much stronger than his, to restrain his army from rasshe desire to
fight, said, that he was warned of god, to fight on the hills. and thus
leaving a lyttel garrison on the river side, gat up on the hills. The
Thebans, taking this to be done for fear, passed over the river, and the
garryzon being easily put to flyghte, pursued very gredely after the other.
and so by inconueniencye of the place, they were overcome of a smaller nombre.

When Scorilo, captain of the Daciens, knew, that the Romans were at
dyscorde among them selfs, nor yet thought the time mete to assail them,
for outewarde war causes Cytyzens to grow to a concord, he caused in the
sight of the people two dogs to fight together, to which most egrely
fightyng, he showed forth a wolf. and forthewith the dogs left their
malice, and fell upon the wolf. By which example he alayde and overcame the
rage of the barbarouse people, that other wise would have turned to the
Romans profytte.

How to encourage and stomach an army to fight. Capit. xi.
M. Fabius, and Cn. Manlius consules, in war against the Hetruscie^s, their
army refusyng to fight, by reason of sedition, feigned them self to prolonge
and put of the battle wyllyngly, until such time the soldiers,
constrained with reproaches of their enemies, desired to fight, making a
solemn oath, that they would return again with vyctorie.

When Fuluius Nobilior must needs try the matter in fight with a small army
against a greatte noumber of the Samnites, which were very haute and proud, by
reason of favorable fortune, he feigned, that he had corrupted one of the
legions to betraye their fellows, and that this might be the better believed, he
commanded the Tribunes, the Centurions, and all the first order, to bring
together all the ready money, gold, and silver, that they had, that he might
show the traitors their reward, promysing to restore them their money again,
wha^ he had opteyned the vyctorie, with great rewards beside. the which
persuasion gave the Romans great comfort and courage: whereby they pighte a
field by and by, and gatte a worthy vyctorie.

When C. Caesar should fight against the Germaynes, and Ariouistus, perceiving
his soldiers to be of small courage, said in his exhortation to them, he
would have no mo that day to help him, but the tenth legion. whereby he brought
to pass, that the tenthe legion, as with a special testimony of manlynes,
was encouraged, and so were the other for very shame, least those alone should
have had the praise of manhood.

Q. Fabius, which knew very well, the Romans to be of so lyberalle and
honest nature, that by despite and contumeliouse dealing, they would be soon
moved, vexed, and grieved: lokynge also for no right nor egall dealing of the
Penians, sent unto Carthage ambassadors, to entreat of peace, upon certain
condytions, which when they were brought and perceived to be unreasonable,
full of insolency and pride, the Romans army was strayghte styred and
encouraged to fight.

When that Agesilaus had pyghte his field, not far from Orchomeno, a city
that was in leage with him, and perceived, that many of the army had their
chyefe riches and treasure within the camp, he commanded the towns men, that
they should receive nothing into the town, belongyng to his army, to the
intent his soldiers might fight the more fiercely, knowing that they fought
for life and goods.

When Epaminundas should fight against the Lacedaemonians, to the end that the
strength of his soldiers might be helped with some feruente affection, he
pronounced in his exhortation, that the Lacedemoniens had determined, if they
got the vyctory, to slay all the men, and to make their wifes and children
bond for ever, and to beat the city of Thebes down flat to the ground. With
the which words, the Thebans were so moved and agreued, that at the first
bront they overcame the Lacedemoniens.

Eutidias captain of the Lacedemoniens, preparynge him self to battle, the
same day that other of his company had obtained in battle on the sea,
although he knew nothing what was done, publisshed abroad, that their side
had got the vyctory. whereby his souldyours were constant and much imbolded to
fight.

A. Posthumous in the battle, wherein he had encountered with the Latins,
setting forth the shappe of two young men on horseback, greatly stomaked his
men of war, saying, that it was Castor and Pollux, which came to help
them, and so he recovered the field.

Archidamus captain of the Lacedemoniens, warrynge against the Archadians,
caused privily by night, certain harneys to be laid within his camp, and
horses to trample about the place where the harneys was. On the morrow he
showed the trackes or fotynges of the horses, as though Castor and Pollux
had there ryd, perswadynge, that they would not fail to come and aid them
in their battle.

When Pericles, should give battle, he espied out a certain wodde, from
whens both ye hosts might be seen, whi che wodde was very great, thycke, and
dark, dedicate to father Pluto: there he ordained an image like a man of
great stature, boted up above the myd thighe, in a robe of pourple, with a
greatte and comely bushe of hear, sytting on a high chariot, drawn with white
horses: the which as soon as the banners were displayed, and the token of
battle given, appeared out in the sight of both hosts, and called Pericles by
name, exhorting and encouragynge him, saying, The goddis ar on the Atheniens
part. which caused his enemies at the first encountre to turn their backs
and flee.

L. Sylla, to encourage his men to fight, feyned that the goddis had showed
him, what should befall. And after in the sight of his army, even a little
before the battle, he prayed to a little image, that he had from Delphis,
and desired, that he would haste the vyctorie to him promised.

C. Marius had with him a certain witch of Siria, of whom he feigned to know
al adventures, that fell in battle.

Q. Sertorius, having a very barbarous host, and dulle of understanding,
led about through Lusitania, a very fair and goodly white hynde, plainly
affirmynge, that he knew by her before hand, all things that were either to
be done, or to be eschewed, to the entente those barbarous fellows should obey
all his commandments, as though they had come from heaven.

When Alexander Macedo should do sacrifice, he writ with a certain water
made by craft for the nonce, in the same hand of the southesayer, that he
should put into the beasts bowels, the letters sygnified, that the vyctorie
should be given to Alexander: the which letters, quik ly received and printed
on the warm liver, and by the king showed to the army, couraged their hearts,
as though god had promised them victory.

Epaminundas warring against the Lacedemoniens, thought it mete to increase the
good affiance of his men of arms, with some point of religion, took away by
night the harneys and armure, that was offered and set up to adorn the
temples, perswadynge his soldiers, that the gods followed him in his
journey, to aid and help them in battle.

When Agesilaus had taken certain of the Persians, whose apporte was very
terrible, as long as their apparayle was on, whom he stryped naked, and
showed their white and effemynate bodies to his souldiars, to the entente they
might despice them.

Gelo the tyran of Syracuse, entering war ayenste the Penians, after that he
had taken many of them, brought forth the weakest and most uncomely persons,
naked in the sight of al his army, to persuade them, that they were but
wretches, and men worthy to be despised.

Cyrus king of Perse, intending to concitate the minds of his people, to
weary and anger them with paynefull labor, held them all day at work, and
utterly tired them in he wynge up a certain wodde: and the morrow after he
made for them a very plentuous feast, demanding in the feast time, which
day lyked them best. And when they all allowed the pastyme of the day
present. And yet these (que he) must he come by, by the other. for except ye
first overcome the Medes, ye can never live in fredome and at pleasure. Whereby
they took great courage and desire to fight, and subdewed their ennemies.

Because L. Sylla in war against Archelaus Mithridates lieuetenant at Pirea,
perceived his souldyars had little courage to fight, he so weried them with
continual labor, that they were glad to desire, that the token of battle
given they might fight.

Fabius Maximus, fearing lest his host would not continue the fight
manfully, by reason they might quickly flee to their ships, commanded them
to be set on fire before he began the batayl.

How to put away fear, that soldiers conceive in all unlucky chances.
Cap. xii.
SCipio, conucyinge his host out of Italy into Aphrike, in landynge, by
chance slypte and cought a fall and perceiving that his soldiers were thereat
abashed, with greatte constancye and bold stomach, turned that, which cau
sed fear, into comfort, saying, Hark what I say my soldiers, I have
fallen upon Aphrike, and oppressed it.

When C. Caesar, taking ship, have to fall, he said, I perceive O country,
what thou meanest. By which interpretation he brought to pass, that they all
believed he should safely return from whence he departed.

Sempronius Gracchus consule, his host being ranged in battle ayenste the
Picentes, and both parts being confounded with a sodeyne earth quake,
comforted and couraged his men to invade their enemies, being
superstitiousely amassed, and by this exhortation he overcame his enemies.

When Sertorius saw, that the outesyde of his horsemens tergates, and the
horses breasts sodeynely, as it had been by some wonderfulle prodigy, appeared
blouddye, he by and by expounded it to be a plain token of victory, because
those parts of the shieldes and horses, are wont to be sprinkeled with the
blood of their ennemies.

Epaminundas perceiving that his soldiers, were sad and sorrowful, because
that the banner clothe, was blown of by a great wind, and carried in to a
grave, where a Lacedemonian had been buried, said, Be not afraid my soudiars,
this sygnifieth the death of the Lacedemoniens, for sepulchers be adorned with
funerals.

The same Epaminundas, seeing his soldiers were afraid with a flaake of
fire, that fell from heaven in the night, said, Surely god shows us this
light, in token of comfort.

As he an other time, being redye to fight against the Lacedaemonians, would
have sytten down, by chance his chair fell under him: whereof his soldiers
were greatly abashed, saying, that commonly such chance betokened greatte
mysfortune, No not so, quod he, but here by we be warned, that it is no time no
we to sytte.

L. Sulpitius Gallus, knowing that the Eclyps of the moon was at hand, lest
his soldiers should take it for a heuye token, warned them thereof before
hand, declarynge unto them all the reason, and causes of the eclyps.

Likewise did Agathocles Siracusanus in war avenst the Penians, what time the
eclypses happened, the day before they should fight, expounded all the reason
thereof unto the army, lest they should take any conceit thereat, and taught
them, that what so ever chanced there, it was by course of nature, and not
appertayned to their affairs.

When on a time there fell a great and terrible flushe of lyghtnyng in Pericles
camp, and made his soldiers greatly afraid, he called them together, and in
all their syghtes with two stones beaten together, struck out fire, showing
them, that likewise the vyolent dashing to gyther of coutrary elements, and
brekyng out of the cloud, caused the lyghtnynge, whereby he alayde all their
trouble and fear.

When that Timotheus of Athens should fight by water against the Corcireens,
and the ship saylynge forth to encounter their enemies, the ship master
hearing oone of the rowers snyse, was going back, than said Timotheus unto
him, What, art thou amassed to here that oone of so many thousands has caught
cold?

When that Chabrias of Athens should foght by see, and perceived that his
soldiers were soore amassed with a lyghtnynge, that flashed out even before
the navy, as a prodigiouse fortoken of some mysaduenture, he said, Now syrs
is the chief time to encounter with our enmies, when Iupyter the great God him
self, shows his power to be present with us.

Thus ends the first book.
THE SECOND BOOK
The preface.
THE exaumples that instruct and teach a captain, what he ought to do, and
how to behave him self before the battle, are in mine opinion sufficiently
declared in the first book, now I wolle show you, what is wont to be done in
the self battle, and what after the field is done.

To chose the opportunity and time convenient to fight. Ca. i.
WHEN Publius Scipio in Spain knew that Hasdruball captain of the Penians
had ranged out his army early in the morning, before they brake their fast,
he kept in his, unto the vii. hour, commanding the^ to sit at rest, and take
their repast. and when his enemies with hungre, thyrst, and long taryenge,
were now tired in their harneys, and began to recule to their camp, suddenly
he ranged forth his host, and gyuynge battle, overcame them.

When that Metellus Pius warred against Herculeius in Spain, and that this
Herculeius by and by at the spring of the day, had raynged out his army even
unto Metellus camp, the season of the year being most feruente and hot, he
kept his in unto the. vi. hour of the day, and so his men being fresshe and
lusty, overcame easelye the other weryed with great heat.

When the same Metellus joining his power with Pompeius against Sertorius in
Spain, had often ranged out his army, his ennemie evermore refusing to
fight, because he thought him self not able to match them both: after on a
certain time, he perceived, that Sertorius soldiers were greatly encouraged
to fight, valyantly exercising feats of arms, chargynge and dischargynge
their spears, thought it best to forbear for a time, till that their heat
and courage were abated: and so reculed his army, and caused Pompeius to do
the same.

Posthumous in Sicile lay with his host. iii. miles from the Penians, the
dictatours whereof ranged out their army daily even before the Romans camp,
the which he resisted with a little bend of men, and small skyrmyshes,
standing even before the trenche. Which custom the Penians now despisyng, he
keeping the residew within his camp, fresh and redye, after his old wont,
with a few sustained thassault of his ennemies, and kept them skyrmyshyng
longer than he was accustomed. And thus they weried, and sore an hungered, after
the. vi. hour, began to recule, whom Posthumous with his army fresh and
lusty, vanquished.

Forasmoche as Iphicrates of Athens had knowledge, that his ennemies,
continually used to eat at a certain time, he commanded his men to take
their repast more timely, and ranged them out in battle, and setting upon
his ennemies, he so dalyed with them, that he neither would give them battle,
nor yet suffer them to depart. now when it drew toward night, he reculed
back again, keeping his men never the less ready in their harneys: and when
his enemies being weryed, not only with standing at their defense, but
also with long fasting, made have to refreshe their bodies, and to take their
repaste, Iphicrates again brought forth his army, and set upon his ennemys
being unready and out of order.

The same Iphicrates warringe against the Lacedaemonians, kept his camp a long
space, hard by his ennemies, and both parties went forth at certain dew times
a forragynge. On a certain day he sent abroad about their busynes the slaves
and drudges of the army in soldiers apparel, keeping the soldiers still
within: and when his ennemies were scatered abroad for like business, he wan
their camp by assault, and the vnarmid retornynge unto the rore, and noise,
here and there with their burdeyns, he easily either slew, or took prisoners.

When Uirginius consul saw afar of, his ennemies racynge out all abroad, he
commanded his to pitche their darts in the ground, and rest them: then with
his army lusty and fresche he set on the other now almost breathelesse, and
put them to flyghte.

Fabius Maximus knowinge, that the french men and the Samnites, were most
valiant at the first brayde and that the courage of his men grew and
increased more and more as the fight continued, commanded his soldiers,
that they should be content at the first encountre to sustain and forhere,
that so with tarienge they might weary their enemies, the which thing
succedynge, he sent in socour unto them, and with all his strength in the
vawwarde, oppressed and subdued his ennemies.

Philip at Cheronea, remembryng that he had warryours hardened with long use
and exercise, and that the Athenienses were quick and fyerce, but unexercised,
and only vyolent at the first brayd, he of purpose prolonged the battle,
and anon after, the Athenienses fayntinge, he auanced his baners more fierce
ly forward, and slew them.

The Lacedaemonians, being certified by their espyes, that the Messenians were
set on such a rage, that they came to battle, with their wives and children,
differred to fight.

When Caesar in the cyuill war, had enclosed the host of Affranius and
Petreius within a trenche, he pyned them with thyrste, in so much that they
thereby erasperated, distroyed all that withstode them, and proffered to fight:
Caesar kept in his men, supposing it no mete time for battle, when ire and
despair had inflamed his ennemies.

It is plain, that Iugurthe, having well in mind the puissance of the
Romans, used always to give battle to ward night, to the entente, that if
his men should be put to flight, they might have the opportunity and succor
of the night to hyde them.

Lucullus in war aienst Mithridates and Tigranes in Armenia the greatter, at
Tigranocerta, when he having but xv. thousand men, and his ennemys an
innumerable multitude, which therefore were unruly, took this advantage, to
inade his ennemies out of array and order, and so forthwith disparpled them,
that the kings them selfs were feign to cast away their cote armure, and
flee.

Claudius Tiberius Nero, in war against the Pa^noniens, seeing the fierce bar
barous fellows come forth in array early in the morning, kept in his, and
suffered his ennemys to be beaten with the myste and rain, as it chanced the
wether to be very foul that day. and after when he perceived their courage
faynted, and their bodies were soore weakened with the rain and long
standing, the token of battle given, he assailed and overcame them.

When Caesar in France had perceived, that Ariouistus king of the Germayns, had
an ordinance in manner of a law, not to fight in the wane of the moon, than
chiefly he joined batayl with them, and overcame his ennemies, entangled and
let with their superstitious observing of the times.

Uespasian the emperor, on the saboth day, when it is not lauful for the Jews
to do any ernest business, assaulted and overcame them.

To chose a place to fight in. Cap. ii.
MArcus Curious perceiving, that king Pyrrhus army, being at large, might
not be resysted, did his endeavor to fight in strayte places, where they
thronged together, might be a let to them selves.

Cn. Pompeius in Cappadocia chose a high place, and thereon pight his tents,
where the stypyng of the hill help the courageous setting out of his
soldiers, and so he easily overcame Mithridates, even with the violent
decours and descendynge down from the hylle.

When C. Caesar fought against Pharnaces, Mithridates son, he ordained his
array on a hill, the which thing got him spedy vyctorie. For the darts thrown
from above, upon the barbarouse people, that came underneath, forthwith put
them to flight.

When Lucullus should fight against Mithridates, and Tygranes in Armenia the
gretter at Tygranocerta, he took quyckely the plain top of the next hylle,
with part of his army, and froo thens rushed down upon his ennemies
underneath, and invaded their horsemen on the one side, and putting sum to
flight, some out of array, so pursewed them, that he returned with right
noble vyctorie.

Uentidius against the Parthians moved not once his army, before his enemies
were within half a mile of him, and then with a sodeyne race he marched so
nere them, that their arrows, which did good service a far of, could now
do him no harm nere hand. By which policy, and with a lustye bold courage,
as though he mystrusted nothing, he quickly vanquysshed and subdued the
barbarous people.

When Anniball should fight against Marcellus at Numystron, he fensed his
army on the one side with holowe broken ways: and using the natural
sytuation of the place, for a fortifycation and defense, he overcame a right
worthy captain.

When the same Anniball at Cannas knew that the brook Uolturnus, far
passing the nature of other ryuers, sent out in the morning exceeding air
and wind, which raised and blewe up sand and duste, he so ordered his
battle, that all the vyolence thereof, should be on their backs, and in the
faces and eyes of the Romans: by the which incommodities wonderfully greuing
his ennemies, he opteyned that famous and notable vyctorie.

When Marius should fight on a day appointed against the Cymbriens, and Deuche
men, he first strengthened his soldiers with meat, and than caused them to
rest before the camp, to put their enemies to the more peynes, in
trauaylynge the space that lay between both hosts. and when he had put them
to this labor, he added thereunto an other incommoditie, that is to say, he so
chose his ground, and ordered his array, that the wind, the duste, and
contrary son lay in the face of his ennemies.

Epaminundas captain of the Thebans, rangynge out his army ageynste the
Lacedaemonians, commanded the horsemen to race out before, and to reyse up a
great duste in his enemies eyes, pretendynge as though he would have set
upon them with the horsemen, conducted the footmen from that part, where the
horse men were, and came behind on their backs unawares, and slew the^.

Three hundred against an innumerable multitude of the Persians, kept the strai
tes of the hill called Thermopylas, where might but like number of men mete
together to fight, and by that means, as touching the meting together, they
were equal in nombre with the barbarouse alyens, and being much more
valiant in war, slew a great nombre of them. neither had they ben overcome,
except the traitor Ephialtes had led their ennemys about, and oppressed them
on the back side.

When Themistocles capytayn of Athens perceived, that it was most profitable
for the Greeks, to try the matter against Xerxes multitude, in the straytes
of Salanes, and could not persuade the cities thereto, by polycie he brought to
pass, that his enemies compelled the Greeks to do according to his advise:
dissembling with Xerxes, as though he would betray his country, sent him word,
that the Atheniens intended to flee, and that it would be a very hard thing
for him, to lay siege to al their cities. Whereby he perswadid the barbarous
host, whi che was disquieted, with lyenge out all night in watch, to fight
with the Atheniens, fresh and lusty, even in those straites, that he desired,
where in no wise Xerxes could use his greatte noumber of soldiers.

To order the arraye. Cap. 3.
VUhan Cneus Scipio in Spain against Hanno, at the town named Indibilis,
perceived, that the army of the Carthaginenses was on this wise ordered, that
in the right wyng were the Spanyardes, a sturdy kind of soldiers, the which
not withstandyng had now in hand an other man's matter: and in the left
winge were the Aphriens, not all thing so sure in strength and man lines, but
of much more constant mind and purpose: he brought back and with drew the
left wynge of his army, to the right wynge, which he furnysshed and besette
with most valyant warriors, and so assayling the weakest of his ennemies, with
the strongest of his army, and vanquyshynge the Aphriens, he easilye
constrained the Spanyardes, which stood as though they had been lokers on, to
yield them self.

Artaxerxes, in battle against the Greeks, for as much as he had the greatter
nombre, devised his array to be spread brother, then the host of his ennemys,
and set the horse men in the fore frunte, and the light harneysed in the
wings, and so caused the mydward to proceed somewhat softer for the nons,
whereby he enclosed the host of his enmies, and so slew them.

Contrary wise Anniball at Cannas, somewhat withdrawyng the wings of his
host, and aduancyng forth the midwarde, at the first brunte and metynge drove
the Romans back, but when they were now joined in fight, the wings at a
certain watch word coming forward, the mydwarde gyuynge somewhat back,
enclosed their enmies, which gredily followed the mydwarde: and so pressed them
on both sides, and slew them, using the polycie of the old and long taught
army. For this manner of order and array, scasely any man may easily put in ure,
but namely he, that is an expert warrior, ready at all points.

Asdrubal in the second war of Carthaginenses, sought means to avoid the
necessity of fight, and therefore conducted and lay with his host on a rough
rocky hylle behynd vynes: Liuius Salinator, and Claudius Nero brought all their
power unto the side wings, leaving the fore frunt void, and so setting
upon him on both sides, overcame him.

Xantippus captain of the Lacedemoniens in Aphrike, ageynste M. Attilius
Regulus, set his light harneysed in the forward, and in the rerewarde the
chief and strength of all the host, and commanded other his soldiers, after
they had flung their darts, yt they should give place to their ennemies, and as
soon as they were come again into their order and array, by and by they
should rounne forth on each side, and break out agein from the wings, and so
get behind their enemies: that when their ennemies were no we come, and
received of the stronger ward, they might enclose them round about.

Sertorius used the same feate in Spain ageynste Pompey.

Cleandridas a Lacedemonie^ against Lycaonos set his host very thick thronged
together, that it might muster much less than it was, and his enemies thereby
taking the less regard, even in the very fight, he opened and divided his
order and arraye into side wings, and so inclosng his enemies, distroied them.

When Castronius of Lacedemonia came to succor the Egyptians against the
Perseans, knowing that the Greeks were the better men of war, and more
dread of the Perseans, their armure and apparel changed, he set the Greeks
in the forefrunt, and while they held the Persea^s hard, and egally matched
them, he sent to them a band of the Egyptians armed like Greeks, the
Perscans, which were scante able to resyste the Greeks, whom they took for
Egyptians, no we perceiving an other multitude come upon them, whom they
believed to be Greeks, were utterly dismayed, and fled.

Cn. Pompeius in Albania, perceyuinge that his enemies were stronger both in
nombre, and of horse men, commanded his horse men, that in the straites, nere
unto a little hill, they should cover their helmettes, lest by their bright
nes they might be seen: Then to march forth on horseback, and as it were to
go forth before the fotemen: and charged them also, that at the first
assault, they should give back, until they came to the footmen, and then
flee out in side wings: the which thing done, the place being dyscouered,
the battle of the footmen appeared suddenly in the mids, and inclosyng his
enmys, slew them.

When Anniball in Aphrike against Scipio, had furnyshed his army of Penians
and other that aided him, For he had in his host strangers not only out of
diverse parts, but also of Italye: next to. lxxx. elephantes, which he had
set in the forewarde, to trouble and break the arraye of his enemies, he
set the frenchemen, Genowayes, Baliares, and the Mauritans, to the intent
they should not flee, the Penians being at their backs: and being set
ageynste his ennemies, if they did none other hurt, yet at least they should
weary them: then his own and the Macedons, fresh and lusty to encountre with
the Romans weried, he set in the myddell ward: and last of all he ordered
the Italians, whose fidelytie and faynte courage he mystrusted, because he had
brought many of them out of Italy ageynste their wylles. Scipto, ageynste this
order and arraye, set the strength of his legion, ordered in three batayles in
the front, the spear men and the chief and strongeste soldiers: he joined
not his cohortes to gether, but left a space between them, through which the
elephantes driven by their enemies, might easily pass without troublynge or
breakinge the order of his battayles: those spaces between he filled with
soldiers in light harneys, that the arraye should not be seen or show open:
which had in commandment, that at the violent coming of the elephantes,
they should either recule back, orels go a side. farther he ordained, that the
horsemen should be in the wings: and over the Romayne horsemen in the right
wynge he appointed Lelius, and Masinissa over the Numidians in the left wynge:
which prudente order, no doubt, was cause of the victory.

C. Caesar, by the same means, that is to say, with stakes, kept of the hoked
chariottes of the french men.

When Alexander at Arbela, was in dread of the multitude of his ennemies, and
yet nevertheless had good affyance in the manlynesse of his soldiers, he so
ordered his battayles, that they might turn them self every way, and fight
on every side, if they chanced to be enclosed of their ennemies.

Archelaus against L. Sylla, set chariottes, armed with hokes like sythes, in
the front of his battle, to trouble and break the array of his ennemies, in
the second battle he set all the foot men in array after the facion of
Macedons: in the third battaylle, as the Romans used, he set them, that
came to aid him, myngled with fugitives, that were fled out of Italy, whose
constancy he much trusted: the light harneised he set vttermooste of all. Than
to enclose his ennemies he ordered his horsemen in two wings, of whom he had a
great number. Against these ordinances, Sylla let cast a broad diche on
either side of his camp, the heedes of which he fortified with bastiedes or
fortresses: to the intent he would not be enclosed of his enmies, and assailed
on all sides with the number of footmen, and namely of the horsemen, which
were very strong.

Than he ordered his foot men in three battayles, leaving spaces for the light
harneysed, and for the horsemen whom he set vttermoste of all, that when
need required, he might send them forth. Farther he commanded them, that
should defend the standerde, which were in the second battle, to drive
stakes in the ground thycke together, between the which, when the waynes
armed with sythes, approached, he received his army. Than at last making all
a great shoute together, he commanded the soldiers, that were light
harneysed, to throw their darts, which done, the enemies waynes armed with
sithes, either combred with the stakes, or feared with the clamor and noise,
or grieved with the darts, turned again upon their own host, and disturbed
and brake the array of the Macedones: which reculynge back, and Sylla
pursuing, Archelaus set to incountre him, his horse men, the which the
horsemen of the Romans put to flight, and acheued the vyctorie.

When that C. Duillius perceived his great shyps to be deluded with the
excedyng swift navy of the Carthaginenses, and that the manlynesse of his
sowldyours stood him in no stead: he imagined hands of iron, to catch and
claspe his enmies ships to his, whiles he might cast over brydges, and so
come together to try the matter, by the which means he distroyed them.

How to trouble and disorder the array. Capit. 4.
VUhan that Papirius Cursor should encountre with the Samnites, in time of
battle he commanded Spurius Naucius, his company knowinge nothing thereof,
that a few of the drudges and horsekepers, rydyng on mules, and drawing grene
bows after them on the ground, should run out together overthwart the hill
with a great noise. and as soon as these felawes were come forth on this manner,
Papirius beholding the^, cried with a loud voice, that his fellow was surely
come to preuente him of the vyctorie. By the which brag the Romans were
greatly encouraged, and dryuynge their ennemies fiercely before them* put them
to flight.

F. Rutilus Maximus in his fourth consulshyppe, at Samnium assayed by all
means, how be it in vain, to break through the array of his ennemies, yet at
the last he privily brought in a company of spear men, and sent them about
with Scipio, to take the other side of the hyl, where they might comme down on
the back side of his ennemies. the which thing done, the Romans courage
increased, and the Samnites being dismayde, and seckynge to flee, were all
together slain.

When that Minutius Ruffus was ouermatched with the great multitude of the
Scordisciens and the Daces, he sent his brother, and a few horsemen before
him, with the trumpetours, to blow a larum: and so it came to pass, that when
his enemies hard the great noise, and saw a face of a great multitude appear
out of the hills, they were utterly amassed and fled.

Acilius Glabrio consul, against the hooste of king Antiochus, which he
brought into Achaia through the straytes of Thermopylas, had not ben deceived,
but also discomfited by the inconuemency of the place, except he had sent
Portius Cato tribune to overthrow the tops of the mountain Callydronius,
and so had sodeynely appiered on the back side the hyl, over the kings
ca^pe. for by this means was Antiochus host disturbed and put to flight, the
Romans breakyng in on both sides of them, and taking their camp also.

When C. Sulpitius Petreius consul, should fight against the french me^, he
commanded the horse kepers and carters, privily to convey them self into the
next hills with their mules, and to advance and show them selfs, when both
hosts were joined together in fight, as though they had been horsemen. at the
which sight the french men, supposing that there came socour to the Romans,
gave back, where they had almost gotten the upper hand.

When Marius, nere unto the waters called Aque sextie, purposed the day folo
wynge to fight against the duche men, he sent by night Marcellus knight,
with a small power of fotemen, and certain horsemen, on the back side of his
ennemies, and that they might make a show of a great multitude, he commanded
the horse kepers, cooks, and drudges to goo also harneysed, taking their
beasts with them, covered and laden with beddynge, and other baggage, and to
come down on the back side their ennemys, when they perceived the battayl
began. by the which color their ennemys were stricken with so great fear, that
they turned their backs and fled.

Licinius Crassus in the battaylle of the fugitives, in the camp of
Calamarcum, rangynge out his army against Castus and Canimocus, capitaynes of
the french men, sent behind the hylle xii. cohortes, with C. Promptinus, and
Q. Martius Rufus his capitains, which when the battle began, making great
shoute and cry, so sharply set on their ennemies behind at their backs,
that they were discomfited: and in every place, where they should have fought,
sought means to flee.

Marcellus fearyng, lest the cry of his soldiers, should disclose the small
nombre of them, commanded the drudges, horse kepers, and all the rascalles,
that followed the host, to make noise and cry to gether, and so under the
color of a great multitude, he feared his ennemys.

When Ualerius Leuinus fought against Pirrhus, and had kylde a rascal
soldier, he held up his sword al blodye, and made both the hosts believe,
that he had slain king Pirrhus. wherefore his enemies, supposyng them self
to be destitute, by the death of their captain, all abashed with that lie
returned again into their camp.

Iugurthe in the battle against C. Marius, having knowledge of the latin
tongue, by long conversation with the Romayne host, came out in to the
forewarde, cryinge in latyne, Ego C. Marium occidi, I have slain Marius, which
words caused many Romans to recule.

Mironides of Athens, in a doubtful and daungerouse battle against the
Thebans, suddenly lepte forth in to the right wynge of his host, cryenge with
a loud voice, that he had got the victory on the left wynge. Whereby he so
encouraged his own men, and so discomfited his ennemies, that he gatte the
vyctorie.

Cresus against a mighty power of horsemen of his ennemies, set out a great
number of camelles, at the which strange sight, the horses being amassed, not
only ouerthrewe those, that bestrod them, but also bore down the array of the
foot men, making them a pray for their ennemies.

Pirrhus king of the Epirotiens, in battle with the Tarentines against the
Romans, after the same manner brake the array with elephantes.

The Carthaginenses also ofttymes used the same policy against the Romans.

When the Uolsciens on a time had pitched their tents nere unto groves and
woddes, Camillus set fire on all that would bourne, even unto his ennemies
tents, and brent them out of their ca^pe.

The Spanyardes against Hamilcar set oxen in their forward with waynes fast
yoked one unto an other, and in the waynes laid they brondes apt to burn, with
dry styckes, myngled with brymstone, and when the token was given to fight,
they set those things a fire, dryuyng the oxen upon their ennemies, and so
amassed them, and brake their array.

The Phalisciens, and the Tarquiniens decked and set forth certain of their
soldiers in prtestes apparaylle, with fyrebrandes and serpents, like furies
of hell, and so troubled and disordered the Romans array.

When Athas, king of Srithia, fought against a huge host of the
Tribulliens, he commanded, that women, chylderne, and all that were unmeet to
battle, should bring droues of asses, and oxen, on the backwarde of their
ennemies, auauncyng, and showing their spears in their hands: than he caused
a rumor to be spread abroad, that the farther Scithiens were come to aid him.
by the which polycie, he put his ennemies to flight.

Of traynes and disceytes. Cap. v.
ROmulus layenge part of his army in secret embushement, approached unto the
Fideniens, from whom he faynyng him self to flee, brought them hastily
pursuyng him, thither where his imbushementes lay, which being sparpled out of
order, they assailed on every side, and easily slew.

Q. Fabius Maximus consul, being sent to succor the Sutrines against the
Hetrusciens, so ordered the matter, that the hole power of his ennemies, set
against him: than dissembling as he feared them, and as though he fled, got
the higher ground, on whom following him out of array and order, he sharply set,
and not only vanquyshed them, but also got their camp.

Sempronius Gracchus ageynste the Celtiberiens first making as though he had
been afraid, kept in his host a certain space, and afterward sent out the
light harneised, to provoke and vere his ennemies, and so to recule again.
When he had thus entysed and brought farther his enemies, and by chasyng in and
out, set them out of order, he suddenly struck out, assaylynge them so sore,
that he took their camp also.

Q. Metellus consul, keeping war in Sicilia ageynste Hasoruball, was the more
circumspect, because that Hasdruball besides his great army, had also the
help of. Cxxx. elephantes, first therefore he showed to mystrust him self, and
as oone discouraged, kept his army within the precinct of the city,
Panormus, casting a great dyche before him. than after perceiving, that
Hasdruball had set his camelles in the foreward of his field, he
commanded his spear men, to goo and throw their darts on the elephantes,
and straight way to recule back into their camp, the which thing done, the
guyders of the elephantes being soore moved so to be mocked, drove their
beasts even into the very dyche, where at the first being combred and let,
some were slain, and some driven back again upon their own company, to the
great trouble of the hole army. Than Metellus, tarienge for this occasyon,
auaunced forward with all his host, and setting on them on the side, slew the
Penians, and so conquered them, and also their elephantes.

Tamiris queen of the Scythians, feinynge as though she for fear had fied,
entysed out Cyrus, capitayn of the Perseans, unto certain straytes very well
known of her soldiers, where suddenly she turned her host, and wanne the
vyctorie, being helped by the situation of the place.

The Egiptians pitchynge their field in a marishe ground, couerid the ground
with reite or wides of the sea, and at the first bronte of the battle,
faynynge to flee, they led their enemies, that followed and chased them into
the fenne, and so enclosed them.

Uiriatus, which of a robber and rouer, became the captain of the
Celtiberiens, fayninge as though for fear he fled, to give place to the Romayn
horse me^, brought them into a very foul and deep gogmier, and when by sure
paths well known, he was escaped and gone, he slew the Romans ignorant of
the places, and drowned in mudde.

Fuluius chyefe capytayne in the battle against the Cymbrians pight his
camp very nygh his enemies, and commanded his horsemen to chase them even
unto their camp, prouokyng them first to fight, and than to feign them
self to fly, and to retrace again. Thus he accustomed them certain days,
until that he perceived, that the Cymbrians, chasynge them very gredily, were
wont to leave their camp without defense: after espieng his time, while part
of his armies kirmyshed with them, as they were wont to do, conveyed him self
privily with the light harneysed, on the back side of their tents: and being
out of order, suddenly set upon them, and passing over the bulwark, wanne
their camp.

Cneus Fuluius, when the Phalisciens host, far greatter than the Romans,
had pight their tents in the Romans borders, set on fire certain vyllages
a good way from the host, by his own soldiers, to the intent the
Phalisciens, thinking their own fellows to have done it, might scatter
abroad in hope of pyllage.

Alexander having a company of Epirotes against the Illyriens, sent forth
certain of his men in the Illyriens apparayle, gyuynge them commandment, to
waste and distroy his own countreye Epirus: the which thing, when the
Illiriens espied, they now careless, began to run forth on every side to
pyllage, supposing those that set the towns a fire, to be spies and
scoutwatches of their own part, and so they were intised and led into
dangerous places, where many of them were slain, and the rest put to flyghte.

Leptenes Syracusanus also warryng upon the Penians, commanded to set a fire
his own fields, vyllages, and certain castelles: the Penians, supposing
their own fellows had done that enterprise, ran out to held them, and
so they were received, and slain of their ennemies.

Maharbal, sent of the Penia^s against the Aphriens, that rebelled, perceyuyng
that this nation was very gredy and desirous of wine, myngled a great quantity
thereof with Mandrage, which has a virtue to cast men into a dead sleep. this
done, he made a light skyrmyshe with them, and of purpose gave place: and
after in the night feigned to depart thens, leaving behind him, certain
packes in his camp, with the wine infected. the barbarous alyens perceiuyng he
was fled, came and took the camp, and for joy so gulled in the wine thus
infected, that they lay alonge straight on the ground like dead men, Maharbal
turnyng ageyn, took and slew them.

Anniball perceiving, that both his own host, and the Romans also lay in
such places, where was but lyttelle wodde, leauyng for the nonce in that
barayne and deserte cost, great plenty of cattayle in his camp, departed
thens, when the Romans came, and found the cattayle, they slew and eat
very much of the flesh, which could not be wholesome, because they wanted
wodde to dress it. Anniball knowing this full well, returned by night, when
they feared nothing, and were very unlusty, by reason of the flesh, that they
eat half raw, and vexed them very soore.

When Tiberius Gracchus in Spayn had knowledge, that his ennemie was very
nedy, and troubled for lack of vitayles, he forsook and left his camp,
plentuously furnished of all manner meats: than his enmies taking the camp,
and ingurgyng them selfs immoderately, became all heavy and unlusty, Gracchus
suddenly returned with his hooste, and oppressed them.

They that warred against the Erithriens, taking a spy of theirs, that lay out
in a high place, slew him, and clothed in his apparayle, one of their own
men, which gyuynge the Erithriens a token from the same place, called and
brought them forth to their discomfiture.

The warriers of Arabia, perceyuinge, that their custom was known, which
used to give warning with smoke by day time of their ennemes coming, and
with fire by night, commanded, that this custom should be continuallye kept:
but after their enemies aproched nere them, that custom was laid aside.
their enemies therefore supposyng, that their coming was not known, because
the lyghtes were not set up after the old manner, came in among them
hastily, and were discomfited and slain.

Alexander Macedo, his enemy pitchynge his tents in the higher ground,
conducted part of his host aside, commaundyng the rest to kendle up fyers
after their accustomed manner, and setting out a face of the matter, as though
the hole host had layne still, he conveyed his power about by higher regions,
and so drove his enemy from the upper ground.

Memnon king of Rhodes, having a great power of horsemen, and desyring to
bring his enmy down into the valey, which kept him self on the mountayn: sent
certain of his soldiers, under the color of runnagates, to his enemies, to
tell, that Memnons host was so vexed with perilous sedition, that now one
part of his host fell away, and after an other, and that credence might be
given to this their saying, he caused small castles and holds to be furnished
with de fence in the syghte of his enemies, as though the seditiouse persons
had ordained such places of socour one against an other. than came they, that
kept the hills, down into the valey, and assaulted the castelles, where they
were by the horsemen enclosed, and discomfited.

Harridas king of the Molossiens, being assaulted of Ardias Illirius, which
had the greater host, sent in to the costs of Aetolia, such as were unable
to fight, spredyng abroad a rumor, that he would give up his cities to the
Aetolians, but he him self in the mean time, with all that were able to bear
weapon, devised and laid wait in the hills, and holowe ways, whereby the
Illyriens should come. they fearing lest the Aetolians would prevent them,
and take all that belonged to the Molossiens, as men hastynge to pillage,
regardyng not their order and array, made great haste: and as they came out of
order, fearing no such thing, Harridas sodeynelye brake out of his
inbushmentes, and vanquisshed them.

T. Labienus, leuetenaunt to C. Caesar against the french men, coveting to
assail them, before they received aid of the Germaynes, pretended a color of
desperation, and remouynge his host to the other side of the water, spredde a
rumor abroad, that he would depart the day following. The french men,
beleuynge him to flee, appointed to pass over the river that was between them.
Labienus perceiving that, turned his army, and even in the water slew them.

When Anniball perceived, that the camp of Fuluius the Romayne capytayne, was
negligently kept, and that he enterprised many things unadvisedly: in the
dawning of the day, the mist being some what thycke, and the air therewith
much obseured, he made a few of his soldiers to show them self to those
that kept watch in the Romans tents: while Fuluius addressed him suddenly
thitherwarde with his host. Anniball on the other side inuadynge him, took his
camp: and so brake out on the back of the Romans, sleinge their ca pitayne
with. viii. M. valiant men of arms.

The same Anniball perceiving, that the Romans host was divided between
Fabius, which was dictatour, and Minutius, master of the horse men, and
that Fabius waited nothing but an occasyon, Minutius being inflamed with
desire to fight, pytched his tents in a field, that lay between his enemis:
and after that he had laid pryuily in wait, a certain of footmen in the
rocky and holowe ways, he sent a company to take the next hill, and so to call
out his enemy. Minutius had no sooner brought forth his host to assault
them, but they, which Annibal had laid in wait, arose, and utterly had
destroid Minutius host, if Fabius had not socoured them in their great danger.

When the same Anniball lay at Trebia, where he might behold Sempronius
host, he set his under captain Mago, with chosen men of arms, the wether
being exceeding cold, at the river, that ran between them. than caused he
the horsemen to race out, even unto Sempronius pale, thereby to provoke him to
follow them, commandyng, that at the first setting out of the Romans, they
should recule over at such fourdes as they knew well. The consul unadvisedly
setting upon, and following after them, caused that his host yet fasting, was
clunged and frosen, by reason of the feruente cold, before they could pass
the river. Anniball forthwith, they being overcome with cold and hunger, set
out against them his army, which he had cherysshed for the same purpose,
with fire, oils, and meat: Mago also appointed for the same purpose, fyersely
set on them behind and slew them.

The same manne at Trasimenus in a place, where a straight way leads unto the
foot of an hill, and thense in to an open field, feigned to fly, and escaped
by the strayghtes into a broad field, and there pitched his tents: and by
night, setting in array his men of arms, brought forth his host in the
dawninge of the day, being also helped with a mist by the hill that hunge over
the strayghtes on both sides: Flaminius still pursued him, until he came into
the straytes, where he was iclosed before, behind, and also on both sides, and
was slain, both he and all his company.

The same Anniball against Iunius, that was dictatour, commanded at midnyght.
vi. C. horsemen, divided into sundry companies, to show them self continually
by course about their ennemies tents: and after that the Romans with lyenge
out in wait al night in the rayn were sore disquieted, and weried, the
captain Iunins, gyuynge them a token to recule, Anniball brought forth his
army, that had layne all night at rest, and invaded their tents.

When Anniball had pyght his camp at Cannas, he caused. v. C. Numidians to
fly from him unto the Romans, and that they might the better be believed,
they yielded up their swords, and their tergats, and so were received into the
rerewarde. and as soon as both hosts joined together, they drew their short
weapons, which they bare about them privily, and caught up the tergats of them
that were slain, and so slew the Romans.

The Iapigiens also gave unto P. Licinius proconsul, under a pretense to yield
them selfs, certain vyllages and towns: and when they were received in the
rerewarde, they slew the Romans.

When both the army of Syphax, and also the Penians host, lay against Scipio
Aphricanus, he appointed by night to set upon Syphax army with fire, because
there was of wodde, and other things apt to bourne great plenty: to the
intent he might both slay the Numidians, for fear runnynge out of their
tents, and also receive the Penians, which no doubt would come forth to
help their fellows, and both came to pass after his own mind and sentence.

Pompeius keeping war in Armenia against Mithridates, which had the
greatter power of horsemen, disposed by night. iii. thousand soldiers in
light harneys, and. v. hundred horse men in a valey among the shrubs, between
the two hoostes, and in the morninge at the break of the day, he sent forth
against his ennemies, horsemen so addressed, that when the hole host of their
enemies, should enter battle with them, they might keep their array, and
give back a little and lyttelle, until they had given space unto them that
lay in wait for the same purpose, to rise behind on the back of their
ennemies: and when they had so done, they turned again, that seemed to have
fled, and slew their enmies, trembling for dread, which they had got
between them. also the footmen approchynge nere, gored in the horses: whereby
they quite abated the courage and great affiance, that the king had in the
multitude of his horsemen.

Mithridates, whom Lucullus often times overcame by very power of chivalry,
set upon him again by craft, subornatynge and privily hyrynge a certain
excellent man of strength, called Adathantes to run away unto Lucullus, and
first by all means to win his favor, and than to slay him, which thing he
manfully attempted, all though he myste his purpose. for not withstandyng that
Lucullus retained him as oone of his knights, yet he laid privy wait on
him, supposing, that it was neither mete, rashly to trust a fugitive, runnyng
from his capitayn, nor yet to forbid other to do the same. Tha^ after he had
showed his diligent service and labor in many ba tails, and was put in
greatte trust, he chose the time for his purpose, when all was at rest and
quiet in the pretors pauilyon: but fortune favored Lucullus. for this felawe,
that might at all times when he would, come unto the capitayn, if he were
waking, came now by chance, when he was a sleep. therefore when he would have
gone in, to the capytayne, as though he had brought word of some sodeyne
chance, or other thing nedeful, and being obstinately kept out by the
servants, that had greatte regard unto their masters health, fearyd lest he
had been suspected, and so fled again unto Mithridates, disapoynted of his
purpose.

Melanthus captain of the Athenians, whom Xanthus king of Boetia provoked
unto battle, was no sooner come within his reach, but he said, O Xanthus,
thou doeste vnlaufullye, and contrary to thy covenant, to come forth against
me alone man, with an other following the. when Xanthus maruayled, who that
should be, that accompanied him, and looked backward, Melanthus stepped in, and
slew him at one stroke.

When Iphicrates of Athens, at Cheronessum, understood, that Anaxibius,
captain of the Lacedaemonians, led his host by land, he conveyed the most
valiant warriors out of the ships into a secret place, commaundynge the
ships nevertheless, as though they had been still manned with soldiers, to
pass over the sees openly, and so by land he brake in behind the
Lacedemoniens, fearing no such thing, and oppressed and discomfited them.

For as much as Alcibyades, capytayne of Athens, against the capytayne of the
Numidians, and the Lacedaemonians, had upon the narow see called Hellespontus, a
great host, and many ships, he landed part of his soldiers by night, and
hid part of his navy behind certain promontories, saylynge forth him
self with a small nombre, to provoke his ennemies: whom making toward him,
he still fled, until he had brought them, where his ships lay. Then they
fleinge and landynge, were slain by those, that he before had landed for the
same purpose.

When the same Alcibiades should fight in battle on the sea, he caused to set
up mastes in a certain promontorye, commaundyng his men, that as soon as they
perceived the battle begin, they should hoyse up the sails. Which feate
caused his enemies, yt supposed, when they saw the mastes, that an other nauye
came to aid him, to turn away and flee.

To let an ennemy escape, left he being enclosed, should through despair,
renew the battle. Cap. vi.
IN the battle, wherein Camillus was captain, the senate thought it best,
that the Gauls, which desired vessels to pass the river Tybris, should be
carried over, and also helped with vittayles. And afterward to men of the same
nation, seekynge to flee by Pomptinus field, the Romans gave way, the which
is therefore called Gallica via.

Wha^ L. Martius a knight of Rome, whom the host chose to be their capitain,
after the two Scipions were slain, had enclosed the Carthaginenses, which to
sell their lives derely, fought very egrely: he somewhat slacked, and opened the
wards of his army, gyuynge them space to flee: and so being sparpled
abroad, he slew them, without any danger of his own men.

What time Caesar had enclosed the Germaynes, whom dispeire caused most
fiercely to fight, he commanded, to let them pass, and as they fled, he
set upon them.

When the Germaynes, at Trasimenus, were enclosed of Anniball, and fought
exceeding fiercely: he opened the army, and made them a way to get out:
beatynge them down as they fled, without any loss of his own men.

When Antigonus, king of Macedonia, had compelled the Aetolians, to take them
to their places of succor and refuge, and afterward perceived, that they
being constrained with hunger, had determined to break out, and dye manfully
together, he gave them a way to flee: and so breaking their vyolente rage,
slew them, when they had turned their backs.

When Agesilaus capitayn of the Lacedemonie^s in battayl against the Thebans,
perceived, that his enemies were enclosed through the situatio^ of the place it
self, and that they fought therefore the more fiercely, as men in despair, he
slacked and opened his array, making the Thebans a way to escape out, and than
closing again his army, without loss of any of his own part, slew them
fleinge.

When Cn. Manlius consule returned out of the fight, and found the Romans
camp taken of the Hetrusciens, and all the ways in, strongely kept, he so
troubled his ennemies, enclosed in the camp, that in the greatte outrage, they
slew both him, and also many of his men: his lieuetenant perceiving that,
removed their standing, and gave them way to pass out again toward their
own company, and as soon as they were sprede abroad, he pursued them
again, and slew them, by help of the other consul Fabius that met him.

When Themistocles had vanquysshed Xerxes, he would in no wise agree, that the
bridge should be broken, over the which he would return home, saying, It was
better to drive him out of Europe, thanne to enforce him to fight of despair.

The same Themystocles sent one to Xerxes, to bring him word, in what
peril he was, onelesse he fled quyckely.

When Pirrhus king of the Epirotes had taken a certain city, and perceiving
that the citizens, their gates being shut, were compelled by extreme necessytie
to fight manfully: he made them a way to flee.

The same Pirrhus among his other precepts, belonginge unto a worthy
captain, has left in remembrance, that a man should not over fiercely follow
his enemy, not only, lest necessity should compel him to play the man, but
alsoo that he might ever after be the better will ling to flee: for as much as
he will suppose, that he that has the upper hand, will not pursue him unto
death.

How to dissemble abuersities. Cap. vii.
Vuhan Tullus Nostilius, king of the Romans, in battle against the
Ueients, saw, that the Albanians, forsakynge the Romans, gat them upon the
next hills, the which thing sore troubled the Romans: he said all a
loud, that the Albanians had so done by his commandment, to enclose his
enemies: whereby he put the Ueientes in great fear, and the Romans in great
comfort. and thus by wisdom he restored the matter, that began to go to
wrack.

Lucius Sylla, his lieutenant fleinge from him with a great power of horsemen,
in the settinge forth of the battle, said plainly, that he commanded him so
to do, and by that means he not only areysed the minds of his soldiers out
of despair, but also gave them good hope and comfort, that some profit should
follow thereof.

The same Sylla, when they that came to aid him, were by chance enclosed of
their enemies and slain, standing in dread, lest that misaduenture should
discourage all the rest of his army, said openly, that those fellows had
conspired to forsake him. Wherefore he sent them of set purpose, in to those
inconvenient places. Thus under a color, as he had revenged him self, he
cloked that manifest calamite, and comforted al his army.

When king Syphax ambassadors brought word unto Scipio, that he should not
pass out of Sicilia in to Aphrike, in trust of his society and aid, and
fearing lest these tidings might abate his soldiers courage, to here that
the leage and societye between them and the king was broken: he sent away the
ambassadors quickly: and spread abroad a fame, that Syphax had sent for him of
his own accord.

When a barbarouse alyen in battle had brought word unto Q. Sertorius, that
Herculeius was slain, he strayte slew him with his dagger, lest he should have
borne these tidings any further, and discouraged the army.

Alcibiades in a sore battaylle against the Abydiens, perceiving a messanger
make great haste to ward him, with sad and heavy chere, would not suffer him to
do his message openly, but after by secret relation, he had knowledge, that
his nauye was assaylled of Phannabasus, the kings lieutenaunt, he kept all
things close, both from his ennemies, and also from his own men: and the
batayl ended, went and rescued his navy.

Anniball taking his journey toward Italy, was left and forsaken of. iii.
thousand carpenters, which were horsemen fightyng in chariottes, and lest his
other men should have been thereby discouraged, he said openly, that he him self
had sent them away, and that credence might be given to his saying, he sent
also certain home again, that could away with no great labor.

L. Lucullus, perceiving, that the horse men of Macedony, which were hired to
help him, sodeynely consenting together, fled from him to his ennemies,
commanded to blow the trumpettes to battle, and sent forth certain
companies to follow them, his ennemies supposing that they should join in
battle, received the Macedoniens fleing to them, with the point of their
wepons. they than perceiving, that the contrary part received them not, and
that they were in great ieoperdy of them that they forsook, by necessity
compelled, turned them self unto fight, and fiercely invaded Lucullus
ennemies.

When Datames, capitayn of the Perseans against Anthophradates in Cappadocia,
perceived, that part of his horsemen were fled away, he commanded all the
rest to follow him, and when he had ouertake^ them, he lauded and gave them
great thanks, that they had so cherefully set out before him: he also
exhorted and encouraged them, manfully to set upon his enemy. The which
thing brought these runawayes for very shame to repentance, in so much that
they changed their purpose, thinking that it was not perceived.

T. Duintius Capitolinus consul, on a time when the Romans began to flee,
imagined and feigned, that his ennemies on the other wynge were put to flyghte.
and so comfortynge and strengthnynge his men, obtained the vyctorie.

When Cn. Manlius against the Hetrusciens, perceived that his fellow Fabius,
which governed the left wynge, was sore wounded, and therefore part of his
host began to flee, beleuyng that the consul had been slain, he ran against
them with companyes of horsemen, cryenge, that both his fellow lived, and that
he had vanquished the right wynge. by the which constant and bold mind, he
refreshed and renewed his men's courage, and got the vyctory.

Marius against the Cimbrians and Almaynes, when they that pytched the tents,
had so unwisely chosen their camp, that the water was in the barbarouse
men's hands, his army complaining and calling for water, poynted their
ennemys, with his synger, saying, Yonder you must fetch it. by the which
secret incitation, he so moved them, that straight way they dystroyed the
barbarouse alyens.

How to order the Battle by constancy. Capi. viii.
SCruius Tullius a young man, in the battle, wherein Tarquinius the king
encountered with the Sabines, perceiving, that the soldiers fought nothing
freshely, took the standarde, and violently flange it among his ennemies, the
To maynes so ardently fought to win again their standarde, that they
recovered their standarde and also the vyctory.

Furius Agrippa consul, for as much as a wynge of his army began to recule,
plucked the baner from him that bare it, and flonge it among the horsemenne of
the Hernitiens his ennemies. whereby he restored the battle, the Romans
endeavored them self with high courage, to recover their standerde.

T. Duintius Capitolinus likewise flunge his standarde among his ennemies, the
Phalisciens, and bad his soldiers go fetch it again.

When M. Furius Camillus, marshal of the host, and having the consulles
power, beheld his army stagger and stand at a stay, caught violently the stan
derde bearer, and drew him with his hands upon his ennemies the Uolsciens,
and Latins: and than very shame made all the other to follow.

When M. Attilius consule in the battle against the Samnites, saw certain
of the soldiers flee again into their tents out of the field, set out an
army of his against them, affirminge, that they should fight with him, and
with worthy citezens, if they would not gladly fight with their ennemies. and
by that means he brought them all again into the battle.

L. Sylla, when the legions reculed and gave place unto Mithridates host,
led by Archelaus, with his sword drawn, ran forth into the forewarde, and
calling his soldiers, said, If any man inquyre of you, where ye left your
captain, answer, fyghtyng in Boetia. for shame whereof they all followed him.

Diuus Julius at Munda, his men reculynge back, commanded his horse to be led
out of his sight, and stepped forth a foot in to the forewarde, his soldiers
being ashamed to leave their captain destitute, began lustyly to fight a
fresh.

Philippus fearing lest his men would not sustain and endure the vyolence of
the Scythians, set his most trusty horsemen on the rere ward, commaundynge
them, to suffer none of their fellows to flee out of the fight, and to slay all
such as would neades depart. by reason of the which charge, it came to
pass, that they, which were most fearful and cowardelyke, chose rather to
be slain of their ennemies, thanne of their own fellows, and so he obtained
the victory.

What things are to be done after the battle, is the mattier prosper, and
to confirm and establishe the resydue of the war. Ca. ix.
VUhan C. Marius had vanquyshed the Almaynes in battle, because the night
was at hand, he enclosed the resydue, fearing and keeping them all night
waking, by noise and crienge of a few soldiers. whereby on the morrow he more
easily overcame them, disquieted all the night before.

When Claudius Nero had overcome the Penians, with their captain Hasdruball,
hastynge out of Spain into Italye: he cut of the said Hasdrubals heed, and
flung it into Annibals Army: whereby Anniball was soore afflicted for sorrow of
his brothers death, and the army stood in despair of the aid, that was
coming to them.

L. Sylla showed up to them that were beseged in Praeneste, the heedes of their
capitaynes slain in battle, set upon spears ends: and so abated and
brake their obstinate frowardnes.

Arminius, capytayn of the Germains, likewise commanded to stycke up the
heedes of them that were slain in battle, and set them up even before the
trenche of their ennemies camp.

When Domitius Corbulo besyeged Tigranocerta, and the Armenians seemed styffely
to endure the siege, he put to death one of their chief magistrates, which
he had taken in war, and flung his heed with a slynge, into the city. the
which heed by chance fell in the midst of the counsel, where the barbarous
fellows were assembled the same time, at the which sight, as a thing
monstrous, they were abashed, and made haste to yield them.

How in hard chances to ease aduersyties. Cap. x.
VUhan the night had broken of that grievous and sharp battle, which T.
Didius fought against the Spanyardes, wherein was great number slain on both
sides, Didius caused many of his men's carcases to be buried in the night: on
the morrow after the Spaniardes came forth to do likewise: and by cause they
found a greatter number of theirs slain, than of the Romans, they argued them
self to be overcome by reason of the number, and condescended to the request
of the Romayne captain.

When T. Martius a Romain knight being governor of the resydue of the host
that remained after the death of the two Scipions, perceived, that two hosts
of the Penians lay at hand, not many miles asonder, he encouraged his
soldiers to set upon the host, that lay next him, at mydnight, being
careless and out of order, through affyaunce of their victory: and slew
them, leaving not so much as a messanger to bear tidings of the miserable
mischaunce. and then gyuing his soldiers a lytte space to rest them, the same
night with all have, preventing the fame of the thing done, invaded the other
army. And thus twice in one night enjoying like chance of battle, and every
where dystroyenge the Penians, he restored Spain again to the Romans.

How to vetayne and keep wauerynge minds faithful. Capi. xi.
P. Ualerius at Epidaurus, fearing that they of the town would deceive him,
for as much as he had but small aid, preparyd games of exercise a good way
from the city, and when the most part of the multitude was thither assem
bled, to se the syghtes, he shut the gates after them, and would not let them
in again, until he had received hostages of the chiefest of the city.

When Cn. Pompeius suspected the Catinenses, and feared lest they would not
receive his garrison, he desired them to suffer in the mean space, such as
were syck and diseased, to be refreshed among them in their city, the which
thing granted, he sent thither his most valiaunte men of arms, as though
they had been sick and dyseased, the which took the city and kept it.

After that Alexander had conquered the Thraciens, iourneying to ward Asia,
he feared lest after his departinge, they would rebel, would needs take with
him, as though it were for honor, the kings, the governors, and all such as
seemed carefulle for their liberty lost, leaving the commons behind, and
making mean men their governors. and so he opteyned, that neither the nobles,
being bound with his benefits and pleasures, would desire any change,
neither could the commons goo about any such thing, being spoiled of their
chief governors and heedes.

When Antipater saw that the Necieus, herynge that Alexander was dead, arose
together, to invade and trouble his empire, he dyssemblynge as though he knew
not for what purpose they came, gave them thanks, that they were assem bled
to aid Alexander, against the Lacedemoniens, adding here unto, that he would
certify the king thereof by writing. How be it forasmoch as he neded not
their help as than, he exhorted them to depart home again. By the which
asseueration and affyrmaunce, he dyspatched the peril that was at hand by
reason of the commotion.

What time among the women that were taken prisoners in Spain, a virgin of
excellent beauty, and also of noble parentage, which ravished all men's eyes,
was brought unto Scipio, he causyng her to be kept with high dyligence,
restored her to Luceius her spouse, and forther gave unto him for a dowery, the
gold that her parents had brought to redeem her. By the which manyfold
magnifice^ce, the hole nation was ouercom, and submytted them self to the
Romain Empire.

It is also written, that Alexander Ma cedo, with so high abstinence regarded a
virgin taken in war, of excellent beaultie, forasmoche as she was espowsed
unto a prince of the next nation, that he would not ones behold her face,
sending her forthewith unto her spowse. by the which benefytte he allured and
wanne the hearts of all the nation.

The emperor Caesar August, building turrettes and places of fe^ce in the
costs of France, in the war, wherein he over coming his enmies, deserved
that surname Germanicus, commanded, that the price should be trewely paid,
for the fruits of all those places, which he had enclosed with his trenche.
and by that renoume and fame of Justice, he made them all his faithful friends.

What things are to be done before the camp, when men mystrust their
puyssannce. Capit. xii.
VUhan the Uolsciens were about to assaut T. Quintius camp, he kept watch and
ward with one cohort, and let all the rest of the army lie in quiet,
commaundynge the Trumpettes no we and than to blow, rangynge on horseback
about the tentis. when he had by this deceytefull brag, kept of his
ennemies, and held them waking all night, in the dawning of the day, he
brake out suddenly upon them, being werye with watch, and easily overcame
them.

When Phares capitayn of the Atheniens, looked after succor and aid, and
feared lest his ennemies, despysyng his small power, should in the mean time
assaut his tents, he commanded the more part of his men, to go out by night on
the backesyde, and to return again into the camp that way, from whens
their ennemies might plainly see them, as though new succor and strength
had comen to him. And thus he defended his host with feyned succor, until
it was furnished with ye aid, which he looked for.

When Iphicrates of Athens, had pight his tents in the plain champyon
ground, and knew that the Thraciens would come by night from the hills,
which had but one way to come down by, to rob and spoil his camp, he
privily conducted forth his army, and distributed them on each side the way,
that the Thraciens should pass by: where he set upon them on both sides, and
oppressed them, runnynge down unto the camp, wherein the fyres were
diligentely maynteyned by a few that remained behynd, to make a show, as
there had layne a great multitude.

Of fleinge away. Cap. xiii.
VUhan the Gauls should fight with Attalus, they delivered all their gold and
silver, to be kept of certain men, that might scatter it abroode, if it
happened them to be put to flyghte, to the intent they might the more easily
escape their enemies, being let with gatherynge up the pray.

Tryphon king of Siria, being vanquyshed, scattered money all the way that he
fled. and so he hyndered Antiochus horsemen, that pursued him, and escaped
them.

When Q. Sertorius was put to flight of Quintius Metellus Pius, he supposed
not a thing sure enough only to fle, but also warned his soldiers, to
disparple them selfs diverse ways, and told them whyther he would have them
resort.

Uiriatus capytayne of the Lucitaniens, escaped the Romayne army, and also the
daungerouse incommoditie of the costs, by the same reason that Sertorius did,
first disceuerynge his host, and then assemblynge it together again.

What time Porcennas host lay sore upon Horatius Cocles, he had his men
return into the city by the bridge, and to hew it down behind him, to
the end their ennemies should not follow them: and all the mean space, while
this thing was doing, he him self standing before the head of the bridge,
kept of his ennemies, and at length, when he hard the bridge crack, as it
brake, he sprange in to the myddest of the river, and swam over, not with
weapons, but with wou^des all to laden.

When Afranius fled from Caesar in Spain unto Ilerda, Caesar still pursuynge
nere upon him, he stayde and pighte his tents. and when Caesar had done
likewise, and sent his men a forragynge, suddenly he gave a token to depart
again.

Philippus being discomfyted in Epirus, lest the Romans should oppress him
fleinge, opteyned a truce to burye them that were slain, by reason whereof, the
watch being somewhat negligente, he escaped.

When P. Claudius was overcome of the Penians in battle on the sea, and must
needs break out through the strength of his ennemies, he commanded other xx.
to be garnyshed and set forth like ships of victory: at the syghte whereof
the Penians supposed the Romans had gotten the vyctory, and this he brake out
terrible and dreadful to his enemies.

The Carthaginenses being vanquyshed by see, and imagining, how to turn
back the Romans, that followed and pursued them, feigned them selfs to be
driven upon the shalowe sondes. and whiles they that chased them, stood in
dout what to do, for fear of like misadue^ture, where none was, they gave them
space to escape and go their way.

When Comminius Atrabas vanquyshed of D. Julius, fled out of France into
Britayne, and arrived by chance in a part of the Ocean with a gayl wind, but
with a low tide, although his ships stacke fast in the dry strondes, yet
never the less he commanded to hoyse up the sails: than Caesar that pursued
and followed him, seeing afar of, the sails swellynge with fulle wind, and
supposing his enemy to have been plucked from him, with prosperous passage,
returned back again.

The end of the second book.
THE THIRD BOOK,
THE PREFACE.
IF I wist that the two books before, did accordingly answer to their titles,
and that they had hitherto assured the reder to harken to them, I would now
descriue the stratagemes and policies, touching the assaute and defense of
towns, another will I make any delay by presocution, but woll first write what
things ar needful for the assautyng and conqueryng of towns, and than what
things may instruct the besieged.

Of sodeyne assaute. Capit. i.
WHEN T. Quintius Consul had vanquyshed the Equiens; and the Uolsciens, and
determined to conquer the town called Antium, he assemblynge his army to
gyther, declared to them, how necessary, and how easy a thing it was to do,
if they would spedily go theraboute. and with that lusty courage, that his
exhortation had kyndeled up, he set upon the city.

Marcus Cato considered, that the means to obtain a certain City in Spain,
was to invade them unawares: and so he traueyled, in the space of two days,
through a rough rocky and deserte ground. iiii. days iourneye: and oppressed
his enemies, dredynge no such thing. And after when his soldiers, that
had won the victory, inquired of him, how this matter came so easily to
pass, he answered: That then they got the victory, when in two days, they
trauayled. iiii. days journey.

show to deceive them that be besyeged. Capi. ii.
VUha^ Domitius Caluinus had besieged Luca, a City of the Genowayes, not only
sure fensed with situation and prouysion, but also with force and strength of
men, he used often times, to range about the walls with all his ar mye, and so
to recule again in to his Camp: the which custom persuaded the townsmen to
think, that the Romans used this feate only for a pastyme: and therefore
little regarding what their endeavor was, Caluinus no longer ranged out after
his old wont, but suddenly assauted the city, and scaled the walls, so sore
oppressyng them, that they were feign to yield them selfs, and their town.

C. Duillius consul, often times exercisynge his men of war and also his
mariners, caused the Penians to be careless: and therefore they little regarded
him, at the time, when he suddenly laid his navy hard to the wall, and scaled
it.

Anniball took many cities in Italy, by sendynge certain of his men of arms
before him, arrayed like Romans, the which by reason of the long war
between them, spoke also latyne.

The Archadiens besiegynge a castle of the Messenians, prepared certain armure
and apparayle, after the fascion of their ennemies, at the same season, when
they had knowledge, that their ennemies should have other succors come unto
them, and puttyng on the said like harneys and apparayle that they ware, which
the Messenians looked fore, came and were received as their fellows, and so
with slaughter of their enemies, won the castelle.

Cimon captain of the Atheniens, intending privily to take a certain city
in Caria, he unlooked for, set fire on the religious temple of Diana, and the
wod, which stood without the walls: and so the towns men, runnynge out, to
help to quench the fire, he took the city void of them that should defend
it.

When Alcibiades capitain of Athens, laid siege to a cite of the Agrigentines,
strongely fortified: he desired, that they might consulte and talk together:
and as it were of things pertaining to both their welthes, he long reasoned
and argued in the Theater, and thus while he withhelde the multitude under a
color of counsaylynge, the Athenians, which he had appointed for the nonce,
took the city undefended.

Epaminundas of Thebes, in Archadia upon a holy day, saying the wyfes of his
enmies wandering without the walls, sent out among them many of his
soldiers in women's apparaylle: and they being received at night within the
gates, took the town, and opened it to their company.

On the feast day of the Tegeates, wha^ all the multitude was gone forth of
the city to do sacrifyce unto Minerua, Aristippus capitayn of the
Lacedemonia^s, sent his soldiers like market men into the city Tegea,
dryuynge beasts ladyn with chafe. and thus no man regarding them, they set
open the gates unto their own company.

Antiochus in Cappadocia besiging the castle Suenda, took the capuls that went
for corn, and sleynge* the drudges that drove them, sent his soldiers back
in to the castle in their apparel, as though they had commen again with
corn. by the which error the kepers being disceyued, they entered in to the
castle, and let i their fellows.

When the Cheba^s by no power could bring the haven of the Sicimens under
their subjection, they furnysshed a mighty great ship with men of arms,
settinge out a face of merchandise to disceyue them, and laid at the farther
side of the walls a small company of men, to whom certain of the ship
unarmed, ran forth and sayned to pick a quarrel, and so to make a great fray:
the Sycintens being called forth to apeace the fraye, the Chebans ships
took both their haven, and the city.

When Chynarchus Aetolus had slain Carmades, king Ptolomeus lieftenant,
putting on the cloak and hatte of him, that was slain, was arayde like a
Macedonian, and he by this error received for Carmades, into the Samnites
haven, won it.

How to entyse enmies to treason. Cap iii.
VUhan M. Marcellus had entysed one of the Syracusa^s, named Sosistratus to
betraye the city, he knew by him, that the watch would be somewhat
negligent, on the holy day, wherein Ephirides their capitain was ever wont to
give them meat and wine plentye: Marcus priuyly waytinge for that merry feast
day, and the sluggishnes that would follow thereupon, scaled the walls, slew the
watch, and opened to the Romans host the city, before time of great renome
through worthy vyctories.

When Tarquinius superbus could in no means cause the Gabiens to yield them
selfs, he sent Sextus Tarquinius his son, al to beaten with rods, unto his
enmies: he accusyng his father of cru eltie, persuaded the Gabiens to use his
hatrede ageynste the king, and being chosen Capytayne of their war, he
betrayed the Gabiens.

Darius the king of Persians, let Zopirus his companion, whose fidelyrie he
had well tried, in all to manglyng his face, of purpose, go unto his ennemies,
and by reason of those great injuries, he was thought to be Darius most mortal
ennemy: which persuasion he greatly forthered, with the manly feats, that he
did against the Persians in battle: and so being made captain of Babylon,
delivered the city to Darius.

Philip being kept out of the town of the Samnites, corrupting their chief
captain Appolonius to betraye the city, persuaded him, to set a wayne loded
with free stone, in the entryng of the gates: and by and by a token given, he
pursued the towns men, and oppressed them, troubled at the gate, that was
stopped with the wayne.

Anniball at the City of Tarentyne, the which was kept of the capytayne
Liuius, with a garrison of the Romans, entysed a certain Tarentyne, named
Eoneus, to betray the city, and thus instructed him, that he should go on
hunting by night, as though he durst not do it by day time, for fear of his
ennemies, and against he came forth, Anniball prepared wild bores for him,
the which he brought unto Liuius, as though he had taken them by venerye.
And wha^ he had thus done many times, and therefore was lyttel taken head of,
upon a certain night, Anniball arrayed his men of arms in hunters apparayle,
and myngled them with Eoneus company, the which being laden with venyson,
and received of the watch, forth with set on and slew them, and breaking
down the gate, let in Anniball, with his army, and slew all the Romans,
except those that fled before into the Castelle.

When Lysimachus king of Macedonia, assaulted the Ephesians, which had
received a great robber on the sea, named Mandro, to aid them, the which
often times before had brought ships laden with pyllage unto Ephesus: to
this manne, corrupted to betraye them, he delivered his most valya^t warriors,
whom he brought into Ephesus, with their hands bound as his prisoners, which
afterward quyckly taking weapons out of the castle, delivered the city unto
Lysimachus.

By what means enemies may be made nedy Capi. iiii.
FAbius Maximus wasting and destroyinge the country of Campaine, to the end he
would leave them nothing, on trust whereof they might endure the siege, he de
parted from them in the seed time, to the intent they might sow the residue
of their corn: and when it was spronge up, he returned again, and trod it to
naught, and so by famyn he got the^.

Antigonus did likewise against the Atheniens.

When Dionysius had taken many cities in battayll, and purposed to assaut the
Rheginiens, the which had great abundaunce of vyttayles, first he feigned peace
with them, and desired to have vittayles mynystred unto his army of the town:
the which thing obtained, and the grain consumed, he set upon the City
destitute of vyttayls, and overcame them.

Alexander entendynge to assaute Leucadia, that had great abundaunce of
vittayles, first got the holds that were in the borders, and gave leave to
all that would, to flee unto Leucadia, that the vitayles by reason of the
multitude might the sooner be consumed.

Wha^ Phaleris of Agrigentyne would have conquered certain places, strongly
fortified in Cicilia, he feined a leage with them, and left the residue of the
grayn, yt he had, with them: than after he found the means, that the roufes of
the chambers, wherein the grain lay, might be so opened, that the wether
might drive in. when they in confidence of this, that was laid up in store,
had wasted away their own grain, he setting on them, in the beginning of
summer, assaulted and compelled them for need of vyttaile, to yield the city.

How to persuade, the syege to contynewe still. Cap. v.
VUhan Clearchus Captain of the Lacedemoniens, understood, that the
Thraciens had purueyed them vyttayles, and all things necessary for a long
season into the mountains, and that they had great affiance, that Clearchus
should be constrained to give over his siege, and depart thens for lack of
vitayle: at the same season, that he supposed their ambassadoures would come
unto him, he caused one of them, that were taken in war, to be slain, and
after in the sight of the ambassadors, to distribute him lymme meal unto the
army, as it were to eat: which thing brought the Thraciens in belief,
that there was nothing, but he would do it, to continue his siege, which could
find in his heart, to taste so detestable dishes: and so yielded them selves.

Tiberius Graccus herynge the Lucitans say, they had vttayles enough for x.
years, and therefore feared not to be besieged, answered, The. xi. year I will
conquer you. Which saying so feared the Lucitans, not with standing their
great provision, that they forth with yielded.

When it was reported unto A. Torquatus, besyegynge a certain city in Greece,
that the youth there was very diligently exercysed in shotyng and throwinge of
darts, he answered: I will shortly sell them so much the dearer.

How to destroy the garrisons of ennemies. Cap. vi.
When Anniball was returned into Aphricke, Scipio perceyuyng, that many
towns, which reason warned him to subdue, were kept with strong garrizons,
devised and set in sundry quarters: he sent now and than a certain power of
men, to trouble and vex them, and last of all he came him self, as though
he would destroy the cities: Than he fainynge fear, fled back. Anniball
supposing that he had been afraid in deed, gatheryng together all his strength
and puissaunce, as though he should have fought a field, began to follow
after. Scipio, bringing to pass that thing that he desired by Macinissa, and
the Numidians, took the cities being now destitute of their garrisons.

P. Cornelius Scipio, considering how greatte a difficulty it was, to
conquer Delminum, because every manne ran thither to defend it: began to
assaute the other towns. and when each man was retired home to the defense of
his own, he took Delminum, void of succors.

What time king Pirrhus would conquer and subdewe the chiefest cite of the
Iliriens, dispeyrynge to win it, began to assault the other cities. and by
this feate he brought about, that his ennemies, on trust that their chief
city was strongely inoughe fortified, determined to go and defend the other.
Which thing done, he called back all his puissaunce, and took the City,
void of such as should defend it.

When Cornelius Ruffinus consul had a certain time laid siege to the town
Crotana, which by reason it was defended with a strong power of the Lucaniens,
was invincible: he made a countenance to give over his enterprise, than sent
he a prisoner, entysed with a great reward, to Crotana (as though he had
escaped from their custody) to persuade, that the Romans were departed and
gone. Which thing the Crotaniens supposing to be true, dismyssed their
garrisons: and so being destitute of those that should defend them, and
unable of them selfs to keep the town, were oppressed and taken suddenly.

When Mago capytayne of the Penians, had ouercom Cn. Piso, and enclosed him in
a certain tower, suspectyng that aid would come to succor him, sent a
runneaway, to persuade them that came after, that Piso was already taken. whereby
he dyscouraged and kept them back, whiles he accomplyshed his vyctory.

When Alcibiades would have won the Syracusans in Sicilia, he sent unto them
a wytty and politic fellow of the Latanensians, where he than lay with his
army: this manne, brought into the counsel house, informed them, that the
Catanians were most grievously set and bent against the Athenians: in so much,
that if they might be aided of the Syracusans, they would subdewe both them
and Alcibiades. whereby the Siracusans were persuaded, to go with all their
power to Catana, and leave their own city: the which Alcibiades on the back
side, assauted, and being destitute, according to his hope, he sore afflycted.

Of deryuinge and turnynge the course of ryuers an oter way. Capi. vii.
P. Seruilius constrained the town Isaura, by tournynge away the river, where
they fette all their water, for thyrste to yield them self.

C. Caesar in France, pyned the city of the Caducians for lack of water, not
withstanding a river ran about it, and that they had great plenty of
wells: which thing he brought to pass by undermining the wells, and keeping
them with artyllery from the river.

Lucius Metellus, in the hythermore Spain, knowing that his ennemies had
pyghte their camp in a low place, brought the river above them: and they
being sore troubled with the sodeyne ouerflowynge of the water, by
enbusshement laid for the nonce, he slew them.

Alexander laying siege unto Babylon, through the myddest whereof, ran the
river Euphrates, let cast a dyche, and raised a great bulwark on the top
thereof, that his enmies might suppose him to cast out earth, for his some
other use. and so the river suddenly being turned, he entered into the cite,
over the way, that the water was wont to have his course, now being dried up.

It is said, that Semiramis, besieging the Babyloniens, likewise turned the
course of the river Euphrates.

Clisthenes of Sycion, brake up the co^dyte, that brought the water into the
town of criseans. And within a while after, being soore grieved with thyrst,
he restored to the^ the water, corrupted with the herb Helleborus: which
water, wha^ they had drunk, cast them into a las ke. and so deceived, he took
them.

How to fear them that are befeged. Ca. viii.
VUhan Philip could by no power get the castle Trinassum, he began to cast
up earth before the walls, and made as though he would undermine them.
Wherefore they of the castle, fearinge, lest they should have been overwhelmed,
yielded them self.

Pelopidas of Thebes, purposynge to conquer two towns at ones, of the
Magnecians, which stood not far a sonder, at the time that he moved one of
his armies to the one of them, he commanded, that. iiii. knights should come
from the other army, with garlandes on their hedes, and a notable merry chere,
as though they brought tidings of victory, and to help forth this
dissimulation, he ordained, that a wodde, which stood between both the
towns, should be set on fire, to make a show as though the town had burned.
Besides that, he caused certain prisoners in the towns men's apparayle, to be
led and brought thither. By the which asseueration he so amassed the besyeged,
that they now thinking them selfs half overcome, yielded up.

When Cyrus king of Perse had enclosed Cresus at Sardes, to which hold there
was no coming, by reason it was fensed with a rough rocky hylle, he caused
mastes to be raised up as high as the top of the walls, whereupon he set
images of armed men, arrayed like Perseans, and in the night made them to be
brought hard to the hill. Than as soon as the day appeared, he gave assaut to
the town on the other side. now wha^ the son arose, and those images
glistered, and shone like men of arms, the inhabitants thought surely their
town had be^ taken on that side: wherefore they of feynt courage thynkyng to
fle, caused their ennemies to get the vyctorie.

How to break out on that side, where we are not looked for. Cap. ix.
SCipio at Carthage, a lyttel before the goinge out of the tide, following (as
he said) god his guide, approached to the walls of the city: and in the
falling of the water, he brake in on that side, where no man looked for him.

Fabius Maximus, son to him that was called Cunctator, considering the
situation of the city Arpos, which was kept with a garrison of Annibals, sent
in the dark night syx. C. soldiers, which should scale the walls, on the
stro^gest side of the town, because it was leeste frequented and taken head
of, and so set open the gates. they being help with the great rushe and noise
that the fall of the water made, (which caused that the noise that they made
in their business, was not hard) did as they were commanded: he on the
other side, after a token given, set upon Arpos, and won it.

When Marius in the war against Iugurthe, at the flood Mulucha, would
conquer a castle, set on a stony hill, unto which there was but one strayte
and narowe way, on every other side being pitchelonge downerighte like a wall:
a certain Lumbarde, a simple soldier, showed unto him, that as he by chance
went gatherynge of snayles among the rocks, he came to the top of the
hylle, where he saw, how the castle might easily be won. then Marius sent
forth certain centurions, and among them the best trumpettours, and the most
wightiest and nymblest fellows, bare heeded and barefoted, to the intent they
might the more easelye epsy and see far and nere, every thing by the
rocks, their tergates and weapons they hanged on their backs: so those
fellows led by the lumbarde, fastnynge darts and nails in the rocks, clamme
up, and came on the back side of the castle, which they found void without
defense (for they within thought it nedeles, to defend that part) then they
began to blow up their trumpettes, and to make great ado, as they were
commanded: Marius manfullye encouragynge them in this adventure, began
fyercely to assaute the castle. the men of arms within being called back by
the unarmed multitude, which cried, that the castle was won on the back
side, caused Marius to pursue hard after, and to conquer the castle.

Lucius Cornelius cons. took many towns in Sardinia, by this policy: he used
by night to lay part of the most valyant men of his host in imbushment:
whom he commanded to lie and wait privily for the time, in which he should
come in the night: and when he came, and that his ennemies would issue out, to
encounter with him, he would make as though he fled, and draw them pursuynge
him far from their city: than they that lay in embushement should assawlte
and win the cities left without defense.

When Pericles captain of Athens, would conquer a certain city, which was
strong and surely defended with great consent and agreement of the
inhabytantes: he commanded in the night, to sown up the trumpettes, and to
make great noise and clamor, on that part of the walls, that lay toward
the sea: his ennemies supposing he would have entered into their town that
way, left the gates: by the which vnkepte and undefended, Pericles entered in.

Alcibiades captain of Athens, coming unawares by night to Cyzicum, to
thentent to win it, commanded to blow his cornettes, on the other side of
the walls, the inhabytauntes, which had been able enough to defend that side
of the walls, run to the other, where they thought them self only to be
assauted, and were not: and so Alcibiades got into the town.

Thrasybulus captain of the Milesians, to thentent to get the Sycionians
haven, skyrmyshed now and than with the towns men by land, and while the
ennemies assembled, and repaired thither, where the byckerynge was, with a
nauye unlooked for, he took the haven.

Pericles intending to get a castle of the Peloponesians, which had but two
ways to come unto it, the tone he closed up with a dyche, the the other he
strongely fortified. Than they of the castle, little regarding the other
side, where the diche was, enforced them selfs to defend that part only,
where they saw the strength of their enemies lie. Pericles preparing bridges,
and casting them over the diche, where his ennemies took none head, got into
the castle.

Antiochus in war against the Ephesians, commanded the Rhodians, which came
to aid him, that they in the night should invade the haven with great brute and
noise. And while all the multitude ran thither hastily without aduiseme^t,
leuyng the other places of fence unkept, Antiochus assauted the city on the
other side, and took it.

Of the traynes that are laid, to intyce out the Besieged. Cap. x.
CAto in the sight of the Lacetayns, whom he had besieged, conueyeng aside his
other sowldiours, caused certain Suessauians, that came hired to war, men of
small courage, to assaute the walls. When the Lacetanes had lightly beaten
those back, and gredily chased them fleing, Cato got the city with the
other cohortes, which he had privily hid.

Lucius Scipyo in Sardinia, with great business leauyng the assault that he
had intended to make to a certain city, made as though he fled: and whiles
they of the town rasshelye followed after: by his other men, which he had
privily laid thereby, he invaded the town.

When Anniball had besiged the city Hymera, he suffered his camp, to be taken
of purpose, commandynge the Penians to recule, as though their enemies had
prevailed. Which feate so deceived the Hymerians, that for joy thereof, they
left their city, and ran out hard to the Penians camp. And thus Anniball
took the city by them, which he had privily laid in wait for the same
purpose.

Himilco of Carthage, at Agrigentu^, laid pryuily in wait nere to the town
part of his army: and commanded, that when the towns men were issued out a
good way of, they should set grene wodde on fire. Than yarly in the morning,
with the other part of his army, he went to entyce out his ennemies, and
making as though he fled, reculyng back a little and lyttelle, drew them
a good way from the city. Than they that lay in embushement nere the walls,
as they were commanded, set the griene wodde a fire. The Agrigentines
beholdynge the smowlder rise up, supposed verily, that their city had been on
fire: and whiles they fearefullye ran back to defend it, they were incontred
of those, that lay in embusshement nere the walls, and so between them, and
the other, whom they pursued, now following at their backs, they were
discomfit and slain.

Uiriatus layinge certain soldiers in imbusshement, sent forth a few, to
drive the Socobrigians beasts away, which to rescue they ran out a pace,
and followed after the robbers that made sem blaunce to flee, till they were
come to the imbusshemente, which brake out, and slew them.

When Lucullus kept two parts of the City Heraclea with a garrison, the
Scordiscians horsemen making semblance to drive away their beasts, provoked
the^ to issue out of the town. Then feynynge to flee, they brought Lucullus
pursuinge them, where their imbusshement lay: which slew him, and. viii.
hundred men of arms.

Chares the captain of Athens, assautynge a city lyinge on the sea cooste,
laid a navy pryuely behind certain promontories: Than commanded he, that
one of his swyftest ships should make out hard by his ennemies garrison:
which seen, all the ships that lay to keep the haven, made out a main to
pursue her: Than Chares with his other ships, swypte in to the haven, and got
the city.

What time the Romans in Sicilia laid siege to Lilybei, both by land and
see, Barca, the capytayne of Carthage, commanded part of his navy, to show
them selfs a far of in their armur: when the Romans saw that, they made out
toward them with all speed. Than Barca, with his other shyps, which he kept in
secret, got the haven of Lilybei.

To dissemble retreat. Ca. xi.
VUhan Phormion capitain of Athe^s had overcome the countreye of Calchidense,
and their ambassadors came to require the cause why, he gave them benign and
curteys answer. and the night that he intended to send away the
ambassadors, he feigned, that his cytezens had sent him letters: which wylled
him in any wise to return home: and retretynge a little back, dysmyssed the
ambassadors: They bringing tydinges, that all thing was well, and Phormion
departed, the Chalcidens through hope of the humanity showed them, and
departinge of the army, neglected the kepinge of their city: Than Phormion
returned again by and by, whose power they, not lokynge for any such thing,
were not able to resist.

When Agesilaus capitayn of the Lacedemonie^s, had besieged the Phocensians,
and understood, that their garrisons were now grieved with the incomodities of
the war, he retreated a little back, as it were for some special
business, gyuynge them good occasion to depart. Not long after he returned
again with his army, and overcame the Phocensians, being destitute of
succors.

Alcibiades ageynste the Byzantians, which kept them selfs within their
walls, laid an imbushement, and feynynge to retreat back, oppressed them
unawares.

When Uiriatus retreatyng back, had gone. iii. days iourneye, he went the
same again in one day, and finding the Sogobrians careless, and occupied
about their sacrifice, oppressed them.

When Epaminundas perceived, that the Lacedemoniens were come to Mantinia, to
aid and succor his enemy, he thought it possible inoughe, to win their
city Lacedemonia, if he could get thither privily. Wherefore he commanded
many fyres to be made by night, to cloak his goinge, as though he had
remained stylle: but he betrayed of a runaway, and overtaken of the
Lacedemoniens host, left his iourneye taken toward Sparta. Never the less
he turned this his polycie against the Mantinians. for making likewise fyres,
as though he would tarry stylle, he deceived the Lacedemoniens, and iourneyeng.
xl. miles back again to Mantinia, took it destitute of aid and succor.

Now contrary wise, touching the safegarde of the besyeged, what disygent
exercise they should use. Cap. xii.
WHEN THE city of Athens was besyeged by the Lacedemoniens, Alcibiades
fearing the negligence of the watches, gave the^ in charge that they should
take good head, and mark well the light, that he by night would show them out
of the castle: and at the sight thereof, they should set up their lyghtes: In
which busynes, he that was found rechelesse, should suffer for it. Thus they
dilygentely lokynge for the token of the captain, kept their watch
thoroughly, and eschewed the peril suspected in the night.

When Iphicrates, capitayn of Athens kept Corinthie with a garrison, and upon
the coming of his enemy, went about to view, how the watch and ward was
kept, he found oone of the watch men on sleep, which he struck through
with his spear: for the which deed, when some rebuked him of cruelty, he
answered, Like as I found him, so have I left him. It is said, that
Epaminundas of Thebes, did such a like deed.

How to send forth and receive in a messanger. Cap. Xiii.
THe Romans besieged in the Capitol, sent Pontius Cominus to Camillus, to
besieche him to come home from exile: which to deceive the watch of the
Gauls, was let down by the rock Tarpeia, and swymmynge over Tyberis, came
to the Ueians: and when he had done his message, he came ageyn to his company
the same way.

The Campanians, beseged and straightly hold by dilygent watch of the Romans,
sent for the a fellow suborned as a run away, that had in his belte or
sword gyrdelle, a letter, the which (finding an occasyon to escape) he bare
unto the Penians.

Some men also have sent letters written in parchement sowed in venyson and
beasts bealyes.

Some also have thronged beasts together, over against their ennemies, and so
escaped the watch. Some have written in the insyde of their scabbardes.

L. Lucullus to certify the Cyriceniaus of his coming, which were besieged
of Mithridates in their city, that had but oone narowe way, to enter into
it, which was strongelye kept and defended of his enemies, a lyttelle
bridge, ioynynge the said City to the main land: caused oone of his
soldiers, which was a good maryner and well skylled in swymmynge, to sytte
between two bottes blown full of wind, with letters enclosed within them,
the which he fastened together beneth with two square staves, egally distaunt
a sonder, and so to pass. vii. miles by see. xx hi the thing this simple
soldier accomplysshed, guydynge his course with his legs, as it were with
rudders: and so deceived them, that stood at wache, thinking it had been a
monster of the sea.

Hircius consul, sent unto Decimus Brutus, that was besieged of Antonius to
Mutina, letters written in lead, which being bound to the soldiers arms,
they swamme over the river Scultella.

The same Hircius with bristels bound letters about pygeons necks, (the which
he had before kept in dark places hungry) which he would let flee as nere
the walls as he could. The pygeons being feign of light, and gredy of their
food, flewe up to the highest buyldynges: and so were taken of Brutus, which
by that mean was certified of al things: and afterward he ordained meat to
be laid in certain places, that the pygeons might flee thither.

How to introduce succors, and to provide vyttayles. Cap. xiiii.
VUhan Ategua a city in Spain, was in the Ciuvle war besyeged of the
Pompeians, Maurus, that was king for a space in time of varyaunce, as though
he had been of Cesars part, and one of the chief capitaynes, called up
certain of the watch, of which he refused some for the nonce: by the which
constant and bold disceite, he introduct and brought Pompeius garrison,
through the mids of Cesars host.

While Annibal lay at siege before Casilinum, the Romans seute thither
barelles of meal down the streme of the river Uulturus, to the intent the
besyeged should take them up: which when Anniball with casting a chain over
the river had stopped, they scatered nuttes in the river, which passed the
chains unto the city: and with that food they help and sustained the need
and scacitie of their fellows.

Hircius sent in salt to the Mutinensians besyeged of Antonie (whereof they had
great need) packed in wine vessels, by the river Saniturnus.

The same Hircius sent beasts down the streme, which being received, great
ly relieved the need of his friends.

How to make those things, which we want, seem plentuouse. Capi. xv.
VUhan the Gaulles had besieged the Capital, the Romans in their extreme
famine, threw out bread among their ennemys, and thereby making them believe
that they had abundaunce of vittayle, endured the syege till Camillus came to
succor them.

It is said, that the Athenians used like policy against the Lacedemontans.

When they that were besieged of Anniball at Casilinum, seemed to be brought to
extreme famyne, by reason that Annibal destroyed the herbs, that was a great
part of their food, by often plowynge of a place, that lay between his camp
and the walls: they sowed their seeds in place prepared and tylled. whereby
they brought to pass, that they were thought to have vittayle inoughe, till
the seeds than sown, should be ripe to serve them.

When the Chracians were besieged on an high mountayn, into the which their
ennemies had no way to come, every man bringinge a littel quantity of wheat
or other vittayles, they fed their beasts therewith, and so let them stray
unto their ennemies camp: which when they had taken and kylde, and found in
their intrayles a manifest token, that they had eaten corn and other
vittailes, they supposed that those men must needs have greatte plenty of
such things, wherewith they fed their beasts, and therefore they brake up
their syege and departed.

Thrasybulus capytayne of the Milesians, his soldiers being sore grieved with
the long siege of the Aliattes, which hoped to compel them by famyne to
yield them selfs, upon the coming to him of the Aliattes ambassadors,
commanded to bring all their corn in to the markette place, and at the same
time he made a great feast through all the city. and so he persuaded his
ennemies, that he had plenty inoughe to endure a long siede.

What remedy against traitors and renneawayes. Cap. xvi.
VUhan Cl. Marcellus knew the purpose, and counsel of Batteus of Nolan,
which endeavored him to corrupt the commons, and thought to do Anniball a
pleasure, because he was by his benefit healed of his hurtes, that he had
among the Cannensians, and delivered out of prison, home to his friends: for as
much as Marcellus durst not slay Batteus (lest for his punishment he should
set the other Nolans in his top) he sent for him and said, He was a right
valyant man of arms, and that he knew it not before, and exhorted him, to
stycke still on his part. and with honorable and courteis words gave him an
horse. With which benignity he not only bound him, but also the commons (by
whom they were much ruled) to be faythefull and true to him ever after.

Amilcar captain of Carthage, seeing that the Galls often times fell from him
unto the Romans, and now of custom were received as frendis, subornated
certain of his most trusty men, in like manner to feine them self to forsake
their capytayne: which slew the Romans when they came forth to receive
them. which crafy polycie did not only further Amilcar at this present time:
but also caused the Romans afterward to suspecte such as were runagates in
deed.

When Hanno captain of Carthage in Sicilia, understood, that the Gaulles that
he had hired, about four thousand, would leave him and go to the Romans,
because they were behind unpaid of their wages certain mo^thes, he durst not
punyshe them for fear of sedition, but promised very lyberally to recompense
the injury that they had by prolonginge the time. Wherefore the Galls thanked
him. At time convenient he sent his most trusty steward to Otacilius Consul,
whi che as though he had fled away for varyaunce between him and the
capytayne in a certain count making, showed, that the next night he might
take at advantage. iiii. thousand Gaulles, which were sent forth to get
pray and pillage. Otacilius another gave credence by and by to the renawaye, nor
yet thought it a matter to be despised: but laid an imbushment for them, of
the most picked men, that he had: which incountrynge with the Gaulles,
satisfied the dryfte of Hanno double, they slew the Romans, and were them
selfs all slain.

Anniball by like policy was revenged on those that forsook him, and fled to
his ennemies. For when he knew, that certain of his souldioures were fled
the night before, and wist well yt his ennemies spies were in his camp, he
pronounced openly, that those runnagates, which were gone forth by his
commandment, to harken and spy what his ennemies did and intended, should
not be called counnynge and witty warriors. The Romayn spies, herynge those
words, returned and told them to their company. Than the Romans, taking
those runawayes, and cuttynge of their hands, sent them to Anniball again.

When Diodorus kept and defended Amphipolis with a garrison of men, and
suspected two thousand Thraciens, which seemed to be bent to spoil and distroy
the city, he fained a lie, that a few ships of his ennemes were arrived at
a stronde hard by the city, which might easily be taken and spoiled. In
hoope whereof, he sent forth those holowe hearted Thraciens, and than shut the
gates, and would no more receive them in.

Of eruptions and breakynges out of ennemies. Cap. xvii.
THe Romans, which lay in garrison to defend the Panormitains, herynge,
that Hasdruball was coming to lay siege to them, of purpose set a few here
and there one, to defend the walls: whose small number, Hasdruball despisynge,
and rasshely approchynge to the walls, was by eruption of the Romans slain.

When Emilius Paulus Camp was vnprouidedly assailed of all the Lygurians
together, he making a countenance to be a frayde, kept in his soldiers a
long time. Than after when his ennemies began to wax werye and faint, he
brake out at. iiii. gates of his camp, and slew and took the Lygurians
prisoners.

Uelius lieuetenaunt to the Romans, keeping the castle of Tarentine, sent
ambassadors to Hasdruball, to get him liberty safely to depart thence: by
the which crafty dissembling he caused his enemies to be careless: and so
struck out suddenly, and slew them.

Titurius Sabinus, against a huge host of the Galls, by keeping in his
army, cowardly at his defense, showed him self to be afraid, and this to
augment, he sent forth a runnagate, which should affirm the Romayne army,
to be in despair, and to seek means to fle. The barbarouse alyens encoraged
with hope of vyctorie, loded them selves with wodde and bows to fill the
dyches: and with great haste and courage set upon the Romans tents pitched
on an hyl: from whens Titurius with all his power rushynge down upon them,
slew the Galls by heaps, and took many of them prisoners.

The Esculanians, when Pompeius came to assaute their town, set to defend the
walls a few feeble old men: And while the Romans as careless for them, took
little head, the towns men suddenly brake out, and put them to flight.

The Numantines being besyeged, did not so much as make defense before their
bulwark, and kept them self so close, that Popilius Lenates boldly began
to reyse up ladders and scale the walls. Which after suspectynge some deceyte
and gyle, (for even then they made no resistance) and so wning to the retreat:
The Numantines breaking out, set upon them, tournynge their backs, and
descendynge down.

The constancy of the besieged Cap. xviii.
THe Romans beseged of Anniball hard at their walls, boldly to show they
nothing mistrusted, sent forth succors at a gate on the other side, to aid
their armies that were in Spain.

The same Romans would after the tenant was dead, let for no less price
the field, where Annibal had pight his camp, tha^ it was wont to go, before
the war began.

The said Romans being besieged of Annibal, and they besiging Capua, decreed
not to reuocate and call home agein their army, until they had taken the town.

The end of the third book.
THE FOVRTHE BOOK,
THE PREFACE.
SINCE I have now by much redynge, gathered together, the stratagemes and
polycies of war, and with no small diligence, digested them in three books,
according to my promise (which I trust I have accomplyshed) I woll in this
fourth, exhibit and declare to you such things, as could not aptely be
descriued with the polycies of the forsayde books, being rather exaumples of
stratagemes or sleightes, than stratagemes them selfs, which although they be
worthy feats, yet have I separated them, because they are of diverse matters,
lest some by chance reading those, should suppose them to be omitted for
lack of knowledge: and therefore woll I explicate them, as thin ges remaining
of the other, and wolle observe like order in their description, as before.

Of discipline of war. Cap. 1.
PVBLIVS SCIpio at Numa^tia, redressed the army, which was corrupted with ye
slouthe and idelnes of the capytaynes that had been before him, dismyssynge a
great number of the slaves and drudges, brynging the fouldiours by daily
exercise, to do their duty: which he caused to make many iourneys, and to
bear on their backs, as much vittayles as should serve them many days: so
that he accustomed them to suffer cold and sharp showers, and to wade over
waters a foot. Now and than he imbrayded them of fearfulness and cowardice,
breaking such vessels in pieces, which they used more of delycacie, than
for need in their expedition. In this behalf, the reproach, that he gave to the
captain C. Meuius, is right notable, to whom he said, To me but a while, to
thy self and to the common weal thou shall ever be lewd and unprofitable.

Q. Metellus in the war Iugurthine with like seuerite restored the
Discipline, that was decayed and neglected among the soldiers: and further
prohybited them, that they should use none other flesh but roasted or sodde.

It is written, that Pirrhus should say to him that took up soldiers,
Chose thou those that be great, and I wol make them strong.

When Scipio Aphricanus saw a soldier bear a targate galyardly decked and
trymmed, said, He maruailed not, that he had so curiousely garnysshed his
tergate, wherein he had more trust than in his sword.

When Philyp had prepared his army to go forth, he commanded, that no man
should have any carte, or other thing used for carriage with him, nor a
horseman to have but one page. x. foot men one slave, which should bear
quirnes and cords: when they went forth in such places, as they lay in the
summer, he commanded them to bear on their necks meal for thirty days.

Caius Marius, somewhat to ease the army in carieng their traficke and
baggage, wherewith they were greatly loded, devised their vessels and vittayles
into fardels laid upon staves, underset with forkes, which made their burden
lyghter, and they might more easily rest under it. Whereupon they were called in
pro uerbe, Marius mules.

When Theogenes of Athens led his host toward Megara, and was inquered how
the army should be ordered, said, He would even there order his battayles. Than
privily he sent forth the horsemen, and commanded them like ennemies to
return and fiercely set upon their fellows. Which thing done, he
permytted the battayl to be thus ordered, that they that remained with him, as
it were prepared to encounter with their enmies, should take every manne what
place he would, and wha^ the faint hearted fellows drew back, the strong and
valiant, boldly stepte forth into the forefront: and as he found them
standing, so he advanced them in the order of chiualry.

Lysander of Lacedemonia corrected a certain man, because he strayed from his
company. And when the man said, he strayed not from the army to rob or
steal any thing, he answered, I wolle that thou show no spece or lykelyhod
of robberye.

When Antigonus hard, that his son had taken up his lodgyng in a woman's house
that had three very fair daughters, he said: My son, I here say, ye be to
straytelye lodged, where be many masters in the house, take a larger Inn. Thus
he being commanded to remove and go thense, Antigonus caused to proclayme,
that no man under the age of fifty years, should lodge in the house of a sole
woman.

All be it that N. Metellus cons. was let by no law, but that he might
contynually have his son in his company, yet would he rather have him win
wages in war.

When Publius Rutilius cons. might according to the law, have his son
always in his company, yet he made him a soldier in the legion.

T. Scaurus forbad his son to come in his syghte, because in the foreste
Tridentine he gave place to his enemies, the young man pressed with shame of
that re proche and infamy, slew him self.

The ancient Romans and other nations did constitute and make their tents
and pauilions through the hole body of thyr army, like round cotages: where
as the old world knew none other, but walled towns.

Pirthus king of the Epirotes, was the first, that ordained to lodge his hole
army within one trenche or bulwark. After when the Romans had ouercomen him
in the fields Arusine, nere the city Statuentu^, and had got his camp,
markynge and observing how he ordered his army, by little and lyttel they
came to this manner of pitchynge of tents, and lodging their army, that is
now used.

P. Nasica lying with his army in their wyntryng places, ordained that his
soldiers should fall to buyldyng of ships, though the use of them was to
him not needful: lest they should be corrupted with slouthe and idelnes,
orels by reason of leisure, having nothing to do, would imagyn and commytte
some injury against those that were confederates and friends to the Romans.

Clearchus, chieftayne of the Lacedemoniens, said to his army, The captain
ought rather to be dredde, than the ennemie: sygnifienge that they, which
feared the doubtefull darte of death in battle, if they left their capitayn,
were sure of extreme punyshement.

By the counsel of Appius Claudius the senators decreed, that they which
were taken by king Pirrhus, and after sent home ageine, if they were horsemen,
should be made foot men, if they were footmen, should be made light
harneysed men, and all such to lodge without the camp, till each of them,
had brought home two spoils of their enemies.

Otacilius Crassus cons. commanded, that they, which taken of Anniball, and
crepynge under the yocke of reproach, were returned home, should lie without
the trenche of the camp, that they being vnfensed, might accustom them selfs
to perils, and wax the more bold and hardy against their ennemies.

P. Cornelius Nasica, and Decimus Iunius consuls, first bette with rods, and
after sold those, that were condemned to have left and forsaken the host.

Domitius Corbulo in Armenia, commanded, that the two wings and three
cohortes, which at the castle, in the beginning of their assault, gave
back to their ennemies, should lodge without the trenche of the camp, till
they had by contynuall labor and prosperous exploites, redeemed their reproach
and infamy.

N. Metellus in Spain, commanded five cohortes, that had given back and
fled their enemies, to make their testamentes, and sent them again to
recover the place, that they had lost, threattynge that they should never of
him be received, except they returned with vyctorie.

The Senators commanded P. Ualerius the consul, to lead the army vanquyshed
at Siris, unto Sirinum, and there to fortify their camp, and in their tents
to pass away the winter.

^. Piso, commanded that Titius, capytayne of a cohorte, because he gave back
and fled his enemies, should stand daily before the pauilyons of the chief
capitayns, the cincture of his gown cut of, his cote vngyrde, and bare
footed, till the watch came, and that he should neither feast nor bayne him self.

Sylla commanded the cohort and centurions, through whose ward their ennemies
had broken, to stand before the pauilyons of the heed capitayns, helmed and
vngyrded.

Domitius Corbulo in Armenia, commanded an officer to cut the garments of
Aemilius Rufus, capitayn of the horsemen, because he gave place to his
ennemies, and had not well furnysshed his wyng with armure: and in that
dishoneste and shameful apparayle, to stand before the heed capitaynes
pauylyons, until they were sent out.

When Attilius Regulus should pass over from Samnium into Lucerna, and his
host was encountered and put back by his ennemies, he sent forth a cohorte
against them, and commanded to slay those that fled, as rebels.

Cotta consul commanded P. Aurelius his kinseman, whom he made governor of
the army at the siege of Lipara, while he went to Messana, to know by
divination what should betyde, because his bulwark was burned, and his camp
taken, to be beaten with rods, and to be taken in the number of the simple
soul diours, and to do such duties as they did.

When Marcus Cato, after a token given, had lowsed from the cost of his
ennemies, where he had layne a certain space, and saw one of his soldiers
left on the shore, crienge, calling, and beckenynge to be taken in: He made
about with all his navy to the shoore again, and commanded the same soldier
to be taken and straight put to death: willing rather to make him an exaumple
to the other, then that he should be slain of his enemies, with reproach and
infamy.

Appius Claudius slew with a clubbe every tenth soldier, brought forth by
lotte, the which had fled and given back from their ennemies.

Aquirius behedded three of the centurions, because their ennemies had broken
through their ward.

The legion that beat down the place, called the kings town, without
commandment of the graunde captain, was so punyshed, that four thousand
of them were committed to ward, and slain. More over, the senators decreed,
that they should in no wise be buried nor mourned for.

L. Papyrius Cursor, being dictator, required, that Fabius Rutilius, master
of the horsemenne, should be beaten with roddis, and beheeded, because he fought
against his commandment, not withstandyng he had the upper hand: another
would he forgive the punyshement, for the contention or intercession and
request of the soldiers, and fleinge to Rome pursued him: neither would he
there remytte the dredefull punishment, until that Fabius with his father
fell down at his knees, and that also the senate and people made intercession
for him.

Manlius, that afterward was named Manlius the proud or imperious, caused his
son, which against his fathers commandment, had encountered with his
enemy a challenger, and got the vyctorie, to be beaten with rods, and
have his heed stryken of.

This Manlius the son, the hoft preparynge seditiousely to arise against his
father for his sake, said: That no man was of so great estimation, that for
his sake the disciplyne of war should be broken. and thus opteyned, that
they suffered him to be punyshed.

Q. Fabius Maximus cut of the right hands of them that fled away from
their capytayne unto their ennemies.

The effect of disciplyne. Cap. ii.
IN the time of ciuyl war, when Brutus and Cassius host should take their
journey together through Macedonia, and Brutus came first to a river, in
which he must needs make a bridge to pass over: yet Cassius army both in
making of the bridge, and spedy passing over, out went Brutus. the which
vygour or strength of knyghtly discipline, brought to pass, that not only in
warkes, but also in the chief point of war, Cassius and his men, excelled
Brutus and his.

When C. Marius was at his liberty, to chose oone of the two armies, he would,
either that, which had been in war with Rutilius, or that which had been
with Metellus, and afterward with him self: he chose the less, which was
Rutilius army, because it was thought to be more expert in discipline of
war.

Domitius Corbulo, with two legions, and a very small number of such as came to
aid him, traded in the discipline of war, withstode the great power of the
Parthians.

Alexander Macedo with. xl. M. me^ accu stomed in chivalry by Philip his
father, continually unto his time, set upon in manner all the hole world, and
vanquished powers innumerable of his ennemies.

Cirus in war ageynste the Perseans with. xiiii. M. men of arms, overcame
innumerable difficulties.

Epaminundas captain of the Thebans, with four thousand men, of the which
only. iiii. hundred were horsemen, overcame the host of the Lacedemonie^s, in
which was. xxiiii. M. footmen, and xvi. hundred horsemen.

Fouretene. M. Greeks, which number came to help Cirus against Artaxerxes,
overcame in battle a hundred thousand barbarous alyens.

The same. xiiii. thousand Greeks after their captains were lost in war,
committing the governance of their retournyng home unto one of their own
army, called Xenophon of Athens, returned and came home safe and sound, passing
through many unknown and dan gerous places.

Xerxes being sore troubled at the straites Thermopyle, by three hundred of the
Lacedaemonians, after that he had with great difficulty ouercomme them, said,
This thing deceived him, that he had many men, but good and expert men in
knyghthode he had none.

Of continency and sober abstinence. Cap. iii.
IT is written, that Marcus Cato was contented with the same wine, that his
maryners used.

When Cyneus the ambassador of the Epirotiens, brought unto Fabricius a
great sum of gold for a present, he would none of it, saying, that he
would rather rule them that had gold, than have it.

Attilius Regulus, being a man in most high authorite, was so pore, that he
found him self, his wife, and his childerne with a lyttelle plotte of
ground, tylled by one baylye of housbandrye, of whose death when word was
brought him, he wrote unto the Senate, to provide an other to occupy his
room: for seeing his servant was dead, he must needs apply his husbandry
him self.

After Cn. Scipio had accomplysshed his worthy enterprises and noble feats in
Spain, he deceassed in great poverty, and left not behind him so much
money, as should suffyse for the dowery of his daughters, to whom, for very
need, the senate was fayn to give dowerye of the common treasure.

Likewise did the nobles of Athens unto the chylderne of Aristides, which
after he had been in most high rome and authority, departed in great poverty.

Epaminundas capitayn of the Thebans, used so great abstinency, that in his
household stuff was there no more found but one brasyn caudron, and one spitte
to roste his meat on.

Annibal, which used to rise very yerly before day, never rested until the night
came again, at length in the twye light he rested him self at supper, neither
with him were there any more beds laid to meat, than two.

The same Anniball being in warfare under the graunde captain Asoruball,
often times slept upon the bare ground, and had no more but his cloak to
cover him.

It is left in remembrance also, that Emilius Scipio was wont to eat his
breadde, as he walked in his iourneye with his friends.

The same thing is also told of Alexander Macedo.

We read also that Masinissa being now lxxxi. years of age, was wont at
noone, either standing before his pauilion, or else walking up and down,
to eat his meat.

When Caius Curious had vanquished the Sabiens, and the mesure of ground and
lands that valiant men of war are wont to receive, was granted him by
decree of the Senate house, after a more ample manner: he held him self
content with the portion, that was customablye given: affirmynge, that he was
an evil citizen, which was not content to live as other did.

Also the continency of the hoole Romayne army, has been often very notable, as
the host, that was led by M. Scaurus. For Scaurus has left in memory, that
the apple tree, which was enclosed at the foot of his camp, was left the
morrow after, when the host removed, standing, without touching of the fruit.

After that L. Mummius had taken Corinthe, and had not only adorned Italy, but
also all the prouynce, with rich tables and costly images: he of so great
spoils, took so lyttelle to his own use, that the Senate was feign for very
need to give dowerye unto his daughter of the common treasure.

Of Justyce. Cap. iiii.
VUhan Camillus had besyeged the Phalisciens, the scoole master under pretense
to walk abroad, brought the Phalisciens chylderne without the walls, and
delivered them unto him and said, The city must needs grant now all his
request, to obtain again these their so dear hostages. Camillus, not only
abhorryng this falsehode, but alsoo byndynge his hands behind his back,
delivered him to the chylderne, with rods to drive him hoome before them unto
their fathers. By the which benefitte he got the vyctory, the which his
will and desire was not to obtain by fraud. For the Phalisciens, for this
Justice, wyllyngly yielded them selfs.

King Pirrhus physician came unto Fabricius, captain of the Romans, and
promised to poison Pirrhus, so that he would give him a reward worthy of so
great an enterprise. Fabricius thinking he had no need to pourchace his
vyctorie so wyckedly, detected the phisytion to the king. The which
faythfulnesse, as of duty, compelled Pyrrhus to seek the Romans frendshyp.

Of Constancy. Cap. v.
VUhan Cn. Po^peius soldiers thret ned to spoil the money, that was carried
in the triu^ph, Seruilius and Glaucia, exhorting him to divide it, leeste it
would cause sedition, he affirmed, that he would no triumph at all, but rather
dye, than bow and obey to the lewd liberty of his soldiers. And when he
had ernestly reprehended them, he cast forth his lauriate bundelles, borne in
sign of vyctorie, bidding them first to spoil those, and by that odiouse
proffer, he pacyfyed them.

In a time of sedition among the citizens, that rose in harneys, when the
soldiers were in their most pride and fiercenes, Caius Caesar feared not to
put the holle legyon out of wages, beheaddynge the captains of the sedition.
Afterward those, which he had put out of wages, besechynge him, not to put
them to that reproach and infamy, he restored, and had most valiant warryors of
them.

When Posthumous had encoraged his soldiers to war, and they ageyn demanded
of him, what his will was, he bad them follow him, catchyng and aduansynge the
standerde, he first of all invaded his ennemies: the soldiers followed after
him, and obtained the victory.

When L. Marcellus was comen unawares into the hands of the Gaulles, he turned
his horse round about, to look, on which side he might get out, when he
saw him self sore inuironned on every side, he callid ye goddis to help, and
struck into the mids of his ennemies: and as they stood bashefully
meruaylynge at his boldness, he escaped, and slew their capitayn also. and
where was scant hope of life, thens he brought spoils of great richesse.

When Paulus had lost his hooste at Cannas, and Lentulus in so great danger
offered him a horse to flee, he answered, that he would not live after so great
a loss and slaughter, not withsta^dyng it chanced not through his defaut: and
so sat still on the same stone, whereto he leaned, being sore wounded, until
that he was oppressed, and thrust through of his enmis.

Uarro his fellow in office, with greater consta^cie, remained alive after the
same destruction, to whom the Senate, with yt hole voice of the people, gave
thanks yt he dispaired not of the commonwealth, and the resydue of his life
time well approved, that he preserved him self, not for desire of life, but
for love of the common welthe. For he let both his beard and his hear grow,
and never after eat his meat, sitting at the table. and when the people
profred to give him any honor and dignity, he refused it, saying, That it
behooved the common welthe to have more prosperous rulers.

Sempro. Tuditanus, and C. Octauius, chief capitaynes in war, when all was
lost at Cannas, and they but a very few together, being also enclosed on
every side, counsayled their fellows, to draw their swords, and to break
out with them even through the garrison of their enmyes, affirmynge, that they
were bent so to do, though no man else would follow them. and with. xii. men
accompanied, they brake through the ward of their ennemies, and came safe and
sound unto Canusium.

C. Fronteius Crassus in Spain, goinge forth to get his pray, with three
thousand men, and circumuented of Asdruball in a dangerous place, his purpose
and counsel told unto the first order only, in the beginning of the
night, when he was nothing looked for, brake out through the watch of his
enemies.

P. Decius, chief captain in war, against the Samnites, counsayled
Cornelius consul, being taken in a dangerous cooste of his ennemies, to
send forth a little power of men, to prevent and take the hylle that was at
hand, offering him self to be their guide: and his enemies being intised an
other way, let out the consul, and besette Decius, the which wrastled out
of those straites, also by night, and came again safe to the consuls army.

The same polycie he used under Attilius Calatinus consul. for when he saw the
host was come down into a valey, his ennemies lyenge in the upper sides
round about, he required and took of the consul. iii. hundred soldiers, whom
he encoraged manfully to fight for the hole army, and ran down into the
mids of the valey, his ennemie coming down on every side to oppress them,
and being hold a good while with sharp fight, gave the consul good occasion
to range and spread out his army.

A certain noble man of Lacedemonia, Phylyp, sendynge them word, that he
would utterly forbydde them many things, except they delivered up the city,
said, what? woll he forbydde us also, to dye for our country?

When it was said, that the Perseans, would send out arrows as thycke as
clouds, upon the Lacedaemonians, Leonidas answered, We shall fight the bet ter
in the shadow.

While Celius a high judge sat to give sentence, a Hickwall alyghted and sat
upon his heed, whereupon the Wissardes gave answer, that if the byrd were let
escape, their ennemies should have the victory: if she were killed, the Romans
should obtain, but Caelius with all his familye should perish. at the which
answer Caelius slew the bird, and so came it to pass, that the Romans gat
the victory, and Caelius, with. xiiii. of the same family and kindred were
slain in the batrel. Some report this of Lelius, and not of Caelius.

Publius Decius, first the father and efte the son, in their magistrate
vowed them selfs to dye for the common welthe, and sprynging out on
horseback among their enemis got the victory, and left it unto their
country.

When P. Crassus in war, ageynste Aristouicus, fell into his enemies hands,
between Aelia and Mirina, and was carried away a live, he abhorringe captivity
in a Romayne consul, with his riding rod threste out the Thratians eye
that held him: which being soore moved with the spiteful deed, and with the
grief of his maime, thrust him through. Thus willingly he avoided the reproach
and shame of servitude.

M. Cato, the son of Censorius, in battle, fell through the stomblyng of
his horse, and after he had recovered, and perceived, that his sword was slypt
out of the scabarde, fearing to be sclaundered, he returned back upon his
enemies, and his sword recovered at length, gatte again unto his own company.

The Peteliniens, enclosed of the Penians, for great need of vyttayles, thrust
out their fathers, mothers, and their chylderne, prolonged their own life with
beasts hydes, moysted and dried ageyn with the fire, with leaves of the trees,
and with all kind of beasts, so endurynge the siege of a. xi. months.

The Casiliniens besieged of Annibal, were brought to so greatte need and
famyne, that a mouse was sold for a hundredth pence: and though the one
famysshed, that sold it, the other lived that bought it: yet they still
continued faithful unto the Romans.

When Mythridates lay de syege unto C^^icu^, he brought forth the prisoners, yt
he had taken of the cite, and showed them to the besiged, thynkyng to compel
them by compassion and pity, to yield them selfs. But they, exhorting the
prisoners, manfully to endure the death, kept still their fealty unto the
Romans.

The Aeginenses, what time their wives and chyldern were slain of the
Uiathotiens, chose rather to behold the turment of those their so dear pledges,
than to fall from the Romans.

The Numantiniens, rather than they would yield them selves, agreed to die al
to gether, and burnt their howsen, slew their wives, their chylderne, and
them selves, that there remained not one to be taken prisoner: so that their
enemies could not triumph, another of their goods, their City, nor yet of
their persons, but of their name only.

Affection and moderation. Cap. vi.
VUhan Q. Fabius son exhorted him, to take a commodiouse place, though it
were with the loss of a few men, he said, Will thou be oone of those few?

As Xenophon syttyng on horsbacke commanded the footmen to take a certain
hill top, one of them grudgynge, and saying, that he might easily sitting
on horseback, command them so painful things, he lighted of his horse, and
set up that simple soldiour, and began to run him self a foot unto the hill
appointed: the soldier not able to abide the shame thereof, his fellows
laughinge him to scorn, lyghted down of his own accord, and they al could
scasely bring Xenophon to take his horse again, and to reserve his labor to
other duties belonging to a captain.

As Alexander, lyinge out in warrefare the winter time, sat by the fire, and
perceived a soldier in the army all most dead for cold, made him sytte in
his own place, saying: If thou had ben borne in Persia, it had been treson
for the to have sytte in the kings seat, but to him that is borne in
Macedonia, it is lawefull.

Diuus Augustus Uespasian, perceiving a certain young man, well borne, unable
unto war, yet by reason of great poverty thruste into the long order and
array, appointed him a certain fee, and so honestly dysmissed him.

Of diverse counsels. Cap. vii.
Caesar was wo^t to say, that the same counsel pleased him ageynste his
enemy, that many physicians used against the diseases of the body, that is,
to subdue them with famyne, rather than with force.

Domitius Corbulo said, that an enemy must be overcome with a broad chyppyng
axe, yt is to say, with diligent labor.

L. Paulus said, that it became a noble capteyne to be aged and ancient in
manners, meaning that sage and sober counsel was to be followed.

It is reported, that Scypio Aphricanus, when some men called him a sorry
lyghter, said, My mother brought me forth to be a worthy captain, and not a
common soldier.

Caius Marius to one Teutonius, provoking and chalengyng him to fight,
answered, If Teutonius would feign dye, he may go hang him self. and wha^ he
had appointed him a player at the sword, a wretched person, and very aged, he
said, If thou overcome this fellow, I will take the victor to task.

Celius capitayn of the company in the forward, when the Romans were
besieged in Germania, fearing less his adversaries, would conueye a heap of
wodde, lyenge thereby, unto his fortress, and so fire his tents, feigned that
he lacked wodde, and sent forth on every side to steal it: bringing thereby
to pass, that the Germayns them self took great pain to remove the wodde
away.

Cn. Scipio in a battle by see, threw into his enemies ships, tankerdes
of pytche and tar, that both the weight thereof might hurt them, and also
the sheddynge thereof, might nourysshe and increase the fire.

Anniball first taught king Antiochus, to cast vessels full of adders, into his
ennemies ships. whereof the soldiers amassed, might be let both in fight,
and in all their other duties, belongyng unto the ship.

The same thing did Prusias, when his navy began to shrynke.

M. Portius violently brake into the navy of his ennemies, and when he had
tumbled out the Peniens, distributynge their armure and badges, whereby they
were known among his souldyours, he drowned many ships of his enmis,
deceyuing them with felowlyke apparel.

The Atheniens being often times greatly disquieted and troubled by the Lacede
moniens, came upon certain festyuall days, which they kept high and holy,
without the walls unto Mynerua: and having al thing thereto belonging, made as
though their intent were to do sacrifice: hydynge privily their armor and
weapons under their clothes. And when they had done their sacrifice, they
returned not immediatelye to Athens, but forth with in good order of battle
marched toward Lacedemonia, at the time when they were least looked for: and so
over ran and spoiled the countreye of their enemies, which were wont to
rob and spoil them.

Cassius set certain of his great ships on fire, which were little worth
for any other purpose: and being driven with the wind among his enemies
shyps, set them also a fire and brent them.

When Marcus Liuius had put Hasdruball to flyghte, and was by certain exhorted
to pursue his ennemies to death, he answered: Let some remayn alive, to bear
tidings to our enemies of our vyctorie.

Hasdruball entering into the borders of Numidie, and intending to subdue
them, affyrmed, when they prepared to resyste him, that he came but to take
elephantes, whereof Numidia had greatte plenty: and made promise, not to hurt
them, so that they would grant him this his request. and when they were
departed a sunder by reason of that persuasion, he suddenly set upon them,
and so brought them under his subjection.

Ptolomeus, being to weak to encoun tree with Perdicca, which had a stronger
and more valiant army, caused a few horsemen to drive all the beasts, drawing
the wagons after the host, and he going before them with that small power that
he had, brought to pass, that the duste raised up by the beasts, mustred
as though an other army to aid him had followed after. The fear of whose
coming so bashed his ennemies, that he overcame them.

When Mironides of Athens should fight with the Thebans, which had much
better horsemen than he, informed his host, that there was some hope of
health, if they kept their ground: but if they fled or reculed back, there
was no remedy but death. By the which reasone, he strengthened his men, and
wan the victory.

Iphicrates captein of Athens, appointed his nauye in apparel like his
enemies, and when he was arrived among them, whom he suspected, and was
received with high reverence, their falshode spied out, he spoiled their town.

After the fyelde fought at the lake Trasimenus, where was great slaughter of
the Romans, and. vi. M. taken prisoners, a pacte and covenant made, Anniball
suffered the confederates and fellows of the Romans, gentyllye to depart
home to their own cities: and to report, that the cause of his war was
only to set Italy at liberty, and by their help and means, certain people
committed them selves into his governance.

What time the Locriens were besyeged of Crispyn, captein of the Romayne nauye,
Mago spredde abroad a rumor that night unto the Romans host, that Hanniball
had slain Marcellus, and was come to deliver the Locriens, that were
besieged: and after he sent out horse men privily, commaundyng them to muster
and show them selves on the mountains, that lay in the syghte of the
Romans host. by the which pollycie he brought to pass, that Crispine,
thinking Anniball to be at hand, took shyppyng, and fled.

P. Scipio in Lidia, perceiving that Antiochus host was soore beaten with
gain, that fell day and night contynually, and not only his men, and horses
began to faynte, but also his bows the strings being wette, were weak and
unprofitable, encouraged his men to pytche the field the morrow following,
not withstandyng it was a dismal day, and by this counsel, he wan the victory.

When the Vacceians in a pyght field were hardly matched with Sempronius
Gracchus, they compassed all their army with waynes, furnysshed with valyant
men of arms, in women's apparel. When Sempronius boldly vanced forward, to
besiege his enmies, as though he had gone against a company of women, they
that were in the waynes, set on, and put him to flyghte.

Eumenes Sardianus, one of Alexanders successors, was enclosed in a certain
castle, where he could not exercise his horses, auaunced them up before at
certain hours daily, in such wise that they rested upon their hinder fete,
having their forefete raised up on high, and when they sought to have their
natural wont and standing, they trauersed and flonge with their heles until
they swette.

What time the barbarous aliens pro mised Cato men to conducte him in his
journey, and also a garrison to aid him, so that he would give them a great
some of money, he stacke not at the matter, to promise them largely, because he
might other pay them obtaynynge the victory with the spoils of his ennemies,
or by their death be lowsed of his promise.

Quintus Maximus commanded to call unto him oone Statilius, a noble man of
arms, and approved in deed, which intended to flee from him unto his
enemies, and made an excuse unto him, that through the envy of his fellows, he
never knew unto that day his manly qualities: than gyuynge to him a horse and
money: he opteyned, that this man, which came unto him fearful, his
conscience accusynge him, departed chierefull. And so of him that was before
to be mystrusted, he had a faithful and valyant man of arms ever after.

When Phylyp hard, that one Pithias, a valyant warrior of his, had withdrawn
his good will from him, because that he had scante to sustain his. iii.
daughters, and was nothing relieved of the king, certain men warned the
king, to take heed and beware of him. What quod the king, if I had a part of
my body diseased, should I rather cut it of, than heal it. Afterward he
privily called Bithias unto him, and perceyuyng, how poor and hard a life he
lad, gave him money largely, and so ever after he found him more trustye,
faithful, and better than ever he did before.

T. Nuintus Crispinus, after the great misauenture in the battle, ageyust the
Carthaginens, wherein his fellow Marcellus was slain, perceiung, that Annibal had
gotten the signet of his said friend Marcellus, he sent letters through out
all Italy, that they should give no credence, if any pistle came unto them
sealed with Marcellus signet. through the which monition, Annibal his
disceites, whereby he attempted to get Salapia and other cities, were all in
vain.

After the great loss and dyscomfiture at Cannas, the hearts of the Romans
were so dismayde and discomfited, that a great part of them, which were left
alive, took counsel with the nobles, and determined to forsake Italye, Publius
Scipio being yet a very young manne, broke vyolently into the same company,
where as these things were reasoned, and plainly protested, that he would slay
him with his own hand, which so ever of them would not take an oath, to
stand and abide by the commonwealth, and when he had first bound him self
with an oath, he drew his sword, thretnynge to slay him, that was next him,
if he made not the same oath. thus by fear he compelled him and the other by his
example, to swear the same oath.

When Milciades had scattered and overthrown a great number of the Perseans at
Marathon, he compelled the Athenians, which prolonged the time in thanks
giuynge, to make speed toward the aid of a city, which the Perseans nauye
intended to invade. And when he had prevented them, and replenysshed the walls
with harneyssed men, the Perseans thinking the number of the Athenians to be
great, and that the battaylle at Marathon was fought with one army, and the
walls kept with an other, made about straight way with their navy, and took
their passage ageyn into Asia.

what time Pisistratus had taken the Megarenciens navy, wherein they came to
Elewsis by night, to have rauysshed the women of Athens, being as than
occupied in the sacrifyce of Ceres, and had well revenged their grefes, in
sleinge a great number of the said Megarenses, he manned the same ships, that
he had taken of theirs, with soldiers of Athens, settyage out in syghte
above the hatches, certain women ordered like prisoners: at the which sight the
Megarensians being disceyued, and scatteringe out to mete them, as though they
had be^ their own company, which after their enterprise luckely achieued,
had returned home, and so being unarmed were ageyn discomfyted.

When Conon captain of the Athenians, had overcome the Perseans nauye, at the
Ilonde Cyprus, he put their harneys upon his own soldiers, and than sailed
into Pamphilia, where his enmies, were in the same ships, which he had taken
of theyrs. The Perseans because they knew the ships and the apparayle of
them, which stood above the hatches, took no head to them self, and so they
being suddenly oppressed, were in one self day, vanquished in battle both
by see and on the land.

The end of the fourth book.
Because the pages should not be vacant, we have added these generalle rules of
war, taken out of Vegetius.
IN all battayles of expedition this is a sure rule, That what so ever is
profitable to the, is hurtefull to thine adversary, and that, that helps
him, hyndreth the. Therefore after our ennemies mind and intent we should nothing
do, or dissemble, but do that only, which we judge profitable for us. For
than thou begynnest to do against thy self: when thou folowest that that he
would faynest thou dyddest. Again, what so ever thou enterprisest for thy
profit, shall be against him, if he woll follow it.

He that in war most labors and exercises his soldiers in trauayles,
that long to the wars, shall always sustain least peril and daungier.

Never range out in the front of the battle, a soldier, of whom before
thou haste had none open proof.

It is better to vanquyshe thyn ennemy with need, with sodeyne inuasyons, or
with terror, tha^ with fyghtyng in plain battle: in the which Fortune is
wont to bear a greatter stroke than virtue.

Those counsayles are best, which thine adversary knows nothing of, till
they be done in deed.

Occasion or sodeyne hap in battle helps more than virtue or strength.

In solycitynge and receyuynge of ennemies, which faithfully flee unto the, is
great trust: for the fleers from thine enemy to the, are to him more
harmefull, than they that thou sleest.

It is better to keep many strong wards behind the forefront, than to sprede
to wide thy warriors.

It is hard to overcome him, that can truly judge his own strength, and what
power his aduersarye has.

More avails virtue and strength than multitude.

The well chosen place, does often times more avail tha^ virtue or strength.

Nature brings forth few strong men, but well divised ordinance makes many.

The army with labor profits, with idelnesse, waxes dull.

Never bring out thy souldyours to fight a battayl, except thou se them hope
to have the vyctorie.

Sudden deeds of war affrayeth the enmies, the usual featis are not regardid.

He that with his people disparpled, pur sueth his enemies unwisely, may hap
to give to his ennemie the vyctorie, that he before had gotten.

He that prepares not before, wheat and vyttayle necessary for his hooste,
is vanquyshed without weapon.

He that has mo people, and is stronger than his ennemie, let him make his
forewarde four square: which is the fyrsie manner of assaylinge.

He that is febler than his foo, let him set his right wynge against his
enmyes left wyng, which is the second manner.

He that feleth him self strongest in the lift wynge, let him assail his
ennemies right winge, which is the third manner.

He that has in both wings strong soldiers, and well exercised, let him
set on both wings at ones, which is the fourth manner.

He that can best rule his light harneised, let him invade either wynge of
his ennemies, setting the archers in the forefront, which is the fyfte manner.

He that trusts neither in the number nor in the strength of his soldiers,
and must needs fight, let him with his right wynge assail his ennemies left
wynge, stretchynge out the rest of his army like a spyt or broche. which is
the. vi. manner.

He that has fewer and weaker soldiers, let him so pytche his field, that
he have on his one side a mountain, a city, a see, a river, or some other
thing, and this is the seventh manner.

He that trusts in his horsemen, let him ordeyne his field in a plain, and
let the burden of the battle rest most on the horsemenne.

He that trusts in his footmen, let him pytche his field on a knap or
high ground, and let the burden of the battle rest most on the foot men.

If thou suspect, that a spy of thyn enemy lurketh in thine host, command,
that every man be in his own lodging by day light, and anon the spy is
perceived.

When thou wottest, that thy counsaylle is discovered to thyn enmies, than it
behooves the, to change thy purpose.

Treat thou with many, what ought to be done, but what thou will do,
disclose that to few, that are most faithful, or else keep it secret to thy
self.

Pain and dread chastyseth soldiers when they lie still, in setting forward,
hope and mede makes them better.

Good capitayns never fight in a pight field, except they be driven thereto
by sodeyne hap or great need.

It is a great wise policy, rather to grieve thyn enmie with hunger, tha^ with
wepon.

Let not thine enmie know, with what ordinance, in what manner wise, or how
thou intendest to assayl him, lest he p^pare ordynance to withstand or distroy
thine.

Londini in aedibus Thomae Bertheleti typis impress.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

ANNO. M. D. XXXIX.


