THE Countess of Pembrokes Yuychurch.

Containing the affectionate life, and unfortunate death of Phillis and
Amyntas: That in a Pastoral; This in a Funeral: both in English Hexameters.

By ABRAHAM FRANCE.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Orwyn for William Ponsonby, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Bishops head.

1591.

To the right excellent, and most honorable Lady, the Lady Marie, Countess
of Pembroke.
IF Amyntas found favor in your gracious eyes, let Phillis be accepted for
Amyntas sake. I have somewhat altered S. Tassoes Italian, and M. vvatsons
Latin Amyntas, to make them both one English. But Tassoes is Comicall,
therefore this verse vnvsual: yet it is also Pastoral, and in effect nothing
else but a continuation of aeglogues, therefore no verse fitter than this. For
such as generally mislike this reformed kind of verse, as I spoke before, so I
say still, I never heard better argument of them than this; Such an one has
done but ill, therefore no man can do well: which reason is much like their
own rymes, in condemning the art, for the fault of some artificers. For
others, that like well of the thing, but not of my peculier labor herein, mine
answer is the same it was: if there were any penalty appointed for him that
would not read, he might well complain of me that publish it to be read:
But if it be in every man's choice to read it, or not to read; why then not
in mine also to publish or not to publish it? He that will, let him see and
read; he that will neither read nor see, is neither bound to see nor read.
If any begin to read, when he begins to take no delight, let him leave
off, and go no further. If he follow on in reading without pleasure, let him
neither blame me, that did what I could; nor be angry with the thing, which
has no sense; but reprehend him self, who would continue in reading, without
any pleasure taking.

Your Honors most affectionate, Abraham France.

Amyntas Pastoral. The first part of the Countess of Pembrokes Yuychurch.
The Speakers.
Cupid in a Shepherds cloak. Daphne. Phillis. Amyntas. Thyrsis. Elpinus. A
Satyr. Fuluia. Ergastus. Chorus, all of Shepherds.
The Prologue by Cupid in a Shepherds cloak.
WHo would think that a God lay lurking under a gray cloak,
Silly Shepherds gray cloak, and armed with a paltery sheephooke?
And yet no pety God, no God that gads by the mountains,
But the triumphantst God that bears any sway in Olympus:
Which many times has made man-murdring Mars to be cursing
His blood-sucking blade; and prince of watery empire
Earth-shaking Neptune, his threeforckt mace to be leaving,
And Jove omnipotent, as a poor and humble obeissant,
His three-flak't lightnings and thunderbolts to abandon.
And I believe, thus shaped, and thus with a mantle adorned
Lady Venus will scarce find out her wily Cupido,
Mine own mother, I hope, will skarce take me for her own son.
She makes me run away, and thus compells me to hide me,
For that still she byds, and still commands as a mother
Boy, and bow, and all: and still persuades as a woeman
Proud-harted woeman, that I bend my bow to the Court still,
And, as a Lord, with Lords and Ladies still be a dwelling:
As for Parckes and woods, such wooden stuff she refers
Unto the wanton wagges that wait on Lordly Cupido.
But let a woman talk, let boys be afraid of a woeman,
Lord of love's no boy, although that he seem to be boylike:
I Will bestow myself, as best shall seem to my owneself;
Doves be my mothers byrds, but desteny gave to Cupido
All-inflaming lamp and golden bow for a weapon.
Oftentimes do I hide myself, and fly fro my mother
(Not that I owe any suite as a servile slave to my mother,
But that I can not abide to be daily desir'de by my mother
For to renounce Hoblobs, and aim at a King or a Kaisar)
Oftentimes do I fly, and shroude my self in a thicket,
Leaving Crystal throanes for bowres and rustical harbors:
But no sooner I can convey myself from Olympus,
But she begins to demand and ask for lovely Cupido,
Where Is that wandering boy, that vile boy, lovely Cupido?
Seek and search my boy, my wagg, my lovely Cupido:
Look for a curldpate boy, his wings will quickly bewray him,
Look for a boy with a lamp and bow and quiver about him:
Whosoever finds my boy, my joy, my lovely Cupido,
And brings back my boy, shall have for a friendly remembrance,
Either a sweet sweet kiss, or somewhat more than a sweet kiss:
As though Lovely Cupid to a fryend that love's to be sylent,
Neither could nor would allow for a fryendly remembrance
Either a sweet sweet kiss, or somewhat more than a sweet kiss.
And, I believe, my kiss, (if love intend to be lovely)
Will be a sweeter kiss to a less then Queen Cytheraeaes.
Thus, many times in vain she seeks for lovely Cupido,
Loving girls are loath to bewray their lovely Cupido.
Yet, to be more secure, my curledlocks I do curtall,
My wings are laid down, my bow and quiver abandond,
Weapons all set aside; and yet love stands not unarmed.
For this staff, that seems but a toy, that I bear for a fashyon,
Is Loves lamp indeed, and bears but a show of a sheephooke,
Lou'es transformed lamp, with most invincible ardor,
Most invisible heat, and secret ardor abounding,
Though in form but rude, and goldhead seems to be wanting,
Whosoever feele's his force shall find it not to be poyntles,
Where it lights it works, and leaves impression endless:
This blunt dart shall give that cureles wound to the hartroote
Of loueles damsel, most loueles damsel amongst all
Those loueles damsels that wait on mighty Diana.
Phillis (that is her name) disdainefulst wench of a thousand
Shall in her hardest heart conceive as mighty a loues-wound,
As was that, that I made in tender breast of Amyntas.
Now many pleasant springs are past, since young Lad Amyntas
And young gyrle Phillis, themselves were wont to be sporting,
Now to be gathering flowr's, and filberds now to be cracking,
Now to be laying gyns for byrds, and now to be anglyng:
And yet, that this blow may make more forcible entrance
And more speedily pierce, i will stay and look for a fit time:
When pyty moves her mind, and makes her breast to be tender,
Then will I stryke and wound; and that this lovely beginning
May as luckyly end, i will talk and walk as a heardsman,
And so insinuate my self to the company rural
Of these jolly Shepherds which hither now be repayring,
All in a brave meryment dame Flora'es wakes to be keeping,
With their garlands green, and boughs of Myrtle adorned.
Here, even here will I make that most incurable harts-wound
Which no mortal eye shall see: then lovely Cupido
Lovely Cupidoe's fame in these woods shall be resounding,
These woods then shall feel a triumphant power to be present,
And perceive that I woork by my self, and not by my servants:
Noble thoughts will I send, and high conceits will I breath forth
Into the lowli'est minds, and frame their voice to a sweeter
And more sugared tune: for wheresoever I harbor,
Wheresoever I keep, i will still be the lovely Cupido,
As Well in Hoblobs heart, as in heart of a King or a Kaisar,
And as I list, I do make an unequal mind to be aequall:
And this is only my joy, and herein most do I glory,
That by the quyckning heat, by the fire of lovely Cupido
Oaten pipe contends with learned Lute of a Lording.
Which if my Mother (who scorn's that I am thus a wandering
Here and there by the woods) can not conceive to be wondrous,
Then she is blind her self, and not sweet lovely Cupido,
Whom some blind fools have blind boy unworthily called.
The first Act, and first Scene,
Daphne, Phillis. WHat? Will Phillis then confume her youth as an anckresse,
Scorning dainty Venus? will Phillis still be a Modder,
And not care to be called by the deare-sweete name of a Mother?
Will not Phillis joy to behold her self in a Phillis,
And her trueloues face in a young boys face to be shining?
Change this mind, fond wench, and this resolution alter.
Phillis. Seek the delltes of love, who list, (if love be delightful)
This life is my love, my bow and shafts be my treasure,
Hunting is my joy; with stubburne beasts to be striving,
Until I fell them down, and fearful beasts to be chasing.
And, till woods want beasts, and quiver feathered arrows,
Phillis shall not want any sweet sports or pretty pastimes.

Daphne. Fine sweet sports indeed for a girl, and wise pretty pastimes,
Still to be killing beasts, and still by the woods to be ranging.
This life, toylesome life, for a while does seem to be pleasant,
Only because as yet thou have not tri'de any other.
So those simple souls that lived when Jove was an infant,
Took for pleasant drink, and meat well worthy a man's mouth,
Streams of purling brooks, and nutbrowne kernel of accorne:
But now, streams of brooks, and nutbrowne kernel of accorne
Are contemn'de as drink and meat but fit for a beasts mouth,
Since that corn and grapes were once known how to be used.
If thou could, nay would (and who would not, but a fonkin?)
Only but one time taste, and but taste only the thousandst
Part of those pleasures and joys, which still be abounding
In true-louers soul, when he feels himself to be loved,
Thou would quickly repent, and quickly bewray thy repentance,
And say thus with tears; Each loueles life is a luckles
And accursed life: my best days vainly be ended,
Flowring time is gone, and age creepes hastily onwarde.
How-many fruyteles nights, poor fool, did I waste as a Wyddowe?
How-many ioyles days as a Nun did I draw to the eunyng?
Days, to be passed away with winged boys pretty pastymes,
Nights to be spent with toys and joys of lovely Cupido,
Pastimes, toys, and joys, which more ioy'de breed me the more joy.
Change this mind, fond wench, and this resolution alter.

Phillis. When that I seem to repent, or seem to bewray my repentance,
Or say so with tears; let floods run back to the fountains,
Let Woolues fly fro the Lamb, and trembling Hare to the Greyhounde,
Let Bears range by the sea, and Dolphin swymme by the deserte.

Daphne. See what it is to be young; gyrles always use to be peevish:
So was I in times past, (Good time il past) when I wanted
Age and experience, and so did I trudg to the forest.
Golden locks, cherylips, red-white face, yuory fingers,
Proud as a praysd Peacock, and so did I trudg to the forest.
Netts were then my delight, and bended bow my rejoicing,
Poynted darts my joy, and slaughtred beasts my triumphing.
If that I saw myself (myself unluckily selfwilde)
But by a glaunce, one glaunce of a Lovers eye to be noted,
Down did I hang my head, and bow mine eyes to my bosom,
Sore displea'sd forsooth, and, God wot, greatly abashed
When my pleasing face to a loves look brought any pleasure,
As though to were some fault, or shame, or mock to my ownself,
For to be looked upon, to be loved, and sought for of others.
But what can not time effect? What can not a lovers
Continual wooing, long seruyng, daily deseruyng
Bring by degrees at length, at length, to a fortunat endyng?
Phillis, I must confess, at last I began to be yielding
Unto a Loves conquest: and these arms made me be yielding,
Long patience, kyndenes, sighs, tears, importunat askings.
Then did a night, one night, one short night teach me a lesson,
Which many thousand days would never let me be learning:
Then did I quyckly repent, and quickly bewray my repentance,
And say thus with tears: Now farewell mighty Diana,
Bows and shafts I renownce, and brutish life I abandon.
So, I do hope, one day, thy gentle-mynded Amyntas
Shall with abundant tears make thy hard heart to be tender;
And why should not I hope, when I see just matter of hoping?
Is not Amyntas fair? is he not loved of many Lasses?
Does not he love Phillis? yet Phillis love's not Amyntas:
And yet, alas, neither thy hate, nor love of an other
Can withdraw his love: And, if thou look to thy gentry,
As sweet Cydippe is known to be truly thy mother,
Cydippe daughter to the sacred God that abides
In this silver brook; so, father of haples Amyntas
Was good Syluanus, Syluanus son to the great Pan,
Pan the shepherds great God, that rul's and raign's by the forest.
And, if Phillis chance to behold her face in a fountain,
Phillis will not seem more fair then fair Amaryllis:
And Amaryllis fair lou's gentleminded Amyntas;
And Amaryllis love is still contemned of Amyntas,
For that, Phillis love still rests in soul of Amyntas,
Although Phillis alas hates her truelouer Amyntas.
Now suppose for a while (God grant it prove but a suppose)
That Phillis sour looks drive of this love of Amyntas,
And Amaryllis love draw on this love of Amyntas,
And that Amyntas kiss, kiss and embrace Amaryllis,
And laugh at Phillis: what then will Phillis imagine?

Phillis. Well: let Amyntas deal as seems best to Amyntas,
And love somewhere else; his love has made me to hate him.

Daphne. Love breed hate? Sweet Sire of a most unnatural offspring
And vile degenerate bastard: but when will a white swan
Hatch any coleblack crow? or meek sheep foster a Tiger?

Phillis. Daphne leave this talk, or look noe more for an answer:
His love breeds my hate, when I hate to aford what he loves:
He Is not a fryend, but a foe, that my virgynyty seeks:

Daphne. Why then, stifneckt bull is a foe, not a fryend to a heyfer,
And to a Turtledoue, not a fryend, but a foe is a Turtle.
Why then sweet springetyme breeds hate and works many mischifs,
Sweetesmyling spring-tyme, that wills each thing to be loving,
World and all in world; o see how sweetly the Pigeon
There with a murmur sweet his copsemate sweet is a wooing.
Mark that Nightingale, which hops fro the bry'r to the hawthorne,
Harck, how bravely she sings, I do love, and love to be lovely,
Nay even sell serpents with cursed poison abounding,
Strong and stoordy Lions, and Tigers fierce be a loving:
And yet Phillis alas Phillis more fierce than a Tiger,
Worse than a wild Lioness, and more vnkyn'de than a serpent,
Phillis lives still alone, and can not abide to be lovely.
But strong stoordy Lions, fierce Tigers, slippery serpents
Have sense and feeling, therefore noe wonder at all, if
Serpents, stoordy Lions, and Tigers fierce be a loving:
O then look to the trees, and learn of them to be lovely,
Look to the senceles trees, and mark how dearly the vinetree
Lou's her loving elm, and clipps him fast with a thousand
Thousand embracements, and beech-tree cleaues to the beech-tree,
And wil'de ash to the ash, and pine tree leane's to the pine tree.
Yea that broadebrauncht oak which stands so stoordyly pitched,
And seems rude and rough, not moved with a storm or a tempest,
Yields to a kind of love; and, if thou were but a little
Tutcht with love, thou mights perceive his lovely bewaylings,
And secreate groanyngs: and will thou then be for all this
Worse then a senceles tree, and never learn to be lovely?
Change this mind, fond wench, and this resolution alter.

Phillis. Well: when I see trees weep, and hear their lovely bewaylings
And secreate groanyngs, i will frame myself to be loving.

Daphne. It Is but a folly I see, to be wasting wyn'de on a proud gyrle,
That knows naught her self, and will not learn of another.
Thou that make but a jest of love, hereafter, I doubt not,
Wilt full sore lament, and fyn'de all true that I tell thee:
When thou shall for shamesly back fro the watery fountayns,
Back fro the springs where now thou see thy face to be shynyng,
For very shame and grief to behold thy beauty decayed
And face all wrynckled: that is bad, but that is but a common
Myschief, look in time that a worse plague light not upon thee.
I Will say naught; but I woe what news were truly reported
By sage Elpinus last day, to the lovely Lycoris:
And he reported before Corydon and Alphesiboeus
Twooe greatest masters of loves laws, and he reported
In fair Auroraes great Cave, whose bewtiful entrance
Has these words engran'd by the hand of lovely Cupido,
(This place is sacred, for lovers only appointed)
There Elpinus said, and said that he heard it of old time
Of that great pastor, (great man, whose sweetly resoundyng
Pipe did pass fro the fyelds and sang of martial horrors,)
How that in hels deep pit, foul fyends have framed a dungeon,
All as black as pytch, and all as darck as an oven,
Hard by the ioyles bancks where smokes and foggs be arising
From wayling Acheron: and there these no-pyty-taking
Dames and scornful gyrles are all condemned to be plagued,
All tormented there in dungeons ougly for ever.
There fit place, fair walks for Phillis shall be prepared:
There shall fogs, and mystes, and smokes, and palpable horror
Wring out tears from her eyes, and force her still to be wayling,
Whom no lovers smart, no grief could make to be weeping.

Phillis. Good sweet Daphne peace, and tell this again to Lycoris,
Terrify babes with bugs: its time to be gone to the huntyng
Solemn great hunting which this same day is appointed
In that pleasant parck, that sweetest parck of a thousand
Yuychurches parck, pretty Yuychurch, that on hill topp
Flowring hill topp sitts, and looks down to the valleys,
There, o there, I do hear (for so Philoueuia told me)
There that Nymph, brave Nymph, that peareles Pembrokiana
Yuychurches Nymph does mean herself to be present,
And with her own person give grace and life to the pastime.
I Will to my wonted well with Crystal water abounding,
There will I leave this dust and sweat that I gate by my toyling
Yesterday, when I made that lightfoote Do to be tumbling.

Daphne. And i will hoame, for an hour or two: and then to the huntyng,
Then to the parck we will go: in mean time marck what I told thee
More than parcks and wells, and, if symplicity blind thee,
Know thy not knowing; so, may thou know of an other.

The second Scene.
Amyntas, Thyrsis. Hollow caves, ragd rocks, waste hills, green watery
fountaynes
For pyty, sweetly reply, and aunswers make to my mournyng:
Strong oak, tall pinetree, green laurel, bewtiful Yuy
For pity, sweetly reply, and aunswers make to my mourning,
Shake their leaves for grief, and bend their bows to my groaning*
Only that one in whom my joys are only reposed
Yields no lovely reply, no answer mak's to my mourning,
Phillis fair and fierce; Phillis more fierce to Amyntas
Than strong oak, tall pine, green laurel, bewtiful yuy,
Hollow caves, ragd rocks, waste hills, green watery fountains.
When blackmantled night mak's every thing to be silent,
Every thing at rest, then wandreth restles Amyntas:
Silver moon, bright stars, you knew these heavy bewaylings,
And for grief your course and due revolution altered:
But she alas greeues not, tak's no compassion on me,
Whose hart-chearing face, and sweet illuminat eisight
Silver moon, bright stars, and all your bravery stained,
And made you for shame, your due revolution alter.
Thyrsis. Harmeles sheep and lambs eat grass: and greedy devouring
Woolues eat harmeles sheep and lambs: but surly Cupido
Surly Cupido feeds himself on streams of abounding
Tears, and's never filled, and yet stands ever a feeding.

Amyntas. No, no, Thyrsis, alas: Love lacks no tears of Amyntas,
Surly Cupido's full, stuftfull with tears of Amyntas,
And thyrsts now for blood, seeks blood of woeful Amyntas,
And what he seeks, he shall have; I Will quench their thirst by my hartblood,
Blind boy's, proud gyrles thirst: and glut their eyes with abundant
Streams of purpled gore of too too wretched Amyntas.

Thyrsis. O bloody word, foul word, o God forbid that Amyntas
Should or think, or woork any outrage unto Amyntas.
Cast of these fancies, leave these toys, pluck up a mans-hart:
If bony Phillis scorn, and make but a mock of Amyntas,
Yet shall Amyntas find as brave gyrls as bony Phillis.

Amyntas. Find brave gyrls? o grief: if Amyntas find not Amyntas,
How can he find others? o how shall he find bony Lasses,
If that he loose himself? o how shall I seek any other,
Since my settled soul and heart are like to an aged
And well grounded tree, which now is come to the full groath,
And will rather break, than bend, or yield to be turned.
Hate augments my love; her frowns give fire to my fancy,
As gentle spaniel, whom beating makes to be loving.

Thyrsis. Fear in a fearful man frets more than plagues that he fears:
Hope, and have, in time any man may gain any woeman.
Long time mighty Lions at length has brought to the bridle,
And wyldest Tigers at length are tam'de in a long time.

Amyntas. Yea, but alas long tyme's too long for wretched Amyntas:
Death must speedely speed, noe wretch can abide any long time.

Thyrsis. Stay but a while, noe doubt these things will mend in a short time:
Thou know that women by kind are mutable ever,
Soon hoate, and soon cold, like and mislike in a moment,
Change as a weathereock, and all as light as a feather.
But let Thyrsis now know more at large of Amyntas
His distressed state; for though thou touldst me a great while
Since, that Love gave first occasion unto thy torments,
And that proud Phillis gave fresh increase to thy sorrows,
Yet whence this love sprang, who was that Phillis I knew not.
And since soemany years w'haue lived so friendly together,
And applied ourselu's to the lores of learned Apollo,
There Is cause why Thyrsis should know those things of Amyntas,
Which his Amyntas knows, and will show only to Thyrsis.

Amyntas. Know o Thyrsis then, know this mine infinite anguish,
Which these hills well know, which these sweet watery wells know,
And yet no man knows: my fatal hour is aproaching,
My death draws so near, that now its time to provide some
Time to provide some friend, which may and will be reporter
Of death and deaths cause, which will for a friendly remembrance
Death and cause of death ingraue in barck of a beech tree,
Hard by the damned place, where corpse of murdered Amyntas
Bloodles corpse shall lie, that when that brave bony damsel
That pytiles Phillis shall chance that way to be passing,
Her proud foot, and yet sweet foot may joy to be treading
Treading and trampling these baleful boanes of Amyntas.
And that serpents tongue, thus take a delight to be vaunting,
This death is my triumph, these bruysed boanes my trophaeum;
That such strange trauelers as this way chance to be wandering,
And foreign Pastors that pass by the grave of Amyntas,
May know this conquest, and make it known to the country.
And perchance (o noe, that is too too good for Amyntas)
Yet perchance one day may once come, when bony Phillis
When bony sweet Phillis, now moved with a lovely repentance,
Lovely remorse, may take some small compassion on me,
And, when it is too-late, lament this loss of Amyntas,
Sheading some sweet tears for death of murdered Amyntas,
His death; whom when he lyu'd, herself did cause to be dying;
Saying, O that he were, that he were not a murdered Amyntas,
O that he lived now, and were my lover Amyntas.
But now harck and marck of cares and woe the beginning.

Thyrsis. Say on then, for I harck and marck perchance to a better
End, than thou thyself can yet conceive or imagine.

Amyntas. When that I was but a wagg, young wagg, so young, that I could scarce
Reach mine outstretcht arm to the bending bows of a plumtree;
It Was my luck (ill luck) t'acquaint myself with a brave gyrle,
Brauest gyrle that spreades her golden locks to the tender
Wind, fair Phillis I mean, but alas what meant I to mean her?
Phillis a flame to the soul, and Phillis a flower to the forest,
Phillis a Townish gyrls disgrace, and grace to the country,
Phillis a fame to the Parck, and Phillis a shame to the Palace,
Phillis that first made Cydippe for to be mother,
Phillis that first made that rich Montanus a father:
With that Phillis I was (most woeful was, when I am not)
With that Phillis I lyu'd (o luckles lyu'd, when I live not)
Phillis a turtle dove, and faithful turtle Amyntas:
Both our bowres were nigh, which made us both to be neighbors,
Both our mynds more nigh, which causd us both to be fryendly:
Both our ages like, which first was cause of a lyking,
Both our lives more like, which still gave fire to a fancy.
If that Amyntas were disposed for to be fishing,
Phillis a fishing went: if Amyntas meant to be fowling,
Phillis a fowling went: if Phillis longd for a filberd,
Yonker Amyntas clymbde: if Phillis would be a hunting,
Who but Amyntas then, but greene-coate Huntsman Amyntas?
Eithers sport was like, and eythers portion aequall.
But when Amyntas thus bestowed himself on his angling,
Other bayts and hooks took secreate hold of Amyntas:
Whilst that Amyntas thus laid trapps and snares for a Redbrest,
White-brest laid new snares and hidden trapps for Amyntas:
Whilst that Amyntas I say ran pricking after a Pricket,
Far more poysned darts have pricked hart-roote of Amyntas.
For, by degrees there grew (as an herb that grows of her own self)
In my breast there grew, but I wist not whence, a desiring
Still to be with Phillis, poor fool, and still to be gazing
On those burning lamps, whence still still I sucked a sweetness,
Strange kind of sweetness which ended still with a sowrenes.
Oftentimes did I sigh, yet knew no cause of a sighing,
And was a lover before that I knew what it was to be loving:
But now Thyrsis, I know, and mark, I Will tell thee the manner.

Thyrsis. Say on Amyntas then; this matter's worthy the marking.

Amyntas. Once on a day (o day, o dismallst day of a thousand)
Once on a summers day (o summer worse than a winter)
Under a beech (o beech of Amyntas woe the beginning)
Phillis sat her down, and down sat Cassiopoea,
And I between them both: when a Be that gathered honny
Here and there fro the flowers, conueys herself in a moment
Unto the red-rose cheek of smiling Cassiopoea,
And there bytes and bytes fair cheek of Cassiopoea,
Thinking sure, (as I think) her red-rose cheeks to be roses.
Be bytes, biting smarts, and smarting Cassiopoea
Wringeth her hands and cries: But, peace, quoth my bony Phillis,
Cassiopoea, be still, cry not sweet Cassiopoea:
I Will with a word or two soon cause thy pain to be ceasing,
I Will soon charm thy cheek; this secreate lately I learned
Of beldame Sagane, for an yuory comb that I gave her.
Then sh'applyes her lips (life-geeuing lips to a Lover,
And yet alas, yet alas life-taking lips from a Lover)
Unto the smarting cheek of whyning Cassiopoea,
And with a sweet sweet sound her spells she begins to be mumbling:
By and by (strange thing) her pain was past in a moment,
Whether charming words did woork so mighty a wonder,
Or that Phillis mouth (which rather may be believed)
Heales where it tutcheth by some great grace of Apollo.
Then then, whereas before I desired but to be seeing
Hart-inflaming eyes, I desired but to be hearing
Soul-inuading voice, sweet voice, and like to the purling
Streams of a silver brook that creepes with a lovely resounding
Murmur among small stones, or like to the dayntyly warbling
Noise of a gentle wind, that makes green leaves to be trembling,
Then then alas did I long and look and wish to be joining
This my mournful mouth to the mouth of my bony Phillis:
And in fine I deuisd (Love fynds out wyly devises)
How to obtain my desire: for I faind, that a wasp fro the bushes
Flew to my face in a rage, and poor lips all to be stinged;
And my doleful looks did look and crave to be charmed,
Though my tongue was afraid, and made no suit to the charmer,
Then simple Phillis, who took my tale for a Gospel,
Came of her own accord and joined her lips to my sore-lipp,
Sore-sick lip God knows: But alas, whilst Phillis a fained
Wound with sweet lips healed, her sweet lips gave me a true-wound,
Gave me a mortal wound that ran fro the lips to the liver,
Nay, immortal wound that pierst fro the mouth to the marrow.
No busy Be can suck more sweet and sugered honny
From sweet smelling flowrs, than was distild fro the roses
Of chery-lipt Phillis by the boiling breath of Amyntas;
Although bashful fear was somewhat a curb to my kisses,
And restraynd my joys: which made me the more to desire that
Poisned bitter-sweete, and feign yet again that I smarted,
That with Phillis lips my lips might freshly be charmed:
And so charmed I was, so sting'd, so deadly bewitched,
So sore inchaunted with spill-soule spells, that I must needs
Either break my heart, or break my love to my Phillis:
This breaking of love was a loues-breake; better it had been
Harts-breake or necks-breake to the sore hart-wounded Amyntas.
Once on a time when Nymphs and Pastors chaunc't to be sporting.
Standing all in a round, and each one whispred a secreat
Into an others ear, poor fool I began to be buzzing,
Phillis, I burn with love, o take compassion on me,
Help or I die Phillis: But Phillis straight with a lowering
Look and frowning face, and downe-cast eyes to the ground-ward,
Blushed for spite and shame, and gave not a word for an answer,
But couueyd her away, and flew fro the place in a fury.
From that time, no time would Phillis abide with Amyntas,
Lend no eyes to the tears, no ears to the playnts of Amyntas.
And now flaxen wheat his ripened stalk to the syckle
Has threetimes yielded, now cheareful spring, to the forest
Flowring bows has brought threetimes, and flowr's to the meddow,
And each thing but death long since was try'de by Amyntas
For to appease Phillis; my death now only remains
For to appease Phillis: which death should soon be procured,
So that I were once sure that I should by my deadly departure
Wring any tears from her eyes, or bring any joy to her hard heart,
Make her weep or laugh; and wheather should I be wishing?
Indeed Phillis tears and mind with mercy relenting
Were far better amends for death of murdered Amyntas,
And more friendly reward for luckles love of Amyntas,
But that I may not wish sweet Phillis mind to be grieved,
Nor Phillis fair face and eyes with tears to be blubbred.

Thyrsis. And what man, madman, can think it possible, if that
Once she do hear these plaints, but that she will yield to be loving?

Amyntas. O good Thyrsis, I doubt, for I never gin to be speaking,
But she recoyls fro my words, as subtle snake fro the charmer.

Thyrsis. Doubt not, I hope ere long, I Will cause her friendly to hear thee.

Amyntas. If thou get that I speak, then naught shall I get by my speaking.
Mopsus alas Mopsus foretold me my desteny long-since,
Soothsayer Mopsus that knows what mystery secreate
And hidden virtues in stones and herbs be abiding,
And by the flight and chirpe of byrds can tell many wonders.

Thyrsis. What? that coosnyng squyre, that brokes and sells to the old wives
Pelting pills in a box, and so scrapes coin fro the country?
Hope yet Amyntas a while; for I know there is matter of hoping:
Only because Mopsus says there is no matter of hoping:
Hope, and meet me again in this same place: for I doubt not
But that in one half hour, I Will bring good news to Amyntas.

Chorus. O Sweet age of gold, not sweet, for that by the pastures
Every brook and bush with mylk and honny abounded;
Nor that fertile ground untilled, vntutcht was afording
Fresh increase of fruit to the pooremans daily reioicing;
Nor that stingles snakes and harmeles slippery serpents
Slyded abroad by the fields and never breathed any poison;
Nor that clowdles skies seemed evermore to be smyling,
And aeternall Spring her springtime daily renewing;
Nor that noe pyne-trees as yet cut down fro the mountains
Ranged abroad by the rocks with salt waves all to be dashed:
But sweet age of gold, for that this name of a noething,
Idle name of naught, and daily deceauable Idol,
Which fools afterward, fine-fooles have made to be Honor,
Was nor named, nor known, nor brought new laws to the country
And poor countrymen, whose lives were only directed
By sweet Natures law, sweet Nature taught them a lesson,
If you will, you may: and strait-lac't rules did abandon.
Then by the greene-mantled pastures and watery fountains
Lou's young wanton waggs were always wont to be singing,
And had noe light lamps, and had no dangerus arrows.
Then brave jolly Shepherds and Nymphs sat sweetly together,
Tempring words with smyles; and every smyle with a kissing.
Nymphs were not so nyce, but that they yielded a full view
Of their bared breasts to the searching eyes of a lover.
Gyrles were not so coy, but that they would with a yonker
Friendly together wash, and bathe themselves in a river.
Honor first cou'red wel-spring of lovely Cupido,
Honor plucked water from scorched mouth of a Lover,
Honor taught fair eyes their glittring beams to be hyding,
And to the darckned soul their light unkindly denying.
Honor caught in netts those golden locks, that in old time
Were leaft loose to the wind dispersed along by the shoulders.
Honor marred our mirth, and louelayes turned to a silence,
And all our pastymes to a sollempne gravity changed.
Honor taught us first our mouths by art to be moving,
Looks by a looking glass, and gate with skill to be framing.
Honor called it a theft, which first was counted a free gift,
Honor made it a crime, which first was thought but a pastyme.
But thou supreme Lord of Love, thou only Monarcha,
Which rul'st mighty Monarchs, what do thou here in a corner,
For so great a Godhead o too too simple a corner?
Go to a proud Diadem, to a golden crown, to a scepter,
Break those great men's sleep; so shall thy fame be the greater:
Disgrace not thy-self with poor contemptible abiects,
But let Countrey-fooles live as they used to be living,
Let them live in love, whilst they have time to be loving.
Sun setts, and rises; goes down, and quickly reuiueth,
But man's light once out, aeternall darkness abides:
Then let Countrey-fooles live as they used to be living,
Let them live in love, whilst they have time to be loving.

The second Act, and first Scene.
The Satyr alone. THis same foolish Bee's but a Be, and Bee's but a small
thing,
Yet this buzzing Be with a small mouth makes a great wound:
But what is less than Love, that lurketh in every corner,
Every small small nooke; and hides himself as a false-thiefe
Sometimes under an hair, and sometimes under an ey-lidd?
Yet this least least Love, when he smites, makes a great-wound,
Great great mortal wound, great cureles wound in a lover.
My flesh's naught but a mark all ouerprickt with her arrows,
My body naught but a wound, my bowels naught but a bleeding.
O Love, nay not Love, that love unlovely requiteth,
Love was as ill called Love, as this proud paltery Phillis
Was well called Phillis; (disdainful Phillis an ill is,
Ill to her owne-self first, and always ill to an other:)
As this Mountaine-byrd, Montanus daughter I should say,
'Was well called Phillis; since hill-borne Phillis a hill is:
Wild waste hills and woods and mountains serve for a harbor
Unto the rau'nous brood of woolues, bears, slippery serpents;
And hillish Phillis makes her fair breast, as a lodging
For foul pride, fell spite, and most implacable anger,
Worse beasts, far more worse, than woolues, bears, slippery serpents,
These with a pray are pleased, but she is not moved with a prayer.
If that I fetch her flowrs, fresh fragrant flowrs fro the forest,
My fresh fragrant flowrs, o spite, with a scorn she rejects,
For cause her fair cheeks with fairer flowrs be adorned.
If that I bring in a dish queene-apples unto my dear Queen,
Dish and queene-apples, o grief, with a mock she renounceth,
For cause her bosom with fruit far sweeter abounds.
If that I range by the woods and fyelds, and gather her honny,
Honn' and honnyes comb, o death, with a flout she refuses,
For cause her sweet mouth more sugered honny afordeth,
O then Phillis, alas, if my poor state can aford thee
Naught, but what thy self may have more lovely within thee,
Take myself for a guyft, i will give myself to my Phillis,
And why should Phillis disdain this gift that I give her?
My face is not foul, my looks are not to be loathed,
Yesterday I beheld myself when I walked by the seashore,
When seaes were calmed, when winds their rage had omytted
My sanguyne countenance with moisture lively replenisht,
Bristled breast, braund arms, and shoulders stoordyly squared
Are all signs of strength, and marks of manlynes only,
And if Phillis doubt, let Phillis try what is in me.
What should Phillis do with a curld-pate paltery cockney?
What with a smooth-fac't fool, with a carpet squyre, with a mylksop?
What with a pyping goose, with a whistling boy, with a mynstrell?
Gyrles indeed, and gyrles in show, effoeminat each way?
If perchance Phillis, (this chance may easyly happen)
Should encounter a Woolfe, or a fell she Bear, or a wild Boar,
Then farewell Mynyons, then bristled breasts be the best men.
O but alas, Phillis does know right well, that I want not
Man's face or man's heart; but gold and silver I have not,
Gold and silver I want, and this makes Phillis abhor me
Country learnes of town to be bought, and every Malkin
Looks for a purse of sylk, or a ring, no less than a Lady.
Here is an age of gold indeed, gold only triumphs,
Gold rul's and ore rul's from a mylkmayd unto an Empress.
Thou, thou wicked wight that first taughtst mayds to be Merchants,
'And made gyrles sell love; o let thy grave be a dungeon
For foul sprytes and snakes; o let thy damnable ashes
Feel both wind and rain, and bones ly all to be scattred
Here and there by the fyelds, bones bruysed of every footeman,
Troaden of every beast, accursed of all the beholders,
This wretch, noble love did abase, when he made it a hireling,
Made it a slave of gold, and made it a monsterus Hydra,
Monster of all monsters that land or water afordeth.
But what mean I to curse in vain? since every creature
Uses such weapons, as nature gave, to defend him?
Claws to the greedy Lions, and foaming tuske to the wild Boar,
Winged eggs to a heart, and pleasing face to a woeman,
Why doel not then deal according unto my nature?
Why do I not show force, since nature fram'es me to forcing?
I Will take by violence and rape those joys fro the proud gyrle
Which are due to my love, and Phillis stoutly denies.
When she begins herself in woonted well to be washing,
( Silen showed me the well, fair well, well worthy a fair less)
I Will rush out from a bush (where first i will lie as in ambush)
And take her napping, when I see occasion offered.
If that I once can roll my hand in her hair, let her hardly
Scratch and byte and whine, she will never escape fro my clutches,
Till, for a worthy reueng, her blood, my blade be a bathing.
The second Scene.
Daphne. Thyrsis. Thyrsis, I know too well, that tender-mynded Amyntas
Has long loved this gyrle; and long may love her, I fear me.
And, as I told thee before, my helping hand did I always,
And will now much more for thy sake, lend to Amyntas.
But more soon may one make gentle a Bear or a Tiger,
And tame young wild Bulls, then learn young gyrls any reason,
Gyrls as fond as fair: whose rude symplycyty knows not,
How their eye-arrowes can pierce men's hearts in a moment.
Thyrsis. Simple? I never yet could see so simple a woeman,
But was most expert, though but new crept fro the cradle,
In these cosn'ing tricks; and knew her face to be framyng,
Now with a smyle t'allure, and now to repel with a frownyng.

Daphne. What skillful Mystres taught them this mystery, Thyrsis?

Thrsis. As though thou knewst not: that Mystres, which did in old time
Take young byrds fro the neast, and taught them for to be flying,
Bull to rebut with a horn, and skaled fish to be swymming,
And proudhart Peacock her painted train to be spreading.

Daphne. What Is her name? Thy. Daphne. Dap. Fie, that is impossible. Thy. And why?
Is not dame Daphne trow you, to be deemed a Mystres
Sufficient t'enstruct ten thousand such bony lasses?
Though in truth they want noe skill, nor need any mystres,
Coy by kind, and proud by birth, and surly by nature.
Yet nource and mother contend this folly to further,
And so make in time young cockrell like to the old crow.

Daphne. Well crow'd, gentle Cock: your song may chance be requyted:
But to the matter in hand, in truth, in truth I remember
One odd toy, Thyrsis, that makes me scarcely resolved,
Wheather Phillis feign and make but a show of a symplesse,
Or for a truth does mean as in outward show she pretends.
For, last day when I went to the green fyeld near to the cytty,
Phillis sat her down by the brook that runs by the green fyeld,
And so her countenance composd, as though she required
Counsel from that brook, and would, b'aduisd by the water,
How to be disposing, and how to be dayntyly ordring
Gold wyr'de hair on her head, and how with skill to be setting
Call on gold wyr'de hair, and how at last to be sticking
Flowers in a golden call, (her lap with flowrs was abounding)
And now takes up a Rose, and straight way takes up a Lylly:
And compares her cheeks to the Rose, and neck to the Lilly:
And then smyles for joy, seeing her louly triumphant
Cheeks more red than a Rose, and neck more white than a Lilly,
And disdaigns poor flowrs, and thus seems them to be scornyng,
Foolish paltery herbs, your pyde coat's naught to my countnance,
Your flowr's naught to my face, your bravery naught to my beauty,
Foolish paltery weeds, I do bear you often about me,
For your own disgrace, and not for a grace to my person,
That your fading flowrs may serve as a foil for a Phillis.
As she was all this while pruning herself by the water,
Princking and prancking, at last by chance she reflected
Her bright beams sydeward, and then saw well, that I saw her,
And was ashamed and blushed, and let fair Lilly be falling.
More that Daphne laughed, more Phillis still was a blushing,
More that Phillis blushed, more Daphne still was a laughing.
Buy yet, her hair half trest, half vntrest well she remembered,
And with a stealing eye to the waterglasse she repaired,
Spying whether I spyde; and see's herself to be undressed,
And yet lykes herself, seeing herself to be seemly
Though undressed, for I saw, yet would not seem to be seeing.

Thyrsis. Peace, peace, good Daphne: this noe news, come to Amyntas.

Daphne. Noe news? yes mary is it: for noe such matter in old time
Ever before was seen: When Daphne was but a Damsel
Dapne was not so: but world now waxes an old world,
Grows to be wayward now, and peevish like to an old man.

Thyrsis. In those days, Townebyrds flewe not so fast to the country,
Nor country lasles did gad soemuch to the Cytty.
Now all is confounded, now fashyons all to be mingled
All to be mangled quyte, and every Madg is a Mystresse,
All Is turned vpsyde down. But may not, may not Amyntas,
And bonylasse Phillis yet talk once fryendly together
By Daphnes good means, and condescend to a parley?

Daphne. Thyrsis, I am not sure; she is too too flatly denying.

Thyrsis. And he, alas, poorefoole, is too too fondly desyring.

Daphne. Then let him ask, entreat, importune, nay let him offer,
Yea offer violence, and take noe nay; for a woeman
Loves to be wooed of a man: thou know well, Thyrsis, a woeman
Runs, and yet so runs, as though she desyr'd to be orerun;
Says, noe, noe; yet so, as noe, noe, seems to be no noe;
Stryues, and yet so stryues as though she desyr'd to be vanquished.
Woeman's like to a shade, that flies, yet lies by the subject,
Like to a Be, that never strives, if sting be removed.
Thou se'st, Thyrsis, I talk as a plain wench unto a plain fryend.

Thyrsis. Then good plain Daphne, its more then time to be plain now,
Help me to help our fryend poor helples fryendles Amyntas.

Daphne. Well to be plain indeed, and end this matter in one word,
Phillis goes with me now by and by to the brave well,
Mighty Dianaes well, where largearm'd ash to the hunting
Nymphs giu's cooling shade; there Phillis shall be presented
Naked, starcknaked to the open view of Amyntas.

Thyrsis. And what then? Daph. What then? then I thinck thusmuch to a wiseman
Will seem sufficient, and is toomuch for a fonkyn.

Thrysis. Now I do know thy mind: but I doubt least fearful Amyntas
Have not soemuch heart, as boldly to offer an onset.

Daphne. Then let Amyntas stay, til an other seek to prevent him.

Thyrsis. If that he were so serud, he deserud well so to be served.

Daphne. But to thyself Thyrsis, wilt still be a boy or a batchler?
Were not far better to be husband or to be lover?

Thyrsis. When that Thyrsis see's, that lou's not a plague to a lover,
Then shall Daphne see, that Thyrsis will be a lover.
But whilst hateful love with tears and fears is aboundyng,
Love who will for me: let another learn to be mournyng,
Thyrsis enough has mournd. Daph. But he has not ioyed enough yet.

Thyrsis. Noe such joys I desire. Daph. But love can force the resister.

Thyrsis. Noe force; i will keep back. Daph. And then love hasteneth onward.

Thyrsis. I Will run. Daph. Love has wings. Thyrs. But short wings in the
beginning.

Daphne. Lovers feel not love, when love is first a beginning,
And when lou's once felt, its too late then to be runnyng.

Thyrsis. But let my love rest, til again we chance to be meeting,
And let Amyntas now, for he most needs, first be relieved.
I Will seek him straight way* and bring, if I can, the retyring
Bear to the stake. Daph. I Will go, but this was far fro my meaning.

Thyrsis. And, if I guess not amysse, lo yonder he coms, with a downecast
Look, and wandering pace, pace and look fit for Amyntas.

The third Scene.
Amyntas, Thyrsis. THyrsis gave good words: I Will see what is done for Amyntas;
And, if noe thing's done, then before that I seem to be undone,
Myself-murdring hand shall reaue this breath from Amyntas
Even in Phillis sight, that like as now she delyteth
Herself with this wound, loves wound, that cleaues to my heart root,
Wound of her own fair eyes: so may she be freshly triumphing
At this gaping wound with purpled gore that abounds
Wound of mine own hands, last wound of murdered Amyntas.
Thyrsis. Leave of thy mourning: Thyrsis brings news to Amyntas.

Amyntas. What news? life, or death?

Thyr. Life, love, bliss, joy to Amyntas,
If that Amyntas dare joy, bliss, love, life be a meeting.
But then he must be a man, not a mome, man fully resolved,
And not shrynck with a shower, as a feynt heart fool or a dastard.

Amyntas. And what great cowrrage, or what resolution is this?

Thyrsis. If that thy Phillis should wander alone in a desert,
Desert walled about with rocks of monsterus hugenes,
Where sharpe-tusked Boares, and Tigers only resorted,
Would thou go to thy love by this so fearful a passage?

Amyntas. Yea, with a better will, than gyrles or boys to the stooleball.

Thyrsis. If thy Phillis were with a theeuish company compast,
And saw naught but sweards and glistring armor about her,
Would thou go to thy love through this same company theeuish?

Amyntas. Yea, with a greater joy, than thirsting Heart to the fountain,

Thyrsis. Yet for such exployt, more courage will be required.

Amyntas. I Will with a good will go through scorching flames of a furnace,
I Will through swelling streams increast with snow fro the mountains,
I Will through damnable hell, through loathsome Styx, to my Phillis,
If that can be a hell where heu'ns-ioy Phillis abides:
But say, show me all.

Thyr. Harck then.

Amynt. Tell speedyly, Thyrsis,

Thyrsis. Thy love sits by a well, sits naked, alone, by a wellspring.
Phillis sitts by a well, and stays for gentle Amyntas,
Dare thou go to thy love, and will thou go to thy Phillis?

Amyntas. What? does my dear life, does my love sit by a wellspring?
What? does Phillis alone and naked stay for Amyntas?

Thyrsis. None else but Daphne; and Daphne woorks for Amyntas,
Otherwise she alone, and naked stays for Amyntas,
Naked, but. Amynt. But what? this vile, But, murdreth Amyntas.

Thyrsis. But Phillis knows not that Amyntas coms to the wellspring.

Amyntas. O wellspring of woe; this cold conclusion ends
All my hope conceau'd, and draws confusion onward;
O pytyles Thyrsis, was sowl-tormented Amyntas
Not yet plagued enough, but thou must heap on a new plague?

Thyrsis. If thou mean to be ru'ld, thou may be a happy Amyntas.

Amyntas. How ru'ld? Thyr. Take that good, which opportunyty offreth.

Amyntas. God forbid, that I take such opportunyty offered
As t'attempt any thing displeasing unto my Phyills.
Yet did I never thing offensive unto my Phillis,
But that I loved her alas, yet alas she'enforc't me to love her,
That fault's hers, not mine, and beauty to blame, not Amyntas.

Thyrsis. If thou could leave love, would thou leave of to be loving,
That by not loving, thou might please thy bony Phillis?

Amyntas. That, will I never say Thyrsis, nor never imagine,
Love will not consent, that I ever leave to be loving.

Thyrsis. Thou will love her then, though in despyte of her own heart.

Amyntas. In despite? o noe, yet needs needs must I be loving.

Thyrsis. What then? against her will. Amynt. Love wills so, if she be
wilful.

Thyrsis. Take then against her will that, which though in the beginning
Seems to be paineful a while, yet proves to be joyful in ending.

Amyntas. Thy long experience, o Thyrsis, maks the be talking,
Maks the be discoursing of love: but freshman Amyntas
Is possessed with love, and love must frame him an answer,
Love, that cloggs hartty'd and tongty'd lover Amyntas.

Thyrsis. Why then, wilt not go? Amy. Yes. Thyr. Whether? Amy. Straight to my
long home,
If noe help, but this, can bring any joy to Amyntas.

Thyrsis. And is this nothing? would Daphne send for Amyntas,
Unless that Phillis seemed in some part to be willing?
And perchance Phillis does know herself, that Amyntas
Coms to the well indeed, but will not seem to be knowing.
Now if thou would have her full consent to be vttred,
And mind expressed, which every woman abhors,
Where is then thy desire, thy Phillis still to be pleasing?
And if Phillis will, that Amyntas joy, be Amyntas
Theft, not Phillis guyfte; what further seeks Amyntas?

Amyntas. O but alas who knows, that Phillis lyketh Amyntas?

Thyrsis. And who knows for truth, that Phillis lyks not Amyntas?
And in an aequall doubt, that part is best to be taken,
Which to the parties mind is most conformable always;
Therefore come. Amy. Stay yet. Thyr. For what? time passes Amyntas.

Amyntas. O stay good Thyrsis, let us here consult for a while yet.

Thyrsis. We Will consult by the way of things that seem to be needful.
Who so thincks many things* brings seaw to a fortunat ending.

Chorus. O Heart-ennobling great love, where shall we be learning
These thy sacred laws? in what school must we be trained
Up to thy high conceits? or what so skilful a master
Possibly may unfold those supreme thoughts of a lover
Which his soul possess, whilst with thy wings in a moment
His mind mounts to the skies, and Christall-mantled Olympus?
Neither learned Athens, nor great fame-worthy Lycoeus.
Could loves force express, or loves perfection utter;
Neither Castalian Muses, nor great-God Apollo,
Nor rymewright singers could once aspyre to the thousandst
Part of those ioys, which in a lovers breast be abounding:
Their voice is not a voice of fire, they sing but a cold song,
Song and voice unfit for loves unspeakable ardor:
So then Loves own voice is a fittest voice for a loues-lay,
So then Love himself is best expressed by his owneself.
Love learnes rural wits, and base-borne breasts to be reading
Hart-burning secreats and woonders, dayntily written
In faire-flaming eyes, by the hand of lovely Cupido.
Love (o strange eloquence of Love) with a sigh, with an half-speach,
Interrupted speech, confused speech of a Lover,
Sooner a Tigers heart to a true compassion urges,
Better a secret smart and inward passion vttreth,
Than trope-turned tale, or ryming ditty, deryued
From foole-hardy Poets, or vaine-head Rhetoricasters.
Nay, those silent looks, and lovely regards of a Lover
More, than a thousand words, express those pangs of a Lover.
Let those famous Clercks with an endless toil be perusing
Socraticall writings; two fair eyes teach me my lesson:
And what I read in those, I do write in a barck of a beech-tree,
Beech-tree better book, than a thousand Dainty devises.

The third Act, and first Scene.
Thyrsis, Chorus. O Extreme disdaigne, o most unmerciful hard-hart,
O unthankful gyrle, o proud, and no-pity-taking
Women, cursed by kind, unkind kind, kyn to a Tiger,
Kyn to a poysned snake. O dame, nay rather a stepdame,
Bunglyng artificer Nature, which framed a woemans
External countnance, and outward parts to be cheerful,
But th'internall soul, and inward part to be spytefull.
O perchance, poor wretch, himself has murdered his ownself.
Every place do I seek and search out every corner,
Every bush, each cave, each banck, and every fountain
All these three hours long, by the well where lately I left him;
Yet noe sight can I get,, noe hearing, no not a footestepp
Wherein he troade of late, not a footestepp yet can I light on:
Sure he is killed, he is dead, himself has murdered his owneself.
I Will ask these Pastors, if they can show any tidings:
Good friends, have you seen, do ye know any news of Amyntas?
Chorus. Some bad misfortune thy mind seems greatly to trouble:
What mean's this sweating and blowing? Fearst any mischif?

Thyrsis. Mischif I fear indeed of Amyntas: show me Amyntas.

Chorus. Nobody here saw him, since you two lately departed.
But what mischif fearst? Thyrs. That Amyntas murder Amyntas.

Chorus. Murder Amyntas. Why? What works so desperate outrage?

Thyrsis. Hate and Love. Chor. Two foes, the one the other deadly maligning*
Either sufficient, but both more mighty to murder:
Yet make this more plain. Thyrs. To be too too heartily loving,
And of a loved Less to be too too spytefuly hated.

Chorus. But show all at large: this place is an ordinary through-fare:
Here some man may pass that may bring news of Amyntas,
And some wind himself may hither chance to be driving.

Thyrsis. I Will show all indeed, for I should unjustly be dealing,
If that I blaze not abroad so shameful a fact to the whole world.
Wretched Amyntas knew, and knew by my only relating,
(Now I repent too late, that I was so fond a relator)
That Daphn' and Phillis would wash themselves in a wellspring:
Thither Amyntas went, but went very faintily thither,
All unwilling went, and backwards often he retired,
But that I still still drove him most unluckily forward.
Forward thus we went, and now came nere to Dianaes
Well, when alas we heard some doleful sound of a damsel,
That still cried, Alas; and saw how woefuly Daphne
Wringed her hands and wept, and seeing us to be coming,
Lifted her hands and voice; O run run quickly to Phillis,
Phillis alas is forced, o run run quickly to Phillis.
Lover Amyntas leapt, as a Rowe-buck pricked with an arrow,
At these words, and flew, and quickly I hastened after:
When we came, we saw fair Phillis bound to a willow,
Naked, stark-naked, bound head hand foot to a willow.
Her locks served for a cord, her gold-locks lapt in a thousand
Knotts, (noe true-loues knotts) were all ty'de fast to the willow:
Her brave Belt, which first that pure virginity guarded,
Bound both hands to to the trunck, and this foul villainy furthred:
And wynding willow, unwilling foe to be winding,
(And yet glad those legs with tender twiggs to be tutching)
Lends her slipps to be strings (each thing can further a mischif)
Strings those trembling legs (o rufull case) to be bynding.
And that beastly Satyr, which causd this monsterus outrage,
Stood with lusting rage, and raging fury before her,
And now, even just now had left of fully to bind her.
Phillis strove as much as Phillis might be a striving,
But for a naked gyrle with an armed foe to be striving,
Booteles it had been sure, if sharpened dart of Amyntas
Against that fleshly Satyr had not been tymely directed:
And I myself mean while my lapp with stones was a filling,
Which made lusting beast at last for fear to be flying.
When this flight gave leave to the loving eyes of Amyntas
For to behold his ioys, those lyms so dayntily trembling,
Trembling yet for fear; at last, at last he aproached
Unto the naked Nymph, and yet yet somewhat abashed:
Pardon, fair Phillis, quoth Amyntas, pardon I pray thee
This my too bold hand, which too too rashly presumes,
And to thy spotles lyms, lyms never tutcht yet, aprocheth,
Since so extreme need, so great a necessity forces
Forces Amyntas his hands fair Phillis her hands to be loosing*
Let not then this grace which fortune seems to aford them,
Seem any foul disgrace, or woork any woo to my Phillis.

Chorus. Words well worthy to make any heart of flynt to be tender:
But what said Phillis? Thyrs. Not a word; but scornfuly blushing
Looks down, hyding all that bands would have to be hidden.
Gentle Amyntas coms, and golden locks he releaseth,
And as he vnknits knotts, thus golden-locks he beespeaketh,
Golden locks too good this senceles tree to be chayning,
What shall Lovers have, wherein they may be triumphing,
If loues-lace can abide to be stretched from a Nymph to a willow?
Paltery willow breaks with rude and boysterus handling,
Golden chain, which gave such grace to the paltery willow.
Then those hard-held hands in such odd manner he loosed,
As that he wished and feared hart-holding hands to be handling.
Lastly, to free her feet, himself he begins to be kneeling:
But when Phillis her hands from bands felt fully released,
His loving service with these proud words she refused,
Tutch me not, hence Pastor, mine own hands shall be my own legs
Freedom, tutch not a Nymph, that is consecrat unto Diana.

Chorus. O graceles guerdon for service dutiful offered,
How can a Nymphs sweet breast harbor so fylthy a monster?

Thyrsis. Gentle Amyntas straight with these words myldely retired,
And withdrew himself, not daring once to be lifting
Up those loue-sick eyes, himself unkindly denying
Joys to his own poor self, that he might ease his bony Phillis
Of that pain, small pain, of giving him the denial.
All this I heard and saw, whilst under an oak I did hide me,
All this I heard and saw, and once I began to be speaking
For very grief; yet I stayed: But marck yet, marck yet a wonder.
After long toyling her feet at last she released,
And scarce, scarce her feet from bands at last she released,
But those winged feet she bestyrs as fast as a young Hynde,
And to Amyntas gives noe not soemuch as a farewell:
Yet noe cause of flight, for Amyntas made not an offer.

Chorus. What did he then poor man, when Phillis leaft him alone thus?

Thyrsis. That can I noeway guess; for I was so mad to behold this
Scornful pride, that I ran to have brought her back to Amyntas,
Ran with might and main, in vain: for I feared her away still;
And when I came backward to the well, then I missed Amyntas.
Surely I fear he is dead, for I know that he fully resolved
Ere that he came to the well, himself to have speedily murdered.

Chorus. That Is but an ordinary thing, for a lover death to be threatening,
But not an ordinary thing any man for love to be dying.

Thyrsis. God grant it prove so in Amyntas. Chor. Doubt not. Thyrs. I fear
it.
Yet to the Cave I Will go, where sage Elpinus abides:
There, if he live, its like, that Amyntas will be recounting
His forepassed pains to the rocks and watery fountains,
And with pleasant pipe, with voice so sweetly resounding
Make those rocks to resound, and wring out tears fro the fountains.

The second Scene.
Amyntas, Daphne, Fuluia. THy pity was pityles, Daphne, my dart to be plucking
From this doleful breast, my pains and pangs be redoubled
By differring death: what meanst thou thus to be turning,
Turning and wynding my troubled mind with a thousand
Fruytles discourses? thou thinckst perchance that Amyntas
Will dispatch himself: if he do, that is best for Amyntas.
Daphne. Fie for shame: leave of these wicked words; for I know, that
Bashfulnes, not pride, made Phillis run from Amyntas.

Amyntas. Owretch; sole despair, that dryues all hope from Amyntas,
Is my sole comfort: fond hope first wounded Amyntas;
And fond hope, even now (o endless grief) is a budding
In my balefull breast, and only because that I live yet,
Which is of all others the deuouringst woorme to the wretched.

Daphne. Live yet wretched a while, and keep thyself for a comfort;
Thinck thou see Phillis sit naked still by the welspring.

Amyntas. Had not fell fortune and lewd love plagued Amyntas
With pains sufficient, but wel-springs must be presented
Unto my eyes: and then to my scortched tongue be denied?

Fuluia. What? shall I then be the Crow, whose neuer-lucky resounding
Still brings baleful news? shall I first bring death to the aged
Father Montanus, whose gray-haires now be deprived
Of their chief comfort, fair Phillis, brave bony Phillis?
Old Father, chyldles Father, nay, now not a Father.

Daphne. Some sad voice I do hear. Amynt. I do hear most dolefuly sounded
Phillis dearest name, which ears and heart is a wounding:
Whoe's that which name's her? Daph. Fair Fuluia, Fuluia dearest
Nymph to the high Huntresse of forests mighty Diana.

Fuluia. Know it he must* and shall, that he may with speed be procuring,
That those lovely relics of Phillis may be preserved;
If those lovely relics of Phillis yet be remaining,
Luckles Phillis. Amynt. Alas, what? yet more plagues for Amyntas?

Fuluia. O Daphne. Daph. What Is that? Say on, sweet Fuluia, what is that
Which thou spakst to thyself? What made fair Fuluia still still
After Phillis name our ears with sighs to be filling?

Fuluia. How can I choose but sigh, so ruful a sight to remember?

Amyntas. O that rueful sight makes my cold heart to be ruefull:
Is my Phillis alive? Daph. Good Fuluia kill not Amyntas
With so long suspense, let us know what may be the matter.

Fuluia. O God, why shall I tell such dead news? and yet I must tell.
Phillis came naked to my house, and told me the cause of
Her coming naked: new dressed, she desyr'd me of all loves
Loving gyrle, that I would accompany her to the pleasant
Yuychurches parck, and frame myself to the hunting.
Both content, both went, and met with a company gallant
Of flowring damsells waiting on Pembrokiana,
With bows and arrows on prince like Pembrokiana.
Much time with pastimes was past, sports drew to an ending,
And on a soddayne lo, where erst no woolf was abiding,
Rau'ning woolf runs forth with blood-red mouth fro the bushes,
And on a soddayne lo, whilst others bows be a bending,
Phillis sent her shaft from her own ear unto the woolus ear:
Soemuch wrought in her heart sweet sight of Pembrokiana,
Soemuch did she desire to be praysd of Pembrokiana.
Wounded woolf to the wood, stout Phillis runs to the wounded
Woolf with a dart in her hand. Amynt. O dreadful dart to Amyntas,
How can a pleasant end come from so deadly beginning?

Fuluia. And with an other dart to the self same place I repaired;
But Woolf and Phillis (grief spurd the one, glory the other)
Were quyte out of sight: yet I trac't them both to the thickest
And most desert place: there, (o dear dart to my Phillis)
There lay Phillis dart, and not far thence was a white lawne
Wherein Phillis locks enwrapped were by my own hands.
And as I turned about, seven other woolus by the naked
Bones of a mangled corse, gore blood were greedily licking:
And as chaunst (would God such chance had Phillis) I saw them,
Yet they saw not me, they were so greedily gorging,
And so bent to the pray: So thence for fear I retired:
And this is all that I know: and here is that lawne, that I spoke of.

Amyntas. And is this not enough? o lawne of my bony Phillis:
O bony Phillis blood, thou art dead my sweet bony Phillis.

Daphne. O dooble deaths wound: dead Phillis murdreth Amyntas.

Fuluia. It Is but a swowne; for he breath's; and lo, he is quickly reuyued.

Amyntas. Grief, leave of lingering: make quick dispatch of Amyntas:
Grief, thou art too too slow; if death be reserved for Amyntas
Hand, he will take it in hand. For alas, if naught be a wanting
Unto the highest point of grief, if nought's to be added
Unto Amyntas woe, for what then stays Amyntas*
O Daphne, Daphne, was Amyntas lately repelled
From death, sweet deaths door by Daphnes means? Was Amyntas
Kept saulf for these joys? O, then, then I might in a good time
Have dischargd myself of a huge and horrible Aetna:
But Daphne would not, but cursed Desteny would not,
Least that I might by death those plagues have tymely prevented,
Which accursed Fates for Amyntas lately prepared.
But now, since my woes at last are come to a full groath,
Desteny and Daphne may well, well let me be dying.

Daphne. Yet differ thy death til certain news be received
Wheather Phillis live or dye; and then be resolved.

Amyntas. Live or dye? who doubts? would God that were to be doubted.

Fuluia. And would God my tongue had clou'n to my roof, when I blabbed.

Amyntas. Geaue me the lawne, good Nymph, white lawne, which only remains
Of sweete-white Phillis, that I may in stead of a Phillis
Kiss my Phillis lawne, and so my joys be prolonging,
So my shortened days with contentation ending.

Fuluia. What? shall I give or keep? Lewd cause wherefore he desir's it
Wills me to keep it still, least it bring fancy to fury.

Amyntas. Nymph extremely cruel, that thincks it much to be geuuing
One poor piece of lawne, even at last gasp of Amyntas.
Well, then I yield to my death, and destiny noe-pity-taking:
Let lawne stay with you, and you stay here for Amyntas.

Daphne. Harck, come back, here, take, o stay, and run not Amyntas.
And yet Amyntas runs, enraged, desperate, headlong.

Fuluia. Yea, and runs so fast, that he is not like to be outrun.
Therefore better I were to my iourneys end to be hasting:
And yet I grieve myself, Montanus mind to be greeuing,
Least these news inflict as deadly a wound in a father,
As they gave even now to the feynting heart of a Lover.

The fourth Act, and first Scene.
Phillis, Daphne, Chorus. But what a dart was that, which mightily flew fro the
fingers
Of brave Lady Regent of these woods, Pembrokiana,
Unto the foreign Bear, which came with greedy deuowring
Jaws to the harmeles game? Whose dying hour was a birthday
Unto her own young whelps, whose groans thus lastly resounded,
Deaths dart, (yet sweet dart, as thrown by Pembrokiana)
Make my wound more wide, give larger scope to my young ones,
Give them a free passage, herself has geu'n them a pasport.
Daphne. Phillis, for your sports I do much joy, but yet a thousand
Times more for yourself, since you so quickly revived
Live yet safe and sound: for Fuluia lately reported
Strange news of your death: would God that Fuluia had been
Dumme, or an other deaf: one mischif draws on an other.

Phillis. And in truth just cause had Fuluia for to believe so,
Since that I was not like from deaths door so to be scaping.

Daphne. But yet noe just cause had Fuluia for to report so.
Now let us hear at large, thy dangers and thy delyu'ries.

Phillis. Whyl'st I ran after a woolf, I was all inclosd on a soddayne
With darck dens and groves, and forced that chase to be leauyng:
But when I sought to retire and company lost to recover,
There did I see this woolf (for I knew this Woolf by an arrow
Which myself did shoot, and gave her a wound by the leaft care)
There did I see this Woolf and more Woolus greedyly praying
On some beasts carkas late slain by them, but I could not
Well discern what beast: this wounded Woolf in a fury
Coms with a gored mouth, (it seems my face she remembered)
And so makes onward, who had been worthyly welcomd,
Had not a tree by a chance my dart unworthily hindered.
My dart mislighting, fell Woolf more fiercely aproching
Drew so near, that I saw 'twas booteles now to be shooting,
And darts were all spent: Therefore at last I retired
And fled back for fear, but wyl'd Woolf hastened onward:
Now marck what chanced, my lawne hanged down to my shoulders
And stooke fast to a bush, and stayed my flight, but I plucked,
Yet bush held it fast; at last my lawne I relinquisht
For to reserve my life, and tore it away with a great part
Of my scattered hair* and fear so forcibly urged
Lightfooted Phillis, that a fearful death she avoided.
As to my house full glad for joy I repaired, I met thee
Daphne, there full sad by the way, and greatly amassed.

Daphne. Phillis alas is alive, but an other's gone to be dying.

Phillis. And what mean's this, Alas? am I now so lightly regarded,
That my life with, Alas, of Daphne must be remembered?

Daphne. Phillis, I love thy life, but I like not a death of an other.

Phillis. Whose death? Daph. Death of Amyntas. Phil. Alas how dyed Amyntas?

Daphne. How? that I can not tell; nor yet well whether it is so:
But noe doubt, I believe; for it is most like that it is so.

Phillis. What strange news do I hear? what causd that death of Amyntas?

Daphne. Thy death. Phil. And I alive? Daph. Thy death was lately reported,
And he beleeus thy death, and therefore seeks his own death.

Phillis. Fear of Phillis death proved vain, and fear of Amyntas
Death will prove vain too: life each thing lively procures.

Daphne. O Phillis Phillis, thou know not what be the torments
Of truelouers heart, heart made of flesh as Amyntas,
Not flynte heart, as thine; else would thou love that Amyntas,
Which loved Phillis more than life or soul of Amyntas.
Phillis, I know, for I saw, then when thou fledst from Amyntas,
Fledst, when by reason thou should have kissed Amyntas:
Then did Amyntas turn his poynted dart to his own breast,
And thrust breast on dart: and vile dart pierst in a moment
Through his coat, skyn, flesh; and would have speedily pierced
That same heart, which thou had more unluckily pierced,
But that I grasped his arm, and stayed that desperate outrage.
And now that small wound perchance will serve for a first proof
Of cursed courage, and mind unkindly resolved,
And that dart make way, and passage show to a damned
Knife, or a balefull sword, with freer scope to be murdring.

Phillis. Is this true? Daph. Noe doubt. Phil. But alas would noebody stay him?
O let us go, let us run, let us seek and search for Amyntas.
If that Amyntas died, when Phillis seemed to be dying,
Then, since Phillis lives, let Amyntas truly be living.

Daphne. Yes yes, quyckly Iran; But who can deal with a madman?
Rage and grief fro my sight conveyed him away in a moment.
Therefore now too late, it is too late now to be runnyng,
And thanck thy running that it is too late to be running.

Phillis. O, this fretts my soul Daphne, this deadly remembrance
Of my scornful pride, that I then my Chastyty called,
And it Chastyty was, but Chastyty noe-pyty-taking,
Now I repent it alas, but now too late I repentyt.

Daphne. Good God, what do I hear? can Phillis now be repenting?
Can she relent or yield? What playnt, what passion is this?
Can proud Phillis love? Phil. Noe love, but yet pyty-taking.

Chorus. When pyty runs before, love always hasteneth after:
And now Phillis loves, since Phillis now pyty-taketh.

Daphne. But too late, Phillis, too late. O wretched Amyntas,
Thou (even like to a Be, that stings, yet dies as he stingeth,
And his wounding life does leave in place that he wounds)
Have by thy death at last pierst Phillis through to the hart-roote,
Whereas in all thy life thou could not possibly move her.
Now if Amyntas soul from flesh and blood be released,
And here wandreth abroad (as I thinck it for to be wandering)
Let that soul now see, and joy her pains to be seeing,
Soul, that living loved, and by death, bought, to be loved.

Chorus. Price to the buyer dear, and shameful price to the seller.

Phillis. O that my love might once purchase life for Amyntas,
O that Amyntas life with my life might be redeemed.

Daphne. When steedes are stolen, then Phillis looks to the stable.

The second Scene.
Ergastus. Chorus. Phillis. Daphne. MY heart with pyty melts, my sowl's so
drowned in anguish,
That noe sight, noe sound objects itself to my senses,
But draws tears fro my eyes, and horror brings to my hearing.
Chorus. What Is this new man's news, that makes him look thus amassed?

Ergastus. News of Amyntas death. Phil. This deaths-newes brings me to deaths
door.

Ergastus. Most noble Pastor, that these woods lately frequented,
Gentle, loved of all, to the Nymphs dear, dear to the Muses,
And but a stripling died, and what death?

Chor. O, let us hear it,
O, let us hear it alas, that we may all be a mournyng
His mischaunce, our grief. Phil. O dear God, I dare not aproach him,
Least that I hear these news, yet these news must I be hearing.
Heart of stone, hard heart, cursed heart, what maks thee be fearing?
Go and encounter these knives, these darts that he brings
In sowle-wounding tongue, there show thyself to be stony.
Pastor, I come for part of thease news rightly belonging
Unto my damnable heart, and due, more due to my hearing
Than thou can conceive; then spare not freely to give it.

Ergastus. Phillis, I surely believe, that I heard this wretched Amyntas
With thy name his life and lamentation ending.

Daphne. Il news differring, is a plague as great as an ill news.

Ergastus. Late as I mended netts on a hill, foretroubled Amyntas,
Horribly vexed and chaft, in face and action altered,
Past by my side in a rage: but I stepped and hastened after,
And ouertook him; for I mused what might be the matter.
Good fryend Ergastus, quoth he then, now do me a pleasure,
Come with Amyntas now, and marck what he dooe's as a witness,
Stand as a witness by; but first swear, so to be standing,
And my deeds so marckt, in noe respect to be hindering.
Here I alas poor fool (for who would ever imagine
Such a detestable act, as he purposd then to be woorking?)
Rapt out horrible oaths straight way, and swear by the mighty
Nightwandring Hecate, Pallas, Pomona, Priapus,
And Pan Pastors God, that I would perform what he wild me.
Then did he lead me along to a steep and horrible hill topp,
All abrupt and rough, and made so fearful a downfall,
That my lyms all quakt, when I looked fro the hill to the valley.
Here did he pause for a while, and somewhat seemed to be smyling,
Which rather made me noe mischif for to be deemyng.
Then, quoth he, what thou see, that tell to the Nymphs, to the Pastors,
And at last, these words with a down cast look he resounded,
If that I could as well command those greedy devouring
Throats and teeth of Woolues, as I can soon leap from a hilltopp;
As my life did dye, o then so would I be dying;
Then should these my lyms and cursed corpse be dyuyded,
As those tender joints, o grief, were all to be mangled.
But since frownyng skies wil'd beasts now will not aford me,
(Which yet I know in time will come this flesh to be tearing)
This must serve, short death, though sharper death I deserved.
Phillis, I come straight way, I Will com to thy company, Phillis,
If thou do not yet disdain my company, Phillis.
If that I were but sure, that death brought end to thy anger,
And that my coming would give noe cause to molest thee,
Then should life with joy leave well contented Amyntas;
Phillis, I come, scorn not, scorn not my company, Phillis.
Thus said, lightly he leapt, and headlong fell to the valley;
My soul quakt for fear. Daph. O grief. Phil. O woeful Amyntas.

Chorus. And why staydst him not? wast fear, thy oath to be breaking?

Ergastus. O noe, for when I saw his mind thus bent to that outrage,
Oaths (in such case vain) I began to be lightly regarding,
And cought hold (naught hold) cought hold by a paltery gyrdle;
Paltery gyrdle brake by the swing, and weight of Amyntas:
Part with Amyntas went, and the other part I reteigned.

Chorus. O but where is that corpse, and bruysed bones of Amyntas?

Ergastus. God knows; for by the fall my senceles soul was amassed,
Neither durst I behold his corpse unluckily quashed.

Chorus. O strange news indeed, breakneck, breakheart of Amyntas.

Phillis. O pytyles Phillis, well may thy heart be a stony
Heart, if breakeneck news can not yet break it a sunder.
If false tales of death, her death, who hated Amyntas,
Took his life yet away; good reason then that Amyntas*
True death, too true death, who my hate lovely requyted,
Should take life from me; and so it shall, with an endless
Grief of troubled soul, or a too too slowly revenging
Stroke of a murdring hand, or this same piece of a gyrdle,
Piece of a gyrdle alas: that left his master Amyntas
For good cause, that so proud Phillis might be rewarded,
And his masters death with Phillis death be requyted.
Luckles gyrdle alas of too too luckles Amyntas,
Take noe scorn for a while in a bosom vile to be lodged,
Since to requyte, to reueng thou mean therein to be lodged.
Phillis should have been true turtle-doue to Amyntas
In this lightsome world, but Phillis prowdly denied;
Therefore by thy means Phillis shall meet with Amyntas
In those darcksome dens, as Phillis rightly deserved.

Chorus. Poor distressed soul, forbear thyself to be plaguing:
His fact, not thy fault, drew his confusion onward.

Phillis. Pastors, why do ye mourn? What mean these heavy bewaylings?
If you mourn Phillis; Phillis noe mercy deserves,
Since this merciles heart to Amyntas mercy denied:
If you mourn his death, who had noe cause to be dying,
Noe such mournyng can suffice for murdered Amyntas.
Dry those tears, Daphne, and wipe thy watery fountayns,
And come, yet come not for me, but come for Amyntas,
Help me to seek and find, t'entombe those bones of Amyntas;
For this I stay yet alive: this funeral obsequy only
Phillis can perform for balefull love of Amyntas.
And though murdring hand pollute so sacred an office,
Yet since Phillis her hand performs so sacred an office,
This will Amyntas take as a most acceptable office.

Daphne. Phillis, I yield my help his scattred bones to be searching,
But so that Phillis make noe more talk of a dying.

Phillis. All this while to myself did I live; but now to Amyntas,
Or to Amyntas bones, crushed bones so long will I live yet,
And live noe longer; my life, his funeral ending.
Pastors: But yet where is that way which leads to the downfall?

Chorus. There: and t'hill stands thence but a little more than a furlong,

Daphne. Come, let us go, and search: I Will guide thee; the place I remember.

Phillis. Pastors al farewell; farewell fair Pembrokianaes
Yuy churches parck, and fountaynes watery, farewell.

Chorus. This Nymph taks her leave, as though these so many farewells
Were her last farewell, which should cause deadly departure.

The fifth Act, and first Scene.
Elpinus. Chorus. Lou's aeternall laws are most unworthily blamed,
Upright laws in deed, in show though somewhat unequal.
And great Lord of love his men with mercy protecteth,
And yet* with justice, with due moderation ordreth.
O by what strange means and wondrous ways, fro the dungeon
Of despair, to the bower of bliss does he bring in a moment
His loving subjects? lo, gentle-mynded Amyntas
Even to the highest point of joy has clymbd by a downfall,
Unto a loves Paradise, by a hell full of infynit horror.
Blessed Amyntas now; soemuch more blessed Amyntas
Now, by how much then more wretch more cursed Amyntas.
Now may Elpinus conceive some matter of hoping
By thine example, that he shall have fortunat ending
Of these loueles toils, and most vnluckly begynnyngs.
Chorus. Sage Elpinus coms, and speaks strange words of Amyntas,
As, that he were yet alive; and thinks his state to be happy,
For that he died for love, and by death, bought to be loved.
Bitter bower of bliss, where monstrous murder abounds,
Loving fools Paradise, that leaves his life to be loved.
What means Elpinus so woeful an end to be wishing?

Elpinus. Fryends leave of mournyng: you heard false news of Amyntas.

Chorus. What, did he not leap down? Elp. Yes down to his only desired
Joys, and past by the shade of a fearful death, to a heaven,
And now leans his head on breast of sweet bony Phillis,
Sweet bony Phillis now, more loving now by a thousand
Parts, then loueles before; and sucks those sweetly beseemyng
Tears from Phillis her eyes, with a mouth with Nectar abounding.
And now nothing else is wanting unto the full joy
Of thease loving sowls, but that Montanus is absent;
And Montanus I seake, whose word maks absolut ending.

Chorus. Their years are aequall, and their affection aequall,
And both learned alyke: o, now Montanus is happy
Happy to have this stay and comfort unto his old age.
But show yet, what luck, what God so saved Amyntas.

Elpinus. Hear, o hear then that, whereof these eyes the beholders
Were, and whereof now this tongue may well be reporter.
By my cave did I sit with Thyrsis down by the downe-fall,
Talking of my love, loueles yet lovely Lycoris:
When from an high we saw some man fall down on a soddayn.
There was a heap of thorns and bows compact on a cluster
Somewhat above our heads; 'twas his hap there first to be lighting:
Which although by the swing and weight it bursted a sunder,
And all came tumbling, and fell down flatly before us,
Yet by this encounter that fall proved not to be mortal,
Though sore and painful, making him lie as amassed
One whole hour and more, as unable his eyes to be op'nyng.
We twooe, astonyed to behold so fearful an object,
Stood starck dumme for a while, although we knew it was Amyntas;
But perceauing that this fall seemed not to be mortal,
Our whole endeavors w'apply'de, his woe to be swaging,
And sent one forthwith, for cunnyng Alphesiboeus,
Alphesiboeus whom that great God learned Apollo
Made to be skilful in herbs, when he gave me the guyft to be singing.
But now in mean time, when Thyrsis began to rehearse me
All those secret woes and forepast pangs of Amyntas,
Daphne and Phillis did meet us there on a soddayne,
Daphne and Phillis, who sought bruysd bones of Amyntas
Whom they thought to be dead, as then was told me by Daphne.
But when Phillis saw her longlookt lover Amyntas,
Discolored, bruysed, sorewounded then with a raging
Voice, and beaten breast on Amyntas flatly she falls,
Face to Amyntas face, and mouth to the mouth of Amyntas:

Chorus. Was not Phillis abasht, unseemly to ly on Amyntas?

Elpinus. Shame to a feynthart love does sometimes serve for a bridle;
But true love indeed contemns so basheful a bridle.
Afterward with tears his bloodles cheeks she bewashed,
And those tears so wrought that Amyntas quyckly reuyued,
Opened his eyes, and breathd; which breath so luckily vttred
Encountering Phillis sweet breath was lovely received.
With what an endless joy these twooe lay sweetly together,
Either in others arms, and either sure of an others
Life and love, lovers may thinck, none else can imagine.

Chorus. Is then Amyntas saulfe, that he needs not fear any danger?

Elpinus. Saulfe and sound, but that those thorns have partly defaced
His fair cheeks, and sides did somewhat chance to be bruysed:
But that is just nothing, and woorks noe woe to Amyntas,
(Happy Amyntas now, that showed such sign of a loving
Heart, and so at last obteynd to be loved of a loving
Soul, his passed pains, make present joys to be greater)
As yourselues shall see: for Phillis coms with Amyntas
Hytherward hard by: myself must first to the lodging
Of rich Montanus, persuading him to be yielding
Unto the purposd match; and thither they be appointed
Shortly to com, this way: and now its time to be walking.

The second Scene.
Amyntas, Phillis. Dear life, when shall I once have full possession of you?
Phillis. When time com's, I Will tell: fruit too-soone plucked, is a sowre-fruyte.

Amyntas. If too-late, rotten.

Phill. Then pluck when time is appointed.

Amyntas. Oyet, come sweet light of these mine eyes to the harbor,
And ten-thousand woes with a good-turne once be requyting.

Phillis. What good-turne would you?

Amyn. That which cost you not a dodkin,
And yet would content my mind much more than a treasure.

Phillis. What Is that? I understand not yet what may be the meaning.

Amyntas. Harck in your ear then.

Phil. Fie, noe: is that but a tryfle?

Amyntas. Yet let us sleep for a while; for your sake long was I watching.

Phillis. Content. Amynt. O sweet Nymphe.

Phil. But stay, and stir not a finger:
As you sleep, I Will tell, what flowrs I do keep for a brydes-wayne.

Amyntas. How can I hear in sleep? Phil. What pleasure then can Amyntas
Take, when he sleeps by my side, if he feel noething when he sleeps?
And yet I can not sleep, for joy, that I found my Amyntas.

Amyntas. Then let us kiss: kissed mouth is nothing worse for a kissing:
So Be sucks sweet flowrs, flowrs noething worse for a sucking;
And you kiss roses, then thinck my lips to be roses.

Phillis. Well: but these roses so kissed, ask not to be kissed:
Then let Amyntas stay, till Phillis mean to be kissing.

Amyntas. If naught else, yet give me leave those eyes to be kissing,
Those fair eyes, and so shall I seem fair soul to be kissing.

Phillis. You would kiss mine eyes: which ever before, with a thousand
Sighs and sobs you cursed, for throwing darts at Amyntas.

Amyntas. Now I desire your eyes of purpose for to be kissing,
Thereby so to declare by this so lovely a token,
That your murdring eyes, my cursing lips be for ever
Now made faithful fryends, and all contention ended.
And, if Phillis thinck herself not fully revenged,
Then let her own teethe byte these lying lips of Amyntas.

Phillis. If that Amyntas cease mine eyes any more to be cursing,
Why should Phillis then for spyte his lips be a biting?

Amyntas. If noe kind of kiss from Phillis may be procured,
Yet let an embracement to Amyntas his arms be aforded.

Phillis. With good will.

Amynt. Most good; what better will to Amyntas?

Phillis. But yet stay: Phillis must first get a boon of Amyntas.

Amyntas. O what guyft shall I grant? what boon seeks my bony Phillis?

Phillis. Four or five apples fro the tree that grows by the hil-topp.

Amyntas. How can I come to the tree for bry'rs and soe-many bushes?

Phillis. I Will bring you so near, as you may easily tutch it.

Amyntas. If that I may clasp it, then doubt not, Phillis, Amyntas
Will clymbe up to the tree, or shake down foemany apples.

Phillis. Is It true? clypt Phillis must then look so to be served.

Amyntas. My life, give me the leave, this fair red rose to be putting
In this bosom, where my heart has made his abiding,

Phillis. O so might you prick your heart with thorns of a red rose,
Or take it fro my breast perchance, and give it an other.

Amyntas. Grant me this one grace yet: this favor do me for all this,
Give me thy snowe-white hand, to be clypt and kissed of Amyntas.

Phillis. So by the hard-gryping, hoate-kissing Lover Amyntas,
Phillis snowe-white hand may melt, or chance to be bruysed.

Amyntas. What kind of love's this, that Phillis bear's to Amyntas.

Phillis. Discreate and sober. Amynt. Well, then this shall be my sober,
And yet lovely request; Sit down, that I may be beholding
That fair Phillis face, and hear her sweetly resounding,

Phillis. Phillis must needs yield, when Amyntas duly demands.

Amyntas. They sing these Asclepiades.
Sweet face, why be the heu'ns so to the bountiful,
Making that radiant bewty of all the stars
Bright-burning, to be fair Phillis her ornament?
And yet seem to be so spytefuly partial,
As not for to aford Argus his eyes to me,
Eyes too feawe to behold Phillis her ornament?

Phillis. First and lastly beloved, only my only joy,
Why has not thy beloved soemany lou'ly hearts
As those Partriches have of Paphlagonia?
One breast is not enough for to reteigne my joy,
More hearts would that I had for to receive my love,
As those Partriches have of Paphlagonia.

Amyntas. Let come fair Helene, Troys tribulation,
Or brave Endymions sweet speculation,
Or Nymph Idalian friendly to passion;
None but Phillis alone holds Amyntas hands:
None but Phillis alone pleases Amyntas eyes:
None but Phillis alone wounds Amyntas heart.

Phillis. Let come that pretty Boy, fond of his own image,
Or goddess Mynion kylde by an ougly Boar,
Or youthful Ganymede rapt by the Thunderer:
Phillis stretches alone hands to Amyntas hands*
Phillis turns alone eyes to Amyntas eyes,
Phillis joins alone heart to Amyntas heart.
O, this Amyntas name enchaunts my soul, that I can not
Leave this Amyntas name: my tongue still runs on Amyntas,
And my heart, and mind, and soul still thincks on Amyntas:
And yet, Amyntas, I know, its more than time to be going:
Elpinus long since has made all known to my father,
And my father, I know, his new son longs to be knowing.

Amyntas. Let me help you up: your hand is in hand of Amyntas
Now at last surprysde: yet I ask but a kiss for a ransom.

Chorus. IF that such sour sauce for sweetest meats be reserved;
If that Amyntas must serve, love, weep, die for a Phillis,
If those great pleasures with great payns must be procured,
Then, good love, geaue those great matters unto the greate-men.
Let my Love soon love; let a sawdrey lace, or a thymble,
Or young nightingale suffice my fancy to further:
Let not such torments and martyrdoms be required
My poor simple joys, and pleasures lowely to season:
But sweete-bitter words, but kind and lovely repulses,
And such falling out, as may be a speedy renewing
And fresh increasing of love: let such be the loving
Wars, and wars, as peace and truce may end in a moment.

FINIS.
Phillis Funeral. The second part of the Countess of Pembrokes Yuychurch.
The first day.
NOw bonylasse Phillis was newly betroathd to Amyntas
By rich Montanus consent; who yet, for a long time
Wedding day differd, til his own birth day was aproaching:
That twooe solemn feasts joined fryendly together in one day
Might with more meryment, and more concurse be adorned.
So men on earth purpose, but Gods dispose in Olympus:
For, when as each thing was by the Father duly prepared,
And byrthwedding day now nere and nearer aproached,
Wedding by brydes death was most untimely prevented,
And fathers byrth-day, deaths-day to the daughter appointed;
Deaths-day lamented many days by the woeful Amyntas,
Deaths-day which hastened deaths-day to the mourneful Amyntas.
Whose mournyng all night all day, did weary the Mountains,
Weary the woods, and winds, and caves, and weary the fountayns.
But when he saw in vain his cheeks with tears to be watered,
Cheeks all pale and wan, yet could not find any comfort;
Comfortles then he turns at length his watery countnance
Unto the water streams; and there his playnts he begins:
Hear, o Brook, these playnts, hear, o sweet brook, my bewaylings,
And convey them down to thy kinsmans watery kingdom,
Down to the world-washing main-sea with speedy reflowing:
World-washing mayne-sea will then convey to the worlds-end
This grievous mournyng by the shore, by the sands, by the desert,
Desert, sands, and shore fit witneses unto my mournyng.
And great God Neptune perchance his mightyly-thundring
Triton will command to recount what I feel, what I suffer,
Raging heat of love passing outragius Aetna.
So th'infamous fame of wretched lover Amyntas,
Blown from the east to the west by the sounding tromp of a Triton,
Through deep seas passing, at length may pierce to Auernus
And fyelds Elysian, where blessed sowles be abiding;
And there meet Phillis, sweet soul of Phillis among them,
Sweet soul of Phillis, still still to be mournd of Amyntas.
O what a life did I lead, what a blessed life did I lead then,
Happy Shepherd with a loving less, while desteny suffered?
Under a Beech many times we sat most sweetly together,
Under a broad Beech-tree, that sunbeames might not anoy us,
Either in others arms, still looking either on other,
Both many times singing, and verses both many making,
And both soe-many words with kisses soe-many myngling:
Sometimes her white neck, as white as mylk, was I tutching,
Sometimes her pretty papps and breasts was I bold to be fingring,
Whilst Phillis smyling and blushing hanged by my bosom,
And these cheeks of mine did stroke with her yuory fingers.
O joyful spring-tyme with pleasures wished abounding,
O those blessed days, whilst good luck shinde fro the Heavens.
But since Phillis, alas, did leave most cursed Amyntas,
Pains have plagued, alas, both flesh and bones of Amyntas,
Noe day rises, alas, but it hears these groans of Amyntas,
Noe night comes, alas, that brings any rest to Amyntas,
Night and day thus, alas, still Phillis troubles Amyntas:
Now if northern blasts should sound their fearful alarm,
And boistrous tempests come thundering down fro the Heavens,
So that I were compeld with Sheep and Kidds fro the pastures
Down to the broade-brauncht trees and thick-sett groaues to be skudding,
There to remain for a while, and all for fear of a scowring,
Phillis then do I want, then my sweet Phillis is absent,
Phillis then do I want, whose wont was then to be harcknyng
All that I could of love, or goddess lovely remember:
Songs or lusty Satyrs, and Fauni fryends to the Mountayns,
And cherefull Charites; such songs, as none but I only,
Only Amyntas made, for none compared with Amyntas.
But now Phillis I want; and who shall now be my Phillis?
Who shall marck what I sing, what I say, forsaken Amyntas?
If that I praise Phillis, these hills give praise to my Phillis,
And Phillis, Phillis from rocks with an Echo reboundeth.
If that I groan, these trees with bending, yield many groanyngs,
And very ground for grief shows her complexion altered:
So this ground, these trees, these rocks, and Echo resounding,
All that I hear, that I see, geu's fresh increase to my sorrow.
Let those happy Shepherds keep company fryendly together,
And I alone, yielding due mournyng unto my Phillis,
I Will now wander alone, still alone by the rocks, by the Mountayns,
Dwelling in darck dens, by the wild beasts only frequented,
Where noe path for man, where noe man's seen to be passing:
Or to the woods i will go so darck with broad-shadoe branches,
That noe sun by the day, noe moon by the night do behold me*
And that I hear noe voice but Goblyns horrible outcries,
Owls balefull skrikings, and Crows unlucky resoundings.
There shall these mine eyes be resolud in watery fountayns,
There shall these fountayns flow over a long by the pastures.
There will I make such playnts, as beasts shall mourn by my playnyngs,
Such playnts, as strong trees shall rent and ryue fro the rooting,
Make wild Panthers tame, and mollyfy lastly the flynt stone.
And, if I needs must sleep, i will take but a napp by my sleeping,
On bare and could ground these lyms all weary reposing:
Noe green turfe to my head shall stand in steed of a pillow,
Noe bows or branches geeue cou'ring unto my carkas,
That some foul serpent may speedyly give my deaths-wound,
That this poor soul may from flesh and blood be released,
And passing Stygian waters, may come to the fair fyelds
Elysian fair fyelds, and daily resort to my Phillis.
Mean while, fryendly Shepherds and plow-men, marck what I tell you;
Disdaigne daynty Venus, give noe ground unto the young Boy,
Young Boy, but strong Boy, take heed, take heed by Amyntas,
The One with a fire has burnt, and the other pierst with an arrow
Flesh and blood and bones, what is worse than a fire, than an arrow?
O bitter fortune of too too wretched Amyntas.
The second day.
AS soon as morning her shynyng rays fro the Mountains
Had shown forth, and driu'n all starr-light quyte fro the heavens,
Then that unhappy shepherd still plagued with vnhappyly loving,
Left those barren bancks, and waters noe pyty-taking:
And on a crookt sheephooke his lyms all weary reposing,
Clymed aloft to the hills, but, alas, very fayntyly clymed,
Kydds, and Goats, and Sheep, dryuing, good man, to the Mountayns,
For Sheep, Goats, and kyds, with pastures better abounding,
Then by the way thus he spoke, to the Sheep, to the Goats, to the young Kydds.
O poor flock, it seems you feel these pangs of a Lover,
And mourn thus, to behold your mournful master Amyntas.
Your wont was, some part to be bleating, some to be skipping,
Some with bended brows, and horned pates to be butting,
Sheep to be gnapping grass, and Goats to the vines to be clymyng,
But now noe such thing, but now noe lust to be lively,
Sheep and sylly Shepherd with luckles love be besotted:
You for Amyntas mourn, for Phillis mourns Amyntas;
O with what miseries poor mortal men be molested?
Now do I know right well what maks you thus to be mournyng,
Thus to be tired, thus to be quayled, thus to be drooping;
Phillis, while she remaynd, mylkt my Goats ever at eunyng,
Goats that brought home duggs stretched with mylk ever at eunyng.
Phillis brought them flowrs, and them brought unto the wels-prings,
When dogg-dayes reigned, when fyelds were all to be scortched,
Whilst that I lay sleeping in cooling shade to refresh me.
Phillis again was wont with Amyntas Sheep to be washing,
Phillis again was wont my sheep thus washed to be shearing,
And to the sweet pastures my Sheep thus shorn to be dryuyng,
Then from Fox and Woolf my Sheep thus driu'n to be keeping,
And in fyelds and coats my flock thus kept, to be closing;
Least by the Northern wynds my Sheep might chance to be pinched,
Least by the frost or snow my Kyds might chance to be grieved:
Phillis loved you so, so Phillis loved Amyntas,
Phillis a guide of yours, and Phillis a fryend of Amyntas.
But sweet Sheep, sweet Goats, spare not to be lively, for all this,
Look not upon my weeping face so sadly, for all this,
Harcken not to my plaints and songs all heavy, for all this.
Harcken not to my pype, my pipe unlucky, for all this,
But sweet sheep, sweet goats, leave of your master Amyntas,
Leap and skyp by the flowring fields, and leave of Amyntas,
Clymbe to the vynes, and tender trees, and leave of Amyntas;
Clymbe to the vines, but run for life for fear of a mischif,
When th'ould Silenus with his ass com's laesyly trotting.
Let me alone, me alone lament and mourn my beloved,
Let me alone celebrate her death by my tears by my mourning:
Like to the silver Swan, who seeing death to be coming,
Wandreth alone for a while through streams of lovely Caister;
Then to the flowring bancks all feynt at length he repayreth,
Singing there, sweet byrd, his dying song to Caister,
Giving there, sweet byrd, his last farewell to Caister,
Yielding up, sweet byrd, his breath and song to Caister.
How can Amyntas live, when Phillis leaves Amyntas?
What for fyelds, for woods, for meddows cares Amyntas,
Meddows, woods, and fyelds, if my sweet Phillis abandon?
Mighty Pales fro the fyelds, fro the meddows learned Apollo,
Faunus went fro the woods, when Phillis went from Amyntas;
Noe good sight to my eyes, noe good sound came to my hearing.
But let Phillis again come back, and stay with Amyntas,
Then shall woods with leaves, and fields with flowrs be abounding,
Meddows with green grass to the poor man's daily rejoicing,
Mighty Pales to the fields, to the meddows learned Apollo,
Faunus coms to the woods, if Phillis come to Amyntas;
Noe bad sight to my eyes, noe bad sound coms to my hearing.
Come then, good Phillis, come back, if Desteny suffer,
Leave those blessed bowres of sowls already departed;
Let those sparckling eyes most like to the fire to the crystal,
Overcome those haggs and fiends of fearful Auernus,
Which have overcome those stars of cheareful Olympus.
And by thy speech more sweet than songs of Thracian Orpheus,
Pacify the infernal Furies, please Pluto the grim God,
Stay that bawling curr, that three-throate horrible Hellhound.
Sweet heart, come to thy friend, to thy friend come speedily sweetehart,
Speedily come, least grief consume forsaken Amyntas.
Phillis I pray the return, if prayers may be regarded,
By these tears of mine from cheeks ay rueful abounding,
By those arms of thine which sometime clasped Amyntas,
By lips thine and mine joined most sweetly together,
By faith, hands, and heart with true syncerity pledged,
By songs, by wedding with great solempnity vowed,
By jests, and good-turns, by pleasures all I beseech thee,
Help and succor alas thy forlorn lover Amyntas.
Or, by thy tears entreat those Nymphs of desteny fatal,
Noe-pity-taking Nymphs entreat that I line not alone thus,
Pyn'de thus away with grief, suffering unspeakable anguish:
But let death, let death come speedily give me my pasport,
So shall I find fair fyelds, fair seats, fair groves by my dying*
And in fields, in seats, in groves fair Phillis abiding.
There shall Phillis again in courtesy strive with Amyntas,
There with Phillis again in courtesy strive shall Amyntas,
There shall Phillis again make garlands gay for Amyntas,
There for Phillis again gay garlands make shall Amyntas,
There shall Phillis again be repeating songs with Amyntas,
Which songs Phillis before had made and song with Amyntas,
But what alas did I mean to the whistling winds to be mourning*
As though mourning could restore what Desteny takes?
Then to his house; full sad, when night approacht, he returned.
The third day.
ANd now since burial of Phillis lovely the third day
At length appeared, when poor distressed Amyntas
Loost his Kidds fro the fould, and sheep let forth fro the sheeepecoate,
And to the neighbor hills full set with trees he resorted:
Where, as amidst his flock, his Less thus lost, he bewayleth,
And maks fond wishes with deep sighs interrupted,
And he relenting air with his outcries all to be beats;
Echo could not now to the last word yield any Echo
All oppressed with love, for her old love still she remembered,
And she remembered, still, that sweet Narcissus her old love,
With tears all blubbred, with an inward horror amazed.
When she begins to resound her sobbs still stay the resounding,
When she begins her speech, her grief still stops her halfe-speech,
With which her wont was with lovers sweetly to dally.
During these her dumps, thus again complains Amyntas,
During his complaynts she with all compassion harkneth.
O what a war is this, with love thus still to be striving?
O what a wyld-fyre's this conveyed to my heart by the blynd-boy?
That neither long time can bring any end to my striving,
Nor tears extinguish this wylde-fyre thrown by the blind boy?
Then then, alas, was I lost, o then then, alas, was I undone,
When the coral-colored lips were by me greedily viewed,
And eyes like bright stars, and fair brows dayntily smyling,
And cherefull forehead with gold-wyre all to be decked,
And cheeks all white-red, with snow and purple adorned,
And pure flesh swelling with quick veins speedily moving,
And such fine fingers, as were most like to the fingers
Of Tithonus wife platting th'ould beard of her husband.
What shall I say to the rest? each part united in order,
Each part unspotted, with long roabs covered each part.
What shall I say to the rest? many kisses joined to the sweet words,
And many words of weight in like sort joined to the kisses,
Under a green laurel sitting, and under a myrtle,
Myrtle due to Venus, green laurel due to Apollo.
That little earthen pott these ioys has now fro me snatched,
That little earthen pot where Phillis bones be reserved:
O thrice happy the pot, where Phillis bones be reserved,
And thrice happy the ground, where this pot shall be reserved.
Earth and earthen pot, you have the beloved of Amyntas,
Natur's sweet dearling, and only delight to the Country,
And sun of this soil, of these woods only Diana.
O thryce happy the earth, but much more happy the earth-pot.
O thrice happy the grass, that grows on grave of a Goddess,
And shooting upwards displays his top to the heavens.
Sweet blasts of Zephyrus shall make this grass to be seemly,
Noe sithe shall tutch it noe serpent craftily lurking
With venymous breathing, or poison deadly shall hurt it;
Noe Lioness foul paws, Bears foot, beasts horn shall abuse it,
Noe byrds with pecking, noe vermyn filthy by creeping,
Noe winters hoare frost, no night-deaws dangerus humor,
Noe rage of Suns-heate, noe stars, or power of heavens.
Noe boistrous tempest, noe lightnings horrible outrage;
Drive hence, good plow-men, drive hence your wearied oxen,
And you friendly shepherds, keep back your sheep fro the graves grass,
Least your sheep unawares may chance by my Love to be harmed,
Least by the bulls rude rage her bones may chance to be bruysed,
Whilst with foot and horn he the graues-ground teareth asunder.
Make haste you yongmen, make haste all you pretty damsells,
With sacred water this sacred place to besprynkle,
Burn piles of beech-trees, and then cast on the Sabaean
Spyce to the pyles burning, send sweet perfumes to the heavens,
Cynnamon, and Casia, Violets, and loved Amomum;
Red-colored Roses, with Beare-breech cast ye together.
And then on every side set tapers sacred in order,
And beat your bare breasts with fysts all weary with anguish,
And sing sweet epitaphs, lifting your voice to the heavens,
Sing sowre-sweete epitaphs in death and praise of a Goddess.
Wanton fleshly Satyrs, and Fauni friends to the mountains,
Nymphs addict to the trees, and in most gracius order
Three Graces joining, shall bear you company mourning.
And I myself will dress, embalme, and chest my beloved,
And, following her coarse, all pale, and wan as a dead man,
Weary the woods with plaints, and make new streams by my weeping
Such streams as no banck shall bar, streams ever abounding,
Such streams as noe drought shall dry, streams never abating.
With me Parnassus, with me shall mourn my Apollo,
And Venus, all chafed, that Desteny took my beloved.
And that same vile boy, which first did join me to Phillis,
His lamp shall lay down, and painted quyuer abandon,
And with his own pretty tears trickling, and sweetly beseeming,
Help me to mourn, although that he gave first cause to my mourning.
But, what alas do I mean to repeat these funeral outcries,
Still to repeat these plaints, and still too late to repeat them?
Thrice has Phoebus now displayed his beams fro the mountains,
Thrice has Phoebus now descended down to the mayn-sea,
Since my beloved was dead, since our good company parted,
Since Phillis buried, since all solempnities ended,
Since my delytes, poor wretch, were all inclosd in a coffyn.
Yet do I mourn here still, though noegood come by my mournyng,
Adding tears to my tears, and sorrows unto my sorrows,
And noe stay to my tears, and noe rest coms to my sorrows.
O strong boy, strong bow, and o most dangerus arrow.
Now do I find it a pain, which first did seem but a pleasure,
Now do I feel it a wound, which first did seem but a smarting,
When strong boy, strong bow shot first that dangerus arrow.
Thus did Amyntas mourn, and then came home by the Sunset,
In these verses, Echo could not now to the last word yield any Echo
All oppressed with love, for her old love still she remembered,
And she remembered still that sweet Narcissus her old love, etc.
Some little men find great fault, that this word, still, being twice used, is
but an idle repetition to make up the verse. Where, if they could see, that in
the first place it is an Aduerb, and an Adjective in the second, they might
as well be still, and not speak any thing, as still talk, and yet say noething.

The like reprehension was that of him, whose wits were so weakened with
passions, that he fell down of his horse, with singing, Down a Down. This
man, first moved by the peremptory Preface of the Lawyers Logike (which yet
could tutch none but the galled back) and reading there in the Analysis of
Stanfords Crown Pleas, that in Homieidijs, etc. although in times past
Voluntas reputabatur pro facto, yet it was not so used in these days, but
only in the Princes case, and certain special and honorable personages
mentioned by Statute in H. 7. time: thought it a wondrous fault, that I did but
Digitum ad fontem intendere, and not literally repeat every word at large out
of Saunders case in Plowden, where I bring in his mynistring of poison with a
murdring intent, as a medium in framing of a Syllogism: whereas alas every
child knows, that Saunders action did effect death, even to his own
confusion. Better might he have reprehended the misprysion of the Printer,
who Page 74. should have left out Higgs, and put in Mynshew, the very living
image of Sir Philip Sydneys Damaetas.


The fourth day.
THrice had shining Sun withdrawn his face fro the heavens,
And earth all darckned since Phillis friendly departed;
And, when fourth day came, then again true-louer Amyntas
Myndeful of old love still, took noe joy flock to be feeding,
But still alone wandering through fyelds, to the bancks, to the waters,
Leaned his head on Bank, and eyes cast down to the waters,
With tears incessant his cheeks full watery washing.
What now rests* alas, to be done of woeful Amyntas?
Noe sense, noe knowledge in these insensible ashes,
In grave noe feeling, in death there is noe-pity-taking.
Phillis maks but a jest, dead Phillis mocketh Amyntas,
Phillis breaks her faith, and plays with Pluto the black-Prince,
Pluto the black-Prince now enioys those ioys of Amyntas.
Speak on, good sweet Nymphs, if you can show any tidings,
Whether among those trulls that wait on Queen of Auernus,
My Queen and Empress, my Phillis chance to be spinning?
Speak, for I fear, for I fear, she will never come to Amyntas.
Father Syluanus, Syluanus good to the mountains,
And flocks on mountains, o help most helples Amyntas,
Help by thyself by thy friends thou God, cause Gods to be helping:
For my relligion, for my devotion help me,
Either let Phillis be returned back to Amyntas,
Or let Amyntas die, that death may succor Amyntas.
And thou naughty Cupide, yet say on, give me thy counsel,
What shall I do? shall I die? shall Amyntas murder Amyntas?
Die then Amyntas: death will bring Phillis to Amyntas.
O hard-harted Love, thou see what I bear, what I suffer,
Heart with flames, and eyes with mourneful water abounding,
Head with cares possessed, and foul full of horrible anguish:
This thou see, and sure I do know, it greeues thee to see this,
Though they call thee tyrant, though so thou justly be called,
Though thy nature pass Busiris beastly behauyour:
For, what makes me to mourn, may cause thee to yield to my mourning:
One rude rock, one wind, and one tempestuus outrage
Batters, breaks, and beats my ship, thy ship to the quicksands;
Our harms are aequall, thy shipwrack's like to my shipwreck;
Love did love Phillis, Phillis was loved of Amyntas,
Phillis Loves dearling, Phillis dearling of Amyntas;
Deearling, crown, garland, hope, joy, health, wealth of Amyntas,
And what more shall I say? for I want words fit for Amyntas.
And thou churlish ground, now cease any more to be fruitful,
Cease to be decked with flowrs and all in green to be mantled:
Thy flower is wyth'red, my garland lately decayed,
Phillis thine and mine with death untimely departed.
Whose sweet corpse thou bar'st, whose footesteps in thee be printed,
And whose face thou did admyre for bewry renowned.
Belch out roaring blasts with gaping jaws to the heavens,
That those roaring blasts may scowre by the skies, by the heavens,
And foul struggling storms cast down fro the clouds, fro the heavens,
For such foul weather will best agree with a mourner.
Howl and mourn thou earth, and roar with an horrible outcry,
Howl as then thou did, when mountains were to the mountains
Put, by thy cursed brood, to be clyming up to Olympus,
When great flakes of fire came flashing down fro the heavens,
When thy crawling sons came tumbling down from Olympus.
Howl as Lady Ceres did then when Prince of Auernus
Stole her daughter away from fields that joined on Aetna,
Unto the dungeons darck, and dens of his hellish abiding.
Thou ground, forgetful what was by duty required,
Should send unbidden, with Phillis, tears to Auernus.
Her blessed burden thou wast unworthy to bear up,
Therefore tender gyrle in flowring age she departed.
O frowning fortune, o stars unluckily shyning,
O cursed byrth-day of quyte forsaken Amyntas,
Phillis, alas, is chaungd, Phillis converted in ashes,
Whose pretty lips, neck, eyes, and hair so sweetly beseeming,
Purple, snow, and fire, and gold-wyre seemed to resemble.
Tithonus fair wife coms always home by the Sunset,
Every night coms home to that old Tithonus her husband,
Sweet Cephalus leaving, and gray-beard heartily kissing:
But my Phillis, alas, is gone, is gone to Auernus,
Gone too-far to return, and this tormenteth Amyntas.
White is black, and sweet is sour to the sense of Amyntas,
Night and day do I weep and make ground moist by my weeping,
Mourn, lament, and howl, and power forth plaints to the heavens:
So do the Nightingales in bushes thorny remaining,
Sing many doleful notes and tunes, sweet harmony making,
Their young ones mourning, their young ones daily bewayling.
Phillis, alas, is gone, she will never come to Amyntas,
Never again come back, for Death and Desteny stay her,
Stay her among those groves and darcksome dens of Auernus,
Where Is noe path to return, noe starting hole to be scaping;
Desteny, Death, and Hell, and Cerberus horrible Hel-hound,
Loathsome streams of Styx, that nine times compass Auernus,
Stay her amongst those Haggs in dungeons ougly for ever:
Only the name and fame, and her most happy remembrance
Still shall abide, shall live, shall floorish freely for ever.
Thus did Amyntas plain, and then came faintily homeward.
The fifth day.
SInce Phillis burial with due celebration ended,
Phoebus again advanced his blazing face fro the maine-sea,
And with morning star dispelling night fro the heavens,
Quickly the fifth time brought broad daylight unto Amyntas:
But yet Phillis in heart, in mind, and foul of Amyntas
Still did abide, and still was Phillis mournd of Amyntas.
Noe care of dryuing his kydds and goats to the mountains,
Noe care of following his sheep and lambs to the pastures,
But daye-light loathing, and days woork wonted abhorring,
Straight to the woods does he walk, in noe man's company walking,
Where he the weeping flower making all weary by weeping,
Untuned speeches cast out, and desperate outcryes.
Where with sighs, to the winds, with tears, increase to the waters
Still did he give, and still vain love most vainly bewailed.
As loving Turtle seeing his lately beloved
Turtle-doue thrown down from a tree with a stone or an arrow,
Can not abide Sunbeams, but flies fro the fields, fro the meddows,
Unto the darkest woods, and there, his desolat harbor
Maks in a Cypress tree, with lyghtning all to be scorched,
Or with Winters rage and black storms fowly defaced:
Where, on a rotten bow his lyms all heavy reposing,
Still does he groan for grief, still mourn for his only beloved:
Then consumed with grievous pangs, and weary with anguish,
Down to the ground does he fall with feynting wings fro the bare bow,
Beating dust with wings, and feathers fowly beraying,
Beating breast with beck, till blood come freshly abounding:
So did Amyntas mourn, such true-loue made him a mourner.
O what a vile boy's this, what a grievous wound, what a weapon?
O what a dart is this that sticks so fast to my heart root,
Like as a root to the trunck, or like as a vine to the elm tree?
O pityles loues-god, poor Lovers how be we plagued?
O strong dart of Love, which each thing speedily pearceth.
This dart God Saturn, God Mars, and great God of all Gods
Jove himself did wound unless that fame do belly them:
Although God Saturn were old, and like to a crushed crabbe,
Although Mars were armed with try'de Vulcanian armor,
Although Jove with fire and thunder makes a rumbling.
Yea thine own mother, thine own invincible arrow
Hurt, and pricked those papps which thou wast wont to be sucking,
Neither spar'st thou him that raigns in watery kingdom,
Neither spar'st thou him that rules in fearful Auernus:
Pluto knows what it is, with a paltery Boy to be troubled,
Neptune knows what it is, by a blind boys check to be mated:
Then since heavens, seas, and hells are naught by thee spared,
Earth and earth-dwelling lovers must look to be pinched.
O what gaping earth will Amyntas greedyly swallow?
O what gulf of seaes and deepes will quyckly devour him,
And bring him living to the dead-mens sowls in Auernus?
God of skies (for love has pierst often up to the heavens)
If pyty move your hearts, if you from stately Olympus
Can vouchsauf to behold these inward wounds of Amyntas,
Free this troubled soul from cares and infynit anguish,
End these endless toils, bring ease by my death to my deaths-wound.
O that I had then did, when Phillis lyu'd with Amyntas,
In fyelds, when Phillis sang songs of love with Amyntas,
In fyelds, when Phillis kissed and embraced Amyntas,
In fyelds, when Phillis slept under a tree with Amyntas,
Blessed had Amyntas been, if death had taken Amyntas.
So my Phillis might have sitten down by my deathbed,
Closing these eye-lidds of dead, but blessed Amyntas,
Blessed, that he died in her arms, that his eyes were closd with her own
hands.
But what alas do I mean for death thus still to be wishing
Fool that I am? for death coms quyckly without any wishing.
Inward grief of troubled soul has brought me to deaths-dore,
Woonted strength does fail, my lyms are faynty with anguish;
Vital heat is gone, like unto a smoke or a vapor,
Yesterday but a boy, and now gray headed Amyntas*
O luckles lovers, how always are we bewitched,
What contrarieties, what fancies flatly repugnant,
How-many lives, deaths, hopes, fears, joys, cares still do we suffer?
O that I could forget Phillis many times am I wishing,
O that I had did for Phillis many times am I wishing,
Thus distracted I am ten thousand times by my wishing,
Like to a shipp, through whirling gulfes vnsteedyly passing,
Floating here and there, hence thence, with danger on each side,
Fearing Scylides jaws, and mouth of greedy Charybdis,
Whylst by the rage of sea, bruysde shipp sticks fast to the quyck-sands,
And by the mighty rebounding waves is lastly devoured.
But what alas do I mean mine old love still to be mourning,
Forgetting pastures, and flocks, and vines by my mourning?
My naked pastures with floods are like to be drowned,
My fyelds untilled with thorns are like to be pestred,
My poor Sheep and Goats with could are like to be pinched,
My pretty black bullock will come noe more to my white cow,
And by the swines foul snowt my vines are like to be rooted,
For want of walling, for want of customed hedging.
Rank bows in vine-tree there is nobody now to be cutting,
Cut bows with withy twiggs there is nobody now to be bynding,
Pecking Pyes from grapes there is nobody now to be keeping.
You rocks, help me to mourn; rocks, pinetrees loftyly bearing,
You woods, help me to mourn; woods always wont to be sylent,
You wells, help me to mourn; wells clear and like to the Crystal.
Vines forelorne, forsaken shrubs, lament with Amyntas.
On you rocks many times Phillis was wont to be walking,
In you woods many times Phillis was wont to be sitting,
With you wells many times Phillis was wont to be smyling.
And you vines and shrubs Phillis was wont to be fingring.
Now it was just darck night, and home came seelly Amyntas.
The sixth day.
SInce Phillis buryall, sixtymes sprang light fro the Mountayns.
Six times had Titan brought back his coach fro the mayn-sea,
And flying horses with-salt waves all to be dashed,
With puft-vp nosthrils great fire flames lustyly breathing.
When to the wyld woods went careless, yet careful Amyntas,
Leaving flock in fould, noe creatures company keeping,
Beating breast with fist, with tears face fowly defacing,
Filling ways as he went with such and soemany waylings,
As were sometimes made by the sweet Rhodopeian Orpheus,
When by the rocks of Thrace, by the fatal water of Haebrus,
His sweet Euridice with most sweet voice he bewailed,
When sweet voice, sweet harp joined most sweetly together,
Made both byrds and beasts, both stocks and stones to be mournyng.
Every beast in fyeld wishes daylight to be coming,
Morning starr by the byrds in fylds is sweetly saluted,
As soon as she begins by the break of day to be peeping;
Every beast in fyeld wishes darck night to be coming,
Eu'ning starr to the kydds well fed, coms hartyly welcome,
As soon as she begyns by the nights approach to be shynyng,
Neither day nor night can please displeased Amyntas,
All day long do I mourn, and all night long am I playnyng,
Noe day's free fro my playnts, and noe night's free fro my mourning.
Whosoe thincks it strange, that thus tormented Amyntas
Can thus long endure, who thincks it strange, that Amyntas
Lives, yet taks noe rest, but still hus, still to be dying;
This man knows not alas, that love is daily triumphant,
Love can abide noe law, love always lou's to be lawles,
Love altreth nature, rules reason, maystreth Olympus.
Laws, edicts, decrees: contemns Jove mightyly thundering,
Jove, that rules and raigns, with a beck that bends Olympus.
Love causd Hippolitus with bryr's and thorns to be mangled,
For that he had foul love of lusting Phaedra refused.
Love made Absyrtus with systers hands to be murdered,
And in pieces torn, and here and there to be scattred.
Love forced Pasiphae man's company long to be loathing,
And, for a white Bulls flesh, Bulls company long to be lusting.
Love and luring looks of lovely Polixena, caused
Greekish Achilles death, when he came to the Church to be wedded.
Love made Alcides, that great invincible Heroes,
Master of all monsters, at length to be whipped by a Mystres.
Love drowned Laeander swimming to the bewtiful Hero,
Unto the town Cestos from town of cursed Abydos.
Love made love, that is ruler of earth and ruler of heaven,
Like to a selly Shepherd, and like to the fruytful Echidna,
Like to a fire, to a Swan, to a Shower, to a Bull, to an Eagle,
Sometimes Amphitrion, sometimes Dyctinna resembling.
But what need I to show this blind Boys surly behauyour,
Lewd prancks, false policies, sly shifts, and wyly devises,
Murdring mind, hard heart, dead hand, bent bow, bloody arrows?
Nobody knows better what bitter grief is abounding
In lou's lewd kingdom, than luckles lover Amyntas.
Whether I go to the groaues, or whether I clymbe to the Mountayns,
Whether I walk by the bancks, or whether I look to the fountayns,
Love still wayts at an inch, and never leaves to be pinching,
Every thing complayns, and answers unto my playnyngs,
Every thing geus cause and fresh increase to my mournyngs.
If that I mourn in woods, these woods seem al to be mournyng,
And broade-brauncht oak trees their upright topps to be bowing.
If that I sigh or sob, this pine tree straight by the shaking,
This peareses pine tree for company seems to be pyning,
As though himself felt th'enduring pangs of Amyntas.
And that bird o! Thrace, my woeful company keeping,
Cry's and calls for Itys, with monstrous villainy murdered,
Murdered alas by the merciles heart and hands of a Mother,
Eaten alas by the cursed mouth and teeth of a father.
And poor Turtle-doue, her mates good company myssing,
Sits on a naked bow, and keeps me company mournyng.
When that I clymbe to the ragged rocks, and creep to the Mountayns,
Staying feeble knees with a staff, for fear of a falling,
If that I then curse death, and rail on desteny fatal,
For marring that face, those cheeks, those yuory fingers
Of my sweet Phillis; Phillis coms back with an Echo,
Echo returns Phillis, five times fro the rocks, fro the Mountayns.
Every beast which hears these woeful playnts of Amyntas
Coms and setts him down twixt legs of woeful Amyntas,
Sustring back to be stroakt with staff of mourneful Amyntas:
As that good Lioness, which first was cur'de by a Romayne,
In Romayne theater gave life for life to the Romayne.
O, if such pyty were in Desteny noe-pyty-taking,
Phillis I should not mysse, nor Phillis mysse of Amyntas.
If that I come to the bancks, and cast mine eyes to the waters,
Waters augmented by these my watery fountayns,
Then these fowle-mouth'd froggs with iarring tunes do molest me:
So that I am compeld with bowing knees to be praying,
Praying unto the Nymphs in bowres of water abiding,
That they would vouchsafe to receive my carkas among them,
And fro the sight of man, fro the light of sun to remove it,
As that loved Hylas they sometimes fryendly received.
But yet I wish in vain, and naught can I get by my wishing,
And of my wishing these lewd winds make but a whistling,
So noething contents poor malcontented Amyntas,
Clogd with an heap of cares, and closd in a hell full of horror.
Then to his homely Cabin, by the moon light hasted Amyntas.
The seventh day.
SIx nights now were past, and seu'nth day hastened onward,
When, with fretting cares all spent and wasted Amyntas,
Went to the wood starkwood with great extremyty weeping,
And to the dull deaff wynds his late loss freshly bewayling.
O how much this Amyntas is altered from that Amyntas,
Which was wont to be capten of every company rural?
Noething nymble I am with willow staff to be threshing,
Nor with toothed rake round hey-cocks for to be making.
Noething nymble I am my branched vines to be cutting,
Nor with sharp-edg'd suck my fruytefull soil to be plowing.
Noething nymble I am my scabbed Sheep to be curing,
Nor with leapping lads, with tripping trulls to be dancing.
Noething nymble I am sweetete rymes and songs to be making,
Nor sweet songs and rymes on pleasant pipe to be playing.
My sense is dulled, my strength extremely decayed,
Since that fair Phillis my love did leave me for ever,
Who was worthy to live, and worthy to love me for ever.
Phillis, fair Phillis, thou dearling dear of Amyntas,
What less durst compare with dearling dear of Amyntas
For wit, for learning for face, for seemly behauyour?
My sweet less Phillis was noemore like to the graygownes,
And country mylk-mayds, than Nightingale to the Lapwing,
Rose to the green willow, or silver Swan to the Swallow.
Phillis amydst fair mayds did fair mayds company countnance,
As ripe corn does fyelds, as clustred grapes do the vinetrees,
As stout Bulls do the droues, as bay leaves beautify gardens.
Phillis name and fame, which is yet freshly remembered,
Passed abroad so far, so far surpast Amaryllis,
As that it yrckt and grieved disdanigeful proud Amaryllis,
Who still thought herself for bewties praise to be peareles:
But let her heart full of hate still pyne, let her eyes full of envy
Still be resolud in tears, Phillis surmounts Amaryllis,
Phillis dead is alive, and so shall live to the worlds end,
Phillis praise shall escape from death and grave to the worlds end.
But what auayls it alas, dead Phillis now to be praising?
Phillis alas is dead, its too late now to be praising,
And to renew old thoughts and fond conceits by my praising.
Better it is to be low, and never clymbe to a kingdom,
Than fro the scepter again to be tumbled down to the dunghill.
For what auayles it now, that Phillis lulled Amyntas
Luld him a sleep in her arms, and slept herself with Amyntas,
Under a cooling shade from scorching beams to defend us,
Which sight made Aeglon, and Mopsus teeth to be watery?
Or what auayls it now to have gathred jointly together
Fragrant herbs and flowrs by the mantled fyelds, by the meddows,
Daffadil, and Endyue, with mournyng flower Hyacinthus,
Thyme, Casia, Violets, Lillies, and sweet pretty Roses,
For Nymphs and wood-gods gay garlands duly preparing?
Or what auayl's it now, to have plucked at Strawbery brambles,
Blackbery bryr's to have spoyld, to have bared Mulbery branches,
With such country fruit our basketts heauyly loading?
Or what auayls it now, to have geu'n her soemany kisses?
Or to have taken again in like sort soemany kisses?
Or what auayl's it now, to have drawn our talk to the eu'nyng?
Or to have made our names with boxtree barck to be growing,
Names and vows which naught but death could cause to be broken?
Woeful wretch that I am, Phillis sorsaks me, for all this,
And forsaken of her, death has possessed me, for all this.
And yet I am not sick (unless that love be a sickness)
But death coms creeping, and lingering life is a flytting,
And this differring of death is worse than a dying.
Lingering fire by degrees has spent and wasted Amyntas,
As Meleager of old, whose life was left in a fyrebrand,
Fyrebrand cast to the fire by the murdring hands of a mother,
When fatal fyrebrand burning did burn Meleager.
Every day do I weep and every hour am I wayling,
Every hour and day dismal to the wretched Amyntas,
Yea mutch more wretched, than that poor silly Prometheus,
Who, for his aspyring, for stealing fire from Olympus,
Was by the Gods decrees, fast bound with chains to the mountain
Caucasus, huge and cold, where he is compelled an Eagle,
Eagle still feeding, with his own heart still to be feeding.
O Pan, o Fauni, that love with mayds to be lively,
Leave your pipes, your songs, your dance, leave of to be lively,
Join your tears with Amyntas tears, and mourn with Amyntas,
And mourn for Phillis, for Phillis leaves Amyntas.
Phillis for your sake fine wafers duly prepared,
Phillis pleased your eyes, whilst Phillis dayntyly danced.
Phillis amydst fair mayds was deemed still to be fairest,
And gave grace to the rest with her eyes and comely behauyour,
As fair laurel trees be adornd with bewtiful Iuye,
As fine gold is adornd by the shynyng light o a Jasper.
Since death of Phillis, noe ioys enjoys Amyntas,
Every good thing's gone, Phillis took every good thing,
Country soil laments, and Contrey-men be a weeping.
And thou garden green now power forth playnts with Amyntas,
Phillis thy sweet bancks and beds did water at eu'nyng,
Phillis amydst thy flowrs always was wont to be walking;
But now noe walking, but now noe water at eu'ning,
Now best flower is dead, now Phillis gone fro the garden.
And you Crystal springs with streams of silver abounding,
Where fair Phillis saw fair Phillis face to be shynyng,
Power forth floods of tears from those your watery fountayns.
Phillis will noemore see Phillis sit by the fountayns,
Phillis will noemore her lips apply to the fountayns,
Lips, to be joined to the lips of Jove that rules Olympus.
And you darcksome dales and woods aye wont to be silent,
Where she amydst the Shepherds and toyling boisterus Heardsmen
Her mylk-white shee-goats many times was wont to be feeding,
Lament and mourn for this Nymphs untimely departure.
But Pan, and Fauni, but garden green of Amyntas,
But you springs and dales, and woods ay wont to be sylent,
Leave of your mournyng, i will give you leave to be silent,
Leave to be silent still, give you me leave to be mournyng,
Leave to be mournyng still, let this most heavy departure
This death of Phillis bring wished death to Amyntas,
Here did he pause for a while, and home at night he returned.
The eyghth day.
NOw since fair Phillis was chested duly, the eighth time
Night gave place to the light, and eu'ning unto the morning:
When to the woods so wild, to the wild beasts dangerus harbors,
Forsaking hye ways, by the bye ways passed Amyntas:
And there setts him down all wearyed under a Myrtle,
For grief still groanyng, with deep sighs heauyly pantyng,
Still Phillis namyng, still Phillis fayntyly calling.
And must one wench thus take all the delight fro the country?
And must one wench thus make every man to be mournyng,
Every man whose flocks on these hills use to be feeding?
And must Aeglon weep? and must that fryendly Menalcas
Wear his mournyng roabe, for death of my bony Phillis?
And must good Corydon lament? must Tityrus alter
His pleasant melodies, for death of my bony Phillis?
And must Damaetas for grief leave of to be loving?
Must Amaryllis leave, for death of my bony Phillis?
And must drooping bull consume as he goes by the meddow,
Must Sheep look lowering for death of my bony Phillis?
And must sighs seem wyndes, must tears seem watery fountayns?
And must each thing change for death of my bony Phillis?
O then what shall I do for death of my bony Phillis?
Sith that I loved bony less Phillis more dearly than all these,
Sith that I loved her more than I love these eyes of Amyntas,
O then what shall I do forlorn forsaken Amyntas,
What shall I do but die, for death of my bony Phillis?
Phillis who was wont with bow and shafts to be shooting,
Phillis who was wont my flock with care to be feeding,
Phillis who was wont my mylch shee-goates to be mylking,
Phillis who was wont (most handsome wench of a thousand)
Either clowted cream, or cakes, or curds to be making,
Either fine baskets of bul-rush for to be framing,
Or by the green meddowes gay dancing dames to be leading:
Phillis whose bosom filberds did love to be filling,
Phillis for whose sake green laurel loved to be bowing,
Phillis, alas, sweet Less Phillis, this brave bony Phillis,
Is dead, is buried, makes all good company parted.
O how often Phillis conferd in fields with Amyntas?
O how often Phillis did sing in caves with Amyntas,
Joining her sweet voice to the oaten pipe of Amyntas?
O how often Phillis clypt and embraced Amyntas?
How many thousand times has Phillis kissed Amyntas,
Bitten Amyntas lips, and bitten again of Amyntas,
So that Amyntas his eyes enuy'de these lips of Amyntas?
O sweet soul Phillis, w'haue lived and loved for a great while,
(If that a man may keep any mortal joy for a great while)
Like loving turtles, and turtle-doues for a great while,
One love, one lyking, one sense, one soul for a great while,
Therefore one deaths-wound, one grave, one funeral only
Should have joined in one both love and lover Amyntas.
O good God, what a grief is this that death to remember?
For, such grace, gesture, face, feature, beauty, behavior
Never before was seen, is never again to be looked for.
O frowning fortune, o death and desteny dismal;
Thus be the poplar trees that spread their tops to the heavens,
Of their flowring leaves despoyld in an hour, in a moment:
Thus be the sweet violets, that gave such grace to the garden,
Of their purpled roabes despoyld in an hour, in a moment.
O how often did I cry, and roar with an horrible howling,
When for want of breath Phillis lay faintyly gasping?
O how often did I wish, that Phoebus would fro my Phillis
Drive that fever away, or send his son from Olympus,
Who, when Lady Venus by a chance was pricked with a bramble,
Healed her hand with his oils and fine knacks kept for a purpose?
Or that I could perceive Podalyrius order in healing,
Or that I could obtain Medaeaes exquisit ointments,
And baths most precious, which old men freshly renewed:
Or that I were as wise as was that crafty Prometheus,
Who made pictures live with fire that he stole from Olympus,
Thus did I call and cry, but nobody came to Amyntas:
Then did I rail and rave, but naught did I get by my railing:
Whylst that I called and cryde, and raged, and rau'd as a madman,
Phillis, alas, Phillis by the burning fits of a fever,
Quickly before her day, her days unluckily ended.
O dismal deaths-day, with black stone still to be noted,
Wherein noe Sun shinde, noe comfort came fro the heavens,
Wherein clustred clouds had cou'red lightsom Olympus.
Wherein noe sweet byrd could find any joy to be chyrping,
Wherein loathsome snakes from dens were loath to be creeping,
Wherein foul scritch owls did make a detestable howling,
And from chymney-top gave woeful signs of a mischif.
O first day of death, last day of life to Amyntas,
Which noe day shall drive from soul and heart of Amyntas,
Til Neptune dryde up, withdraw his floods fro the fishes,
And skaled fishes live naked along by the seashore.
For since Phillis went and left forsaken Amyntas,
Joys and pleasures went, and left forsaken Amyntas:
Perplexed speaking and vain thoughts only remained,
Immoderate mourning, and mad love only remained.
Thou Jove omnipotent, which do with mercy remember
Mortal men's myseries, which know what it is to be loving:
And thou God Phoebus, that sometimes dryu'n from Olympus,
Feeding sheep did love, help luckles Lover Amyntas
Feeding his poor sheep, help poor man, young man Amyntas:
Thou that abridgest breath, and make our light to be darkness,
Cut this threede of life, dispatch and bring me to darkness
Infernal darkness, fit place for mourner Amyntas.
So shall Amyntas walk and talk in darksom Auernus,
So shall Amyntas love with Phillis again be renewed,
In fields Elysian Phillis shall live with Amyntas.
Thus do I wish and pray, this praying is but a prattling,
And these wishing words but a blast, but a wind, but a whistling:
Die then, Amyntas, dye: for dead is thy bony Phillis.
Phoebus went to the sea: to the poor house hasted Amyntas.
The nynth day.
SInce Phillis burial, now fair Aurora the nynth time
Showed her shining face, and Phoebus lightened Olympus:
When, from couch all wet with tears, confounded Amyntas
Raysd his crazd carkas, with mind still abroad to be wandering
Unto the wild beasts dens, and fearful vnhospital harbors,
Where was noething else, but certain death to be looked for.
But whilst naked lyms with roabes all ragged he cou'red,
Often did he call and cry for Phillis, for bony Phillis,
With deep sighs and greanes still Phillis, Phillis, he called:
And then dressed, up he gets, and gets himself to the desert,
Desert dens, man's sight and Suns light ever abhorring.
There, by the woods wandering, and love unlucky bewayling,
More and more did he feed that wonted wound of a lover;
Like as a trembling Heart, whose heart is pierst with an arrow,
Runs, and yet running, his death still bears about him,
Runs to the thickest groaues, yet bleeds and sweats as he runs,
Runs, and so with toil and grief, death hasteneth onward:
Then with tears does he seek Dictamus flower by the desert,
Seeks, but can not find Dictamus flower by the desert:
Like to the trembling Heart, went hartles lover Amyntas;
And thus again at length (his cheeks with water abounding)
From sullen silence, abruptly began to be raging.
Since Phillis locked up that starr-light lively for ever,
Since fair Phillis slept that long sleep, what shall Amyntas
Think, conceive, contryue, or what shall Amyntas imagine,
What shall Amyntas do, that Amyntas go not a begging?
For noe care is of health, no care of wealth in Amyntas,
Noe joy, noe comfort, but Phillis abydes in Amyntas.
Who will fodder now in winter give to my bullocks?
Who will now any more bring my white Bull to my Heyfer?
Who will goats and kyds to the ragged rocks be a driving?
Who will sheep and lambs from rau'ning woolues be defending?
Who will look to my rams, and wash their fleece in a river?
Who will anoint scabd sheep, least-that contagius humor
Once get strength, make way, and spoil whole flock of Amyntas?
Who will let them blood, when raging fire of a fever
Runs along by the bones, and marrow quickly deuoureth?
Who will tender sheep drive up fro the fields, to the mountains,
When deep brook (increast with rain or snow from Olympus)
Drives down wonted walls, and banks all beats asunder,
Ouerflowing fields, and pastures fowly defacing?
O poor flock, poor heard, o life and love of Amyntas,
Phillis life and love is gone, o wretched Amyntas.
Even as a Merchant man, who lost his ware by a shipwreck,
And ship left on sands with blind rocks broken a sunder,
Swym on a board staggring, with salt-waues all to be dashed,
Dryu'n hence thence with wyndes, and knows noe place to be landing,
Wandering here and there, and sees noe stars to be shyning:
So twixt hope and fear, twixt life and death does Amyntas
Daily delay his days, yet deaths wound bears about him.
For since Phillis alas in a dead sleep slipped from Amyntas,
Inconstant, wandering, distracted, moydred Amyntas
Rangeth alone by the rocks, by the woods, by the dens, by the deserts,
Deserts, dens, and woods, and rocks, where nobody walks,
Nobody dare approach for fear of slippery serpents,
And crawling adders with baleful poison abounding:
And yet I cannot find, what I seek, what I look, what I long for,
Phillis I mean, by the rocks, by the woods by the dens, by the deserts.
Since that time, that time of grief and woe the beginning,
Neither Sun by the day, nor Moon by the night did Amyntas
Ever see sleeping though weak and weary by watching.
And no food I desire, for I feed too fast on a fancy,
Love fills fainty stomach, and every part of Amyntas:
And I desire noe drinck, for I drinck up watery fountains
Fountains of salt tears still trickling, euer-abounding,
Like showers in winter, driu'n down with wyndes from Olympus.
O most mighty Pales, which still bar'st love to the country
And poor countrey-folk, have thou forgotten Amyntas
Now when as other Gods have all forsaken Amyntas
Thou on whose feast days Bonefires were made by Amyntas,
And quyte leapt over by the bouncing dauncer Amyntas?
Thou for whose feast days great cakes ordained Amyntas,
Supping mylk with cakes, and casting mylk to the bonefyre?
And thou surly Cupid, thou churlish dame Cytheraea,
With, whose praise I did once, whilst Phillis abode with Amyntas,
Make these fields to resound, make beasts and men to be wondering,
On pitiful poor wretch is noe care, noe pity taken?
What? shall I noething get for making soemany offerings,
Soemany sweet persumes, for saying soemany prayers,
All with a garland green, with leaves of Myrtle adorned?
Are Gods unthankful? can noe grace come from Olympus?
Are Gods unmindful? why then, what mean I to worship,
Worship I know not what for a God, when it is but an Idol?
For, noe guerdon, alas, noe good thing's left for a good man.
Poor fool, what did I mean, on Gods or stars to be railing,
As though stars or Gods could alter Destenies order?
Poor, fool, what did I mean incessant tears to be sheading,
Still to the hills, to the woods to the fields, to the floods to be wayling,
Since these hills, these woods, these fields, these floods to my weeping
Can lend noe feeling, can aford noe sense to my wayling?
Yet will I call Phillis, though noe-body come by my calling,
And weep for Phillis, though noegood come by my weeping:
Thus will I do: Many men, many minds; this pleases Amyntas.
And yet I cannot abide any more by the woods to be ranging,
And this living death, this dying life to be leading:
Die then Amyntas, die, let Amyntas murder Amyntas;
So shall that grym Sire, and fowle-fac't Prince of Auernus
Some pity take, when he sees this wound of murdered Amyntas,
This wound wide and large; and loss of grau's but a small loss.
So shall Amyntas walk, and Phillis walk with Amyntas
Through those pleasant groaues, and flowring fields of Auernus.
But yet again to his house with doubtful mind he returned.
The tenth day.
SInce that fatal day and hour unlucky, the tenth time
Fair Aurora betymes by the days break, rose from her husband
Husband old and cold, and drove darck clouds from Olympus,
Making way to the Sun, taking her way to the yonker
Brave yonker Cephalus, whom fair Aurora desired.
Aeolus, of purpose Auroraes fancy to further,
Sent forth sweet Zephyrus with tender breath to be blowing,
And moist dew by the fields with whistling blast to be drying,
Least nights cold moisture might stay their lovely proceedings,
Stay brave Aeolides, stay fair Aurora fro kissing.
Every thing did smile, woods, fields, air, watery fountains,
Every Larck did sing, and made sweet mirth to the Morning,
And chereful Charites with gold-locks gayly bedecked,
Daunced along by the fields in due and gracius order;
And th'vnruly Satyrs by the sound of a paltery piper,
Leapt and skipt by the woods in most lasciuius order.
Only Amyntas loathed these sports and these pretty pastimes*
Only Amyntas mournd, and owld grifes only remembered,
Leaving house and home, and deserts only frequenting,
Scratching face with nails, and Phillis freshly bewayling.
O what means Phillis? can Phillis cast of Amyntas?
O consider, alas, consider careful Amyntas,
And forget not, alas, forget not faithful Amyntas,
Who for Phillis sake, for love and fancy to Phillis
Bears this fire in his heart, and still this fire is a feeding.
What means Phillis, alas, in those fair fields to be walking,
(...) those Elysian fair fields, and leave me behind her?
What Is there noemore care of flock in Phillis abiding?
What? noe care of love, noe care of lover Amyntas?
O unthankful wench, if this thing come by thy causing,
And accursed Fate, if Desteny cause thee to leave me.
See what a strange effect these cares have wrought in Amyntas*
Needles cares have driu'n all needful cares from Amyntas.
Noe care, no comfort in driving goats to the mountains,
When rising Phoebus displays his beams in a morning;
Noe care, noe comfort in bringing sheep to the sheepe-coates*
When sitting Phoebus withdraws his face in an eu'ning.
Rimes are quite set aside, and seu'n-hoald pipe is abandond,
Rimes that I played on pipe; pipe used at every dancing:
Leather bottel's lost, and tarr-box broken asunder,
Shoone and myttens gone, and sheepehooke cast in a corner,
And little old Lightfoote has lost his Master Amyntas
Whose watchful barking made woolues afraid to be biting.
See how Phillis death does make my Goats to be dying:
Noebody gives them Thyme and other flowrs to be gnapping,
Noebody gives them drinck and water fresh to be sipping,
Noebody brings them back to the sold, or shade to refresh them.
See how Phillis death does make my sheep to be dying,
Whilst th'vnlucky Shepherd neglects his sheep to be feeding,
Lambs in woeful wise by the woolues are daily devoured,
Eawes in loathsome sort with scabbs are fowly molested,
And their wool with dust and dirt is filthily fowled.
O but, alas, poor fool, whilst thou thus rayl'st on Olympus,
Phillis fair, perchance, in pleasant fields of Auernus
Keeps better goats, and better sheep is a feeding,
Leaving this poor flock, and their poor master Amyntas.
And must only my death cause endless plagues to be ended?
And shall I never die, til time that Desteny poynted?
O, what a life is this, with life and death to be striving?
And yet I love this life, this strife, and every moment
Reason yields to my rage, and rage gives place to my reason:
And whilst breath shall abide in burning breast of Amyntas,
Perpetual sobbing shall make these sides to be smarting,
Perpetual plaining shall make this mouth to be sounding,
Perpetual weeping shall make these eyes to be swelling.
As soon as Titan with face all fyry returns,
With violent clamors great clouds will I cast on a cluster.
As soon as darck night does spread her mantle among us,
With tears still trickling, I Will make springs ever abounding:
What love's like to my rage, what fancie's like to my folly,
That not a day, not an hour, not a moment scapeth Amyntas,
But still Amyntas mourns, since Phillis grave was a making?
That lewd Lord of Love drew my destruction onward,
That boy bred my bane, my death untimely procured,
When by the sight of a Less, by the flaming eyes of a Virgin,
Fire did pierce by my flesh, to my soul, to my bones, to my marrow,
And there burns and boyls like scalding sulphur of Aetna.
Who would think thou Love could bear such hate to a lover?
Or would woork such harm to a countryman that is harmeles?
But bloody boy thou art, thou bearst bloody mind, bloody weapons.
And thou most spiteful Nemesis, whose hasty revenging
Hands are ever at hand, whose mind is mutable always,
At miseries laughing, at men's felicity grudging,
Why durst thou deal with, what did thou mean to be meddling
With loving Phillis, with Phillis Lover Amyntas?
If that Phillis I kissed, or Phillis kissed Amyntas,
If that Phillis I clypt, or Phillis clipped Amyntas,
If that I spent many hours in talking under a Myrtle,
Wast any great offense, any great disgrace to a goddess?
We were country folk, twooe seeliest sowles of a thousand;
Those golden Diadems, that state of a King or a Kingdom
More fit for Nemesis: Phillis more fit for Amyntas:
Who would thinck thou could on beggars thus be triumphing?
Why should silly Shepherds be molested thus by a Goddess?
Nay godless Nemesis: for thou do noe-body goodness,
And where is noe godnesse, who thinks there can be a Goddess?
And thou most hellish Lachesis, more fierce than a Fury,
What reason foundst thou such mischif for to be working,
That by the gryping pains, by the cold-hoate fits of an ague,
Phillis fit for a man, should die thus before she be fitted?
O why should thou take all comfort quite fro the country,
And make countrymen thus comfortless to be mourning?
Could not that sweet face, nor that most seemly behauyour,
Nor that league of love still lasting lead thee to mercy?
But thy delight is death, and blood thou only desire,
Therefore bring me to death, take living blood from Amyntas,
For my delight is death, death only desires Amyntas,
And to procure quick death, its fully resolved by Amyntas,
That fair Phillis again may love her lover Amyntas.
And yet about eu'ning with staggring stepps he retired.
The eleventh day.
NOw th'eleuenth day from death of Phillis aproached,
Which to the former rage that long possessed Amyntas,
Dogged new conceits with more resolution added.
And shall I stay, quoth he, now? shall I wait for greater abundance
Of sowle-tormenting horrors? shall I still be a dying,
And yet living still? Did I thrust my breast on a poynted
Dart, when Phillis lived, though Phillis fled from Amyntas?
Yea, did an untrue tale, did a hearsay woork in Amyntas
So, that he threw himself fro the hill topp desperate, headlong,
Hearing Phillis death by Fuluia falsely reported?
And shall Amyntas now, when he knows, when he sees, when he looks on,
Looks on Phillis alas, and see's her fayntyly gasping,
Looks, and sees her alas, her last, last breath to be yielding,
Looks, and sees those eyes with fathers hands to be cloased,
(Eyes by Amyntas his hands more worthyly for to be cloased)
Looks, and sees, (dead sight) her sacred face to be cou'red,
And corpse embalmed; shall he now, now fear to be dying?
Daphne stayed darts-wound, and causd it, not to be deaths-wound,
Desteny made downfall for that time not to be mortal;
But neither Daphne, nor cursed Desteny henceforth
Shall withdraw this knife from bleeding breast of Amyntas.
If Daphne could not, nor cursed Desteny would not
Keep Phillis from death; why should they keep me fro Phillis?
Once it was my chance my naked lovely Diana
For to behold by the well; but alas my lovely Diana
Her poor Actaeons true love unkindly requyted,
And freed Phillis did fly from freer Amyntas.
Afterward, forsooth, our wedding day was appointed;
Apples tutcht my chyn, to my lips streams lovely aproached;
But when Tantalus hoapte his fruit and streams to be tutching,
Apples fled fro my chyn, fro my lips streams lovely retired,
Brydall by buryall was most untimely prevented.
Now, if worse do remain, let come, let come to Amyntas
Ere that Amyntas die, for he means noemore to be trifling,
But this self-sacrifice to the sweetest Saint to be offering.
Go poor Sheep and Kydds, sometime the delight of Amyntas,
Seek now somewhere else both boughs and grass to refresh you,
Make your way by the fyelds, and never stay for Amyntas,
Lodge your selus at night, and never look for Amyntas:
Some pytyfull goodman will take compassion on you,
And feed you wandering, and bring you home by the eu'nyng:
Now shall I never more your horns with flowrs be adornyng,
Now shall I never more yourselus to the fyelds be a dryuyng,
Now shall I never more see you creep up to the Mountayns,
Now shall I never more sit down and sing in a valley.
Thinck it noe strange thing if Woolus do chance to devour you,
Since that Woolues are like to devour your master Amyntas,
Unless some good man this carkas chance to be cou'ring.
Go poor loving dog old Light-foote, seek thee a master.
Get thee a new master, since thine old master Amyntas
Gets him another dog, foul Cerberus horrible helhounde.
Now shall I never more give Light-foote bones to be gnawing,
Now shall I never more cause Light-foote glooues to be fetching:
If, for thy feeding from a whelp, thou mean to be thankful,
Then keep rau'nyng Woolus from wounded corpse of Amyntas.
Pype, fit for meryment, unfit for mourner Amyntas,
Hang on this myrtle, til good luck send the a master,
More blessed master, than tentymes cursed Amyntas.
Roses fair and red, which Phillis loved to be wearing,
Keep still fair and red, keep fresh and lovely for ever,
My red blood shall still give new supply to the rednes.
Yuychurch farewell; farewell fair Pembrokianaes
Parck and loved lawndes; and, if fair Pembrokiana
Scorn not my farewell, farewell fair Pembrokiana.
Hills and dales farewell, you pleasant walks of Amyntas,
Floods and wells farewell, sweet looking glass of Amyntas.
Now shall I never more my sorrows utter among you,
Now shall I never more with clamors vaynly molest you.
Handkercher farewell, sweet work of my bony Phillis,
Handkercher many times made moist with tears of Amyntas,
Now shall thy Gelyflowrs; which wanted naught but a rednes,
Prove perfect Gelyflowres; my blood shall give them a rednes,
So shall Phillis woork in part be the woork of Amyntas.
Heart of gold, farewell, which Phillis gave to Amyntas,
Sign of a loving heart, which greeues my heart to be leaving:
And would never leave, unless that I meant in a moment,
This my living heart, and heart of gold to be leaving.
Wedding ring, farewell, she is gone, whose yuory finger
Should have been thy grace: full well did I cause to be graven
In thy golden round, those words as true as a Gospel,
Love is a bitter-sweete, fit words for bitter Amyntas.
Farewell knife at last, whose point engrau'd in a thousand
Barcks of trees that name, sweet name of my bony Phillis,
And hard by that name* this name of Lover Amyntas:
So that in every ash, these names stood, Phillis Amyntas,
And each Beech-tree barck, bare these names, Phillis Amyntas:
Pastors daily did ask, what folk are, Phillis Amyntas?
Nymphs did daily demand, who wrote this, Phillis Amyntas?
But now, loved knife, thy pain is somewhat abridged,
Now write Phillis alone, and noemore, Phillis Amyntas:
Now write Phillis alone, but let not an ash, or a beech-tree
Bear so blessed a name, which only belongs to Amyntas:
My breast shall be the barck, write Phillis name in Amyntas:
And since sharpened point shall find so tender a subject,
Strike, engraue, cut, launse, spare not to be mightily wounding*
Let fair Phillis name to the eyes of lovely beholders
With blood-red letters in Amyntas his heart be apearing.
Yet this murdring stroke to an other time he referred.
The twelfth day.
ANd now since Phillis dead corpse was laid in a coffyn
Twelfth day came at last, when weak, yet wakeful Amyntas
Spy'de through tyles of his house fair Phoebus beams to be shynyng*
Which when he saw, then in haste himself he began to be stirring,
And with trembling knees, with mind extremely molested;
Passed along to the fyelds where grave of Phillis apeared,
Meaning there to the grave, to the ghost, to the scattered ashes
His last lamenting in woeful wise to be making.
But when he saw fresh flowrs and new grass speedyly start up,
And Phillis sweet name ingrau'n by the hand of Amyntas,
Then did he stay, and weep, with an inward horror amassed:
And at length his knees on grave there fantyly bowing,
With dolorous groanyngs his fatal hour he bewailed.
This day, this same day, most blessed day of a thousand,
Shall be the first of joy, and last of anoy to Amyntas,
This shall bring me myself to myself, and bring me to Phillis.
Let neither father nor mother mourn for Amyntas,
Let neither kinsman, nor neighbor weep for Amyntas,
For Venus, only Venus does lay this death on Amyntas,
And Phillis sweet soul in fair fyelds stays for Amyntas.
If you needs will show some sign of love to Amyntas,
Then when life is gone, close up these eyes of Amyntas,
And with Phillis corpse lay this dead corpse of Amyntas,
This shall Phillis please, and Phillis lover Amyntas.
And thou good Thyrsis, drive forth those Sheep of Amyntas,
Least that Amyntas Sheep die with their master Amyntas.
And thou good Daphne, when so thou gang'st to the Mountayns,
Drive on Phillis Goats, fair Phillis Goats to the Mountayns;
For now, now at length, i will leave this life for a better,
And seek for mending in a most unnatural ending.
Must then Amyntas thus but a stripling murder Amyntas?
O what an imperious princess is Queen Cytheraea?
For, stil-watching love would never let me be resting,
Nor never sleeping since Phillis went from Amyntas.
And noe longer I can susteigne these infynit horrors
And pangs incessant, which now are freshly renewed
And much augmented; therefore am I fully resolved
Of lingering loves wound to be speedily cured by a deaths-wound.
Thus when he had contryu'd in his heart this desperate outrage,
And meante fully to die, with an hellish fury bewitched,
What do I stay, quoth he, now? it is loss of time to be lingering:
Then with a fatal knife in a murdring hand, to the heavens
Up did he look for a while, and groaned with a deadly resounding,
With thease words his life and lamentation ending.
Gods and ghosts forgive, forget this fault of Amyntas,
Pardon I crave of both, this knife shall bring me to Phillis,
And end these myseries, though desteny flatly deny it.
Even as he spoke these words, down fell deepe-wounded Amyntas,
Fowling hands and ground with streams of blood that abounded.
And good-natured ground pytying this fall of Amyntas,
In most loving wise, very gently received Amyntas,
And when he fell, by the fall, in mournful sort, she resounded.
Jupiter in meane-tyme, and the other Gods of Olympus,
When they saw this case (though great things were then in handling)
Yet lamented much, and then decreed, that Amyntas
Soul should go to the fyelds where blessed Phillis abides,
And bloody corpse should take both name and form of a fair flower
Called Amaranthus then, for Amyntas fryendly remembrance.
Whilst these things by the Gods were thus decreed in Olympus,
Senses were all weak, and almost gone from Amyntas,
Eyes were quyte sightles, deaths-pangs and horror aproached.
Then with his head half up, most heauyly groaned Amyntas,
And as he groaned, then he felt his feet to the ground to be rooted,
And seeking for a foot could find noe foot to be sought for,
For both legs and trunck to a stalk were speedily changed,
And that his old marrow to a cold juice quickly resolved,
And by the fame could juice this stalk still lively apeared.
Which strange change when he felt, then he lifted his arms to the heavens,
And, when he lifted his arms, then his arms were made to be branches;
And now face and hair of Amyntas lastly remained;
O what mean you Gods to prolong this life of Amyntas?
O what mean you Gods? with an hollow sound he repeated,
Until his hollow sound with a stalk was speedily stopped,
And fair face and hair bare form and shape of a fair flower,
Flower with fair red leaves, fair red blood gave the beginning.
Then with bow and shafts, and painted quyuer about him,
Vprose Lord of love from princelyke seat in Olympus,
And, when it was too late, laments this loss of a lover,
Speaking thus to the Gods of this new flower of Amyntas.
Myrtle's due to Venus, green laurel's dear to Apollo,
Corn to the Lady Ceres, and vines to the young merry Bacchus,
But thou fair Amaranthus, gentlest flower of a thousand,
Shall be my flower henceforth, and though thou camst from a bleeding,
Yet blood shall thou staunch, this guyft will I give the for ever:
And by the pleasant park where gentlemynded Amyntas
Lately bewayld his love, there thy leaves louly for ever,
Boys and gyrls and Nymphs, shall take a delight to be plucking,
Take a delight of them their garlands gay to be making.
And now in mean time whylst these things were thus a working,
Good loving neighbors for a long time myssed Amyntas,
And by the caves of beasts, by the dungeons darck, by the deserts,
And by the hills and dales, by the wells and watery fountayns,
Sought for Amyntas long, but never met with Amyntas.
Down in a dale at last, where trees of state, by the pleasant
Yuychurches parck, make all to be sole, to be sylent,
Down in a desert dale, Amaryllis found Amaranthus,
(Nymph, that, Amyntas loved, yet was not loved of Amyntas)
Found Amaranthus fair, seeking for fayrer Amyntas;
And with fair new flower fair Pembrokiana presented.
Who, by a strayte edict, commanded yearly for ever
Yuychurches Nymphs and Pastors all to be present,
All, on that same day, in that same place to be present,
All, Amaranthus flower in garlands then to be wearing,
And all, by all means Amaranthus flower to be praising,
And all, by all means his Amyntas death to be mournyng.
Yea, for a just monyment of tender-mynded Amyntas,
With new found tytles, new day, new dale she adorned,
Called that, Amyntas Day, for love of lover Amyntas,
Called this, Amyntas Dale, for a name and same to Amyntas.
FINIS.
The Lamentation of Corydon, for the love of Alexis, verse for verse out of
Latin.
SIlly Shepherd Corydon loved hartyly fair lad Alexis
His masters dearling, but saw noe matter of hoping;
Only amydst darck groves thickset with broade-shadoe beech-trees
Daily resort did he make, thus alone to the woods, to the mountayns,
With broken speeches fond thoughts there vaynly revealing.
O hard-harted Alexis, I see my verse to be scorned,
Myself not pytyed, my death by thee lastly procured.
Now do the beasts even seek for cooling shade to refresh them,
And now green Lyzards in bushes thorny be lurking,
And, for faint reapers by the suns rage, Thestilis hastnyng,
Strong-smelling wild time and garlyck, beats in a mortar:
But whilst scorcht Corydon does trace his lovely Alexis,
Groaues by the hoarce-chirping Grasshoppers yield a resownding.
Wast not far better to have borne with surly Menalcas,
And sore displeased, disdaigneful, proud Amaryllis,
Although thou white were, although but swarty Menalcas?
O thou fair white Boy, trust not too much to thy whytenes:
Fair white flowers fall down, black fruyts are duly reserved.
Thou car'st not for me: my state thou know not Alexis,
What flocks of white Sheep I do keep, of mylk what abundance*
On Sicil high Mountayns my Lambs feed more than a thousand;
New mylk in summer, new mylk in winter I want not:
My song's like Thebane Amphions song, when he called
His wandering bullocks on Greekish mount Aracynthus.
Nor so foul be my looks; for I saw myself by the seashore,
When seas all calm were: I Will overcome Daphnis, I doubt not,
Even by thy own judgment, unless my face do deceive me.
O let this be thy will, to frequent my rustical harbors,
And simple cotages, sticking in forcks to vphould them,
And drive on forward our flock of Kidds to the mallows.
We will amidst wild woods contend Pans song to resemble;
Pan was first that quills with wax tide jointly together,
Pan is good to the sheep, and Pan is good to the sheepesman.
Neither think it a shame to thyself to have played on a corne-pipe*
For, that he might do the same with skill, what did not Amyntas?
Damaetas long since did give me a pipe for a token,
Compackt of seven reeds all placed in order unequal:
And thus said when he died; one used it only before thee:
Thus said Damaetas; this grieved foolish Amyntas.
Also twooe pretty kidds do I keep, late found in a valley
Dangerus, and their skins with milk-white spots be bedecked,
Of dams milk not a drop they leave, and for the I keep them:
Thestilis of long time has these kydds of me desired:
And they shall be her own, for that thou scorn'st what I give thee.
Come near, o fair boy; lo, Nymphs here bring thee the Lillies
With full stuffed baskets, fair Nais, lo, to thy comfort
White Violets gathering, and Poppies daintily topping,
Daffadil adds to the same, and leaves late plucked fro the sweet Dill:
Then mingling Casia, with diverse sauory sweet flowers,
With yealowish Marigold she the tender Crowto bedecketh.
I Will pluck hoare Quinces with soft down daintily clothed,
And Chessnutts which were loved of my sweet Amaryllis:
Add will I wheat plumbs too, for this fruit will be regarded:
And you, Laurel leaves, will I pluck, and next to the Laurel
Leaves, I Will pluck Myrtle; for so placed, yield ye the sweet sent.
Thou Art but a fool Corydon; for first, gifts move not Alexis,
Then, though thou give much, yet much more give will Iolas.
But what alas did I mean? I do let go madly the Southwinde
Into the flowrs, and boars send foreward into the clear springs.
Whom sli'st thou, fond boy? Many Gods have gladly resorted
And Paris of Troy-towre, to the woods: let towers by Minerua
Built, by Minerua be kept, and woods of us only regarded.
Grimme Lioness runs to the Woolf, and Woolf to the yong-Goate,
And wanton yong-Goate to the flowring Tetrifol hastneth,
And Coridon to Alexis; a self-ioy draws on each man.
But lo, Plow coms home hanged fast by the yoke to the bullocks,
And shadoe, by Phoebus declining, dooble apeareth,
Yet do I burn with love: for what mean can be to loving?
Ah Coridon, Coridon, what mad rage has thee bewitched?
Thy vine's scarce half cut, pestred with leaves of her elmetree*
Leave this churlish boy; and bend thyself to thy busnes;
With twiggs and bulrush some needful thing be a making:
Thou shall find others, though thou art disdaign'd of Alexis.
FINIS.
The beginning of Heliodorus his Aethiopical History.
As Soon as Sunbeams could once peep out fro the mountain
And by the dawne of day had somewhat lightened Olympus,
Men, whose lust was law, whose life was still to be lusting,
Whose thryuing theeuing, conveyed themselves to an hil-top,
That stretched forward to the Heracleotical entry
And mouth of Nylus: looking thence down to the maine-sea
For seafaring men; but seeing none to be sailing,
They knew 'twas booteles to be looking there for a booty:
So that straight fro the sea they cast their eyes to the seashore;
Where they saw, that a ship very strangely without any shipman
Lay then alone at road, with cables tide to the maine-land,
And yet full-fraighted, which they, though far, fro the hil-top,
Easily might perceive by the water drawn to the deck-boords*
But men on every side lay scattred along by the seashore,
Some dead, some dying, some whose corpse heavily panting
Showed a late fighting, though noe just cause of a fighting:
Only a man might guess, there had been some bloody banquet
Which to the guests quaffing gave such unfortunate ending.
For bancks with tables, tables with daynty devises
And delicate dishes were there well stored, amongst which
Some served as weapons in this so desperate onset,
Weapons with pale hands of dead-men greedily clasped:
Some lay as cou'rings on such as fear had amazed,
Cou'rings for feint hearts who thither seemed to be creeping,
Cupps were all thrown down; some fell fro the greedy carowsers
Hands feint and feeble; some flew like stones fro the fingers
Of them, who new shifts for deadlifts quickly preparing,
Vsd' bowls for bullets, and caused pots to be pellets.
Of them, whose carkas lay mangled along by the sea-shoare,
Some with fire were burnt, and some were brusde with a lever,
Some with an axe were knocked, and some were hurt with a shel-fish,
With shells of seafish, by the seashore ever abounding,
Some this way, some that; but most with feathered arrows.
So blood brewd with wine, so buffets joined to the banquets,
Killing with swilling and beating unto the eating,
Caused a strange wonder to the thieves, who saw fro the hil-top
Men kyld, noe killers; many dead, noe conqueror extant,
Victory, noe spoiling, shipp fraughted, yet not a shipman.
But, notwithstanding for a time they stood thus amazed,
Yet for greedy desire of gain they hastened onward
And drew nere to the place, where men lay all to bemangled,
And ship-full-fraughted; thinking themselves to be victors.
But, good God, what a sight, what a strange sight, yea, what a sweet fight,
And yet a woeful sight, to the thieves unlooked for apeared?
There was a maid so made, as men might thinck her a Goddess,
There was a sweete-fac't maid, that sat on a rock by the seashore,
Sat on a rock full sad to behold this desperate outrage,
Sad, yet not dismayed to behold this desperate outrage,
For that a maidens face was there well matched with a mans-hart.
Laurel crowned her head, but her head gave grace to the laurel:
Left hand armed with a bow, and back with a quyuer adorned,
Right hand held up her head; her thye was a stay to the right hand:
Head never moving, eyes ever fixed on one thing,
Fixed on one young man sore wounded down by the seashore.
Sore-wounded yongman now lifted his eyes to the heavens
Heavily, like to a man that is wak'ned late from a dead sleep,
And yet he seemed fair and looked lovely for all that;
And though some bloody spots his face had lately defaced,
His whitenes by the red more fresh and lively apeared.
Sore-wounded yongman for grief now closed his eye-lidds,
And yet he causd this maid very steedily still to behold him,
Still to behold his wounds and face very steedily, so that
Whosoe looked to the maid must also look to the yongman;
Who, when he came t'himself, these words very faintily vttred:
And art thou yet saulf, thou sweetest soul of a thousand,
Or by thy death have thou augmented this bloody slaughter?
Whether death do triumph, or whether life be prolonged,
Whom Love has joined, noe death shall cause to be seu'red.
In thee alone do I joy, and for thee alone am I living,
On thee alone do I see my wealth to be wholly depending.
And thee alone I do love, that sweet Nymph quickly replied,
On thee alone I rely: therefore was I fully resolved,
With this knife, lo here, to have speedily given me my deaths-wound
But that I looked for life, and hoapt for a tymely recou'ry.
Thus said, lightly she leapt fro the stone; which made the beholders
Like men lately amazd with a lightning, run to the bushes,
And there hyde themselves for fear and wonder among them.
For, standing upright, this maid more stately apeared,
And much more divine, and far more like to a Goddess.
Her shafts on shoulders did clash by her hasty removing,
Her gold-wrought garments by the Sunbeams glystred about her,
And fro the green garland her fair hair sweetly beseeming
Scattred abroad by the wind, fell dayntily down to the gyrdle:
Which princelyke marching of a maiden greatly apaled
Those timorous vagabonds, who peeping out fro the bushes
Saw thus a strange wonder, but knew noe cause of a wonder.
Some said, Sure this Nymph must needs be the mighty Diana*
Some rather thought her that great Egyptian Isis
Whom those men worshipped; and some were flatly resolved
That some Priest of Gods inspyr'd with fury from heaven
Had causd that bloodshed; so every man was a gessing,
Noeman gessed aright, noeman came nere to the matter.
But she away began fly, and ran forthwith to the yongman,
Weeping sore for his hurts, his wounds very daintily wiping,
Kissing, embracing, pitying, and greatly bewayling
His late misfortune and grief; which causd the beholders
Quickly to change their mind and former opinion alter.
And are these, said they, such wondrous woorks of a Goddess?
What? can a Goddess kiss, can a Goddess clip thus a dead-man?
What? can such loue-tricks and fancies fly to the heavens?
Nay, then down lets go, and see what may be the matter:
So then down they go to behold what might be the matter,
Go to the maid; who then this yongmans wounds was a dressing.
When they came to the maid, they stopped and staid on a soddaine,
And not a word, for life, was there once vttred among them,
And not a deed, for life, was there attempted among them,
But like stocks or stones they stood very ghastly beside her.
When she beheld the shadoes of men stand rightly before her,
And perceived a sound and noise of somewhat about her;
Thereat somewhat moved, herself she removed a little,
And looked back for a while, but again very speedily stouped
Down to the yongmans wounds, and them with care was a dressing,
Noething troubled at all to behold that company theeuish,
Which there gapte for a pray, and glistred in armor about her.
Such is true-loues force, that where it takes a lyking,
There noe pain is felt, noe pleasure can be regarded
In respect of that which is so dearly beloved.
But when those Rakehells began march on bowldly before her
With foul black visages, making some show of an onset,
Up then again, poor wench, herself she began to be lifting,
And thus spoke, their looks, and countnance ougly beholding.
If that you be the ghosts of such as lately departed,
Then do ye us great wrong with such strange sights to molest us:
For most part of you your selus have fylthyly murdered,
And we for our sauegard, God knows, were forced to be fighting
Sith force and violence were offered unto my person:
If not ghosts but men, then sure ye be thieves, as apeareth
By your night-walking; and we shall thinck it a pleasure,
If you cause our death, our death cause grief to be dying.
Thus she bewayld her woe; but alas those barbarus outlawes
Understood noe word, noe part of her heavy bewayling;
But there left them alone as noething like to be starting;
And ran straight to the ship with treasures wished abounding,
With precious diamonds, gold, silver, curious arrace
Clothes, and finest sylk themselus all heauyly loading,
Other wares, that were of less price, lightly regarding.
When that enough was brought, and pray pleased greedy desyring,
All was cast on a heap, and then they fell to dyuyding
And parting booties, by the greatenes, not by the goodness,
Thincking afterward, of those poor sowles to determyne,
Pooreman, poor maiden. But now whilst this was a working,
Other thieves began aproach, whose foremen lustyly praunsing
Were two stout horsemen, resolute, and framed for an onset.
First thieves fear last thieves (one robber robs an other)
Fear, and fly for fear; and leave their booty behind them,
Least by a quyck pursuyte their pray might chance to betray them
Into the hands of these last thieves, in number abounding,
They ten, these thrice ten. Now, now that lovely Virago
Was captyued again, poor soul, and yet not a captyue.
For these last rouers, though greedyly bent to the booty.
Yet somewhat fearful (thieves always use to be fearful)
And with wonder amasd (such sight might well be a wonder)
Paused a while, and thought those former thieves to be autors
Of this foul outrage: but when they lastly reflected
Their distracted sight to the brave and glorius object
Of sweet Nymph, with strange attire yet costly adorned,
Stowt-hart Nymph, that styrd not a foot nor feared any danger,
(And yet well, too well she might have feared a danger)
Constant Nymph, whose eyes, heart, hands were bent to the yongman,
Loving Nymph, pytying this youngman more then her owneself,
(And yet most pytyfull, God knows, she seemed her ownself)
Thieves themselus, rude thieves were even compeld to be wondering
At this mayds courage, nothing dismayed at a myschif,
At this mayds persnage, noething empayrd by a myschif,
At this man, though sore, yet tall and comely apearing
Even as he lay on ground; for now was he somewhat amended,
And had strength at length and former beauty recou'red.
After much gazing, their guide and capten aproaching
Caught poor maid by the hand, and bade her for to be rising
And accompany him: poor maid surprysde by the capten
Understood not a word, (as borne in a contrary country)
And yet gest what he meant: and cleaued fast to the yongman,
And held yongman fast, and every way she declared;
Unless yongman went, she never meant to be going,
Unless yongman went, herself she meant to be murdring,
And with a knife in her hand to her heart she begins to be poynting.
Which when their capten (with some compassion harcknyng)
Partly by her wyld talk perceau'd, but chiefly by gesture,
And saw this yongman, though wounded, yet to be manly,
And very like to be fit for some great noble adventure
If that he once might chance his former strength to recover,
Himself dismounting commands his squyre to be lighting,
And yongman youngmayd to the horses straight to be lifting,
Then byds his fellows take opportunyty offered,
And make haste after, when spoils and booty be gathred:
Himself by their sides still runs as a page or a lackey,
Staying wounded-man, weak maid for fear of a falling.
Thus was a Lord at last made vassal unto a vassal,
Thus was a brave capten made captyue unto a captyue;
So does Noblesse woork, and soemuch bewty preuayleth,
That very thieves themselus it some cyuylyty teaches,
And their bruytish breasts to a new humanyty frames.
Thus for two forlongs they passed along by the seashore;
Then leaving Neptune, they turned their course to the left hand
Over a hill to a poole, which there lies down in a valley,
Valley grown to a lake and standing poole by the swelling
And ouerflowing of Nilus down to the valley:
Poole very huge and deep, whose utmost bryms by the marshes,
As salt sea by the shore, enclosd, was a notable harbor
Of rogues and robbers and all Egyptian outlawes.
Their floating whyrries are so contryued in order,
That they serve these thieves as well for coats to be dwelling,
As for boats, by the poole, that rogish sea, to be passing:
Since each part of land lies ouerspred by the water,
But some small angles and nookes, that chance to be peeping
Here and there by the poole: whereon these raskaly scapethriftes
Patch vprude cotages, fit bowres for such an asembly.
In these boats their trulles and wives keep usual howshold,
Here their bratts are borne and bred, fit neast for a poole-byrde.
Poole-byrde first brought forth, sucks mothers mylk for a season,
Then feeds on fishes, when sucking days be determynd,
Fishes caught in poole, and roasted a while by the sunbeams.
But when he fynds his feet, and gyns by the boat to be creeping,
One legg's tide to a cord, for fear of a fall or a ducking:
So this young crackrope, by a cord is traynd to a halter,
And scapes from drownyng, that he may grow fit for a hangyng.
Every yonker that fro the poole thus takes a beginning,
In this poole still keeps, and there does he make his abiding:
Poole is his house and home; in poole his life he reposeth
Poole is a trusty refuge which poole-babes strongly protecteth.
This makes wandryng squyres that live by the spoil of an other,
Shyfters, nyght-walkers, rouers, and all the detested
Pack of rogues to the poole, tag, rag, to be daily repayring,
As Lords and Ladies of a lake, securely triumphing.
For this marsh with reeds, this poole with water abounding,
Water seru's as a wall, and reeds insteede of a bullwarck.
And for a further strength to the place, they craftyly framed
Diverse blind by ways and crooked walks with a thousand
Turnyngs and wyndings, as well known unto the autors
And marshmen themselus, as not known unto a stranger.
So that on every side they thick their fort to be fenced,
And noe danger at all, and noe pursuyte to be feared.
Now had fyery Phlegon his days revolution ended,
And his snoring snowt with salt waves all to be washed,
When to the Poole with spoils, etc.
Carmen amat, quisquis carmine digna gerit.
FINIS.
Errata.
B. 29. He that will, may for those verses,

I Will soon charm thy cheek, this secreate lately I learned
Of Beldame Sagane, for an yuory comb that I gave her.
Read these,

I Will soon charm thy cheek: this charm did Aresia teach me,
For mine yuory horn, with gold all bravely adorned.
D. 14. In most part of the impression, by too much haste, bastneth went
forth, insteede of, hasteneth. l. 2. 29. For sloodes, read floodes. K. 3. 17
For eorps, read corpse.


