A BOOK OF christian Ethics or Moral Philosophy: Containing, The true
difference and opposition, of the two incompatible qualities, Virtue, and
Voluptuousness. Made by William Fulbecke, master of Arts, and student of the
Laws of England.

At LONDON, Imprinted by Richard Jones, dwelling at the Sign of the Rose and
Crown near Holborne bridge. 1587.

To the worshipful and virtuous Gentleman, M. George Seintpolle Esquire:
William Fulbeck wishes all prosperous euentes.
THe G^aecians were wont to consecrate to their several Gods, several trees:
as, to Apollo the Laurel, because he was always fresh in countenance: The
Oak to Jupiter, as being always strong: the Olive to Minerua, as being
always fruitful of some gallant inventions: the Fur tree to Neptune, as
President of ships, always swimming, and never sinking: the tree called
Aesculus to the three sons of Saturn, because the root is in the bottom of
the earth, the tru^ck in the water, and the top in the clouds. It behooves me
(likewise) somewhat to the imitation of them, to yield a reason why I
consecrate to your worship this Pamphlet, not as a massy Tree, but as a slender
fruit of a rooted good will, though of a short travail: in it, I have given
pleasure an overthrow, being not able for weakness to manage in the field,
and not willing for wantonness, to give careful care to the bloodye notes of
the trumpet: and because it is impossible that you should behold the face of
one that flies from you, therefore I am constrained, but not much against my
will, to present to your worship, the view of pleasures back, upon which you
may see engraven the picture of hell, howsoever her visage do represent the
face of the firmament: but because you have expressed more in a godly life,
then I have shadowed in a few godly lines, and because your zealous
conversation is the image which my thoughts have in this discourse imagined:
therefore, I judged it most convenient to submit this book to your favorable
construction, not as a monument of my victory, but as a memorial of your
singular modesty: nor as a sufficient counterpain of your good behavior, but
as a short abridgement of your ample ver^ues: the friendly countenance
wherewith you have always cheared my drooping fancies, was the loadstarre that
drew me on, to sail so far in this boisterous Sea: where, if the winds do
threaten me above, and the water below, yet as long as the star shines, the
stern shall not fail. Leander lost his ankerholde for lack of light, and the
Tunnies dare not swim but when the moon does shine: the light that I crave is
your favor, the extinguishing that I am afraid of, is mine own fear:
wherefore, changing fear with hope, I change words with silence: beseeching
God that your virtue may be extended with your life, and your life
counterpaized with your happiness.

Yours to the uttermost of his power. William Fulbecke

To the courteous Reader.
IT is reported of the Eagle, that she opposes her yonglinges against the face
of the Sun, meaning thereby, to make trial, and have certain knowledge, which
be natural Eagles, and which be bastardly branches: they that can look
directly against the Sun, she admits for her own, those that are
constrained to wink, she extrudeth out of her nest. Her in I may resemble my
self to the Eagle, who being the inue^ter of this treatise, have laid it open
to the eyes of alimen: that is, to the eyes of the world: which Ovid in his
metamorphosis applies to the Sun: Sol oculi Mundi.
now if it be indewed with this felicity, that it can abide the stern visage
of severe sages, the pearsing eyes of curious Gentlemen, and the critical
censures of the learned Academickes, I will challenge and cherish it as a
fortunate issue: otherwise refuse and reject it, as misbegotten: having more of
Amphitrio, then of Jupiter: of fancy then of reason. I have long time
sacrificed my studies to Angerona, the Goddess of silence, laying my finger on
my lips, and saying nothing: foreseeing that if I should rub the galle,
rippe the impostume, ransacke the kannell of worldly opinions, (worldly I
term them, as being bredde in the world, received of the world, and
practiced by worldlings: by worldlinges, I mean the most and the worste, most
fond and worst minded), I should stir up Waspes, and have my words
entertained with nipping gloses, and returned home with a bitter farewell: but
since it is no shame to write against such, against whom not to write is a
great shame: I have taken courage unto me, and brought against the^ a co^pleat
legion. If I should have inueighed by Satires, I should have seemed too
curious: if I should have iested by Epigrammes, I might seem too captious: if
by Commedies. I should copy out their lives, they would account me too
scurrilous: if by tragedies I should lament their manners, they would judge me too
scrupulous: therefore using the name of Christian Philosophy, I do mean
nether to fray the^, with the title, nor to flatter the^ with the treatise: but
mine endeavor is specially bent, to allure them by lenitye, to win them by
parley, and to convince the^ rather by confession, then by confusion: but if
this first trumpet which I have sounded against them do give me a sign of
their obstinate resista^ce after this legion displayed, I will encounter the^
(by the grace of God) with a whole army of reasons: setting thee courteous
Reader on the top of Tarpey, where thou may easelye behold the conflict and
warfar of the Romans and Sabines, fighting in the valleis of Hetruria: neither
bend thy body to the one side nor wag thy hand to the other: but with both eyes
behold both, so shall we both be beholden to thee, and being justified by a
righteous se^te^ce, give thee the come^dation of an upright Judge. Farewell and
be not partial.

Thine in Christ. W. Fulbecke.

The true difference between Virtue, and Voluptuousnes.
THere be seven Arts whose Principles are principallye learned and practiced
of voluptuous livers: the art of dissembling, the Art of blaspheming: the art
of deceiving: the art of flattering: the art of disdaining: the art of
loving: the art of dicing: seven heads of Hydra, seven lewd sisters, and
seven illiberall arts, not worthy the name of arts, fith their best
professors are the baddest men: and they are so much better in their arts, by
how much they are worse in their manners: being therefore impudent, because in
vanity they are arteficial: and therefore vain, because in their arts they
are impudent. These be not the Muses inventions, because they are conjoined
with great dishonestie, and have a rank smell of a loathsome impiety: these be
ye daughters of lady pleasure, nestled in Pandoras box, and sent^ like
Harpaies over the face of ye earth, to take away from us our wholesome food,
and with their own dunge to defile ^ur trenchers, being thoroughly instructed
of Circe to change men into beasts, men's minds into brutish appetites, men's
inventions into foolish dreams, and the reason of man into a brutish passion.
Circe drinks of these pottes to the worldlings, that thirst after pleasures:
but virtue has made a wall of partition betwixt the pottes of Circe, and the
mouths of the virtuous: betwixt these Panther-like odoures, and the nostrelles
of her followers: betwixt these Cupids counterfeyting Ascanius, and the
closette of their minds in whom virtue is resident. There is great
difference betwixt Apollo his Schole, and an old wives Cottage, between the
Temple of virtue, and the Theater of pleasure. Pleasure has sent abroad not
long ago thr^^ precious works, and three delightful co^ments: the court of
Venus, the Castle of fancy, and the Paradise of pleasure: books in which, there
is much wit, and little virtue: whose ripeness^ heretofore, the frequent use in
former times, did sufficiently argue: whose rottenness at this present, is by
the universal loathing and surfeit of those that before were delighted with
them abundantly testified. This is the property of a voluptuous mind, when it
is full gorged with honny, to cast it up like galle: and therefore it seems
that pleasures iunkets would not have turned into any good blood, or wholesome
nourishment. Diverse Poets have written for delight, but they have also written
for profit: but many of their readers being enchanted by pleasures, have from
their flowers gathered poison like the spider, not honny like the Be: whereas
contrariwise, the well meaning minds have of these flowers made soueraign
preservatives: let ye Troyan history be delivered to a sober, wise, and
discreet scholar, he reapes much honny, much delight, much commodity by the
reading thereof: if he be examined what is the sentence, substance, marrow, and
iuce of that history? he will answer wisely and sincerely.

The story which reports the Graekish wa^ against Barbary, Horat. Epistolarum.
Lib. 1.
for Paris love vneleane:
Does strange events of Trojan folly show, and fruits of vlissean policy
contain.
But if the sense and signification of that history be demanded of some
delicate stripling, of some Ouidia^ Acontius, an inte^perate youngman, an
impure spider, Ovid in Epi. Acont. Non sum qui soleam paridi^ reprehendere
factum. Nec quemque qui vir possit vt esse fuit.
and a second Catiline: he will answer boldly, briefly, and badly.

I am not wont sir Paris to reprove,
Or any man that plays the man in love.
Behold what abundance of poison, what store of galle, what dregs of
filthiness this spider sucketh out of the flowers of this history, with
greedye and vnco^secrate lips. First, he gathers that the love of Paris was
not to be reprehended: next, that al they which imitate the woeing of Paris
are men: they are men I grant in name, but in nature, they are lecherous
goats, and rutting Leopards: But as Alexander the great, did then most of all
term himself a God, when he was most estranged from God, namely when he was
drunken: so these Acontij, these s^ctators of Paris, these men do then
especially boast of their ma^hood, when they become most brutish: what thanks
therefore, and what sufficient glory can be rendered to virtue, that preserves
her scholars from such pestilent poisons, and such froth of vices, by godly
admonitions, grave precepts, and solemn institutes? persuading them by sound
reasons, whereof every one is as strong as Achilles, that an history is not as
it is taken of the voluptuous, the trumpet of Cupid, and the calendar of Venus:
but the library of knowledge, the vnsouldresse of treacherye, the lantern of
policy, ye doctresse of behavior, the register of antiquity, the glass of
justice: But when ye voluptuous know the bent of pleasures bow, her browe I
would say, they are ready with full sail, and swift course to try these ways
that pleasure has chalked out and prescribed unto them, spending all their
rents, revenues and reuersions upon the servants of Bacchus, upon purpled
Apes, painted beggars, counterfaiting R^scij Graduates in the Epicures School,
horseleeches of money, the dogs of Verres, the bloodhoundes of Fortune, which
ransacke every corner for coin, having apt noses for the smelling of Gold
and Silver, and when they are instructed and lessoned by such hungry Gnatoes,
professors of all impude^cie, and practisers of all impiety, they are
matriculated, and nursed in these delights, in which, none are conversant but
Venusses pullets and Neroes whelps, politic, delicate, gallant tenderlings,
which are fast linked to pleasure, and use her at their lust, but they know not
her disease, they know not her companion, they know not her sauce. Her disease
is impuritie, her companion is penalty, her sauce is sorrow: they may for a
while sing those Caroles yt Penelopes woers did sing, wresting the sweetness
of their Cytharne, to the loss of their time, and their own disprofite: as
Horace reports of certain young men which were wont to sleep till midday,
and Ad strepitu^ cytharae cessatu^ ducere cura^. By sound of harp, to bring
their cares to rest.

But this dittye will be closed up with a dumpe.

Nocet empta dolor voluptas. The pleasure is naught that is bought with pain.
Horat. Epistola^. lib. 1.
This I do not speak to disprove the delightful harmony of music, which I
account most commendable, but to glaunce at the idle life of luxurious
persons, whose ears are continually fed with the hearing of such soundes.
Orpheus his harp is not to be dispraised, which did draw men from death to
life, but ye foulers whistle is not to be heard, which allureth the hearers to
the snares of death, and ye pit of destruction: Euterpes pipe deserves
audience, because it is the pipe of one of the Muses: but the pipe of Leucosia
is to be debarred from our ears, because the piper is a Siren: the harp of
Achilles sounded with gravity, and was a kind of motive to the warlike
courage: but on the effeminate harp of Paris, nothing was played but
amatorious sonnets, and ridiculous Iigges. Poetry in former times made a
progress through the world, being desirous to hear the soundes of the
Instruments, that in those days were used, and being accompaned with the
nine Muses, she listened to their melodye, she heard Pan puffing on a reed:
the Arcadians creaking with whistles: Triton roaring with a shell, in steed of
a trumpette: the shepheardes of Scithia, winding an oaten straw: she heard the
Coribants tinckling on their brazen Basins: she heard the Moenades shouting
in the air with a clamarous bellowing: Poetry partlye taking pity, and
partlye being ashamed of this deformed and barbarous music, gave to mankind,
for the pipe of Pan, the histories of Clio: for the whistles of the Arcadians,
the tragedies of Melpomene: for Tritons shel, the Co^medies of Thalia: for the
shepherds oaten straw, the pipe of Euterpe: for the brass of the Coribants,
ye harp of Therpsicore: for ye howling of the Moenades, the verses of Calliope:
which she did not bestow in consideration of the Epicures fancy, neither to
inchaunt ye minds of lascivious persons with a senceles security, neither did
she make the^ y^ idle man's Ephemerides, whereby he might deceive the long and
irksome time, the redemption of which, cannot by any value be procured.

Nulla coelum reparabile gaza.
No gold can time reuerse.
The loss of which, if it were thoroughly considered, would make us loath our
stale music in comparison of the sweet sounding melody of time: which is the
reporter of things most desired, the Corner of truth, whose desca^t, though it
be somewhat crabbed, yet, that to which we apply our attendance, we wish should
rather be true, then forged: rather a matter of certainty, then a flying fable.
But the secure and voluptuous Epicure cares not for this advantage of time, so
he may rest himself in his Ladies lap, and have his ears thoroughly tickled
with a musical concordance: he is content that the circle of the Sun should be
rouled backward and forward, so that he continue still in iolitie, without any
interruption of his pleasures: Scilicet hoc est viuere: but when the date of
his time is almost expired, and arrived at the point, from which it took ye
beginning, then he stands bouud before the tribunal seat of time, and he
thus accuses him: unfruitful sluggard did thou wake or sleep all thy life
time? If thou did wake, what work haste thou left behind thee either
visible to the eye or memorable to the mind? where be the monuments of thy
labors? where be the gains of thy travails? where are the fruits of thy
life? If thou did sleep, and thy actions were only a dream, that dream was a
passion but of action: thou have not a print to show, but that thou may see
the bounty and riches of time: awake out of thy sleep, wash thine eyes, and
thou shalt clearelye behold what opportunities have escaped thee. Thou see
on thy right hand, the fields into the which thou did wander sometime, but I
always presuppose as in a dream: thou did there only suruay the colors of
flowers, thinking perhaps of the transmutation of them into flowers, whom the
panges of love did consume: thou did rest on the green grass as on a
cushion, having a mind so dead and destitute of the intellectual faculty,
that thou did hide and bury thy self under the shadows of trees: not
knowing that the green Liceum was the Schole of the Peripatetikes, and
Vmbrifera Academia, the School of the Academikes: but thou, wishing that all
thy body were changed into an eye, like Argus, that thou might all thy life
time, have nothing else but colors in veiwe, or else wishing that all thy body
were made a nose, as Catullus desired, that thou might spende^ all thie
days in smelling to the fragrant flowers, and perfuming herbs, did make a
pause in these fancies: if thou had bended thine eyes but a little from
these these things, thou might have espied ye seely Ant or Pismire, of which
thou might have learned to have taken pains, to have lived by thy pains, to
have rejoiced after thy pains: to have taken pains by seeing the^ martch in
the pathway to the fields for their sustena^ce, carrying their burdens on
their shoulders, hastening and returning with great speed, notwithstanding the
great weight: to have lived by thy pains, by seeing the^ to be so careful of
ye nipping winter, hurding up the corn in the graniers, piling it in the
barnes, cutting it into parts, yt it maynot grow: to have reioiced after thy
pains, in that thou have prevented the sharpnes of hunger and in that thou
have sufficient to satisfy natures demand: but look what shines over thy
head, the glistering heaven, the starrie firmament, which thou did gather to
be nothing else then the candlestick of the world, made to none other end, then
to give light, and to discover the dens of Moldwarpes in the earth: not
considering that by the access, and departure of the Sun, things increase and
decrease: that by the waine and full of the Moon, the Sea ebs and flows: that
by the particular influence of particular Stars, such and such alterations
are framed in the earth: the diverse motions and effects of those causes, might
have led thee by the hand, to the first mouer, in whose ample government of all
things, thou might have had a bottomless consideration of pearelesse
value, that would hane stirred up an admiration in thy mind, admiration would
have caused inquisition, and inquisition would have engendered knowledge: which
would have been a great ornament unto thee, and a great ^urthera^ce to further
matters: but now that thou art ignorant, blame not me, wrich have often given
thee warning to call thy wits together: When thou wast tending from youth to
manhood, ^ drew lines in thy visage, which signified, that thy life did
waste: and by them I writ upon thy face, the second age: when, from manhood
thou wast twining to old age, thy den^s and riueled cheeks, thy toothlesse
chaps, thy white and hoary hears* I sent as messengers unto thee, whereby I
foreshewed the third age, that was approaching: now therefore, blush at thine
own sluggishnesse, be ashamed of thy lingering, and since there be no signs or
lineaments, of former knowledge in thee, I propose thy dotage as a spectakle to
be laughed at. This sharp reprehension may perhaps, leave prickles in the
minds of sluggards, but the remorse quickly vanishes. Icarus does not fear
his fall, til the greatest part of his wings be melted, and his body do kiss
the face of the water: but of all the knowledge that ouerpasse them, the
mystical knowledge of their salvation being hidden from their eyes, and
debarred from their hearts: is with a whole Ocean of tears to be lamented, if
out of a Flinte any water may be wrested. It may be comprehended in two lines,
and yet the fleshly Epicure could not afforde half an hours study to the
repetition and rehearsal of it in his mind, 1 Timoth. cap. 3.
that it might be a perpetual monument imprinted in his memory: God did appear
in the flesh, was justified in the spirit, was seen of Angels, was preached to
nations, was believed in the world, was received in glory. This being
perfectly had without book, would have been a soueraign retentiue from the lusts
of the flesh: but pleasure, being a sweet and flattering Enchauntresse, does
smoothly insinuate her self into the minds of me^, and there dwells as
Helena dwelt in the City of Troy: who pleased the Troyans but to their
miserye: who soung delightfully, but was too delightfully hard: for the honny
of words, is a poison to the heart: and a sweet sound in the a^re, is a Siren
in the ear: Thus it is evident that the study or exercise whereunto
voluptutuous and effeminate persons, do wholly addict themselves, is nothing else
but ye whetstone of vanity, the mistres of misdemenour, and cossin germane to
idleness. Now it remains to be discussed, what other abuses they have in the
common course of their life. Salust in coniur.
Salust did generally discribe ye gluttony of delicate tre^chermen, when he did
particularly discipher the inordinate appetite of the Romans: the Romans
(says he) to satisfye their bellies, sought out al things yt could be found
either in sea, or on the earth: they did not tarry til hunger or thirst
ouertook the^, but they did prevent these by an arteficial appetite: before the
diluge, the only treasure on the earth was wine, the people did eat and
drink, married and gave in marriage, rise up to play, and used all kind of
dalliance even until the day wherein the windows of Heaven were opened upon
them, till the waters had oueflowed and disfigured the earth, that the very
shard of a drinking cup could not be seen in the world: It is a very
unnatural thing that the belly being made by nature, a place of excrements,
should be made an Idol: but it is a greater shame that the Idol of the
beastly Cyclops should be made a God to Christians, which the true GOD will
at the length confound, together with all them also that make it a God.

It is strange to see the appetite of man: that whereas beasts are contented
with that food which nature has appointed for them, and take no more thereof,
then that quantity which nature has allotted unto them: man should so far
surpass the limits of reason, and reverence due to nature: that with an
insatiable desire he follows those things, which are discommodious,
pernicious, and pestilent unto him. And although in the kind of beasts, the
Lion is most i^co^tinent, most ravenous, and greedy of his pray: and be ^ide
this, Aristot. lib de Histor. animalium. 8. cap. 5.
has a^ excessive appetite, which cannot be stanched without great
superfluity of nourishment: yet for the space of three days, or at the least
two two days after, he is fully satisfied: and the Wolves when they are
gaunted with hunger, do eat rather earth and clay, then they will violently
rush upon the beasts of their own kind. Joseph Ben Gord.
This abstinence is greater then Mirianis, who though she were of singular
behavior amongst the Jews, yet could not abstain from gnawing the bones of
her own child: and man to augment the greedy worm whereof he is possessed,
does invent and use daily, sauces, sirupes, brothes, mixtures: that may prick
his stomach forward, to crave more then it may well contain, John Baptist
Gello incite^
whereby there arises such superfluitye, and such superabundance of naughty
humors in the body, that there be more then fifty kinds of diseases
engendered in the eyes: and by such varietye of tastes, we are provoked to
drink so much, that a great number of diseases: as Catarres, rewmes,
swellings, goutes, dropsies, do shake the foundation of our health, and the
whole frame of our body, and if the body were only cloyd with the
inconueniencies that arise of surfeiting, the riot of banquets, were more
tolerable and less reprouable: but since Corpus onustum Hesternis vitijs,
Horat.
animu^ quoque praegrauat ipsum. The body stuffed with hosterne cates, does
ouercharge the mind.

Our trenchers are to be washed with our tears, our tables whereat we sit
drinking, beluing, and carousing, are to be accounted engines and snares, laid
by the devils subtlety, to entrap our souls: our costly viandes are to be
accounted the lures of gluttony: our musical and sweet sounding instruments
which are prepared to make the mind more cheerful and frollicke: are no
better to be esteemed then alluring Sirens, which eat them whom they delight,
and kill them with their teeth, whom they have called with their tongues. It
were infinite to number the great mishappe that has chanced, and the
outrageous cruelty that has bin committed, after that the mind has been
ouercast with the miste or exhalation that rises from the stomach surcharged
with delicates. The City of the Troyans was drowned in wine, before it was
burnt by fire: Jerusalem was overflowed of gluttony and drunkenness, before
it was ouerrun of the Romans and Turks: the Aegiptians were not so much
ouercom'd by armed men, ^irgil ^eneid* 1
as by the banquettes of Cleopatra: Catiline did besiege Rome with a troop of
pleas^res, before he did threaten it with an army of soldiers: Dido was first
enchanted of Liber Pater, before she was bewitched of the boy Cupid: Nero was
filled with the wines of Campania before he was poisoned with the counsel of
Anicetus, and there was in his stomach a flood of Nectar, before there was Furor
in mente or Ferru^ in manu: ye principal cause why ye Persians were enemies to
the Lidians, was because of the good cheer that they found iu Lidia. Herod o^.
lib. 1.
Now if any man think that the mind being a substance immateriall cannot be
infected by any contagio^ proceeding from the body, he shall perceive his
judgment to be erroneous, both by cause, and by example: the soul I grant
might liue-like an angel in the body, and it does as yet shine in the
corporal lump, but tanquam coelum in coeno. Like an heaven in a dunghill. It
is so nigh the banks and borders of this earthly Tabernacle: nay, it is so
enclosed within the walls and gates thereof that it must of necessity be
defiled with the dust that arises within the walls: but to find out the
reason I will use a very briese discourse, which notwithstanding, shall carrye
some taste of Philosophy. There be some things that belong to the soul
alone, as reason, meditation, reminiscence: some things to the body alone, as
heaviness, augmentation, diminution, and that strength which the Latins call
Robur, the Graecians Ischus One thing there is which is common both to the
soul and the body, and that is, Appetitus or vis concupiscentiae, The appetite
or force of concupiscence which being an ambidexter or parasite both to the
soul and body, inueagleth the soul by the senses of the body, and deceives
ye body by the liking of ye soul: for, when the mind has made ye mayor
proposition of the sillogisme: Whatsoever is pleasant and sweet, is to be liked
of: the body by the force and virtue of ye senses, makes the minor
proposition: ( Dainty cheer is pleasant and sweet,) the appetite does
straightway conclude: Ergo, Dainty cheer is to be liked off. the natural and
carnal man, having learned this lesson, triu^pheth in his own conceit, and is
both ways bent, either to confute ye Stoicke, or defend ye Epicure. but ye
modest and well judging mind, can make a distinction of pleasant things, as
also of pleasure: there is a pleasure that is, Dulcis and decocta, Sweet and
liquid, which melts as soon as it feels the heat of ye mouth, and is
digested as soon as it is devoured: so that being not able to abide ye stamp
of ye teeth, it is rather to be accounted superfluous dross, the^ substa^tial
mettel. There is another pleasure: y^ is, Austera and solida, Sincere and sound:
which though it be not as pleasant as spice, yet it is as necessary as salt,
and though it do not slide through the body as through a conduite, yet it
descends into the mind as y^ evening shower into the caves of the earth: the
true pleasure is neither painted with colors, nor blanched with cookery, neither
sod in a pot, nor roasted on a spit, but the dew thereof droppeth from heaven,
and the fruitful effects thereof are evident to the view of every Christian
cogitation. Now that we have showed the reason of this Simpathy: it remains
that some examples be sent for to illustrate this treatise: to know therefore,
that the diet of the body does leave some color, and impression in the mind,
consider ye diet and disposition of y^ Goths, and Tartarians, who because they
are ^ed with man's blood, and drink the gore of their ancestors, in the skuls
of their ancestors: are therefore cruel, unmerciful, and savage: thirsting
after man's blood, and sucking at the skin for blood, as the child at his
mothers dugs for milk. The Parthians that lick water like dogs, are
courageous in warfare, and no whit effeminate: the Turks measuring, and
dividing their commons by weight and balance, have their wit and magnanimitye
fresh against the fury of the enemies* but the Indians because they are
continually nourished with spires, which kind of nourishment* is very slender:
therefore they are melsh hearted, fearful, and fugitive, to whom I may rightly
compare the men of Saba, which country is very fruitful of sumptuous
delicates, but very barren of good soldiers: like unto these are the
Agrigutini, whose minds, whether prosperity flatter, or adversity threate^,
are continually in Patinis: the ancient Britons are reported to have bin very
valiant and victorio^s, ^ion in vita Neronis
but they are also reported to have lived very hardly, to have used roots for
their bread, herbs for their meat, the raw juice of wild fruits for their
oil, water for wine, trees for houses, and y^ foggy vapors of fennish
grounds, for the smell of perfumes. And geuerally it is always seen y^ in
the coldest Climates and frozen Alps which afforde no banqueting cheer, the
best soldiers have given a notise of their valiant courage. Now when the belly
is well warmed with sweet iunkets, then Venus spreads a delightful carpet,
unto which the eye and affection give a diligent attendance, the mind begins
to burn in lust* and to make excursion beyond the limits of reason: Solomon who
had had experience of both, affirms y^ same. Look not upon wine (says he)
when it glittereth and the color thereof shines in a glass: Proverb. 23.
it goes in with delight, but in the end it will bite like a snake, and like
the^cockatrice it will sprinkle poiso^ Thus far of glottony: but how does Venery
follow, Thine eyes (says Solomon) shall behold strange women, and thy heart
shall utter perverse things, thou shall be like one that sleeps in the midst
of the sea, and like a sleepie governor having lost the healme. Since therefore
by the judgment of this King, whose mind was full fraught with wisdom: these
two instruments, made of the devil to seduce men from good behavior to
E^icurisme, are linked and conjoined. Mise^able is ye state of these, y^ make
pleasure the mother of these two) their Goddess, (...) think no life happy,
unless it be sweet^ed with the sugured juice of a carnal dele^ation, ye seek for
heaven in the center of ^ell, and care not how brutish they become, ^o they be
not covered with the hides and ^orns of beasts: but let him that minds ^o see
good days, and follow Christ (which ought to be y^ principal profession of
christians) make a covenant with his eyes and ears from beholding and hearing of
vanity: when the epicures banquet is as bitter to our taste as gall, and the
sweet savor of fragra^t pouders as loathsome as y^ he^lock, then is an arriual
made at y^ haue^ of christian security, the^ are we entered into y^ straight way
which is indeed a large field of happiness. But yet when we have attained this
many incu^bra^ces will be apposed against our quietness, and the better our stats
is, the more is the devils envy and hatred: but this must not discomfort us.
None can climb to the top of heaven without sweating: and God (as Plato says)
sells his benefits for labor and travail. We must consider that the world
will never cease to be deceitful, the devil never to be malicious, and the
flesh will never intermit his combat and conflicte with the spirit, as long as
we are in this painful pilgrimage. We must suffer the blustering tempest of
adversity, the sharp edge of temptation, and the fiery darts of the devil,
we fight against powers and principalities, and therefore may be wounded, if not
overcome. Our affections may become perfidious unto us, betraying us to our
enemies, and therefore being in danger both of foreign and of domestical
foes: we had need to be very vigilant and circumspect, least conspiracy
accoo^plish that, which violence could not bring to pas When a Christian is
besieged with temptation, Jacob. 1.
let him rejoice, for the Lord proves before he approoueth, and tries
before he trusts, whom he loves them he chastises, and his gold is tried in
the midst of the furnace. If we may obtain glory by victory, then we must
fight to obtain the victory. No man is crowned before he overcomes, and no
man overcomes but he that lawfully strives, let him think as he is provoked
to fight, so he may be provoked to a crown of glory. Yea, one can not miss
of the promotion, unless he willingly forsake it: his heart cannot faint, his
strength cannot fail, except he will. To be willing to fight, is to fight
courageously, and as long as that will continues, God will countenance that
courage. O the exceeding felicitye of a Christian manne, whose only will
being directed by Gods will, is more pearceable then steel, and more
impenetrable then the strong Rock, whose wish atchiueth the victory, and
whose victory is far beyond his wyshe. If we survey the affairs of the
world, we shall find that there is no lucre so vile, nor any gain so gross,
but ere we can compass it, we must stretch joints and sinews, we must
sweat and breath, use restles and endless labor, which when it is purchased,
vanishes like a smokie exhalation, and like a bubble in the water, rises and
faleth in an instant. The Merchant man thinks himself a Monarche, and
vaunteth of his increase, when after a ten years navigations after a thousand
discommodities, dangers and disaduantages, he has gotten a little more
treasure then he had before.

The Soldier when he has tasted the bitter fruits of warfare, when he has
worn his body, altered his complexio^, diminished his health, lost some
principal member of his body, how large soever his stipend be, yet he is
like a dead Truncke that has lost the bravery of his boughs. In seeking the
favor of noble men, in getting and reteyning the friendship of equalles, in the
ambitious laboring for honors and dignities, in y^ whording of coin, and
scraping of commodity, in closing and disclosing, digging and deluing, turning
areable into pasturable, and pasturable into areable, woods into wastes, and
wastes into woods, in building and battering, in turning square into round,
and triangles into quadrangles, is such an infinite labor, and a world of
business, that he which waigheth in a balance both the care and the
commodity, shall find an ounce of commoditye for a pound of care, and he
that puts these things in practice, shall like a perverse Al^umist, distill
a penny out of a portague. Therefore let him that minds to be a true
Christian, despise these transitory, corruptible and contemptible things, for
which the worldly myzer gives no trust to his eyes, has the birds of the
air in suspicion, fears least his own behavior do bewray his base and
barbarous affections. Let him erecte and life up his mind to the celestial and
divine solaces, which neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor the heart
of man is able to imagine, to the pursuing of which, the minds of worldly
Mammonistes are slow footed, drooping and continually dreaming of the
eternity of their barnes, when the very Weasels before their eyes do devour
their corn, and even against their wylles they are drawn of God to heavenly
and spiritual things: upon which they look as Cerberus looked upon the sun,
when he was drawn out of hell, very straungly and vn^^thly: and in deed
their blea^ed eyes cannot long behold the brightness of the divine Majesty.
Now if the worldly felicity could be attained without labor, as it were in a
trance, and as if we should let it in at a window: or if Fortune would throw
into our nets our selves sleeping, as she is feigned to have dealt with her
love Polycrates, then there might be a kind of reason framed by our fancye,
and it might perhaps be believed with an uncircumcised credulity, that it
were a great deal better to serve the world then God: but if there be more
wearines in walking, as a worldling, the^ laboring as a Christian, if to be
choked and strangled with the cares of this world, be an infinite torment: if
to see the conscience besieged with an hundred hels, and to feel the racking
and renting thereof, as it were with a thousand fleshhookes, be an
intolerable grief, then happy and thrice happy is the mortified Christian
that is satisfied with the sweet content of a mean estate, and the moderate
portion that God has allotted him. If we be no where less troubled then in
the ways of God, and no where more wearied then in the way of sinners, as that
voice of damned persons bears witness: Lassati sumus in via iniquitatis, Sapi.
5.
we were wearied in the way of wickedness: is it not an extreme madness, rather
to bestow our labors, lands and life upon those things from which we must
very shortly depart, not into a new Paradise, but into an eternal dungeon,
where there is continual g^ashing of teeth, and the worm never dies, then to
consecrate our lives and liuinges unto the Lord, and for his sake to abide the
uttermost brunt of tribulation, when for our pains we shall have a surpassing
reward: for the honor that we here lost, an unchangeable honor, for the
pleasure that here we forsake, an inestimable felicity? besides all this,
what a singular peace, and what a delicate banquet is a good conscience, not
wexing pale with villainous cogitations, which is better then all the Epicures
delights, then all transitory pleasures, then all curious and exquisite
inticements, wherewith the iugling world does sophistically delude us. What
pleasure can there be in the riches of this world, which before they are
purchased, do weary us, when they are possessed, do infatuate us, and when
they are lost, do excruciate us. Without question, the souls of the wicked
are tossed hither and thither, with perpetual cares, with most intricate
perplexities, and griefs innumerable. This the Lord has affirmed, who as he
cannot deceive, so he cannot be deceived, ^say, 57,
Cor impii quasi mare feruens, the heart of a wicked man is like a raging Sea,
that can take no rest: Nothing is quiet unto them, nothing peaceable, the
trenchers whereon they cut their meat with trembling hands can bear
witness, the meat yt stays in^theyr chaps whilst they are thinking
mischief, can bear witness, their slow and imperfit digestion may bear
witness: the leanes, palenes, and wannes of their cheeks may bear witness. They
are afraid of all things, suspect all things, and every thing is a messenger
of death unto them. Who would therefore aemulate them, or immitate their
manners. Who having forgotten their dignity, their heroycal nature, and their
heavenly Monarche, being made free men are become bondslaues to the world,
living miserably, dying more miserably, and most miserably like to be afflicted
with eternal flames. There is none, but he sees these things, as clearly as
he beholds the Meridian Sun: but there is not one amongst a thousand that
does these things, which he knows are to be practiced, but we cleave as yet
to the dirt, wallow in the mire, and though the loathsome satietie of pleasures
do breed a surfeit unto us, yet cure we the poison of pleasures with the
hemlocke of obstinacy, and though our minds do sometime reclayme us from
such vanities, or rather impieties, yet such cogitations are soon extinet. We
assign the regiment of our minds to a foolish Phaeton, namely to the secure
sensualitye of an appetite charmed with pleasures. Let a Christian man
consider, what a dangerous thing it is, to live amongst them day and night,
whose life is not only an inticement to sin, a wicked May Game and a most
pernicious example, but does with al endeavor, bend it self to the overthrow
of virtue, under the Emperor Beliall, under the standerde of death, and under
the stipende of hell, wageing battle against heaven, against the Lord and
against his anointed.

These are they whom God has delivered into passions of ignominy, into a
reprobate sense, to do those things which are indecent, Rom, 1,
full of all iniquity full of envy, hatred, deceit, malignity, poysenfull,
blasphemers of God, contumelious, proud, disdainful. inuentors of mischief,
unwise, dissolute, disorderly without affection, without mercy, who though
they see the justice of God, yet will not acknowledge it being so far from
excuse, that they which seek to cloak and color their impuritie, are the
seauenfolde sons of the devil, and are worthy to be racked with wild horses
till they confess ye truth. And therefore let them which are zealous in the
Lords ways, separate themselves from the company of such to whom the name of
God is odious, virtue unpleasant, Religion a base profession, godliness a simple
gift, honesty a strange monster, and charity a foolish affection. Let a
certain holy ambytion possess our minds, and let us disdain to take
precepts of them, which therefore offend because they lack the use of godly
precepts. It were better far that they taking example of the godly, by
living well, may learn to be Christians, then that the godly omitting their good
purpose should by living as they do, be transformed to beasts. Let them be
assured, that pleasure when it most delights is at an end, that it falls
headlong into the bosom of sorrow, and that the greatest pleasures will at
the last be turned into sharpest torments. Gluttony is the mother of cruditye
in the stomach, drunkenness breeds the ache of the sinews venereous practices
breed palsies, stifnes of joints, and a roaring ventositie in the entralles.
Pleasures are not sound nor faithful, they salute us with a fair face, but
behind their backs is a grim desolation. And therefore let the^ be shaken off
in time: they embrace freendly, that they may strangle traitorously, and
whosoever performs this admonition, let him bethink himself to what a
number of bad companions he has given a farewell. His body is free from ougly
diseases, his mind is delivered from ignorance, his appetite from sensuality,
his estate from danger, his house from dyscorde, his soul from ye secret
pange of a griping conscience, al things shall then turn to the best unto
him, his afflictions to preservatives, his sorrows and brinish tears, to an
acceptable sacrifice: and the great inconstancy of friends, to a great
confidence in God. I am plunged in a deep and unspeakable sorrow, when I
think upon the fancies, or rather furies of me^, which I can better deplore,
then describe, and rather marvel at then amend. Is it not a great madness, not
to believe the word of God, whose truth is published by the blood of Martyrs,
resounded by the voice of the Apostles proved by miracles, confirmed by reason,
witnessed by counselles, by the heavens declared, and by the devils confesed.
But is it not an exceeding madness, for a man not to doubt of the truth of the
Gospel, and yet so to live as though there were no doubt, but it were false? If
yt be true which is said in the Gospel. It is harder for a rich man to enter
into the kingdom of heaven, Math, 19
then it is for a Cammell to pass through a needles eye, why do we so gape
for rytches, why do we dedicate all our labor to unjust Mammon, making gold
our patron and protector, as though life and death were in the veins of that
vile metal: but here some professors of cauills will take this exception.
Riches are in the number of good things, and are the blessings of God, and
therefore there can be no excess of them, because there is no excess of a
good thing. This reason because it is so well pytcht on the heads of worldly
cormorants, that they take it for a helmet, must be with great consideration
confuted. Riches I grant are the blessings of God, and a clear light of his
favorable countenance, neither is there any excess in the Lords bestowing,
who deals unto every one according to weight and measure: but the excess of
riches proceeds from ye outrageous appetite of man, as the heathens did
prefigure by ye covetous desire of Midas: by the infinite desire of Alexander
Magnus, who imagined a plurality of worlds, for the better instructing of
who^ I am of opinion that Aristotle did especially write his first Book de
caelo. It is (I say) of the inordinate appetite of man, which because it is
excessive, it must of force prosecute an excess of riches. And thus it may be
proved, that it has such an obiecte to work upon. Every thing when it has
gotten a sufficient and proper matter to work upon, employeth his force to
that thing only, as having a task prescribed to it of nature. Therefore if
riches were the proper object and matter of worldly desire, then having gotten
the wealth that it first desired, and fully proposed, as a co^tentation til
the end of life, it would rest in yt as in an haven and be contented with that
only was sought for contentation: but we see the contrary, for it flies from
sufficiency to superfluity, in such fugitive manner, that it seems nothing
will satisfy it, but excess of riches, and to that (indeed) all the
cogitations of ye covetous are bended, ever labouringe, longing and compassing,
till they have aspired to an excessive substance: Ouermatching him whom the
Romans thought matchles in his kind, the wealthy M. Crassus. Much like to
these ravening affections were the chaungeable imaginations of the Heathens,
who placed at first in their Olympus but a few Gods, yet when they wext so
haughty that every one would have a God, for himself, and himself a God,
their heaven wext so full of he Gods and she Gods, that as Iuuenall says,
Iuuenal Satyr. 3.
Atlas has a heavy burden, or to make his meaning more plain, a knauish
load. Now if excess be the object of covetousness, covetousness must of
necessitye be a vice, for all excess and defect properly taken is a vice, and
al excess and defert as Aristotle says, Aristo. Libro, 2 ^^hicor cap. 2,
is to be shunned. Riches therefore are abused by the untamed concupiscence of
man, and are often wrested by a sinister interpretation to abuse.

It is not to be doubted, but the riches, wherewith God advanced Job, were
very singular, and the rare blessings of the Almighty, but the devil that
erroneous Serpent, used them as a bayte and snare to intrappe the soul of Job.
For he imagining that his riches, had lulled him in security, and entangled
his conscience, thought that the spoil of Job his riches, would have been
the sacking of the soul. So riches were an instrument of abuse to the father
of lies. And though the patrimony of Naboth, were ye ordinary mean of God to
serve the use of Naboth, yet the same was an instrument of abuse to the devil
against the soul of Achab. So likewise riches were used of God for the
allurement of Nabuchadnozer, to the acknowledging of of his mercies, but the
devil wrought in him a discontented desire, and brought him to this
absurdity, that he thought Babylon was a Heaven, and himself a God.

There is nothing in the world so precious, but it may be abused, as a
glystering Pearl, may be placed in a Swines snoute: the abuse of riches, is
the excess of riches in man's mind, which because it is an abuse, it must not
be used, and because it is an excess, it must not be coueted, least swelling
with Esops Frogge, to become as byg as a Bull, we burst at length with desire,
and vanish into nothing. The like may be spoken touching the abuse of honors.

It is no doubt, but they are the Ensigns of Justice, and the honorable
rewards of virtue, but yet we see how by ambition they have been abused, and
how by corriuall passions of mighty men, common. Weals have been brought
to great wrack. Was not the grievous distress of Thebes to be lamented, Seneca
in Thebaid,
when Eteocles and Polynices issuing out of the same womb, did violently rush
into the bowels of their Country, as a Lion and Leoparde: when they, which by
birth were equal: by blood, were brethren: neither distant by womb, nor
disseuered by Country: they against the prescript of nature, whose sinewous
persuasion does exceed all the bravery of Rhetoric against the Law of
Nations, against the law of Arms, against all right and reason: chose rather
mutually to afflict themselves, then not to despise one another, as though
contempt had been the crown of Princes, and as though to despise had been as
much as to touch Heaven with their fingers.

If ye will have a witness more nigh unto your memory, look upon Rome:
which was so wasted and consumed by the immoderate contempt of equalles, and
did so languish by the excessive conflict of noble Peers, that it seemed
rather to be a shamble to the carcasses of virtuous Citizens, the^ a prison
to the voluptuous, and a grave to the riotous. Pompeie did plesantly jest at
Caesar, Caesar did more esteem the paring of his nails, then the honor of
Pompeie, both their swords were drawn against the naked common Weal, one
Sheep was committed to two Wolves, and the final end of their contempt, was
the funeral of their common Weal. These actions did follow and immitate the
contentions of Marius and Sylla. Marius made little estimation of all the
Nobility, Sylla did take Marius for a vile and base borne creature, as an
abject or forlorn person: but this light contempt was of great weight, and the
scalefire of pride could not be extinguished or repressed without the downfall
of the common Weal. Villeius Pater cul.
Marius being constrained fled to Carthage, in whose ruins and relics
whilst he lodged, Marius beholding, defaced Carthage, Carthage beholding,
disgraced Marius, one of them might have been a comfort to the other.

Thus were honors peruerslye drawn from their proper end, to the pursuing of
an unlawful tyranny, and yet it is most certain, that they be God his
special benefits and signs of his just approbation. Saul was invested of God
with most excellent honor, but the devil racked the power of Saul to the
tyrannical persecution of David. It is best therefore to seek the glory that
is of God, and not that which is of men. Why do we hang so upon the estimation
of man? Why do we fashion our selves to this world? Why do we seek to be
commended for rych and wealthy, howsoever we be dyscommended as ignorant
and waywarde? In nakedness we appeared at first, and our last appearaunce shall
be in nakedness: therefore to care for the morrow, which perhaps we shall not
see, or cramme our Barnes, of whose fatnes we shall not eat, is it not a
folly, a misery, and a madness? If it be true, Prou, 2,
that the righteous shall inhabit the earth, and the simple minded shall
continue in it. If the ungodly shall be wiped from the face of the earth, and
they that work wyckednes shall be taken from thence. Why do we live in
pleasures, since we cannot continue in them, because we live in pleasures. If
we have any faith in us, why do we not believe that the Lord will sometime
say: go ye cursed into everlasting fire, and contrariwise, Come ye blessed,
possess the kingdom that was prepared for you, from the beginning of the
world? Why do we fear nothing less then hell? And why do we hope for
nothing less then the kingdom of God? Why are we in name Christians and not
indeed? Why cry we Lord, Lord, but do him no service? Awake worldlings, cast
the foggie mist from your eyes, see and say the truth, give pleasures their
pasporte if they fawn upon you, believe them not they are the forerunners of
death, and they have clapped hands with destruction. Endeavor to enter at the
narrow Gate, be not obstinate, because ye are many. Know that but a few
shall be crowned, and it is as great a glory to be crowned with few, as it is a
shame to be condemned with many. But that they may the better be persuaded
by me, and give more credit to these assertions which I have set down, I
will by the grace of God, unfold the sweet treasures of a solitary life,
joining thereunto an exhortation, whereby they may be moved, though not
mended, and loath their vices though not leave them: But here at my first
entrance, they will trippe me with this objection. Would you have us go
into the Wilderness, that is a place for Hermites: to the Forest, where Palmers
do macerate themselves: to the Hills and Valleys, where solitary Sheep
heardes do abide: or to the Woods and Groves, where Outlawes hide their
heads? Their patience in such sort I mean not to offend, because I will not
touch that string whereon they harp so much.

The continuance of this dyscourse shall make manifest, that as I aim at a
fayrer mark, so I mean to take my standing on a better ground. But for the
excusing of the Hermites life, thus much I do answer: Prou, 26
not as greatly urging it, but as aunswering fools according to their folly.
The Hermit having nothing, has nothing to be robbed of, is not with cares
over pressed, nor with the multitude of the unjust ouercrowded. The rich
personages, in whose houses swarm troops of friends and servants, have so
many moathes commonly feeding upon their bags, unless they be altogether
expenceles Eoclioes, that the silver falls out of them before it can well be
spared. And in such variety of friends, whereof some be choleric, some
melancholicke, some sage, some voluptuous, some humble, some proud, some
merciless, some pitiful, some envious, some faithful, and this last some is
the least some: in such discord of affections, disagreement of inclinations,
dissent of motions, contrariety of humores, whether or whom will he please
that has shuffled himself with so many: and entered into a league with men so
diversely disposed. If he be a dauncer, his Stoicall friends are at his
elbowe, with a pair of pinsors to keep him in tune. If he be no dauncer, his
Epicureall friends think straight way that he is in a trance, that he is
dyspossest of his lively spyrites, that he is inflamed with a foolish zeal,
that he is allured by Pulpet persuasions, as if they should say, that he were
tempted of God: and when he is thus estraunged from their fashions, they are
ready to be at defiaunce with his freendship.

Charus erit Verri, qui Verrem tempore quo vult,
Accusare potest.
Iunenall, Satyr, 3,
Verres amongst his friends does only him recyte
That being his confederate may him of crimes indite.
Now there is an other sort which be of the mean pitche, and they allow to
their friend some kind of dancing, but some they abiudicate, having that
saying of Aristotle for a principle: Omnis saltatio non est illicita, Arist. in
art poetica.
quemadmodum nec omnis motus. All dancing is not unlawful, no more then every
motion. There is a fourth sort, and they can not abide their freende to give
his mind to any thing, to which they do not addict themselves, though they
do not mislike the quality wherein he delights, saying that a freende must
be alter idem, so like, that if he spitte after an other sort, he is to be
accounted a Schismatike. Amongst so many heads, senses, and sentences, such
change and mutability does ensue, that every morning, wherein a man so
distracted by diverse persuasions arises out of his bed, he arises with an
other mind, and as an other man like to these animatio diaria, Cicero.
and horaria which continue in their estate but for an hour or a day: or like
to Heraclitus his horse, Arist. Metaphisi. 3, c. 5
which going into a River, did never return out of the River, ye same horse
that he was when he went in Though this be an inconvenience, yet it is seasoned
with this commodity, that a man in company is merry, and passes away the
time by some recreation or other. See how we triumph in our folly. We laugh
as loud as Jupiter did, Valor. Flaccus argonautic. Lib. 6.
when he was heard to laugh from the heaven to the earth: but it is impossible
that our mirth should not be ouercast, with a cloud of sorrow. Every
foresight of some mischief being at the door ready to arrest us, or
remembrance of some sorrow, having lately past by, and frozen our hearts with
his stormy countenance, daunteth our cheer, interrupteth our mirth,
changes our Commedie into a Tragedye, and our laughter into lamentation.
Every doubtful rumor of a perilous thing, makes our heart to sobbe, our
mind to fear, and smites the whole man with such an universal ecstasy, that
we feel as it were a worm, feeding on our hearts, and a threatening that
makes us to shake, and all our joints to tremble. How soon might a man
discharge himself of this burden, if he would profess a solitary and chaste
life: which I will first illustrate by a similitude, and afterward by reasons
and examples. When a man makes his Testament, he renounceth the world, and in
a little paper he does orderly and conveniently dispose every thing. When he
is dead, he is never more likely to be troubled again with such cares, or with
any worldly business, which is the fountain of sorrow, of which, as often as we
think, we cannot choose but sighe. If a man would ordain his will, take his
leave of his carnal friends, bid the worldly cares and cogitations adewe, and
betake him self to a solitary or sober life, I mean amongst men, not amongst
beasts: amongst men also, not as separated from their company, but as
sequestered from their contagion, he should not in any wise enjoy less
quietness and tranquillity, then if he were in his grave, the door whereof is
always shut, that no evil tydinges may enter. He that sits on the throne
of wealth, compassed with a large circle of friends, has (as long as the
sun-shyne of Fortune does warm his bags, and as long as his glistering
substance, makes every man to cast up his eyes) a great multitude of
friends, but when Fortune begins to wage battle with him, when his riches
be melted, and his authority eclipsed, then every freende flincheth from him,
and then he is as wylling for shame and sorrow to forsake his friends, being
then by compulsion enforced to lead a solitary life. And hand he not been
better to have chosen a solitary life at the first, that is, not to have
reposed his confidence in friends, but to have wholye relied upon his God,
trusting friends as mistrusting them, and so determining of them, as having a
doubt of the^? To be chained to a freende, is a servitude, and to follow him in
all things, is to leap beyond the line, to raunge out of the way, and to leave
God for man. Now, when after our pleasures comes a change, and after the
dawning of our joy, ensues a black and gloomy night of care and sorrow, then
we wish for death: but that desire which encrocheth upon us, by the violence of
adversity, is nothing so welcome unto us, as that we willingly admit. If the
man so debased, and thrown from the top of a prosperous estate, had at the
first given himself to solitarines, he had wanted, I grant many pleasures,
but he had lacked also many sorrows, and he had escaped that extreme
sorrow, into the bottom of which, aduersitye has thrown him, and how can
it be, but that such a life should be better, the^ a life led in pleasures,
when he wysheth after the end of his delights, never to have enjoyed them,
Augustus
saying some time as Augustus said: O vtinam caelebs vixissem, orbusque
periissem. I would I had never been a husband, I would I had never been a
father: sometime with a tragical tune lamenting, Senec^
duru^ est seruire, cum didiceris dominari: It is an hard thing to learn
servitude after sovereignty. Sometime with dyscontented Cicero exclayming:
Cicero.
Cum no^ sis qui fueris, non est cur velis viuere. Since thou can not enjoy
thy living, why would thou enjoy thy life? If thou had been solitary
Cicero, thou had not drunk of the poysonfull cup of envy, thou had
escaped the swords of Antonius and Herennius, carrying thy head upon the
point of his sword, should not have made the Romans to have gazed upon it,
as Children stand wondering at a Puppet erected on a pinnacle. Much eloquence we
had lacked, if thou had not been in Fortunes favor: but yet many honor
thy eloquence, that care not for thy fortune. If thou had declaymed against
a Pillar of thine own house, within thy private walls, and had imagined
it to have been Antonie, and had engraven therevppon, thy Philippicall
Orations, neither had we lost the eloquence which we contained in them, nor
thou the dignity in which thou did pronounce them. Let every one consider,
to what course of life he commits himself. If he make pleasures his
companions, his money cannot long keep him company: if he make moneie his
companion he shall not lack copartners. His Penelope can not be without fiftye
wooers, a company of good fellows, commonly called thieves, will be ready ad
conciliandam beneuolentiam, of his argenteall assembly, gathered together from
diverse coasts and quarters of the world. If he seek one lie to have the
applause and approbation of the common people, as a perpetual Perithous unto
him, he follows after flying Birds, and beats the wind with his breath.
The people is a chaungeable society, and he must be a perfitt Chamaeleon
that retains their favor. Demosthenes did think that the Athenians good
will, had been for his singular eloquence in the highest degree toward him,
and I think it was: but as it is the use of human things, which fall when
they are at the highest. Diogenes holding up his scrip on his staff, whilst
Demosthenes did with an oratoricall discourse allure the ears of the
Athenians, withdrewe from Demosthenes all his auditors, and turned all their
eyes to a vain spectacle, verifying that which he did before speak of them,
that they were Bellua multorum capitum, A beast of many heads, to use a more
civil interpretation, men of many minds. Now he that ^ancieth so much the
peoples favor, must either serve their humors, or else they will utterly reject
him: if he follow their affections, he must be a slave to their wylles, and so
not be led by his own reason, which is proper to man: and in him contrary
winds must blow at the same time, which combat is against nature. He must
hold with some of the people one thing, and with other some y^ contrary: and
so in inward affection. He shall fight for himself against himself, being
diversely distracted, Li^ius, Lib, 1
making a Met^us Suffetius of his own mind, plunged in the hell of doubts,
and a galla-mafrie of his conscience, which if he wound, that is an other
hell, and if he die without repentance, he must look for the third hell. But
he will so provide, that he be in great favor with some honorable personage,
and so having gotten a golden vizarde to a badde face, he thinks he may
mask in all kind of pleasurs, without any stayning of his credit: for as for
conscience, that is the least question, he thinks his estimation can never be
impaired by any change of fortune, imagining that he is secundus a Jove, De
moribus vltima fiet quaestio Iuuenal.
the next to Jupiter, and like a foolish Weather-cocke, turns to every proud
imagination, as his fancy windeth him, but he must not think, that his mind
can be faber fortunae suae, the carpenter of his own fortune. He may imagine
that he has golden Mountains, that he is a Citizen of the silver world, that
he is the son of the white Hen, and many such gloses he may make upon a
fantastical text. But Fortune cannot be faithful, she is only steadfast in
unsteadfastness, rolling continually hither and thither, according to the circute
of her wheel. Plautianus was in high fa^our with Seuerus, Dion in vit. Sever.
but his estimation was nothing so great as his ruin, his adversity by many
degrees exceeded his authority: if he had not been known too many, many had
not known his fall: if the light of the Moon were not very great, who would
watch half a night to behold the eclipse. To lose at one clappe the credit
which he did purchase by so great service, and so continual attendaunce, that
he did even serve out a servitude to purchase a kingdom, which both to
obtain and lose, almost in one moment, to change his honney for poison, and
his bliss for bale, must of force be a great anguishe to Plautianus. A
whetstone to his myseries, a wormwood to his remembrance, and a canker to his
heart. If he had dwelt in a mean Village, under the name of a poor
Gentleman, he should have been loved of his neigh bours, but not envied: and
though he had been a scandal unto his enemies, yet he should not have been
unto them a ridiculous spectacle. It is not my meaning, to persuade any manne
to dwell in Diogenes his Tubbe, or Clearchus his Truncke, to live only by
eating the air, or to repose his cheifest delight in the buzzing of a Be, but
to exhort every one, that he single and seuerre his desire from the worldly
delicates, to estraunge his cogitations from the allurements of the eye, to
restrain his appetite from the devils triangle, Bacchus, Cupid, and Venus.
That is, not to be accounted a chaste and contemplative life, which is consumed
in corners upon a melancholicke passion, or continued in deserts upon an
amorous desperation, or which is spent to loathing the society of men, but
not in forsaking and renouncing the company of vices. They which so pass the
time, that the print of their foote-steppes cannot be perceived, to tend
either toward the Court of Virtue, or to the Court of Venus, but stand still
in the meeting of these two ways, are rather to be accounted Neutralles the^
Christians, rather sluggish drones, then either godly Eremites, or celestial
Eunuchs, or solitary Virgins, hating rather men with Tymon, then the sin of
Man with S. Augustine. The popish Monks make a gooly show every one of them
living solus cum sola, I would have said solo, but that they serve not Bona
Dea, and therefore they use not her precept.

Non intret faemina limen. These are not the true professors of a solitary and
virtuous life, being nothing else but the Popes Adamant, not to draw iron, but
coin unto him. But they only are accounted the perfitte Solitaria^ns, and
they only are precious in the sight of God, which behave themselves in this
world like Strangers and Pilgrims, being as it were ^ncarnate Angels, having
their minds fixed on the heavenly delights, and on the heavenly knowledge:
which are base in the sight of Men, fools to the Stoikes, blocks to the
Epicures, cast awayes to the contemptuous, and to express all in one word,
worms and not men. They are like Beacons upon hills, which stand in a
solitarye place, and yet give light to the whole Country round about, at whom
every worldling does gaze, as at a Stranger, or outlandish person, meruailing
whence he came, whether he will, or what course he means to take: but these
strangers of the world, stand at a bay with pleasures, at a defiance with the
devil: having crucified themselves to the world, and the world unto them,
they put a great distinction between the Harp of Paris, and the Harp of
David, betwixt the dancing of Debora, and the Jewish women, Statius in Achilie
id,
and y^ dancing of Venus, and Lycomedes his Daughters, being never merry,
but when it is said unto them, Come let us go into the house of the Lord, Psalm.
22.
because their feet shall stand within the gates of Jerusalem, never delighted
to throng with the multitude, but when they go ad domu^ dei cum frequentia,
Psalm, 55*
to the house of the Lord with a great assembly.

They seek not to have their names blazed by the Trumpet of the common people,
they do not watch, nor care, nor travail for a popular freendship, they do
not hawk nor hunt for lucre and gain, but if it please the Lord to place them
in seats of honor, they take it as a free gift, not as a merited reward,
using their honor to the Lords honor, ready at al times to resign it, when it
shall please him to remove it: and if it please the Lord to keep the^ in a low
estate, and to bar them from the weight of honors, they are contented with
his grace, and making friends of the wicked Mammon, upon whom they do not
rely, because they must not make such a base matter their Bulwark, but
charitablie dispensing their substance, to the use of their needy Brethren,
to the discharge of their own want, and to the glory of God: they so use y^
world as not abusing the world. But in these days, unless a man be frollicke,
and dissolute, he is accounted melancholic: unless he have a round invention
to return a quippe, he is accounted lunaticke: if he cannot cozen, he is a
sott: if he be simple, he is a fool: if he be solitary, he is a (...),
but if he be a familiar companion, one that is taught to the game, and a
confederate in venereous practices, Ovid*
such a one, as Ovid describes. Qui canit art canat, qui bibit art bibat: he
is accounted immediately a good fellow, a flower of this age, and he is invested
with such sible titles, that he follows the race of them that praise him, as
the Ape does the steps of them that trace him. The solitary man has few
friends, and therefore few enemies: he takes no parts* and therefore is
partaker of no harms. Cicero was once determined to prosecute his study, and
not to meddle in the civil war, betwixt Caesar and Pompeie, but alas he
drew his feet too late out of the mire, wherein so long he had bedawbed them:
for showing before a freendly countenance to Caesar, and professing great
freendship to Pompeie, such like affections to persons so diversely affectioned,
he was looked for of the one, and longed for of the other: the one claymed him,
the other challenged him: Caesar was iealious of him, and set Scoutes to prye
whether he applied himself any way to the pleasuring of Pompey, and Pompey
also watched him very narrowly, with an attentive heed, examining his
proceedings, and doubting that he did more esteem of Caesar then of him: so
that Cicero then beginning to be solitary, was debarred from his intent, and
the more close and solitary that he was* the more diligently and
circumspectly was he watched: so that it is not enough to shake of partiality
and affection, and go to his study, and there betroth himself to his
Minerua, having the world before him, in a Cosmographicall Map, and the
state of the common Weal in the parliament of his cogitations, but he must set
upon his door in the first year of his Man hoode: Hic situs est Vasias: Vasias
lies buried here: as though he had lost his life, and had entered into a new
world. For if a man be half alive and half dead, to this wicked world, full
of contentions and cares, he purchases to himself the name of Amphibion, a
beast that lives both on water and on land, and such a munke is like to the
bare scalpe of a Monks head, that is half an head, and half a skul: such
demi-worldlinges should be used like the Batte, which was thruste both from
beasts and birds, and have a garment shaped after two fashions, that he may
learn of his coat what deformity there is in his mind, but the linges are so
charmed with the sweet coniuration of pleasure, that they think their
delights shall never have an ebb, that there shall be no intermixion of sorrow, no
change of fortune: that they shall entreat age with a congie, death with a
kiss, the hellish tyranny with a devout placebo, and the God that makes the
Temples of Heaven to shake with thunder, by pouring out a few words in form
of a prayer. Sith they have abundance of all things, ioculiaritie at will,
pleasure in their hands, poverty under their feet, wealth in a chain, which
they pluck in, or let out, as it shall please their fancies: they are fully
persuaded, that they shall never taste the cup of sorrow, that they shall
never be pricked with thorns: that they shall never behold the sword of
vengeance. These voluptuous Thrasoes, think that they shine like the greater
stars, which obscure the less. And indeed they shine in a kind of bravery:
but how? Even as y^ glimmering of a glassie substance, which is darkened as
soon as it appears, and from the Orient to the Occident thereof is a very
short space, and a little distance. In ye dark clouds of misery, in the
ruin of prosperity, in ye wayne of fortune, in the confusion of states, and
the conversion of times: where be these sparkling stars Hector, Troylus,
Deiphobus, Paris, and Priamus? where is the pomp and majesty of that great
kingdom? where be these gorgious Women, Andromache, and Hecuba? where be these
divine walls, built, erected, and established, by y^ hands of Neptune and
Apollo? where is there a monument, print or sign of y^ large and famous
region, which was called Dardania? Troy is not in so good case that it is
turned into standing Corn, as the Poet imagined, when he said Iam seges est
vbi Troia fuit: Ovid in Epistol.
but the corn is cut, and the stubble remains. These same stars have
now lost their light, and are covered with the mantle of darkness. They may
say, we were Trojans, but now are ashes: we were stars, but now are
carcasses: we were Grapes, but now are dregs: we were the honor of Troy, but
now are the footestoole of the Grecians. O wonderful change, importunate
times, and crooked fortune. The Sheepeheardes do sing in the field, the
conquest of the Trojans, and the Trojan war is the Sheepeheards caroll. O
slipperie dignities, headlong honor, fugitive glory: which in one moment
lighted upon them and rebounded from them. But these were mighty men that
bare too high a sail, and therefore had justly such a stripe given them, and
such a penalty inflicted, let it be so: But shall Hector die, and Astianax
live? Shall the thunderbolt of Jove strike down the Giants, and shall Phaeton
that proud boy escape the force thereof? Shall the trees fall, and shall not
the leaves be moved? Shall Cities be shaken with earthquakes, and shall
cotages stand, it is impossible, and incredible: but what is this against the
voluptuous? Troy was deceitfullie overcome by the Greekish craft, and perjury:
but Troy was first bathed in Wine, before it was circumuented by fraud,
Virgill.
and drenched in blood.

Inuadunt vrbem vino somnoque sepultam. The Greeks invade a careless drunke^
Town.

When I call to mind, how the sumptuous buildings, which the Romans did
consecrate to pleasure, are turned to nothing, how their Theaters,
Amphitheaters, Circi and delightful bathes are withered with a light drynes,
dissolved with a little blast, and rowlde down as it were with Fortunes
da^liance. I marvel that the Epicures are so secure, that they think their
joys shall always continue, or if they think on death, yet they imagine, that
after their death they shall be renowned for some rare Trophee of pleasure:
when death has once seysed upon them, all such things are discontinued,
neither can they look back to their former pastimes: the Idolles of of their
Epicurisme shall be thrown down by the breath of his mouth, before whose
face, the Idols of the Gentles were dissundred into dust, and now in dust are
they buried. Let them therefore before their death think of their death, let
them before they be embarcked, meditate both of the Haven, which is the Port
of happiness, and of the Rock, which is the receptacle of the unhappy: and let
them in mind foresee the grim and blustering countenance of the terrible and
threatening day, in which the Axletrees of the world shall fly in sunder, the
stars shall fall from the heavens, when the Sun shall be ouercast with an
iron color, hyding his head because he has lost his light, and the moon
being deprived of her light, shall stand astonished, when the revenging fire
shall drop from Heaven, and the sparks of the lightning shall kindle in the
stonye Rocks: when the Seas and fountains shall burn, when the air shall be
inflamed with burning clouds: when this ancient form of the world shall be
changed. Let them think of y^ miserable Dungeon, which contains the powers
of darkness, that loathsome lake of hell, where the devils are plunged, as in a
swallowing gulphe, out of which there is no egresse, buried in the bottom of a
vaste furnace, and breathing out of their nostrelles the smoke of vengeance,
out of their mouths an eternal fire, to torment the distressed: with one
hand they stretche out bright firebrandes, in the other they hold their three
forked fuskins, both of them as fit instruments of their tyrannous cruelty.
There is continual gnashing of teeth, sighing and sorrowing, both of the
devil himself, and those whom he scourges, with whips that will never be
worn, scorcheth with fire that will never be extinguished, fettereth with
chains that will never be loosed, and teareth with wild Bulls that will never
be wearied, consumes with a worm that will never be filled, dysioynteth with
rackes which will never be broken. The Prince of darkness howleth, because he
has lost the heavenly mansion, wherein before he had the use of inestimable
joys. And they because they left the happiness, y^ was offered unto them, if
they would have left the ways that led to destruction. Let them to whom God
permits the fruition of this vital air, think of these things, and lay
them up deeply in their hearts, let them lift up their eyes to heaven, and
their hearts to the heavenly comfortes, let them long to be placed in the
Parradise of bliss, and to be cladde with the robes of glory, to be crowned
with the garland of victory, to be initiated into the mysteries, and admitted
into the secret treasure of that divine contemplation, which is not by any
man's speech, or thought counteruailable, by the benefit of which they shall
behold the shyning gates of the heavenly Jerusalem, the walls streets, and
dwellings thereof, y^ troop of Citizens and their mighty Monarche: whose
Towers are of precious stones, whose buildinges are adorned with Sapphire and
Smaragdi: Then they shall see the Sacrifice of their redemption, the pure,
holy, and immaculate Lamb, with the quyre of Angels, they shall glorify God,
amidst ye blessed number of Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and Confessors, with
the righteous Men and Matrons, with the innocent Virgins and Children.
Wherefore let them desire to be delivered from these fleshly bonds, let them
be wyllingly content to leave their Tents of Ceder, that dwelling with
Cherubins and Seraphins, and the happy souls of the Saints, they may
triumphantly sing these hymns unto the Lord, which are used in Sion. Let
them add to these three, three other contemplations, very necessary and
convenient, let them deeply I say deliberate of these three things: First,
how base our estate is in this life. Secondly, how discommodious this world
is unto us. Thirdly, how short and momentarye this life is. For the first, let
them enter into the consideration of man's original, who when he comes into
the world, does with great weakness, imbecility, fear and trembling, enjoy
the earth* and receive the air: he shrinketh, quaketh, and quauereth,
stagereth and starteth back, as though he would gladly return, and reenter
into the closette of his mothers womb. And for the evident demonstration of
his mysliking of this world, he begins to weep, and cry out in most rufull
and pitiful manner, with a skreeking and doleful gen^thliacon, which ^s so
proper to the nature of man, when it first sprouteth in this world, that the
learned Mirandula not unwisely said, Joan. Pic. Mirand. lib. 7, in Astro.
that a Child as soon as he is borne, gives out no sign, which is proper to
man, but only weeping: and has he not good cause of weeping, when he
comes into the Theater wherein Maliciousnes plays her prize, when he
comes into a veil of myseries, into a deserte full of unclean byrddes, into
the world (I mean) possessed of white devils and black devils, into a place
that received him being actually innocent, but will send him back, being
overflowed of vices, and when he grows in age, he grows like a tender
herb, unto which he has often been, and may well be compared, not for any
internal power, wherein he resembles the herbs of the field, but for an
internal impotencie, for his fraltie, tenderness and weakness, for his great
need of underpropping, cherishing and defending, subject to the coldness of the
air, subject to the parching of the Sun, subject to rage and violence, and
when he is even at the top of his perfection, how far is he excelled in
many things of the brute beasts, which he takes upon him to manage, to use
at his pleasure, and with a lyon-like look to despise. Aristot. R^etoric. 1.
cap. 11.
All temporal and worldly delight, consists in three things: in perceiving
things present, which are delightful unto us: in remembering things past,
which have been pleasant unto us: and in hoping for things to come, which may
be pleasant unto us. In these three things, Man may challenge the victory: but
quietness consists in three other things. In perceiving things pleasant,
without hurt: in remembering things past, without grief: in looking for
things to come, without fear. And in these three things, Man is ouercomed of
the brutish creatures. Variety likewise consists in three things: in
enjoying many things: aunswering to many affections: in finding out helps to
nature: in knowing many things: in those three, Man is the victor. But
contentation is reposed in three other things: in being fre^ from mutabilitie
of desires, in being satisfied with that which natures bounty does exhibit,
in knowing nothing that might be wyshed to be known: and herein the savage
beasts have pre-eminence. There be four small things in the earth says
Solomon, and yet they are wyser then men that be wise. Prou. 30
The Antes a people not strong, yet prepare they their meat in the Summer.
The Connies, a people not mighty, yet make they their houses in the Rocks. The
Grasshoppers have no kings, and yet they go all forth by bands. The Spider
holds with her hand, and is in kings palaces. So the Lord that he might
show how weak man's power is, being compared to other creatures, that his
own power might cleerelye shine in the creation and government of them, does
thus expostulate with Job. Job, 39,
Who has set the wild Ass at liberty, or who has loosed his bands? It is
I which have made the wilderness his house, and the salt places his dwellinges.
He mocketh the multitude of the City, he hears not the cry of the
dryuer. And again. Have thou given the horse strength, or covered his neck
with neyghing, he diggeth in the valley, and rejoices in his strength, he
goes forth to meet the harnest man, he despyseth fear, and turns not his
back from the sword. Job being greatly apalled and daunted, with these and
such like speeches, does confess his imbecillitie, acknowledges his baseness,
and remooueth from his mind all opinion of statelines, and with great
humility, meekenes, and lenitye of mind, frames this answer to the Lord.
Behold I am vile, what shall I answer thee, I will lay my hand upon my
mouth.

This may sufficiently argue man's ignobilitie and contemptible estate in this
life: if we rest only in the natural manne, and go no further: but this
notwithstanding he will scarce believe, that this world is discommodious and
dangerous unto him, since he tastes the fruits of most acceptable
freendshippe, and has such a large title to so many friends. By that record
I will be tried, and as the judgment of freendshypp is registered in the hearts
of wise men, let definitive sentence be given. The discolored and mutable
affection of friends has driven many to that exigent, that they have been
ready to aduowe and betake themselves to a voluntary exile, whereof Vmbricius
the Roman was one, who made this protestation.

proponimus illuc Iuuenal Satyr, 3,
Ire fatigatas vbi Daedalus exuit alas.
Thither I mean to hie Whither the wearied Dedalus constrained was to fly.

And he gives afterward a substantial reason.

Quis nunc diligitur, nisi conscius, and cui feruens
Aestuat occultis animus semperque tacendis.
What man is now beloved,
but he whose guilty mind
Does feel the flames of secret sins,
and can no comfort find.
Solomon did much lament the defect of charity, and the coldness thereof, when
he considered that the poor and innocent manne was freendles and succourlesse.

I beheld ( says Solomon) the ^eares of the innocent, and there was none to
comfort him, and he could not resist the violence of adversaries, being
destitute of all men's aid. Therefore I praised them that were dead, Eccle, 4,
more then them that were living, and happier then both did I judge him that
was not yet borne. As it was in Salomons time, so is it now, and I fear
worse. What cruelty is daily committed of neighbor against neighbor, brother
against brother, friend against freende?

non hospes, ab hospite tutus,
Nec socer a genero, fratrum quoque gratia rara est
nor host his guest does spare. Nor son in law the father in law, and
brothers love is rare.

There is nothing more common in these days, then freendly salutations,
sugered speeches, large promises, fauning faces, favorable words, the
fidelity of the forehead, and the charity of the countenance.

But a freende that will take his heart out of his breast, and gage it for thy
safetye, to whom thy tears be as grievous as the drops of his own blood,
which accounts thee his own dear worth, though thou be deformed by
pouertye: such a friend is the beauty of the world and his freendship is a rare
mystery to the consideration of man. But such friend ship is ye imagined
freendship of Aristotle, which is (so have we corrupted and altered nature) an
accident but not inhaerent in any subject: an excellent thing, and divinely
described. But ye good Philosopher (peace be to his cinders) could not give an
instance of a perfect friend, though he gave many rules and documents, which
may direct to freendship. Nothing tinckleth more in the ears of men, then the
name of society, and the profession of amity, nothing seems more delectable
unto us, then the name of freendship, nothing more detestable then the name of
enimitie: yet in the common practice of our life, that which by words we do
so greatly dyscommend* by deeds we do confirm and approve, and in our
hearts enimitye has a francke tenement: freendshyp is tenant at will, which
in every choleric fury, we are ready to extrude. This is the cause that
freendship is so clowded by anger, so diminished by suspicion, so weakened by
emulation, so corrupted by envy, so supplanted by treachery, so sold for
commodity, so changed with nouelty, so far distant from constancy, that
this only remains to a man to beast of in freendshyppe, that he is not
deceived nor be trayed by his friends. Now if friends be so disprofitable, and
freendshyppe so dangerous a thing in this World, what are then our foes in
this world our sworn foes, our bitter enemies, such as are never satisfied,
till their eyes be glutted with beholding a whole Ae^na of miseries falling
upon us. Let him loath therefore this world, let him loath this life, let him
desire to leave this carcass. This life is indeed a death, and this carcass
but a Tomb and Sepulcher of a shry^ed soul. Phill. 1.
Let him desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, for that is the best
without comparison. Let him lastly call to account the shortness of this life.
Let him mark how the Feathers are almost as soon molten as they begin to
grow.

Man ( says Job) is of a short continuance, and full of trouble, Job, 14,
he buddeth as a flower, and is soon cut down* he vanishes also as a
shaddowe and continues not. Though a man ( says David) should pass the
compass of a thousand years, Psalm, 90
they are but as yesterday with thee, and as a watch in the night. Thou take
them away, as it were in the flowing of the sea, they are as a dream. They are
in the morning as grass, that vadeth away, which vadeth in the fame morning
wherein it flowrisheth, in the evening it is cut up, and withers away:
all our days, pass away from us by thine anger, we spend our years, and
they are like unto a tale, in the days of our life, be but seauentie years,
and if we be most healthful, but eyghtye years, the greatest excellency of
them is troublesome and grievous, which when it passes away we do immediately
vanish. Let us therefore make great account how we spend ye days of our
peregrination in this world, and the longer we live, let us live the better,
God will not be wanting to our will, if our will be not wanting to our selves,
let the worldling weigh in his mind, the reasons and precepts that of the
sacred word of God I have borrowed. If he think them to burthenous, let him
think of the reward that he shall have for the carriage. The weight wherewith
he is charged, is the weight of pearls, not of quarry si^nes. Every ounce has
a pound of commodity: and let the godly Christian take this poetical clause,
not as poetical but true, and as a freendly farewell of a contemplative
Christian.

Hic sumus extorres, alienaque regna tenemus
sub grauis exilii seruitiique iugo: Mantua

Est illic natale solum, sedesque penatum,
Regnat vbi magno maximus orb pater.
Here under heavy yoke of servitude,
Like banished men, we run a pilgrims race,
There is our Country and our only God,
Where only God does bear imperial mace.
The Authors Resolution.
SIncke down into the bottom of thy grave,
Into the dankish den of Uestaes womb
Thou mildering lump of my despised coarse:
With greenish I
Mantle let thy loins be cladde,
Bestow thine entralles on the griping worms.
And at the dawning of that dreadful day,
When Christ as corronell of blessed Saints,
Shall be enuironde with a burning Sphere,
A radiant Star to his tryumphant Church.
When hallowed souls shall to their bodies fly,
And damned ghostes shall be recorporate,
Rise thou again, and with these fleshly eyes,
Behold the flesh of thy sweet Savior Christ.
Strike then thine heart, and let thy tears distill
Strain then thy voice to hear the Echoes sound,
Which with a cheerful chaunt may bid thee come:
May bid thee come to taste the joys of Heaven,
To bear a Crown, to take eternal rest.
And thou my soul which wandrest here too long,
In desert vaste of worldly wilderness,
Fly to the utmost Heaven, thy native soil,
To take thine heritage among the Saints,
To hold a plotte of Parradise for share.
And leave the Wagon of this earthly moulde,
To be dissundred by the tools of death.
Make heaven thy Haue^, make Sions mount thy tower.
Make there thy nest, where Hermons dew does drop,
Make there thy tents where God of hosts does reign,
Make him thine arm who is the God of hosts,
Make there thy mansion where thou still must live.
Let Salem new by thy Jerusalem.
Let Abrams bosom be thy Palestine.
For Milk of Canaan taste thou Angels food.
For Jordan ^^oode let Cristall Fountain serve.
Let mercy be thy meede: good hap thy hope:
Nourish this hope good Lord, and grant this hap.
FINIS.

