A IOVRNALL OF THE VOYAGE of the young Prince Frederick Henry, Prince of
Bohemia:

Taken in the sixth year of his age, from Prague in Bohemia, to Luerden in
Friesland, to the Court of Count Ernestus Cassimerus van Nassaw Governor of
Friesland.

With his several Gifts and Entertainments: and the description of diverse of
the chief Cities.

Being accompanied in his passage by these of the Germane Nobility, and
others, viz. Count Attemberg. Count Henry van Nassaw. Count Stulsberg. Baron
Scoske, a Bohemian Lord. Mr. John Ashburnham Esquire, an Englishman, and
Governor to the Prince. Mr. Frederick Porvel a German, the Princes Tutor.


With diverse other Gentlemen of Quality, Servants and other Attendants.

Printed at London for Nathaniel Butter and Nicholas Bourne. 1623.

A IOVRNALL OF the Voyage of the young Prince Frederick Henry, Prince of
Bohemia, etc.
ON the 12. day of September Anno 1620. the Court removed from Prague to
Brandis or Prandis, (being three miles distant) on the river Elb, near where
the river Gitzera falls into the Elb: where the Prince the next day following,
taking his leave of the King and Queen his father and mother, and being royally
attended, set forwards toward Barlene, the chief residence of the Marquess
Elector of Brandenburg his uncle. Although the passages were too full of
soldiers for him to go the nearest way: for which cause, and for the better
commodity of lodging, shaping his course from Prage full North; on the
thirteenth of September he set out from Brandis: which Town being no great
State, is in the same longitude and latitude with Prage, that is, 29. and 46.
and some odd minutes, and upon the great and fair river of Elbe or Albis,
which the Bohemians call Labe; which we passing, came the same day to
Wieswasser, which signifies in English White water, the Bohemians call it
Biela: an ancient City it is, and though it be situated in the Kingdom of
Bohemia, yet is this with diverse others under a particular government of some
of the ancient Nobility of that Country: this City is five miles from Brandis,
eight from Prage.

Hereabouts are also (almost) continual great waldts or woods, which marching
from the banks almost of the river Elbe, East and West, tend even to the
borders of the upper Lusatia, which is one of the incorporated Provinces
belonging to the Kingdom of Bohemia: At this Wiswasser the Prince was met by
the Inhabitants, and brought into the Castle, and there by the Burgraues
appointment (himself being through sickness unable to come to wait upon the
Prince) he was for that night entertained by the Citizens with very good
observance.

The next morning being the 14. of September, the Citizens brought him on his
way with an able Conuoy of 150. horse and foot, till he past out of Bohemia
into Leutznatz or Lusatia; where at his first entrance the townsmen of Gabel
met him, the chief of which company in the name of the townsmen made a
complementall Oration, intimating their faithful loves, and his most hearty
welcome unto them. The Oration being ended, he was conducted by them toward
Gabel. Within half a miles riding he was met by a troop of horse, being about
150. which were sent from the Marquess of Iegerensdorf. Here the Conuoy of
Wiswasser returned back, and this troop brought him to the town of Gabel,
here the Prince dined. This Gabel is one of the first good towns on the
borders of Lusatia toward Bohemia; it stands near unto the river of Niesse
one of the chief Floods of Lusatia, which rises not far from hence.

From hence departing after dinner, about a mile off from the Town, he was met
by a second troop of horse, sent also from the said Marquess of Iegerensdorf,
by which troops his Highness was conuoyed to the City of Zittaw or Sittaw,
standing upon the river of Niesse. At the entrance whereof, he was received by
two other troops of horse, and three companies of foot, besides the Citizens
themselves standing all in their Arms on each side, with music of Trumpets
on the Cathedral Church, and Haultboyes on the tower of the Statehouse, which
sounded until the Prince was entered into his lodging. Before which, by
commandment of the town, was placed a strong Guard of both horse and foot,
besides two companies of foot placed within the gates in the Court, for defense
of his person. And at each gate of the City for that night was set an
extraordinary strong Court of Guard both of horse and foot, the times being
then dangerous, because the Duke of Saxony was then in Arms, and held his
Leaguer before the City of Baultzen, within four miles to the North-West of
that place, upon the river of Spre; and we were now upon the borders of
Meissen, which is one of the Duke of Saxonies Countries, and confines upon
Lusatia, by a long tract of ground. And thus far even from Prage in Bohemia
unto Zittaw in Lusatia, our Court was full North.

But the next day being the 15. of September, departing from thence, we took
up upon the right hand more toward the East, setting forward toward Gorlitz,
which also stands upon the river of Niess aforesaid, which river rising in the
Country of Miessen (I take it) eastward of Gabel, passes by Zittaw, Gorlitz,
and so northward through both the Lusatiaes, till it falls into the Oder, which
parts Lusatia from Silesia. On the way toward this Gorlitz, (the Princes
horses being almost wearied) he was met by certain Coaches and diverse troops
of horse, sent from the Marquess of Iegerensdorf, who in that time of war
had his chief residence in that City. This guard took up both sides of the
way for a mile and a half together: and within half a mile off the City, the
Marquess himself in person met the Prince, accompanied with 4000 horse and
foot. And within a quarter of a mile off the City, he was received by the
Citizens, ranging themselves in armor on both sides the way, their order
extending even to the very entrance of the Marquess his Palace. For the
Princes better contentment, the soldiers were all commanded to march by in
Battaglia and warlike order, with Drums, Fifes, and Ensigns displayed. After
all which the Prince was by the Marquess and all his Council most royally
feasted. He was lodged in the Palace in a most fair chamber, richly furnished,
and cut with antique works of great art and beauty. At this good entertainment
we stayed two nights and two days.

This Gorlitz is the chief town of the upper Lusatia, and a fair and a
strong one it is, as being naturally defended, partly by his mountainous
situation, and by the nearness of the River of Neiss, over which it has a
commodious and well covered wooden Bridge. The Church of S. Peter's is a very
fair piece, as is also the Tower of the State-house.

On the third day after being the 1^. of September, the Marquess with all his
train and troops, brought his Highness half a mile out of Town, and there
solemnly taking his leave, parted with him, commanding his Troops to go on
with the Prince, and to convoy him to a garison-Town of his called Lauben,
which is to the Eastward of Gorlitz, and something out of the way. At our
approach within two miles of the town, we might behold the Soldiers both Horse
and Foot drawn forth in two divisions, the Horse in one, and the Foot in the
other, and both ranged in battell-aray. The reason of this demeanor, was a
jealousy of some treachery which they conceived to be intended against their
Garrison, for that the night before the Princes Quartermaster being sent
before, to give them intelligence of his Highness coming, they supposed him to
have bin a spy, and clapped him up close prisoner, lading him with irons. These
troops and companies of Garrison Soldiers being afar off discovered, bred
also the same jealousy of them in us, as our approach did of us in them,
either part having a misprision of the others intentions. Whereupon it was
resolved to send a Trumpet before, with certain Gentlemen, to give and take
satisfaction on either side. Whereupon they being better satisfied, and all
mistrust being quite taken away, the chief Burgers of the Town advanced
forwards, and coming to the Prince, they kissed his Highness hand: And after some
solemn Speech of entertainment, with their excuse alleged, for their late
behavior, imputing the same to the danger of the time, and their unexpected
and sudden notice of his arrival, the Prince mounted on horseback, and rode
clear through their troops toward the Town: and having past them, the horse
and foot discharged three vollies of shot for his welcome: and coming to the
gates of the town he was received by a guard of towne-dwellers, and by them
conveyed to his place of rest, where for that day he dined, where also the
Marquess of Iegerensdorfs Conuoy of horse left us, and returned to Gorlitz.

This town of Lauben is situated upon the banks of the River Queis, which also
runs into the Oder, and is near unto the borders of Silesia, and unto a
neck of land which thrusts out from Bohemia also, which being very narrow at
Gabel, we touched upon Miessen the Duke of Saxonies Country.

This Lauben is in the frontiers (as it were) both of Bohemia on the
South Side, and Silesia on the East, it self being the utmost town of the
upper Lusatia, which makes the Garrison to stand more warily upon their guard.

After dinner he was conducted out of the same Town by a troop of horse of
the town garrison, which waited upon his Highness, till he came to the City of
Limberge in Silesia, which town stands upon the River of Bober, and not far
from the river Queis aforesaid. But before he came near the City, the Prince
was met by a troop of horse from thence, in the midst of whom he was
conueiged to his lodging in the town, which was one of the chief Burgers
houses, where they placed a strong guard at the door, for the safety of his
person. This was upon a Saturday at night.

That day (his Highness coming thither being known abroad in the country) all
the young Nobility and Gentry thereabouts came in to see the Prince, and to
wait upon his Highness at table at Supper-time, so that all the Princes servants
were for that time dismissed from their attendance upon him.

The next day being Sunday, and September. 19. the Prince mounted on horseback,
the Nobility going before him on foot, and their children on each side, with
the troops of horse and Foot attending. In which stately and solemn manner his
Highness rode to Church, and heard a Sermon. Whence being returned, he dined
with the Nobility.

After dinner the same day, he was by them and their troops conducted to the
City of Somponsel, where he was most nobly entertained of the Citizens. So
soon as the Prince was discovered by the Watch upon their Towers, they sounded
their Trumpets, and beat up their great kettle-Drums, continuing so until he
came to the gates. Where as soon as he was entered, the Townsmen making a
guard of themselves, gave the Prince a lusty volley of shot for his welcome.
Then with the sound of Corners and Haultboyes he was entertained to his
lodging. At the entrance whereof the Townsmen gave him another volley of shot,
and placing a strong court of guard for that night before his lodging, departed.

The 20. of Sept. the Nobility took their leave of the Prince, and the
Townsmen waited upon him with a conuoy to a place called Crozan, or Crossen,
where his Highness dined.

After dinner the same Conuoy brought him through till he came to a city
called Friestadt, which is not far from the borders of Poland, and lies to
the North the river Oder, running between this part of Silesia and Poland,
through the Duchy of Crossen, which is finally parted from hence by a ledge of
woody mountains, tending north-west and by north by a long tract to the
Eastward Here the troops of Somponsel left him, and returned homewards, the
Soldiers both horse and foot of Friestadt receiving him into their ranks in
warlike order. All which by reason it was late and dark, was done by the
Citizens by torch-light: by whom he was gallantly conducted to his lodging,
where he rested for that night.

This being the last town we lay at in Silesia, the next day being the 21. of
September, the Prince being conuoyed by some horse of the town, we entered
into the Brandenburgher marck, that is, the marches or borders of the land of
Brandenburg, through which we passed on to the City of Franckford upon Oder, so
called, to distinguish it from the other Franckford which is near to the
Palatinate, where the great Mart is twice a year kept; which is also called
Franckford upon Maine, because that that stands upon the river of Maine, as
this does upon the river of Oder. This last town being under the government of
the Marquess Elector of Brandenburg, the chief Citizens at the Princes
arrival (according to their wonted manner to noble strangers) presented their
loves in huge flaggons of wine (which grows here) and banqueting stuff, to
the Prince; their flaggons being so much the greater, in regard of their loves
to the Duchess of Brandenburg their Princess, who is Aunt to the Prince. This
being moreover the general courtesy of the great Cities of Germany, to
present their loves to all Princes their friends, and Ambassadors of Princes,
with an Oration, the Burgers bring each of them a great bottle of wine, which
hangs by a ringle upon his arm; and if he has any business or Embassy to
their State, they send him also Oats and Fish.

This Franckford is esteemed the third town of worth in the Country, and being
upon the very North west angle of Silesia, and about some 14. years before our
being there (viz. Anno 1606.) was made an University by Ioachim Marquess of
Brandenburg: the Oder runs upon the East side, the other parts are fenced in
by the mountains.

From hence upon the 22 of September we set forwards toward Ruttersdorp, but
the way being waste ground, and without habitation, we were feign to have our
provision carried along with us, and dined that day at a Boers house. The same
night his Highness came to the village of Ruttersdorp, where he lodged in the
Castle, both which belong unto the Marquess of Brandenburg.

At this place (the Marquess himself being then in Prussia or Pruce land) the
Prince was feign for that night to content himself with such entertainment as
the place could afford. But the Marchioness being certified of the Prince her
Nephews being there, sent post all night, with plate and other provision;
which made so good speed, that by the morning there was store of furniture, and
by breakfast time very good variety of provision of all sorts; which was a
strange change, and a sudden alteration, over night to be served in vessels of
Tin, and in the morning to have a Cupbord of Plate. And thus by the Duchess
noble care, the Princes supper was well mended, by a full and sufficient
breakfast.

This Marchioness of Brandenburg is named Elizabetha Charlotta, daughter to
Frederick the fourth Prince Elector Palatine; and sister to the prelent King
of Bohemia, the Princes father.

After which the 23: of September he set on toward Berlin, the Court of the
Marquess, and ordinary place of his residence. The Duchess hearing of his
aproach, by a Post which the Prince dispatched to her aforehand, to give her
Highness notice of his being so nigh; the Duchess sent forth her brother
Prince Lodowicke, Duke of Simmern, and uncle to the Prince, together with a
young Polish Duke (whose father had been banished out of Poland) and Count
Philip van Solmes, who all with a fair train came to meet the Prince, of
whom, after most joyful and mutual salutations, he was brought into the
Palace, where his Highness with the rest of his followers were most nobly
welcomed, and royally feasted.

This gallant young Prince, uncle to our Prince Frederick, is styled Lodowicke
Philip, Count Palatine, etc. was borne Nouem. 22. 1602. had the two Dukedomes
of Simmern, Lautern, with the Country of Sponheim assigned him for his portion,
by his fathers Testament; which was confirmed unto him by the Emperor
Rodulphus the second: he going up with his brother into Bohemia, had all his
country and goods taken from him by Spinola in the Palatinate: he went from
Prage to Berlin before Prince Frederick, where they now meeting, went into the
Low Countries together.

Here we abode ten days, having as great variety of entertainment, as that
time of mourning would permit. For the old Marquess Elector being lately
deceased, and the household and whole Court all in mourning, and the day of the
Funeral drawing near, was not a time of mirth or masking. In our stay here,
this one thing was exceeding well worth the seeing and remembering, which was
this; The time of the Funeral growing, the vault in the great Church was
opened, where Marquesses Electors of Brandenburg still use to be enterred. The
Prince and all we of his train were brought in to see the place; going down
into which, there was an object of State Antiquity and much reverence, namely,
the bodies of 16 Princes embaulmed in Coffins of Tin, and laid by three and
three on the top of each other, with their swords and spurs hanging by them:
which also besides the worth of the present sight, shows also the antiquity of
the succession since the choice of that place of burial. The Funeral was
appointed to be five days after the Princes departure, which was now at hand.

After ten days stay therefore, on the 3. of October the Prince took his
leave of the Marchioness Electoresse his Aunt, and of the rest of the Court,
and departed out of Berlin; and being accompanied with Prince Lodowick his
Uncle, and Count Philip van Solmes, who from hence iournied with him all the
way, and never left him till he came into Holland; they arrived the first night
at an old City and a strong Castle called Spandaw, for now from Berlin we
turned about again on the left hand and full West: the river of Spre upon which
Berlin is situated, being betwixt that City and this Spandaw. Here the Prince
lodged all night, his provisions and entertainments being all made at the
charges of the Marchioness Electoresse. This Spandaw stands near the
conscience of the two rivers Havel and Spre.

The next day being the 4. of October, the Princes dined at a place called
Sando, and the same night they lodged at a Dorpe called Bernese; which because
they be places of no great account, I therefore pass them over without any
more description of them.

The 5. of October the Princes dyned at the City of Ratenaw, which stands by
the River of Hauell, beyond this City, and to the North or Northwest loses
himself and his name in the greater Elue or Albis. After dinner they set
forwards again, and came that night to the Castle of Tungermund on the River
Elue. The place is something old, but what it is, is in the Marquess of
Brandenburgs Dominions.

The next day being the 6. of October, the Princes passed through the Forest of
Neslingham, where they also hunted; and that night they lay at the Marquesses
Lodge in the Forest: and thus far the Marchioness sent her plate,
furniture, and servants to attend the Princes, and feasted them hitherto at her
own charges. Which from hence being the boundary of the Marquisate on that
side, returned home again toward Berline. And all this while we held our
course full West from Berline. By the Westside of this Forest runs the River
Ohre, which we passed.

The next day being the 7. of October, they entered into Brunswick Land, and
dyning at a Town called Caluer, they came the same night to a College of
Lutherans called Miriando: where the Rector would not open his gates to receive
the Princes, until he heard his Princes the Duke of Brunswicks pleasure, who
was at the same time 7. miles off from that place. Here we stayed 2. hours and
above, in a terrible storm of rain and wind, until a Post which the
Princess had dispatched the night before unto the Duke, was returned. Upon
whose arryuall with Letters from the Duke, the Princess were received with all
fitting respects, and the best entertainment that the place could afford. The
Rector and the Society excused themselves by reason of the times, which were
dangerous, and full of suspicion, and the persons of the Princes unknown to any
of them, and the College it self being a place of importance. A tedious night
this was and a could, and some were wet with the rain, and othersome escaped
better. But that which gave us some comfort, was; that about midnight there
came another Post from the Duke, who requested the Princes to stay there all
the next day also, for that the Duke had not made his provision for their
entertainment at his Court in such a short warning. And in the mean his
Highness sent in his own furniture for the Princes table, and commanded such
provision to be brought in, as the Country there abouts could afford, so that
we had there the next day by dinner time, all things fitting for entertainment.

The next day being the 9. of October, the Princes left the College, and set
on toward Wolfenbuttell, the chief place of residence of the Duke of
Brunswick, and where the Court then was. But a little before we came to the
City, the Duke of Brunswick himself, with the L. Chancellor of the Duchy,
diverse of the privy Council, with many Nobles and Gentlemen, came forth of the
Town, with many fair Companies of horse, to entertain the 2. Princes, and so
went along together with them into the Town. Within which were diverse Companies
of Soldiers with full Armies under their several Ensigns with Colors
flying, with Trumpets sounding, Fifes playing, and Drums beating in warlike
manner, very gallant to behold, which stood along until we came to the
Castle. The Haultboyes and Cornets playing in the mean time from of the top of
a Tower, and a peale of Ordinance being shot off at their entrance into the
Castle.

The Princes were led into very stately, rich, and fayer Rooms in the Castle,
and every where in the house there Princely plenty and variety of all things
necessary.

The Princes having reposed themselves a while, were by the Duke brought into
the Duchess Chamber, who being allied to them both, received them with all
Joy and contentment.

Supper time being come, the Princes were again brought into a wondrous faier
room, where the Tables were covered and great state used according to the
German fashion of entertainment, which is full and sumptuous. In this supping
place, there was a room wherein there was a very large and rich Cupboard of
plate; at one end of which stood the music of Instruments and voices, and at
the other end stood the Officers of the Celler and Buttery, to fill wine and
beer to the table. For here is beer in this Country which is rare in other
places of Germany, though scarce good any where. Yet here at this
Wolfenbuttell, is a huge vast Tun, larger then that of Heidleberg, but this
is filled with Brunswick beer, as that other with Rhenish wine. There were also
6. other tables, where the 2. Princes servants did eat, the Dukes own
Gentlemen bearing them company, which time and the whole three days that we
stayed here at this Royal entertainment was spent with great mirth, iollity and
extraordinary show of magnificence, bounty, and courtesy; al which excellent
well became a kinsman and a Prince.

The present Duke of Brunswicks name is, Fredericus Vlricus, he was born the 5.
of April 1591. he married Anna Sophia daughter of John Sigismund, Marquess
Elector of Brandenburg then lately dead in Noue^ber 1619, and sister to
Georgius Wilhelmus the present Prince: she was borne March 17. 1598. the Dukes
alliance with the Prince comes in by the mothers side: for Anne Queen of
England was daughter to Frederick the 2. King of Denmark; as was also Elizabeth
her elder sister, the mother of this present Duke. The Dutchesses alliance with
the Prince comes in by the house of Brandenburg, of which she is descended. The
Duke of Brunswick has as yet no children; his only brother and heir apparent
is our valorous noble Champion Christian D. of Brunswick, and Bishop of
Halberstadt: he has or had also 5. sisters.

Leaving therefore this City the 14. of October in the morning, the same day
they came to a place called Stanberge, where the Princes dyned at the Dukes
charges. The same night they lodged at a place called Collenberge, which stands
upon the West side of the River of Glein.

The 15. day the 2. Princes dyned at Hamelen which is by the River of Wester,
and on the East side. After dinner they went to Dalmel, where they lodged. And
thus far the Princes was feasted and furnished whith Plate and other
provision Royal, at the sole cost and charges of his Highness the Duke of
Brunswick, who is elder brother to Duke Christian of Brunswick, Bishop of
Halberstadt the famous young Warrior; and this Town is upon the Confines of
the Duchy of Brunswick, which is bounded on the West by the Country of
Westphalia, from which the Weser parts it. Here the Dukes Servants and Officers
returned from the Princes back again to Wolfenbuttell.

This Duchy of Brunswick was sometimes accounted to Saxony, and got a
particular and distinct name from Bruno, who being son to Ludolphus Duke of
Saxony, laid the foundations of City in this Duchy, which of him is called
Brunswick; the Duchy of Luneburg has also been possessed by the Dukes of
Brunswick, continuing so until the year of Christ 1430. in which the Country
was divided between William the victorious, who had the title of Brunswicke,
and his uncle Bernard, who had the title of Luneburg: in whose posterity both
these Dukedomes still remain, the Dukes of both being both of one family,
Brunswick being of the direct line, the elder house, and the greater Dukedom.
The chief City both of Brunswick and of all Saxony, is the Town of Brunswick,
which gives name to the whole Duchy, although the Court be most commonly kept
at Wolfenbuttell, which with the whole Duchy we having left behind us, entered
next into Cleueland.

The 16. of October setting out somewhat late, we arrived the same night at a
City called Belfield, where within a mile of the Town, they were received by
certain troops of horse, and so conveyed to the City. Entering the Gates,
they were welcomed with a peale of Ordinance; and so by the Townsmen in
Armor, they were brought into the Castle of Spanberg, where the Governor and
Captain entertained them with their forces marshalled in warlike order. Here
the Princes were feasted 4. days.

In the mean space it was consulted upon for the Princes safety; that seeing
they were now to pass by diverse Garrisons of the Enemies: that it were best to
dispatch a Post before hand to the Prince of Orange, to certify his Excellency
of the Princesses neerenes, which was also done. Both the Armies of the States
and the Spaniards being then about Wesel. Here it was also agreed upon to send
Prince Lodowick with some others another way into Holland; that so the
Country People might be satisfied with his presence in stead of the Princes;
which took effect accordingly; and did not only give the people good content
through whom he passed, who came flocking into the high ways to see him; but
also diuerted their expectations, from any thought of his passage any other
way: by means whereof, his Highness the Prince of Bohemia passed in his way
with the more safety and secrecy.

From Spanburg Castle we came next to the Castle of Arden, which is under the
Grave of Benthem; and so by Glandorpe to Mareling, where we lodged all night.
From whence forward the Towns being near and so well known, I forbear to make
any further description of them, but only name them as we pass through them.

From thence we went to Russenbeck; from thence to Embsbourne; from thence to
North-horne; from thence to Hardenberg, where we lodged. From thence we went to
Realte; from thence to Deuenter in Holland, where we met with the Princes
again.

The next day we set forwards toward Swoll, which is a strong Town of
Garrison; where we stayed two nights and one day. And here the Count Ernest van
Cassimere (who coming in Post from the Prince of Oranges Leaguer at Wesel, had
before met with the Princes) received the Prince into his charge, and safe
protection. And here Prince Lodowick departed from his Highness, and went
directly toward the Hage: And Prince Frederick kept on toward Freezland.

The next day at dinner being the 25. of October, we came to a City of
Garrison called Steenwick, where his Highness was met by the Burgers in Arms,
and received into the Town with a volley of shot, and coming to the Castle
they discharged a peale of Ordinance for his welcome: and all marched by in
warlike manner in the Princes view.

From thence after dinner they came to Wolfingow, where they rested all that
night.

The next day, they dined at Hernenfen, and came the same night to Luerden in
Freezland, the place whether at his first setting out of Prage, it was his
intention to go. Here the chiefest of the Town met the Prince on Horseback. At
the entrance thereof, the Ordinance of the City were discharged to welcome
him: and the Burgers within the Town in Arms, ranking themselves on each side;
conveyed his Highness to the Castle being the Court of Count Ernestus van
Cassimerus; at that instant time, being received in succession of Count William
of Nassaw his brother lately deceased, for Governor of Friezland.

The Prince being come to the Court, and brought to an exceeding fair Chamber,
beheld all the Townsmen marching by in their Arms: and then being brought to
the Chamber of the Countess, he was there most Nobly entertained by them both,
with all joy and solemnity.

And thus it pleased the Almighty God to lead this sweet young Princes first
one way, and then again another way, now through friends Countries, and now
through foes, as from Heidleberg in the Palatinate, to Prage in Bohemia at
first; so now again from Prage to Luerden: which is almost round about the
middle part of Germany. A Journey by Land which would have tired the little
Iul^s. Which two, as they may hitherto be compared together for their high
birth, (both being borne of gods, and both descended from Venus) and their
early travels, and in the loss of their native Countries; so it may please God
also to conclude them alike in this too: that it may be said hereafter, how
that they were both; The Fathers of a race of Emperors.

That so the Towns he past, may for their honors say,
Nere, Prince, King, Emperor, Frederick Henry lay.
FINIS.

