RVBBE, AND A great Cast. EPIGRAMS.

BY Thomas Freeman, Gent.

HORACE, Lectorem delectando pariterque monendo.

Imprinted at London, and are to be sold at the Tigers Head. 1614.

TO THE THRICE HONORABLE, RIGHT NOBLE, AND TRVELY Virtuous, his (ever to be
observed) singular good Lord: THOMAS Lord WINDSORE.
RIGHT HONORABLE.
IT was much against my mind, to entitle your worthy Lordship to these
worthless toys, or make such a slight and Artlesse fabric carry so fair
and glorious a frontispice, as your Honorable name prefixed; yet finding it (as
it is) in these days a matter so frequent with the worst Poets (as they have
most need) to seek out the best Patrons: collecting from their presumption a
fearful boldness I have out of a reverent zeal, and observance, presented
to your Honor these my poor and naked labors: Poor, as being unpolished, and
naked as they came from their mother Truth: Yet for that, (and only but for
that) beseeming a better Writer. Vouchsafe them I beseech you, your Honors
wonted benign and gracious aspect, and read them with your accustomed candor;
but for your deepe-searching judgment, pardon me my Lord, I disclaim from
that, and appeal to your partial, and more pleasing favor. The most part of
them have already past your Lordships private liking: they All tointly crave
your public protection. It is no diminution to Honor, nor disparagement to
Greatness, to Countenance the meanest well-meaning Author: You have it, Cum
tantis commune viris; Scipio gracing rude Ennius, and the mightiest of earths
Monarks, unskillful Chaerilus. Nor is it derogatory to judgment, to accept an
oblation of Poems of slight subject; as Augustus of Virgils Gnatt: nor of bad
composure; as that of the forenamed Chaerilus to Alexander: And I shall surely
bear a part of reproof, in this ages general Apostasy to Poesy, the rather
for trading (as the world interprets it) in the coursest and commonest of it.
So hardly hears the Epigram from all, the very name sticks to him like an
Inustum stigma. But how the Comonest? in it self; why, there, being good (as
it is no less) it should be Melius quo communius. Is it in the Professor? yea
there is the misery, it is gone, ab Equis ad Asinos, Notum Lippis and
Tonsoribus, and Played the Pithagorean pitifully, enduring most brutish
transmigration, and traueld in as durty wits as the way between Hogsdon and
Hounsditch, Turpe and miserabile: Yet that this should impeach the ingenuous is
mere injustice. But indeed the true cause for which the Epigram suffers, is
his liberty and sincere honesty in the search and unmasking vice, hence comes
it men mark him with Fenum in cornu, and fire off; or take the wind of him, as
of one infected, Hence the world fears and consequently hates it: I could go
on in just indignation, but time is precious with your Lordship, and this is an
Epistle, and not a Treatise. I therefore return to your Houour; craving, once
more, acceptance and Protection, to these (howsoever they sound, for so being)
course-spun Epigrams. Howsoever my pen fail, my prayers shall not, but ever
solicit the Calestiall TRIVNITY, to bless your Honor, and send you here
all, and the compleatst joys on earth, forerunners of your future true
happiness in heaven.

Your honors most obsequiously devoted servant. THOMAS FREEMAN.

Regalia Vota, Precesque
Ad Regem Iacobum.
NOt like your Player, who prophanes his lips
With scurrile ieasts of some lewd ribald Play;
And after all, upon the Scaffold skips,
And for his Sovereign then begins to pray:
More manerly, whilst pure, this Pen of mine
Presents her prai'rs (great King) for thee and thine*
Proreligiosiss. ^ruditiss. Augustiss. Rege.
WHat should I wish to that my Sovereign has
But long Continuance, both of Him, and it?
Long to live the Defender of true Faith,
Our IOSVA Long over Israel to sit,
Long t'entertaine the Saints of God like LOT;
To be our DAVID Long, our SOLOMON;
Still keeping without blemish, without blot:
The Fathers Zeal, the Wisdom of the Son.
To these (O God) what should we pray thee give?
But (as I said) Continuance and long date,
To live the days METHVSALA did live,
And after, when he falls'ith hand of Fate:
O yet vouchsafe in mercy some delays,
To Add to our good EZECHIAS days!
Maneant ^afata nepote^.
Pro Illustrissima and Serenissima Regina.
EVrops Glory, Englands greatest Good,
O! may thou flourish like the fruitful Vine,
And make Great Britain rich in Royal blood;
The life of all our hopes lives in thy Line:
Live ever blessed, and be more a Mother,
And from thee may that offspring issue forth,
That may secure their Kingdoms, conquer other,
Make all the world to wonder at their worth:
Nay, win it all, and part it too (Heavens smile)
As Brutus sons did once divide this I Will.
Maneant ^afata nepotes.
Pro CAROLO Maximae, magnae Britannuiae, spei, Principe.
Our SECOND, late; now FIRST-best, future HOPE,
Whose, in remainder, we; and thou art, ours;
What should we wish thee, but that Heaven wide open?
Rain down her Blessings in abundant showers,
To make thy Parents happy; thy self blessed,
And we, in them, and through them, to have in thee
The greatest Good that ever men possessed:
Which with the Goodness may as lasting be.
Long stand our Atlas; and when he shall fall,
Be thou our Hercules, hold up our Heaven,
Our happiness, I mean, and help us all:
Sit at the Helm, and keep our Ship up even;
Then take, and Long, O long keep at the stearne!
Mean time now grow in Goodness, Greatness, State,
All which thou needst not travel far to learn,
Nor need but thine own to imitate:
Thy wise and zealous Sire, thy virtuous Mother,
And, O that Great heart! now heaven crowned thy brother.
Maneant ^afata nepotes.
Pro fulgentisima ELIZABETHA.
GReater thy Self, Author v^vebat ista ante auspicatiss* nuptias.
by greatest Princes sought,
On whom best Stars have smilde their influence,
Where heaven a Map of Miracles has wrought,
Our glory, Natures pride, Earths excellence:
In whom alone the Graces live refinde,
Where Chastity with more then Cyprian-feature,
And Beauty with all virtue lives conioyn'd:
O Goddess sure! or some Celestial Creature!
In whose whose fair face so equally do run
The purest Lillie-white, the Orientst red,
Like Vialactea, and the Rising Sun.
Happy that Prince shall the fair Princess wed,
Which holy Hymen shall no snoner finish,
But we shall pray. That thou the blessedst Bride
Mai'st with such blessed ones the World replenish,
That may hereafter help the world to guide.
And that our Royal blood more deep root take,
As they from thee, so may from them spring other:
May thy great Father, great Grandfather wake,
And reckon their descent from thy blessed Mother:
And Englands King, and Queen, may live to see,
Their Childrens Children, Kings and Queens to be.
Maneant ^afata nepotes.
Ad excellentissimum Principem Palatinum: Illius in Lectissimae Elizabethae
(iam sibi coni^gatae) electione, Iudicium, approbat, admiratur.
IF as in this thrice Royal Fredaricke,
Thy judgment in electing still be like;
What need the other Six or stand on seven?
Why not the whole to whom the Chief is given? Quia principalis Elector.

Indeed, what needed any other Voice?
The World might put his life upon thy Choice.
Pro Nobilitate Britannica.
GR^ue, for your Council, great, for place and Blood,
O you Arch-Columnes of our Commonwealth!
You truly wise, religious, Noble, good.
Who does not wish all happiness, all health,
With Nestors years, your Honors to attend,
Is not the Kings, is not his countries friend.
Pro Domino suo Honoratissimo Domino Windesor.
ANd now, more properly to pay his vows,
He comes to you (his noble Lord and Master;)
Whose life, for you, is but a debt he owes,
Whose prayers, could they keep off all disaster,
And make you blessed; there should breathe in our state,
No Lord more happy, less unfortunate.
Liber ad Lectorem de Authorosuo.
EXeo: sed quidsi, quamvis Liber exeoparvus,
Parvus in hac magna plurimus vrbe ferar.
Paul, meum Titulum tua Ianua quaque tenebit,
Haerebit multis pagina prima locis.
Lector and exurgens leget, atque inquiret eund^
E^quis habet talem Ribliopola librum:
Inventique petens pretium, persolvit, abitque,
Et modo mercato: perlegit vsque Iocos.
Quisquis, and O quisquis, ^^pidissimus (inquit) et author
Post mult^s multis anteferende venis:
Laudibus ad Coelum vehimur, Dominusque, Liberque,
Sedulus hunc laudae, Me sine fine legit.
Ne cu^ fit mirum? Cui nonplacuere lepores?
Rarus amat Lector seria, quisque Iocos.
Quare Rub and Run;
SPhaera mihi; Calamus, Mundi sunt crimina, Nodi,
Ipse sed est mundus, Sphaeromachia mihi.
Sieve manner iubes, ^ector, seu currere sphaera^t.
Lusori pariter, curre ^^^eque placent.
Rub and a great Cast.
Epigram I.
Lectori quomodo legate.
REader remember that I do fore-warne thee,
Pry not into the secrets of my Pen.
See not; if thou see ought, that seems to harm thee,
Wrong not thy self; if I do, blame me then:
Look on, laugh on, and if I touch thy grief,
Or tell the fault wherein thou have been filthy,
Let not thy knowledge cause thy mis-beliefe,
I name thee not, what need'st thou then cry Guilty?
The Choleric descry their own offense,
When like a gald-backt Jade scarce touched they wince.
EPIGRAM. 2.
Me quoque vatem.
Why am I not an Epigrammatist?
I write in covert, and conceal their names,
Whose lives I burden with some bitter jest,
Themselves I cloak, and yet vn-clowd their shames.
Again, me thinks I am not shallow sprighted,
Nor seems my wit so insufficient
(Although not like to others deepe-conceited)
It can indite, although not excellent.
The Reader laughes, this reason he rehearses,
The Ape likes her own whelps, and I my verses.
EPIGRAM. 3.
I^, Rich^rdum primum, Regem.
GR^^ter then great Alcides thee did grace,
The Lions Heart, and not the Lions Case.
Richard^s cord, Hercules exuvijs Leonis gestiens.
EPIGRAM. 4.
O Tempora! O Mores!
HAd I an hundred mouths, Mihisi ^^^guae c^ntum, o^aque c^ntum, ferrca vox
esset. Virg.
as many tongues,
An Iron voice; then should this Iron Age
Be moved, or I would thunder out their wrongs.
And breath out boisterous accents full of rage.
I would inueigh against foul Usurers,
As those that live by causing others wants;
I would defy the filthy Flatterers,
That show themselves dissembling Sycophants.
The Lawyer too my lavish tongue should lash,
And Avarice should not avoid the scourge,
And with the Courtier would I have a crash:
And most of all the Atheist would I urge.
Yea every one (as every one is faulty)
Should bide the brunt of my all-biting tongue,
It should be no excuse t'alledge their frailty,
Suffiz'd, they s^i'd, and I must tell the wrong.
Yet well I wot, when words had done their worst
Lewd men (like Foxes) fare best when they are cursed.
EPIGRAM. 5.
In Bacchum.
OF all the old Gods Bacchus is the best,
And has more fellowship then all the rest:
They have their habitations on hye,
He loves not foaring so ambitiously;
For lofty dwelling he cares not a louse,
He likes the lowest part in all the house;
Each Cellar is his Amphitheater,
And is content to be compound with water,
And lives as erst Diogenes has done,
The One in a Tubbe, the other in a Tun.
EPIGRAM. 6.
In Superbum.
SVperbus sold a gallant Manor place,
Himself with a new-fashion'd suit to grace.
Meant he himself an Elephant to make,
In carrying such a Castle on his back.
EPIGRAM. 7.
In Castorem.
CAstor complains he is mightily mis-vsed,
That he a Man, should beast-like be cornuted:
Content thee Castor, thou art not abused,
Even Jove himself was such a one reputed.
He horned, the better to beguile his love;
Thou horned, the more thy love be guileth thee:
Europa's carriage caused horns in Jove,
And thy wives carriage causes thine to be;
Only in this thou have him ouer-gone,
In that thy wife bare many, he but one.
EPIGRAM 8.
In Mustapham.
MVstapha still amongst his company
Swears Wounds and blood how he will be revenged
On such a one for his late villainy,
Whom then, but for entreaty, he had swinged.
I heard him once tell such a tale as this,
Whereas by chance the party came in place;
Lo, whom he vowed to kill, he bowd to kiss,
Him with much curt'sie crouching to embrace*
Happy the man that had so mild a foe,
Who absent, killed him; present, kissed him so.
EPIGRAM. 9.
Nec retinent patulae, etc. In Garruhtatem.
NAy, to keep counsel, this our Age excels,
To Lagus one a thing in secret told,
This to his friend in secret Lagus tells,
The which his friend to tell, his friend is bold,
In secret too; that friend unto another,
Who makes a Midwife of the next he meets
To tell his secret to; each makes a brother
Lightly on whomsoever next he hits.
Thus all abroad this secrecy is blown,
And yet in secret told to every one.
EPIGRAM 10.
In Fimum.
FImus is Coach'd, and for his further grace
Does ask his friends how he becomes the place.
Troth I should tell him the poor Coach has wrong,
And that a Cart would serve to carry dong.
EPIGRAM. 11.
In Goslingum Puritanum Praedicatorem.
GOsling the Puritan held so excellent,
Never quoteth Father, never speaks Latin sentence,
Indeed the Scriptur's all-sufficient,
As he being ask told one of his acquaintance,
But we who know him, know the cause was rather
He never learned Latin, never read a Father.
EPIGRAM. 12.
In Photinum.
I Met Photinus at the Chancelors Court,
Cited (as he said) by a knave Relator:
I asked him wherefore, he in laughing sort,
Told me it was but for a Childish matter,
How er'e he laughed it out, he lied not,
Indeed 'twas Childish, for the Child he got.
EPIGRAM. 13.
Quo ruis ah demens?
Londons progress.

WHy how now Babel, whither will thou build?
I see old Holborne, Charing-crosse, the Sirand,
Are going to St. Giles his in the field;
Saint Katernes she shakes Wapping by the hand:
And Hoggosdon will to Hy-gate ere't be long.
London is got a great way from the stream,
I think she means to go to Islington,
To eat a mess of straw-berries and Cream.
The Citty's sure in Progress I surmise,
Or going to revel it in some disorder
Without the Walls, without the Liberties,
Where she need fear nor Mayor nor Recorder.
Well, say she do; 'twere pretty, but 'twere pity
A Middlesex Bayliffe should arrest the City.
EPIGRAM. 14.
In Rufum.
PRiscus to Rufus for some filthy usage
Did send a challenge by a peevish boy,
The boy he beat that brought so bold a message
But No point field would Rufus par mafoy:
So have I seen a dog often bite the stone,
And not the man, by whom he sees it thrown
EPIGRAM. 15.
In Crantorem.
CRantor the Citizen long in despair,
For twenty years his barren wife teemed not,
And now that she has brought him forth an Heir,
He Is frollicke and a joyful man God wot.
Alas poor fool how vainly he reioyces
It Is none of his if 't go by most of voices.
EPIGRAM. 16.
In Poetastrum and amicam suam putricem.
MY little Litteratus has a Squall,
A limned one, whom he does Mistress call:
They eat, drink, talk, and laugh, and lie together,
And lawful it is, and it is allowed to either.
The reason is (who so desires to know it)
His Mistress is a painter, he a Poet.
Pictoribus atque poetis quidlibet, etc.
EPIGRAM. 17.
In Hersilium.
HErsilius the Barber-Surgeon
Hates Lucy cause she barbeth many one
And them so artificially does trim
That they need neuermore be shau'd by him:
This is the cause Hersilius does hate her
But would the foolish man well weigh the matter
How it is his profit that she plays the Barber
His heart against her would no such hatred harbor:
What though she makes him loose a lowsy science,
She fits his Surgery with fatter Clients.
EPIGRAM. 16.
Of Tobacco ashes.
TObacco for a Phoenix Will does prize
Such virtues from the ashes of it rise:
His instance; He his whore and horse does make
It scoured her teeth, it skind his skabby back.
EPIGRAM 19.
In Leonatum.
THe filthiest, the fowlst-deformed less
That is, will be, I think or ever was
Leonatus loves, wherewith should she him draw,
Except as she is like iet, he be like straw.
EPIGRAM. 20.
In Cosmum.
Ask Cosmus why he is a Gentleman,
He tells what services his sire has seen,
As when victorious Henry Bolleine wanne,
And when King Phillip took S. Quintius in:
His Uncle was at th'rising in the North,
And did at Tilbery good reckoning carry;
Ask of himself he can bring nothing forth,
But thinks their deeds, are his, heredita^y?
And say he be a Gentleman therefore
Because he bears their Image and their name
He is but like the Ass that Isis bore;
They honor got he vnder-goes their fame,
And bearing thus what others brought to pass,
He Is but his Fathers and his Uncles Ass.
EPIGRAM. 21.
Sic transit Gloria.
PRide, and the Court; you make us too unthrifty;
Buy coach and horse: but what is the end of all,
What cost an hundred, sell again for fifty,
And then my Gallants from their Chariots fall:
Fore-times but fabled of one Phaeton
You make ours testify of many one.
EPIGRAM. 22.
In Hylam puerum immature mortum.
HYlas a child, and dead, how should it come?
Surely his thread of life was but a thrum.
EPIGRAM. 23.
In Castriotem.
SEe, see, what love is now betwixt each fist;
Since Castriotes had a skabby wrist,
How kindly they lie clawing one another
As if the left hand were the right hands brother.
EPIGRAM. 24.
In Marthum.
HOw often have I heard Martha make her boast
How she her husband used before she had him,
How palpably his patience she crossed,
In plainer terms too what a Calfe she made him,
What since I hear not, but it is shrewdly ghest
The Calfe is since become a horned beast.
EPIGRAM. 25.
In Selinum.
THey say Selinus writes exceeding well,
Till he of Bacchus grape too deeply taste,
For then is his Minerua quite displast,
How contrary to that which Poets tell,
Of Jove's strange breeding, stranger nursing vain,
Selinus wit is breecht when wine's in's brain.
EPIGRAM. 26.
In duos ebrios.
FAber and Frankus I you both commend,
For both you will be drunken with a friend:
'Twas Theseus and Perithous amity,
So went they both to hell for company.
EPIGRAM. 27.
Ad quosdam florentes quondam, iam miseros and conquerentes commilitones suos.
Why show you me, my (whilome happy) mates
The ouergrowne infirmities that grieve you,
Wo's me to see your so-much altered States:
I can lament, but I can not relieve you.
Think thou Wat I can cure the curelesse gout?
Can James Scyatticke hips hope help of me?
Dicks dropsy-ale-puft flesh stands swelling out,
I can recover none of all you three:
And Rafe, the pox may eat into thy bones,
And thou remain remediless for me:
Nor leprous lack be freed from scabs: at once
I can help none of you in no degree:
For first I Am no Physician at all,
And Poor, I cannot build an Hospital.
EPIGRAM. 28.
Videntur and non sunt.
SOme men go brave and some again go bare
When neither of them seem the men they are,
I know rich lads go patcht in leather pelts,
And hood their heads under some greasy felts:
Again I know some silk lads, coinelesse ever,
Bear high their heads in some fresh colored Beuer,
And siluer-shooe-strings ore their toes do wear
Such shooe-strings as a man may safely swear
Are better then their purse-strings, ten to one,
For they can show some silver, these can none.
EPIGRAM. 29.
Velle paupertatis suae.
It Is strange, now I am poor what I would do,
What Hospitals what Almse-houses vpreare;
Build Vpton-bridge in Worc'ster-shire anew;
Give toplesse Paul's one more sky-threatning Spire;
Bring Thames to Oxford, Wye into North Wales,
Trent to Northampton, Seauern into Trent,
Auon to Seauern; All to carry Sails
Quite from the sea into the Continent:
Help Widows, Orphans, Maimed, and the Poor,
With Wadam build a College for the godly;
Erect (so far surpassing all before)
A Library with all praiseworthy Bodly:
Make a huge chain from Dover reach to Callis
For to secure all passengers for France,
Free Bond-slaues, ransom Captives from the Galleys,
All honest Sea-wrackt Merchants re-aduance.
Nay more, what Learned Bacon left undone,
Engirt Great Britain with a Brazen Wall:
On thousand good deeds now my mind does run
Now I can nothing, now I would do all
I can so little and would do so much,
Sure I am too well given, to grow rich.
EPIGRAM. 30.
Arcades amb^.
I Ack and Dick both with one woman dealt,
So long till she the Pains of women felt:
Now Dick, he thinks to put a trick on Jack,
And Jack again to hang it on Dicks back:
Which got the child, it makes't a doubtful case,
It has so like (they say) Iacks nose, Hic vsurpatur pro Dick, inquibusdam
paatibus Angliae.
Dicks face:
But by both marks, my judgment should be quick
Et vitula tu dignus, Jack and h^e.
EPIGRAM. 31.
In Richardum.
AT three go downs Dick doffs me off a pot,
The English Gutter's Latin for his throat.
EPIGRAM. 32.
In Marcellum.
MArcellus if you mark how he does go
Is nothing else but imitation,
By his apparel you can hardly know
What Countriman he is, or of what Nation,
For note you him; he wears a Spanish felt,
A French-craw'd Doublet, and a Dutch deep Slop:
A Turkey Blade, a Crosse-bar'd Irish Hilt,
Hangers guilt-wrought with Indian pearl a top,
And girdle too, wherein (ware the stabbado)
His Poyniard in a swaggering skarfe is got:
His stocking silk of Naples or Granado,
His Garter tied with a Switzers knot,
Beside a long French lock, a Sarazens head,
A big Gades Beard, a grim Swartruttres look:
By these what Countriman, who can aread?
Nay of what Country may he not be took?
Sure if a man a (...) be, Microcos^^^.

Marc^llus seems that little world to me.
EPIGRAM. 33.
In A^mam.
NAn trades, yet will she not be called whore,
Nor Pet nor Puncke, but call her Curtezan:
She takes it kindly and conceiues no more,
But it is as much to say as courteous Anne.
A thing in these our days to wonder at,
A Catholic not know t'quiuocat.
EPIGRAM. 34.
Quot bipedes aurum.
What ordinary Gallant now but goes
On Spani^^ leather haltred with a Rose,
Circling with gold, or siluer-spangled lace:
It Is strange how times have altered the case.
Less cost, then is now bestowed on either foot,
Did buy K. William Bufus a whole suit.
EPIGRAM. 35.
In Christophorum.
KIts conscience shall never bring him introuble
It Is like an Os^er any way 'twill double:
And for the oath, no touching of him there,
You shall have him, what you will have him, swear^
Nor for Religion; for to tell you true,
He Is neither of the Old nor of the New.
EPIGRAM. 36.
In Luscum morionem.
LVscus, that Minotaure thy monstrous wit,
Lies in that lowsy Laborinth thy head,
So close as no Art can discover it,
Now whilst thou art living, nor when thou art dead.
A longer thread then Ariadnes twine,
Shall never find wit in that same pate of thine.
EPIGRAM. 37.
In Metellum.
MEtellus vowed a voyage into France,
To learn the language, and be Frenchifide,
But he found out a nearer way by chance:
For in a vauting house as he did ride,
Of his pretense in part he was possessed.
For there his Genius did so well apply him,
That she with whom his conf'rence did consist.
Even as she spet, her breath did Franchifie, him.
Surely I can but wonder how the wench,
That never knew to speak, should spet out French.
EPIGRAM. 38.
In Stilponem.
COward Stilpo, often dared to fight,
Still puts it off with pretty odd excuses,
He fears not any living by this light,
But he shows reason wherefore he refuses:
The little man too much his vndermatch,
T'imbrue his sword, his blood is too too base.
The Eagle scorns the silly Fly to catch:
The Mouses death's the Elephants disgrace:
One like himself of equal strength and making,
O 'twere a prey fit for his Lions paw,
But should he kill him, he were in wise taking,
He fears not him; marry he fears the law:
Nor will he answer every idle Jack.
Stilpo is rich, and he has much to lose,
The Other perhaps in penury and lack,
Grows desperate, and cares not how it goes.
Thus Law or Fortune, or too niggard Nature,
Begets excuses for his cowardice.
The strong, the poor, the man of little stature,
He dares with all, daring with none (more wise.)
Surely by this I see, and seek no further,
Stilpo keeps one Commandment, Do^^ (...)
EPIGRAM. 39.
In Demetrium.
Stark drunk, Demetrius word is: He Will stand too^,
When he has neither use of hand nor foot,
But iostles this, and shoulders up that wall,
And stands to nothing, yet he will stand to all.
EPIGRAM 40.
In Swadde.
SWadde's in Commission, yet but bears the name,
For all the roast is ruled by his dame,
Sh'examines, bailes, binds over, and releases,
Remits and Mittimusseth whom she pleases,
To all that come to him for wrongs redress,
His wife's the Justice, he but of the peace.
EPIGRAM. 41.
In Spurium.
I Wonder on it, Apelles when he painted
The rare perfections of the Gr^cian Dame,
Himself with sight of many fair acquainted,
And stole some grace from every one that came.
And Spurius, is it possible thy mother,
Helped with the workwanship of many one,
Who had, besides the sight of sundry other,
Should bring forth thee such an ill-shaped son?
But her confusion did as much portend,
'Twould prove some lumpish Chaos in the end.
EPIGRAM. 42
In e^ndem.
THat thou art monstrous most of any other,
The reason to proceed here hence I gather,
That having such a strumpet to thy mother,
The monster Multitude became thy Father.
EPIGRAM. 45.
To all good subjects.
YOu rich, your royal, loyal hearts reveal,
Not grudging when your gratio^s Sovereign sends,
Nor at a Nonplus for a Friuy seal,
But when your Prince (like Cyrus) tries his friends,
Make you your Prince, with Cyrus to approve,
A Kings Exchequer is his subjects love.
EPIGRAM. 44.
In Caspiam.
CAspia the decrepit old rich Croot,
Whose face (th'antiquity of time bewraying)
Is riueld like a ruffled summer Boot;
She that is in all things, but in wealth, decaying:
Caspia, that same foul deformed Fubs,
Who never needs fear coughing out her teeth,
(For she has none, but a few Holly-stubs)
She that should think of nothing now but death;
Maugre th'imperfections of her Age,
She will with Tubrio the young gallant wed,
And link herself to him in marriage.
What shall we say next day when she is dead?
That this old fool did that young fellow take,
Him not her Husband, but her Heir to make.
EPIGRAM 45.
Bis duo notani quae non possunt reuocari,
Virginitas, Tempus, Verbum dictumque, Voluptas.

SCaurus his life voluptuously has led; Voluptas. Verbum. Virginitas. Tempus.

Ruffinus tongue has walked immodestly;
Lusilla she has lost her maiden, head;
And Thuscus spent his time in vanity:
But now the Black Ox treads on their feet,
They find their faults, and 'gin to fear their fate,
And like the Trojans they have after-wit,
And would be wise when now it is too late:
For who can call back Words already spoken,
Lost time, past Pleasure, Virgin-bands once broken?
EPIGRAM. 46.
In Dol pregnantem.
DOl learning Propriaquae maribas without-booke,
Like Nomen crescentis genetiuo does look.
EPIGRAM. 47.
In Oxoniam.
Iile terrarum mihi preter omnes Angulus ridet. Horat. Od.
ENglands fair Athens, Youths thrice happy Nurse,
Natures resiner, Learnings Consistory,
Refuge whereto the Muses have recourse,
And where to be the Graces chiefly glory:
Pardon thy Pupils high-presuming pen,
That dares thy praise ambitiously aduenter,
"Each little stream repaies the Ocean
His borrowed waves, and does the seare-enter:
My self with like gratuity incenst,
Return to thee (from whom it first sprang forth)
That little wit, that heretofore thou lentst,
To legend out thy true deserved worth.
But out alas, what relish has my riming,
It can but be a blemish to the breeder,
And I shall be controuled for high climing,
Me thinks I hear already from the Reader;
Who tells me, in my talking thus so boldly,
"Better be silent, then commend so coldly.
EPIGRAM 48
Adeandem. Desiderium in discessu.
AT natale solum placet omnibus: optat Ulysses,
Fumantes Ithacae posse videre domos:
Cuique, placet Natale solum; mihi di'plicet (...);
Horreoque, in Patria solus ego esse mea;
Ipsamque inuitus repeto: sic perfidus olim
Dicitur ad patrios, Hannibal isse lares.
Cur fugimus patriam, si causam quaritis; ^d^m;
Illum amor Italiae, me tenot Oxoniae.
Anglice.
EAch man his Country loves: Ulysses wish
Was to see Ithacks smoke (smoke little worth)
Each cares for Country; I care not a rush,
I loath to live where I was first brought forth.
Now go I home, as Hannibal once went,
To native Afric, sad and discontent.
We hate our Countries: would you neds know why?
My love is Oxford; His, was Italy.
EPIGRAM 49.
In Salium.
WHen Salius takes the pen in hand, he bragges;
He Will rowze his wit to raise the p^ise of rags; Quia ex lacer pannu sit pap^

And writes such verses as stand men in steead,
For Priny bisnesse rather then to read.
Now pray you when the paper lies besh --
How are rags raised by his rowzing wit?
EPIGRAM. 50.
In Flauium.
WHen Flauius once would needs praise Tin,
His brain could bring no reasons in,
But what his belly did bethink,
Platters for meat, and Pots for drink.
EPIGRAM. 51.
In Virtutem.
Virtue we praise, but practice not her good,
( Athenian-like) we act not what we know;
So many men do talk of Robin Hood,
Who never yet shot arrow in his bow.
EPIGRAM. 52.
In Ebrios.
WHy Drunkards should be so improuident,
And yet so often drink a Deity: ^. Bacchum.

To prove the cause I know no Argument,
But that they surfeit in satiety.
Honey, how wholesome, and how full of pleasure, ^tiam mel fi ninium ingra^u^.

And yet how hurtful taken out of measure!
EPIGRAM 53.
In Crispinus.
CRispinus gives, where gifts he looks for greater,
This kindness shows him but a kind of Cheater.
EPIGRAM. 54.
In Patum.
PAEtus dying, cozend Atropos,
She should not cut his vital thread in two,
His Shorditch Saint a fairer fate bestows,
She did as much as destiny could do;
Yet not by cutting (for she used no knife)
But by the burning of the thread of life.
EPIGRAM. 55.
In duos letigiosos.
FIcus has three-farthings-worth of wrong
Done to him by his neighbor Clunnico,
For which he vows to be revenged ere long;
That to make good, to law he means to go:
And Clunnico, as stubborn, will not shrink
What ere it cost: by this the Lawyer's feed,
Who nimbly purses their dis-powched chinke,
And hearts them both, that they be not agreed:
They (like two dogs) lie fighting for the bone,
The which a third, the Lawyer, feeds upon.
EPIGRAM. 56.
In Embrionem.
TRow ye who lately to the wars is gone?
The neither wise nor warlike Embrion:
There if perhaps he happily atcheeue
What we have now no reason to believe;
And that his valors unexpected proof,
Be to his Countries and his own behoof.
Thus in my times his name I will inroll,
Lo here the Goose that saved the Capitol.
EPIGRAM 57.
LOndon is like to have no more strong Beer, Aquae duclu^ per Magistru^
Middletonun omnium, (qui vnquam fuerunt) ciuitati vtilissimus.

All long of my Lord Mayor as we hear:
His brother rather may the cause be thought,
That so much water to the Town has brought.
EPIGRAM 58.
Proh dolor.
THe 17 Provinces are all at peace:
Alas good Soldiers, it boots not now,
The military Science to profess,
You must come home, and live the Lord knows how:
Like to have small relief, but too much Law,
And hanged, if but for taking of a straw.
EPIGRAM. 59.
In Mathonem.
THough great men's houses make it known,
How Buckes-hornes stand the hall in steed,
To hang up Hats and Caps upon;
Yet every where there is no such need:
For what needs it in Mathos hall?
His head, his horns, may serve for all.
EPIGRAM. 60.
Dum Spiritus hos regit artus.
OF all the letters in the Cris-crosse row,
I love the W. why? if you will know;
It does begin two names, I would be loath
For too much boot change either of them both:
The first I serve, love, honor, and attend,
The other is my Kinsman, and my Friend.
EPIGRAM. 61.
In Clit^m.
THat Clitus is become so melancholy,
Nor loss of goods, nor death of friends does cause it,
But his Pr^^pus, fired by his folly,
He is in fear he shall be fore'd to loose it:
He heard such news from the Physician,
It must be saved by Circumcision.
EPIGRAM. 62
Consanguinio suo Febricitanti.
TWo contraries (Philosophy says) never,
At one time can in one selfe-subiect be,
Yet note but the condition of the fever,
And it is a false position we see;
Which strangely does conioyn mere opposites,
And extreme cold t'exce^s^ue heat unites.
Which (like two st^uggling twins within one womb)
By striving, so our vital powers distort,
As both our strength and senses quite benumme,
Distaste our pallats, make us All a^ Mort,
Our bodies of all faculties displace,
And makes our brains to run the wilde-goose chase.
Cozen, to you these lines I need not write,
Who have the practike, mine is but speculation,
I do but tell; you, feel the Agues might
Would you were less acquainted with her fashion.
Yet to your comfort, I have heard it ever,
"No Physic for the body to the fever:
Which though it bring it to some little weakness,
It purges choler, swageth swelling tumors,
Cuts off the causes of ensuing sickness,
Rarefies fleame, and for all ill-bred humors,
Phleb^tomy, nor purging, no^ the Bath,
Have half the healthful power th'Ague has:
Besides that it the shomacke does restore,
Reformes digestion, concockts crudities,
Repaires the faculties impaired before;
Yet for all these, and more good properties,
I think you could be well contented yet,
And I could rather wish you rid of it.
EPIGRAM. 63.
Viae tibi. Eidem.
Look to thy self, and learn to live at home,
Have fellowship henceforth with few or none,
See, see, to what a pass the world is come,
Friendship abides not, be thy fortunes gone,
Be thou like Winter that like Summer wast,
The Swallows fly that flockt before so fast:
Friends swim, like fishes, as the stream does run,
And like slye serpe^ts lurk in fairest green,
They only reverence the rising Sun,
Scarce looking to'ards him, when he does decline;
It Is wealth preserues good will, that from thee taken,
Thou that wast followed shall be soon forsaken:
Nay mark even now; the very Bird of love,
Betakes her self unto the fairest building;
And her own home abandoneth the Done, Fugi^nt ad can dida tecta Columb^e.

If once she sees it ruinous and yielding,
No marvel then, though faith fail in the trial,
When loves true Turtle is turned thus disloyal.
This vile Hart-gnawing Vultur-Age then fly,
Feed not the Hounds whose teeth may after tear thee,
Let not the serpent in thy bosom lie,
Lest stinging, thou repent he lay so near thee:
Be thine own neighbor; and be this thy doom,
To look unto thy self, to live at HOME.
EPIGRAM. 64.
In iactabundum gentis suae^
TEll me no more what trophies were erected,
By those, from whom thy Gentry took deriuing,
Show me their virtues that made them respected,
If they, as yet, be in their son suruiuing:
It Is not enough, 'tinherit any man,
To reckon from Coruinus thy descent,
From Nasica, or Nobler Affrican,
If virtue be not in th'here ditament;
Or say; it is credit to be come of them;
It Is more dishonor when thou shall digress,
And prove a bad stalk of so brave a stem,
Disabling thy birth in thine unworthiness:
I would Thersites had begot thee rather, Trans^tum ex luuenal:

And thou prove like Patroclus worthy friend,
Then that Achilles should have been thy father,
And thou to prove Thirsites in the end:
"No fathers deeds can dignify the son,
Nor can we call that ours, we have not done.
Quae non fecimus ipsi
Vixea nostravoco.
EPIGRAM. 65.
In Richardum.
DIck will to wiuing, and a whore will wed,
Ware horns; a wager, whether will have more
A Tanners backe-side ( Richard) or your head,
Or Scot of Fleet-streete, though he have such store:
Dick were your hornos as visible as they,
I hold my life it were an even Lay.
EPIGRAM. 66.
In pestem, Oxonium a duobus Gallis allatum anno. 1609.
OXford's infected, and the Frenchmen brought it,
The Pox to bring the plague, who would have thought it,
I should have said, nay more, I should have swore it,
The Pox had been a Supersedeas for it.
Good Town; for thee (for thee I ever loved)
I wish the Proverb had not been disproued.
EPIGRAM. 67.
Epitaph. foeneratoris.
With usury and common harms,
Here he lies that purchased Arms;
Earth press softly, worms forbear,
It Is a Gentleman lies here,
He and all that so heap good,
Needs they must be men of blood.
EPIGRAM. 68.
In liuorem.
Envy did ask me for her Epigram,
I flatly answered she should have none:
But if that for her Epitaph she came
I would have willingly bestowed one:
Think thou I Will dye (quoth. she) I must furuiue,
So long as any shall be left alive:
Pascitur in vinis.
EPIGRAM. 69.
Candida simplicitas.
A poor man at the Tavern was in place,
Where his Attorney told his Clients case
Unto another; Lawier-like the while,
Naming but Ioha a Noxe, and John a St^e,
And, quoth th'Atturney, you must understand,
This John a Noxe is owner of the Land:
The poor man present, could not but reply,
Not John a Noxe, and't please you sir, it is I.
EPIGRAM. 70.
A Freeman.
A Kings-B^nch fits not such as I
And Lud your Gate is built too hy,
And yet my credit shall not Fleet
It Is better then two Counters yet:
EPIGRAM. 71.
Adorans substantiam et orans imaginem.
I Love my Soueragine as good Subjects should,
I Would have my Sovereign as rich Subjects would*
Himself; why no: but by a second course
I would his picture always in my purse.
EPIGRAM. 72.
Dij votis aspirate meis.
ALl prayers for Iacobus are, but mine is,
Both for Iacobus and for Iacobines.
EPIGRAM. 73.
In Cinnam.
SO long as Cinna holds his peace, he is took,
To be a Wiseman, only for his look,
But he no sooner speaks, but men discry him,
And find his countenance did ^oule belie him:
Were Cinna dumb, he had a hapy turn,
Or if to hold his peace he could but learn;
" Silence in most shows wit, in Fools alone
It makes men think th'haue some when they have none.
EPIGRAM. 74.
In Critonem vociferante^
Good Man (quoth a) knowing who I am,
My wealth might teach thee use another name:
Good Man, heart; I can hardly forbear thee,
Sweet Master Crito pardon; now I hear thee,
Why this at first had pleased me; well it is past,
Remember next your words be better placed.
Such is the strange condition of men
A rich-man once, no more a Good Man then.
EPIGRAM. 75.
Honores mutant mores.
When I and some of my Com-rades were poor,
O Lord how we loved one another then,
We loved as, I thought, no men could love more;
But, since the most of them are grown rich men,
And I stick fast still to my poverty,
They fly from me and or I am skarse known,
Or quite forgotten, what an Ass am I,
The case is partly mine, but more their own:
And their offense may well forgiven be,
That have forgot themselves as well as me.
EPIGRAM. 76.
In Colaxem.
SInce Colax came from the Low Country wars,
Each Tavern and Red-lettice knows his skars
His skores too; well known to them all,
Skarrs on his skin, his skores upon their wall.
EPIGRAM. 77.
In fungum.
FAint-harred Fungus that dare fight with none,
When he is drunk will fight with any one;
Is It he, think you? No, Bacchus for his sake
The shape of him does surely undertake;
Nor is it strange, for in Troy-wars we read,
So for their favorites the old Gods did:
With drunken Fungus ware you fight not than,
For trust me it is God Bacchus, not the man.
EPIGRAM. 78.
In Luscum^ quod quisque suae fortunae faber.
LVs^^, the worst demeanur'd man alive,
Wonders, of all he only cannot thrive,
But ' it is his luck, says he, when by his favor,
It Is not his luck, it is his lewd behavior:
"Our selves our fortunes frame (how ere he give it)
"And none is hurt but by himself, believe it.
Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso.
EPIGRAM. 79.
Alea, Vina, Venus.
Four things in drinking breed our discontent,
Our Wealth, our Wit, our Strength, our Time misspent,
Three of the four (which makes us more aghast)
Wealth, Strength and Time by Women are defaced.
And two of three (take only strengh away)
Our Wealth and Time the Dye brings to decay.
Therefore, that Wealth, Wit, Strength, Time be not lost.
Fly Dice, fly Women, but fly Drinking most.
EPIGRAM. 80
Aliud de eisdem.
THe earth three furies has, which ouer-match
The Hellish^ A^^; yea, or all the Fiends
Three headed Hecate did ever hatch,
Yet holds the earth these Furies for her friends:
And suckes the sweet that sowrely does digest,
And first the Die she uses for disport,
And holds the Grape-god greatly in request,
Yet brings this this double pleasure, treble hurt.
The third to these, I was about to name,
Lusilla bob'd me, and bade, Peace for shame.
EPIGRAM 81.
In Cosmum.
WHen Cosmus will auerre a thing for truth,
He swears, as he is a Gentleman forsooth.
Well, say he tell the most notorious lie,
Yet as he swears, it is true, and that swear I:
For wot you whence the Gentleman did come,
His father Miller had a golden thum.
EPIGRAM. 82.
De Epigrammatis suis.
MY Epigrams, among my learned friends,
Are only praised for their pretty ends,
They join with me but only in the close,
Against all the rest they have too rank a nose;
Liu^d he (who stoale from Greece her eloquence)
Tully should be his own and my defense,
Against those that my beginnings discommend,
Against those that note his sentences nice end,
Against all such selfe-conceited seeming-wise,
Me and himself well would he patronize:
Me, for my idle entering to the matter,
Himself, for's Esse posse vid^atur.
EPIGRAM. 83.
Omni homo mendax.
POoets and Painters, once it was your part,
And none but you were priuiledg'd to lie;
Now all the world authorizing your Art,
Challenge a charter of like liberty:
Philosophy affirms, a wise man may
Sometimes dissemble with safe conscience:
And your Ciuilian will not stick to say,
That The officious lie is no offense:
Our Pure Divines that make so to abhor it,
False A^anias trade have not forgot.
And for your Lawyer fee him roundly for it,
He Will lie you faster then a horse can trotte:
Seek to Phisicians, health they will assure thee;
And if thou have a skabbe or ulcer grieve thee,
What say the Surgeons? questionles the^'l cure thee,
When both in the end in worser case do leave thee^
How falsely swear your Sellers to the Buyers;
Nay, almost, who will not abjure the truth?
Yet being asked, who will they say are liers?
Poets and Painters, and none else forsooth:
Who tells me so, tell me too (if he can)
Who Is not a Poet, or a Painter than?
EPIGRAM. 84.
Fortius est quise etc.

Ad Labeonem.
Believe me Labeo, this were fortitude,
Over thy self to get a victory;
To see thy foul affections subdude,
This were a triumph worthy memory;
Though some will hold, true valor does con^st
In resolution and an active bodle,
Of injuries not suffering the least,
But who so thinks, I think him but a noddie.
Achilles was commended, wot you why?
Not for the valiant deeds he did perform;
But then he showed his magnanimity,
When against great Agame^non he did storm:
Others perhaps with hasty insurrections
Would take revenge of an injurious offer,
Well could he temper our affections,
And (what the valiant seldom can) could suffer
True valor, Labeo, if I read aright,
Must not be only Active to attempt:
For why the Lion and the Bull can fight
And show great minds too, and much hardiment;
But the Irrational can only grieve:
Ours must not be so Beast-like furious,
But readier sometime, wrong to take then give,
Else manhood might prove too injurious,
Where it must be considerate and careful,
Betwixt extremes to keep the merry mean,
Not to be rashly bold, nor basly fearful,
Not too too mild, nor too too full of spleen,
Who thought one world too little to subdue,
Found 'twas too much t'orecome a furious mind*
Then, as at first, so here conclude we now:
Labeo, this were true fortitude I find,
This were a triumph worthy memory,
Over thy self to get a victory.
EPIGRAM 85
In Truncum.
SWaggring Truncus swears in every town,
He is for any for a broken crown,
And fight, else damn him, he will with any one,
Marry with cudgels, edge-tooles, he will use none,
I like the Woodden-hearted slave that wanting mettle
He will be sure his weapon have as little.
EPIGRAM. 86.
In Gualterum.
MY schoole-fellow, and my old friend Gualter,
Could read the ABC, Primer, and the Psalter
None more distinctly, none could read it better,
And now I hear he does scarce know a letter;
His marriage, and his wanton Wise men guess,
have wrought in him this strange forgetfulness:
If that be all, doubtless he will recover,
If so be she will do but her endeavor:
And as she hurt him she can help him too,
Or make him learn his Horne-booke over anew.
EPIGRAM. 87.
Vitia virtutis speciem induunt.
VIce thought it once her only grace,
T'Imm ask her self with virtues face,
Now she abhorres those idle shifts,
And stands upon her own good gifts:
Knowing the worlds opinion
Has made her the worlds Minion.
When Pride is counted Decency,
And Wrath reputed Valiancy;
Enu^'s held for Emulation,
Sloth a life in Con^emplation;
When all commend the Gluttony
Of Aegypts Queen and Antony;
And to be drunken once a week,
It Is a Gentleman-like trick,
Besides the wholesomenesse they urge
O it is Physic, 'twill the body purge;
And Letch^ry; o GOD forbid,
There should be sin in such a deed,
Why it breeds love, begets delight,
Besides the world is peopled by it.
Dissembling and Hypocr^y,
Shows Wisdom, and shows Policy;
The world it selfe's turned Macheuill
In practicing and praising ill.
My self too, that can well become
A Roman when I am at Rome,
And otherwise when otherwhere
English, Scotch, Irish, whatsoever;
Am willing sometime to traduce
To wanton sense my merry Muse,
Holding it foolish modesty
Idely still to talk of honesty;
And say I do write ribaldrous,
It is a vice held virtuous.
EPIGRAM. 88.
In Palladium.
PAlladius when all the world does judge
Thy wife so fair, thy servant such a drudge,
I wonder what is the reason of thy wrongs
To give the foul what to the fair belongs.
Or is it, because affections often blindness
Does undeservedly dispose her kindness?
Or is it, because it is our natures course,
To see the better, yet to seek the worse?
Or this, or that, or what I know not else:
Only I here men say the Maid she swells,
Which makes me gather by the History,
Farther meaning of a future mystery,
And that Palladius did it, but to know
By change of Pasture how a Calfe might grow.
EPIGRAM. 89.
In Caluum.
CAluus swears a complete Gentleman
Must have the Pox, or else he can be none,
I see then I can not be what he can
For I Will be sworn he is a pocky one.
EPIGRAM. 90.
Of Moll Cutpurse disguised going.
THey say Mol's honest, and it may be so,
But yet it is a shrewd presumption, no:
To touch but pitch, it is known it will defile,
Moll wears the breech, what may she be the while;
Sure she that does the shadow so much grace,
What will she when the substance comes in place?
EPIGRAM. 91.
In Hylam.
HYlas the Puritan is of belief,
That he by no means can a Cuckold be*
If whilst he sleep another slip to his wife,
For in my sleep I am as dead quoth he,
And who can do a dead-man injury:
Here-hence his wife so wanton waxen is,
That should he sleep 'tauoid all infamy,
And dye as often as she does amiss,
How many times a day, had Hylas need
To drink of Lethe, or eat Poppy seed?
EPIGRAM. 92.
In Dorotheam.
DOll, accused for a common Trull,
Says, she is for her Country borne,
Sweet sin as sweetly salu'd (sweet Doll)
Thou speak but reason I Will be sworn,
Borne for thy Country, it is most true;
Nay thou have borne thy Country too.
EPIGRAM. 93.
In Castorem.
CAstor, were it charectred in thy brow,
Every offense thy lustful wise does do;
Them needs not, that see thy knotty front
So much wish: Now a horne-plague vpon's:
Rather they might with admiration
Go learn the Art of Numeration
Nor could they Number, but they might aim fair
By likelihood; a Horn for every Hair.
EPIGRAM 40.
In ^undem.
CAstor, thy horned brow can be no shame,
That very place predominates the Ram,
Besides th'in visible grace; thou fool, what fear.
None see the horns that many know thou wear'st.
EPIGRAM. 95.
In Momum quendam.
THough against my Rimes thou art out-ragious,
Think thou I care for thy fantastic fits?
Thou say my sense is as my self, Contagious,
It Is Venomous, 'twill poison younger wits.
Although I know the world holds me excused,
And that my pen needs no Apology:
I mean not for the method therein used,
Or that it savors ought of Poetry,
But for I do so libr'ally disclose,
And touch the vicers of this vice-growne Age,
And them to laughtes and to shame expose,
As if I seemed possessed with holy rage:
No, no, but let the Spartane speak for me,
Whose vie I gladly imitate herein,
He lets his Son his drunken Servant see,
That by the sight he may avoid the sin,
Like v^e, may men make of my Epigrammes,
That when they see deciphered here by me,
Other men's sins together with their shames,
By seeing others, may their own foresee.
But O my ribald terms: No Momus, no,
Hereby my Muse seems more commodious:
Is It shame to say? How much more then to do,
What by but naming seems so odious?
Thus Momus, whilst thou labourst to pervert
What I have labourd to a good intent
Well may thou show the malice of thy heart,
But never make me the more male content,
Rather thou make me proud to censure thus,
"Envy is only against the virtuous.
EPIGRAM. 96.
In Fuscam.
I Pre thee Fusca, would thou have a Coach
To poast the streets, so like a paragon,
That all that to thy Concaue Carre approach,
May cry Madona to a Curtezan,
And simpringly salute a sluttish sweet,
And as it were make curtsie to a crab*
Thy hopes are high, and yet perhaps may hi^,
And destiny may dignifie a drab;
Or Brid^wels duty may (to thy desert)
If not a Coach, yet help thee to a cart.
EPIGRAM. 97.
In Fortunam.
FOrtune, be stormy as thou have been still,
Dis-gorge thy good upon some witless gu^s,
Still credit me in crossing me with ill:
What says the proverb, Fortune favors fools.
Folly thy favors, Wisdom has thy frowns:
Hence I suspect my self a poor wise man,
Yet wish to be thy Fool, and full of Crowns:
Sweet Fortunes Al^umize me if you can;
Let me be Midas, and be this my fate.
To be a Fool, and to be Fortunate.
EPIGRAM. 98.
Innersio Argumenti.
Fool that I am to wish my self a fool,
As if that Fortune would be Follies friend,
Each boy, but grounded from the Grammar-schoole,
Will find my fault, and wherein I offend;
Some Paradox, from Tully will he fetch,
Or from the Stoics strain an argument,
To prove, the only wise are only rich,
And none are poor but the improuident.
Is It true indeed? How came it then to pass,
That Apulcius proved a golden Ass?
EPIGRAM. 99.
In Frankum.
FRankus indeed House-keeping's commendable,
But hark you: you must fashion your course;
Begin as to hold on you may be able,
And rather still grow better then grow worse.
Who keeps within his compass, at his pleasure
May give his Liberality more scope,
When he that spends beyond his means and measure
Of being Better banisheth all hope.
Beside, there is none almost but will mis-doubt,
Seeing such hare-brain'd hospitality,
How such a one is able to hold out,
All through his lavish prodigality*
Frankus take heed, and fear this foul disaster,
The house may surfeit and spu^ out his master.
EPIGRAM. 100.
Ad familiarem suum, quomodo in Musam male meritam animaduertat.
MAy be my Muse, like that same foolish reed*
That all abroad his Masters shame descried
Will do by me, as he by Midas did,
And for a fool will make me notified.
Which, gentle friend, if so it shall fall out,
M^ssacre thou this my unthankful Muse,
Let not thy Spirit be made a ( --) clou^,
All these my Epigrams are thine to use*
Which though they will do thy study little grace,
They Will do thee pleasure in some Pr^uy place.
MARTIAL. LIB. 1. Cui legisse satis non est Epigrammata centum,
Nil satis est illi, Ceciliane, mali.

Explicit

Rub and a great Cast.

Sequitur

Run and a great Cast.


Brutigina tollant equites, pediteque, cachinnum:
Per me equidem lic^at.

HORAT: Iocum tentauit, eo quod Illecebris erat, and grata nouitate morandus
Lector.


RVNNE, And a great Cast.

THE SECOND BOWL.

To the right Honorable his singular good Lord and Master, THOMAS Lord
Winasore: His Run, and a great Cast.
YEt more (thrice worthy Lord) more of that vain,
My idler times and youthfulness affected;
Agarb which amongst the gracefu'st wits does reign,
Whereto the choicest spirits are addicted:
Not that I place my wit amongst the pregnant,
And yet your Lordship, when that you have seen them,
Shall see my stars have not been so malignant,
But my conceits do carry salt within them:
Though not like some, in such abundant measure,
I may be named, though they be more noted,
To whom the Muses have unlocked their treasure;
Ennius (as artlesse as he is) is quoted,
But hence vaine-boasting, I Will be no Suffenus;
Only your Lordships liking, and delight,
And pardon when there is any thing obscenous,
I hope, and crave; and where all goes not right,
Your Honor rather pity then reprove,
Since Duty shows her ignorance for Love.
Virtus vera Nobilitas, Symbolum Domini, scripto a se nominl, vsitatissime
subscriptum.
THat virtue is the true Nobility
I see subcrib'd often to your written name,
But who your virtuous actions shall eye,
And how your heart habituates the same:
He must confess it a far greater point,
He sees it there but Written, here in Print.
Your Honors ever the same devoted. T. F.

Run and a great Cast.
LECTORI.
EPIGRAM. 1.
Whilst (Pedler-like) I here vnpacke my pen,
And lay you forth the fairest of my wit,
Still more and more conceits come flocking in,
And in my brains do Hurly-burly it.
To Grace them all, I would ingrosse them all;
But when I would this indigested heap
Reduce (more seemly) into several;
In steed of one; in, All together step.
That when I would tell Sylla's tyranny,
Or Nero's cruelty, and Casars stabbing,
Straight interrupts me Druso's letchery,
Lucullus drudging, or Lucilla's drabbing.
Yet being willing (though not being able)
I broach my best invention to dispose them;
But proves my work still like the Tower of Babell,
And thus confusedly I leave, and loose them;
Then English Hodge-podge; Irish-boniclabor,
Go on, go on, my Gally-maufree labor.
EPIGRAM. 2.
Ad Merionem, curpassim Poetae.
WHy should thou marvel so Meriones,
Whence our so many chattering Poets rise?
Have thou not heard, Pierides i^ Puas.
how the Piorides
Were metamorphosed to tatling Pies?
Those Pies our Poets caught, this one got I,
Which here thou see I do again let fly.
EPIGRAM. 3.
Of Leathe false Accuser:
LEa some three years since, the false accuser,
Of his two ears, for that fault, was a looser:
And yet they say, he swaggers, stamps, and swears;
Pray you why not? who can have him by the ears.
EPIGRAM. 4.
In Miluum.
MIluus, that art deformed in thy face,
In every part ill-fashioned by nature,
Beware I wish thee, gaze not in thy glass,
Look to thy self, but look not, in the water:
Lest looking in thy glass, thou' euacuate
From forth thy filthy corpse, thy fairer soul,
Or in the water should grow desperate,
And drown the oblect of thy self so foul:
How far unlike to fair Narcissus fate;
He, for self-love, thou, drowning for selfe-hate
EPIGRAM. 5.
Hincille lachrime.
ALas the while, poor Kitchen boys may curse
That whirling lacks, and Dogs in wheels turn broaches
And Seruingmen, poor Souls, have fat'de the worse,
Since great men got the trick to ride in coaches,
These first of these for food may now go statue,
Nor needs th'attendance of a Seruing-man,
A horse-pac't Footman, and a Coach will serve,
For certainly since first the world began,
And great men, with the world, to run on wheels:
They have but few or no men at their heels.
EPIGRAM. 6.
In Mopsam.
MOpsa had not, I heard her when she swore,
The toothache not these twenty years and more,
And well may Mopsa swear, and swear but truth,
It Is above twenty since she had a tooth.
EPIGRAM. 7.
In Cletum.
What Is Cletus better for his Benefice,
I see not how he can fit much the warmer,
He ownes the Sheep, another sheares the Fleece,
He Is Parson, but his Patron is his Farmer;
It Is worth at least 200 hundred by the year,
Cletus is glad he can get barely twenty,
Nay and his Patron thinks he paies too dear,
Livings grow scarce, and Ministers grow plenty.
Five for a Reader, ten pounds for a Vicar,
Is fair preferment, twenty Marks a Preacher,
With monthly Sermons, if he come off quicker,
Why there is his praise, To be a painful Teacher.
But Cletus takes too much above the Market,
What twenty pound? well may his Patron grutch:
He could have had as learned as Cletus clarke it,
For less a great deal, nay for half as much;
And swears his predecessor Parson took,
But bare five Marks, besides his Easter-booke.
EPIGRAM. 8.
In Epitaphium pingui minerua composituur.
WHen Crassus died, his friends, to grace his hearse,
Requested one to make his funeral verse,
Of whom they did procure it in the end,
A ruthful one, and pitifully penned:
That sure the man who made it, made great moan
His Epitaph was such a sorry one.
EPIGRAM. 9.
Aliud.
THis Epitaph deserves, this on this stone,
To lie as low, as he it lies upon.
EPIGRAM. 10.
Aliud.
I Must needs say, were thou mine own brother,
This Epitaph of thine deserves another:
Such sorrow would make the learned to laugh
To read: Here lies a dead Epitaph.
EPIGRAM. 11.
STrut to Size and Sessions brings a man
To talk with him when he with none else can:
Besides, to show he is of some command
To talk to one, that stands with hat in hand.
EPIGRAM. 12.
De Pompeio and filijs, ex Martial. lib. 5.
POmpei genitos Asia, atg Eur^pa, sedipsum
Terratenet Libies, si tamenvlla tenot:
Quid mirum, toto si spargitur Orb? jacere
Vno non poterat tanta ruina loco.
Translatum.
ASia and Europe, Pompeis sons, interre;
Himself in Afric lies, if any where
What wonder, through all parts o'th world he is, thrown
So great a ruin could not lie in one.
EPIGRAM. 13.
Honaratis: Domino suo T. D. W. in minoribato sua, dicat.
SOme in their Loves, some other in their fears,
Do wish my Lord, your days at least endure,
To the full term of one and twenty years,
The latter, but to make their States more sure;
And those, are they, whose wills once being got
Their wishes end, their prayers are expirde,
Then live or die; all is one; they weigh it not:
But they who in their loves your life desirde,
Will still the fates importunately trouble
Your one and twenty, twenty times to double,
EPIGRAM. 14.
-- Mediocribus esse Poetis
Non homines, non dij, non concessere column.
Horat. art
PIety o pity, death had power
Over Chaucer, Lidgate, Gower:
They that equaled all the Sages
Of these, their own, of former Ages,
And did their learned Lights advance
In times of darkest ignorance,
When palpable impurity
Kept knowledge in obscurity,
And all went Hood-winkt in this I Will,
They could see and shine the while:
Nor Greece nor Rome could reckon 'vs, Sloebat Graci, and Rom: omnes alias
gentes Barbas asnuncupari.

As then, among the Barbarous:
Since these three knew to turn perdy
The Scru-pin of Philosophy
As well as they; and left behind
As rich memorials of the mind:
By which they live, though they are dead,
As all may see that will but read;
And on good works will spend good hours,
In Chaucers, Lidgates, and in Gowers.
EPIGRAM. 15.
To the worthy, his friend, Master FOVLX KNOTTESFORD.
WHo knows thee right he will thee rightly prize
Above the general of Gentlemen,
Not sullen-sad, nor selfe-conceited-wife,
Yet knowing how to speak, and where and when,
And how to live, and how to love thy friends:
And say (as man) thou have inherent sin,
Thy rare and many virtues make amends:
And do but hold the way that thou art in:
The president begun, as well but end it,
Many may follow, but there is none can mend it.
EPIGRAM. 16.
In Rodulp.
RAfe is grown poor, and now the wood cock grudges,
That his Inferiors rise and are grown rich,
He swears he hates them, calls them dunghill drudges,
And he has spent, they will never spend so much:
Indeed he has spent all, and I know none,
I, able to spend more then Rafe has done.
EPIGRAM. 17.
Vilior Alga.
SO fares the world; we love our friends, if rich;
I^ not, then not: So wary wise we grow,
We question not the manner, but how much words
A man is worth: we ask no other How:
Yet friendships praised, and virtue gets good
'That's all the goodness this vile age affoords.
EPIGRAM. 18.
In Peg.
PEg would play false but that she stands in fear
'Twill prove within three quarters of a year:
She fancies, though she follows not the game,
It Is not for fear of sin, but fear of shame.
EPIGRAM. 19.
In Lusillam.
LVsilla, though her beauty be out-wore,
Yet has an Image of her fairest hew,
As when she was but sixteen, and no more,
That in her Chamber hangs to open view;
To all that come, that portrature she shows,
And sighs she is not what she was whilere,
This surrow'd face so full of Cris. cross rows,
Was once (quoth she) such as you see it there:
With that she leaves him gazing on her picture,
And makes to go, she knows not whereabout;
But what is her meaning I cannot conjecture,
Except she would her picture prostitute:
And that it be more like her, and be lewd,
While she absents her self so like a bawd.
EPIGRAM. 20.
To the Stationer.
I Tell thee Stationer, why never fear,
They Will fell in faith, and't be but for their Title,
Thou can not lose, nay, I dare warrant clear,
They Will get thee twenty nobles, not so little:
Why read this Epigram, or that, or any,
Do they not make thee itch, and move thy blood;
Of all thou have had (and thou have had many)
Have e're read better nay, have read so good?
Do laugh? they will make the rigidst Callo do it;
Besides smooth verse, quaint phrase, come, what wilt give?
No more but so: Ah! what shall I say to it?
I pity Poetry, but curse the time,
When none will bid us Reason for our Rhyme.
EPIGRAM. 21.
Patruo suo colendist. Rich. Freem (...)
THese, and himself that sends you these, are yours,
From who^ he yields he had his chief proceeding,
To whom he owes his best bestowed hours,
And (better then man's birth) ingenuous breeding;
Though much against your mind he has imployd
That precious jewel Time, to his great loss:
Yet all you have bestowed is not destroyed:
There Is some gold o^e in this huge heap of dross:
So much, and such as it is, accept, and save it,
If it were more, and better, you should have it.
EPIGRAM. 22.
Eidem.
TO whom may I these times more truly send,
Then unto you, where they were bred and born,
Should all forsake them, you, must be their friend,
If good, your praise, if bad (t'escape from scorn)
To Buckelers-bery; or Tobacco-takers,
Or Flax-wiues vent them, or near home you may,
To Tewkesbery amongst the Mustard-makers,
Or fire them, or send them quite away:
Your only sweet course for Virginia ship them,
For by the Statute you are bound to keep them.
EPIGRAM 23.
Consanguina^ suo chariss. generosiss. W. Warmstry.
Who would you not in all abundant measure,
The triple good of body, mind and fortune;
Even those to whom you never yet did pleasure,
How much more, I may such a wish importune:
Who in good troth if but the troth were known*
In wishing your health, do but wish mine own.
EPIGRAM. 24.
In Swaggerum.
SWagger, the only Strike-fire of our time,
Whose sword the Steel, whose fury is the flint,
Well would this Caualier become my rhyme,
But, O impatience I God's Blood put him not in it:
For if I do, be sure he will be my bane,
Not Herc'les used the three-chopt Hel-hound so,
As I shall be, if in his clutches taken,
He Will teach the curre for barking any more.
Yet good sir Swagger, if I pen thy praise,
Record thy valor, registring in it
How many thou have killed in thy days:
All which I dare be sworn are living yet.
If I shall say how thou becomst a terror,
A Bugge-beare to those Babie-hearted slaves,
That know not how they grosely live in error,
To think thee valiant only for thy braues.
If I shall term thee the Innes only hackester,
The Tauerns tyrant, like some cutting Dicke,
To call the Oastler rogue, beknaue the Tapster,
With, Fill's another quarte, come villain quick.
If I shall tell how thou made Pickt-hatch smoke,
And how without smoke thou wast fired there:
If I shall tell how, when thy head was broke,
Thou would have bin revenged, but for fear.
Thus if I praise-thee, say, shall I not please thee,
Well, do, or do not, thus resolved I am,
Swagger, thy words, thy oths shall not release thee,
Be thou the subject of this Epigram:
Swagger thou may, and swear as thouart wont,
Thou will not fight, I am assured on it.
EPIGRAM. 25.
In Quintium.
Is It not a wonder, Quintius should so dread,
To see a Hare run crossing in his way,
The Sale fall toward him, or his Nose to bleed,
Begin a journey upon Disemores day;
Yet fears not things more ominous then these,
But dares to drink with him that has the pox,
And ligge with her that has the like disease;
But what cares Quintius, so he ply the box?
So long to swill with him, to play with her,
Till he be sure of the venereall murre.
EPIGRAM 26.
In Malchaonem.
Jealous Malchaeon thinks his wife will do it,
And she, poor soul, to save his soul, falls to it:
Would every jealous man had such a wife,
He should be sure, be saved by his belief.
EPIGRAM. 27.
In duas meretricos litigantes.
FRancke and Kate wage law, wherefore!
Because that Francis called Kate whore;
Yet Kate is known, and Francis too,
Wenches that will not stick to do:
Faith Kate, let fall thy Action
Law proves it no detraction:
I, him that weaues, a Weauer call,
No vantage to be got at all:
And how can Francke be found too blame,
That to thy trade so fits thy name.
EPIGRAM 28.
In Salonum.
OF^ in the night Salonus is inclinde,
To rise and piss, and does as often break wind;
If's Vrinall be glass* as it is no doubt,
I wonder it so many crackes holds out.
EPIGRAM. 29.
In Caium: Dantur opes nulla nunc nisi diuitibus.
WHen Caius needed no man's amity,
He might have been beholding unto many:
But when he sought in his calamity,
He could not be beholding unto any.
Then every man his kindness gone recall,
His friends forgot they ever knew the man,
His kinsfolks were to him no kin at all;
All scorned their quondam kind companion.
A common case, and true it is we see,
With seeming friends, how we shall be attended,
The whilst our state stands happy, who but we?
O how the fortunate shall be be friended!
But when soul fortune throws us to the ground,
Lo then they seek occasion to be gone:
To beat that dog a staff is quickly found,
Hang him (say they) we never knew such a one.
Riches are only given to the rich,
And he that is down, shall still lie in the ditch.
EPIGRAM. 30.
In Rusticum generosum.
WHy has our Age such newfound Gentles made,
To give the Master to the Farmers son,
And bid, Good morrow Goodman to his Dad,
Whence has his brat those brauer titles won?
He that saw nothing but the seething pot,
That never went further then Chimney corner,
His father son (so like him every jot,)
Why is he better then the elder Farmer?
Except, as said King Philip long agone
(Seeing his subjects honor Alexander)
Men give more reverence to the Rising Sun,
Then unto that which to the West does wander:
So did the ^ace (...) adore
For Philips manhood, Alexanders ^odhead;
So may we set this son, his site before,
And call the father, Clown, the son a Gods-head.
EPIGRAM. 31.
Shroueteusd^y.
YOu belly-gods, behold your Bacchanals,
The Calends of the Epicures are come,
Bombast your guts until you break your galls,
Fat you with flesh; to morrow't goes from home:
Now lard your lips, and glut your greasy logs,
You Hinxy-hinds, you Bul-biefe-bacon-hogs.
EPIGRAM 32.
In Rufum legentem pracedens Epigr.
RVfiu was reading the foregoing time,
Early one morn when he was fresh and fasting;
O Lord, said he, for that thrice happy time!
Or that Shroueteusday might be everlasting!
I looked, and laughed, and saw a wondrous matter,
Even as he wished his mouth began to water.
EPIGRAM. 33.
In Apparitores.
CIte-sinne the Sumner is a sharking lad,
He seems to friend offenders by forbearance,
Only a trick to try what may be had;
If nothing, ware their Doomes-day of appearance;
They must come in, the Court commands it so,
And pulls his Process from his frighting powch,
Shows to their names the terrible EXCO:
This crowing Cock makes country lions crowch,
With His Coramnomine keeping greater sway,
Then a Court-Blew-coat on Saint Georges day.
EPIGRAM. 34.
Lectori.
IT will be thought to many, that I am,
For some inuectiue veins that I do use,
Rather a Sa^yre then an Epigram,
But who so thinks mistakes my merry Muse:
Who though she smite at first in the end does smile,
And laugh at that she so dislikt erewhile.
EPIGRAM 35
Epitaphium meretricis.
Graves are gone on commonly we see,
It Is no offense to them that buried be:
Why then this grave is for the common tread,
And so was she too that therein lies dead.
EPIGRAM. 36.
Quis cladem.
MOre did not Dulake, nor Godfry of Bullen,
Beuis of Hampton, nor Guy Earl of Warwick,
The Knight of the Sun, the three Kings of Cullen,
Nor all the world twixt Dover and Barwicke,
Nor any man, if his Cap made of woollen,
At land, at sea, without Castle or Carricke:
Feeders on man's flesh, bloud-suckers brave lack
Has thum'd many thousands, and killed with a knacke.
EPIGRAM. 37.
Lectori.
WHoop, whoop, me thinks I hear my Reader cry,
Here is rhyme doggrell: I confess it I;
Nor to a certain pace tie I my Muse;
I give the Reins, anon the Curb I use;
And for the foot accordingly I fit her,
To diverse matter using diverse meeter,
Her lines, they are as long as I allot her,
As why not, vessels be as please the Potter,
Nor care I for a Censors civil hood,
I please my self, at home my Musicke's good.
EPIGRAM. 38.
MEn are grown monsters now at last,
By their apparells alteration:
Their knees are bigger then their waste,
Else how came in the Cloake-bagge fashion?
EPIGRAM. 39.
In Heredipetam.
AGed Leontus ha^h much land and wealth.
And but one son, and that ^^me one so^ sickly,
Sickely to see his father in such health,
My proper squier looks the church-books weekly*
Compares his fathers with his grandsires years,
And how long all that lignage wont to live,
And yet his father; O^ and then he swears
To have him winded, what would he not give?
Fie on this sin of sons, for not this one,
But many thousands wish their fathers gone.
EPIGRAM. 40.
Ad Risum.
LAughter to thee that art mirths eldst-begot,
My sportiue idleness I dedica^e;
Good show thy tee^h, or if thou have them not,
Let Us ^^e bare gums, the (...) bare smiles I hate,
To see ones lips drawn in a direct line,
Yawne me, and laugh, until thou fall to coughing,
And on thy hip-bone lay that hand of thine,
And swear thy heart is almost broke with laughing,
Your Pu^itanicke laugh I do detest,
And hear them say; it is pretty* Hang your pretties*
Laugh till thou have the Hickocke in thy chest,
Else get, and sit, and laugh amongst the petties:
Shall I speak plain? I do not care a^f.
For ha ha hes that come not from the heart.
EPIGRAM. 41.
Asinus ad Liram.
IN merriment, I once upon a time,
Did make a Clown acquainted with my rhyme:
And gave him leave to turn a m^rry leaf,
Although I knew, I sung to one was deaf:
Yet how he, with blind eyes, and judgment blinder
Could look and like (for then asoole none kinder)
And laugh and draw his lips aside and smile,
At that he understood not all the while:
Nay I dare swear for ^ight conceiving me,
His fathers horse had as much wit as he.
EPIGRAM. 42.
In Elizabetham.
BEsse does Act^onize her husbands Crown,
And trimming his head proves she trimmes her own,
And yet her head is still attired but badly,
Besse, once, quoth I, I would the reason gladly,
Mine own (quoth she) do you not that descry,
My Husbands mine, and that same head trim I.
EPIGRAM. 43.
In Fungum.
FVngus the Usurers dead, and no Will made,
Whose are his goods? they say no Heir he had,
Sure I should think (and so has Law assigned)
They are the devils, for he is next of kind.
EPIGRAM. 44.
In Gulielm^m.
WILL would have Officers reform well one fault,
And punish severely transporting of Malt:
Peace Will, there is none can remedy the matter,
It has gone, and will go away, still by water.
EPIGRAM. 45.
In Rollonem.
ROllo has made away a fair estate,
Well seated Lord-ships, goodly Manor places,
And now they say he walks a simple mate:
He is no Ianus, has not many faces,
And yet he hopes and harpes upon a string,
And here is his comfort: friends he has in Court,
By them he will get some forfeits of the King;
Some Statute-breach, no matter whom it hurt,
Or get some office, or perchance procure
A Corporation for some petty Trade,
Himself free on it too, may he not? yes sure
If Beggars may a Company be made,
Or fools, or madmen, some rich charter get,
There is some hope of Rollo's rising yet.
EPIGRAM. 46.
In Sextinum.
A Pretty block Sextinus names his hat,
So much the fitter, for his head, by that.
EPIGRAM. 47.
Encomion Cornubiea.
I Love thee Cornwall, and will ever,
And hope to see thee once again,
For why thine equal knew I never,
For honest minds and active men:
Where true Religion better thriues:
And GOD is worshipped with more zeal;
Where men will sooner spend their lives,
To good their King, and Commonweal;
Where virtue is of most esteem,
And not for fear, but love, embraced:
Where each man's conscience does seem
To be a Law, and bind as fast:
Where none does more respect his purse,
Then by his credit he does set:
Where Words and Bonds have equal force,
And promise is as good as debt.
Where none enuies another state,
Where men speak truth without an oath:
And what is to be wondered at,
Where men are rich, and honest both.
Where Is strickt observance of the Laws,
And if there chance some little wrong,
Good neighbors hear and end the cause,
Not trust it toa Lawyers tongue.
Where, as it seems, by both consents,
The Sea and Land such Ex piscatione, and stanni fodi^is.
plenty brings,
That Landlords need not rack their rents,
And Tenants live like petty Kings.
Where goodness soly is regarded,
And vice and vicious men abhorred:
Where worth in meanest is rewarded:
And to speak briefly in a word:
I think not all the world again,
So near resembles of Saturnes reign.
EPIGRAM. 48.
In laudem Pensanciae.
WHat ever Markaiew pretends
Upon some musty old record,
For Noblest hearts and truest-friends,
Pensance shall ever have my word:
No little Town of like account,
On this side, nor beyond the Mount.
EPIGRAM. 49.
In Hieracem.
HIerax now a Hermit may become
He dwells alone, and not a neighbor by him,
Indeed there stood: but he, for elbow room,
Demolisht quite the village that stood by him.
Pox on his coin, that scuruy white and yellow,
Have made him Country proverb.
Bailife Acham, without fellow.
EPIGRAM. 50.
In Caconum.
CAconus thinks his Dad does do him wrong,
To live and keep a way the land so long:
Why, he has lived these 80. years and odd,
And yet he is not going toward GOD;
He Is never sick, nor e're will be, he thinks,
With such an appetite he eats and drinks:
Sleeps soundly, walks, and talks with such a courage*
And sops his dish himself, and sups his porridge;
And looks so buxsome, bonny, and so blithe,
Not dreaming once of death, or Times sharp sith.
His father; why he will be, (he will hold a Testor)
Some nine-liu'd Cat, at least, some three-liu'd Nestor.
His soul, she needs no transmigration dout,
She has a body will so long hold out.
An Heir: why if the sates thus still defer it,
Impossible to live for to inherit.
I think in very troth (if troth were known)
He would his fathers death, and fears his own.
A habit now a days in sonne^ soon gotten,
Scarce ^ipe they wish their Parent: dead and rotten.
EPIGRAM. 51.
In Brusorem.
BRusor, is grown to be a man of wealth
Only by knavery, cozenage, and steal^h.
As all men know, yet none dare say so much,
For now he is honest, why; because he is rich?
EPIGRAM. 52.
His d^fiance to Fortune.
HEnce cares, I will none of your wrinkled surrowes,
Before my time, to make me to look old;
I Will not submit my younger years to sorrows,
No sullen-sadnesse shall of me take hold:
And though the ragged hand of fortune shake me,
As that my nearest kindred will not know me,
And all my old acquaintance quite forsake me,
And whilome friends no friendship now will show me,
Though cruel chance does rack me with that rigor,
Would make almost the stoutest fall to stouping,
Yet shall my heart retain her wonted vigor,
And this my Muse shall keep my mind from drouping:
Perhaps I Will triumph too, and make loud boast,
How Fools have fortune, and brave men are ^rost.
EPIGRAM. 53.
In Medicastrum.
ONce, and but once, in my most grievous sickness,
I sought by Physic to support my weakeness^^
And got me unto no great learned man,
No Galeuist not Paraculsian:
One that had read an English book or two,
Yet what durst he not undertake to do?
He took in hand, the Vrinall I brought him,
And told me what some Almanacke had taught him,
Surueid my water, gave me such an answer*
As well I wot showed but a simple censure:
In fine; I found in him no other matter,
But I to cast my money, he my water;
And I returned poorer in my purse,
But sick in body, as before, or worse.
EPIGRAM. 54.
In Iohannem.
IAcks once curled Scalpe, is now but skin and bone,
There Is not a hair awry for there is none:
And call it by what name you list to use,
Or Scalde or Balde, there is not a hair to choose.
EPIGRAM. 55.
Et dare ^utoricaleous ista potest.
O Let me laugh before I tell you how,
Old Miso's son is grown a Caualier,
Become a flat Recusant to the Plow:
Hanged, he a drudge, and be his fathers Heir,
Nay, such a one's Leifetenant of the Shire,
And't shall go hard but he will wear his cloth:
Or he will serve him that shall be Shriefe next year,
Not for the world will he live as he does,
He 'le shake of that same home-made russet su^e,
And book his father but he will have better,
Whose name he knows sufficient to do it:
The Mercers glad too of so good a detter.
Lo in a Blew-Coate, or a Livery Cloak,
Who swaggers it, but good sir Clunian;
His hands behind him, or in either poke
He Is every Gentleman's companion:
When by his leave, in good time be it said,
And Ape's an Ape, how trim so ere aray'd.
EPIGRAM. 56.
In Grobenduck. Animum gerit is muliebrem.
SIr Grobenduck in the house is better skilled,
Then with his servants working in the field;
He marks the maids, and what they have to do,
To wash in Soap, to Bucke, to Bake, to Brew,
M^lke, and make Cheese, Churn^ Butter, Spin, and Card:
To call the Pigs and Poultry i^ the yard,
Grope Hens and Ducks: ^'th house what longs unto it
O^ he see's done, or he himself does do it,
And but for wearing long-coates, like in all
To the Assirian Sardan ^pall:
This Woman-man, this House-Hermophrod^te,
Does live nor like a Lady, nor a Knight.
EPIGRAM. 57.
In Prodigum.
Poor Prodigus brags wheresoere he comes
How much he has consumed in his days:
How many hundred pounds, no lesser sums:
Think Prodigus this can be for thy praise,
Thou, whose decline can never be redeemed
Of friends, of fortunes, every way defac'st,
An Irus now, though Crassus late esteemed:
Think thou the world takes notice what thou wast!
No, no, thou shall be ballanc'st as thou art,
Men's minds are metamorphoz'd with thy means,
And want can alienate the truest heart,
And: Lo, (says some one) how on us he leaves,
Perh p^ ^hee thinks that we will bear him out:
He says it too, perchance, that cost thee much:
The whilst thou bragst thou have not spared to do it,
For him ere now, and twenty other such:
When none but fools would boast the bankrout joy
Of Once we flourisht; we have been of Troy.
EPIGRAM. 58.
Sine sanguine and sudore.
RAfe challenged Robin, time and place appointed,
Their parents hard on it, Lord how they lamented,
But, God be thankt, they were soon freed of fear,
The one never meant, the other came not there.
EPIGRAM. 59.
In L^^^^ettam.
LAuretta is laid over, how I Will not say,
And yet I think two manner of ways I may,
Doubly laid over, videlicet, her face
Laid over with colors, and her coat with lace.
EPIGRAM. 60.
Cur Vulcanus non Planeta.
WHy is not Vulcan, many times I wonder,
Amongst the seven Celestial Planets one:
He that made love the Gyant-quelling Thunder,
When he kept shop within the Torrid allem, quam Aetn^* cunque fabul^r Poetae.
Zone?
Why not as well as Mars the God of strife?
Or Saturn he that looks so dull and dunne?
Why not as Mercury that cunning Thief,
Or that prospectiue-glasse-ei'd God the Sun?
I wonder why not rather then his wife?
Or changing Moon (and one as ho^n'd as he?)
I cannot find the reason for my life,
Except (and that may chance some reason be)
Because a fellow of no Influence:
Bad in Conjunction, worser in Aspect,
And therefore Mars got the pre-eminence,
For he supplied, where Vulcan made defect:
Besides his polt-foot; all these might fore-token
He should no Planet be, but Planet-stroken*
EPIGRAM. 61.
In Vopiscum.
A Changling, no; Vopiscus scorns to do it
Nor be a shifter, still he is in one suit:
Yet ^or his Constancy, let none deride him,
For by his clothes he seems semper idem:
Perchance Religious, and I should aread,
Some Capuchin by wearing still one Weed.
EPIGRAM. 62.
In Puritanum.
Who's that incountred us but even now,
With such a level and Religious a look?
So grave and supercilious a brow
With such spruce gate, as if he went by the book,
His cloak (not swaggring) handsomely, he wore
His head and beard short cut his little tuffe,
His double^ fit ^or's belly, and no more,
With seemly hose made of the selfsame stuff;
In all, how nea^ly, and not nicely trim:
Nay, and (me though^) his words as well he placed,
Saluting us when we saluted him,
As e're I heard, I pre thee say, who wast?
Know you no^ him sir? it is a Puritan,
Trust me, I took him for an honest man.
EPIGRAM. 63.
Morum amorum, amicorum candidissimo cordatissimo, suo, Magistro Iohanni Smith
Oxon.
WHat shall I say? but what I must say still,
Let any Cymcke with a light go seek,
At night, at noonday, at what time he will,
He may look long, and miss to find thy like:
For a free spirit that breathes more sincerely,
In harmless sport, and mirth with innocence,
That loves his friend more truly, more entirely,
Speaks honest English without complements:
The womb that bare thee, bare thee not a brother,
For ^ such sons could not come from one mother.
EPIGRAM 64.
Of Spencers Faiery Queen.
VIrgil from Homer, the I^alian from him,
Spenser from all, and all of these I ween,
Were borne when Helicon was full to th'brim,
Witness their works, witness our Faiery Queen:
That lasting monument of Sp^nsers wit,
Was never come near to, much less equaled yet.
EPIGRAM. 65.
In Phaedram.
NOw by her troth she has bin, Phadra says,
At a play far better edified,
Then at a Sermon ever in her days;
Phaedra* it is true, it cannot be denied:
For Stage Plays thou have given ear to many,
But Sermons Phaedra never heardst thou any.
EPIGRAM. 66.
In Caeliam.
NO, hang me Calia, if I Will be thy guest,
We scarce begin to eat, but thou to chide;
This Goose is raw, that Capon is ill dressed,
And blamst the Cook, and throwest the meat aside:
When we sit judging, that would rather eat,
No fault o'th Cooks, it is thou would save thy meat.
EPIGRAM. 67.
Typographo.
PRinter, that art the Midwife to my muse,
To bring to light what is unworthy light,
Let me entreat thee leave thy wonted use,
Print not at all, or print my book aright:
Trouble not thou the Reader to go see
Faults escaped in the Impression,
Too much already is transgrest by me,
Augment it not in thy profession;
But where thou see my imperfections wants,
The Sense scarce seeming intelligible,
Give me the fairest Characters thou can,
It is thy grace it go forth legible:
They that peruse, will praise it for the print,
If for no other goodness they see in it.
EPIGRAM 68.
In Lucam.
LVke says, Let Gallants gallant howsoever,
They are but like the Moon, and he the Sun;
For every month a new suit they do wear,
When a whole twelve month he is still in one:
It Would make you laugh, if you the reason knew,
He has nor means, nor money, to buy new.
EPIGRAM. 69.
Ad Sam. Danielem, vt civil bellum perficiat.
I See not ( Daniel) why thou should disdain, Aetas prima canat veneres
postrema tumultus: Master Daniels Mot^ prefixed to most of his Works.

If I vouchsafe thy name amongst my mirth;
Thy Aetas prima was a merry vain,
Though later Muse tumultuous in her birth:
Know, here I praise thee as thou wast in youth;
Venereous, not mutinous as now;
Thy Infancy I love, admire thy growth,
And wonder to what excellence 'twill grow:
When thou shall end the broils thou have begun,
Which none shall do, if thou shall leave undone.
EPIGRAM. 70.
In Aemiliam.
AEMilia took her husband in a trippe,
Aduenturing his ware in a strange ship;
Poor soul, she could no less, she chaft, and child him;
But for she did no more, there she undid him:
For now he is saucy, and there is little odds,
Betwixt him and that Pagan-king of gods:
And cares no more then Jove when Juno spide him,
For now he knows the worst, she will but chide him.
EPIGRAM. 71.
In Moscam.
WHile Mosca's teeth in even ranks fair stood,
Her nose could never give her chin the meeting,
Where now regarding not how near in blood,
They Are seen with shame, incestuously greeting:
Or it may be her chin's like a Salt pit,
And Pigeon-like her nose lies pecking it. Amant loca salsa colum^ae.

EPIGRAM. 72.
In Sotonem.
SOto, a country Justice, at each Session
Speaks more then all the Bench, does never cease,
It Is contrary to his profession,
Or if a Justice, surely none o'th Peace.
EPIGRAM. 73.
In Cleon.
TI^ one of Cloes qualities,
That ever when she swears, she lies:
Do love me Cloe? swear not so,
For when thou swear'st, thou lie I know*
Do hate me Cloe? pre thee swear,
For then I know thou love me dear.
EPIGRAM. 74.
In Owenni Epigrammata.
OWen, not to use flattery (as they
That ^une men's praises in too high a kay)
Thus far, in troth, I think I may commend thee,
The Latins al (save one) must come behind thee,
Add yet one little, but a lovely fault,
Thou have: too little gall, Semper excipio (...).
but full of salt.
EPIGRAM 75.
In Thuscum.
THuscus does vaunt be has an Ouid^ vain,
That for my every one verse he will make twain;
Lick he like Vide Virgilij vitam.
Virgil too, I do not doubt,
For lack of liking, he will lick all his out.
EPIGRAM. 76.
In eundem.
THuscus writes fair, without blurre or blot,
The rascall'st rimes, were ever read, God wot;
No marvel: many with a Swans quill write,
That can but with a Gooses wit endite.
EPIGRAM. 77.
Quid non ebrietas?
APe-drunkards they are merry, Lion-drunkards mad,
Fox-drunkards cheat, Swine-drunkards lie and spew*
Goat-drunkards lust, and these, and more as bad,
Beasts attributes to men by drinking grew:
Yea this same sin when it dis^igures least,
Deformes a man, and makes him but a beast.
EPIGRAM. 78.
In Carentium.
CArentius might have wedded where he wood,
But he was poor, his means were nothing good*
'Twas but for lack of living that he lost her,
For why, no penny now, no Pater noster.
EPIGRAM. 79.
In Leucam.
LEucas does think 'twould countenance (...)
To dedicate it to a Puritan,
With some more solemn title set to it,
And a fair Preface to that holy man.
Tu^^ Leucas, so my Book, by such a (...)
Might be accounted a dissemble^ too*
A (...) with an outward ^ecke;
Why that is all the Puritan can do;
Nay, let him with a penny-father f^c^
O're-vaile his shame, and vizardize his sin,
When none performs fruits of lesser grace:
My times, such as they are, shall such be seen;
Their very title shall instruct men rather,
Grapes upon ther^s how hopeless it is to gather.
EPIGRAM. 80.
I Have some Kinsfolk rich, but passing proud,
I have some friends, but poor and passing willing,
The first would gladly see me in my shroud,
Which in the last would cause the tears distilling:
Now which of these love I? so God me mend,
Not a rich Kinseman, but a willing Friend.
EPIGRAM. 81.
CRispus could help me if he would,
Charus would help me if he could;
Would Crispus Charus mind did bear,
Or Charus but as wealthy were.
EPIGRAM. 82.
In Tiburn.
TIburne is a Wrastler, yet can nor leg, nor trip,
But play at collars, and it is ods she throws you with a slip.
EPIGRAM. 83.
In lactantem Poetastrum.
ONe told me once of Verses that he made
Riding to London on a trotting jade;
I should have known, had he concealed the case
Even by his Verses, of his horses pase.
EPIGRAM. 84.
To John Dunne.
THe Storm described, has set thy name a floate,
Thy Calm, a gale of famous wind has got:
Thy Satyrs short, too soon we them o'relooke,
I pre thee Persiu^ write a bigger book.
EPIGRAM. 85.
In Gallam and Gelliam.
IF Galla frown, is Gellia disdainefull?
Sure like the tradesmen of some town they are,
Who for to make their mercha^dise more gainful,
Do pitch a common price on all their ware:
And why not Galla and her fellow jade,
Use common tricks too in their common trade.
EPIGRAM. 86.
In Thuscum.
THuscu^, print not thy Epigrams, for men will see
Thou Have sucked, nor with the Spider, nor the Be;
Honey, nor Poison: not a drop of a Gall,
There Is not a corn of Salt among them all,
Thy wit has been an honest Innocent,
A Natural, a Iohn-Indifferent:
Nay more, (to speak comparatively sportfull)
A John in Porrige, neither good, nor hurtful.
EPIGRAM. 87.
To George Chapman.
GEorge, it is thy Genius innated,
Thou pick'st not flowers from another field,
Stolen Similies or Sentences translated,
Nor seek, but what thine own soil does yield:
Let barren wits go borrow what to write,
It Is bred and borne with thee what thou inditest,
And our Comedians thou out-strippest quite,
And all the Hearers more then all delightest,
Wi^h v^^ffected Style and sweetest Strain,
Thy in-ambitious Pen keeps on her pace,
And comes near'st the ancient Commicke vain,
Thou have beguilde us all of that sweet grace:
And were Thalia to be sold and bought,
No Chapman but thy self were to be sought.
EPIGRAM. 88.
In Milonem.
Here Is Milo to be seen with a strange goose,
Not such as in the Stubble's wont to lagge,
Nor such as Tailers in their trade do use,
His is more costly, well may Milo brag:
Besides, it came from Winchester: O rare!
Far got, dear bought, but no good Lady ware.
EPIGRAM. 89.
In Hodge.
HOdge sees men shun him, and does wonder why,
They know (qd^he) my breath will not infect them*
I never had the pox, nor plague yet, I;
These who so have, men worthily reject them:
Hodge, thou have poverty, a worse disease,
Then pox, or plague, or twenty worse then these.
EPIGRAM. 90.
In Lucam.
AS Hearts their horns, as Serpents cast their skins,
Luke leaves his old faults, and a fresh begins.
EPIGRAM. 91.
In Elizabetham.
WE say the Ibertans Belgia do oppress,
But it is the French, if we be judged by Besse:
Who knows, where in the low countries (would she blab)
They made hot wars, and bred, and left a scab.
EPIGRAM. 92.
To Master W: Shakespeare.
SHakespeare, that nimble Mercury thy brain,
Lulls many hundred Argus-eyes asleep,
So fit, for all thou fashionest thy vain,
At the horse-foote fountain thou have drunk full deep,
Virtues or vices theme to thee all one is:
Who loves chaste life, there is Lucrece for a Teacher:
Who list read lust there is Venus and Adon^s,
True model of a most lascivious leatcher.
Besides in plays thy wit winds like Meander:
When needy new-composers borrow more
Thence Terence does from Plautus or Menander.
But to praise thee aright I want thy store:
Then let thine own works thine own worth vpraise,
And help t'adorne thee with deserved Baies.
EPIGRAM. 93.
To his worthy friend Master Heywood, of his Gold and Silver Age.
SO wrote the ancient Poets heretofore,
So have thou lively furnished the stage,
Both with the golden, and the silver age,
Yet thou, as they, do but discourse of store,
Silver and gold is common to you^ Poet,
To have it, no; enough for him to know it.
EPIGRAM. 94.
TWo Gallants in a ba^dy house once fought
Who first should be possessour of the prey,
The stronger man by force won what he sought,
Yet got he not the glory of the day:
For sure in my opinion I held,
The man that lost was he that won the field.
EPIGRAM. 95.
In Aegyptum suspensum.
CHarles the Egyptian, who by iugling could,
Make fast or loose, or whatso'ere he would,
Surely it seemed he was not his crafts-maister
Striving to loose, what struggling he made faster,
The hangman was more cunning of the twain,
Who knit, what he could not unknit again.
You Countrymen Egyptians make such sots,
Seeming to loose indissoluble knots;
Had you been there, ^he Egyptians ^rase.
and but to see the Cast,
You should have won had you but laid: It Is fast.
EPIGRAM. 96.
Of Tho. Nash.
NAsh had Lycambes on earth living been
The time thou wast, his death had bin al one,
Had he but moved thy tartest Muse to spleen,
Unto the forke he had as surely gone:
For why there lived not that man I think,
V^^e better, or more bitter g^ll in Ink.
Ore Lycambi^ae^ rabioso occiderit ambas
Archilochus. Quia patr^m and filiam furce.
Auson: Carminibus adegit.
EPIGRAM. 97.
Cencri Thomae B^ugh, qui dum ambit and amittit Rectoriam, S. Sepulchr,
moriens, ibi Sepulchrum inuenit.
STellified Baugh, St. pulchers much mistook
That took thee not, as worthy as another,
And knew'st as well (...) the seuen-seal'd Book,
And bring them sweet Milk from the Church their Mother,
But they rejected thee as Berea Paul.
For which thy blessed soul shook^ off her dust,
And let her frail corruption mongest them fall,
And now she sings and Saints it with the just:
Now heaven her to a happier place prefer'th,
Then to be Saint Sepulchred here in earth.
EPIGRAM. 98.
Aliud.
TO loose by Fortune, and to win by Fate,
Such was the case of learned Baugh of late;
He sought S. Pulchers; where (though not his lot
To have S. Pulchers) yet a grave he got.
EPIGRAM. 99.
Fata Epigrammat^r
I Wish not with ambitious desires
These lines eternity, no I do not,
Nor yet to live the nine lives of a Cat:
For few and none but those blessed heaven inspires,
Are like to live unto another age;
Our former Writers, we count barbarous,
Succeeding times may do as much for us;
And then shall we be thrown off the Stage,
Yea even the best; much less these idle toys
May they hope life; but like th'abortiue birth
No sooner borne but dead, so this my mirth:
Or at the most some Term, or two, inioyes.
Epigram's like the stuffs your Gallants wear,
Hardly hold fashion above half a year.
EPIGRAM. 100.
Conclusio.
HEywood wrote Epigrams, so did Dauis,
Reader thou doubst, vtram horum mauis,
But unto mine whose vain is no better
Thou will not subscribe, Relegetur, ametur:
Yet be it know though thou do not heed us,
I am, Mihi domi placens citharaedus,
Although in thy good will I should rather glory,
To have thy good word Suffragari labori.
Thus careful of love, careless if thou hate us,
I rest I protest, in vtramque paratus.
Th. Fr.

Martial. Terceatena quidem po^eras Epigrammmata fur Sed quis te ^erret
perlegere^ve, liber.
FINIS

