A SERMON preached at Hampton Court, on Sunday being the. 12. day of November,
in the year of our Lord. 1570.

Wherein is plainly proved Babylon to be Rome, both by Scriptures and Doctors.

Preached by William Fulke Bacheler of Divinity, and fellow of S. John's
College in Cambridge.

APOCALIPS. 14. She is fallen, she is fallen, even Babylon that great City,
for of the wine of the fury of her fornication she has made all nations to
drink.

Imprinted at London by John Awdely.

TO THE RIGHT honorable and virtuous lord Ambrose Dudley, Earl of Varwike,
Master of the Queens Majesty's Ordinance, and Knight of the most noble order
of the Garter.
WHERE as it pleased your Honor to require a copy of my Sermon which I preached
last in your Honors hearing, so far as my memory would serve me to repeat it:
I thought it my duty to satisfy your godly desire. Not that I count it
worthy of longer remembrance, in respect of any great skyl or diligence of
mine showed therein (although in regard of the matter, I would it might never
be forgotten) but because I acknowledge my self so much bound to your Honor,
that whersoeuer I may perceive that my poor service may be accepted of the
same, I would in no wise be slack to offer it, much less refuse to yield it,
when it pleases your Lordship so earnestly to require it. In which request,
albeit the singular good will that your Honor bears toward me, moves you to
think better o^ my simple doings, then they deserve in deed: Yet your godly
zeal to the glory of GOD, and the detestation of Papistrie, may appear to
all men, as it is thoroughly known to those that daily have experience of your
honorable disposition. Wherefore I addressed my self to put in writing, that
which before I had uttered in speaking, obseruyng as near as I could, not
only the substance of matter, but also the phrase of words, which I then
used, as by reading your Honor can best judge. Which after I had sent to a
friend of mine in London, to be written out, at my next repair to the City, I
found that it was already committed to a Printer, who had undertaken to set it
out in prynt. For which cause I thought good to set this Preface before it;
most humbly beseeching your Honor to take it in good part, and for the delay of
time to hold me excused, seeing it shall come otherwise into your Lordships
hands, then of me at the first was purposed. The Lord of Lords increase al
honorable and godly virtues in your Lordship, with prosperity in this life to
his divine pleasure, and after the course of this time ended, perpetual joy
and felicity.

Your Honors to command always in the Lord William Fulke.

A sermon preached at hampton Court the. 12. of November. 1570.
THat I may speak to ye glory of God, and the edifiyng of the Congregation
here gathered in his name, I shall desire you all, right honorable,
worshipful, and well-beloved in our savior Christ, to join with me in
faithful and earnest prayer. And in this prayer. etc.

It is written in the 14. chapter of the Revelation of s. John, the 8. verse:
She is fallen, she is fallen, even Babylon that great City, for of the wine of
the fury of her fornication, she has in (...) all nations to drink. The holy
Euangeli^^ s. Luke (right honorable, and well-beloved in Christ) in the. 4.
chapter of his Gospel, records that on a time when our savior came into the
Sinagoge at Nazareth, to read as his custom was, there was delivered to him a
book, containing the Prophecy of the Prophet Esaias. Which after he had opened,
at the first be found the place where it was written in these words: The spirit
of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me, that I should preach the
Gospel to the poor: he has sent me that I should heal the broken in heart,
that I should preach deliverance to the Captives, and sight to the blind, that
I should set at liberty them that are bruised, and to preach the acceptable
year of the Lord. Then after he had closed the book, and delivered it to the
Minister, he sat down to preach, and the eyes of all them that were in the
Congregation, were bent upon him. Then he opened his mouth, and spoke unto the^
these words: This dai is this scripture fulfilled in your ears, and they all
gave him testimony that it was so. In like manner may I say, concerning this
place of scripture which I have read unto you: In your eyes and ears is this
scripture this day fulfilled; And I pray God you may all likewise bear witness
with me, that it is so.

The last time that I spoke in this auditory, I entreated of the floorishing
and prosperous (...) of Jerusalem, which is the Church of (...) forth in the.
122. Psalm, and therefore good order now requires that I should speak of the
d^cay and overthrow of the enemy of Jerusalem which is Babylon, the Sea and
church of Antichrist. And for that purpose principally have I chosen this text
of scripture to speak of: That by the one we might be enflamed with love of
the true church of Christ, and by the other be moved to the hatred of that
false church of Antichrist. Now this text of scripture ( She is fallen, she is
fallen even Babylon that great City, for of the wine of the fury of her
fornication she has given all Nations to drink) offers me three special
things to be considered: First, what Babylon is: secondly what is become of
her: and thirdly, what is the cause of her heavy decay.

In the first part, by the assistance of God, and your honorable patience, I
shall plainly show and prove that Babylon is Rome: In the secend, ye Babylon or
Rome, by the just judgment of God is fallen, yea she is fallen: In the last,
the reason of this so sharp sentence of God against her, because she has
deceived all the world with dronke^nes and whoredom. Within the c^mpasse of
these three propositions, I will keep my self in all my discourse: Saving
that by your favor, forasmuch as this is the myddle voice of three Angels that
speak in this chapter, for (...) I will use the voice of the first Angel, of
whose preaching this my text is a co^sequent: an^ in the steed of a
conclusion, I will touch the voice of the third Angel, which is a consequent of
this the myddle Angels voice. Concerning the Preface, it shall be this in few
words.

After that s. John had described the preservation and unity of the church of
god in Christ their head, even in the midst of the fury of Antichrist, under
the figure of ye Lamb, standing on mount Syon, with. 144000. of his chaste
worshippers: Next he declares, that God would bring the same again into the
sight of the world, by preaching of the Gospel, and the overthrow of the
kingdom of Antichrist. Wherefore he sends an Angel, flying in the midst of
heaven, or between heaven and earth, bringing wc him an ever lasting Gospel,
and preaching that all men should fear God, and give glory to his name, for yt
time of his judgment was at hand, and that they should worship him that made
heaven and earth, and althings that are in them. A very angelical sermon in
deed, and an euerlast^ng Gospel is that (howsoever the enemies charge it with
novelty) that teaches to fear God, to give glory to his name, and to worship
him only, that is the creator of heaven and earth. And a consequent of that
Gospel is this sermon of the Angel, She is fallen, she is fallen, even Babylon
that great (...) For whersoeuer men are taught to fear^ (...) a right, to give
all glory to him alone, and to worship none other but him that made heaven and
earth, and althings in them contained: there must needs follow a great fall and
overthrow of Babylon and Babilonical religion, which teaches the contrary.
Wherefore if we love the peace of Jerusalem, to the overthrow of this her great
adversary, let us embrace this everlasting Gospel that we fear God, glorify
God, and worship God alone. Again, if we hate Babylon, with a perfect hatred,
as we ought to do, and therefore would seek her utter ruin and decay, let v^
procure, that this Gospel may be preached, that men may learn to fear, honor
and serve God only, and then undoubtedly Babylon shall fall, she shall fall I
say, she can stand no longer. Let this suffice therefore for a Preface.

Now have we to consider, what Babylon is, I have undertaken to prove, that
Babylon here spoken of, is Rome. But first I must admonish you, how I
understand Rome. And that is not only for a certain place in Italy, compassed
about with walls, and furnished with buildinges, us other Cities are: but for
that aucthority, government, and pre-eminence which is challenged by means of
that city, or for the Roman Empire, which is claimed by prerogative of ye same
City: And so is Babylon taken in the scripture, and namely in this prophecye.
For in the. 11. chapter of this Revelation, the same great City is called also
Sodoma and Aegiptus, where our Lord was crucified. Sodoma, for the great
abomination and filthiness therein maintained: and Aegiptus, because it keeps
the people of God in miserable bondage and slavery, as Aegipt under Pharao did
of old. Whereby it is manifest, that the great City is to be taken for that
tyranny, government, and pre-eminence, as I said, which is ch^llenged in the
right of that great City: and so is the regiment and governance of the Roman
Antichrist depending upon the prerogative of his See, which is Rome. Now if any
will contend, that Babylon must be taken in the proper sense for a City in
Chaldea only, as though we should look for the Sea of Antichrist out of the
East: As the Papists for. xxx. or. xl. years ago devised a fable, that was
renewed also in Queen Mary's days, of a monstrous child which should be borne
at Babylon, which they would have men suppose to be Antichrist: He may be
flatly co^uicted of great ignorance, when the Angel in the. 17. chap. of this
prophecy testifies that her name is Babylon in a mystery, as in the. 11. chap.
that she is spiritually called Sodoma and Egiptus, not in respect of situation
of the place, but in similitude and likeness of conditions.

Wherefore it remains, that (according to my promise) I prove Babylon here
mentioned, to be Rome. The greatest controversy ye this day troubles the
world, is where ye true church of God should be, ye Papists making great brags
that it is on their side, and we affirming that it is on our side. This
controversy will soon be cut of, and brought to an end, if it may be showed,
that Babilo^ is Rome. For then cannot Rome be the church of Christ, but the
church of Antichrist: and therefore it stands ure upon, to bring very good and
substantial proves, to maintain this my assertion, ye Babylon is Rome. But what
proves may be counted sufficient? Is not the authority of holy scriptures, and
the testimony of ancient Doctors of ye church, good and substantial proves?
Therefore if authority of scriptures be a good and substantial proof, ye shall
have scriptures: if consent of ancient writers in the same sentence be of any
value, you shall have plenty.

And first beginning with scriptures, I will not allege such places as be hard
and dark to understand, but such as be plain, evident and manifest, and can
receive no other interpretacion to satisfy the judgment of any reasonable man.
I omit therefore so many figures as in this Revelation do not very obscurely
signify, but even directly point and paint out ye Antichristian church. For
although they do so aptly and fitly agree thereto, as a man might easily judge,
they were made even for the same purpose: yet because they might be wrested to
some other meaning, if manifest places did not withstand: I will leave all
advantage that I might take of them, and hold me only at this time, to those
plain and evident demonstrations, which with no equity nor conscience can
admit any other interpretacio^. Only I will here note, ye forasmuch as all
figures, types and coulors contained in this book, may so conveniently be
applied to Rome, as though they had been properly appointed to describe her (as
they were in deed) it is a great prejudice against Rome, although no playner
proves might be brought. But when so plain arguments ar brought forth, that
without to much impudency cannot be avoided, and al other figures and dark
speches agree accordingly, it is a manifest co^uiction ye Rome is none other
but this Babilo^.

But to begin with these plain places as I have promised, the first shall be out
of the. 11. chapter of this Revelation, yt place before alleged: where it is
declared, ye God in all times, yea in the greatest persecution, would maintain
his Church, and reserve at the least two witnesses which should testify of his
truth, in spite of Antichrist and his adherents. Which although the monstrous
beast that arises out of the bottomless pit, should murder and slay: yet God
should restore them to life again, continually stirring up a sufficient number
to bear witness of his name and doctrine. In that chapter I say is contained,
that when the beast had murdered them, he should envy them the honor of burial,
and so their bodies should lie in the street or market place of that great
city, which is spiritually called Sodoma and Aegyptus where our Lord was
crucified. Declaring thereby, that as Rome had slain and crucified the head, so
should Rome persecute the members: and in the same city where their Lord was
murdered, the servant also should be persecuted.

But here a man would think, yt I were impudent, to affirm that our savior
Christ was crucified at Rome, whom all the world knows to have suffered death
at Jerusalem. But you must call to remembrance, y^ at the first I gave warning,
that I did not understand Rome for ye topography of Rome, that is, so much
ground only as is compassed within the walls of that city, but for the
regiment, governance, and prerogative that is claymed, by reason of that city,
or that monarchy, whereof Rome is the head: and then I shall easily prove, that
Christ was crucified at Rome. For by whom was he condemned? Was it not by
Pilate the Deputy or Liefetenant of ye Roman Empire? For what cause or crime
was he adjudged to dye? Was it not for treason pretended to be committed
against the Roman Empire? With what kind of Execution was he put to death?
Was it not such as was usual by ye laws of the Romans, for such heinous
offenses as were unjustly laid to his charge? Finally, was not the place
wherein he suffered, within the circute of the Roman Empire? May I not then
justly affirm, ye he was crucified at Rome, when by the Roman Judge he was
condemned for a crime against the Roman state, and executed by a kind of
death appointed by the Roman laws, and in a place of the Roman dominion? As
for the Jews, they had at that time no authority to put any man to death, as
they confess them selves, when Pilate had them take him, and judge him
according to their own law, meaning they should decree some light punishment
against him, they answered: It is not lawful for us to put any man to death,
and he has deserved to dye. As touching the cause, although they accused him
of blasphemy, in that he made himself the son of God, yet could he not be
condemned for that, because Pilate would admit no accusation, but such as
contained a crime against the Roman laws. And as for the death of the cross,
it is manifest to be proper to ye Romans, for the Jews would have stoned him,
if they might have condemned him for blasphemy, according to the law of Moses.
And that the Angel in ye place by no means can understand Jerusalem, it is
manifest by these reasons: First, that he calls it that great city, which
term could never be spoken of Jerusalem: also he calls it Sodoma and
Aegiptus, which was the sea of the monstrous beast Antichrist, which in other
places is often called Babylon, whereas no man ever did imagine, that Jerusalem
should be called Sodoma, Aegipt, or Babilo^. Add hereunto, that Jerusalem, the
place where Christ suffered, was utterly destroyed in S. John's time, whereby it
is evident, that by this great City, spiritually called Babylon, Sodoma, and
Aegiptus, is meant none other but the Roman Empire, which crucified the head,
and should also bring forth the monstrous beast Antichrist, which should
torment and afflict the members which began with murder of the Lord, and
should continue, till it were destroyed, in murdering of the servants. And by
this plain text, which cannot be wrested to any other sense, this great City
Babylon, where Christ was crucified, is proved to be Rome, and the aucthority,
rule, and power of the Roman City.

The second plain and evident proof which I will use at this time, shall be
taken out of the 13. chapter of this Revelation, where that evil shapen beast
is described, which is the head of the persecuting malignant church: having.
vij. heads, and ten horns, and is the same which afterward in the. 17.
chapter bears the great whore Babylon, ye mother of all abominations of the
earth. Who so therefore that will compare these things that are written in this
book, concerning the disposition of that monstrous beast, with those things
that the Prophet Daniel in the. 7. chapter of his prophecy describes of the
^4. beasts, and specially of the fourth, which all men confess to be the
Roman Empire, except ^e be to much blinded with frowardnes and per^ers
affection: he must need acknowledge, that ^his beast which John painteth out,
is the same that Daniel sets out: which containing in it ^he cruelty of the
Leoparde, the Bear, and the Lion, which were the former Monarchies, is unlike
to them all, and therefore is the fourth Empire, which all ye world
acknowledges to be the Monarchy of Rome. What should I speak of the number of
the horns, equal in both, and generally of all other parts of their
description, which is set forth so like, and almost with the same words both of
the one, and of the other, that it were mere madness to imagine that this beast
which John describes, should be any other, then that Daniell had so long
before portraited. Then if the Beast in Daniels description, does signifye the
fourth kingdom, as the Angel expounds it, which no man will deny to be the
Roman Monarchy: The same monstrous Beast, being here painted out in this
Revelation, with the same shape, coulors and conditions, must needs signify the
Roman Empire, and so Babylon by this reason also is proved to be Rome.

The third argument or proof is taken out of the. 17. chapter of this
Revelation, and the. 9. verse Where the Angel expounding to S. John the mystery
of the beast with seven heads, declares in very plain words, that the seven
heads do signify seven hyls, whereon the woman sits. Now seeing it is
evident, that the woman signifies a great City, we must see where we can find
a great City builded upon seven hyls, and that by the interpretacion of the
Angel is Babylon, the Sea of Antichrist. And if we seek throughout ye whole
world, where shall we find a great City builded upon seven hyls, but that great
City in Italy? Which al writers, Poets, Historiers, Cosmographers, with one
consent do confess to be Rome, which is builded upon. vij. hills, whose names
are these: Palatinus, Capitolinus, Aue^tinus, Exquilinus, Viminalis,
Quirinalis, and Caelius. This is so plain a notacion of Rome to be Babylon,
builded on seven hyls, that the Angel could not more plainly have expressed
Rome, though he had named her. Nay this is a more evident and certain
description of Rome, to be the Sea of Antichrist, then if in plain words he had
said Babylon is Rome. For it might be that some other City then that here was
meant, might have the name of Rome, but no other City could have this notacion,
to be builded on seven hyls. For Constantinopolis was afterward called new
Rome, but Consta^tinopolis was not builded upon seven hyls like unto old Rome.
Therefore this is a plain and manifest circumlocution of Rome, which with no
reason can receive any other exposition.

For what Boy going to the Gra^mer school, and reading in Virgils Georgikees
this verse: Septem quae vna sibi muro circundedit arces. That City (says
Virgil) which has compassed seven hyls within her wall, what Boy I say in the
Grammar school, does not understand this to be meant of the City of Rome,
although the Poet in that place, does not once name Rome? With what face
therefore will any man deny, that the Angel here means any other City by this
Periphrasis and circumlocution, then Rome? For it any man will be so froward to
except, that the word of hyls is not taken in the proper sense, but
figuratively and Metaphorically for some other thing, as some would seem to
interpret seven hills in this place, for. vij. kingdoms, he shall plainly be
convinced by these reasons: First it were absurd, that the Angel should repeat
one thing twice, for in the next clause he shows, that the seven heads do
signify kyngdoms also. But specially we must remember, that this is an
interpretacio^ of the Angel, which must either be plain and easy to be
understood, or else it deserves not ye name of an interpretacio^. Therefore if
the Angel, offering to expound the mystery of the seven heads, gives this
exposition, that they signify seven hyls: if hyls be not taken in their proper
sense, to what purpose serves this exposition? For if the name of hyls has
need of an other exposition, he had been as good to have left the name of
heads vnexpounded. And as for the interpretacio^ of hyls to signify Kings, is
more obscure, dark, and far fet, then that heads should represent Kings, for it
is more apt by Metaphore, to call a King an head, then to call him an hyl.
Therefore except we will say, that the interpretacion of the Angel is in vain,
yea more dark, then the thing that is expounded by him, we must needs confess,
that hyls ar taken in their proper sense for hyls, and then the City builded
upon seven hyls, without all controversy is the City of Rome.

The fourth and last proof that I will take out of the holy scripture, is ye
last verse of the same 17. chapter, which is yet a more plain description of
Rome, if any thing can be more plain, then that has been already spoken of.
For there the Angel in plain words expounds, that ye woman which S. John
saw, which was the great whore Babylon, is that great City which has do^inion
over the Kings of the earth. What brazen face is so impudent, to deny that Rome
was that great city, which had dominion over the Kings of the earth at that
time, when this was spoken? Or what other city had dominion over the Kings of
the earth in s. John's time, but Rome? Who is therefore so froward and untoward,
ye he will not acknowledge Babylon here to be plainly called Rome? If I should
name the chief City of England, who would not understand London? If I should
speak of ye chief city of Eraunce, who would not conceive Paris? And when the
Angel named the chief city of ye world, who could be ignorant, living in
that time, or knowing the history of that time, that he understood it of the
city of Rome, which was the Sea of the Empire, and from whence we should look
that Antichrist should come, according to the former prophecies. For it is a
shame in this place to slay unto Allegories, and further expositions of this
Angelical interpretacion, which as I said before, if it be not clear, plain,
and easy to be understood, deserves not yt name of an exposition: as when one
known thing is expounded by another, as much or more unknown, it is vain,
superfluous, and ridiculous. Wherefore, whom any bands of reason will hold in,
they must be satisfied with the exposition of the Angel, that Babylon is Rome.
For seeing it was necessary for the church of God, to know as well the place
where Antichrist should sit, as to be instructed of his craft and cruelty: our
savior Christ, the Author of this Revelation, would not suffer his
congregation to be ignorant thereof, but sent his Angel plainly to interpret
and expound the vision of the great whore, that the Church being thoroughly
admonished of her wickedness, and instructed perfectly to know her, might more
easily take heed of her, flee from her, and abhor her. So that according to
my promise I have sufficiently proved by authority of holy Scripture, this first
proposition which I took in hand, that Babylon is Rome.

But because some ar of such obstinate and wilful frowardnes, that nothing will
satisfy them, but they will still grudge and repine, ^arpe and object against my
interpretacions of the holy scriptures (for the text they cannot deny) I wish
them that are such, if they like not these expositions which I have brought to
the defacing of Antichrist and his religion, then that they admit and reverence
those expositions, which their own Authors bring for the maintenance of the
Popes authority, and his religion. Of which sort are these: God (says Moses in
Genesis) made two great lights, the Sun to rule the day, and the Moon to
govern the night: That is, says the famous Interpreter, God ordained ye Pope
and the Emperor to rule the world. By the Sun is meant the Pope, and by the
Moon the Emperor. And look how much greater, and more glorious the Sun is
then the Moon, so much greater and more glorious is the Pope, then the
Emperor. And not content with this he cou^teth by Arithmatike how much greater
the Sun is in quantity, then the Moon, by proportion that it has to the
earth, and so by many parts be concludes that the Pope is greater then the
Emperor. But here a man might help him, what by Geometry, and what by
Arithmatike, for where as the Sun is. 166 times greater then the earth, and
the earth. 39. times greater then the Moon (as is proved by Mathematical
demonstration) the Pope should be 6474. times greater then the Emperor. This
is one noble exposition that is set forth to advance the dignity of the Pope,
and his kingdom.

Another like to this, is upon the words of the Apostels, which answered unto
our Savior Christ, when he commanded him that had no sword, to sell his coat
and bye one, signifiyng the great danger ye was at hand: Lord (say they) here
are two swords. These words (says the Glosar) are the Civil and
Ecclesiastical power, which rem^ined in Peter, and therefore his successor the
Pope has pre-eminence of both. No doubt a worthy interpretacion, and that
agreeeth well we the text, and does the Pope great worship.

Again S. Paul says to the Corinthians. 1. Cor 2. The spiritual man judges
althings, and he himself is judged of none. This spiritual man, says the
Interpreter, is ye Pope, which is Judge of all the world, and may not be
controlled of any man, no though he draw with him innumerable souls into hell
fire, there to be tormented with the Devil and him for ever more, yet no man
must be so bold as to find fault with him, or to say: Domine quid ita facis?
Lord, why do you so? Is not this an handsome exposition? Yes I promis you, even
like unto this other: Statuimus vt Clerici nec ceruam nutriant, nec barbam
radant: We decree (says the Canon of an ancient Counsel) that the Clergy
shall neither wear long here, nor shave their beards The Glosar finding this
Canon to be so clean contrary unto the custom of the popish Clergy, who use
to wear long here, and to shave their beardes, thought he would draw it at
the least, if it would not come by fair means, to maintain the lawdable
custom of the popish Clergy: and by exposition of one word, he makes ye
whole Canon to serve his turn. Therefore Statuimus (says he) which is we
decree, is to be expounded for Abrogamus, which is, we disanul or abrogate, and
so the sense afterward falls out very plain for the popish Priests thus: We
disanul that Priests should go with out long here, or vnshauen beards. A right
cunning interpretation, and proper for the place, and such in effect are all
those yt serve for the maintenance of the Popes authority and the religion of
popery. Therefore, he yt is of so sharp judgment, that he will mislyke and
refuse those plain expositions, which I have brought of the places before
alleged, and except against them, as enfor^ed, constrained, and far fetched:
let him like of, praise, magnify, and admire these interpretations, which are
sought out to uphold and establish the Popes throne, and his religion, as
rightly, faithfully, and truly collected. Atque idem iungat Vulpes, and mulgeat
Hircos, and by as good reason let him join for his plough not Oxes, but Foxes,
and milk for his payle, not she Goats, but he Goats, as the Poet says.

Now yt I have proved Babylon to be Rome by autorite of scripture, it follows
that I must show for the same, the consent of ancient Doctors. And as in my
former probatio^ I touched only such places as did plainly, directly, and
manifestly set forth my purpose: so in this behalf I will deal with the
Doctors. Not such as they are wont to allege against us, names in deed of
great and reverent antiquity, but works of mere falsehood and forgery,
bewraying their Authors not to be such as they are fathered upon, but such as
out of the body of blindness and superstition of much latter time, have begotten
them. Such are the decretal Epistels of the old Bishops of Rome, Linus,
Cleme^s, Anacletus. etc Of which Clemens writing to s. James, forsooth in his
second Epistle charge him very earnestly, that ye Pixe be cleanly kept, so yt
there appear no Myse doong, or any other filthynes among the fragments of the
body of Christ, with many other apostolical commandments. The impudence of
whose Authors appears notably in this, that whereas they were ignorant Buzards
that could not write true latin, they would ascribe their cou^terfet Epistles
to so learned fathers, as though at that time when women and children spoke
latin, naturally as their mother tongue, the bishops were so unlearned, that they
did write so barbarously, and were not able to utter their mind in true latin.
But leauyng those delicates for such as long after them, I will use no authority
for this purpose, but such as they cannot refuse, but that it is ancient,
catholic, and authentical. I will begin therefore with Irenaeus, one of the
most ancient and authentical writers that the Church has: Who in the fifth
book of his treatise against all heresies, speaking of the Sea of Antichrist,
The nu^^ring of Beasts name by Greek ^^^ters.
upon the last verse upon the 13. chapter of this Revelation, where it is
said, that the number of the Beasts name is six hundred, sixtye and six,
shows that the opinion of many in his time was, that seeing this name (...),
(...)
which is in English The Latineman, or Roman, in the numerall Greek letters,
contains this number, yt Antichrist must be sought at Rome. His words are
these: Sed and (...) no men sexcentorum sexaginta sex numerorum. etc. et valde
veresimile est, quoniam verissimam regnum hoc habet vocabulum Latini enim sunt
qui nunc regnant. Also (says he) this name Latemos, containing the number of
666, is thought to be the name of Antichrist, and it is very like so to be, for
that which most undoubtedly is a kingdom has that name, for they be Latins
which now do reign. You see by this testimony of Iraeneus, that this prophecy
of old time was understood of Rome, and therefore it is no new interpretacio^
that Babylon is Rome, and that the number of the Beasts name is to be found in
one that bears rule at Rome. If this exposition or explication of yt Beasts
name had been devised by Luther, Zwynglius, or Calvin, it might have been
suspected, as a thing imagined of spite and envy against the church of Rome,
but when it is brought forth by so ancient a Doctor, which lived not many
years after this Revelation was given, as he himself says, it was but a little
before his time, under Domitiane the Emperor, which died 13. hundred years
before Luther was borne: we must needs judge it both to be very ancient, and
void of all partiallity. Wherefore I will pass over diverse other applications
of that number to other names, which nevertheless hit Babylon home, because they
have been sought out of late by such as bear ill will unto Rome. For I think
this is sufficient with all reasonable men of equal judgment, to prove that
this is no new opinion to seek the Sea of Antichrist at Rome. They them selves
to prove their doctrine catholic, allege authority of a 11. or 12. hundred
years antiquity: behold this opinion is 13. or 14 hundred years old, yt
Antichrist should be a Roman, and that the Sea of his tyranny is at Rome.

The second witness of this assertion, that Babylon is Rome, is Tertullianus, a
very ancient writer also: Who in plain words affirms that Babylon
signifies Rome, in yt third book against Martion, which denied yt Christ had
a true body. Wherefore Tertulliane uses this reason against him: That thing
which has a figure of it, must be a thing of truth, and so discoursing of many
things figured, and the figures of them, comes to these words: Sie et Babylon
apud Iohannem nostrum, Romanae vrbis figuram portat, perinde and magnae, and
regno superbae, and sanctorum debellatricis. That is to say: Even so does
Babylon (in the Apocalips) of our s. John, bear the figure of the city of
Rome, which is altogether as great, and as proud in reign, and as great a
persecuter of the Saints, as Babylon was. You see therefore most clearly and
plainly, that Tertulliane wc al his learning could not interpret these things
yt be written in this Revelation, concerning Babylon to be applied to any other
city then Rome. And he is also a witness void of al partiallity or affection to
either part, of them that strive in our days. For he departed nere about,
xiij. hundred years before our time: why should we not then be credited in
this case?

Well next unto him I will join Chrysostom, in his Co^mentary upon the second
Epistle to the Thessalonians the second chapter, in his fourth Homely. Where as
s. Paul speaking of the manifestation of Antichrist, says, they knew what was
the stay, that he was not presently revealed: But when that stay is taken away,
he should be revealed in his due time. Chrysostom expounds this stay, to be
the Roman Empire, which must give place unto Antichrist. That like as the
Persians came in place of the Chaldeans, the Grecians in place of the Percians,
and the Romans in place of the Graecians, even so Antichrist should invade the
Empire of the Romans: Vacantem imperij principatum inuadet, and tentabit ad se
capere hominum and Dei imperium. Antichrist (says he) shall invade the vacant
principallity of the Empire, and shall assay to draw unto him self the Empires
both of God and men. And is it not manifest that the Papacy grew and took
increase by the decay of the Empire, and at the fall of the Monarchy challenged
full possession of all dominion, both spiritual and temporal?

Of the same judgment is s. Jerome, writing upon the same place of Paul unto
Algasia, in the eleventh question, whose words are these: Nec vult aperte
dicere Romanum imperium de struendum, quod ipsi qui imperant aeternum putant,
vnde secundum Apocalypsim Ioha^nis in front purpuratae meretricis scriptum est
nomen blasphemiae, id est Romae aeternae, etc. that is: Neither will he openly
say, that the Roman Empire should be destroyed, which they that govern it
think to be everlasting, wherefor^ according to the Revelation of s. John, in
the forehead of the purple whore there is written a name of blasphemi, which is,
Rome everlasting Lo here another witness of good antiquity, and sufficient
credit, which not only agreeeth plainly with Chrysostom, that Antichrist
should take possession of the Roman Empire, when it should be decayed in the
Emperors: but also most plainly agreeing with Tertulliane, calls that
Babylonicall strumpet, which is described in the 17. chapter of this Apocalips,
that purple whore of Rome, and the name of the blasphemye to be, Rome
everlasting: As though he had heard the Pope brag of the eternity of his See,
which he says is the Rock, against which the gates of hell cannot prevail.
But he is fowly be giled, for Rome the Sea of his Popedom, is by s. Ieromes
judgment, that Babylon of who^ the Angel preaches, ye howsoever the boast of
her eternity: She is fallen, she is fallen, even Babylon that great city, and
never shall rise again.

They cry out against us, that we rail, and speak co^tumeliously of the holy
See of ye Pope, when we call Rome the whore of Babylon: but when the old
Doctors (to whose judgment they themselves appeal from the authority of the
scripture) fear not so plainly in their writings, to paynt out the
Babylonycall strumpet in her right coulors, and in flat words to say she is
Rome the mother of al abominacions, and the Sea of Antichrist: why should we be
blamed for saying as we are taught by them? And especially of those men that
make so great vauntes, that the judgment is altogether on their side: by whom
they offer to be tried, when they dare not abide the judgment of the
Scriptures. Again, consider I pray you of the old Doctors, before Antichrist
were openly revealed, did understand by the scriptures, that he should ^yt at
Rome: what think you would they have said and written, if they had lived in
these days, and known and seen all that was prophesied to be fulfilled in
him, with what confidence suppose ye, they would have inueyed against him? With
how open mouths would they have cried out upon him? At least wise do you not
think in your conscience, that when they had considered the authority of the
Pope, and his wholesome doctrine, they would have changed their minds, and
recanted their writings against Rome, and repented that ever they had called
her ye purple whore of Babylon, seeing she is the holy mother church of Rome,
the Sea of the most holy father the Pope, the head of the same church? I must
needs say thus much in your behalf (O ye Papists) as ill as I love you, that
if Hierome, Tertulliane, and the rest of the Doctors did so account of Rome as
you affirm of them, they were much to blame to defame her with such odious
names, as to call her the purple whore of Babylon, which must needs make her
vehemently suspected to be the church of Antichrist, and not of Christ. For
what Papist in these days dare say, that which Hierome said, that Rome is that
purple harlot Babylon which S. John speaks of in the Apocalips? The same
Hierome in his 13. book of Commentaries of the prophecy of Esaias, upon the 47
chap. writes in this manner: Licet ex co quod iuxta 70 scriptu^ est (...), id
est filia Babylonis, no^ ipsum Babylonem quidam, sed Romanam vrbem
interpretantur, quae in Apocalypsi Iohannis and Epistola Petri Babylon
specialliter appellatur, etc. That is: For as much as the seventy Interpreters
write, not the daughter Babylon, but the Daughter of Babylon, some do
interpret thereof, not Babylon in Chaldea, but the City of Rome, which in the
Revelation of saint John, and the Epistle of Peter, is specially called
Babylon. Note that Hierome in this place, accounted Rome to be Babylon the
younger, daughter of Babylon ye elder. And secondly, that this was not his
opinion only, but the consent of many other in his time, and namely of such as
used to interpret the Prophet Esaias. Thirdly, and especially consider, that he
affirms Rome in the Apocalips, to be specially called Babylon. So that
Babylon in the Apocalips, by his judgment, cannot be understood for nothing
else but Rome, because Rome is there specially figured by Babylon. What means
Hierome so often to beat in this nail, that Babylon is Rome? If it had
slipped out of his pen but once, he might have been pardoned for his oversight:
but when he has never done writing, that Rome is Babylon, and in the
Revelation specially called Babylon, why should we account him any longer for a
Catholic? For in his Preface unto the book of Didimus, De spiritu sancto,
which he translated out of Greek into Latin, writing to Pauinianus, he
utters these words: Cum in Babylone versarer, and purpuratae meretricis
essem Colonus, and iure Quiritum viuerem, etc. Of late (says he) when I was in
Babylon, and was an inhabitant of the purple harlot, and lived after the laws
of the Romans, I thought to entreat somewhat of the holy Ghost. What needed
Hierome in this place, so odiously and contumeliously to call Rome by the name
of Babylon, but yt he could never consider Rome otherwise, but to be yt See
appointed for Antichrist? for in other places, where he interprets yt
scriptures and Prophecies, concerning Antichrist, we may less marvel if he
interpret Babylon for Rome, because no reason could lead him to expound it
otherwise: But here talking pleasa^tly with his friend, what necessitys
compelled him to use such descriptions of Rome, but that this persuasion was so
deeply graven in his mind, that Babylon is Rome, that neither in earnest
noriest he could forget it, but is always harping upon it, as though he
thought scorn to call Rome by any other name, then that he had learned in the
scriptures, to be Babylon, and the purple Harlot. For in like manner, writing to
Marcella a virtuous Gentlewoman of Rome, whom he allured to forsake Rome, and
to dwell nere unto him in Bethlehem, one especial reason that he uses to
persuade her, is this: That as Bethlehe^ whether he would have her to repair,
is situate in the holy land, and the place consecrated to the birth of Christ:
So Rome where she desired to remain, was the Babylonical harlot according to
the Revelation of s. John, appointed for the birth of Antichrist, which there
should arise, and exercise tyranny, and from thence should deceive yt whole
world with his wicked wyles.

But who so will read the works of Jerome, may find yet more places, in which
he is bold to call Rome Babylon, yt very See of Antichrist. Whereby it is
apparent, that it is no new or strange matter to seek Antichrist at Rome,
when such old Doctors of the church so commonly in Commentaries, Epistles, and
other writings, do teach us that Rome is Babylon, and the scripture affirms
that Babylon is the Sea of Antichrist. But let us leave s. Jerome, and see what
other say of the same matter.

Saint Ambrose, writing a Co^mentary upon the Revelation of s. John, is of the
same judgment. Of the authority of the work, I will move no question at this
time, seeing it is commended to us by Cuthbert Tonstal, late bishop of Duresme,
who found it in an old Library, and first set it in print, under the name of
that great s. Ambrose, and is willing that men should so think of it. It is
good authority I say, against the Papists, being commended by so Catholic a
Prelate, and because they are wont to receive whatsoever comes under the
name of an old Doctor, though it be never so unlike his writing, and cry out
upon us for rejecting at our pleasure the works of ancient Doctors that make
against our doctrine, as though we rejected any without cause, or they refused
none for any cause: whereas Pighius their great Patron blusheth not to reject
the report of two general Counsels, the fifth and sixth of Constantinople, which
are commended to us by public faith of yt church of Constantinople, because in
ye one Pope Honorius is condemned and accursed for an heretic, and in neither
of both ye Popes Legates could have the highest place, according to yt request
of their ambicious Master. But as for this Ambrose, if he were not Ambrose of
Millain, yet is it apparent by the style, that he was some ancient writer of
the Latin church, and he throughout this prophecy interprets Babylon to be
Rome: and Antichrist to be sought no where but at Rome.

Primasius also, a very ancient writer, who likewise co^menteth upon the
Apocalips, expounds these prophecies of Antichrist to be fulfilled in yt
Roman empire, and of the city of Rome.

S. Augustine in his work De Ciuitate Dei, not once or twice, but oftentimes
is bold to call Rome Babylon, and Babylon Rome, as in his 16. book, and 17.
chapter, he calls Rome an other Babylon in the West. And in his 18. book,
and 2. chapter he calls Babylon of Chaldea the first Rome, and Rome of Italy
the second Babylon, willing men to consider, that in the beginning of the city
of God, which was the church in Abraham's time, ye first Rome that was Eastern
Babylon her enemy was builded in Chaldea, and about the same time that the
first Babylon was destroyed, least the city of God should lack her enemy, the
second Babylon which is Rome in Italy was erected. It is a strange matter, yt
the same city which is yt professed enemy of the city of God, should be the
mother of al religion, and the very city of God it selfs. O Augustine, thou wast
not well advised to make the city of Rome enemy to the city of God, that Rome
should be the same to the church of God, that Babylon of old was at Jerusalem.
The same Augustine in the 22. chap. of the 18. book, calls Rome an other
Babylon, and daughter of the first Babylon. And in the 27. chap. he calls
Rome Western Babylon. By these and other testimonies of old^ writers that might
be brought, but for tediousnes I suppose it is sufficiently proved that Babylon
in this my text spoken of, is Rome, and that we should not seek Antichrist to
proceed from any other place then from Rome. But what need I trouble my self
to seek further testimonial, for confirmation of this matter, that Babylon is
Rome, then of the Papists them selves? For it is the common catholic opinion
of all Papists, that s. Peter in his Epistle where he sends salutacions from
the Church gathered in Babylon, by Babylon understands Rome. And they learn
it of Ieronime, which in the life of s. Mark does so expound it. So greedy
they are to find a place in Scripture where Peter should be said to have been
at Rome, that they are content to acknowledge Babylon in the scripture to be
understood of Rome. And thus I have performed I trust sufficiently, yt which I
took in hand to prove, both by the authority of holy scripture in plain and
manifest textes, and by consent of many ancient writers, yea by the confession
of the Papists them selves, that Babylon in the scripture is taken for Rome.
And thus much for the first part, in which because I have been over long, I will
be shorter in that which remains.

In the second part I promised to declare how Babylon which is Rome is fallen,
according to the prophecy of this Angel: She is fallen (says the Angel) she
is fallen. He repeateth y^ word of falling for two causes: First, to declare
the certainty of her decay, yt howsoever she seemed to floorish and triumph, as
though she should never have fallen or come to ruin: yet God for her wickedness
most righteously, and for the comfort of his church most mercifully, had
decreeed undoubtedly that she should fall, when that time was once come, which
in his most wise and well ordered council was appointed for her destruction.
Secondly, he repeateth twice that she is fallen, to show that she should have
an unrecoverable fall: she should not fall as other cities, which have risen
again, but she should fall without al hope of recovery, never to be restored
again. Therefore in the 18. chap. a mighty Angel takes up a great mylstone, and
throws it into the sea saying: With such violence s^al Babylon that great
city, be thrown down, and never be seen any more. So that as it is impossible
for a great millstone, thrown with great forc^ by a mighty Angel into the
bottom of the sea, to rise up again, and swym above the water: so impossible
is it that Babylon, when she is at the lowest of her fall, should ever be set
up again. And in the 19. chap. it is said: That the smoke of her burning
ascended up for ever and ever. Also of her utter desolation descriptio^s ar
made in the 18. chapter, where it is said, that Babylon is made a dwelling place
of devils, a cage of unclean birds, according to the prophecy of Esaias,
concerning old Babylon, that Zyim and Ohyi^ which be Sprights and Goblins shall
walk in he^ palaces, Scrichowles and Ostriges shall cry in he^ houses, Apes
and Satyrs shall dance in her beutiful buildings. No voice of men shall be heard
in her, no sound of a myl shall be heard, no light of a candle shall be seen, but
perpetual solitude and sorrow shall dwell there for evermore. Therefore says the
Angel, She is fallen, she is fallen, that is she is destroyed, and never shall be
repaired.

But if we will better understand how she i^ fallen, we must consider more
distinctly wherein the is fallen. First, in wealth and riches. she has
sustained a great fall. Consider how many kingdoms and states of the world have
renou^ced her obedience, and al these have withdrawn great ren^s, revenues,
and commodities, that in times past were addict to the mayntenance of Babylon
the church of Rome. A great fall without peradventure, and that will never be
recovered. Remember so many Abbeys, Monasteries, Nunneries, Frieries,
Hospitals, Chauntries, Churches and Chapels, now ^uerthrowne and made even
with the ground: Al lands, is wels, ornaments and great treasures that belonged
unto them, clean taken away from them: and you will confess with me, that Rome
in riches has a great fall. Yea, if you would see with your eyes ^ manifest
example of Gods judgment against Babylon, behold that evil favored mines and
^ea^^es of Monasteries, that were sometime gor^eous and sumptuous buildings. The
same end ^emaineth all that pomp and pride of Babylon, ^or yet altogether
beaten down, but even now ^ falling: For the mouth of the Lord has spo^en it,
and his immutable counsel has decreeed (...), and he has sent an Angel to
proclaim it.

Some wish perchance, yt Monasteries had ^ood still, and been converted to
better uses: But ^ndoubtedly the providence of God so ordered al ^^ings yt his
curse which was upon them might ^e executed, and the prophecies that were
concer^ing them, might be fulfilled, that they might be a monument of h^s wrath
unto all the posterity, the beginning of the fall of Babylon, and an example of
the destruction of all the rest that should follow soon after. Who would ever
have thought that so great riches, treasures, and revenues should so suddenly
be overthrown destroyed, and come to nothing? Therefore it is manifest, that
in wealth and worldly substance, whereby the pride, voluptuousnes, and
intemperaunce of riotous Rome was maintained, and grew to an intolerable
exces, is greatly diminished, sore decayed, and has a foul fall, and shortly
shall have a final fall.

Well, Babylon is not fallen only in wealth and riches, but also in power and
authority. For the Kings of the earth, which sometimes were subject to that
monstrous Beast, have now shaken of the yoke of her servitude; and wythdrawen
the obedience of al their subjects from her. Yea* the most part of the. x.
horns, which sometime gave over their power and authority unto the Beast, which
were all the Kings and Potentate^ that acknowledged the Pope for their suprem^
head, and sovereign Lord, do now hate and abhor the Harlot of Rome, and
shall make he^ desolate, by withdrawing their subjects from her obedience, and
nakedly spoiling her of he^ treasures, and shall eat her flesh for pure hatre^
and burn her with fire: For great is the Lord which judges her. So that she
which before at her pleasure might command all Princes to begin war, to cease
from war, to defend her quarrels, to annoy her enemies: now is glad to flatter
a few seduced Princes to take her part, that she be not utterly forsaken of al
men: Or else to practice by treason and treachery, suborning Roges and Vacabonds
to stir up tumults among ye rude people, to trouble godly estates and common
wealths, that despise her dominion, but without all hope ever to recover her
ancient tyranny.

Her thunderboits of Excommunication, which were sometime terrible to all men,
are now feared of no man. What though she retain her proud and presumptuous
stomach, and will do while her breath lasts, to pronounce sentence of
depriuatio^ against Princes that abhor her wickedness? Her impudent arrogance
is not so much detested of many, as laughed to scorn of all. Her Proctors and
privy practisers, though they change them selves like Proteus, into never so
unlikely shapes, are espied in every corner. For God himself reuealeth their
pretenses, and will not suffer her to prevail any longer. So that in power and
authority Babylon is fallen and falls daily more and more into utter contempt
with all men, until she be utterly consumed, and brought to nothing, which will
not be long before it come to pas. For this sentence yt God has thrown
against her, and begun also to execute, cannot be changed, or much longer
differred.

But especially and chiefly Babylon is fallen in credit of her doctrine. For
besides so many princes and states of Christendom, that by public authority
have received the Gospel, and utterly abolished all Babilonicall doctrine: Even
in the midst of her tyranny and persecution, great multitudes daily are
lyghtened with the bright beams of the Gospel, that for all Inquisitions,
imprisonments, exquisite torments, and cruel burnings, they never a whit
diminish, but rather increase, as God has provided, that the blood of the
Martyrs should be the seed of the Church. And they are more then obstinate, if
they do not acknowledge that this matter is governed from God above. For if it
had been of men, it must needs have decayed before this time, and have come to
naught, as Gamaliel said of y^ doctrine of the Apostels. Therefore in fighting
against it, they show them selves but after the manner of the old Giants, to
make war against God. Or as it is contained in this prophecy, ye Antichrist
should gather together the Princes of the earth to make battle against him
that sits upon ye white Horse, whose name is the word of God, but al to
their own utter confusion and destruction. For the word of God must conquer and
preuail in the last age, and Antichrist must be consumed by the spirit of ye
mouth of Christ, which is his holy word, and utterly abolished by the glorious
brightness of his coming to judgment, as s. Paul testifies in the second
chap. of the second Epistle to ye Thessalonians. Therefore it is in vain that
they seek to underprop the doctrine of Babylon by cruelty and tyranny, for all
will not serve, seeing the time of her final fall approaches, and now already
our savior Christ with the spirit of his mouth, has wasted and consumed a
great part of that credit and estimation, in which ye doctrine of Babylon of
long time has triumphed. And it is our parts to pray, that her credit may
daily more and more decrease, yt the kingdom of Christ may be perfectly
established amongst us, and the kingdom of Antichrist may be overthrown even
from the foundacions. That no superfluous relikes of Babylonical religion may
remain where the church of Christ is in building: but yt the doctrine of Babylon
may fall altogether.

Thus have I declared that Babylon in wealth and substance, in power and
authority, in credit and estimation of her doctrine, is fallen, and that with
out hope of recovery. For her credit is cracked not only among her enemies the
Protestants, but even among her best friends, and greatest Archpapists. For I
suppose there is none in the world so blind, so supersticious, so devoutly
addict in all points of popish idolatry and supersticion, as they were. xxx.
or. xl. years past. Although they close their eyes never so obstinatly against
the light of Gods word, yet some effect of the beams of force will pearce even
through their eye lids. And that they them selves cannot dissemble, although
they would never so feign, but that they have been deceived with gross errors,
and shameful supersticions. Their Pardons, their Pilgrimages, their Legends:
who is now so blind, that seeeth not how the world has been seduced by them?
And the simplicity of the people abused to satisfy their insatiable
covetousness. As for the greatest Patrones of Popery that be learned, they
cannot deny, but that great errors have been received and taught for truths:
yea ye Pope himself has acknowledged, that many errors have crept into the
church, yea even into the Mass, but the reformation of them pertains to him
alone, and the general council. But what hope of reformation is to be looked
for at their hands, let it be seen in the decrees of the last council of Trent.
What little Mise those great mountains in so many years travel have brought
forth. In fortye or fifty years consultacion, two great matters reformed: One
for Pardoners not to be common Pedlers, another for the Communion in both
kinds, to those that desire it: so they confess it were as good in one kind,
and agree with them in all other points of Popery. Yet all was not well, they
confess by their correction. And as for the greatest pillars and Proctors they
have, if they be pressed nere, acknowledge a great deal more. As one that
landed lately at Yarmouth, before witness of good credit restified, that if he
might be satisfised in two points, concerning y^ Popes supremacy, and the real
presence, for other matters he would not greatly strive. So that I will
conclude that Babylon is fallen in riches, in power, in credit of doctrine, not
only with protestants, but even with Papists them selves.

But now I know what will be objected against me, that I have traueled all in
vain, to prove that Babylon is fallen, and that Babylon is Rome: And yt I have
abused the textes of scripture, and sentences of old Doctors to prove the ^ame.
For what soever is contained, either in ^he scripture, or in the writing of the
ancient Doctors, to prove that Babylon is Rome, is to ^e understood of Rome
under the heathen Em^erours, and not under the Popes: And that all ^his while I
have wrested the scriptures, and en^orced the Doctors to affirm that which
they ^euer thought of. In deed I will confess, ye some ^rophecies contained in
this Revelation, were ^ulfilled in the heathen Emperors, and that the ^eathen
Empire was an introduction unto An^ichrist: but that Antichrist the great enemy
of the church of Christ, and which is principally called Antichrist, could not
be any of the heathen Emperors, neither the state of the heathen Monarchy, I
will make it manifest by plain demonstrations. And first I will retain this
principle, sufficiently proved before, that Rome is the Sea of Antichrist, and
that by authority of scriptures and consent of ancient writers, we can seek
him no where, but in the Roman Empire. And now the controversy rests in this,
whether yt heathen Emperors or the Pope us them.

First s. Paul in the second chap. of the second Epistle to the Thessalonia^s,
speaking purposely of Antichrist, says expressly that he shall sit in the temple
of God, which is y^ church of Christ* But it is manifest, that the heathen
Emperor^ did not sit in the church of God, therefore yt heathen Emperor is not
this Antichrist. And by yt same reason it is manifest, that Mahomet is not that
especial Antichrist, because he sits without the temple of God, as there be
diverse that would have these things to be understood of Mahomet or Ottomanus:
but it is as clear as the Sun at noone days, for as much as neither the
heathen Emperors, nor Mahomet, nor Ottomanus sits in ye temple or church of
God, that none of them is that great Antichrist, o^ whom the prophecies of the
scripture are to be expounded. And where as some of them interpret the
abominacion of desolation, whereof Christ speaks, to be meant of Antichrist,
or at least wise to be a figure of him, that cannot be understood of the
heathen Emperors, or any other yt is without the Church, for that stands in
the holy place, which is the temple, and signifies the church. Now the Pope
sits in the midst of the temple of God, and boasts him self to be God,
challenging to him self such authority, as is proper only to God, and usurping
such honor as is peculiar only to God. Therefore not in the heathen Emperors,
but in ye Popes, is this prophecy accomplished.

Another reason to prove y^ Antichrist, which in this Revelation is foreshewed
to come into the world, cannot be understood to be the heathen Emperors, is
taken out of the. 17. chap. of the same book. For there the Angel
interpreting unto s. John the mystery of the Beast that bears the Harlot,
which has seven heads: after he has showed that the seven heads signify. vij.
hyls, he declares that they signifye also seven Kings, or principal estates,
or forms of regiment, for so the name of King is often taken in the Prophets,
and specially in Daniel, at which prophecy s. John borrows many phrases. Of
^hese seven heads five (he says) were fallen, the sixth was then presently in
authority, and the ^euenth was not yet come, which seventh was the monstrous
beast Antichrist, that was both the seventh and the eight. Now it is evident,
that this could not be understood of the heathen Emperors, for Nero the first
persecuting Paynim, was come and gone, and Domitian an other persecuter, by
whose tyranny s. John was banished into the Isle of Patmos, where he saw and
received this Revelation, was then in authority: So that of the Monarchy or
tyranny of heathen Emperors, this could not be understood, and of the Christian
Emperors no man will expound it, so that it must needs be turned over to the
Pope, for it can rest in no place else. And being referred unto him, all the
rest has a very ap^ exposition of the city of Rome, and the dominions thereof
has had seven principal states or forms of regiment. The first state of
Kings, the seco^^ of Consuls, the third of Decemuiri, the fourt^ of Dictatores,
the fifth of Triumuiri, the sixth o^ Caesar's or Emperors, and the seventh of
Popes Now five of these states or forms of regimen^ were fallen and abolished
in s. John's time: the sixth which was the Emperors, in his time wa^ in place:
and the seventh which is the Popes was not yet come, which was the very beast
i^selfe: the Roman Empire revived, and raise up from the bottomless pit of hell,
into the usurped tyranny of the Pope. And this is yt Beas^ that sometimes was of
wonderful great power and glory, in the days of Augustus, and some other of
his successors, but then much decayed, as if it had not been, although in some
sort it were, but should be restored in the usurped authority of the Pope, that
claims all the world to be his Diocese: Which power comes not from God, but
from the Prince of pride, out of the bottomless pyt. But chiefly let us
consider, that the beast, although he be but one, yet in the account he
stands for two, for he is yt seventh head, and the sight also: And remember
that the Pope challenges double authority, namely the power of both swords,
the spiritual and the temporal. So that in this exposition, althings agree most
aptly. Again, it is manifest in the scriptures, that Antichrist should deceive
the world with false doctrine, under pretense and coullor of true religion, and
therefore so often times the scripture warns men, that they be not seduced by
him, which were needeles, if any open professed enemy of Christ should be that
Antichrist. For there is no likelihood, yt an heathen man, a Jew or a Turk,
should deceive any multitude of true Christians, but he that under the pretense
of the name of Christ, seeks most of all to deface the honor of Christ: he is
a subtle adversary, and the very spirit of Antichrist, as S. John also in his
Epistle does testify. For in ye second chap. speaking of those Antichrists
which were the forerunners of yt great Antichrist, be shows that they went
out from the church: and in the fourth chap. he calls them false Prophets,
and teaches them how to know yt spirit of Antichrist, He that denies JESUS to
be Christ, he that denies that JESUS Christ is come in the flesh. That is, he
that derogateth any thing from the honor of Jesus to be Christ, and in his
flesh to have performed the full work of man's redemption, as yt Pope does most
blasphemously, he is Antichrist: and who so teaches any such doctrine,
speaks by yt spirit of Antichrist: For the testimony of JESUS, is the spirit
of prophecy. Seeing therefore that S. John accompteth Antichrist for one that is
gone from the Church, and for a false Prophet, it is clear that Antichrist is
no heathen Emperor, which was never of the Church, nor any false Prophet, that
took upon him to teach in the church. The same may be said of Mahomet, who
never professed him self to be a Christian, nor yet a Prophet in the Church of
Christ, pretending to uphold the religion of Christ, but an open enemy or the
Gospel, and of our Savior Christ, altogether without the Church. By these
arguments I doubt not, but all men may see, that see^ng Babylon is Rome, and
that the head of Babylon is Antichrist, that he cannot be any of the heathen
Emperors, but even the Pope him self. And therefore I conclude, according to my
text, yt Rome is fallen, if Babylon by fallen.

Now remains the last part that I promised to entreat of, namely the cause
of Gods so severe judgment against Babylon, that he has decreeed her utter
overthrow and destruction, which the Angel comprehe^deth in these words:
Because she has made al Nations drunk with the wine of the fury of her
fornication. That is: She has deceived all the world with false doctrine,
which he compares unto two kinds of vices, whereby men are so deceived, that
they leese al right judgment: Dronkennes and Fornication. For as these two
vices do allure men to commit them, by coveting of vain de^ectacion that is in
them: even so Babylon has enticed all men like an other Circe, to drink of
the cup of her delectable errors, and to commit most filthy fornication with
her idolatrous religion. For of all other religions to the carnal man, none is
so pleasant as Popery is, in which be so many kinds of satisfaction to be
obtained, both in this life, and after men be dead, that there is no greater
security of an hipocri^e to sleep in, then in the fair promises of Popererye.
And that causes so many willingly to embrace it, and so loath to depart from
it, because they would still continue without check of true doctrine, which
calls men to repentance, and amendment of life, or else threateneth eternal
damnation. For howsoever it pleases them to charge the doctrine of the Gospel
with cause of security, it may easily be seen by comparison of it, with the
doctrine of Popery, whether be cause of security: that which teaches no
satisfaction but one, for them that be penitent in this life: or theirs that
has so many ways to merit rewards, and to satisfy for sins, not only
while men live in the world, but also for them that are already gone out of it.
And there is no wine so sweet to the taste of a carnal man, as that which
makes him droonke with opinion of his own righteousness, as it is the nature of
strong wine, to make very Cowardes think them selves to be valiant Champions:
and such is the cup of popish doctrine, containing merits and satisfactions.

Again, when we consider that Antichrist should make men droonke with his
erroneous doctrine, we marvel less how men could be so blinded and infatuate,
that they could not see and perceive such gross errors, and manifest
untruths as are in Popery. For as they that are overcome with the strength of
wine, have lost the right use, both of their wit, and of their senses: even so
they that are droonke with the heretical doctrine of Papistry, do grope in the
clear light of the Sun, and see not their own deformity, though all the
world beside cry out of them. In like manner, they that be overcome with the
dishonest love of Harlots, have their reason so imprisoned in corrupt affection
and foolish fantasy, that they are at liberty neither to see their own folly,
nor admit any wise and godly counsel. So it fares with those that the
Babylonicall Circe the church of Rome has al^ured by her enchauntments, to
commit spiritual fornication with her, they cannot abide to hear the voice of
them that calls them out of that damnable estate, so highly they please them
selves in their own misery, as if they were in case of perfect felicity. This
is chiefest of their ^roke^nes, this is chiefest of their fornication, and this
is the just judgment of God, that they which have shut up their ears from
hearing the truth, should be deceived with strong delusions, that they might
believe lies. Furthermore, by the names of these vices, the Angel comprehends
all other vices that follow of them, as intemperancy, arrogance, impudency,
and such like as are wont to follow dronkennes and incontinence. For these
crimes go not unaccompanied, for where either of them is, commonly both will be,
and they have either of them, and both together, their train to wait upon
them. And all these we see to have ouerflowed in Rome the Western Babylon, as
she her self, though she have a brazen forehead, and be past al shame, cannot
deny altogether. And because of these so great and heinous enormities the just
sentence of God, pronounced here by the Angel, is come upon her, that she is
now in her fall and decay, as she was once in her ruff and glory. But this
especially is to be noted, that the Angel here says, that She should deceive
al nations with the fury of her fornication. For this is the great
vniuersallity that they make so great bragges of, and would have it to be a
certain Note and Marcke of the catholic church to be universal: Behold the
Angel here says in plain words, that all nations should drink of the wine
of the fury of her fornication. Where is then the universal consent and unity
of all nations in religion, that makes a true religion? And yet vniuersallity
and unity be two great pillars of the Church of Rome. And for my part I do not
enui her those marks which she challenges of vniuersallity and unity,
(although we might stand in law with her for them) but let her peaceably enjoy
them: for they may help to prove her to be yt false church of Antichrist, but
they cannot make her to be the true church of Christ. We see plainly that
Babylon has here vniuersallity and unity, for she makes al nations to drink
of the furious wine of her fornication: but ye church of Christ, as he himself
says, is a small flock, and him self by Symeon is said to be a sign of
contradictio^, a mark that is gaynsaid of most men.

And here also is answered one great mighty objection, wherewith they think to
chekers: That seeing the church of Christ, is the Spouse of Christ, how could
it be that Christ should forsake his Spouse, and suffer her to continue in
damnable errors, so many hundred years? Why, Christ him self declares, that
the deceites and errors of false Prophets should be so great, that if it were
possible, the very Elect should be deceived. Yea, there should be such a
miserable dispersion, that scarce two true Professors of his name should
remain together in one plac^, and yet the holy hand of unity should be in the
head, which is our savior Christ: for where soever the carc^sse is, thither the
Eagles would be gathered. And S. Paul in manifest words declares, that the
second coming of Christ should not be, before there were a general Apostasy,
that is: a departure from the true faith and religion of Christ, and that the
son of perdition Antichrist were openly showed. And ^n this Revelation how
often is it said, that ^ntichrist should deceive all the world, all na^ions,
people, and tongues, and that the Church of Christ should be driven into the
wilderness, ^ut of the sight of the world, and there remayns a space, until she
should be brought again to light and open knowledge of all men? As it is come
to pass this day, Gods name be therefore everlastingly praised.

But because I have occupied long time, I will draw to an end: For by that I
have said, I trust it does sufficiently appear, that God according to his
righteous judgment, has determined utterly to overthrow Babylon, because she
has deceived all nations with the wine of the fury of her fornication. And now
it rests only, that I speak a word or two of the voice of the third Angel,
which is a consequent of this my text, and serves very aptly for the
conclusion of my Sermon.

The third Angel followed, crying with a loud voice, and saying: If any man
shall worship the Beast or his Image, or receive hy^ mark on his forehead, or
in his hand, or shall acknowledge any obedience or reverence to him, as
willing to drink of the cup of Babylon^ fornication, the same shall drink of
the wyn^ of the furye of Gods wrath, which is poure^ forth unmingled, into the
great cup of God anger, and they shall be tormented with si^ and brymstone,
before the Lamb and his holy Angels, and the smoke of their torments shall
ascend for evermore, and they shall have n^ rest d^y nor night from extreme
torments that worship the Beast, or show any reverence unto Antichrist. The
effect is in few words: That horirible, intolerable, and eternal torments
remain for all them, that now especially, when Babylon is now discovered, will
have any thing to do with her damnable errors and pernicious doctrine. For
howsoever ignorance before her fall, though it were inexcuseable, yet seemed to
diminish the greatnest of the crime: Now that her wickedness is openly
displaied, no pretense can save men from the extremity of Gods wrath, if they
will still obstinately continue in her heresies.

Let us therefore pray unto almighty God instantly, that al men in their
vocation may seek the utter overthrow and destruction of Babylon: that Princes
and Magistrates may, according to the prophecies of them, hate her with a
perfect hatred, and utterly abolysh what soever belongs to her: that they may
reward her, as she has rewarded us, and give her double punishment, according
to her works: and in the cup of affliction that she has poured forth for us,
they may pour forth double as much to her. And look how much she has
gloryfied her self, and lived in wattonnes (which was without measure) so much
they may bestow upon her of sorrow and torments. That Preachers and Ministers
of Gods word, may plainly and without dissimulation or halting, discover her
wickedness: and earnestly to urge whatsoever has yet need of perfect
reformation. That all Subjects may continue in holy obedience, first to GOD,
and then to their Prince, to the aduauncyng of the honor and glory of GOD,
through JESUS CHRIST. To whom with the holy Ghost be all honor, glory, power,
and dominion, both now and ever.

AMEN.
Imprinted at London by John Awdely, dwelling in little Bryttayne street,
without Aldersgate. 1571.


