IOSEPH'S PARTIE-COLORED COAT, CONTAINING, A COMMENT ON Part of the 11. Chapter
of the 1. Epistle of S. Paul to the CORINTHIANS*

Together with several Sermons: namely, 1 Growth in Grace. 2 How far
Examples may be followed. 3 An ill Match well broken off. 4 Good from bad
Friends. 5 A Glass for Gluttons. 6 How far Grace may be Entayled. 7 A
Christning Sermon. 8 Faction confuted.


By T. F.

JOHN 6.12. Gather up the Fragments that remain, that nothing be lost.

LONDON, Printed by John Dawson, for John Williams, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the Sign of the Crane, in Paul's Church yard. 1640.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, the Lady JANE COVERT, of Peper Harrow in Surry.
MADAM,
Custom has made it not only pardonable, but necessary to flatter in
Dedicatory Epistles, Epitaphs, and Dedications, are credited alike.

But I will not follow the stream herein: First, because I account it beneath
my calling, to speak any thing above the truth. Secondly, because of you it is
needless: Let deformed Faces be beholding to the Painter, Art has nothing to
do, where Nature has prevented it.

Wherefore I will turn my praising of you, into prayer for you, desiring God
to strengthen and increase all goodness in you, and give you perseverance
(that golden Claspe) which joins Grace and Glory together.

Thus desiring to shroud my weak labors, under your favorable Patronage. I
rest

Your Ladyships in all service, Thomas Fuller.

A COMMENT on 1 COR. 11.18. etc. For first of all when you come together in the
Church, I hear there be divisions among you, and I partly believe it.
THE Apostle calls the Corinthians to an account, and reads his black Bill
unto them. It contains several Items, which you may read in the following
chapters; but the Imprimis is in the Text. For first of all etc.

When you come together in the Church, etc.
Even in the nonage and infancy of Christianity, Observe.
there were Churches appointed for Gods holy service. True some take Church
here, pro caetu fidelium; yet Theophylact, and all Greek Writers generally
expound it, the material place of meeting.

Two things then were chiefly aimed at in Churches.

1. Receipt, that the place were capable to contain the people. 2. Privacie.
Being then under persecution they built not their Churches to be seen, but
not to be seen, and then were as plain in their houses, as in their dealing.
Beauty and Magnificense were of later date in Christian Temples, when Religion
grew acquainted with peace and prosperity; and good reason Gods house now
should be decently garnished: Some shunning whorish gaudinesse, leave the
Church to sluttish nastinesse. The Font (our Jordan) having more mud than water
in it: the Communion Table unseemingly kept.

Caution.
Withal let us take heed lest as it has been observed in England, that great
House-building has been the bane of good Hous-keeping. So let us take heed
lest piety in us be so much the worse, by how much our Churches are better
then they were in the time of Saint Paul: What a shame would it be, if there
should be more light in the Church windows than in our understanding: more
pious sentences written in their walls than in our hearts, more uniformity in
the building, than in our behaviors.

I hear there be divisions among you.
How came Saint Paul by this intelligence? Quest.
Was not he at Philippi, when he wrote this Epistle? (as appears by the
Postscript) which was many miles from Corinth. How heard the Apostle of these
divisions at such a distance?

Saint Paul was cunning in a kind of Christian and lawful Magic. Answ.
All the world was his circle, (for so he says of himself, The care of all
Churches lies upon me, 2 Cor. 11.28.) and some faithful friends in every
Church were his familiar Spirits in this circle, to inform him of all
considerable passages. So that Saint Paul was at Corinth, when he was not at
Corinth, absent in person, present by Proxies, these Intelligencers which kept
correspondencie with him.

Men in authority have quick ears to hear at a great distance. Doct
The mutterings of Malefactors are hollowings to Magistrates, who hear
distinctly what offenders but whisper to themselves.

Let none therefore be encouraged to sin through a confidence to be
concealed: Use.
What though Sinners be the servants of the Prince of darkness, and therefore
hope to obtain from their Lord and Master a protection that no punishment may
arrest them; yet let them know, that though the place wherein they sin seem to
them as dark as Egypt, it is as light to men in authority, as the land of
Goshen: Lions sleep with their eyes open; Magistrates with their eyes both
open, and seeing: when we think them blind, they Behold: when deaf, with
Saint Paul they Hear.

Quest.
Did these men (whosoever they were) well in telling Saint Paul these discords
of the Corinthians? had they not better have gone backward, and covered the
nakedness of their neighbors with the cloak of silence? Pity it is but that
his tongue should be for ever bound to the peace, who will prate of every
fault he finds in another, and at the best they are but clacks and tel-tales
for their pains.

Answ.
Had they told it to some scoffing Cham, or mocking Ismael, who would have made
music to himself of the Corinthians discords; then they had been faulty in
relating the faults of others; Tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in Askalon,
lest the etc. 2. Sam. 1.20. but it being told to S. Paul, who would not mock,
but be moan; not defame, but reform these offenders, it was no breach, but a
deed of charity, and the doers hereof, benefactors herein, to the Chuch of
Corinth.

Doct.
It is both lawful, and laudable to discover the faults of our dearest friends,
to those who have power and place to reform them. Thus Joseph brought to his
father Jacob the evil deeds of his brethren, Genesis 37.2 Indeed the Devil is
called the Accuser of the brethren, Revel. 10.12. but he accuses them often
without cause, even without charity, who since he has been cast into hell,
knows no other heaven then to do mischief. But for a man to open the sins,
the wounds of his neighbor, not with desire to put him to torment, but that
the Chyrurgion may search and salve them, is an action most charitable.

There are divisions. Object.

But did not Saint Paul in the 2. verse of this Chapter praise the Corinthians?
Now I commend you brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keep the
Ordinances as I delivered them to you. Were they grown so bad since the
beginning of this Chapter? or does Saint Paul with Saint Augustine write a
retractation of what he had written before? Is this fair dealing, that he
who formerly had by his commendations given the Corinthians a general
Acquittance from al their faults, should now come over them with an
after-reckoning, and charge them with the sin of divisions?

1 Some answer, Cornel. ^ l. ^^ pide on the Text.
Omnia, Answ. 1.
id est pleraque omnia. So that all the ordinances are to be expounded the
greatest part of them. 2 Others by Ordinances understand only certain
Ecclesiastical Thom. Morton in his comment upon the 1 Cor. 11.
Rites and Ceremonies, touching the discipline of the Church, which had no
necessary influence, either on doctrine, or manners; so that the Corinthians
might be observant of all these, and yet peccant both in life and belief.
If this be the meaning, then let us take heed, that though we be whole in
discipline, we be not halting in Doctrine, though sound in ceremonies, not
sick in manners, there being no such inseparable connection betwixt the one and
the other, but that a man may observe all orders in Church service, and yet be
disorderly in his life and conversation, lightning often times breaks the sword,
yet bruises not the scabard; so error and vitiousnesse may break all piety and
religion in us, though in the mean time the sheath of Religion (formal
decency, and outward conformity) remain in us sound and entire.

Call. 1 Cor. 11.2.
Calvin's opinion is that the Apostle commending the Corinthians, means the
maine and general body of the Church, though there might be many straglers
justly to be reproved, confessing Laborasse quidem alios alijs vitijs: Interea
tamen ab universo corpore re tentam fuisse formam quam commendaverat. That
Church therefore is, and is to be counted and commended for a good Church,
whose head is whole, heart healthful, all vital parts entire, though having a
lame leg, a bleared eye, a withered hand, some bad and vicious members,
belonging unto it.

And I partly believe it.
That is, I believe some of you are guilty of this fault, though others be
innocent.

General censures condemning whole Churches are altogether uncharitable. Doct.
Angle out the offenders by themselves, but take heed of killing all with a
Drag-net: And grant many, yea most to be faulty, yet some may be guiltless.
Wickedness was not so general a Rule in Sodom, but that righteous Lot was an
exception from it. See Obadiah (as a Jewel in the head of a Toad) Steward of
Ahabs wicked household. Yea, seeing Impiety intrudes it self amongst the
thickest of Gods Saints, (even drowning Cham in Noah's Arc) just it is that God
should have some names even where the trone of Satan is erected.

Let us therefore follow the wary proceedings of Iehu, 2 King. 10.23 who being
about to kill Baals Priests, caused a strict search before to be made, Search
and look that there be here with you, none of the servants of the Lord, but the
servants of Baal only. So when we are about with censuring, to murder the
credits of many together, let us take heed that there be not some Orthodoxe
amongst those whom we condemn al to be Heretics; some that desire to be
peaceable in this our Israel, amongst those whom we condemn for all factious
Schismatics.

But these words [ I partly believe it] may thus also be expounded, as well of
the faults, as of the persons, as if he had said, I believe these accusations
only in part, and hope they are not so bad, as they are reported.

Doct.
When Fames are brought unto us from good hands, let us not be so incredulous,
as to believe no part of them; nor so uncharitable as to believe all; but with
Saint Paul partly believe it. The good man carries a Court of Chancery in his
own bosom, to mitigate the rigor of common reports, with equal and
favorable interpretations.

Rea 1.
Because Fame often creates something of nothing, always makes a great deal of
a little. It Is true of Fame what is said of the Devil: It has been a Liar
from the beginning. Yea, and sometimes a Murderer. Absalom slew one of David's
sons, and Fame killed all the rest, 2 Samuel 13.30.

2
Because men in reporting things often mingle their own interests and
engagements with their Relations, and making them bettter, or worse, as they
themselves stand affected: Water resembles both the taste and color of that
earth, through which it runs, so reports relish of their Relators, and have
a blush and a smack of their partial dispositions, and therefore such Relations
are not to be believed in their full latitude, extent, and dimension.

It confutes
Those that will believe nothing of what they hear reported, 1
though warranted by never so good witnesses. Though they be persuaded, they
will not be persuaded, and will not credit any accusations though never so
just. Yea, sometimes are so far from trusting the tongues of others, that
they will not trust their own eyes: I bear them witness these men have
charity, but not according to knowledge.

But where too much charity has slain her thousands, 2
too little has slain her ten thousands. More men there be who take all
reports upon the credit of the Relators, and never weigh them in the scales of
their own judgments, to see if they be too light or no: Yea, some are so
excessive in this kind, their belief out-stretcheth the report; what is told
them to be done out of ignorance, they believe to be out of knowledge, what is
told them to be done out of infirmity, they believe to be done out of
presumption; they need not say with the man in the Gospel, Lord I believe,
help my unbeleefe; But Lord pardon my too much belief, pardon my
over-credulity; in that I believe all, and more than all reported. To conclude,
let not our beliefes be altogether of clay to receive any impression, nor
altogether of Iron, to receive none at all. But as the toes in the Image of
Nebuchadnezzars Dream were partly iron, and partly clay: So let our beliefes
be composed of charity, mixed with our credulity, that when a crime is reported,
we may with Saint Paul partly believe it.

VERSE 19. For there must be also heresies among you, that they which are
approved, may be made manifest among you.
HEre Saint Paul argues a minore ad majus, being the more easily induced to
believe there might be divisions among them, because also there must be
Heresies.

Heresies are worse than Schisms, false doctrines more dangerous than
divisions. The former, sins against faith; the later, against Charity; and
though these two Graces be sisters and twins, yet Faith is the eldest and
choycest.
However, as children use to say, they love Father and Mother both best: So let
us hate Heresies and Schisms both worst. The rather because schism is a fit
stock to graft Heresy on; yea of their own accord, old Schismatics ripened
with age, grow young Heretics, witness the Donatists, who (as Saint Libro de
Haeresibus ad quod vult deum.
Augustine says) were but pure Schismatics at first, and turned Heretics
afterward.

Quest.
What is a Heresy? A demand very important to be answered, seeing Saint Paul
says, Acts 24.14. After the way which they call Heresy, so worship I the God
of my Fathers.

Heresy is an error in the fundamentals of Religion, Answ.
maintained with obstinacy. It must be in the fundamentals. In the Primitive
Church many were too lavish in bestowing the name of Heretic on those which
dissented from the Church, in [as I may say] Venial errors. A charitable man
would have been loath to have been of the Jury, to condemn Iovinian for an
Heretic, on no other evidence, than that he maintained marriage in merit to
be equal with Virginity. As therefore by those many Kings mentioned in the old
Testament, thirty and one in the little land of Canaan, Josh. 12.24. is meant
only Toparchs, not great Kings, but Lords of a little Dition, and Dominion; So
in the ancient Catalogues of Heretics [especially of that which S. Ang. loco
prius citato says of him, Haereses quidem ipse comnemorat, sed (...) haereses
non videntur
Phylaster made] we may understand in some of them only erroneous persons,
swarving from the truth.

The next thing necessary in an Heresy, is that it be maintained with
obstinacy, which is the dead flesh, making the green wound of an error,
fester into the old soar of an Heresy. Those two hundred men of Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 15.11. who followed Absalom to Hebron in their simplicity, and knew not
any thing; cannot properly be counted Traitors or Rebels: No more can people
purely erroneous, who do not bolt and bar their eyes against the beams of
truth, but willingly would embrace it, if delivered unto them, and maintain an
error out of conscience, not knowing the truth be accounted Heretics.
Charitable therefore was the cautiousnesse of Epiphanius, who would not
condemn the Anthropomorphites for Heretics, (who mistaking some places of
Scripture, which speak of Gods eyes, feet, and hands, conceived him to be of
a bodily substance) but rather imputed it to their simplicity, than obstinacy,
Rusticitati eorum tribuens.

Quest.
Whether does every Heretic maintain that which in his own conscience he
knows to be false?

Answ.
No: perchance some Heretics at first may strive to defend errors, even against
the reluctancies of their own judgments, and God may afterward justly take
from them, that light which they thrust from themselves; and as great Liars
tell lies so long till at last they themselves believe them to be true: so
many Heretics so long mainetaine falsehoods against their judgment, till at
last being delivered up to a Reprobate Mind, they believe their very errors to
be truth.

And we will take just occasion to describe those qualities, which dispose a
man to be a Father, and Founder of an Heresy.

1 He must be abominably proud: Pride is the key of the work, especially
spiritual pride; when one is elated with conceited sanctity above others,
chiefly he will snarle with his Superiors, and quarrel with men in authority,
that those are before him in place, which are behind him in piety. 2. To pride
add coffeehouse, that his preferments bare not proportion to his supposed
deserts; thus Arius would be an Arian, because he could not be a Bishop. 3.
Learning void of humility. The Serpent was the subtilest of all the beasts in
the field, Genesis 3.1. in this kind a Dance is no dish for the Devilstooth. But
in default of learning, good natural parts will serve the turn, especially
Memory (which is (...)* a Wonder-working faculty) and a fluent expression* so
that when he calls for words, Gad: Behold a Troop comes. If both learning
and natural parts be wanting, yet (as when the golden shields were taken away,
Rehoboams brazen Shields did the deed, and made as much glittering, 2 Chronicles.
12.10.) Boldness and brazenfac't impudence will supply the place, especially
if he trades with the Vulgar, broaches dregs, and founds a dull and sottish
Heresy, which has no affinity with Learning. To varnish all these, there must
be pretended Piety, and Austerity of life, and how foul or filthy soever the
Posterne or Back-doore be, the door which opens to the street, must be swept
and garnished: put all these together, Pride, Discontent, Learning, (at
leastwise good parts, or impudency) pretended sanctity, and they spel together
Haeresiarcham, one cut and carved out to be Ringleader and Captain of an
heresy.

To prevent these mischiefs, let such men pray to God for Humility (that
virtue which is most worth, yet costeth the least to keep it) and beware of
spiritual pride, which is the Hectic Fever of the soul, feeding on the very
moisture of the heart of Piety. Let them beware of coffeehouse, which is a
direct quarrelling with God, who is the fountain of all preferment, though men
may be the channel; and he who has the least from him, has more than he
deserves: And grant preferment is denied thee, be not so childish to cast
away a Crown, because thou can not get a counter; willingly throw away thy
soul, and foolishly revenge the fault of the times, (as thou countest it) upon
thy self. Lastly, if God has bestowed good parts upon thee, pray to him to
sanctify them to thee, otherwise the greatest memory may soon forget it
self, and a fluent tongue may cut his throat that has it.

So much for the Character of an Arch-Heretike. But those whose barren wits
want pregnancy to be the Mothers of Heresies, may notwithstanding serve for dry
Nurses to feed and foster them; and to this purpose the Devil will make use of
them.

A plain Follower of an Heresy may be thus described: First he must be
ignorant, for he that knows nothing will believe any thing; these be Maidens
for their Religion; and therefore the opinion, which first woed them, first
wins them, first come first served. Old Seducers, as it is 2 Timothy 3.6. Creep
into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with
diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth. Secondly, desirous of Novelty: It is an old humor for men to love new
things, and in this point even many Barbarians are Athenians. Lastly, (what
resulteth from the two former) they must have the persons of men in much
admiration, doting on some fancied man's parts and perfections, and entertayning
any thing he says, because he said it.

To prevent these mischiefs, that men may not be Followers of Heresies, let
the meanest parted labor to attain to some competent measure of knowledge in
matters of salvation, that so he may not trust every spirit, but be able to
try whether he be of God, or no; believe no man with implicit faith in
matters of such moment; for he who buys a Jewel in a case, without ever
looking on it, deserves to be couzened with a Bristoll Stone, instead of a
Diamond. Secondly, kill the itch of novelty in thy soul, practicing the
Prophets Precept, Ier. 6.16. Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and
see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and
ye shall find rest for your souls: Lastly, love and admire no man's Doctrine
for his person, but rather love his person for his Doctrine. And now to return
to the very words of the Text.

There must be also Heresies.
There is a double Must, or a twofold necessity of things being; first an
absolute necessity; when the thing has in it self the cause of its necessary
being: Thus God alone Must Be: (for what can be, if being it self be not) and
must be good, and must be true. Secondly, a conditionate Must, or a
necessity, ex hypothesi, which must needs be if such a thing be granted
before. As suppose the Sun be risen, and it must be day. Such a conditionate
necessity is this in the Text: For upon the presupposition of these two things
which cannot be denied; that the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion seeking
whom he may devour, and that the flesh lusts against the spirit, making men
prone to all wickedness; hence it follows there must be heresies. Thus he
that beholds a family, and finds the Master to be careless, the Mistress
negligent, the sons riotous, the servants unfaithful; he may safely conclude
that family cannot be safe, but must be ruined: There must be heresies;
parallel to that, Luke 17.1. It is impossible but that offenses should come: But
far be it from us to conceive that God imposes a fatal necessity, or by
the irresistablenesse of his Decree, urges or enforces any to be Heretics;
their badnesse he wisely permits, but in no wise is the cause or Author thereof.

Among you.
You Corinthians, though men of excellent parts and endowments, are not
privileged from having heresies among you; yea happily because of your
excellent natural gifts are more disposed thereunto. Or take it generally
among you Christians, for properly heresies have their rise, and original out
of the Church, and issue thence, according to the 1 John 2.19. They went out
from us, but they were not of us; for if they had, etc. I see not therefore how
Epiphanius can well make Platonists and Pythagoreans to be Heretics (the
latter for their opinion of Transanimation) seeing neither of these were ever
of the Church.

That they which are reproved may be made manifest among you.
That they whom God from all eternity in his secret council has approved, may
have their Epiphany and manifestation unto the world, that thus discovered,
they may receive from men a Testimonial of their soundness, and sincerity.
Not that God hereby gains any accession of knowledge ( fore-knowne unto God
are all his works from the beginning of the world, Act. 15.18.) but others
hereby are certified and assured of that which was doubtful before: Thus often
times Goldsmiths, though they themselves be sufficiently satisfied of the
goodness of the gold, yet puts it to the touch, to content the Beholders.

And hereby also those which are not approved are made manifest. Many who do
(...), make a brave show in the flesh, and carry it in a high tryumphant way,
will prove but base when brought to the trial. Whilst many unknown man, of whom
the world took no notice, not suspected for any worth, shall acquit themselves
valiant, and appear glorious to God, and all good men: Many a bright candle
formerly hid under a bushel, of a private and obscure life, shall then be set
on a Candlestick, and shine forth to the world: And shall cause, 1 Glory to
God, who shall be honored and praised in these his servants, and as it is
Matthew. 9.8. The multitudes will marvel, and glorify God which has given such
power unto men. 2. Honor to these his Champions of the truth. Never had
Athanasius so answered his name, and been so truly immortal in his memory,
but for opposing of the Arrians. Never had Saint Augustine been so famous, but
for quelling of Manicheans, Pelagians, Donatists, and whom not for all his
Heretics lay pat for his hand to dash them in pieces. 3. Clearing to the
Truth: her old Evidences which have laid long neglected, will then be searched
and found out, her rusty Arguments will be scoured over, and furbished up. Many
will run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased. Those which before
shooting at the Truth, were over, under, or wide, will now with the left handed
Gibeonites hit the mark at an hairs breadth, and fail not: Many parts of true
Doctrine have bin but slenderly guarded, till once they were assaulted by
Heretics, and many good Authors in those points which were never opposed, have
written but loosely, and suffered unwary passages to fall from their posting
pens. But when thieves are about the country, every one will ride with his
sword, and stand on his guard; when Heretics are abroad in the world, Writers
weigh each word, ponder each phrase, that they may give the enemies no
advantage. 4. Confirmation to weak Christians, many whose hearts and
affections were loyal to the Truth, but likely to be overborne by the violence
of the opposite party; will hereby be strengthened, and established in the
Right. 5. Those will be reduced, who (as Agrippa said of himself, Act. 26.28.
That he was almost a Christian) are almost Heretics, not as yet Formati and
Radicati Heretici, but such as well going, (or rather ill going that way) will
pluck one foot out of the snare, and will return to the bosom of the Church.
6. Lastly, the Hardened will be made unexcusable, who obstinately persist in
their errors: They cannot plead they lost their way, for want of Guides, but
for mere wilfulness. And thus God is so good, he would suffer no Heretics
to be in the World; were he not also, so strong and so wise, that he can
extract thus many goods, by permitting them.


VERSE. 20.21. When you come together therefore into one place, this is not to
eat the Lords Supper. For in eating, every one takes before other his own
Supper; and one is hungry, and another is drunken.
OF the sense of the first of these verses are many and different opinions,
both what is meant by This is not to eat, and the Lords Supper. Omitting
variety of Interpretations, we will embrace that which we conceive the best.

This is not to eat the Lords Supper.
As if he had said: True it is ye Corinthians, when ye come together to one
place, you eat the Lords Supper (meaning the body and blood of Christ in the
Sacrament, so expounded by Epist. 118. ad Ianuar. cap. 5. Ipsam acceptionem
Eucharistiae, caen^m Dominicam vocat.
Saint Augustine, and Ambrose, with many other Latin Writers) and yet though
you eat it, you do not eat it. You perform the material part of the action,
but leave out the life and soul thereof, not doing it legally and solemnly
according to Christ's Institution Such is your want of charity, and excess of
riot in your Love Feasts [which you eat before the Sacrament] whereby your
souls are disturbed, distempered, and quite put out of tune to eat the Supper
of the Lord, as ye ought.

Doct
A duty not done as it ought to be done, is in effect not done at all. [ Esaias
64.7.] There is none that calls upon thy name that stirs up himself to
take hold of thee. (...) at the true Church of God, in whose (...) it is spoken
(as Antiquity expounds it, and may be demonstrated by unanswerable Arguments)
do any times wholly neglect, though too often negligently perform their
calling on God; not doing it with that faith, and constancy, care, and
fervencie, devotion, and diligence, as they ought, and God requires; they did
not call on God, in the same sense as Saint Paul speaks This is not to eat.

Use.
It will abate their pride, who rest on Opus operatum, as bad Divinity as
Latin. For a deed done, is a deed not done, where the manner of the doing
confutes and confounds the matter of the deed. Yea, in the best of Gods
children; as Gideons Army of two and thirty thousand, did shrink to three
hundred, Judge. 7.6. So it is to be feared, that their so many Sermons heard,
prayers made, Alms given, which they score up to themselves, and reckon upon,
will shrink in the tale, when God takes account of them; and prove Sermons not
heard, prayers not made, Alms not given, because not done in form as he
requires.

Yet it is some comfort unto us, if all our actions proceed from faith, and
aiming at Gods glory; so that the faylings be rather in the branches, and
leafes, than in the roots of our performances. As for the Unregenerate, they so
remaining have in them laesum principium of all true pious works, all their
divine actions are none at all. It being true of their whole list, what
Spondanus Annal. Eccles. in anno 903.
one writes of the year of our Lord, 903. Annus sua tantum obscuritate
illustris, famous only for this, that nothing famous was done in it, and the
whole story thereof a very Blanke.

For in eating every one takes before other his own Supper.
Herein the Apostle reproves their abuses in their Love Feasts, whose
Institution, Declination, and Corruption, we will briefly describe.

Their Institution.
Love Feasts were founded on no express command in Holy Write, but only on the
Custom of the Church, who immediately before the receiving of the Sacrament, as
appears both by the Text, and S. Augustines Loco prius citato.
Comment on it; (though Saint Chrysostom makes these Love Feasts to be after
the taking of the Eucharist) used to have a great Feast, to which all the poor
people were invited, on the charges of the rich. This they did partly in
imitation of our Savior, who instituted the Sacrament after a full Supper; and
partly in expression of their perfect love, and charity toward all men.

Their Declination.
But the number of the rich men increased, not proportionably with the poor, 1
Cor. 1.26. Behold your calling, that not many wise men after the flesh, not
many mighty, not many noble are called. The Church (in time of persecution,
especially) is like a Copse, wherein the underwood grows much thicker, and
faster, than the Oaks. Hence came it to pass, that there were few Hosts, many
Guests; few Inviters, many to be invited, and the burden growing heavy, lying
on few backs, they wholly omitted the poor, who loath to come without any
invitation, [the warrant to keep a Guest from trespassing on good manners]
were excluded from their Feasts.

Their Corruption.
Thus love to men in want, was quickly turned into want of love, Mare Euxinum,
into Mare Axinum, Love Feasts into No-love-fasts. (Thus too often Charity is
changed into bargaining, Hospitals turned into Exchanges, wherein those are
taken in, that can give; and those left out, that have nothing.) The poor
people in Corinth did see, and smell, what the rich men tasted, Tantalizing all
the while, and having their penury doubled by the Antiperistasis of others
plenty; yea, riot and excess; for some of them were drunken.

Yet mark by the way, that Saint Paul does not plant his Arguments
poynt-blanke to beat these Love Feasts down to the ground, wholly to abrogate
and make a nullity of them, but only to correct and reform the abuses
therein, that there might be less riot in the Rich, and more charity toward
the poor.

Let not things simply good in themselves, Use.
be done away for their abuses; Abraham said unto God, Genesis 18. To slay the
righteous with the wicked, that be far from thee, and far be it from us, to
casheare the good use of a thing, with the ill abuses annexed thereunto. He is
a bad husband, that having a spot in his coat, will cut out the cloth, not
wash out the dirt. Wherefore in matters of a mixed nature, wherein good and bad,
are confusedly jumbled together; let us with the fire of judgment try the
dross from the gold; and with the fan of discretion winnow the chafe, from
the corn.

For in eating every one takes, etc.
By Every one, understand not every particular person, in the Church of
Corinth, [for then how could some be hungry.] But every division, the faction
of Paul a part, of Apollo a part, the sect of Cephas by it self.

His own Suyper.
Meaning that Love-feast, or plentiful Supper whereof formerly, therefore
called their Own, both because severally provided for their Own faction, as
also in distinction of the Lords Supper, which they took afterward.

And one is hungry.
Here is nothing in the poor to be condemned. For that they were hungry, was
no sin in them, but their punishment; Gods pleasure, and the rich men's fault.
Observe.
Poverty sometimes keeps men innocent, whiles abused wealth makes rich men to
offend.

Something is here in the poor to be commended, that they would be hungry.
Our age affords such unmannerly Harpies, they would have snatched the meat out
of the rich men's mouths. Some will not want a fire, if there be fuel in
their neighbors yard: But O let us not unlawfully remove the Landmark of our
estates. Let us rather trespass against modesty, than honesty, go naked, than
steal clothes; be hungry, and fast, than feast on forbidden food.

And another is drunken.
Quest.
Is it credible that any of the Corinthians being about to receive the
Sacrament, would be so far overtaken, as to be drunken?

Answ.
Surely not so drunken, as he, Prove. 23.35. They have stricken me, said he,
and I was not sick, they have beaten me, and I felt it not. They pronounced
not Siboleth, for Shiboleth; so that it might have been said to them, as it
was to Saint Peter, Thy very language betrayeth thee. Sure their tongues, eyes,
and feet, were loyal enough to preserve their Masters credit. So then by
Drunken here, understand the highest flight, and pitch of mirth. And as herbs
hot in the fourth degree, are poison; so Summa hilaritas, is Ima ebrietas, the
highest staire of mirth, is the lowest step of drunkenness.

There is a concealed Drunkenness, Doct
which no Informer can accuse, no witness can testify, no earthly Judge can
punish; yet is it liable to a censure in the Court of Heaven, and counted
Drunkenness in the eyes of God. And though others cannot perceive it in us,
we may take notice of it in our selves, especially if we examine our selves.
1. By our unaptnesse to serve God in our general, or particular callings. 2.
By the quantity of the liquor we have drunk. 3. By the company with whom we
drink. For as some who of themselves, never take notice of their own fast
going, yet are sensible of it, when they hear some of their company, whose
legs are not so long, and so strong, begin to complain; so though of our
selves we find no alteration in our own temper; yet if any of our Companions
in drinking, who started from the same place, and ran the same pace with us,
begin to be tired, let them be our Monitours, that is high time, claudere jam
rivos, to leave off our course, as being already drunkenness before God.

Use
Let us not walk to the utmost bounds of what we may, nor take so much liquor,
as perchance we may justify. It was permitted to the Jews to beat a
Malefactor with forty stripes, Deuteronomy. 25.3. yet they never exceeded nine and
thirty, as appears by their scourging Saint Paul, to whom no doubt, they used
their greatest cruelty, 2 Cor. 11.27. Let us not stretch our Christian Liberty
to the utmost; he that never will drink less than he may, sometimes will
drink more than he should.

Quest.
But why is here mention of Drunkenness only, and not of Gluttony, seeing
probably at such great Feasts these twin-vices go together?

Answ.
The Apostle only instanceth in that sin, which is most obvious, and appearing
to sight: Gluttony is scarce discernable in him that is guilty of it; Quia per
esum necessitati voluptas miscetur, quid necessitas petat, and quid voluptas
suppetat, ignoratur, says Gregory, Moral. lib. 30. cap. 28 ante medium.
Necessity in eating, so incorporates it self with delight, that they are
hardly to be distinguished. Besides, as thunder and lightning, though they come
together, yet lightning first arriveth to our sight: So though probably at the
Corinthians Feasts, Gluttony and Drunkenness were both joined together in the
same person, yet Drunkenness was soonest and easiest discerned.

VERSE 22. What have ye not houses to eat and drink in, or despise ye the
Church of God, and shame them that have not, what shall I say unto you? shall I
praise you in this? I praise you not.
MVst you needs make the house of God the place of your feasting; If you be
disposed to be merry, have ye not houses wherein ye may do it with more
privacie, and less offense? or despise you the Church of God? Do you
under-value the place set apart for Gods service, to convert it into an
ordinary Banqueting House. This is the exposition of all Greek Writers, who
expound it the Material Church; and their opinion is much favored, by the
Antithesis and opposition in the Text, betwixt Church and Houses. Hence it
appears, that these Love Feasts (which of late by the rich men's covetousness,
were enclosed into a private courtesy, which at the first were a common
Charity) were to their greater abuse, kept in the Church, or place of public
meeting.

Only duties pious, and public are to be performed in the Church. Duties
public and not pious more befit a Guild Hall or Towne-house; duties pious, and
not public more become a Closet, Psalm 4.4. Commune with your heart in your
Chamber, and be still, whilst duties public, and pious beseem a Church, as
proper thereto.

Use.
Too blame those that turn the Church into a Counting House, there to rate
their neighbors, both to value their estates, and too often to revile their
persons; others make it a Marketplace, there to bargain in; yea some turn it
into a Kennell for their dogs, and a Mew for their Hawks, which they bring
with them. Surely if Christ drove out thence sheep and doves, the emblems of
Innocence, he would not have suffered these Patterns of cruelty, to have abide
in his Temple.

But most Latin Writers expound these words; Or despise ye the Church of God,
of the spiritual Church. The rich Corinthians in not inviting the poor, made
Balkes of good ground, chafe of good corn; yea, Refuse of Gods Elect.

Object.
But not inviting the poor, was not despising them. A Free-will-offering is no
debt. In gratuitis nulla est injustitia. Seeing therefore it had been no sin
in the Corinthians, wholly to have omitted their Feasts (as being not commanded
by Gods Word) it could be no offense to exclude any Guests at their pleasure.

This is true of civil and ordinary entertainements: Answ.
But these being entitled Love Feasts, and Charity pretended the maine Motive
of them, poor people were the most proper, should have been the most
principal Guests. Besides, if not Christianity, yet Civility; if not grace,
good nature, might have moved them, whilst they gorged themselves, to have
given something to the poor, which stood by. To let them look on hungry, was a
despising of them in an high degree, a Scandalum Magnatum, censurable in the
Star Chamber of Heaven: Thus to wrong their Peers in Grace here, and glory
hereafter.

He that despises the poor, Doct.
despises the Church of God. Whereof they are a member inferior to none in
piety; ( God has chosen the poor of this world to be rich in faith, James
2.5.) Superior to all in number. Now he that pincheth the little toe, paineth
the whole body; the disgracing any member, is the despising the whole Church.
Let us beware of affronting those in want, upbrayding their rags with our
silks; setting our meat before their eyes, only to raise their appetites. He
that has the things of this World, and sees his Brother to want, how does the
love of God dwell in him?

And shame them that have not.
Not, that have not houses, though perchance but homely, and hired; but (...),
those that have not wealth, and substance to pay the shot, and go to the cost
to invite you again.

What shall I say, shall I praise you in this?
Doct.
Pastors may, and must praise their people wherein they do well. Reasons.
1. Hereby they shall peaceably possess themselves of the good-wils of their
people, which may much advance the power and efficacy of their preaching. 2.
Men will more willingly digest a Reproof for their faults, if praised when
they do well. 3. Virtue being commended does increase, and multiply; Creepers
in goodness will go, Goers run, Runners fly.

Use 1.
Those Ministers to be blamed, which are ever blaming, often without cause,
always without measure; (whereas it is said of God, he will not be always
chiding, Psame 103.9.) These Preachers use their reproves so commonly, till
their Physic turns natural, and will not work with their people.

Do any desire to hear that which Themistocles counted the best Music;
namely, themselves commended? On these conditions, we Ministers will indent
with them; Let them find matter, we will find words; let them do what is
commendable, and blame us if we commend not what they do. Such work for us
would be Recreation; such employment, a pleasure, turning our most stammering
tongue, into the pen of a ready Writer to: reprove is pressed from us, as Wine
from Grapes; but praises would flow from our lips, as water from a Fountain.
But alas how can we build, when they afford us neither brick, nor straw? how
can we praise what they do, when they will not do what is to be praised? if
with Ahab they will do what is evil, then with Micaiah, we must always
prophecy evil unto them.

In this I praise you not.
Ministers must not commend their people when they do ill. Doct.
1. Dishonorable to God. 2. Dangerous to the Ministers. Reasons.
That Ambassador, who being sent to proclaim war, pronounces peace to
Rebels; ( There is no peace, says my God to the wicked, Esaias 57.21.) deserves
at his return, to be preferred to the Gallows. 3. Dangerous to the people,
who are soothed in their sins: Honey-dewes, though they be sweet in taste,
do black and blast the corn; So those who praise their people, without cause,
are cruelly kind unto them, it is pleasant to the palate of flesh, but
destroys and damneth the soul.

Use.
It were to be wished, that as those that live under the Equinoctial at
Noonday, have no shadows at all; so great men should have no shadows, no
Parasites, no Flatterers to commend them, when they least deserve it.

Object.
But why does Saint Paul deal so mildly with the Corinthians, I praise you not?
Me thinks he should have made his little finger, as heavy as his loins. O
ye Corinthians, I excommunicate every mothers child of you, I damn you all to
the pit of hell, and deliver you to Satan for your sin of Drunkenness, at
the receiving of the Sacrament, never to be absolved, but on your most serious
and solemn repentance: Otherwise, considering the corrupt humor in the
Corinthians, the Apostles purge was too gentle for them.

Answ. 1.
Theophylact answers; that Saint Paul reproves the rich men the more mildly,
lest otherwise they should be implacably incensed against the poor, fretting
against them, as the causers of the Apostles anger.

2.
2. It was the first time he told the Corinthians of their fault, and therefore
used them the more gently, on hope of their amendment. This corrupt humor in
the Corinthians, was not as yet grown tough, baked and clodded in them by
custom, and therefore the easier purged and removed.

Observe.
Ministers must use mildness, especially at their first reproving of a sin.
Yea God so blessed the mild serveritie of Saint Paul, that the Corinthians
reformed all their errors; for no fault reprehended by the Apostle in them in
this first Epistle, is taxed again in the second Epistle; a very strong
presumption, that all those faults were amended.

Now whereas we find such abuses in the Church of Corinth, presently after it
was newly planted: we may learn

Corruptions will quickly creep into the best Church. Doct.
Thus Saint Paul no sooner went back from the Galatians, but they went back
from his Doctrine, Gal. 5.7. Ye did run well, who did hinder you? And as we
read of Mezentius, a cruel Tyrant, who joined dead corpse to living men, and
so killed them with lingering torments: So some Seducers in the Church of
Galatia, sought to couple the lively grace of God, and active faith with the
dead Letter of the Law, and old legal Ceremonies long since dead, buried, and
rotten, in the Grave of our Savior.

If it be done thus to the green Tree, Use.
what shall be done to the dry? If Primative Churches, whilst the Apostles
which planted them, were alive to pruine them, had such errors in them, no
wonder if the Church at sixteen hundred years of age may have some defaults.
Moses said unto the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 31.27. Behold while I am alive with you
this day, ye have been rebellious against the Lord, and how much more when I
am dead. So if while Saint Paul survived, Churches were so prone to decline,
what can be less expected in our days: It was therefore well concluded in the
39. Session of the Council of Constance Fox Martyrol. page 594.
: That every ten year at the farthest, there should be a General Council
held, to reform such errors in the Church, as probably in that time would
arise.

VERSE 23. For I have received of the Lord that which I also delivered unto
you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night, in which he was betrayed took bread.
AFter he had fully reproved the corruptions of their Love Feasts, comes he
now to reduce the receiving of the Sacrament, to the first Institution of
Christ: It is the safest way to correct all the Errata's in the Transcript,
Observe.
according to the Original Copy: Thus did Christ in the matter of Divorce,
Mat. 19.8. But from the beginning it was not so. Excellently Saint Cyprian; We
must not heed what others did, who were before us, but what Christ did who was
before all.

Use
Were this used betwixt us, and the Papists, to clear the stream of Gods
service, by the Fountain of its first Institution, how soon would seven
Sacraments shrink to two? how quickly would Cream, Oil, and Spittle, fly out
of Baptism, and leave nothing, but fair water behind? How soon, etc.

For I have received of the Lord.
How could Saint Paul receive it of the Lord, Quest.
with whom he never convers't in the flesh, being one borne out of time, as he
confesses of himself.

He received it. Answ.
1. Mediately by Ananias, who began with him where Gamaliel ended. Besides,
(lest the Corinthians should say, that they received it likewise at the second
hand, as well as Saint Paul) he had it immediately from God, Gal. 1.12. For I
never received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the Revelation of
Jesus Christ.

I also delivered unto you.
The Greek is (...). Latin, Tradidi vobis, English it as you please, I
traditioned it unto you. Nota (says A Lapide on this place) Hunc locum pro
traditionibus quas Orthodoxi, verbo Dei scripto adjungendas docento. Bellarmine
also starts Traditions out of the same place. What eye salve are their eyes
anointed with, that can see unwritten Traditions here, when the Apostle
delivers nothing, but is recorded in 3. Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke.

However hence we will take occasion briefly to speak of unwritten Traditions;
the Church of Rome maintayning that the Scriptures of themselves are too scant
to salvation, except the course list of unwritten Traditions be cast in to make
measure; and this they will have of equal authority with the written Word.

4. Observeables concerning Traditions.
Mark by the way. 1. This is the Reason why Romanists are so zealous for
Traditions, for finding themselves cast by the Scriptures, they would faigne
appeal to another Judge: yea hereon are founded those points which get them
their gain, as Purgatory, and the Appurtenances thereof. Has not Demetrius
then reason to stand for Diana, ( Act. 19.25) when his goods and her Godship
must go together? 2. Though they lock up the Scriptures in an unknown
language, and forbid the Laity to read them, yet they suffer Traditions to be
preached and published to all in general. Such wooden Daggers will never hurt
Popery to the heart, and therefore they suffer their children to play with
these dull tools, though not to handle the two-edged Sword of Gods Word. 3.
Romanists will never give us a perfect List, and Catalogue of their Traditions,
that we may know their set number, how many there be of them, but still reckon
them up with an Et Caetera, leave still a Plus ultra to place more in if need
require. And as the Athenians for fear they should omit any Deity erected an
Altar, to the unknown God: So the Papists in summing up their Traditions, will
not complete their number, but are careful to leave Blankes and void places
for a Refuge, and Retreating Place, that in case they be pressed in Disputation,
and cannot prove their point by places of Scripture, they may still plead it is
a Tradition.

4. Whereas the word Tradition is taken in several senses, and there be many
kinds of them, Papists jumble, and confound them together. As Cheaters use to
cast their counterfeit coin amongst good gold, hoping so to pass it away
current, and undiscovered: So they shuffle false and true Traditions together
in one heap, that the bad may go off, under the countenance and protection of
the good. We will mar their Mart, by sorting them into these several Ranks.

1. Traditions in a general sense are taken for things delivered, though in
Scripture by Christ and his Apostles; thus Saint lib. 3. contra Eunomium.
Basil calls Baptising, In the name of the F: S. and H: G. a Tradition. 2. For
such matters of Faith which are not found in Scripture, totidem verbis in the
words and sound; but yet in the same sense, and substance, or at least may by
faithful consequence be thence deduced as the Trinity of Persons, two wills in
Christ, his Consubstantiality with God the Father: Thus Lindan a Papist calls
Original sin a Tradition. 3. For such opinions, against which nothing
appears in Scripture, and the Church in all times, and ages, have maintained
them, condemning the Opposers for erroneous: As that the Mother of Christ was
ever a Virgin. 4. For such Rites and Ceremonies of the Church (no matters of
Faith) which therein have been used from great Antiquity; and therefore
probably might have their Original from the Apostles; As Fasting in Lent,
though the manner, time, and continuance in keeping it was very different in
several Churches.
Take Traditions in the first and second acception, we account them to have
equal force and authority with the Written Word. In the third sense we honor
and embrace them as true: In the last Acception we approve and practice them
as decent and ancient; provided always, they be not obtruded, as things
necessary to salvation, but indifferent in their nature.

But all this makes nothing for the black Guard of Romish Traditions, which
lag still behind some of them frivolous. As Clemens Romans lib. 40. cap. 10
Apost. Constit.
this Apostolical Tradition; That a Priest if against their wills they receive
any money from wicked men they must in no case expend it on meat, but to buy
wood, and coals. Some impious and blasphemous worshipping of Images, prayers to
Saints, the Sacrifice of the Mass, Purgatory, etc. having nothing for them,
much against them in Gods written Word.

To draw to a conclusion. Scriptures besides many others have two most
principal privileges above Traditions: First, their Infallibility, as being
inspired by the Spirit of God, 2 Pet. 1.20. So that ye first know this, that
no prophecy of the Scripture is of any private Interpretation. verse. 21. For
the Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man; but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. As for the authors of Traditions,
they might both falli and fallere, be deceived themselves, and deceive others:
They might be deceived themselves, either by misunderstanding the Traditions
delivered unto them, or by mis-remembring, or by mis-relating them again. They
might deceive others, either unwillingly by these forenamed slips and
infirmities, or else willingly and wittingly by venting those things as
received from the Apostles, which they had not received from them.

And by usurpation, intitling the fancies of your own heads, to be
Apostolical Precepts.

2. The Providence of God plainly appears in his preserving of the Scriptures
against all oppositions. Many a time from my youth up ( may the Scriptures now
say) yea many a time have they fought against me from my youth, but they could
not prevail against me. Neither Antiochus before Christ, nor Julian the
Apostate since him, nor the force of Tyrants, nor the fraud of Heretics
(though the world of late has scarce yielded a wicked sharp wit, that has
not given the Scriptures a gash) could ever suppress them. Their treading on
this Cammimell, made it grow the better; and their snuffing of this candle made
it burn the brighter. Whereas on the other side, the Records of Traditions are
lost, and those books wherein they where compiled and composed, Aut in curia
hominum, aut injuria temporis; or by some other sinister accident are wholly
miscarried, and no where appear. Papias is reported by Lib. 4. Hist. cap. 8.
Eusebius in five books to have contained all the Apostolical Traditions,
which they call the Word not written, by Bellarmine himself confessed, that
these are lost. Likewise Clemens Alexandrinus (as the same Eusebius storieth
it) wrote in a book those Traditions, Lib. 6. Hist. cap. 11.
which he received from the Elders, and they from the Apostles, which book
the Papists themselves at this day cannot produce. I will conclude all with
Gamaliels words, Act. 5.39. But if it be of God, ye cannot destroy it. Had
these books been inspired by Gods Spirit, no doubt the same Providence would
have watched to preserve them which has protected the Scripture. Let us
therefore leaving uncertain Traditions stick to the Scriptures alone, trust no
Doctrine on its single band, which brings not Gods word for its security. Let
that Plate be beaten in pieces, which has not this Tower-stampe upon it.

That the Lord Jesus the same night, wherein he was betrayed.
Christ bestowed the greatest courtesy on mankind, Observe.
when he foresaw that he should receive the greatest cruelty from them. O
that we were like minded with our Savior, to move fastest in Piety, when we
draw nearest the Center of Death; and then chiefly to study, to fasten favors
on our Enemies*

Why did Christ institute it then, Quest.
and not before?

Because dying men bequeath not their Legacies till they make their wills, Answ.
1.
nor departing friends bestow their tokens, till they take their farewell.

2. Because till then, 2.
the Passover (a Sacrament in the same kind) did continue in full force, and
the Lords Supper was not to be lighted, til the Passover was first fairly put
out.

Seeing Christ appointed it a Supper, Quest.
how comes it now to be a Dinner?

God has instrusted the discretion of his Church on just occasion, Answ.
to alter some circumstances in the Sacrament. True it is, such circumstances
as are Sacramental, not only of the Commission at large, but also of the Quorum
nomina, whose absence or alteration, maims and mangles the Sacrament, are
unchangeable. But Common, and ordinary circumstances (such as is the Time,
Place, Kind of Bread and Wine) the Church has power to alter, by virtue of a
Warrant left to it by Christ. Let all things be done decently, Reasons of the
charge.
and in order. It was turned into a dinner. 1.
1. To avoid the Inconveniences, which a full stomach surfetted, and
surcharged will bring, as in the Corinthians.

2.
2. That our bodies which are like new barrels, whiles we are fasting, may first
be seasoned with the liquor of Christ's blood.

Let us thank God that we are not necessitated to receive the Communion in the
night, as in the Primitive Church, in time of Persecution, when Christians to
drink Christ's blood, did adventure the loosing of their own.

Took Bread.
Quest.
Why did Christ choose so cheap, and common a thing to exhibit his body in?

Answ. 1
Herein he graciously provided for the poor. Had he appointed some rich, and
costly receipt, the estate of the poor could not procure it for themselves, and
the charity of the rich would not purchase it for others.

2.
2. Had he instituted it in some dear and precious element, happily people would
have imputed the efficacy thereof, to its natural worth, and working, not to
Christ's Institution. Christ therefore chooses plain bread, a thing so mean
in it self, it is not within suspicion, to eclipse God of his glory, none can
be so mad as to attribute to plain Bread it self, such spiritual Operation.

Let us take heed, how we take snuff at the simplicity of Gods Ordinance, say
not with Naaman: Is not Abanah, and Pharphar, etc. Is not the Bread in the
Bakers panniers, and the Wine in the Vintners cellar as good, as that which is
propounded in the Sacrament? And far be it from us to seek with our own
inventions to beguard that, which God will have plain; rather let us pray, that
our eyes may be anointed with that eye salve, to see Majesty in the meanness,
and the state in the simplicity of the Sacraments. Quest.


But amongst such variety of others, such cheap Elements to represent Christ's
body in, why was bread preferred above all?

To show our bodies can as well subsist without Bread, Answ.
as our souls without a Savior. It is called the staff of Bread, other meats
are but as pretty wands to whisk in our hands. Without Bread no Feast, with
Bread no Famine.

VERSE 24. And when he had given thanks he brake it, and said, Take, eat,
this is my body, which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of me.
And when he had given thanks. (...).
SO it is Luke 22.19. But Saint Matthew, chap. 26.26. has it (...), he
blessed. Yet let not these two words fall out, for they are Brethren, of
affinity in sense and signification: At this day (...), He gived thanks, has
christened the whole service of the Eucharist.

Doct
Whenever we are to receive any food, we are to give God thanks, but
especially at Sacrament.

Rea 1.
1. It is our duty. God the Lord Paramount of the World, though he has made us
in Christ Freeholders of all his creatures; yet has reserved thanks, as a
quick Rent for himself.

2
2. It is profitable for us, 1 Timothy 4.45. For every creature of God is good, and
nothing to be refused, if it be received with thankesgiving; for it is
sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer. Yea thanksgiving makes every creature
both chew the cud, and cleave the hoof The Physician may forbid one meat, the
Divine cannot, it may be against ones health, not ones conscience. True, the
Jews life was a constant Lent, from much forbidden meat; but Christians paying
thanks to God, buy a License to eat any thing.

He brake it.
To signify how his body should be broken for mankind. Whilst therefore the
Priest in the Sacrament breaks the Bread, let the peoples meditation attend
his Action, and conceive they see Christ's head, back, hands, feet, side broken
with the thorns, whips, nails, spear. And hence it appears, that the
celebrating of Christ's body in broken bread, is more natural to Christ's
Institution, and more expressive in it self, than as the Church of Rome does
in a whole and entire VVafer.

And said unto them, Take.
That is, take it in their hands, and put it to their mouth, not as the custom
lately induced in the Romish Church, for the Priest to put it in the mouth of
every Communicant.

But it is pleaded for the Popish custom that it is unmannerly for Laymen to
handle Christ's body; Object.
and therefore it is most reverence to take it with their mouths.

There is no such Clown in Christianity as he, Answ. 1.
who will be more mannerly than God will have him: It is most reverence for us
to do as God commands us, Ahaz tempted God in saying, he would not tempt him,
when God bid him ask a sign, Esaias 7.12. Those do little better, who more nise
then wise, strain courtesy not to take Christ's body in their hands, when he
reaches it.

2.
2. Take it strictly, and our mouths are as unworthy as our hands to receive
Christ's body. No more sanctity in the one, than in the other, being both made
of the same lump of flesh: But seeing it is Christ's pleasure to come under the
roof of our mouth, let him also pass through the porch of our hands. The
rather, because it seems that we entertain Christ's body in more state, and
with more observance toward it, when the more servants attend it, the more
members of our body, using their service in receiving it.

3.
3. Lastly, the Romish custom in putting it into their mouths loses the
expression and significancie of the hand of faith. The taking Christ's body in
our hands, minds us spiritually by faith, to apprehend and lay hold on his
mercies and merits.

T. C. needless cavil.
And here let us take notice of the needless cavil of such, as snarle at the
practice of our English Church. Because whereas Christ said in a generality,
once for all to his Disciples, Take and eat; our Church speaks it to every
particular person. We answer, this is no considerable variation from Christ's
form; for first it appears not in the Text to the contrary but that Christ
might speak these words severally to each Apostle, though it be not expressed,
because Histories trusse up things in bundles, and omitting particulars, set
down only the total sum. Secondly God has entrusted the Ministers of his
Church to spin out his universal Precepts and promises into particulars. Thus
Mat. 28.19. Christ says, Teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, etc. Which the Priest by the consent of all Churches applies to each
Infant, I baptize thee, etc.

This is my Body.
That is, that which signifies, signs, and presents my body, and sacramentally
is my body, and which received with faith seals to thee all the benefits of my
death and passion, not transubstantiated into my body, according to the Popish
opinion, whereof briefly.

The Doctrine of Transubstantiation was first occasioned by the unwary speeches
of Damascen and Theophylact. These seeing no present, and foreseeing no future
errors about the Sacraments were too transcendent, and hyperbolicall in their
expressions, about the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament: Thus as
oftentimes, Lascivia calami, the dashes and florishes of a Scrivener
over-active with his pen, have afterward been mistaken to be Letters really
intended: So the witty extravagancies, and Rhetorical phrases of these
Fathers, were afterward interpreted to be their distilled doctrinall positions:
so dangerous it is for any to wanton it with their wits in mysteries of
Religion. But Transubstantiation was never made an Article of faith, till the
Council of Lateran; no penalty imposed on the Maintainers of the contrary,
till the Council of Trent. But let us hear some of their Arguments.

Argum. 1
The Text says, this is my body, and therefore it is so plainly to be
understood. For Scripture admits of a figurative sense as its Refuge, not as
its Choice, only se defendo, to shield and shelter it self from nonsense and
contradictions, otherwise the literal sense is to be embraced. And therefore
the Holy Spirit is so here to be understood, this is truly my body.

Answ.
From the literal understanding of these words flow many absurdities, and
therefore we are forced to fly to a figurative meaning. Philosophy brings in
an Army of Impossibilities, as that the same body at the same time should be
in several places; that accidents should subsist without a substance, etc. To
wave these, the Antiquity of faith excepts against it, it destroys the nature
of a Sacrament, the same thing cannot be the sign and seal of Christ's body,
and the very body in substance.

2. We are not to measure Gods Arm by our eye, Argum. 2.
his power by our understanding; Wherefore non obstante, all pretended
impossibility; God does turn the bread into his sons body, for nothing is
impossible unto him.

Were it expressed in Scripture, Answ.
that it were Gods will to turn the Bread into Christ's flesh, we would work
our selves to believe it, and make Reason strike sail to Faith: So it is not
Gods power we question, but his will and pleasure.

But he says, Argum. 3.
totidem verbis, this is my body, and dying men use to speak most plainly,
with them figures are out of date, the flowers of Rhetoric fade, especially
they write without welt or Guard in their wills and Testaments.

A familiar Trope or Figure is as plain as no figure: Answ.
Even a child in age, is man enough to understand; Cool the Pot, drink off
that Cup. Yea, many speak figures, who know not what figures mean: Besides,
Christ at his death spoke no other language, then what his tongue and his
Disciples ears were used too in his life time. I am the Vine, I am the Way, I
am the Door. He who is so sottish, as to conceive that Christ was a material
Door, shows himself to be a Post indeed.

Which is broken for you.
The flesh of Christ was afterward on the Cross literally broken, there was
solutio continui, with the nails in his hands, and feet: As for his bones,
John 19.36. Not a bone of him was broken in the literal sense. But vertually
and eminently in the same meaning, wherein it is said a Broken Heart, all his
bones were broken, that is contrited and grinded with grief and sorrow.

Do this.
In Latin, hoc facite, which the Papists expound sacrifice, this according to
Virgils verse, Cum faciam vitula pro frugibus ipse venito.


So much is the Church of Rome beholding to this Poet, both for the sacrifice
of the Mass out of his Eclogs, and Limbus Patrum out of the first book of his
Aeneads. But seeing this action, Do this; is enjoined as well to the people as
the Priest; and seeing none but the Priest could offer Proprij nominis
sacrificium, it plainly appears this cannot here be a proper sacrifice.

In Remembrance.
Doct.
Wherein this Doctrine is intimated: Men are prone to forget Gods favors unto
them, except they be minded of them. The Israelites had not this great
goodness in remembrance: But were disobedient at the Sea, even at the Red Sea,
Psalm 106.7. Who would have thought that the deliverance at the Red Sea would
so soon have been drowned in a deeper Sea of Oblivion.

Reasons of our Forgetfulness.
1. The Devils malice, Rea 1.
who whilst we sleep in Idleness, and negligence, steals into the memory,
the Muniment house of the soul, and embezileth, and purloyneth from thence the
Records of most moment and importance.

2. But not to play the Devil with the Devil, 2.
not to accuse him falsely, he is not the principal cause of our
forgetfulness, which flows chiefly from the corruption of our nature; which
like a Bolter lets all the floor pass, and keeps only the bean behind.

But here we must not understand the bare naked and empty Remembrance of
Christ's death, the calling to mind the History of his passion (which the Devils
can do, and the worst of men) thus to remember Christ were but to forget him;
But a remembrance cum effectu, the relying on his death with a lively faith,
and applying his merits to our souls. Whereof more largely hereafter.

Of me
Incarnated, of me borne, of me circumcised, of me baptized, of me tempted, of
me scourged, but especially of me crucified, and also of me ascended, and now
glorified.

VERSE 25. After the same manner also he took the Cup, when he had supped,
saying, this Cup is the new Testament in my blood, this do ye as often as ye
drink it, in remembrance of me.
Follows now the other part of the Sacrament instituted in the Wine. He
doubleth the elements to show, that in Christ is not only necessary and
sufficient, but also plentiful and abundant, with assured Redemption.

Too too blame then the Church of Rome, whose Levites are guilty of that fault
whereof Benjamin was taxed, they have stolen away the Cup. If to steal the
Chalice be the phrase whereby men express the highest sin, what sacrilege is
it to steal the Wine of the Chalice, from whom it belongs? But it is a
wonder if old Thieves be taken without an excuse; let us hear what these
Romanists plead for themselves.

Object. 1.
Nature has so put flesh and blood in a joint Patent, that they go always
together. Where there is one, there are both, and where not both, neither. It
is superfluous therefore to give the Laity the blood the second time, who by
concomitancie had received it before.

Indeed flesh and blood like loving Playmates were together in Christ's body,
Answ. 1.
till torments forced them to part asunder: Now we are to receive Christ's blood
Shed, not as it was at home housed in heaviness; but as pain banished it
abroad and powered it out. Wherefore what God has put asunder to be taken
severally and distinctly, let no man join together.

But there be many Inconveniences, Object. 2.
yea mischiefs attend the Layeties receiving of the Wine, as its sticking in
their beards, spilling of it, etc.

Non debemus esse sapientiores legibus. Answ. 2
God in the Omnisciency of his wisdom surveyed the latitude of all
occurrencies, yet beholding all future Inconveniences present, he appointed
the Laity to drink of the cup. Wine was then as subject to spilling, it has
not since gotten a more liquid or diffusive quality.

But in several places of Scripture, Object. 3.
no mention is made of wine, but of bread only, as Act. 2.4. and the 46.
Continued breaking of bread from house to house, Act. 20.7. Met together to
break bread.

Either bread by a Synecdoche, Answ. 3.
is here put for Bread and Wine, or else that phrase imports their ordinary
meetings, and civil feasts. But a Cart-load of these exceptions, Tekel, are
weighed in the balance, and found too light, to out-poyse Christ's Institution.
The wise Shunamite woman, 2 King. 4.30. was not content with the company of
Elisha's staff and servant; but as the Lord lives (says she) and as thy
soul lives, I will not leave thee, she would not lean on the staff, but on
the staffs Master, and would have him with her: So let us not be so foolish to
depart from Gods written Word in the Sacrament, concerning giving the Laity the
Cup, for the company of humane Arguments on our side; but let us stick close to
our Commission, and then we need not fear a Praemunire, so long as we have
the Letter of Gods Law on our side.

When he had supped.
Christ did therefore institute this Sacrament after Supper, to show that
herein he chiefly aimed not at the feeding of our bodies, but the refreshing
of our souls. We are not to bring our devotion in our guts, and to come to the
Communion for Belly-cheare; like those that followed our Savior, John 6.26.
Because they had eaten of the Loaves, and were filled. No, we are to come with
more refined thoughts, and as for matter of bodily meat, contain our selves as
after Supper.

This Cup is the New Testament in my blood.
This Cup, that is the wine in this Cup. We cannot scarce stir a pace in
Scripture, without meeting with a figure, even in these Testamentary
Expressions of our Savior: Why then do the Papists make such news, yea
wonders at Figures, then which nothing is more common? Is the New Testament in
my blood; that is, the wine therein contained signeth unto you the New Covenant
of Grace, which is ratified and confirmed in my blood; that is by my death. For
indeed it is the death of the Testator that gives life to the Testament, and
the will though sealed, is not sealed in effect, till the Maker of the same be
dead.

But why is it called the New Testament; seeing it is an old one, and the same
which was made to Adam, (the seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head)
often reiterated and confirmed to Abraham, David, and others.

Indeed it was old in the Promise, new in the Performance; old quoad
substantiam and materiam faederis, new quoad modum clarioris manifestationis.
It is said of those, that live within a mile or two of Olympus, that they are
under a constant and continued shade, which the height of the Mountain casts
upon them: So the Jews and all the Church of God before Christ's coming, lived
in constant umbrages, and shadows, of Types, Figures, Ceremonies, and
Representations; al which were taken away, when our Savior, the Sun of
Righteousness did appear. Therefore it is said in My Blood as in opposition to
the blood of Kids, Calves, Goats sacrificed in the Temple. Other parts of the
verse are expounded in the former.

VERSE 26. For as often as ye eat of this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do
show the Lords body till he come.
Under as Often, is Often included; whence we gather, We must frequently
celebrate the Lords Supper. In the Eusebius, lib. 1. Demonst. Evan. cap. 10.
Primitive Church it was done every day; and fit it was the Aqua Vitae bottle
should ever be at their nostrils, who were sounding every moment, and they
needed constant cordials, who ever and anon had the Qualmes of temptation in
the time of Persecution. This frquencie soon abated, when peace came into the
Church, which makes Saint Ambrose reprove the negligence of the Eastern
Churches, Lib. 5. de Sacramentis, cap. 4.
who received it but once a year: At this day our Mother Church of England
seeing her childrens backwardness herein, by canon compels them to receive,
at the least thrice a year; such is the necessity to force them by Law to come
to a Feast, and to make a statute for hungry men to eat, and sick folk to
take Physic. But hear the Arguments of some to the contrary; that it is to
be but seldom received.

The Passover was celebrated but once a year, Object. 1.
in whose place (for Sacraments never dye without heirs) the Lords Supper
succeeds.

The Passover by God was stinted to be used no oftener, Answ. 1.
in the Lords Supper we are left to our own liberty. Finding therefore our
continual sinning, and therefore need thereof to strengthen us in our grace;
we may, yea must oftener use it, especially seeing all services of God under the
Gospel ought to be more plentiful and abundant, than under the Law.

Things done often, Object. 2.
are seldom done solemnly. Manna if rayned every day, is not dainty; the
frequent doing of it will make men perfunctory, and negligent therein.

Necessary duties are not to be left undone, Answ. 2
for the Inconveniences, which per accidens, through humane corruption may
follow thereon: Then Sermons should be as seldom as Apolloes smiles, semel in
anno; and prayers should not be presented to God every day, lest the
commonnesse of the duty should bring it into contempt; Rather Ministers are to
instruct their people to come with reverence; notwithstanding their frequent
repayring thereunto.

But long preparation is requisite to this Object. 3.
Action; and therefore this Sacrament cannot often be received. Answ. 3.
After the first Grand Preparation, whereby faith and repentance we are first
estated in Gods favor, other preparations are not so difficult in doing, or
tedious in time, as being but the reiterating of the same again. The good
Huswife which scoureth her Plate once a week, has less work than she that
does it but once in Twelve-moneth. Often preparing makes the work easy, and
fits men the sooner for the Sacrament, though I am not altogether of Saint Loco
prius citato.
Ambrose his opinion, that Qui non meretur quotidie accipere, non meretur post
annum accipere.

Quest.
Whether is it of absolute necessity, that a man on his Deathbed should receive
the Sacrament.

Answ.
He is as weak in Judgment, as the dying man in body, who conceives it so. It
is not the bare Absence, but the neglect and contempt of the Sacrament, which
is dangerous. Besides, that surely is not by God, made absolutely necessary to
salvation, which in some cases is impossible to be had. As in sudden death;
when the sick man is gone, before the Priest can come: In infectious diseases,
when the Priest cannot bring Christ's blood without the hazarding of his own;
not to speak of the Inconveniencie of giving it to those, who go out of the
world for pain to bring others into it.

Yea of such persons, who desire the Sacrament, I find three sorts. Some do it
out of mere fancy, who desire it because they desire it: (like David's longing
for the water of the Well of Bethlem) can give no account of their humor
therein. A second sort out of superstition. A third out of a true faith, and
feeling of their infirmity. Now Charity thinks no ill, hops all things. We
Ministers believe all, to be of the later sort, and will not think much of our
pains to tender our service unto them when sent for: But be it betwixt God and
their consciences, let them take heed how they abuse Gods Ambassadors, and
cause us to come on foolish occasions, to feed their own fancies.

You do show forth the Lords body.
The Sacrament solemnly celebrated, Doct
does represent, and set forth the death and Passion of Christ. This is the
meaning of Saint Paul, Galat. 3.1. O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you,
that you should not obey the truth; before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been
evidently set forth, crucified among you: That is, Christ was so powerfully and
pathetically preached unto them in the word, his Death so done to the life in
the solemn, decent, and expressive Administration of the Sacrament, that the
tragedy of Christ's death nigh Jerusalem was re-acted before them.

Use.
Say not then in thine heart, how shall I get to Jerusalem, to see the place of
Christ's suffering? see Faith can remove Mountains, Mount Calvary is brought
home to thee, and though there be (...), a great Gulf, or distance of ground,
betwixt England and Palestine; yet if thou be a faithful Receiver, behold
Christ Sacramentally crucified on the Communion Table; say not in thine heart,
how shall I remember Christ's Passion, it was Time out of mind, 1600. years
ago? Christ here teaches thee the art of Memory, what so long was past is now
made present at the instant of thy worthy receiving: stay Pilgrims, stay (would
your voyages to the Holy Land had been as far from superstition, as hitherto
from success) go not you thither, but bring Palestine hither, by bringing pure
hearts with you, when you come to receive the Sacrament, for there, The Lords
body is showed forth, as on the Cross.

Till I come.
Observe.
God till the Worlds end, when he comes to judgment, will have a Church on
Earth, wherein Pastors shall administer, and people receive the Sacrament.
Witness his promise before his death, Mat. 16.18. And the Gates of hell shall
not prevail against it; and another after his Resurrection, Mat. 28.29. And
lo, I am with you, always unto the end of the World, with you in your selves
and successor, persons and posterity: Indeed the Church may want things of
Luster, never of Essence: It may want a glorious being, never a being, Deus non
decrit in necessarijs: The Church is like the sun, which may be clouded and
eclipsed, yet still remains, Psalm. 89.37. A faithful witness. Besides,
Churches may fall away, but the Church cannot; the setting of the Gospel in one
place, will be the rising of it in another: This is meant Rev. 2.5. I will
remove thy Candlestick out of his place, not I will quench, or put out thy
Candle, but I will remove it, so that it shall still remain in one place or
other, Till I come. And then Sacraments shall be celebrated no more, but types
shall give place to the truth, and shadows shall yield to the substance: Then
all the week shall be one constant Sabbath, and yet therein no Sermons
preached, nor prayers made, but all our Lyturgie shall be praising of God. And
now what remains, but that we cry from our hearts with the Saints; Come Lord
Jesus come quickly.

VERSE 27. Wherefore whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of
the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
Lo these words present us with two principal parts.

1. The sin. 2. The sinfulness of the sin.
The sin is the unworthy eating and drinking of the Bread and Wine of the
Lord.

Quest.
Is any man so well stored with grace, that he can eat these Sacraments worthily?

Answ.
One may do an action worthily in a threefold respect; first worthily,
Dignitate aequalitatis, as the Labourer is worthy of his hire, Threefold
worthiness.
Luke 10.7. 1
This exact worthiness may claim and challenge a reward due unto it, and the
Denier or Detayner does this worthy party wrong and injury: Now no Saint can
receive with this Gods justice-proofe worthiness, as appears by their humble
confessions, not out of complement, but consciousnesse of their faults, Jacob,
Genesis 32.10. John Baptist, Mat. 3.11. Yea, this worthiness is waved by our
Church Liturgy, at the Communion, both (as I may say) in our Grace before meat;
We be not worthy so much as to gather up the crumbs under thy Table, and in our
Grace after meat; and though we be unworthy through our manifold sins to
offer unto thee, etc.

2. The second is, 2.
worthily Dignitate convenientiae aptitudinis, or decentiae, which consists
though not in a perfect and exact proportion, yet in some fitness, meetnesse,
and likeness unto that which is required; such phrases are frequent in
Scripture, Mat. 3.8. Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of Repentance; that
is, such as bear no open repugnancy and contradiction to the repentance you
profess, but in some sort meet and agreeing thereunto. So, walk worthy of the
Lord, Col. 1.10. worthy your calling, Ephesians. 4.1. worthy the Gospel, Phil.
1.27. That is, let not your life shame your belief, break not the
Commandments against the Creed, let not your practice be (...), with your
profession. And we must know, that Peccata surreptitia, sins of infirmity
(not through their want of wickedness, but Gods store of mercy) may stand and
subsist with this worthiness of conveniencie. In this acception we understand
in my Text to eat worthily, that is so fitted and prepared, as may bear some
resemblance and agreement to the solemnity of the work we go about.

3. There remains a third kind of Worthiness, 3.
which is Dignitas dignationis, the worthiness of acceptance, when God for
Christ's sake is pleased to take our actions in good worth. That is well spoken,
which is well taken, and that man is worthy, who by God is accepted so to be.
Indeed if base and ignorant people should cry one up to be worthy, and prize
pebles to be pearls, he is no whit the better for the over-valuing of him;
but if God pleases to esteem men, worthy, things are as they are accounted by
him, his valuing of them puts worth into them, I have blessed him (says Isaac
of Jacob, Genesis 27.33.) Yea and he shall be blessed; God has accounted them
worthy; yea, and they shall be worthy, as it is Rev. 3.4. They shall walk with
me in white, for they are worthy. Let us when we come to the Sacrament bring
with us the worthiness of fitness, and convenience; and God of his goodness
will be pleased to reward us with the worthiness of acceptance.

Two sorts of people then do eat and drink unworthily. First, the
Unregenerate, those which as it is Heb. 6.1. Have not as yet laid the
Foundation of Repentance from dead works, and faith in Christ, but remain
still in their pure, impure naturals, not ingrafted into Christ. Without this
foundation, the fair side-wals of a good nature, and the proud roof of all
moral performances, will both totter and tumble to the ground. Secondly, the
Regenerate, but guilty of some sins unrepented of, who eat unworthily till
they have sued out a special pardon out of the Court of Heaven.

Come we now to the sinfulness of the sin: shall be guilty of the body and
blood of the Lord; that is, they are offenders in the same form with Judas and
the Jews, guilty of shedding the blood, and wounding the body of Christ: For
as those that deface the stamp, or abuse the Seal of a King, are entitled to
be traitors, so the unworthy receivers of these elements, which personate and
represent Christ's body, are interpreted to sin against the body of Christ it
self: Some Protestants have by Gods Providence escaped in their persons, and
yet the papists to manifest their spite have burned their pictures at a stake;
Christ's person is shot-free from any man's malice, out of the reach of your
cruelty, sitting at the right hand of God in Heaven; as for his Picture, it is
with us in the Sacraments, and unworthy Receivers show to the shadow, what
they would do to the substance if it were in their power, they push as far
as their short horns will give them leave.

But may one say; Object.
Grant unworthy Receiving be a grievous sin, yet me thinks too heavy an
accent is put upon it to equalize it with the murdering of Christ; Jonathan
said, 1 Samuel 14.43. I did but taste a little honey with the end of my Rod, and
lo I must dye; but more justly and grievously may the wicked Communicant
complain; I did but eat a morsel of Bread, and drank a Draught of wine, and
lo I must dye here, hereafter, temporally, and eternally; yea my sin is
heigthned to be even with the sin of Judas and the Jews, who wilfully
embrued their hands in Christ's blood.

Answ.
How ever humane corruption may be the Advocate to plead herein, yet we must
count sins to be so great, as God esteems them to be. He sees not as man
sees, nor judges he as man judges: He will judge that to be pride, which
we count to be good carriage; that lust which we count love, that
drunkenness which we good fellowship, and unworthy receiving which we
perchance esteem a fault, but not of the first magnitude, he judges it the
highest of any pardonable sin, even guiltiness of Christ blood it self.
Learn we from hence to measure and survey a sin in the true height, length,
and breadth thereof. Hearken not to the partiality of thine own flesh, which
will make thine offenses in number less, in nature lighter; listen not to the
suggestions of Satan, which will never suffer us to see our sins truly, but
is always in the excess or defect: When we go on in a sinful course, he
bears us in hand, that our sins are small; and when we are touched in
conscience he seeks to persuade us that they are too great, Mountains too big
to be drowned in the Ocean of Gods mercy; but let us measure them by the
square of Gods Word, an infallible rule that will not deceive us.

To conclude, men generally hate Pilate and Judas, if we see them but in
Pictures our blood rises at them, we could scratch them out with our nails;
being more angry with them, then David with the rich man, that took away the
poor man's Ewe Lamb; whereas in some sense it may be said of many of us, Thou
art the man. Yet as for those which hitherto have not taken notice of the
haynousnesse of this sin, and through the want of consideration, have been
guilty of the body of Christ; let me say to them what Saint Peter does, Act.
3.17. And now brethren, I wot that through Ignorance you did it: Repent
therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out; And let us
all pray with David, Psalm 91.14. Deliver us from blood-guiltinesse O God, but
especially from being guilty of the body and blood of thy Son.

VERSE 28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this Bread,
and drink of this Cup.
LEt us know that some make these words [ Let a man examine] to be a bare
permission and concession, that if they will they may do it. Others make it a
council or advice; that according to the rule of Prudence or discretion they
should do it. A third sort, and that the truest make it a mandate or command
that we must do it, and the seeming indifferency in the English tongue is
necessitated in the Greek, Reasons of the necessity.
(...).

1. The first is taken from the Majesty of that God, 1.
to whose presenee we approach. Lord what prodigious state did Ahashuerosh, an
earthly Prince stand upon, Esther. 7.12. The woman that was thought fit to be
his wife, must be purified twelve months before, six months with the oil of
myrrh, and six months with sweet odours; Behold a greater than Ahashuerosh is
here; and therefore those that come to his Table, must seriously examine and
prepare themselves before.

2.
2. From the great profit which we receive thereby if we come prepared.

3.
3. From the grievousnesse of the punishments if we be unworthy Receivers: The
Sacrament is not like to those harmless Receipts, (as innocent as the
Prescribers are simple) which some good old women give sick people, which if
they do no good, do no harm; but this is a true maxim, To him to whom the
Sacrament is not Heaven, it is hell: If it brings not profit, and spiritual
grace, it draws great plagues and punishments on us.

Examine himself. A Christians eyes, ought to be turned inward, and chiefly
reflected on himself: yet how many are there, whose home is to be always
abroad; It is a tale of the wandering Jew, but it is too much truth of many
wandering Christians, whose thoughts are never resident on their own souls, but
ever searching and examining of others: These say not with the soldiers, Luke
3.14. And what shall we do? but are questioning always, as S. Peter is of
John, Ioh. 21.21. And what shall this man do?

Yet a man's examining of himself excludes not his examination of those who are
committed to his care and charge; as Pastors examining such young people, as
according to the orders of the Church they are to catechize. As for that
Father, who tries his wife and children, he still examineth himself.

Two sorts of people are unfit to receive. 1. Those that wilfully will not
examine themselves. 2. Those that cannot by reason of their want of age, or
some other impotency.

Yea children which are old enough to conceive the words of a Minister, yet as
yet not of age to partake of the Sacrament. Think not that the Church makes
ciphers of you, and esteems you of no account, you are heirs apparent to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, none can hinder you from it; yet during your
minority thy Church is your Guardian, and carefully keeps that treasure for
you, till you come of age, provided you carefully learn your Catechism, to be
able to answer your Minister. But I will turn my Precepts to you into prayers
for you, and so wish you good success in the name of the Lord.

In examining of this word Examine, learned men run in three several streams,
some prosecute the Metaphor of a Goldsmiths, searching the purity of his gold,
(...), being a proper word to them in their mystery, 1 Pet. 1.7. (...), That
the trial of your faith being much more precious then of gold that perishes,
though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, etc. Others because
bread and wine to be taken in the Sacrament, are both food and physic, please
themselves best to insist on the similitude of a Physician, giving preparatives
to his patients before he receives the physic. A third sort make Examine here
to be Verbum forense and juridicum, as Magistrates question offenders, and
therefore choose to follow that resemblance: David was in a great strait,
betwixt three evils; I am in a straight betwixt three goods, not knowing which
to choose: how ever we will follow the latter as most consonant to the Apostles
sense.

A man in examining himself, must personate three, and act three several
parts. 1. The part of the Offender. 2. Of the Accuser. 3. Of the Judge. The
part of the Accuser, may be well performed by that faculty of the soul, which is
called Conscience; for besides her office, to be the Regester and Recorder of
the soul, and Remembrancer of the acts thereof; It is also the Attorney
General of the King of Heaven in our hearts, to press the evidence against us
after the indictment. As for our reason and judgment, that must supply the
office of a Judge, Et secundum allegata and probata, acquit or condemn us.

But here it is to be feared, men will be partial to themselves in two
respects; first in not giving their conscience fair play: they will not give it
that liberty Agrippa granted to S. Paul, Act. 26.1. Thou art permitted to speak
for thy self, but what in whole they cannot silence, they will in part disturb
and interrupt. 2. It is to be feared our judgment will not be upright, but as
S. Peter said to our Savior, (...), Master spare thy self, Propitius tibi
sit, Mat. 16.22. So our judgment will be partial, and favorable to us, as
foundred feet will never tread hard.

Wherefore because of this double suspicion of partiality; this is a sound and
safe Rule. Let us account our selves to be worse, than upon examination we
find ourselves to be: Thus did Saint Paul, 1. Cor 4.4. For I know nothing by my
self, yet am I not hereby justified, but he that judges me is the Lord. That
is, since his conversion, his conscience accused him of no great sin
unrepented; and yet hereupon he durst not pronounce himself to be innocent,
for God judges not as man judges, neither sees as man sees; but those who
are acquitted by themselves, may be condemned by him.

Seeing thus as it is said, a man is to act three parts, by the way we may
observe.

Doct
A Christian, though alone may make company for himself, Psalm 4.4. Commune
with your hearts in your Chamber, and be still, Psalm. 43.5. Why art thou so
heavy O my soul? why art thou, etc. One, (as we have said) may make himself
three, Offender, Accuser, Judge, so that he should never be less alone, then
when alone, being always in the company of heavenly Discoursers in himself:
Had men the art of these selfe-examinations, and Soliloquies, they need not (to
put away melancholy, as they pretend, and to avoid solitariness) repair to
the schools of drunkenness, there to seek for bad company, that there (to use
their own expression) they may drive away the time. Fools to drive away that
which is winged, and which though they should strive to stay, they cannot.

1. Now the Interrogatories; whereupon every man is to be examined, are these.
1. Whether thou do repair to receive the Sacrament, with a competent measure
of knowledge?

2. Whether do thou come with unfeigned Repentance for thy sins past? which
Repentance consists not so much in outward sorrow (for their faces may be
flints, whose hearts may be Fountains, their souls may drop blood, whose
eyes cannot shed tears) as in the inward contrition, and hatred of sin, and
shunning of it in the sequel of our lives.

3. Whether do thou come with a lively faith, relying upon God in Christ, for
the pardon of thy sins?

4. Whether do thou come with love undissembled, freely from thy heart to
forgive all injuries committed against thee? Some when they are to partake of
the Sacrament, say to their malice, as Abraham did to his two servants, Genesis
22.5. Abide you here, and I will go yonder, and worship, and come again to
you. They leave their injuries at the Church door, till they have received the
Lords Supper, and then returning make a resumption of them again: But let us
not only lop the bows, but grub up even the roots of our malice, not only
suspend the act, but depose the habit of our hatred.

And here as God said to the Jews, Ezekiel. 18.3. that they should have no
occasion any more to use that Proverb in Israel; The Fathers have eaten sower
Grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge; In like manner I could wish no
occasion, that the English byword be any more used, I forgive him, but I will
not forget him. Such people I dare say, neither forgive nor forget; like sluts,
they sweep the house of their heart, but leave all the dust still behind the
door; but let us not only break the teeth of our malice in forgiving, but
also pluck out the sting, which is still behind in the tail, and labor fully
to forget.

To these Interrogatories, some have added these additionals, which vertually
are contained in the former: Whether do thou come with an earnest desire, and
longing to be made partaker of these heavenly mysteries?

Whether do thou come with thankfulness to the God of heaven; for this his
great blessing?

Hereon let every one examine himself, I dare boldly say, none can decline the
answering to these interrogatories; not that common evasion, Non tenetur
respondere, as if they were not absolutely pertinent to the matter in hand, but
it concerns every one of us to make a punctual and direct answer thereunto.

Upon examination all will confess themselves guilty, except a dumb Devil,
or a Pharisaicall spirit has possessed any. Yet are there degrees of
guiltiness: Some are guilty that they have not these graces at all, but the
opposite vices in stead of them; in stead of knowledge ignorance. All the
reason Laban could render Jacob in cozening him with the elder sister for the
younger, was but pleading the custom of the country, Genesis 29.26. And this is
the best account some can give, why they receive the Sacrament: It is an old
ceremony, a fashion of their Forefathers, a custom of the Church, that young
men and maidens at such an age use to receive; and so of the rest; in stead of
repentance, obstinacy in sin, in lieu of faith unbelief, in place of charity,
malice, an indifferency for desire, and ingratitude for thankfulness; these in
no case must presume to receive, but tarry till these vices are amended, and
graces in some degree begotten in them.

Others are guilty, that though they have them in sincerity, yet they have them
not in perfection, these are bound to come to Gods table, his dainties are
provided properly for such guests, and by his blessing these holy mysteries may
work in them what is wanting, and strengthen what is weak. And to conclude, as
the father of the lunatic child cried out, Mar. 9.24. Lord I believe, help my
unbelief; so may the best of us all, when we come to communicate, call out
with tears, Lord I come with knowledge, help my want of knowledge, Lord I
come with repentance, help my want of repentance. Lord I come with faith, help
my want of faith. Lord I come with love, help my want of love, Lord I come, etc.

VERSE. 30. For this cause many are weak and sick among you, and many sleep.
RIght at this time, there raged and reigned in the Church of Corinth, an
Epidemicall disease; and my Apostle in my Text tells them the Fountain from
which it flowed, namely from the unprepared, and unreverent receiving of the
Sacrament. The words contain the punishment, and the cause thereof; I must
confess in the Heraldry of nature, the cause is to be handled before the
effect; but because the punishment being the effect, discovered it self first
while the cause was yet unknown, we will first treat thereof. The punishment
contains three steps to the Grave. 1. Weakness. 2. Sickness. 3. Temporal
death called sleep. Learn,

God inflicteth not the same punishment for all, but has variety of
correction. In his Quiver some Arrows are blunt, some sharp, and of these
some he draws half way, some to the head. And the Reason is, because there
are diverse degrees of men's sins, some sin out of Ignorance, others out of
Knowledge, some out of Infirmity, others of Presumption, some once, others
often, some at the seducing of others, others seduce others. God therefore does
not like the unskilful Empiricks, who prescribe the same quantity of the same
receipt at all times, to all ages, tempers and diseases. But wisely he varieth
his physic, few strips to those that knew not his will, and many stripes for
them, who knew his will, and did it not. Sometimes he shoots half canon,
weakness, sometime full canon sickness, sometimes murdering Pieces, death it
self.

Let us endeavor to amend, Use 1.
when God lays his least judgment upon us; let us humble our selves with
true Repentance under his hand, when he lays his little finger upon us, lest
we cause him to lay his loins on us: let us be bettered, when he scourges us
with rods, lest we give him occasion to Sting us with Scorpions, for light
punishments neglected, will draw heavier upon us.

Let Magistrates, Use 2.
and men in authority mitigate or increase the punishment, according to the
nature of the offense. Let there be as well the stocks for the Drunkard, the
house of correction for the idle Drone, the whip for the petty Lassoner, as the
brand for the fellon, and the Gallows for the Murderer. Let mercy improve it
self, to obtain, if not a pardon, yet a lighter punishment for those, in
whose faces are read the performance of present sorrovv, and promise of future
amendment. Let severity lay load on their backs, which are old and
incorrigable sins, so that there is more fear of their perverting others,
than hope of their converting. Then shall the gods in earth, be like to the God
in Heaven, and Magistrates here imitate the pattern, which God sets in my
Text. For probable it is, that those Corinthians, who are least offenders in
the irreverent receiving of the Sacrament, were punished with weakness, the
greater with sickness; the greatest of all with death temporal, called Sleep
in my Text.

The death of the Godly in Scripture language, is often styled sleep. And
indeed sleep and death are two twins; sleep is the elder brother, for Adam
slept in Paradise, but death lives longest; for the last enemy that shall be
destroyed is death. But some will object, was Saint Paul so charitably
opinioned to these Corinthians, as to think that they, some wereof were
drunken at the receiving of the Sacrament, that they slept; that is, dyed and
went to Heaven? me thinks so strong a charity argues too weak a judgment: I
answer, the Apostle had perceived in these men's lives, the strength of unfeigned
piety, and though God suffered them to fall into a sin of so high a nature, as
this must be confessed to be, yet Saint Paul did Christianly believe, that this
sin by Repentance, and faith in Christ was pardoned, and their souls
eternally saved. Let us measure the estates of men after death, by the rule of
their lives; and though we see some commit grievous sins; yea such sins
for which they are brought to exemplary death (perchance by the orderly
proceeding of the Law) yet withal, if we had known, that the drift and scope
of their lives had been to fear God, we may and must charitably conceive of
their final estate, and that with the Corinthians in my Text, they are fallen
asleep. So much for the punishment, we come now to the cause. For this cause
many are weak.

All sicknesses of the body proceed from the sin of the soul: I am not
ignorant that the Lethurgy arises from the coldness of the brain, that the
dropsy flows from waterish blood, in an ill affected Liver, that the spleen
is caused from melancholy wind, gathered in the midriffe; but the cause of all
these causes, the Fountain of all these Fountains is the sin of the soul.
And not only the sins, which we have lately committed, and still lie fresh
bleeding on our consciences, but even those which we have committed long ago,
and which process of time has since scarred over, Job 13.26. For thou writest
bitter things against me, and make me possess the sins of my youth. So
that Job being gray is punished for Job being green; Job in the autumn of his
age, smarts for what he has done in the spring of his age; and as those which
have been given to violent exercises in their youth, when they are old read
the admonitions of their former folly in the aches of their bones; so they who
have prodigally ryoted their youth out in vicious courses, in their old age
find the smart of it in their weak and diseased bodies. Do we then desire to
lead our old age in health, I know no better preservative, or diet drink can
be prescribed, then in our youth to keep our souls from sin; for now we sow
the seeds of health or sickness, which perchance we shall reap twenty years
after.

Quest.
But how came Saint Paul to know that this sickness of the Corinthians
proceeded from the irreverent receiving of the Sacrament, especially sithence
there were four other grand sins, which then reigned in their Church, each
whereof upon hew and cry, might be taken as suspicious, to be the cause of this
disease. 1. Factious affecting of one Minister above another, to the disgrace
of God and the Gospel, 1 Corinthians, 1.12. Now this I say, that every one of
you says, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I am of Cephas, and I am of Christ. 2.
Suffering an incestuous person husband to his mother, and son to his wife, to
live amongst them without public penance and punishment: For though this
incest, as it was committed but by one man, was but a particular and personal
sin, yet as it was connived at, and not punished, it began gangreenlike to
spread, and leaving its nature of personality, it entitled it self to be a
public general Church-sin of the Corinthians. 3. Going to law one with
another under heathen Judges, 1 Cor. 6.1. Dare any of you, having business
against another be judged by the unjust, and not by the Saints? 4. Denying the
Resurrection of the body, 1 Cor. 15.12. How say some among you, that there is
no Resurrection of the dead? Sithence therefore at the same time, the
Corinthians were guilty of factious affecting of their Ministers, going to law
under Pagan Judges, suffering an incestuous person to live amongst them
unpunished, denying of the Resurrection of the body; why might not Saint Paul
think, that any one, or all of these might be the cause of this disease in the
Church of Corinth, as well as the irreverent receiving of the Sacrament?

Because this sin was the sin paramount, Answ.
like Saul, higher then his fellows, from the shoulders upwards, the other
four sins were felony, robbing God of his glory; but the irreverent receiving
of the Sacrament, was high treason against the person of Christ, and so against
God himself. The other for sins were Tetrarchs reigning over the Corinthians;
but this was as Augustus the Emperor over the Tetrarchs more conspicuous then
any of the rest. Learn we then, that though God of his goodness may be pleased
graciously to pardon, and pass by sins of an inferior nature and meaner alloy,
yet he will not hold them guiltless, and let them escape unpunished, who
irreverently receive the body and blood of his Son. This stentor sin shouts
in Gods ears for revenge. Saint Anselme says, that many diseases that reign
in the summer (though Physicians may impute them to other second causes)
proceeds from peoples irreverent receiving the Sacrament at Easter.

Answ. 2.
Because the Apostle perceived some resemblance, betwixt the sin committed, and
the punishment inflicted. For as a Physician when he comes to his Patient, and
finds him strangely affected, so that the disease puzles al his rules of art to
reduce it to some natural cause, then he will be ready to suspect, that his
Patient has eaten some poison, which has strangely invenomed the estate of
his body; so Saint Paul seeing the Corinthians to be punished, with a strange
and unusual sickness (some conceive it was the plague) presently suspected,
that they had eaten some poysenous thing, and on inquiry he finds that it was
the Sacrament irreverently received: It being just with God to turn that which
was appointed to be preservative for the soul, to prove poison to the body,
being not received with due preparation. And here I may adventure upon a
profitable discourse, how a man in his sickness may come to know the very
particular sin, for which God has inflicted that sickness upon him. It is not
a mere curiosity, which will afford the ground work of much good meditation;
nor an impossibility, though a difficulty to arrive at the knowledge of it:
Wherefore let a man in such a case summon all his great sins to make a
personal appearance in his memory, and not only those of the last edition,
but even those whose impression is almost out of the date of his memory, such
as were committed long ago in his youth: This done, all the matter will be to
find out, which is the veriest sin for which God punishes him at that time;
and here I must confess my candels to be but dim, but I will light the more of
them.

First, Rea 1.
see to which sin the punishment thou suffer, bears the most proportion of
resemblance, for God commonly punishes like with the like. Thus one may see
Gods hand in the cutting of one of Adonibezecks fingers, he being served, as
he had served 72. Kings. And thus King Ioram, who had cruelly slaughtered his
brethren on a stone, was troubled with an incurable disease, that his bowels
fell out, and just it was that he should have no bowels, that had no compassion.

2. See if thou can not find some proportion in the disproportion, 2.
and likeness in the unlikenes of some sin to this punishment; God often times
punishing by the contrary. Thus those who out of niceness, and curiosity, have
took more then comes to the share of a corrupt creature, are commonly sent to
their graves, by some nasty and loathsome disease; as proud Herod, whom the
worms impatient to stay so long, till death had dished him for their palate,
devoured him alive.

3. Something may be gathered from the place or part, wherein the disease
lies; For if it be in the eyes, it is probable, its inflicted for the shooting
out of lustful and lascivious glances, or looking with envious and covetous
sight on the means of others; if in the ears, for giving audience to wanton
sonnets, or for being over credulous in the hearing ill reports of others; if
in the tongue, for lying, swearing, etc.

4. See whether Chronology, or the time wherein the sickness seizes upon
thee, will not something advantage thee, for the discovering the cause thereof.
Thus as one observes, the Lord Hastings was beheaded at London, that very
selfsame day twelve-moneth, yea the same hour; and if curiosity may go
further, the same minute, wherein he had conspired the death of the Queens
kindred at Pomfret Castle.

5. Consider what sin it is, for the committing whereof thou have conceived
the least sorrow. For though we can never be condignly sorry for our least
sin, yet we may be more penitent for one sin, than for another, and that
sin which has cost us the slightest and shallowest Repentance, is most
likely to be the cause of our present sickness.

6. Hearken chiefly to the Indictment of thy conscience; for when we hunt
after that sin, which causes our disease, and we find our selves to be either
at a loss, or at a cold sent, if once our conscience begin to spend her open
mouth, we may certainly conclude, that the game went that way, and that that
is the very sin for which at that time we are punished. Thus the Patriarks,
Genesis 42 21. Said one to another, we have verily sinned against our Brother, in
that we saw the anguish of his soul, where he besought us, and we would not
hear, therefore is this evil fallen upon us. Reuben did not impute it to the
defiling of his Fathers bed, nor Judah to his Incest, nor Simeon and Levi to
their murdering of the Shechemites, for these were but personal sins; but
all jointly agreed, that it was for their cruelty to their Brother, a sin
wherein all they were equally engaged, as they were equally inwrapt in the
punishment.

If by these or any other means we attain to the knowledge of that particular
sin, for which we are punished; let us drown that sin in penitent tears,
and in the blood of our Savior; but if we cannot find it out, let us imitate
the example of Herod, Mat. 2. Who that he might make sure work to kill our
Savior, slew all the children in Bethelem, and the country about it, from two
years old and under; a plot probable to have taken effect, if heaven had not
been too wise for hell. In like manner, let us indifferently, and impartially
repent for all our sins in general: if we know not which was the Be that
stung us, let us throw down the whole Hive; if we know not which was the
thorn, that pricked us, let us cut down the whole hedge, and so we shall be
sure that sin shall not escape, which has caused our present sickness.

Now whereas God might have tumbled the Corinthians down into hellfire, for
their irreverent receiving of the Sacrament, and yet was pleased to inflict on
them bodily weakness and sickness, and death, we learn.

God oftentimes with his Saints commuteth eternal torments into temporal
punishments. He is therefore angry in this world, that he might not be angry
in the world to come, Et misericorditer adhibet temporalem paenam, ne just
inferat aeternam ultionem. If any object, but why will God pardon talents, and
not tokens, pounds, but not pence; and for Christ's sake forgive, and strike off
eternal torment, and yet not cross the score of temporal punishment? I
answer, 1. To make us take notice that we have been offenders. 2. That by
feeling the smart of what he inflicteth on us, we may be the more sensible
of his favor, how much pain he has forgiven us. 3. To make us more wary and
watchful in time to come. But far be it from us, to conceive that there is
any satisfactory, or expiatory power in the afflictions which we suffer.
Satisfaction for sin could not be but once, and once was fully made, when
Christ offered himself upon the Cross.

Let us therefore learn patience under Gods afflicting hand, when he lays
any sickness upon us. Solomon said to Abiathar, 1 King. 2.26. Get thee to
Anathoth, to thine own fields, for thou art worthy of death; but I will not at
this time put thee to death, because thou barest the Arc of my Lord God before
David my Father: Thus God deals with us, when he might justly deprive us of
our life, yea of our eternal life; yet if we have borne his Arc, if we can
plead any true reference, or relation to Christ our Savior; God will be
graciously pleased, not to take away our lives, but only to send us to our
Anathoth, to confine us to our beds, to keep us his close Prisoners, and only
to deprive us of our health, pleasure and delight. Let us therefore patiently
endure the aching of the teeth; we have all deserved the gnashing of the teeth.
Let us patiently endure a burning Fever; for we have all deserved Hellfire.
Let us (...) a bodily Consumption; for we have deserved to be consumed, and
brought to nothing.

GROWTH IN GRACE.
1 PET. 2.18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior,
Jesus Christ.


1 PHilosophers make a double growth. One per aggregationem materiae, by
gayning of more matter: Thus Rivers grow by the accession of tributary Brooks;
heaps of Corn wax greater by the addition of more grain; and thus stones
grow, as some would have it, though this more properly be termed an
augmentation, or increase then a growth. The other per intro receptionem
nutrimenti, by receiving of nourishment within, as plants, beasts, and men
grow. Of the latter growth, we understand the Apostle in the Text, and will
prosecute the Metaphor of the growth of vegetables, as that which the Holy
Spirit seems most to favor, and intend in these expressions.

2. Here is one thing presupposed in the text, and laid down for a foundation;
namely, that those to whom S. Peter writes, were already rooted in grace and
goodness. These must be an Unit at least, before any multiplication, a Basis
before any building upon it: no doubt they were such as to whom S. Paul writes,
Ephesians. 3.18. (...), Being rooted and grounded in love, such as the Colossians
were, Col. 2.7. Rooted in Christ, and established in faith. And such I trust
you are, to whom my discourse is directed, or else it were in vain for me, or
any to give you instructions for Growth in Grace.

Object.
3. But why is it said in the Text, first in Grace, and then in Knowledge; this
seems to be an (...), the Lantern is to go first, Knowledge is to be the
Usher of Grace, information in the understanding must go before reformation in
the will and affections.

Answ.
I could answer, the holy Spirit is no whit curious in marshalling these graces,
which he puts first, they need no herald to show their pedigree, which will
not fall out for precedence. But to the point, their is a twofold knowledge,
one precedent grace, as disposing one thereto, and making capable thereof; the
other subsequent, and is an effect thereof, and a reward of it through Gods
mercy. These that have gracious hearts do daily better, and improve their
knowledge, in matters of salvation, and some herein arrive at a great height,
as David, Psa. 119.99. I have more understanding than al my teachers, for thy
testimonies are my meditations. 4 However see the Apostle puts grace and
Knowledge together, What God has joined, let no man put asunder. We must grow
according to both demensions, both in height, in knowledge, and in breadth, in
piety, both in head and in heart, both in speculation and practice, we must not
all run up in height, like an Hoppole, but also burnish, and spread in breadth,
then shall we be well proportioned and complete, and indeed practice without
knowledge is blind, and knowledge without practice is lame.

5. Three things are required to make a plant to grow; first that it has life
within it. Thus the Christian must have in his soul a quickening vivifying
faith. Secondly it must be watered in a man with the dew of Gods Word, Isa.
55.10. For as the rain comes down, and the snow from heaven, and returns
not thither, but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, that it
may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater, so shall my word be that
goes forth out of my mouth, etc. And the same allegory is followed by Moses,
Deuteronomy. 32.2. My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distill as the
dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass.
Thirdly, the blessing of God is requisite, without which both the former are
nothing worth; Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but God gives the
increase. It was observed of Master Greenham, that painful and zealous
Preacher of Gods Word; that though he was very industrious in his calling, yet
his people still remained most ignorant; and as one says, Greenham had
Pastures green,
But sheep full lean.


So true it is, that Gods blessing is the Key of the work, without which all
is but labor in vain.

6. Now we may take notice of two remarkeables in the growth of a Christian.
First plants have their (...), their bounds, both in height and breadth set by
nature: (Hither shall thou come and no further) to which when they have
attained they grow down-ward, and wax less; yea all sublunary things, Habent
suos terminos, quo cum venerint sistunt retrocedunt ruunt. But growth in grace
admits of no such period, but still there is Plus ultra: What Saint Paul says,
Pray continually, rejoice evermore, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. is as true of spiritual
growth, grow continually, increase evermore, never stop nor stay in grace, till
thou come to glory. Secondly, trees dote as well as men in their old age;
yea then they are barren, and bring forth little or no fruit; whereas
Christians on the contrary, Psalm. 92.13.14. That be planted in the house of
the Lord, shall flourish in the Court of our God, they shall still bring forth
fruit in old age: They shall be fat and flourishing. Like wine, they are best
when they are oldest; like Caleb, able and active men, even at four-score years
of age.

7. Come we now to set down those things, which do either in part hinder, or
in whole destroy men's growth in Grace. For the first let us take heed of
Suckers in our soul, such superfluous excrementall sprigs, which like so many
thieves, steal away the nourishment, which should maintain the tree. By these
Suckers we may understand those felonious avocations of worldly employments,
which either out of season, or out of measure, busy our souls in earthly
things, when they should be employed in heavenly matters. The only way to
prevent this mischief, is to prune and cut off these Suckers, and speedily to
stop up these Emissaries, by out-lets and private sluices, lest they drain dry
the very main channel of grace in our hearts.

8. As for destroyers of grace it is twofold: first the blighting or blasting
of a conscience-wasting sin: Thus drunkenness and Incest destroyed grace in
Lot for that very instant, till he recovered himself again by unfeigned
repentance. Secondly, the drowth, and scorching heat of persecution. How
promising a Plant? what a shoot in Goodness did he give on a sudden, who said
to our Savior, Master I will follow thee whether soever thou go? But how
quickly was he withered with one scorching beam, when Christ told him, how
hard service he must undergo?

9 Observe by the way: There is a double rooting in Grace, the one a sound and
sure one, the other but shallow and superficial: The former rooting belongs to
the Saints of God, and these though they may be blighted with sin, or
scorched with persecution, yet still as I may say, there is a secret sprig of
life in the root, though in outward appearance, the leaves and bows may seem
quite dead, and in Gods due time they grow out of their sins by repentance, out
of their afflictions by patience. Let us therefore take heed of being too
tyrannical, in passing sentence of condemnation upon them before the time.
Cambd. Brit. in Northumberland.
Scotus that famous Schoole-man being in a strong fit of an Apoplexy, was by
the cruel kindness of his over officious friends, buried before he was dead.
Many over hasty in their uncharitable censures, seeing one fallen into a sin,
bury him alive in their judgments, counting him a Castaway and Reprobate,
when by Gods mercy, and his own repentance he may recover again, as still
retaining in his heart some sparks of spiritual life. As for the wicked,
which have only a superficial hold in grace, rather sticked than rooted in
it; we see what our Savior says of them, Mat. 13.4. And forthwith they
sprung up, because they had no deepenesse of earth; and when the sun was up
they were scorched, and because they had not root they withered away. They were
quite dried up, and here made fuel for hell, never recovering themselves any
more; whereas the godly, though they seem dead in the winter, they may grow
again next spring. Use 1.


10. This Doctrine if applied, serves to confute many: First, those that grow
backward in grace, and are worse now, then they were seven years before; like
the Galatians, You have run well, who hindered you? Secondly, those who stand
still in goodness; like those women, whereof the Apostle complayneth, that
they were Ever learing, and never come to the knowledge of the truth. Thirdly,
those that grow, but not proportionably to the long time, wherein they have
been planted, the fat soil wherein they have been set. The long time wherein
they have been planted, Heb. 5.12. For when for the time ye ought to be
teachers, you have need that one teach you again, which be the first
principles of the Oracles of God, and are become such as have need of milk,
and not of strong meat. The fatness of the soil wherein they have been set,
and plenty of water powered on them, and herein no country comes near to ours;
and therefore we are most unexcusable, if we grow not in grace. Outlandish
men call our Island the Rainy Island; because we have such plenty thereof,
arising of the store of vapors, from the vicinity of the sea. They call it
also the Ringing Island, because it has bells, so many and so tuneable; I am
sure without flattering it maybe thus called in an higher sense, the dew of
Gods Word is no where powered more plentifully, and we have (God increase their
number) many and melodious bells, tuneable amongst themselves, and loud-sounding
the Word of God to others: Most heavy therefore will be our account, if we
yield not some proportionable growth in grace, to these great means God affords
us.

11 Now in examining themselves, I find three sorts of men to be deceived. Some
account themselves to be grown in grace when they are not: others esteem
themselves to be not grown, when they are. Of the former some account
themselves to be improved in goodness, when God takes from them the ability
to commit sin they had formerly. An old man says, I thank God I am grown
in grace: well, how shall this appear? Thus, says the old man: Twenty years
ago I was given to lust and wantonness; now I have left it. Alas he puts a
fallacy on his own soul; for the sin has left him, his moisture is spent,
his heat abated, and he disabled from performing the task of wickedness. So
the Prodigal, who has spent his estate, hugs himself in his own happiness,
that now he is grown in grace; because he has left Vanity in clothes,
Curiosity in diet, Excessivenesse in gaming; when alas needs must the fire go
out, when the fuel is taken away; he is not grown in grace, but decreased in
estate. Others construe it to be growth of grace in themselves, when only God
takes away from them the temptations to sin. He that living in a populous
place was given to drunkenness, who now being retired to a private Village,
takes himself to be turned very sober. Alas, it is not he that is altered,
but his place, he wants now (a want with gain) a crew of bad good fellows to
solicit him to the tavern; but had he the same temptation; let him examine
himself, whether he would not be as bad, as ever he was before.

A third sort count themselves, grown in grace, when they have not left, but
only exchanged their sin; and perchance a less for a greater: Thou that
abhorrest Idols, committest thou sacrilege? Romans 2. Some think themselves
improved in piety, because they left prodigality, and reele into Covetousness:
left Profaneness, and fallen into spiritual Pride, or peevish affecting of
outside holiness. Thus like the Sea, what they loose in one place, they gain
in another, and are no whit grown in Grace.



So a Christian newly regenerated, and brought out of the dark state of
nature, into the life of grace, is more apprehensive at the first illumination,
of the knowledge he receives, than of far greater degrees of knowledge which
he receives afterward.

14. Some think they have less grace now, Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa
pecunia crescit; So is there an holy, heavenly, and laudable covetousness of
grace, which deceives the eye of the soul, and makes a great deal of
goodness seem but a little.

15 Many think they are grown less and Non sequitur, for though it be the
same temptation in kind, it may not be the same in degree and strength; thou
may still be as valiant, yet thy enemies may conquer thee, as assaulting
thee with more force and fury: when thou were newly converted, God proportioned
the weight to the weakness of thy soldiers, bound up the Devil, that he
should set upon thee with no more force, than thou could resist and subdue.
Now thou have gotten a greater stock of

16 Some think grace is less in them now than it was at their first
conversion, because they find not in their souls, such violent flashes, such
strong impetuous (I had almost said) furious raptures of goodness, and flashes
of grace and heavenly illumination: But let them seriously consider, that these
raptures which they then had, and now complain they want, were but fits short
and sudden, Nimbus erat, cito preterijt, not settled and constant, but such as
quickly spent themselves with their own violence: Whereas grace in them now may
be more solid, reduced, digested, and concocted: Bos lassus fortius figit
pedem, more slow, but more sure, less violent, but more constant; though grace
be not so thick at one time, yet now it is beaten and hammered out to be
broader and longer; yea I might add also, it is more pure and refined: This we
may see in Saint Peter, when he was a young man in a bravery, he would walk on
the water, yea and so daring was he in his promises; Though all forsake thee,
yet will not I: But afterward in his old age he was not so bold and daring;
experience had not only corrected the rankness of his Spirit, but also in some
sort quenched, surely tempered the flashes of his zeal for the
adventurousnesse of it; yet was he never a whit the worse, but the better
Christian, though he was not so quick to run into danger, yet he would answer
the spur when need required, and not flinch for persecution, when just occasion
was offered; as at last he suffered martyrdom gloriously for Christ.

17 To conclude; Grace in the good Thief on the Cross, like Ionah's Gourd,
grew up presently, for he was an extraordinary example; but in us it is like
the growth of an Oak, slow and insensible; so that we may sooner find it
crevisse, then crescere, it must therefore be our daily task all the days of
our lives; to which end let us remember to pray to God for his blessing on us:
our Savior says, Matthew. 6.27. Which of you by taking care is able to add one
cubit unto his stature in the corporal growth? Much less able are we in the
spiritual growth, to add one inch or hairs breadth to the height of our
souls. Then what was pride in the Builders of Babel, will be piety in us,
to mount and raise our souls so high, till the top of them shall reach to
Heaven. Amen.

HOW FAR EXAMPLES ARE TO BE FOLLOVVED.
RVTH. 1.15. And Naomi said, behold thy sister in Law is gone back unto her
people, and unto her gods, return thou after thy sister in Law.


IN these words Naomi seeks to persuade Ruth to return, alleging the example
of Orpah, who as she says was gone back to her people, and to her gods; where
first we find that all the Heathen, and the Moabites amongst the rest did not
acknowledge one true God, but were the Worshippers of many gods; for they made
every attribute of God to be a distinct Deity. Thus in stead of that attribute,
the wisdom of God, they fained Apollo the God of wisdom; in stead of the
power of God, they made Mars the God of power; in stead of that admirable
beauty of God, they had Venus the Goddess of beauty: But no one attribute was
so much abused, as Gods Providence. For the Heathen supposing, that the whole
world, and all the creatures therein was too great a Diocese to be daily
visited by one, and the same Deity; they therefore assigned sundry gods to
several creatures. Thus Gods Providence in ruling the raging of the seas, was
counted Neptune; in stilling the roaring wind Aeolus in commanding the powers
of Hell Pluto; yea sheep had their Pan, and Gardens their Pomona; the Heathens
then being as fruitful in faigning of gods, as the Papists since in making of
Saints.

Now because Naomi used the example of Orpah, as a motive to work upon Ruth to
return; we gather from thence. Examples of others set before our eyes, are
very potent and prevalent Arguments, to make us follow and imitate them,
whether they be good examples, so the forwardness of the Corinthians to
believe the Jews, provoked many: or whether they be bad, so the dissembling of
Peter at Antioch, Drew Barnabas and others into the same fault: But those
examples of all others are most forcible with us, which are set by such who are
near to us by kindred, or gracious with us in friendship, or great over us in
power.

Let men in eminent places, as Magistrates, Ministers, Fathers, Masters, (so
that others love to dance after their Pipe, to sing after their Music, to
tread after their tract) endeavor to propound themselves examples of piety,
and religion to those that be under them.

When we see any good example propounded unto us, let us strive with all
possible speed to imitate it: what a deal of stir is there in the world for
civil precedence and priority, every one desires to march in the Forefront,
and thinks it a shame to come laging in the Rear-ward. Oh that there were such
an holy ambition, and heavenly emulation in our hearts, that as Peter and John
ran a race, who should come first to the grave of our Savior, so men would
contend, who should first attain to true mortification; and when we see a good
example set before us, let us imitate it, though it be in one, which in outward
respects is far our inferior: shall not our Masters be ashamed, to see that
their men, whose place on earth is to come behind them, in piety toward Heaven
to go before them? shall not the Husband blush to see his Wife, which is the
weaker vessel in nature, the stronger vessel in grace? shall not the elder
Brother dye his cheeks with the color of virtue, to see his younger Brother,
who was last borne, first reborne by faith, and the Holy Ghost? yet let him not
therefore envy his Brother, as Cain did Abel, let him not be angry with his
Brother, because he is better than himself, but let him be angry with
himself, because he is worse than his brother, let him turn all his malice
into imitation, all his fretting at him into following of him. Say unto him, as
Gehazi did of Naaman; As the Lord lives I will run after him: and although
thou can not overrun him, nor as yet over-looke him; yet give not over to
run with him, follow him, though not as Azael did Abner, hard at the heels;
yet as Peter did our Savior, a far off; that though the more slowly, yet as
surely thou may come to Heaven; and though thou were short of him while he
lived, in the race, yet thou shall be even with him when thou art dead, at the
mark.

When any bad example is presented unto us, let us decline and detest it,
though the men be never so many, or so dear unto us. Imitate Micaiah, 1 King.
22. to whom when the Messenger sent to fetch him, said, Behold now the words of
the Prophets, declare good unto the King with one mouth, let thy Word therefore
I pray thee be like to one of them; Micaiah answered, As the Lord lives,
whatsoever the Lord says unto me, that will I speak. If they be never so
dear unto us, we must not follow their bad practice: so must the son please
him that begot him, that he does not displease him that created him; so must
the wife follow him that married her, that she does not offend him that made
her; wherefore as Samson, though bound with new cords snapt them asunder, as
tow when it feels the fire; so rather then we should be led by the lewd
examples of those, that be near and dear unto us, let us break in pieces all
their engagements, relations whatsoever.

Now here it will be a labor, worthy discourse, to consider how far the
examples, even of good men in the Bible are to be followed. For as all
examples have a great influence on the practice of the Beholders, so especially
the deeds of good men registered in the Scripture (the Calendar of Eternity) are
most attractive of imitation.

We find in Holy Writ nine several kinds of examples. First kind of examples.
First Actions extraordinary, the doers whereof had peculiar strength, and
dispensation from God to do them. Thus Phineas in an heavenly fury killed
Cozbi and Zimri; Samson slew himself, and the Philistims in the Temple of
Dagon; Elias caused fire to descend on the two Captains of fifties; Elisha
cursed the children, the children of Bethel.

These are written for our instruction, Use of them.
not for our imitation, if with Elisha thou can make a Bridge over Jordan
with thy cloak, if with him thou can raise dead children, then it is lawful
for thee, with Elisha to curse thy enemies. If thou can not imitate him in
the one, pretend not to follow him in the other.

Abuse of them.
When men propound such examples for their practice, what is said is imputed to
Phineas for righteousness, will be imputed to us for Iniquity, if being
private men by a Commssion of our own penning, we usurp the Sword of Justice
to punish Malefactors.

Second sort.
Actions founded in the ceremonial Law, as Abraham's circumcising of Isaac,
Hezekiahs eating the Passover, Solomon's offering of sacrifices, etc.

Use of them.
We are to be thankful to God, that these shadows in Christ the substance are
taken away. Let us not therefore superstitiously feign, that the ghosts of
these Ceremonies may still walk, which long since were buried in Christ's grave.

Abuse of them.
By those who still retain them. Excellently Ignatius, Epist. ad Magnesios,
(...). Yea, we must forfeit the name of Christians, if we still retain such
old Rites. Let those who are admitted in the College of grace, disdain any
longer to go to the school of the Ceremonial Law, which truly may be called
the School of Tyrannus.

Third sort.
Actions which are founded in the Judicial Law, as punishing theft with
fourfold Restitution, putting of Adulterers to death, and raising up seed to
the Brother, etc.

These oblige men, Use of them.
to observe them so far, as they have in them any taste or tincture of a
Moral Law; and as they bear proportion with those Statutes, by which every
particular Country is governed. For the Judicial Law was by God calculated
alone, for the elevation of the Jewish Commonwealth. It suited only with the
body of their state; and will not fit any other Commonwealth, except it be
equal to Judea in all Dimensions. I mean in climate, nature of the soil,
disposition of the people, quality of the bordering Neighbors, and many other
particulars, amongst which the very least is cosiderable.

When men out of an over Imitativenesse of Holy Presidents, Abuse of them.
seek to conform all Countries to Jewish Laws. That must needs break, which
is stretched further, than God intended it. They may sooner make Saul's Armor
fit David, and David's Sling and Scrip become Saul, then the particular Statutes
of one Country, adequately, to comply with another.

Actions founded in no Law at all, Fourth sort.
but only in an ancient Custom, by God winked and connived at; yea tolerated
at the least wise not openly forbidden in precept, or punished in practice. As
Poligamy, in the Patriarchs having many wives. Indeed when God first made the
large volume of the world, and all creatures therein, and set it forth, Cum
regali privilegio, Behold all things therein were very good, he made one Eve
for one Adam. Poligamy is an Erratum, and needs an Index expurgatorius, being
crept in, being more than what was in the maiden copy: It was the Creature of
Lamech, no work of God.

Use.
We are herein to wonder at, and praise the goodness of God, who was pleased
herein to wink at the faults of his dear Saints, and to pass by their
frailty herein, because they lived in a dark age, wherein his pleasure was not
so plainly manifested.

Abuse of them.
If any in this bright sunshine of the Gospel, pretend as a plea for their
lust, to follow their example.

Fifth sort.
Doubtful examples, which may so be termed, because it is difficult to decide,
whether the Actors of them therein did offend or no: so that should a Jury of
learned Writers be empannelled to pass their verdict upon them, they would be
puzzelled, whether to condemn or acquit them, and at last be forced to find it
an Ignoramus. As whether David did well to dissemble himself frantic, thereby
to escape the cruelty of Achish, King of Gath. Whether Hushai did well, in
counterfeiting with Absalom, or whether therein he did not make Heaven to bow
too much to earth, I mean Policy to entrench upon Piety; and so in this act
was so good a Statesman, that he was a bad man.

Let us not meddle with imitation of these actions, Use of them.
that are so full of difficulty and danger, that our judgments therein may
easily be deceived: The sons of Barzillai, Ezr. 2.63. Because their
Genealogies were doubtful and uncertain, were put by the Priesthood, till a
Priest should rise up with Vrim and Thummim, by which we may understand some
especial man amongst them, who by Gods Spirit might be able to decide the
controversies, which were questioned in their pedigrees. So let us refrain
from following these doubtful examples, till (which in this world is not
likely to be) there arise an infallible Judge, which can determine in these
particulars, whether these actions were well done or no.

By such who though they have room enough besides, Abuse of them.
yet delight to walk on a narrow Bank, near the Sea, and have an itch to
imitate these doubtful Examples, wherein there is great danger of miscarrying.

Mixed examples which contain in them a double action, Sixth sort.
the one good, and the other bad, so closely couched together, that it is a
very hard thing to sever them. Thus in the unjust Steward, there was his
wisdom to provide for himself, which God does commend; and his wickedness,
to purloyne from his Master, which God cannot but condemn. Thus in the Hebrew
Midwives, Exodus 1. when they told the lie, there was in them, Fides mentis, and
fallacia mentientis, the faithfulness of their love to their Countrymen, and
the falsenesse of their lying to Pharaoh.

Use of them.
Behold, here is wisdom, and let the man that has understanding, discreetly
divide betwixt the Gold and the Dross, the Wheat and the Chafe; what he is
to follow and imitate, and what to shun and avoid. In the first year of the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, the students of Christ-Church in Oxford, buried the
bones of Peter Martyrs wife in the same Coffin, with the ashes of Fridswick a
Popish Saint, to this intent, that if Popery, (which God forbid) should ever
after over spread this land, Papists should be puzzled to part the ashes of a
supposed Heretic, from one of their canonized Saints. Thus in some actions of
Gods Saints in the Bible, which are of a mixed nature; wickedness does so
insensibly unite and incorporate it self with that that is good, that it is
very difficult to sever and divide them without a sound, and well advised
Judgment.

In such as leave what is good, Abuse of them.
take what is bad, follow what is to be shunned, shun what is to be
followed.

Actions absolutely bad, Seventh sort.
so that no charitable Comment can be fastened upon them, except we will
incur the Prophets curse and woe, To call good evil, and evil good; such
were the Drunkenness of Noah, the Incest of Lot, the lying of Abraham, the
swearing of Joseph, the Adultery of David, the Denial of Peter.

Let us read in them first a Lecture of our own Infirmity: Use of them.
who dare warrant his Armor for proof, when David's was shot through?
Secondly, let us admire and laud Gods mercy, who pardoned and restored these
men on their unfeigned Repentance. Lastly, let us not despair of pardon our
selves, if through Infirmity over taken, God in like manner is merciful to
forgive us.

When men either make these their patterns, Abuse of them.
by which they sin, or after their sinning allege them for their excuse and
defense. Thus Judith did, Judith 9.2. For whereas that murder, which Simeon and
Levi did commit upon the Shechemites, Genesis 34.12. was cursed by Jacob, as a
most heinous and horrible sin; yet she propounds it as an heroic act, and
the unworthy President for her imitation: O Lord God of my Father Simeon, to
whom thou gave the Sword to take vengeance on the strangers, which opened the
womb of a Maid, and defiled her, etc. Well, if the Arm of Judith had been as
weak as her judgment was herein, I should scarce believe, that she ever cut
off the head of Holophernes.

Eighth sort.
Actions which are only good, as they are qualified with such a circumstance,
as David's eating the Shewbread in a case of absolute necessity; which
otherwise was provided for the Priests alone. Such are the doing of servile
works on the Lords day, when in case of necessity they leave off to be Opera
servilia, and become opera misericordiae.

Use of them.
Let us be sure, that in imitating of these, to have the same qualifying
circumstance, without which otherwise the deed is impious and damnable.

Abuse of them.
In those which imitate the example without any heeding, that they are so
qualified, as the action requires.

Ninth sort.
The ninth and last sort remains, and such are those, which are eminently good;
as the Faith of Abraham, the Meekness of Moses, the Valor of Joshua, the
Sincerity of Samuel, the plain Dealing of Nathaniel, etc. Follow not then the
Infidelity of Thomas, but the Faith of Abraham; the Testiness of Jonah, but
the Patience of Job; the Adultery of David, but the Chastity of Joseph; not the
Apostasy of Orpa, but the Perseverance of Ruth here in my Text.

AN ILL MATCH WELL BROKEN OFF.
1 JOHN 2.15. Love not the World.


THe Stoics said to their affections, as Abimelech spoke to Isaac, Genesis 26.16*
Get you out from amongst us, for you are too strong for us: Because they were
too strong for them to master, they therefore would have them totally banished
out of their souls, and labor to becalm themselves with an Apathy: But far
be it from us, after their example to root out such good herbs, (instead of
weeds) out of the Garden of our nature; whereas affections, if well used are
excellent, if they mistake not their true object, nor exceed in their due
measure. Joshua killed not the Gibeonites, but condemned them to be Hewers of
wood, and Drawers of water for the Sanctuary. We need not expel passions out
of us, if we could conquer them, and make Grief draw water-Buckets of tears
for our sins, and Anger kindle fires of zeal and indignation, when we see
God dishonored. But as that must needs be a deformed face, wherein there is a
transposition of the colors, the blewnesse of the vines being set in the lips,
the redness which should be in the cheeks, in the nose; so alas most misshapen
is our soul, since Adams fall, whereby our affections are so inverted, Joy
stands where Grief should, Grief in the place of Joy. We are bold where we
should fear, fear where we should be bold, love that we should hate, hate
what we should love. This gave occasion to the blessed Apostle in my Text, to
dissuade men from loving that, whereon too many dote. Love not the World.

For the better understanding of which words, know that the Devil goes about
to make an unfitting match, betwixt the soul of a Christian, on the one party,
and this world on the other. A match too likely to go on, if we consider the
simplicity, and folly of many Christians (because of the remnants of
corruption) easily to be seduced and inveagled, or the bewitching entising,
alluring nature of this world: But God by Saint John in my Text forbids the
banes, Love not the world.

In prosecuting whereof, we will first show the worthiness of a Christian
soul, then we will consider the worthlesnesse of the world, and from the
comparing of these two, this Doctrine will result that.

It is utterly unfitting for a Christian to place his affections on worldly
things.

Let us take notice of a Christians Possessions, and of his Possibilities; what
he has in hand, and what he holds in hope: In possession he has the favor
of God, the Spirit of Adoption, crying in him, Abba father, and many excellent
graces of sanctification in some measure in his heart. In hope and expectance
he has the reversion of Heaven and happiness, (a reversion not to be got
after another death, but his own) and those happinesses which eye cannot see,
nor ear hear; neither it can enter into the heart of man to conceive.

Now see the worthlesnesse of the World; three Load-stones commonly attract
men's affections, and make them to love, Beauty, Wit, and Wealth. Beauty the
world has none at all. I dare boldly say, the world put on her Holy Day
Apparel, when she was presented by the Devil to our Savior, Matthew. 4.9. She
never looked so smug and smooth before or since, and had there been any real
beauty therein, the Eagle-sight of our Savior would have seen it; yet when
all the glory of the world was proffered unto him, at the price of Idolatry,
he refused it. Yet as old Iezabel, when she wanted true beauty, stopped up the
leakes of age, with adulterated complexion, and painted her face; so the world
in default of true beauty decks her self with a false appearing fairness,
which serves to allure amorous fools, and (to give the world, as well as the
Devil her due) she has for the time a kind of a pleasing fashionablenesse:
But what says Saint Paul, 1 Corinthians. 7.31. (...), the fashion of this World
passes away: The wit of the World is as little as her beauty, how ever it may
be cried up by some of her fond Admirers; yet as it is, 1 Cor. 3.19. The
wisdom of this World is foolishness with God, and Cuilibet artifici
credendum est in sua art, what wisdom it self counts foolishnes, is folly
to purpose* her wealth is as small, as either what the world calls Substance, is
most subject to Accidents, uncertain, unconstant, even lands themselves in
this respect are movables, Riches make themselves wings, and fly away; they
may leave us whilst we live; but we must leave them when we dye.

Seeing then the World has so little, and the Christian foul so much; let us
learn a Lesson of Holy Pride, to practice heavenly Ambition. Descend not so
far O Christian, beneath thy self, remember what thou art, and what thou
have, loose not thy self in lavishing thy affections, on so disproportioned a
Mate: There is a double Disparity betwixt thy soul, and the world: first that
of Age. Perchance the world might make a fit mate for thy old Man, thy
Unregenerate half, thy Relics of sin; but to match the old, rotten,
withered, worme-eaten World, to thy new Man, thy new Creature, the regenerated
and renewed part of thy soul, gray to green, is rather a torture, then a
marriage, altogether disproportionable.

Secondly, that of quality or condition, thou art Gods Freeman: If I have
freed you, (says Christ) then are you free indeed, the world is, or ought to
be thy slave, thy vassaile, John 1.5.4. For whosoever is borne of God
overcommeth the world, and this is the victory that overcommeth the World, even
our faith. Be not then so base, as to make thy vassal thy mate. Alexander
denied to marry Darius his Daughter, though proffered unto him, scorning to be
conquered by her beauty, whose Father he had conquered by his valor. Let us
not make the world our Mistress, whereof we ought to be the Master, nor
prostitute our affections to a slave we have conquered.

Object.
Yea may some say this is good counsel, if it came in due season; alas now it
comes too late, after I have not only long doted, but am even wedded to this
world; Infant affection may be easily crushed, but who can tame an old and
rooted love: Think you that I have my affection in my hand, as Hunters their
dogs, to let slip or rate off at pleasure; how then shall I unlove the world,
which has been my bosom Darling so long.

Answ.
Art thou wedded to the World, then instantly send her a Bill of Divorce. It
need never trouble thy conscience, that match may be lawfully broken off, which
was first most unlawfully made: Yea, though were long before contracted to God
in thy Baptism, wherein thou did solemnly promise thou would Forsake the
Devil and all his works, the vain pomp and glory of this World. Let the
first contract stand; and because it is difficult for those, who have long
doted on the world, to unlove her; we will give some rules, how it may be
done by degrees. For indeed it is not to be done on a sudden, (matters of
moment cannot be done in a moment) but it is the task of a man's whole life,
Rules how to unlove the world.
til the day of his death.

1.
Look not with the eyes of covetousness, or admiration on the things of the
world. The eye is the principal Cinqueport of the soul, wherein love first
arrives, Vt vidi, ut perij; now thou may look on the things of the world,
Vt in transitu, as in passage (otherwise we should be forced to shut our eyes)
and we may behold them with a slighting neglectfull fastidious look; but take
heed to look on them with a covetous eye, as Eve on the forbidden fruit, and
Achan on the wedge of Gold. Take heed to look on them with the eye of
Admiration, as the Disciples looked on the Buildings of the Temple, Matthew. 24
1. wondering at the Eternity of the structure, and conceiving the Arch of this
World, would fall as soon as such stones riveted to immortality, might be
dissolved. Wherefore our Savior checketh them, Verily I say unto you, there
shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be cast down.
Excellently Job, chap. 31.1. I have made a Covenant with mine eyes, that I
should not behold a woman. A Covenant? But what was the forfiture, Jobs eyes
were to pay in case he brake it? It is not expressed on the band; but surely the
penalty is employed many brackish tears, which his eyes in repentance must
certainly pay, if they observed not the Covenant.

Silence, that Spokesman in thy bosom, I 2.
mean that allurements of the flesh and Devil, who improveth his utmost power
to advance a match betwixt thy soul and the world. And when any breach happens
between thee, and the world; so that thou art ready to cast her off, the flesh
in thy bosom pleads her cause: Why will thou (says it) deprive thy self of
those contentments, which the World would afford thee? Why do thou torment
thy self before thy time? Ruffle thy self in the silks of security, it will
be time enough to put on the Sackcloth or Repentance, when thou lie on thy
Deathbed. Hearken not to the Flesh, her Enchantments; but as Pharaoh charged
Moses, to get him out of his presence, he should see his face no more, Exodus
10.28. So strive as much as in thee lies to expel these fleshly suggestions
from thy presence, to banish them out of thy soul, at leastwise to silence
them, though the mischief is, it will be muttering, and though it dare not
hallow, it will still be whispering unto thee, in behalf of the world, its old
friend, to make a Reconciliation betwixt you.

3 Send back again to the world, the Love Tokens she has bestowed upon thee,
I mean those ill gotten goods, which thou have gotten by indirect, and
unwarrantable means. As for those goods, which thy parents left thee, friends
have given thee, or thou have procured by Heavens Providence on thy lawful
endeavors, these are no Love Tokens of the world, but Gods gifts; keep them,
use them, enjoy them to his glory: But goods gotten by VVrong, and Robbery,
Extortion and Bribery, Force and Fraud, these restore and send back: For the
world knows, that she has a kind of tie and engagement upon thee, so long
as thou keep her tokens; and in a manner thou art obliged in honor, as long
as thou detainest the gifts that were hers. Imitate Zacheus, see how he casts
back what the world gave him, Luke 19.8. Behold Lord, the half of my goods I
give to the poor, and if I have taken any thing from any man, by false
accusation, I restore him fourfold.

4. Set thy affections on the God of Heaven, the best wedge to drive out an old
love, is to take in a new, Postquam nos Amaryllis habet, Galataea reliquit:
Yea, God deserves our love first, because God loved us first, 1 John 4.19. It
is enough indeed to blunt the sharpest affection, to be returned with scorn
and neglect; but it is enough to turn Ice into ashes, to be first beloved by
one, that so well deserves love. Secondly, his is a lasting love, John 13.1.
Having loved his own that were in the world, he loved them to the end. Some
men's affection spends it self with its violence, hot at hand, but cold at
length; God's not so, it is continuing. It is recorded in the honor of our
Look Lord Bacon in his life.
King Henry, the seventh; that he never discomposed favorite, one only
excepted, which was William, Lord Stanly, a rare matter, since many Princes
change their Favorites, as well as their clothes, before they are old: But the
observation is true of the Lord of Heaven, without any exception; those who are
once estated in his favor, he continues loving unto them to the end.

Hark then how he woes us, Hoe every one, Esaias 55.1. that thirsts, come
ye to the waters, and he that has no money come, etc. How he woes us, Mat.
11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest. Love his Love-letter his Word, his Love Tokens, his Sacraments, his
Spokes-men, his Ministers, which labor to further the match, betwixt him and
thy soul. But beware of two things.

1. Take heed of that dangerous conceit, that at the same time thou may
keep, both God and the World, and love these outward delights, as a Concubine
to thy soul. Nay, God he is a jealous God, he will have all or none at all.
Munsters Cosmog. de Germ. l. 3. page 143.
There is a City in Germany, pertaining half to the Bishop thereof, and half
to the Duke of Saxony, who named the City Myndyn, that is, mine and thine;
because it was theirs Communi jure, and at this day by corruption it is called
Minden. But God will admit of no such divisions, he will hold nothing in
Coparceny, he will not share or part stakes with any, but he will have all
entire to himself alone.

Take heed thou do not only fall out with the world, to fall in with it
again, according to that, Amantium irae amoris redinte gratio est:
For even as some furious Gamesters, when they have a bad game, throw their
cards out of their hands, and vow to play no more, (not so much out of mislike
of gaming, as of their present game;) but when the cards run on their side,
they are reconciled to them again; so many men, when the world frowns on
them, and crosses them, and they miss some preferment they desire; then a
qualme of piety comes over their hearts, they are mortified on a sudden, and
disavow to have any further dealing with worldly contentments. But when the
world smiles on them again, favors and prospers them, they then return to
their former love, and doting upon it. Thus Demas 2 Timothy 4.10. would needs have
another farewell embrace of the world, even after his solemn conversion to
Christianity, Demas has forsaken me, having loved this present World. But when
we are once at variance with the world, let us continue at deadly eternal
feuds with it; and as it is said of Amnon, 2 Samuel 13.15. that the hatred
wherewith he hated his sister Thamar, was greater then the love wherewith he
loved her: so (what was cruelty in him, will be Christianity in us) once
fallen out with the world, let the joint be never set again, that it may be
the stronger; but let our hatred be immortal, and so much the stronger, by
how much our love was before.

GOOD FROM BAD FRIENDS.
2 SAMUEL 15.31 And one told David, saying, Achitophel is among the Conspirators
with Absalom.


THis Text is a Glass, wherein Gods Justice is plainly to be seen. David had
formerly falsely forsaken Vriah, and now God suffers Achitophel to forsake
David.

Vriah neither in loyalty, nor valor, though placed the last in the List, of
the List of David's Worthies, was any whit inferior to any of David's subjects.
How did he sympathize with God's Ark, and his fellow soldiers, stayed still
in the Camp, though he was in the Kings Court, in that he would not embrace
those delights, the Marriage Bed did afford him: No, though they practiced upon
him to make him drunk, yet in his drunkenness, he was so sober, that all
their wine washed not from him his first resolution, but he remained still
constant. But how falsely did David forsake him, sending him with that Snake in
his bosom, which was to sting him to death; I mean the Letter, which was
Vriahs Pasport, to his own Grave. Well Vriah placed much confidence in the love
of David, who deceives him; David with no less trust relyes on the loyalty of
Achitophel, and see what my Text says. And one told David, saying, Achitophel
is also among the Conspirators with Absalom.

Observe. 1.
Before we go farther, let us learn, when our friends forsake us, to enter
into a serious scrutinie of our own souls: Have thou never played foul or
false with thy friend; if not in action, yet in intention? Do thou not mean
to prove base, if put to the trial, and if occasion he offered to deceive him?
If so, know thy false friend has only got the start of thee, and played the
fore-game, doing what thou meanest to do. Rail not then on the times, nor
speak Satyrs against the faithlesnesse of men, but laying thy hand on thy
mouth, confess God has justly found thee out, and dealt with thee, as he did
with David.

Secondly, Observe. 2.
hence we may observe: The most politic heads have not always the
faithfullest hearts. Achitophel was the Jewish Nestor, or their Solomon before
Solomon, and like the Oracle of God for his wisdom, but like the Oracle of the
devil for his deceitfulness; for whilst David swaied the scepter, who more
loial to him then Achitophel, and once when David is in banishment, he falls
first to Absalom, he loved to worship the sun rising; yea whils David the true
sun was but over-cast with a cloud, he falls adoring that blazing star, that
Comet only fed with the evaporations of pride and ambition, which shined for a
while, and then went out in a stink.

Reasons why the most politic are not always the most faithful.

1. Because that cement which conglutinates hearts, and makes true friends
indeed, is Grace and Goodness, whereof many politic heads are utterly devoid, 1
Cor. 1.26. For ye see your calling Brethren, how that not many wise men after
the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called. 2. Politic men make
their own profit, the rule and square of their loves, they steer their course
by the pole star of their own good. And as in their actions, so in their
affections, have an invisible end to themselves, which begins where that end
ends, which is apparent to others.
Use.
Do not then undervalue and despise the love of those, who are of mean and
inferior parts; wise men have made use of such servants, and found them more
manageable, and more profitable, though their judgments were weaker, their
affections might be stronger, than wiser men.

Observe. 3.
Thirdly, observe. False friends will forsake thee in time of adversity. He
that believes, that all those who smile on him, and promise fair in time of
prosperity, will perform it in time of his want, may as well believe, that all
the leaves that be on trees at Mid-summer, will hang there as fresh, and as
fair on New-yeers day.

Come we now to consider, what good uses one may make to himself, from the
unfaithfulness of friends, when they forsake us.

1 First consider with thy self, whether thou have not been faulty, in
entertaining Talebearers, and lending a listening ear unto them: Solomon faith,
Prove. 16.28. A whisperer separateth chief friends. Whethersoever he comes,
he brings with him, the fire, fuel, and bellows of contention.

2 If herein thy conscience accuse thee not, examaine thy self, whether there
was not a Laesum principium, in the first initiation of your love: How came you
acquainted, whereout grew your amity, whereon was your intimacie grounded?
Did thou not first purchase his favor with the price of a sin? for know,
friends unjustly gotten, are not long comfortably enjoyed. Thus Absalom, by
sordid flattery stole the hearts of the Israelites, descending too much beneath
himself, 2 Samuel 15.5. As always ambitious spirits, when they would personate
Humility, over-act their part, and play baseness: We see King Hezekiah, who
procured Senacharibs love by his sacrilege, enjoyed not that purchase, which
he made God and his Temple pay for, 2 King. 18. 16. For Senacharib no sooner
received his money, but hoc non obstante, persisted in his former enmity and
hostility against the Jews, and as it follows in the very next verse, sent
up his Captains to besiege Jerusalem.

3. If there be no fault in the inchoation; Examine, has there been none in
the continuance of your friendship, have thou not committed many sins, to
hold in with him? If so, then it is just with God, he should forsake thee:
Thus Tyrants often times cut off those stairs, by which they climb up to
their Throne: Yea, good Princes have often times justly sacrificed those their
Favorites to the fury of the people, who formerly have been the active
Instruments to oppress the people, though to the enriching of their Princes.
Have thou not flattered him in his faults, or at least wise by thy silence
consented to him? If so, God has now opened thy friends eyes, he sees thy
false dealing with him, and has just cause to cast thee out of his favor.

When Amnon had defiled his sister Thamar, the Text says, 2 Samuel 13.15. that
the hatred wherewith he hated her, was greater than the love, wherewith he
loved her. Poor Lady, she was in no fault, not the cause, but only the
object, and the occasion of her brothers sin, and that against her will, by
his violence. Now to reason, A minore ad majus; If Amnon in cold blood viewing
the heinousness of his offense, so hated Thamar, which only concurred
passively in his transgression, how may our friends justly hate us, if happily we
have been the Causers, Movers, and Procurers of their badnesse. If we have
added fuel to the flame of their riot, played the Pandors to their lusts, and
spurred them on in the full speed of their wantonness, deserve we not (when
their eyes are opened, to see what foes we have been unto them, under pretended
Friendship) to be spit in the face, kik't out of their company, and to be
used with all contumely, and disgrace?

4. Have thou not idolatrized to thy friend? has he not totally monopolized
thy soul, so that thou have solely depended on him, without looking higher, or
further? Tu patronus, si deseris tu perimus. Thus too many wives anchor al
their hopes for outward matters, on their husbands, and too many children lean
all their weight on their Fathers shoulders; so that it is just with God, to
suffer these their wooden Pillars to break, on whom they lay too much heft.

5. Have thou not undervalued thy friend, and set too mean a rate and low an
estimate on his love? If so God has now taught thee, the worth of a Pearl, by
loosing it? And this comes often to pass, though not in our friends voluntary
deserting us, as Achitophel did David, yet in their leaving us against their
wills, when God takes them from us by death.

But here this question may be demanded; Quest.
whether is one ever again to receive him for his friend, and to restore him
to the old state of his favor, who once has deceived, and dealt falsely with
him?

Many circumstances are herein, Answ.
well to be weighed; first did he forsake thee out of frailty, and infirmity,
or out of mere spite and maliciousness? Secondly, has he since showed any
tokens, and evidences of unfeigned sorrow? has he humbled himself unto thee,
and beg Gods, and thy pardon? If he has offended mischievously, and persists
in it obstinately: O let not the strength of thy supposed charity, so betray
thy judgment, as to place confidence in him! Samson was blind, before he was
blind; the lust of Dalilah deprived him of his eyes, before the Philistims
bored them out, in that once and again being deceived by Dalilah, he still
relied on her word: But if he has showed himself such a Penitent, and thou
art verily persuaded of his Repentance, receive him again into thy favor.
Thus dealt our Savior with Saint Peter, Mark 16.7. But go your way, tell his
Disciples, and Peter, Peter especially; Peter that had sinned, and Peter that
had sorrowed, Peter that had denied his Master; but Peter that went out and
wept bitterly.

6. Sixthly, and lastly, it may be God suffers thy friends to prove
unfaithful to thee, to make thee stick more closely to himself: Excellent to
this purpose is that place, Mica. 7.5. Trust ye not in a friend, put ye no
confidence in a Guide, keep the doers of thy mouth from her, that lies in thy
bosom: For the Son dishonors the Father, the Daughter rises up against the
Mother, the Daughter in law, against her Mother in law; a man's enemies are the
men of his own house. But now mark what follows; therefore will I look unto
the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation. As if he had said, is the
world at this bad hand? is it come to this bad pass? That one must be far
from trusting their nearest friends; it is well then I have one fast Friend, on
whom I may rely, the God of Heaven. I must confess these words of the
Prophet, are principally meant of the time of Persecution, and so are applied
by our Savior, Mat. 10.21. However they contain an eternal truth, whereof
good use may be made at any time: Let us therefore, when our friends forsake
us, principally rely on God, who has these two excellent properties of a
friend; first he is near to us, so says the Psalmist, Thy name is near, and
this does thy excellent works declare: They have a speedy way, of conveying
Letters from Aleppo to Babylon, sending them by a winged Messenger, tied to the
legs of a Dove; but we have a shorter cut to send our prayers to God, by
sending our prayers by the wings of the Holy Spirit, that heavenly Dove,
whereby they instantly arrive in Heaven. As God is near to us, so he is ever
willing, and able to help us: On him therefore let us ever rely; and when
other Reeds bow or break, or run into our hands, let us make him to be our
staff, whereon we may lean our selves.

A GLASS FOR GLVTTONS.
ROMANS 13.13. Not in Gluttony.


THese words are a parcel of that Scripture, that converted Saint Augustine.
He, (as he confesses of himself) at the first was both erroneous in his
Tenets, and vicious in his life, when running on in full carreare in
wickedness, God stopped him with his voice from Heaven, Toll et lege; take up
thy Book, and read; and the first place which God directed his eye to, was
these words in my Text, and after this time being reclaymed, he proved a
worthy Instrument of Gods glory, and the Churches good. Now as those receipts
in Physic are best, which are confirmed under the Broad Seal of Experience,
and set forth with the privilege of Probatum est; so my Text may challenge a
priority, before other places of Scripture, because upon Record it has been
the occasion to convert so famous a Christian. Neither think, that the virtue
of these words, are extracted by doing of this one Cure, or that my Text with
Isaac, has only one blessing for him that came first, no by Gods blessing it
may be cordial, for the saving of our souls. To day therefore part of Samsons
Riddel shall be fulfilled in your ears: Out of the Devourer came meat, Gluttony
that vice, which consumes and devoureth food. The discourse thereof by Gods
assistance shall feed us at this time.

Not in Gluttony.
Doct
Gluttony is a dangerous sin for any Christian to be guilty of.

Rea.
Because humane Laws has provided no penalty for it. Men will be afraid to
commit petty Lassony, for fear of whipping; Felony for fear of branding,
Murder, for fear of hanging; worse sins, for fear of having a Grave, whilst
living. But it is too likely, that men will take leave and liberty to
themselves, to be Gluttons, presuming upon hope of Impunity, because man's Laws
have ordered no punishment for it; yet as those offenses are accounted the
greatest, which cannot be punished by a Con^^^^^, a Justice, or Judge of
Assize; but are reserved immediately to be punished by the King himself; so
Gluttons must needs be Sinners in an high degree, who are not censureable by
any earthly King, but are referred to be judged at Gods Tribunal alone.

Because it is so hard and difficult to discern; Rea. 2.
like to the Hecktick fever, it steals on a man unawares. Some sins come with
observation, and are either ushered with a noise, or like a snaile, leave a
slime behind them, whereby they may be traced, and tracted, as Drunkenness.
The Ephramites were differenced from the rest of the Israelites, by their
lisping, they could not pronounce H, which then was a heavy aspiration unto
them, when it cost the lives of so many thousands. Thus Drunkards are
distinguished from the Kings sober subjects, by clipping the coin of the
tongue. But there are not such signs and Symptoms of Gluttony. This sin
does so insensibly unite, and incorporate it self with our natural appetite,
to eat for the Preservation of our lives; that as Saint Lib. 30. Marat. ca.
28. ante medium.
Gregory says; It is a hard thing to discern, Quid necessitas petat, and quid
voluptas suppetat, quia per esum voluptas necessitati miretur: what is the full
charge of food, which nature requires for our sustenance, and what is that sure
charge, which is heaped by superfluity.

Rea. 3.
Because of the sundry dangers it brings; first to the soul, Luke 21.34. Take
heed lest your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting: And indeed the soul must
needs be unfitting to serve God, being so encumbered. That man has but an
uncomfortable life, who is confined to live in a smoaky house. The brain is
one of these places of the residence of the soul, and when that is filled with
streams, and vapors arising from unconcocted crudities in the stomach, the
soul must needs male habitare, dwell unchearfully, ill accommodated in so
smoaky a mansion. And as hereby it is unapt for the performance of good, so it
is ready for most evil, for uncleanness, scurrulity, ill speaking; this being
the reason, says Saint Gregory, why Dives his tongue, was so tormented in
Hell, because he being a Glutton, with his tongue had most dishonored God.
Secondly, this sin empaires the health of the body: the outlandish Proverb
says, That the Glutton digs his Grave with his own teeth, hastens his death
by his intemperance; For if there were a conflict in Rebeckaes body, when two
Twins were in her womb, must there not be a Battle and Insurrection in his
stomach; wherein there is meat, hot, cold, sod, roast, flesh, fish; and which
side soever wins, nature and health will be overcome, when as a man's body is
like unto the Arc of Noah, containing all Beasts clean, and unclean; but he
the most unclean Beast, that contains them: Our Law interprets it to be
murder, when one is killed with a knife. Let us take heed we be not all
condemned by God, for being Fellons, de se; for wilful murdering our own
lives, with our knifes by our superstitious eating. Thirdly, it wrongs the
creatures that hereby are abused: Indeed they willingly serve man, so long as
he is a King over them; but they are loath to do it, when he turns Tyrant:
So if when the Drunkard sings, the drink sighs; when the Glutton laughes, the
Meat grieves to be so vainly misspent by him. God says, Hosea. 2.9. That he
will recover his Flax, and his Wool from the Idolatrous Jews, Vindicabo, I
will rescue and recover them, as from slavery and subjection, wherein they were
detayned against their will; and in such like tyranny are the creatures, as
Bread, Wine, and Meat tortured under the Glutton. Lastly, it wrongeth the
poor; for it is the overmuch Feasting of Dives, which of necessity makes the
Fasting of Lazarus, and might not the superfluous Meat of the Rich be sold for
many a pound, and given to the poor.

Come we now to consider, wherein Gluttony does consist. I am not ignorant of
that verse in Thomas:

Praepropere, laute, nimis, ardenter, studiose: But I will not march in Saul's
heavy Armor, or confine my self to follow the Schools directions herein; I
will go against this Goliath of Gluttony, with my own Sling and Stone, and use
a private and plain Method. This sin therefore consists, either in the
quantity of the meat, or in the quality, or in the manner of eating. In the
quantity: And here it is hard to define the Omer of Manna, for every man's
belly; the proportion of meat for every man's stomach; that quantity of rain
will make a claye ground drunk, which will scarce quench the thirst of a sandy
Country. It is thus also in men, that proportion of meat surfetteth, and
surchargeth the stomachs of some, which is not enough to satisfy the hunger of
others, especially of those, who being young, have hot and quick disgestion, of
those who living in a cold clymate, and thereby have the heat of their stomachs
intended, of those whose stomachs are strong, by reason of their labor and
travel; and not to speak of the disease, called ( Boulamya) men's natures
being thus diverse, by what standard shall I measure them? let this be the
rule, he shall be arraigned and condemned before God, for Gluttony in the
quantity of meat, who has eaten so much, as thereby he is disabled, either in
part, or wholly, to serve God, in his general, or particular calling, be his
age, clymate, or temper whatsoever.

2. In quality, and that four ways, 1. When the meat is too young, Exodus
23.19. Thou shall not sees a Kid in his Mothers milk; that is, thou shall not
eat it before it has age, to be just and firm flesh: Circumcision was
deferred till the eighth day; one reason rendered by Divines, is because a Child
before that time, is not Caro consolidata; and sure there is a time, before
which Beasts and Fowls are not sollid, fast, and lawful to be eaten. I must
confess, we are to live by the creatures death, they being borne are
condemned to dye, for our necessity, or pleasure; and these condemned persons
desire not a pardon, but deserve a Reprive, that they may be respited, and
reserved so long, till they be good and wholesome food, and not clapped into the
Gluttons bowels, before they be scarce out of their Mothers belly. Secondly,
when the meat is too costly; thus Cleopatra, macerated an Union, a Pearl of an
inestimable worth, and drank it in a health to Mark Anthony; a deed of hers
as vain, as the other wicked, when she poisoned her self. Thirdly, when the
meats are only incentives, and provocations to lusts, in some kind thereof; I
could instance, were I not afraid to teach sin, by confuting it. Why is the
Furnace made seven times hotter; then ever it was before? Is not the Devil of
himself sufficiently mischievous? Is not our own corruption of it self
sufficiently forward? yea, headlong to evil? But also we must advantage them
by our own folly. Have we vowed in our Baptism to fight against, and do we
our selves, send Armor, and Munition to our Enemy? yea, many set their own
houses on fire, and then complain they burn, Labor est inhibere volantes,
parcere puer stimulis, and fortius utere Lastly, when the Meat is such, as is
only to increase Appetite; when one before is plentifully fed. Such is the
cruelty of the Spanish Inquisition; that when they have brought a man to the
door of death, they will not let him go in, when by exquisite tortures, they
have almost killed him; then by comfortable Cordials they do again revive
him: And whereas of God it is appointed, for all men once to dye: these men's
cruelty makes men to dye often. Thus men, when they have stabbed and killed
hunger with plentiful eating, with sauce, and salt meats of purpose, they
restore it again to life; and for several times, according to their own
pleasures, kill and recall, stab and revive their appetites.

3. In the manner of eating. 1. Greedily without giving thanks to God: Like
Hogs, eating up the Mask, not looking up to the hand that shakes it down. It
is said of the Israelites, Exodus 32.6. The people sat down to eat and to
drink; there is no mention of Grace before Meat; and rose up to play, there
is no mention of Grace after. Secondly, Dives fared deliciously every day;
there was no Friday in his week, nor Fast in his Almanac, nor Lent in his
year: whereas the Moon is not always in the full, but has as well a
wayning, as a waxing; the Sea is not always in a Springtide, but has as well
an Ebbing, as a Flowing; and surely the very Rule of Health will dictate thus
much to a man, not always to hold a constant tenure of Feasting, but sometimes
to abate in their dyets. Lastly, when they eat their meats studiously, Requiems
in their soul, with the Glutton in the Gospel, Soul take thine ease, etc. And
whereas we are to eat to live, these only live to eat. Let us therefore beware
of the sin of Gluttony, and that for these Motives.

1. Because it is the sin of England; Mot. 1.
for though without Usurpation, we may entitle our selves to the pride of the
Spanish, Jealousy of the Italian, Wantonness of the French, Drunkenness of the
Dutch, and Laziness of the Irish; and though these outlandish sins have of
late bin naturalized and made free Denisons of England Yet our ancientest
Carte, is for the sin of Gluttony.

Mot. 2.
It is the sin of our age, our Savior says, Mat. 24.37. But as it was in the
days of Noah, so likewise shall the coming of the Son of Man be, They did
eat and drink, etc. That is, excessively; for otherwise they did eat in all
ages. It is said of old men, that they are twice children; the same is true of
this old doting World, it does now revert, and relapse into the same sins,
whereof it was guilty in the Infancy, we on whom the ends of the World are
come, are given to the sins of Gluttony, as in the days of Noah.

Mot 3.
The third Motive is from the time, These seven full Ears, these seven fat
Kine; these seven weeks of Feasting, between Christmas and Shrovetide are
past; these seven lean Ears, these seven lean Kine, the seven Fasting Weeks
in Lent, are now begun: Practice therefore the counsel, which Solomon gives,
Prou. 23.1. When thou sit to eat with a Ruler, consider diligently what is
before thee, and put thy knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to thy
appetite. This is thy throat, that narrow passage of Importance, guard it with
thy knife, as with a Halbert, that no superfluous meat pass that way, to
betray thy soul to Gluttony. But it is to be feared, that we will rather
turn the backs of our knifes, then the edges; I mean we will use little
violence to repress and restrain our own Greediness, that our knifes may
therefore be the sharper; let these Whet-stones set an edge on them.

1. Consider the Bread that thou eatest, is the Bread that perishes: And our
Savior says, Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that which
endures to everlasting life: Biscate is but perishing Bread, though it may
last two years; for what is two years to Eternity?

2. We shall perish that eat the meat, but God shall destroy both it and that:
And then the Glutton which has played the Epicure on meat, whist he lived, the
worms shall play the Epicures on him when he is dead; and whilst the temperate
Man shall give them but ordinary commons, the larded Glutton shall afford them
plentiful exceedings. To conclude this point, wary was the practice of Job,
Job 1.5. Who after the days of his sons feasting, were gone about, offered
burnt Offerings to God for them; for he said, it may be my sons have sinned,
and cursed God in their hearts.

So since Gluttony is so subtle a sin, and so hard to be discerned, when we
have been at a great Feast in the day; Let us sacrifice our prayers to God,
and sue out a Pardon from him, lest peradventure in the heart of our mirth,
without our knowledge, and against our will we have inseverably been overtaken
with the sin of Gluttony.

HOW FAR GRACE CAN BE ENTAILED.
2 TIMOTHY 1.5. When I call to remembrance, the unfeigned faith, which is in thee,
which dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois, and thy Mother Eunice; and I am
persuaded that it is in thee also.


WHEN I call to remembrance. Observe. 1.
It is good to feed our souls on the memories of pious persons: Partly that we
may be moved to praise God in, and for his Graces, given to his Saints; and
partly that we may be incited to imitate the virtues of the deceased. Ahaz was
so taken with the Altar at Damascus, 2 King. 16.10. that he would needs have
one at Jerusalem, made according to all the worke-manship thereof. When we call
to mind the virtues of the deceased, and cannot but be delighted with their
Goodness; let us labor to fashion our selves after their frame, and to erect
the like virtues in our own souls.

Obser. 2.
Godly Children occasion their Parents to be called to memory: Saint Paul
beholding Timothies Goodness, is minded thereby to remember his Mother, and
Grandmother Eunice and Lois; they can never be dead, whiles he is alive.
Good children are the most lasting monument, to perpetuate their Parents, and
make them survive after death. Do thou desire to have thy memory continued?
Art thou ambitious to be revenged of death, and to out-last her spite? It
matters not for building great houses, and calling them after thy name, give
thy children godly education, and the fight of their goodness will furbish up
thy memory, in the mouths and minds of others, that it never rusts in oblivion.

Which dwelt first.
That is, which was an Inhabitant in their hearts: Faith in temporary
Believers, is as a Guest, comes for a night, and is gone, at the best is but as
a Sojourner, lodges there for a time; but it dwells, makes her constant
residence, and abode in the Saints, and servants of God.

Grandmother Lois, and Mother Eunice.
Why does not Saint Paul mention the Father of Timothy; Quest.
but as it were blanch him over with silence?

First, it is probable that Saint Paul had not any special notice of him,
Answ. 1.
or that he was dead before the Apostles acquaintance in that Family.

2. Likely it is, he was not so eminent, and appearing in Piety; the weaker
vessel may sometimes be a stronger vessel of honor: yea, the Text intimates
as much, Act. 16.1. Behold a certain Disciple was there named Timotheus, the
son of a certain woman, which was a Iewesse, and believed, but his Father
was a Greek. Let women labor in an holy Emulation, to excel their husbands
in Goodness; it is no trespass of their modesty, nor breach of the obedience
they vowed to their husbands in marriage, to strive to be Superiors, and
above them in Piety.

3. Eunice and Lois, the Mother and Grandmother, are only particularly
mentioned, because deserving most commendation for instructing Timothy in his
youth; as it is in the Chap. 3. ver. 16. Knowing of whom thou have learned
them, and that from a Child thou have known the Holy Scriptures. For the same
reason the names of the Mothers of the Kings of Judah, are so precisely
recorded for their credit, or disgrace, according to the goodness or badnesse
of their sons. Let Mothers drop instruction into their children with their
milk, and teach them to pray, when they begin to prattle.

Doct.
Though Grace be not entayled from Parent to Child; yet the Children of goldy
Parents have a great advantage to Religion; yea that five-fold.

1. The advantage of the promise; yea though they come but of the half blood,
(much more if true borne on both sides) if one of their Parents be godly, 1 Corinthians. 7.14. For the unbeleeving Husband is sanctified by the unbeleeving
Wife; and the unbeleeving Wife is sanctified by the Husband, else were your
Children unclean, but now they are holy. 2. Of good Precepts, some taught them
in their Infancy, so that they can easier remember what they learned, then when
they learned it, Genesis 28.19. For I know Abraham that he will command his
children, and his Household after him to fear the Lord. 3. Of good Presidents,
Habent domi unde discant; whereas the children of evil Parents see daily what
they ought to shun, and avoid, these behold what they should follow, and
imitate. 4. Of Correction, which though untoothsome to the palate to taste, is
not unwholesome to the stomach to digest. 5. Of many a good prayer, and some no
doubt steept in tears, made for them before, some of them were made, Filius
tantarum lachrymarum non peribit, said Saint Ambrose to Monica, of Saint
Augustine her son; Disdain thou then out of an holy pride, to be the vicious
son to a virtuous Father, to be the profane Daughter of a pious Mother; but
labor to succeed, as well to the lives, as to the Livings, the Goodness, as
the Goods of the Parents.
Yea, Object.
but may the Children of bad Parents say; This is but cold comfort for us, and
they may take up the words of the Soldiers, Luke 3.14. And what shall we do?

First, Answ. 1.
if thy Parents be living, conceive not that their badnesse dispenceth with thy
duty unto them, thou have the same cause, though not the same comfort, with
good children to obey thy Parents; this do labor, to gain them with thy
conversation. It was Incest, and a foul sin in Lot, to be Husband to his
Daughters, and beget children on them; but it would be no spiritual Incest in
thee, to be Father to thy Father, to beget him in grace, who begat thee in
nature; and by the Piety and Amiablenesse of thy carriage, to be the occasion
by Gods blessing, of his Regeneration; and what Samuel said to the people of
Israel, 1 Samuel 12.23. God forbid that I should sin against the Lord, in
ceasing to pray for you; so God forbid thou should ever leave off to have
thy knees bended, and thy hands lifted up, for the conversion of thy bad
Father. Moreover, labor more especially to shun and avoid those sins, to
which thy Father was addicted; and chiefly such sins, the Inclination whereto
may depend from the temper and constitution of the body; so that a pronenesse
thereto, may in some sort seem to be intayled to Posterity. Was thy Father
notorious for wantonness? strive then to be noted for chastity; was he
infamous for Pride? Labor thou to be famous for Humility. And though thou must
not be dejected with grief, at the consideration of the badnesse of thy
Parents; yet may thou make a Soveraigneuse thereof, to be a just cause of
Humiliation to thy self.

If thy Parents be dead, and if thou can speak little good of them, speak
little of them. What Sullenness did in Absolon, 2 Samuel 13.22. He spoke to his
Brother Amnon, neither good nor bad: Let Discretion do in thee, seal up thy
lips in silence, say nothing of thy Parents: He is either a Fool, or a mad
man, who being in much company, and not being urged thereunto, by any occasion
will tell others, My Father lies in the Fleet, my Father lies in Prison, in the
Counter: More witless is he, who will speak both words, Uncharitable, and
Unnatural, concerning the final estate of his Father, in an eternal bad
condition.

And I am persuaded, there is a threefold kind of Persuasion, whereby one may
be persuaded of good in another man.

1. The persuasion of Infallibility, and this only God has, Act. 5.18. Known
unto God are all his works from the beginning of the World, he alone
searches and tries the hearts and reins. And they also have it to whom God
immediately reveals it. Thus Ananias knew that Paul was a true servant of God,
after it was revealed to him, Act. 9.15. For he is a chosen Vessel unto me,
to bear my name, before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the children of Israel.
And in this sense of infallible persuasion, we may understand, Saint Paul in
the Text, because it is said 1 Timothy 1.18. This Commandment write I unto thee,
son Timotheus, according to the prophecies which went before upon thee, that
thou by them should fight a good fight. 2. The persuasion of Charity, and
this I must confess is but weak, and rather a presumption, than a persuasion.
Charity, 1 Corinthians. 13.17. Thinks no evil, it believes all things, hops
all things; And in this kind of Persuasion we conceive that all men have faith
dwelling in them, of whom we know no just reason to conceive the contrary. 3.
The Persuasion of a well, and strong grounded opinion, to make which, these
three things must concur; first the party that conceives this opinion, must
have a good judgment, and discerning Spirit, well to dive and pierce into the
natures and dispositions of men. Secondly, He must be long acquainted with that
person, of whom he has such an opinion, that faith dwells in him. Too bold
are these men, who upon a superficial knowledge, and short conversing with
any, dare peremptorily pronounce, that such an one has saving grace and
sanctity in him. These are Professors of spiritual Palmestry, who think that
upon small experience they can see the Life-line (the Line of Eternal life in
the hands of men's souls) where as for all their skill they often mistake the
hands of Esau, for the hands of Jacob: Lastly, they must have intimate
familiarity with them, and be not only their acquaintance large, but in
Ordinary. Te intus and in cute novi. Put all these three together, that one
has a discerning Spirit, long and intimate acquaintance with one, and he may
arrive at Saint Paul's persuasion in my Text, to be persuaded of faith dwelling
in in him, with whom he has been thus long, and intimately acquainted. And
in this sense (though it may be of the infallible Persuasion by Revelation)
understand we that, 2 King. 4.1. Now there cried a certain Woman, of the
Wives of the sons of the Prophets unto Elisha, saying; Thy Servant, my
Husband is dead; and thou know that thy Servant did fear the Lord.
Yet for all this we may set this down for a true Position; that the wisest
of men easily may, and sometimes are deceived in counting them good, which are
very counterfeits, and especially in these cases.

First, in close natured men, such as lie in

2. In various, and inconstant men, which Proteus, never appear twice in the
same shape, but differ as much from themselves, as from other men, and are
only certain in uncertainty; so that one can build no certain Conclusion on
such floting, flitting Sands; and even know not what to make of them.

Titus Vespatian, was called Deliciae humani generis. This Euphuia presents it
self in all outward signs and Symptoms; So like to Grace that it is often
mistaken for it. Whereas on the other side, men of a rugged, unbrusht nature,
such as were never lickt, hewn, or polisht, may be slaundered in many men's
judgments, to be altogether devoyd of Piety.



To conclude, if we desire to pass a rational Judgment on Faith in others,
and Piety in their hearts: Let us first labor to have true Sanctity in our
own. One complained to a Philosopher; that it was an hard thing to find a wise
man. It is true (said he) for he must first be a wise man that seeks him,
and knows when he has found him: So that on the matter, it is not one wise
man, but two wise men, must meet together. So it is an hard thing to know true
Sanctity in another man; because he must have true Piety in himself, that
knows it, or else he is an Incompetent Judge, to pass a Verdict on a
another. Let us therefore labor first to have true Grace in our hearts, that
so with Saint Paul, we may be persuaded of Grace that dwells in another.

A CHRISTNING SERMON.
2 KING. 5.14. Then went he down and dipped himself seven times in Jordan,
according to the saying of the man of God, and his flesh came again, like to
the flesh of a little child, and he was clean.


IN this Chapter, Naaman the Syrian coms hurrying with his Horses, and rattling
with his Chariot to the door of the prophet Elisha, to be cured of his
Leprosy. Now he said in his heart, (I could not have told his thoughts,
except first he had told them me) he will surely come out to me, and stand
and call on the name of the Lord, his God, and strike his hand over the place,
and recover the Leper: Thus he thought, that the very noise of the wheels of
his Chariot, should call Elisha to come to him, because he was Captain of the
Host of Syria, he thought to be Commander of Gods Prophet, and he expected a
great deal of service from him, and truly he might expect it: For the Prophet
beat him at his own weapon, outshot him in his own bow, out-stated him in
stateliness it self.

1. Called him not in, but let him stand at door. 2. Came not to him in his
person, but by a Proxy. 3. Sent him a plain and cold answer, Wash seven times
in Jordan.
By the way, I dare boldly say, Elisha in himself was not proud at other
times, he could fare hardly on Barley Loaves, and feed hungerly on plain
pottage; but at this time his affecting of state, was both lawful and
necessary. First it was the sight of Naamans shoe, which made Elisha so high in
the Instep; with the stately, he would be stately; the rather because he did
perceive that Naaman must be humbled, before he could be healed, and the
proud flesh first taken out of his heart, ere the putrid flesh could be cured
in his body. Secondly, Naaman, though he was a Prince, yet he was but a
Pagan; and in this respect, the lowest Hebrew was higher than he; Elisha
therefore would teach him to learn himself; that he was not proper to
receive so great favors, as being but a Goat, and no lost sheep of the Fold
of Israel. Lastly, Elisha was an extraordinary man, he might well stand upon
terms of double distance, who had a double portion of Elijah's Spirit.

You my Brethren of the Ministry, let us know, that we succeed to the office,
but not to the Eminencies, to the place, but not to the personal perfections
of the Prophet Elisha. And let us know, that Humility is our Honor and Crown;
so that except we be forced unto it against our wills, Se defendendo, to
maintain the Honor of God, and our office, to stand upon our points, let us
leaving the Pattern of Elisha's stateliness, rather follow the president of
Saint Paul's Humility, I was made all things to all men, that by all means I
might gain some.

To return to Naaman: The mention of the water put him into a fire, he
burns with Choler and Passion: Are not Abanah, and Pharpar, Rivers of
Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? May I not wash in them, and be
clean? so he turned and went away in a rage: Well, his servants come to him,
to persuade him, and bring with them good Logic, and Ethics, good Arguments,
and good manners; good Logic reasoning a minori ad majus; If the Prophet had
bid thee do some great thing, would thou have not done it? How much rather
then, when he says to thee, Wash and be clean? Good Ethics, my Father, my
All-speaking in one person, so unanimously they consented in one opinion;
Father, as if they had said, we confess thou art wiser then we are, of more
age, of more honor; yet you are near unto us, you are dear unto us, we wish
your weal and welfare: O what a deal did they speak in a little, and how
many sentences are comprised in this one word, Father: These words so wrought
on Naaman, that the Lion became a Lamb; he that formerly had conquered his
foes, now subdues himself, down came he in his stomach, and down comes he
in his person.

Then went he down, etc.
These words contain a Cure most strange, most true, wherein observe: 1. The
time wherein it was wrought, Then. 2. The sick man, (or if you please) since
his servants have persuaded him, the Patient. 3. The Disease, Leprosy. 4. The
Physician, the Man of God, Elisha. 5. The Physic Quid, Washing in Jordan,
Quoties, seven times.
6. The Effect and Operation thereof: And his flesh came again, like the flesh
of a little Child, and he was clean.


But as Gideon had too great an Army for his use, and therefore sent most of
his Soldiers away; so the time commands me, to dismiss most of these points,
and only to retain such with me, as are most pertinent to the present
occasion. I begin with the time, wherein the Cure was wrought:

Then.
Then: Observe.
When? After his servants had persuaded him: Whence observe,

Wise men must sometimes follow the counsel of their Inferiors, as Naaman did
of his servants. The reason is, that wise men may be deceived in those
actions, wherein they themselves are parties, and interested, it is possible
that Passion, prejudice, and Partiality one, or all of these, like so many
Pearls, may blind the eyes of your Judgment. Whereas such as look on, may
see more then those that play the game, and though in other respects their
judgments be far inferior, yet herein they may be more clear, because
less engaged: Yea, Solomon himself, though the wisest of Kings had a Counsel
of aged men, that stood before him. And though this might seem but the
lighting of so many Candles to the Sun, yet no doubt he knew wisely to make
use of them, who in wisdom were far beneath him. I have seen a dull
Whet-stone set an edge on a Knife: yea, the wisest of men need not think
scorn to learn of the worst of men, when we may be taught, not to take
carking care by the Lillies, and yet providently to provide from the Pismire.

But then especially are we to listen to the counsel of Inferiors, whose
advise we know proceeds from a loving heart, and is aimed and levelled at our
good, especially if they be such, that our credit and profit is embarked in the
same bottom with theirs, together they sink, and together they swim; so that
we cannot suspect, dare not deny, and must confess, that their advise looks
straight forward at our good, and squints not aside at any sinister respect.
Wherefore, sometimes let Abraham hearken to Sarah, his wife, Moses the Jew, to
Iethro the Gentile; David the Sovereign, to Ioab the subject; yea, let not
Apollo, though eloquent, and mighty in Scripture, think scorn to learn his
Christ-crosse from Aquila, and Priscilla.

Yet when Inferiors presume to commend their counsel to their Superiors, let
it be qualified with these cautions.

1. Let them do it seasonably, in a fit opportunity. Now opportunity is the
Spirits of time extracted, or the quintessence of time at large, distilled, and
such an opportunity must he wait for, who hopes to do any good by his advise
to his betters. Abigail was excellent hereat, 1 Samuel 25.36. She told her
Husband Nabal, nothing less or more, until the Morning light: Either because
she would not cast the pearl of her good counsel before a Swine, wallowing
in Drunkenness; or because she thought her physic would work the better
with him, if she gave it him fasting. 2. It must be done secretly. An open
reproof of our betters, is little better than a Libell. True it is, we
Ministers may publicly, (when occasion is offered us) reprove the vices of
those, who in outward respects are far our Superiors, yet we must do it
Publicly, Secretly; publicly for the place, secretly for the manner. We are
not to make in the Pulpit such an Hue and Cry after the Offender, that the
capacity of the meanest may take him on suspicion, whom we mean. No, let us
deliver our Doctrine in common, and let the guilty conscience enclose it to it
self. 3. They must do it with all reverence, and humility, as the servants of
Naaman, in my Text. A Wool-packe does conquer the strength of an Ordnance, by
yiedling unto it: so there be many natures, which will be led, but may not be
drawn, or dragged; and these may be broken with fair usage, that cannot be
bowed with forcible dealing. 4. Let them pray to him, who has the hearts of
all men in his hand: like the Rivers of water, he turns them whether he
pleases, that he would be pleased to prepare, and mollify their hearts, to
whom they are to address their counsel, that he would bow their ears to
hear, their heads to conceive, and their hearts to practice, that advise which
shall be commended to them for their good. And so much for the time. Come we
next in the second place to the Physic prescribed, Water of Jordan. Whence
observe.
Observe.
God appoints weak means by the virtue of his Institution, to accomplish
great matters. Take a survey of all the parts of Gods service, and we shall
find this true. Begin at the Font, there is plain water of Jordan; yet by the
virtue of Gods Ordinance, it washes away original sin. Pass from the Font to
the Ministers Pue, there is still plain water of Jordan, the weakness of the
Word, and the folly of Preaching; yet Gods wisdom and power, to make the Goat
a Sheep, the Lion a Lamb, the Wanton chaste, the Passionate patient; yea, to
revive such as are dead in trespasses and sins. Look on the Minister, here is
still plain water of Jordan, earthen vessels, men laden with infirmities,
like the rest of their Brethren, yet are they Dispensers of the mysteries of
God. Proceed to the Communion Table, there is still plain water of Jordan, a
morsel of Bread, and a Draught of Wine, yet these worthily received, sign and
seal unto us, the body of Christ, and the benefits of his Passion.

Let us take heed, Use.
that we take not exception, at the simplicity of Gods Ordinance. A Spanish
Don having heard much of the fame of Calvin, traveled to Geneva, to see him;
where finding him, both plain in person, and poor in apparel, he repented
himself of his pains, and whom his ear did admire at distance, his eye did
contemn, when present. Just such Valuers are carnal men of Gods Ordinances,
they guess the Jewel by the Case, and think nothing can be good, which is
not gaudy. But surely were our eyes anointed with that Eye Salve, mentioned,
Revel. 3.18. then (as Heralds account the plainest Coats, the most ancient)
better then those of a later Edition, which are so full of filling, that they
are empty of honor) we should see the inward state in the outward simplicity,
and inward Majesty, in the outward meannesse of Gods Ordinance* When one of his
Courtiers showed the Great Turk the Sword of Scanderbag^: I see, said he no
such miracles in this sword, rather then in any other, that it should atchieve
such victories: Yea, but said one that stood by, If you had seen also
Scanderbags Arm, with what a mighty force he wielded this Sword, you then
would change your resolution. So many say, they can see nothing in the water of
Baptism, more then in ordinary well water, they can see nothing in the world,
in the Bread and Wine in the Communion, then in that in the Bakers panniers, or
Vintners Cellar, no more in a Sermon, than in a civil Oration in a Guild Hall
of the same length. But if they saw the Arm of God, with what a mighty
strength he enforces these Ordinances, and how his invisible Grace attends
them, they would be of another mind; Gaze then no longer on Ehuds hand, for
that was lame, or on his Dagger, for that was short; but look on Gods finger
in Ehuds hand, and that can work wonders. Look not on the Ordinance, but on
the Ordainer; on the means, but on the Meanes-maker; neither be offended at
the meannesse of the one, but admire the Majesty of the other.

Use
It confutes the Papists, who displeased, as it were at the simplicity of the
Sacraments, as God has instituted them, seek to better and amend them by
their own additions: This they account plain water in Baptism too mean, and
therefore they mingle it with Cream, Oil, Spittle, and other Ingredients,
which I as little know what they be, as they know why they use them. Yea all
their service of God, is not only made sweet, but luscious to the palate of
flesh, and they plainly show by their baits, what fish they angle to catch;
namely, rather to get men's senses, then their souls, and their eyes then their
judgments. Not that I am displeased with neatness, or plead for nastinesse in
Gods service; surely God would have the Church his Spouse, as not an Harlot, so
not a Slut; and indeed outward Decency in the Church, is an Harbinger to
provide a lodging for inward devotion to follow after. But we would not have
Religion so bedaubed with lace, that one cannot see the cloth, and Ceremonies
which should adorn, obscure the substance of the Sacraments, and Gods worship.
And let us labor to be men in Christianity, and not only like little children
to go to School, to look on the guilt and gaudy Babies of our Books, and to
be allured to Gods service, by the outward pomp and splendour of it. But let us
love religion not for her clothes, but for her face, and then shall we affect
it, if she should chance (as God forbid) to be either naked, through poverty,
or ragged through persecution. In a word, if God has appointed it, let us love
the plainness of his Ordinance, though therein there be neither warm water,
nor strong water, nor sweet water, but plain water of Jordan.

Come we now to the Quoties, how often? He dipped himself seven times; that
is, he went in, and washed himself, and came out again, and went in, and
washed himself, and came out again, and so till the seventh time. Thou
therefore, whosoever thou art, who art afflicted in body or mind, or any other
way, do not grudge against God, and grieve in thy self, if thy pain be not
eased in an instant, if thy malady be not removed in a moment: O tarry the
Lords leisure (the Lords pleasure is the Lords leisure) wait and attend his
time: Think not that thou shall not be cured at all, because thou art not all
cured at once. Naaman himself was not completely cleansed at the first
entrance into Jordan, but it cost him seven times washing.

The number of seven is most remarkable in Holy Writ, and passes for the
Emblem of perfection, or compleatnesse, as well it may, consisting of an Unity
in the middle, guarded and attended with a Trinity on either side. Once I must
confess, I find this number of seven to be defective, and too little; and yet
the correction, and supplying thereof, still runs on a septinary number: Shall
I forgive my Brother seven times? yea said our Savior, seventy seven times. If
any ask, why God pitched on this number, and imposed on Naaman; the best
answer I can make, shall be in the words of our Savior, Matthew. 11. Even so
Father, because it pleased thee well: Naaman was bid to wash seven times, and
he did wash seven times: Hence observe.

We must observe Gods Commandments, Doct.
both in matter and manner, both in substance and circumstance: But some will
say, had Naaman washed once more, or less, under or over seven times, would so
small a matter have broken any squares? and would God have imposed any penalty
on so slight a forfeiture? I answer, things that are small in themselves swell
great, when they are either forbidden, or commanded by God: Look upon Lots
Wife, looking back with carnal eyes, and it will seem a small offense: O how
flesh and blood could easily be her Advocate, to plead for her? What if she did
look back? She did no more, and could do no less, and be a Mother; Would you
have her to be a Pillar of stone, before she was a Pillar of salt; I mean so
hard, so remorselesse, as not to send one farewell glance, to that unfortunate
City, wherein she had so much kindred and acquaintance: Well, however we
must know, the Offense was most heinous, by the heaviness of the punishment
inflicted upon her.

And as it is thus in small things forbidden, so is it in small things
commanded. They must be precisely observed: In those general Maps of the
world, which are usually made in a sheet of paper; the least prick or point
which can be made with a pen, extends to five mile at the least: But I say the
smallest Deviation and Declination, the least imaginable Deflection, from the
commanded will of God, is an infinite distance from it, as breaking the command
of an infinite God, and deserves infinite punishment. Observe therefore, not
only all things considerable, but all things in Gods will: For indeed all
things therein are considerable; not only every Syllable, but every Iota, the
least Letter; yea every prick, Comma, and Accent, has his Emphasis, and must
be pronounced in our practice: As Moses therefore in making the Tabernacle,
made it in all things alike, to the Pattern he saw in the Mount, not a Knop
or a Bole, or an Almond in the Candlestick, under or over; not a Bell or a
Pomegranate in Aarons Coat, more or less; but Concordat Copia cum Originali:
The transcript agreed with the Original in all things; so let us precisely
follow the instructions God gives us; let us not willingly be Hetroclites
from his will; either Defectiues, to do too little, or Redundants, to do too
much; but let us be truly regular, not washing more then seven times, with
the superstitious man, nor less then seven times with the profane man; but
with Naaman in my Text, just seven times.

When I compare our present occasion with this History we have treated of, I
find a great Resemblance betwixt them. Here is a little Child to be cured of a
Leprosy: For so may Original Corruption fitly be called: First for the
Hereditarinesse of it, it is a successive disease, entayled from Father to
Child, ever since the fall of our first Parent Adam: Secondly, from the
over-spreading nature thereof, the Infection defiling all the powers of our
souls, and parts of our bodies. Here also is the water of Jordan to wash it
away, since Christ washed Jordan, by being washed in it, he has given it a
power to cleanse our Original Corruption: Some Thieves have eat off their
Irons, and fretted off their Fetters with Mercury water; but there is no way to
work off the Chains of our Natural Corruption, whereby our feet are hurt in
the Stocks, the Irons have entered into our souls; but only by the Water in
Baptism: Only the Maidenhead, and Virginity of the water, in the Poole of
Bethesda, was medicinal to cure Diseases; he that came first was cured; the
second got no profit. But in our Jordan, our Water in the Font; the virtue
thereof is not lessened in the using, the Child that is last baptized, shall
receive as much benefit, as that which is first washed therein.

But herein I must confess, there is a difference on the cure of Naaman, and
this Child, he was totally, and perfectly cleansed from his Leprosy; but this
Child is washed but in part, so far as is Gods pleasure. The condemning power
of Original Corruption is drowned in the Font; but though the bane be removed,
the blot does remain, the guilt is remitted, the blemish is retained, the
sting is gone, the stain does stay; which if not consented to, cannot damn
this Infant, though it may hereafter defile it: Secondly, the final
peaceable-commanding power, is washed away in the Laver of Regeneration; though
afterward it may dwell in us: it shall not domineere over us; it may remain
there as a slave, not as a Sovereign sure not as a lawful one, be he ever
resisted, often subdued, though never expelled. These things deserve larger
Prosecution, but this is none of Joshua's day, wherein the Sun stands
still, and therefore I must conclude with the time.

FACTION CONFVTED.
1 COR. 1.12. Now this I say, that every one of you says, I am of Paul, and I
am of Apollo, and I am of Cephas, and I am of Christ.


SVch is the subtilty of Satan, and such is the frailty of the flesh, though
things be ordered never so well, they will quickly decline. Luther was wont to
say, he never knew as good order last above fifteen years: This speedy
decaying of goodness, you may see in the Church of Corinth, from which S. Paul
was no sooner departed, but they departed from his Doctrine. Some more carried
by fancy, then ruled by reason, or more swayed by carnal Reason, then governed
by Grace, made choice of some particular Pastor, whom they extolled, to the
great disgrace of his fellow Ministers, and greater dishonor of God himself.
Now Saint Paul not willing to make these Ministers, a public Example,
concealeth their persons, yet discovers the fault, and making bold with his
Brethren. Apollo, and Cephas, applies to them and himself, what the
Corinthians spoke of their fancied Preachers. Now this I say, that every one of
you says, I am of Paul, and I am of Apollo, and I am of Cephas, and I am of
Christ.

Object.
But the Apostle herein has made no good choice, to mention Cephas: For he was
only known to the Corinthianss, by his fame, not by his person, seeing it
appears, not either in Scripture, or Ecclesiastical Story, that ever Cephas
(that is Saint Peter) was ever at Corinth.

Answ.
This hinders not the Application of the Apostle: Granting Saint Peter was never
there; For many Ministers are most admired at distance, Major e longinquo
reverentia: Like some kind of stuff, Tacitus.
they have the best Gloss, a good way off, more then a Prophet in his own
Country. Thus the good esteem, which Forrainers have conceived of the Piety
and Learning, of the Geneva Ministers, has been the best stake in the hedge of
that State.

I need not divide the words, which in themselves are nothing else but
division, and contain four sorts of people, like the four sorts of Seed,
Mat. 13. The three first bad, the last only, [ I am of Christ] being good and
commendable.

I am of Paul; as if they had said, there is a Preacher called Paul; his matter
is so powerful, his Methods so pleasing, his Doctrine so sound, his Life so
sincere; his Preaching I affect, or his person I prefer, I am of Paul. Tush
(says another) what talk you of Paul? Indeed his Epistles are powerful and
strong, but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech of none effect; there
is one Apollo, an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, he stands
highest in my esteem; I am of Apollo: Fie says a third, why name you Apollo,
one that learnt the best part of his Divinity from Aquila, and Priscilla, a
Layman, and a weak woman: There is one Cephas, that caught three hundred
souls at the preaching of one Sermon; that is the man for my money: I will say
of him, as Gehazi did of Naaman; As the Lord lives I will run after him, I am
of Cephas: Well, says a fourth, Paul I know, and Apollo I know, and Cephas I
know, men endowed with great Grace, and eminent Instruments of Gods glory, I
acknowledge them as the Channel, but on God alone, as the Fountain, of Faith
and Conversion, and do attend on him alone in these his Instruments, I am of
Christ.

The Staple Doctrine herein to be observed, is this: Doct.
The factious affecting one Pastor above another, is very dangerous. Indeed we
may, and must give a famous part of Reverence, and a Benjamins Portion of
respect, to those, who ( Data paritate in ceteris) excel in age, pains,
Gousartius did deserve, when for more then fifty years Geneva. In Pains,
being such as have borne the heat of the day; so that the stresse of the
Ministry has layen heaviest on their shoulders; such an Elder is worthy of
double honor. In Parts, being stars of the first Magnitude, brightly shining,
by whole sale, all honor on one, and scarce Retaliating out any respect to the
other, raising high Rampires to the praise of the one, by digging deep Ditches
to discredit, and disgrace an other, is that which Saint Paul does reprove in
my Text, and we must confute at this time.

Four great mischiefs will arise from this practice. Misch. 1.
First it will set enmity and dissension betwixt the Ministers of Gods Word.

I confess, we that either have, or intend to take on us the high calling,
and holy Function of the Clergy, ought to endeavor by Gods Grace, so to
qualify our selves, that our affections never mistake the true object, nor
exceed their due measure: But alas such is our misery (rather to be bemoaned,
then amended; the perfect removing whereof, is more to be desired, then hoped
for) that as long as we carry Corruption about us, we are men subject to like
Passion with others. Hence is it come to pass, that as the Grecians, Act. 6.1.
Murmured against the Hebrews, Because their Widows were neglected in the
daily Ministration: So Ministers will find themselves agrieved, that people in
the partial dispencing of their respect, pass them by unregarded. Perchance
the matter may fly so high, as it did betwixt Moses and Aaron, Numb. 12.2. And
they said, has the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses? Has he not spoken also
by us? It will anger not only Saul, a mere carnal man, but even those that
have degrees of Grace, He has converted his thousands, but such a one his ten
thousands: These discords betwixt Ministers, I could as heartily wish they were
false; as I do certainly know, they are too true.

Misch. 2.
It will set dissension amongst people, whilst they violently engage their
affections for their Pastors: The woman that pleaded before Solomon, 1 King. 3.
The living Child is mine (said she) but this dead Child is thine: Nay (said
the other) but thy son is dead, and my son is the living. Thus will they
fall out about their Pastors. The living Minister is mine; he that has life,
spirit, and Activity, in the manner and matter of his Delivery; but the dead
Minister is thine; Flash in his matter, confused in his Method, dreaming in his
utterance; he comes not to the quick, he touches not the conscience; at
the most with Ioash, King of Israel, 2 King. 13.18. He smites the Aramites but
thrice; Leaves off reproving a vice, before people be fully reformed. Nay
(says the other) my Minister, is the living Minister, and thine is the dead
one: Thy Pastor is like the fire, 1 King. 19.12. Flashing in the flames of ill
tempered, and undiscreet zeal; But the Lord was not in the fire: or like the
Earthquake, shaking his Auditors, with ill applied terrors of the Law, but the
Lord was not in the Earthquake: whilst my Minister is like to a still voice,
and the Lord was in the still Voice, stanching the Bleeding hearted Penitent,
and dropping the Oil of the Gospel into the wounded Conscience.

It will give just occasion to wicked men, Misch. 3.
to rejoice at these dissentions, to whose ears, our discords are the sweetest
Harmony. O then let not the Herdsmen of Abraham and Lot fall out: whilst the
Canaanites and Peresites, are yet in the Land. Let not us dissent, whilst many
Adversaries of the truth are mingled amongst us, who will make sport thereat.

Lastly, Misch. 4.
it will cause great Dishonor to God himself, his Ordinance in the mean time
being neglected. Hear is such doting on the Dish, there is no regarding the
Dainties: Such looking on the Ambassador, there is no notice taken of the
King, that sent him. Even Mary's Complaynt is now verified: They have taken
away the Lord, and placed him, I know not where. And as in times of Popery:
Thomas Becket dispossessed our Savior of his Church: in Canterbury (instead of
Christ's Church, being called Saint Thomas Church): And whereas rich Oblations
were made to the Shrine of that supposed Saint, Summo Altari nil: Nothing was
offered to Christ at the Communion Table: So whilst some Sacrifice the
Reverence to this admired Preacher, and others almost adored this affected
Pastor: God in his Ordinance is neglected, and the Word being the savor of
life, is had in respect of persons.

To prevent these mischiefs, both Pastors and people must lend their helping
hands. I begin with the Pastors, and first with those whose Churches are
crowded with the thickest audience.

Let them not pride themselves, with the bubble of popular applause, often as
causelessly gotten, as undeservedly lost. Have we not seen those that have
preferred the Onions, and Fleshpots of Egypt, before heavenly Manna, Lungs
before Brains; and sounding of a voice, before soundness of matter. Well, let
Princes count the credit of their Kingdoms to consist in the multitude of
their Subjects: Far be it from a Preacher, to glory when his Congregation
swells to a Tympany, by the Consumption of the Audience of his Neighbor
Minister.

Yea, when Pastors perceive people transported with an immoderate Admiration of
them, let them labor to confute them in their groundless humors. When Saint
John would have worshipped the Angel, See thou do it not (says he) worship
God. So when people post headlong, in affecting their Pastors, they ought to
wave and decline this popular honor, and to seek to transmit and fasten it on
the God of Heaven. Christ went into the Wilderness, when the people would have
made him a King: Let us shun, yea fly such dangerous Honor, and tear off our
heads, such wreathes, as people would tie on them, striving rather to throw
Mists, and Clouds of Privacy on our selves, then to affect a shining
appearance: But know, whosoever thou art, who herein art an Epicure, and love
to glut thy self with peoples applause, thou shall surfeit of it, before thy
death, it shall prove at the last pricks in thy eyes, and thorns in thy side,
a great affliction, if not a ruin unto thee, because sacrilegiously, thou have
robbed God of his Honor.

Let them labor also to ingratiate every Pastor, who has tolerability of
desert with his own Congregation. It was the Boon Saul begged of Samuel,
Honor me before my people: And surely it is but reason, we should seek to
grace the Shepherd in the presence of his Flock, though perchance privately we
may reprove him, disgrace him not publicly before those that are under him.

I am come now to neglected Ministers, at whose Churches, Solitudo ante ostium,
and within them too, whilst others (perchance less deserving) are more
frequented.

Let not such grieve in themselves, or repine at their Brethren. When Saint
John Baptists Disciples told him: That all flock't to Jesus, whom he baptized
beyond Jordan: I must decrease (answered he) and he must increase. Never fret
thy self, or vex out thy soul, if others be preferred before thee, they
have their time, they are Crescents in their waxing, full Seas in their
flowing: Envy not at their Prosperity. The Stars in their course did fight
against Sisera; thy course of credit may chance to be next, thy turn of
Honor may chance to come after. One told a Grecian Statist, who had
excellently deserved of the City he lived in: That the City had chosen four
and twenty Officers, and yet left him out: I am glad (said he) the City
affords twenty four abler than my self: So let Ministers triumph, and rejoice
in this, that the Church yields so many men, better meriting then themselves,
and be far from taking exception thereat.

And let us practice Saint Paul's Precept, by Honor and Dishonor, by good
Report and Disreport: Seven years have I served God in good esteem, and well
respected, by the time I have served God so long in disgrace and reproach,
perchance the Circulation of my credit may return, and with patience I may
regaine the esteem I have lost; and if otherwise, let him say with David, Lord
here I am, do with thy servant as thou please.

By this time me thinks, I hear the people saying unto me, as the Soldiers
to John Baptist, Remedy 1.
but what shall we do? Now the Counsel I commend to you, is this. First,
ever preserve a reverent esteem of the Minister, whom God has placed over
thee. For if a Sparrow lights not on the ground without Gods especial
Providence, surely no Minister is bestowed in any Parish, without a more
immediate and peculiar disposing of God, and surely their own Pastor is best
acquainted with their diseases; and therefore best knows to apply spiritual
Physic thereunto. And as Gods Word has a general Blessing on every place,
so more particularly is it sanctified and blessed there, to those Parishioners
from the mouth of their lawful Minister. Let not therefore the Sermon of a
stranger, who perchance makes a Feast of set purpose, to entertain new Guests,
be preferred before the pains of thy own Minister, who keeps a constant
house, and a set Table, each Lords day, feeding his own family. Wherefore, let
all the Ephesians confine themselves to their Timothy; Cretians to their Titus;
every Congregation to their proper Pastor. And I hope Pastors considering the
solemn oath they took at their Institution, and the profit they receive from
their people, and how irrational it is to take wages, and do no work, and
the heavy account they must make at the day of Judgment, will provide Milk
in their breasts, for those who must suck of them. As for those, whose necessary
occasions do command their absence from their Flocks, let them be Curats of
their Curats; over-see such, whom they appoint to oversee their people.
Columella gives this counsel to Husbandmen, never keep a horse to do that
work, which may be done by an Ass; both because Asses are of a lower price,
and cheaper kept: But God forbid Ministers should observe this Rule, and so
consult with their profit, as to provide unworthy Substitutes, to save charges.

Remedy 2.
Let them not make odious comparisons betwixt Ministers of eminent parts: It is
said of Hezechiah, 2 King. 18.5. That after him, was none like him, of all the
Kings of Judah, neither any that were before him. It is said also of King
Josiah, 2 King. 23.25. And like unto him, there was no King before him, that
turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his
might; neither after him rose up any like him: The Holy Spirit prefers neither
for better, but concludes both for best; and so amongst Ministers, when each
differs from others, all may be excellent in their kinds. As in comparing
several handsome persons, one surpasses for the beauty of a naturally painted
face: A second for the feature of a well proportioned body: A third for a grace
of Gesture, and Comeliness of carriage: so that Justice it self may be
puzzled, and forced to suspend her Verdict, not knowing where to adjudge the
Victory: So may it be betwixt several Pastors. Ones Excellency may consist,
in the unsnarling of a known controversy; an other in plain expounding of
Scripture, to make it portable in the weakest memory. One the best Boanarges,
an other the best Barnabas: Our Judgments may be best informed by one, our
Affections moved by a second; our lives reformed by a third: I am persuaded
there is no Minister in England, for his Endowments like Saul, Higher then his
Brethren, from the shoulders upwards; But rathes some hundreds like the Pillars
in Salomons House, all of a height: But grant some in parts far inferior to
others: was not Abishai, a valiant, and worthy Captain, though he attained
not to the Honor of the first three? And may not many be serviceable in the
Church, though not to be ranked in the first form, for their sufficiency?

Let them entertain this for a certain truth, That the Efficacy of Gods Word
depends not on the parts of the Minister; but on Gods blessing, on his
Ordinance: Indeed there is a Generation of Preachers, that come upon the Stage,
before ever they were in the Tyring-house, whose backwardness in the
University, makes them so forward in the Country; where what they lack in
Learning they supply in boldness: I could wish, that as Genesis 21.19. When
Hagars Bottle of water was spent, God opened her eyes, and she went to the
Fountain again; So when these Novices have emptied their store of set Sermons
they brought with them, that their Parents would remit them back to the
University, the Fountain of Learning and Religion, to furnish themselves with
a better stock of sufficiency: Such Ministers as these, I account as none at
all; but as for those that have the Minimum ut sic, the least degree of
tolerability, to enable them in some measure, to discharge their Office: God
may be, and often is, as effectual in, and by them; as by Rabbis, of far
greater parts.

To conclude, let us with one mind, and one mouth, advance the Glory of God,
that thereby the Gospel may be graced, Wicked men amazed; some of them
converted; the rest of them confounded: weak Christians confirmed, to the
grief of Devils, Joy of Angels, Honor of God himself: Amen.

FINIS.
Imprimatur, THOMAS WYKES, May 30. 1640.


