A GOODLY GALLERYE WITH A MOST Pleasant Prospect, into the garden of natural
contemplation, to behold the natural causes of all kind of Meteors, as well
fyery and ayery, as watery and earthly, of which sort be blasing sterres,
shooting stars, flames in the air etc. tho^der, lightning, earthquakes, etc.
rain dew, snow, clouds, springes etc. stones, metalles, earthes etc. to the
glory of God, and the profit of his creaturs.

PSALM. 148. Praise the Lord upon earth Dragons and all deepes, Fire, Hail,
Snow, Ise, Wyndes, and storms, that do his will. LONDINI. Anno. 1563.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD Robert Dudley, Master of the Queen's
majesty's horse, Knight of the most Noble order of the garter, and one of the
Queen's majesty's privy Counsel. William Fulce, wishes increase of grace and
heavenly gifts, in perfect health and true honor, long to continue.
THe most mighty Monaychie of the Romain Empire Octauius Augustus, (right
honorable Lord) did show so great liberality, or rather magnificence
toward all them that bare him good will, that he also most largely rewarded
sundry persons yt had tought Popingayes and other birds, to pronounce some
salutation (as he passed by them) in his praise and commendation. At the length
a poor young man, allured (as it seemed) by his bountiful remuneration of
other: had tought a Crow (an untowardly bird) after the same manner to salute
the emperor. Who perceiving his purpose, that it was rather for hope of gain,
then testimony of good will: answered that he had store enough already, of
such saluters at home, meaning those Popingayes and other birds, which at the
first for their strangenes, he had dearly paid for. In like manner (right
honorable Lord) when I present the salutation of this mine untowardly bird, a
Crow in comparison of such pleasant popingayes, as have been hetofofore
offered unto your honorable Lordship: you may have just cause of suspicion,
that being moved with your former liberality and magnificence toward other, I
do as the Poet says: Occulium cautus decurrere piscis ad hamum.

And so if your gentle nature and noble disposition could suffer, as a crauer
of undeserved benefits, to reject both me and my present. But since my state is
such, that I can not testify the good will of mine heart toward your honor,
otherwise then by such means as this: I was bold to refer that suspicion to
the judgment of your wisdom and humanity (knowing my self clear from such
intent) and to commit this vnbewtifull byrd, under the wings of your
honorable protection, trusting that the same (which I take as a commen defense
of all good learning) shall not only at this time be my stay and refuge, but
also hereafter to more worthy attempts a continual encouragement. But specially
at this time, I was bold to enterprise the matter, for that one James
Rowbothum, a man of notable impudens (that I say no worse of him abusinge your
singular humanity and gentleness expressing thexample of one Bathillus, or
rather (that I may continue in the allegory of birds) of Esopes crow, has
not ben ashamed to dedicate unto your Lordship of late a treatise of mine,
which I gathered out of diverse writers, concerning the Philosophers game:
notwithstanding he was straightly commanded to the contrary by the right
honorable and reverent father, my Lord of London, of whom also I was exhorted
and encouraged to dedicate the same unto your honor, my self. Which though
now through his importunity and disobedience, it be intercepted, and the
book defaced with his rude rythmes and peuish verses: yet I thought best to
give your Lordeship understanding that your honorable protection which is and
should be the defense of learning and learned men, might no more be a boldening
to such ignorant and dishonest persons. And like wise most humbly to desire
your honor that though mine Epistle dedicatory, be not annexed to that book,
yet considring by what pertinacitie I was hindered, you would accept that book
also together with this, as an homely present of mine, of which I may conclude as
one did in like case. Illum ego co^posui libru^, tulit alter honore^
Sic vos non vobis lacte tumetis oues.
Sic vos non vobis praeda agit ampla canes
Sic vos non vobis conditis antra ferae,
Sic vos non vobis pondera a fertis equi.
Thus sparing to trouble your honor any longer, either wc complaint or excuse,
I desire almighty God to multiply his blessings toward you, that abounding
in all good gifts both bodily and ghostly, you may have long life in health
and honor, to his glory, the profit of other, and your endless comfort. Amen.

A GOODLY GALLERY The first Book.
FOr as much as we entend in this treatise, to declare ye causes of all those
bodies, that are generatede in the earth, called Fossilia, as well as those
other Impressiones, named of there height, Meteora (which no writer hitherto
has done, yt we have seen) the comen definicion given by most writers, in no
wise will serve us, and whether we may borowe ye name of metcoron to
comprehend the whole subject of our work we are not all together out of
doubt, all though ye philosopher, deryuinge it from doutfullnes, gives us some
collore so to take it, and paduenture we might be as well excused to aplye it
to mineralls, as other auters ar to use it for earthequakes: yet to avoid all
occasions of cauellynge at words, we shall both defyne and also describe the
subject of our matter on this manner: yt is a body compounde with out life
naturalle: and yet to stop one hole, because hear wants ye name of ye
thing to be destinede, yt is no new thing, to them that have read
Aristoteles works to find a diffinition, Aristotle's.
of that whereof there is no name. But what need you be so precise (will some man
say) mean you so to proceade in all your discourse? no verily, but because many
of quick judgment not considering the style to be attempered, to the
capacity of the Readers, will impute the plains to the ignorance of the
authors, we thought good in ye beginning to pluck that opinion out of their
minds (that as the common saying is) they may know we have skill of good
manners though we little use them.

These meteors are divided after three manner of ways, first into bodies
perfectly and imperfectly mixed. Secondly into moist impressio^s and dry.
Thirdly into fiery, aerie, watery and earthly. According to this last division,
we shall speak of them in four books followyng. But first, we must be
occupied a little in the general description of the same, yt afterward shall be
particularly entreated of.

Why they be called imperfectly mixed.
THey are called imperfectly mixed, because they are very sone changed into
another thing, and resolved into their proper elements of which they do most
consist, as do all impressious, fyrie, ayrie, watrie, as snow into water,
clouds into waters. etc.

Why they be called perfectly mixed.
The last sort namely earthly, Meteores are called perfectly mixed, because
they will not easily be changed and resolved from that form which they are in,
as be stones, metalles and other mineralles.

According to the quality of the matter, they are divided into moist and dry
impressions, consisting either of vapores or exhalations. vapores are called
moist, and exhalations dry, which terms must be well noted, because they
must be much used.

Of the general cause of al Meteores and first of the material cause.
The matter whereof the most part of Meteores does consiste, The material
cause.
is either water or earth, for out of ye water, proceade vapors, and out of the
earth come exhalations.

Vapor as the Philosopher says, What be vapors and what exhalations.
is a certain watrie thing, and yet is not water, so exhalation has a certain
earthly nature in it, but yet it is not earth.

For the better understanding of vapors, understand that they be as it were
fumes or smokes, warm and moist, which will easily be resolved into water,
much like to the breath that proceadeth out of a man's mouth, or out of a pot
of water standing on ye fiere. These vapors are drawn up from the waters and
warry places, by the heat of the Sun, even unto the middle region of the
air, What the middle region is shall be told afterward.
and there after diverse manner of meating with coldness, many kind of moist
Meteors are generated, as sometime clouds and rain, sometime snow and hayle,
and that such vapors are so drawn up by the Sun, it is plain by
experience: for if there be a plash of water on a smothe and hard stoone,
standing in the heat of the sun, it will soon be dry, which is none
otherwise, but yt the son draws up the water in thin vapores, for no man
is so fond to say, that it can sink into stoone or metal, and it is as
greatfoly to think, it is consumed to nothing: for it is a general rule, A
general rule.
that that which is once a thing, can not by changing become nothing,
wherefore it follows that the water on the stoone, as also on the earth, is
for the most part drawn up, when the stoone or earth is dried

Exhalations, What exhalations be.
are as smokes that be hot and dry, which because they be thin, and
lygther then vapors, pass the lowest and middle region of the air, and are
carried up even to the highest region, where for the excessive heat, by nearenes
of the fire, they are kindled, and cause many kind of impressions. They are
also sometimes viscose* that is to say cla^my, by reason whereof, they cleuing
together and not being dispersed, are after diverse soortes set on fire, and
appear somtims like Drago^s, somtim like Goats sometime like ca^dels sometime
like spears.

By yt which is spoken of vapors and exhalations, it is evident yt out of ye
fire and the air no matter whereof meteores should consist can be drawn,
because of their subtlety and thinnes. For all exhalatio^ is by making a
grosser body more thin, but ye fire (we mean ye eleme^tal fire, and not the
fire of the kitche^ chimney) is so subtle and thin, yt it cannot be made
thinner: likewise the air is so thin, yt if it be made thinner, it is changed
into fire, and as the fire if it were made thicker, would become air, so the
air, being made grosser, would be turned into water. Wherefore to conclude this
part, ye great quantity of matter, that causes these meteores, is taken out
of ye earth and the water. As for ye air and the fire, they are mixed with this
matter as with all other things, but not so abundauntly, that they may be said
the material cause of any Meteore, though without them none can be generated.
The efficient cause of all Meteores is that cause, The efficie^t cause
which makes them, even (...) they are not to nyghe to the direct beams, nor
to far of from them: there is a moderate heat, drawyng out great abundance
of matter, so that in those contries, many Meteores of many sorts as
generated, as in the far North parts are few, but watrie impressions. Also
in Autumn and Spring, are oftener Meteores seen, then in Summer and Winter,
except it be in such places, where the Summer and Winter are of the temper of
Spryng and Autu^ne. Let this be sufficient, for the efficient causes of
impressions, as well first and principal, as second and particular. Concerning
the formal and final cause, we have little to say because the one is so
secret, that it is known of no man, ye other so evident yt it is plain to all
men The essential form of all substaunces, Gods wisdom comprehends, the
universal chief and last end of all things, is the glory of God. Mydle ends
(if they may be so called) of these impressions are manifold profits, to Gods
creatures, to make the earth fruitful, to purge the air, to set forth his
power, to threathen his vengeance, to punyshe the world, to move to
repentance: all the which are referde to one end of Gods eternal glory, ever
to be praised. Amen.

Of the places, in which they are generated.
THe places in which Meteors are caused, be either the air or the earth, in
ye air be generated rain, hayle, snow, dew, blasing stars, thonder,
lightning etc. In the earth be wells, springs, earthquakes, metalls minerals,
etc. made, and as it were in their mothers belly begotten and fashioned. But
for the better understanding hereof, such as have not tasted ye principles of
Philosophy, must consider ye there be iiij. elements, Earth, water, Air, and
Fire, one co^passing another round about, saving yt the waters by Gods
commandment ar gathered into one place, yt the land might apeare. The highest
is ye spear of the fire, which touches the hollownes of the Moons heaven, the
next is the air, which is in the hallownes of the fire, the air within his
hollownes, comprehends the water and the earth, which both make but one
Sphere or Globe, or as the commen sort may understand it one Bal. So each
eleme^t is wcin another as ye skales of a perle, ar on above another, or (to
use a gross similitude) as ye pieles of an onio^, ar one wc in another, after
ye same sort from ye highest heaven to ye earth, yt is lowest, one part yt is
greater compasses round about another that is lesser. But for this present
purpose it is to be known, yt the air is divided into three regions, What the
regions of the air be
ye highest, the middle, and the lowest. The highest, because it is next to the
region of ye fire, is exceading hoate, the lowest being next the earth and the
waters, is temperat, and by repercussion or striking back of the sun beams
waxes hoate, and by absence of them is made cold, being subject to Winter and
Summer. The middle region of ye air, is always exceading cold, partly because
ye son beams, can not be cast back so high, and partly because the cold
that is there, between ye heat above and the heat beneath it, is so kept in
that it can not get out, so that it must needs be excessiuely cold. For the
water and the earth being both cold elements, after the sunnesetting in the
night season do cool ye air, even to the middle regio^. But in the morning
the sun rising warmeth ye air, so far as his beams which are beaten back
from the earth and the water, can extend and reach, which is not so high as
the middle region, and by heat on both sides, is enclosed and kept, saving that
a little thereof falls down in the night, which the next day with much more
is driven back again. Wherefore this region being so cold, is dark and
cloudye, in so much that some doting Divines have imagined, purgatory to be
there in the mydle region of the air.

In the highest region, be generated Cometes or blasing stars, and such like
of diverse sorts.

In the middle region clouds, rain, storms, wyndes. etc. In the lowest
region, dew, frost, horefrost, mistes, bright rods, candels burning about
graves, and gallowses, where there is store of clamy fatty or oily substance,
also lights and flammyng fires, seen in fields, etc.

And thus much for the general causes of all Meteores.

The second Book of fyery Meteores.
A Fiery impression, is an exhalation set on fire, in the highest or lowest
region of the air, or else apearing as though it were set on fire and burning.

They are therefore divided into flames and aparitions. Flames are they, which
burn in dead and are kindled with fire. These are discerned by iiij. ways,
by the fashion of them, by their place, by the abu^daunce of their matter, and
by the want of their matter. Their placing is after the abundance and
scarsetie of the matter where of they consist, for if it be great, heavy and
gross, it cannot be carried so far as the middle region of the air, and
therefore is set on fire in the lowest region, if it be not so great, light, and
full of heat, it passes the middle region and ascends to the highest, where
it is easily kindled and set on fire.

According to their diverse fashio^s, they have diverse names, for they are
called, burning stoble, torches, daunsing or leapinge Goats, shooting or
falling stars, or candels, burning beams, round pillars, spears shieldes,
globes or bowls, fierbrandes, la^pes, flying drago^s or firedrakes, pointed
pillors or broched steples, or blasing stars, called Cometes. The time when
these impressio^s does most apere, is ye night season, for if they were caused
in ye day time, they cold not be seen, no more then ye stars be seen, because
the light of ye sun which is much greater, dimmeth ye brightness of the^ being
lesser.

Of the generation of the impression, called burned stoble or sparcles of fire.
THe generation of this Meteore is this, Sparks of fire.
when the matter of the Exhalation is in all parts a like thynne, but not
compacted or knit together, then some part of it being carried up into the
highest region, by the fiery heat is set on fire before another part, that
comes up after it, and so being kindled by little and little, it flies
abrooode like sparkles out of a chymney, in so much that the common people
suppose, that an infinite number of stars fall down where as it is nothing else,
but the Exhalation that is thin kindled in many parts, sparkling as when
saw dust or cool dust is cast into the fire.

Of Torches.
TOrches or fire brandes, Torches.
are thus gen^rated: when the matter of the exhalation is long and not broad,
being kyndled at one end thereof, in the highest region of the air, it burns
like a Torche or fire brande, and so continues, till all the matter be burned
up, and then goes out, none otherwise then a Torche when all the stuff is
spent must needs burn no longer.

Of dansyng or leaping Goats.
DAnsyng Goats, Daunsing Goats.
are caused when the exalation is divided into two parts, as when two
torches be seen together, and the flame appears to leap or dau^ce from one
part to the other, much like as balls of wild fire dance up and down in the
water.

Of shotyng and falling Stars.
A Flying, shooting, or falling Sarre, Shootinge stars.
is when the exhalation being gathered as it were on a round heap, and yet not
thoroughly compacted in the highest part of the lowest region of the air,
being kyndled, by the soden cold of the mydle region is beaten back, and so
appears as though a Star should fall, or slide from place to place.
Sometime it is generated after another sort, for there is an exhalatio^ long
and narrow, which being kyndled at one end burns swiftly, the fire ronning
from end to end, as when a silk thread is set on fire at the one end. Some
say it is not so much set on fire, as that it is direct under some Star in
the firmament, and so receiving light of that star, seems to our eyes to be
a star. In dead some times it may be so, but that is not so always, nor yet
most commonly, as it may be easily demonstrated. The Epicurians as they are
very gross in determining the chief goodness, The Epicurians opinion.
so they are very fond in assigning the cause of this Meteor. For they say, yt
the stars fall out of the firmament, and that by the fall of them, both
thonder and lyghtning are caused: for the lightening (say they) is nothing else
but the shyning of that star that falls, which falling into a watrie
cloud, and being quenched in it, causes that great thonder, even as whoat
iron makes a noyce if it be cast into cold water. Psalm. 148
But it is evident that ye stars of the firmament can not fall, for God has
set them fast for ever, he has given them a commandment which they shall not
pass. And though they should fall into the cloud, yet could they not rest
there, but with their weight being driven down, would cover the whole earth.

For the least star that is seen in the firmament, The greatness of Stars.
is greater then all the earth. Here will step forth some merry fellow, which
of his conscience thinks them not to be above three yardes about, and say
it is a loud lie, for he can see within the compass of a bushel more the^
xx. stars. But if his bushel were on fire xx. mile of, I demand how bygge
it would seem unto him? He that has any wit, A proof of the stars greatness.
will easily perceive, that stars being by all men's confession, so many
thousand miles distant from the earth, must neades be very great, that so far
of should be seen in any quantity.

Thus much for the shootyng or falling Stars.

Of burning Candels.
Burning candels.
WHen the Exhalation carried up into the highest part of the air is in all parts
thereof of equal and like thynnes, and also long, but not broad, it is set on
fire and blased like a candle, until the Exhalation be quite consumed.

Of burning Beams and round Pillars.
Burning beams and round pillars.
THese are caused, when the Exhalation being long and not very broad, is set
on fire, all at once and so burns like a great beam or logge. The difference
of beams and pyllers is this, for beams are when they seem to lie in
length, in the air, but they are called pillars, when they stand right up,
the one end nearer to the earth, then the other.

Of burning Spears.
BUrning spears are generated, Burninge Spears.
when a great quantity of Exhalatio^s, which may be called a dry cloud, is
set on fire in the myddest, and because the cloud is not so compacte, that it
should suddenly rende, as when thonder is caused, the fire breaks out, at the
edges of the cloud, kendlyng the thynne Exhalations, which shoot out in great
number like fyry spears, or darts, long and very small, wherefore they continue
not long, but when they fail, within a short while after, more fire breaking
out, they shoot out as many more in their place, and likewise, when they are
gone, other succeade, if the quantity of the matter will suffice, more then a
doosen courses. This impressio^ was seen in London, Anno dom. 1560. the thirty
day of January, at eight of the clock at night the air in all other places
being very dark, but in the North east where this cloud burned, it was as
light as when the day breaks, toward the Sun rysyng, in so much, that
plain shadow of things opposite, was seen. The edge of this cloud was in
fashion like the Raynbowe, but in color very bright, and often times casting
forth almost innumerable darts, of wonderful length like squybbes, that are
cast up into the air, saving yt they moved more swiftly then any squybbes.

Of shieldes* Globes or Bowls.
Shieldes Globes or Bowels.
THese Meteores also have their name of their fashion, because they are broad,
and appear to be round, otherwise their generation differs not from the
cause of the like impressions before mentioned.

Of Lamps.
THe lamp consists of an Exhalation, Lamps.
yt is broad and thick, but not equally extended, namely smaller at one end
then at another, which being kindled about ye midst thereof, burns like a
la^pe. The cause why, as well this impressio^, as many other, apeareth round, is
not for yt always they are round in deed, but because the great distance
causes the^ to seem so. For even square forms, far of seem to be round. It
is written, yt a la^pe fell down at Rome when Germanicus Caesar, set forth the
sight of sword players.

Of flying Dragons or fire Drakes.
FLying Dragons, or as Englyshmen call the^ fire drakes, Flyinge Dragons or
fire Drakes.
be caused on this manner. When a certain quantity of vapors ar gathered on a
heap, being very near co^pact, and as it were hard te^pered together this lo^pe
of vapors assending to ye region of cold, is forcibly beaten back, which
violence of moving, is sufficient to kindle it, (although some men will have it
to be caused between ij. clouds a whote and a cold) the^ ye highest part,
which was climming upward, being by reason more subtle and thin, apeareth as ye
Dragons neck, smoki^g, for yt it was lately in the repuls bowed or made
crooked, to represent the drago^s belly. The last part by ye same repulse,
turned upward, makes ye tail, both apeari^g smaller, for yt it is farther of,
and also, for yt the cold binds it. This dragon thus being caused, flies
alo^g in ye air, and so^time turns to and fro, if it meat with a cold cloud to
beat it back, to ye great terror, of them that behold it, of whom some called
it a fire Drake, some say it is the Devil him self, and so make report to
other. More then sixtene years ago, on May day, when many young folk went
abroad early in the morning, I remember, by six of the clock in the
forenoone, there was news come to London, that the Devil the same morning,
was seen flyinge over the Temmes: afterward came word, that he lyghted at
Stratforde, and there was taken and set in the stocks, and that though he
would feign have dissembled the matter, by turning him self into the likeness
of a man, yet was he known welinough by his cloven feet. I know some yet
alive, that went to see him, and returning affirmed, that he was in deed seen
flying in the air, but was not taken prisoner. I remember also that some wyshed
he had been shoot at with gons, or shaftes as he flewe over the Te^mes. Thus do
ignorant men judge of these things that they know not, as for this Devil, I
suppose it was a flyinge Dragon, whereof we speak, very fearful to look upon,
as though he had life, because he moves, where as he is nothing else but
clouds and smoke, so mighty is God, that he ca^ fear his enemies, with these
and such like operations, whereof some examples may be found in holy
scripture.

Of the Pyramidall pyller like a spire or broched steeple.
THis sharp poynted pillar, Of spires.
is generated in the highest region of the air, and after this sort. When the
Exhalatio^ has much earthly matter in it, the lighter parts and thinner (as
their nature is) ascending upward, the grosser, heavier, and thycker, abide
together in the bottom, and so is it of fashion great beneath, and small
pointed above, and being set on fire it is so seen, and thereof has his name.

Of Fire scattered in the air.
Fire scattered in the air, Fire scatered.
or illuminations, are generated in the lowest region of the air, when very
dry and whote Exhalations, are drawn up and meeting with cold clouds, are
sent back again, which motions sets the^ a fire, whose parts, being not
equally thycke or joined together, seem as though fire were scattered in the
air. Yea sometimes, the whole air seems to burn, as though it would rain
fire from heaven, and so it has come to pass, burning both cities and towns.
Then judge, how easy it was for God to rain fire upon Sodom and Gomor, for
their sins and wickedness.

Of lights that goes before men, and follows the^ abroad in the fields by
the night season.
THere is also a kind of light, yt is seen in the night season, and seems to
go before men, or to follow them, Light that goes before men and follows
the^ in the night.
leading them out of their way unto waters, and other dangerous places It is
also very often seen in the night, of the^ that sail in the Sea, and sometime
will cleave to ye mast of the ship, or other high parts, sometime slide round
about the ship, and either rest in one part till it go out, or else be
quenched in the water. This impression seen on the land, is called in latin,
Ignis fatuus, foolish fire, that hurts not, but only fears fowls. That
which is seen on ye Sea, if it be but one, is named Helena, if it be two, it
is called Castor and Pollux.

The foulishe fire is an Exhalation kendled by means of violent moving, when
by cold of the night, in the lowest region of the air, it is beaten down, and
then commonly, if it be light, seeks to ascend upward, and is sent down
again, so it danseth up and down. Else if it move not up and down, it is a
great lompe of glueysh or oily matter, that by moving of the heat in it self,
is enflamed of it self, as moist hay will be kyndled of it self. In whote
and fenny countries, these lyghtes are often seen, and where as is abondaunce
of such vnctuus and fat matter, as about churchyardes where through the
corruption of the bodies there buried, ye earth is full of such substance,
wherefore in churchyardes, or places of common burial, oftentimes ar such
lights seen, which ignorant and superstitious fools, have thought to be
souls tormented in the fire of purgatory. In deed ye devil has used these
lights (although they be naturally caused) as strong delusions to captive the
minds of men, wc fear of the Popes purgatory, whereby he did open injury to
the blood of Christ, which only purges us from al our sins and delivers us
from al torments, both temporal and eternal, according to the saying of the
wise man, the souls of the ryghteous are in the hands of God, and no torment
touches them. But to return to the lights in which, there are yet two
things to be considered. First, why they lead men out of their way. And
secondly, why they seem to follow men and go before the^. The cause why they
lead men out of the way, is, that me^ while they take heed to such lights,
and are also sore afraid, they forgett their way, and then being ones but a
little out of their way, they wa^der they woote not whether, to waters, pyttes,
and other very dangerous places. Which, when at length they hap the way
home, will tell a great tale, how they have been lead about by a spirit in
the lykenes of fire. Now the cause why they seem to go before men, or to
follow them, some men have said to be the moving of the air by the going of
the man, which air moved, should drive them forward if they were before, and
draw them after, if they were behynd. But this is no reason at all, that the
fire which is oftentimes, three or four miles distaunt from the man that
walks, should be moved to and froo by that air which is moved through his
walkinge, but rather the moving of the air and the man's eyes, causes the fire
to seem as though it moved, as the Moon to children seems, if they are
before it, to run after them: if she be before them, to run before them, that
they can not overtake her, though she seem to be very near them. Wherefore
these lyghtes rather seem to move, then that they be moved in dead.

Of Helena, Castor and Pollux.
WHen the like substance in the lowest region of the air, over the Sea by the
like occasion is set on fire, if it be one only, it is called Helena, if there
be two, they are called Castor and Pollux. Helena, Castor, Pollux.
These impressio^s will oftentimes cleue to the maste and other parts of the
ships, by reason of the clammynes and fatnes of the matter. Helena was of the
Heathen men, taken as a Goddess the daughter of Jupiter and Leda* Castor and
Pollux, were her brethren. Helena was the occasion yt Troy was destroyed,
therefore the Mariners by experience tryinge that one flame of fire apearyng
alone, signified tempest at hand, supposed the same flame to be the goddess
Helena, of whom they looked for nothing but destruction. But when two lights
ar seen together, they are a token of fair wether, and good luck, the Mariners
therefore believed, that they were Castor and Pollux, which saylyng to seek
their sister Helena, being carried to Troy by Paris, were never seen after, and
thought to be translated into ye number of the Gods that give good success to
them that sail, as we read in the last chapter of the Acts of the Apostles,
that the ship wherein S. Paul sailed, had a badge of Castor and Pollux. A
natural cause why they may thus fore show either tempest or calmnes, is this.
One flame alone may give warning of a tempest, because that as the matter
thereof is compact, and not dissolved, so it is like, that the matter of
tempeste (which never wants) as wind and clouds, is still together, and
not dissipated, then is it like not long after to arise. By two flames
together, may be gathered, that as this Exhalation which is very thycke is
divided, so the thycke matter of tempest is dissolved and scactered abroad by
the same cause that this is divided. Therefore not without a reason, the Mariner
to his mates may promise a prosperous course.

Of flames that apeare upon the hears of men or beasts.
THere is yet another kind of fyry impression, which is flames of fire upon
the hears of men and beasts, Flames upon hears of men and beasts.
especially horses. These are sometime cla^my Exhalations, scatered abroad in
the air in small parts, which in the night by resistaunce of the cold, are
kendled, cleauyng on horses ears, on men's heads and shoulders that ride or
walk. In that they cleave upon hears, it is by the same reason, that the dew
will be seen also upon hears or garments, whose woll is high, as fryese
mantels and such like. Another sort of these flames, are caused, when men's or
beasts bodies being chaffed, se^d forth a fat and cla^my swet, which is in like
manner ki^dled as ye sparks of fire yt ar seen when a black horse is curred.
Liuius reports of Seruius Tullius, Liuius. Seruius Tullius.
ye as he lay aslepe, being a child, his hear seemed to be all on a flame,
which for all that did not burn his hear, or hurt him. The like history he
recites of one Marius, Marius.
a Knight of Rome, that as he made an oration to his Soldiers in Spain, they
saw his head burning on a light fire, and he him self not ware of it. Thus
much concerning these flames..

Of Comets or blasing Stars.
A Comete is an Exhalation, Comets or blaesinge stars.
whote and dry, of great quantity, fat and clammye, hard compacte like a
great lompe of pitche, which by the heat of the sun, is drawn out of the
earth, into the highest region of the air, and there by ye excessive heat of
the place, is set on fire, apearing like a star with a blasinge tail, and
sometime is moved after the motion of the air, which is circuler, but it
never goes down out of the compass of sight, thought it be not seen in the
day time for the bryghtnes of the sun, but still burns until all the
matter be consumed. An argument of ye greatness is this, that there was never
any Comet yet perceived, but at the lest it endured seven days, but much
longer they have been seen, namely fowrtye days long, yea, lxxx. days, and
some six months together. Wherefore, it must neades be a wonderful deal of
matter, that can give so much noryshement, for so great and fervent fire, and
for so long a time. There are considered in a Comet, specially the collor and
fashion, which both arise of the disposition of the matter. Their colors, be
either white, ruddye, or blewe. If the matter be thynne, the color is white.
If it be meanly thycke, then is the Comet ruddy, after the color of our fire,
but when the matter is very thycke, it is blewe, like the burning of Brymstone.
And as the matter is more and less, after this disposition: so is the Comet of
color, more or less lyk to these three principal colors, some yelowyshe,
some duskish, some grenishe, some watchet etc.

In fashion ar noted three differences, for either they seem round, wc beams
round about, or with a beard hangyng downward, or else with a tail stretched
out sydelong, in length. The first fashion, is when the matter is thickest in
the myddest, and thin round about ye edges. The second is, when the
Exhation is upward thick, and in length downewarde also, meanly thycke. The
third form is like the second, saving that the tail hangs not down, but
lies aside, and is commonly longer then ye beard. The time of their generation
is oftenest in Autumn or harvest. The temper of the 4. quarters.
For in the spring, there is to much moisture, and to little heat, to gather a
Comet. In summer, is to much heat, which will disperse and consume the
matter, that it can not be joined together. As for winter, it is clean
contrary to the nature if a Comet, which is whoat and dry, winter being cold
and moist, therefore no time so meet as Autumn.

Now for so much as many learned men, have gone about to declare the
signification of blasing stars, The signification of Comets.
we will omit nothing yt has any shadow of reason, but declare what is
written of the^.

Such things as are set forth of yt betokening of Comets, ar of two sorts: the
first is of natural, the second of civil or politic effects. They are said to
betoke drought, barynes of ye earth and pestilence.

Drought, because a Comet can not be generated without great heat, and much
moisture is consumed in ye burning of it.

Barrines, because ye fatnes of ye earth, is drawn up, whereof the Comet
consists.

Pestilence, for so much as this kind of Exhalations, corrupts the air, which
infecteth the bodies of men and beasts.

The second sort, might well be omitted, saving yt Aristotle him self, Arist.
disdayneth not to seek out causes for some of them. Generally it is noted of
all Historiographers, that after the apearing of Comets, most comenly
followed, great and notable calamities. Beside this, they be token (says some)
wars seditions, cha^ges of comme^ wealths and the death of Princes and noble
men.

For what times Comets do shine, there be many whote and dry Exhalations in the
air, which in dry me^ kindle heat, whereby they are provoked to anger, of anger
comes brawling, of brawling fighting and war, of war victory, of victory
change of common welths. Then also Princes, living more delicatly the^ other
men, ar more subject to infection, therefore dye sooner the^ other me^. If it were
lawful to reason of this sort, we might enduce the^ to betoke^, not only these
few things, but al other things ye chanse in the world.

Yet these predictions have a show of reason though it be nothing necessary:
but it is a world to see how the Astrologians, dote in such devises. They are
not ashamed, to an earthly substance, to ascribe an heavenly influence, and in
order of judgment to use them as very stars, suerly by as good reason as to
the celestial stars, they atribute divine influences and effects. But this
their fooly, has been sufficiently detected by diverse godly and learned men,
and this place requires no long discourse thereof. Wherefore this shall
suffice, both for the natural causes of blasyng stars, and also, for all
flames in general. It follows therefore that with like brevity we declare
the causes of fyery aperitions.

Of Aparitions.
AN Aparition, Aparitions.
is an Exhalation in the lowest or highest region of the air, not verily
burning, but by refraction of light, either of the sun or the Moon, seems
as though it burned. Which appearaunce of color, ryseth not of the mixtio^
of the four qualities, as it does in bodies perfectly mixed, as herbs, stones
etc. But only of ye falling of light upon shadow. The light is in stead of
white, and the shadow or darkness in stead of black. These diuersely mixed
according to ye diverse disposition of ye exhaelation, which ministers
variety by thicknes or thynnes, cause diverse colors.

There be commonly recited three kinds of fyery apparitions.

Colors, wide gapinges, and deep hooles, which apeare in the clouds.

Of colors.
Colors are hear meant, Colors in the air
when there is nothing else to be noted, but the colors of the clouds, and
they are caused (as it is said) by casting the light into the shadowye cloud,
according as it exceadeth more or less in thicknes. whereof some be very bright
white, and that is when the Exhalation is very thynne: some yealowish, when the
Exhalations is thicker, sum ruddy, when it is meanly thick, and very black
when it is very thick. The redd and ruddy colors are seen, only in the
morning and evening, when the light of the sun is not in his full force, for
at other times of the day, his light is to vehement, clear, strong, and
pearsing. This much of colors.

Of wide gaping.
Wide gaping is caused, Wide gapinge of clouds in the air.
when an Exhalation is thick in the midst, and thin on the edges, the^ the
light being received into it, causes it to appear as though the sky did
rende, and fire break out of it.

Of round opening Hiatus.
THese holes called Hiatus, differ from wide gapinges, Round opening in the
air.
in nothing, but that they be less, and therefore seem as though they were
deep pittes, or holes, and not rending or gaping, and these be those
apparitions, that apeare fyery and yet be not so in dead. Therefore let this
be sufficient to have showed the natural causes of all fiery Meteores.

The third Book of aerie impressions.
Under ye name of aerie impressio^s, be comprehended, such Meteores, whose
matter is most of the air. Of this sort be winds, earthquakes, tho^der,
lightni^gs stormewyndes, whirlewyndes, circles, raynbowes, ye white circle,
called of some watli^g street, many su^nes many mones

Of Wyndes.
THe wynd is an Exhalation whote and dry, Wind.
drawn up into ye air by ye power of ye sun, and by reason of ye wayght
thereof being driven down, is laterally or sidelongs carried about the earth, and
this diffinition is to be understood, of general wyndes, ye blow over al ye
earth, or else some great regions, but beside these, there be particular wyndes,
which are known but only in some countries, and the^ not very large, The
second kind of wyndes.
these wyndes oftentimes have another manner of generation. And that is on this
manner. It must needs be confessed, ye wtin the globe of the earth, be
wonderful great holes, caves, or do^geo^s, in which when air abondeth (as it
may by diverse causes) this air, yt cannot abide to be pined in, finds a
little hole in or about those countries, as it wear a mouth to break out of:
and by this means, blows vehemently, yet ye force and vehemens extends not
far, but as ye wind that comes forth of bellows, near the coming forth,
is strong, but far of, is not perceived: So this particular wynd, in ye
country, where it breaks forth, is very violent and strong, in so much, yt,
it overthrows both trees, and houses, yet in other countries, not very far
distant, no part of that boisteous blast is felt. Wherefore this wind differs
from the general wyndes, both in qualities and substance or matter, for the
matter of them is an Exhalation, and the qualities such as the nature of the
Exhalation is, very ayery, but not ayere in dead: but of this particular
wind, the matter and substance is most commonly air.

There is yet a third kind of wind, the third kind of wind.
which is but a soft gentle and cool moving of the air, and comes from no
certain place (as the general wynd does) yea it is felt in the shadow under
trees, when in the whote light and shining of the sun, it is not perceived.
It comes whisking suddenly, very pleasant in the heat of the summer, and
cease by and by. This properly is no wind* but a moving of the air by some
occasion. As for the general wyndes, they blow out of diverse quarters of the
air, now East, now West, now South, now North, or else inclininge to one of
the same quarters. Among which the East wind followyng the nature of the
fire, is whote and dry, the South wind expressing the quality of the air,
the qualities of the wyndes and the fow^ quarters of the world.
is whote and moist, the Western blast, agreing with ye waters property is
cold and moist. The North that never was warmed with the heat of the sun,
being cold and dry, partaketh the conditions of the earth. The middle wyndes
have middle and mixed qualities after ye nature, of those four principal
wyndes more or less, the quality of middle wyndes
as they incline toward them more or less.

Generally the profit of all wyndes, the profit of wind.
by the wonderful wisdom of the eternal God, is wonderful great, unto his
creatures. For besides yt these wyndes, alter the weather, some of them
bryngyng rain, some drynes, some frost and snow, which all are necessary,
there is yet an universal comoditie, that ryseth by the only mouyng of the
air. Which were it not continually styred, as it is, would soon putrify, and
being putryfied, would be a deadly infection to all yt has breath upon the
earth. Wherefore this wind whose sound we hear, Joan. 3.
and know not from whence it comes nor whether it goes (for who can affirm
from whence it was raised, or where it is laid down) as al other creaturs
beside does teach us, the wonderful and wise providence of God, that we may
worthily cry out, with the Psalmist, and say: O Lord, how manyfolde are thy
words, Psalm. 104.
in wisdom have thou made them all, etc. Let this be sufficient, to have
showed the generation of the wyndes.

Of earthquakes.
AN earthquake, Earthquakes.
is a shaking of ye earth which is caused by means of wind and Exhalations,
that be enclosed, with in the caves of the earth, and can find no passage, to
break forth, or else so narrow a way that it can not be soon enoughe
delivered. Wherefore, with great force, and violence it breaks out, and one
while shakes the earth, another while rendeth and cleaves the same, sometime
it casts up the earth, a great heyght into the air, and some time it causes
ye same, to synke a great depth down, swallowyng both cities, and towns, yea
and also mighty great mou^taignes, leaving in the place where they stood,
nothing but great holes of an unknown depthe, or else great lakes of waters.

Of diverse kinds of earthquakes.
Diverse authors write dyuerselye, of the kinds of earthquakes, Diverse kinds
of earthquakes.
some making more and some less, but we shall be content at this time to
comprehend them in four sorts.

The first kind is when the earth is shaken laterally, to one side, which is
when the whole force of the wind dryueth to one place, and there is no other
contrary motion, to let it. This wind if it be not great shakes the earth,
that it trembles as a man that has a fyt of an agewe, and does no more
harm, but if it be great and violent, it louseth the foundations of all
bydinges, be they never so strong, and overthrows whole cities, but
specially yt great buildings, and not only buyldinges, but some time also
casts down great hills, ihat cover and ouerwhelme, all the valley under
them. Many noble and great cities, have been overthrown by this kind of
earthquake. Twelve cities overthrown with one earthquake.
It is written that twelve of the most bewtifull cities, and most sumptuous
buildyngs in all Asia, were overthrown and utterly destroyed with any
earthquake. How often, Antiochia, yea within short time, was destroyed, they
which have read the histories, can testify. How terrible was the
earthquake, that shook Constantinople a whole year together, Constantinople
the chiefest city of Greece now the Turks palace.
that the Emperor, and all the people, were feign to dwell abroad in the
fields, under tents and pauilions for fear their houses would fall on their
head, it is recorded in Chronicles, and worthy to be remembered.

The second kind is, The second kind.
when ye earth with great violence is lifted up, so that the buyldinges are
like to fall, and by and by synketh down again: this is when all the force
of the wyndes stryueth to get upward, after the nature of gunpowder, and
fyndyng some way to be delivered out of bondage, the earth that was hoysed up,
returns to his old place.

The third kind is a gapinge, The third kind.
rendyng, or cleaving of the earth, when the earth synketh down, and
swalloweth up cities, and towns, with castles, and towers, Earthquake on the
sea.
hills and rocks, ryuers, and floodes, so that they be never seen again. Yea
the Sea in some places has been drunk up, so that me^ might have gone over on
foot, until the time of tide or flood returning, covered the place with
waters again. But in the land, where this earthquake swalloweth up any city,
or country, there apeareth nothing in the place thereof, but a marvelous wide
and deape goulf, or hole. Aristotle makes mention of diverse places, Aristot.
and regions that were ouerthrouwen with this kind of earthquake.

The fourth kind, The fourth kind.
is when great mountains ar cast up out of the earth, er else when some part
of the land synketh down, and in stead thereof arise ryuers, lakes, or
fyers, breakyng out wc smoke and ashes. It causes also ouerflowyngs of the
sea, when the sea bottom, is lyfted up, and by this means, arise many Islands
in the sea, New Islands in the sea.
that never were seen before. These and other such miracles, are often to be
found in the writers of histories, also in the Philosophers, as Aristotle,
Arist.
Seneca, Seneca.
and Plinius. Plinius.


Nevertheless, the effects of some, as most notable it shall not be
unprofitable to recite. Plato in his Dialogue, Plato.
entitled Timens, makes mention by the way of a wonderful earthquake, A
wonderful earthquake.
wherebye not only Africa was rent asonder from Europa and Asia (as it is
indead at this day, Africa. Europa. Asia the three parts of the earth
except a little neck by the red Sea,) the Sea entering between them that now
is called Mare mediterraneum: Mare mediterraneum because it goes through the
midst of the earth.
But also a wonderful great Island, which he affirms, was greater then
Aphrica and Asia both, called Atlantis, Atla^tis. an Island.
was swallowed up, and covered by the waters, in so much, that on the Sea
called Atlanticum, for a great while after, no ship could sail, by reason
that the same huge sea, by resolution of the earth of that mighty Island, was al
turned into mudde. The famous I Will of Scicilia was also some time a part of
Italy, and by earthquake rent asonder from it. Seneca makes mention of two
Islands. Seneca.
Thereon and Therea, Thereon and Therea.
that in his time, first apeared. It should seem both by Aristotle, Arist.
and also by Herodotus, Herodotus.
that Egypt, in ancient time, was a goulphe of the sea, Egipsom time a golphe
of the sea.
and by earthquake made a dry land. During the raygne of Tyberius the
Emperor, twelve notable cities of Asia, were overthrown in one night, etc.

How so great wyndes come to be under the earth.
THe great caves and dens of the earth, must neades be full of ayere
continually, but when by the heat of the son, the moisture of the earth is
resolved, many Exhalations ar generate as well within the earth, as without,
and where as the places were full before, so that they could receive no more
exepte part of that which was in them nor let out, in such countries, where
the earth has few pores, or else where they be stopped, with moisture, it
must neades follow, that these exhalations striving to get out, must neades
rende the earth in some place, or lift it up, so that either they may have
free passage, or else rowm enough to abide in.

Of the signs and tokens that go before an earthquake most commonly.
THe first is the raging of the sea, when there are no tempestuous wyndes, The
signs of an earthquake.
to styre it, yea when the air is most calm without wyndes. The cause why
the Sea then rages, is that the wind begins to labor for passage, that
way, and fynding none, is sent back, and soon after shakes the land.

The second sign is calmenes of the air, and cold, which comes to pass
by reason that the Exhalation, that should be abroad, is within the earth.

The third sign, is said to be, a long thine struck of a cloud seen, when
the sky is clear, after the setting of the son. This (say they) is caused,
by reason that the Exhalation or vapor, which is the matter of clouds, is
gone into ye earth Other affirm that it is the Exhalation that breaks out of
some narrow hole of the earth, out of which the rest of the wind cannot
issue, neither will it wayghte the time, wherefore within a while after, it
seeks and makes it self by soden eruption a broader way to be delivered
out of prison.

Also the sun certain days before it, appears dim, because the wynd,
that should have purged and dissolved ye gross ayere, that causes this
dymnes, to our eyes, is enclosed within the bowels of the earth.

The water in the botome of deape wells, is troubled, and the savor thereof
infected, because the pestilent Exhalations yt have been long enclosed, within
ye earth do the^ begin a little to be sent abroad. For thereof comes it, that
in many places where earthquakes have been, great abundance of smoke, flame,
and ashes, is cast out, when the abundance of brymstone that is under the
ground, through violent motion is set on fire, and breaks forth Finally, who
knows not, what stynking mynerals and other poisonous stuff does grow under
the earth? wherefore it is no wonder if well water, before an earthquake, be
infected, but rather it is to be marueiled, if after an earthquake, there
follow not a grievous pestilence, when the whole mass of infection is blown
abroad.

Last of all, there is hard before it, in the time of it, and after it, a
great noise and sound under the earth, Tho^dring under the earth.
a terrible groanyng, and a very thondryng, yea somtymes when there follows
no earthquake at all, when as the wind without shaking of the earth, fyndeth a
way to pass out at. And these for the most part, or at lest some of them,
are forewarninges that the most fearful earthquake will follow, then the
which there is no natural thing, that brings men into a greater fear. Cato
was very curious to confess him self, Cato.
that he repented, that ever he went by water, where as he might have gone by
land. But what land, can be sure? if it be the Lords will, by this work of
his to shake it? what building so strong yt can defend us? when the more
strong the more danger, the higher ye greater fall.

Of thonder.
THo^der is a sound, Thonder.
caused in ye clouds by the breaking out of a whote and dry Exhalation,
beating against the edges, of the cloud. It is often herd in spryng and
summer, by reason yt the heat of ye son, the^ draws up many Exhalations,
which meating in the middle regio^ of the air, wc cold and moist vapors, ar
together with them, enclosed in an hollow cloud, but when the whot Exhalatio^
cannot agree wc the coldness of ye place, by this strife being driven together,
made stronger and ke^dled, it will neades break out which soden and violent
eruptio^, causes ye noise which we call tho^der. A similitude is put by great
autors of moist wood, a similitude.
ye cracketh in ye fire, we may add here unto ye breaking of an egg in the
fire, of an apple, or any like thing, for whatsoever holds and withholdeth,
enclosed any whot wind, so yt it can have no vente, it will seek itself a way,
by breaking ye skinn, shell or case. It were no ill co^pariso^ to like^ tho^der
to the sound of a gonne, which be both caused of the same or very like causes.

The sound of tho^ders is diverse, after which, men have divided ye tho^ders
into diverse kinds. Diverse kinds of thonder.
Making first ij. sorts, yt is, small tho^der and great. But as for the
diversity of sou^des, generally it comes of ye diverse disposition of ye
clouds, one while having more holes then at another, sometime thicker in one
place then in another. The small or little tho^der is, Small thonder and the
kinds thereof
when ye exhalatio^ is driven from side to side, of ye cloud, making a noise,
and either for ye small quantity, and less forcibles, or else for the thicknes
of ye clouds walls, is not able to break the^, but ro^bleth up and down wtin
ye cloud, whose sids ar stronger the^ ye force of ye exhalation is able to
break, it ro^neth up and down wtin, and striking against the cloud and moist
sides, makes a noise not unlike to the que^ching of whote yro^ in cold water.

And if ye Exhalation be meanly strong, and the cloud not in all places of
like thickenes, it breaks out at those thinn places which such a bussing,
as wynd makes blowyng out of narrow holes.

But if the cloud, be so thynne, that it cannot keep in ye Exhalation,
although it be not kyndled, then it blows out with like puffinge as wind
comes out of a pair of bellows.

A great thonder, is when the Exhalation is much in quantity, Great tho^der
and the kinds thereof.
and very whote and dry in quality, the cloud also very thycke and strong,
that easily will not give place to the wind, to escape out.

Wherefore if the Exhalation do vehemently shake the cloud, though it do not
at the first disperse it, it makes a long and fearful romblyng against the
sides of the cloud, until at the last being made stronger by swyfter motion,
it dissolueth the cloud, and has liberty to pass out into the open air.
The cloud resolved, droppeth down, and then follows a shower of rain.

Otherwhyles it shakes the cloud, not long, but streyghtwaye rendeth it a
long space and time, whose sound is like the rendyng of a broad clothe,
which noyce continues a pretty while.

And sometime it discusseth the cloud at once, making a vehement and terryble
crack like a gonne, sometime with great force, casting out stones, but most
commenly fire, which sets many high places on fire. As in the year of
our Lord, 1561. the fourth day of June, the steple of saint Paul's church in
London was set on fire, as it has been once or twyse before, and burned. The
noyce of thonder though it be great in such places over which it is made, How
far thu^der is hard.
yet is it not hard far of, especially against the wind. Whereof we had
experience also in the year of our Lord, 1561. on saint Mathyes day in
February, at the evening, when there was a great flashe of lyghtnynges, and a
very terryble crack of thonder followynge, they that were but xv. miles from
London Westwarde, heard no noise, nor sound thereof: the wind that time was
Western.

The effect of thonder is profitable to men, The profit of thonder.
both for that the sweet shower does follow it, and also for that it purges,
and purifieth the air by the swyft mouynge of the Exhalation, that breaks
forth, as also by the sound which deuidynge and pearcyng the air, causes
it to be much thynner, which may be veryfied by an history that Plutarchus in
the life of T. Quincius Flaminius, Plutarchus T. Quincius Flaminius.
reports, that there was such a noyce made by the Grecians after their
liberty was restored, that the birds of the air that flewe over them were
seen to fall down, by reason that the air divided by their cry, was made so
thinn, that there was no firmitie, or strength in it to bear them up. And let
this suffice for thonder, whom lyghtnyng succeadeth in treaty, that seildome
is from it in nature.

Of Lyghtninge.
Among the diverse kinds of lightning, Lightni^g
which writers in this knowledge do number, we shall entreat only of four
kinds, yet so, that under these four, all the rest may be comprehended. The
names we must borrowe of the latin tongue. The first is Fulgetrum, The second
Coruscatio, the third Fulgur the fourth, Fulmen. Fulgetiu^, Coruscatio, Fulgur,
Ful^^^


Of Fulgetrum.
FVlgetrum we call that kind of lyghtening which is seen on summer nights and
eueninges, Fulgetru^
after a whote day. The generation hereof is such, when many thynn, light,
and whote Exhalations, by the immoderate heat, have been drawn up from the
earth, and by the absence of the sun, be destitute of ye force, whereby they
should have been drawn further upward, yet something ascending by their own
nature, in that they be light and whote they meat with the cold, either of the
night in the lowest region, or else of the air in the middle region, and so by
resistance of co^traries (as it has been often before rehearsed) they are beaten
back, and with the vehement moving set on fire. This lightning commonly goes
out in the air, terrible to behold, not hurtful to any thing. Except somtim
when the matter of it is, earthy and gross, being stricken down to the earth,
it blasteth corn, and grass, with other small hurt. Sometime it sets a
barn or thacked house on fyere. The color of this lightninge, The collor of
this lyghtning.
as of all other, is diverse, partly according to the matter, and partly
according to the light. If the matter be thynne, it is white, if the substance
be gross, it is ruddy, like flames of fire, in great light as in the day it
appears white, in the night, ruddy, yet sometime in the day time, we may see
it yealow, which is a token that the matter is wonderful thick and gross.
Old wives are, wont to say that no night in the year, except one passes
without lyghtnynge, but that is as true as the rest of their tales, whereof
they have great stoore.

Of Coruscation.
COruscation is a glistering of fire, Coruscation.
rather then fire in dead, and a glymmerynge of lyghtning, rather then
lightning it self. which is ij. manner of ways, one way, when clouds yt be
lower then the upper part of the earth, without the compass of our sight, are
enflamed, and the reflection of that flame, is cast up into our sight appearyng
in all points like lyghtning, sauinge that the air where it appears is so
clear, that we are persuaded no lightning can be there caused. Another way, is
when there be thycke clouds over us, and commonly a double order of clouds,
one above an other, if lightninge or any other inflammatio^ be in ye upper part
of these clouds, the light of them perceth through the lower parts, as through
a glass, and so appears as though it lyghtned, when perhaps it did lyghten
in dead, yet that which we saw, was but the shadow thereof. And this is
often without thonder.

Of Fulgur.
FVlgur is that kind of lightning which follows thonder, Fulgur.
whereof we have spoken before. For when that violent Exhalation breaks
forth, making a noyce as it beats against the sides of the cloud, with
the same violence, it is set on fire, and casts a great light, which is
seen, far and near. And although the lyghtnyng appear unto us, a good
preaty while before the thonder clappe be hard, The lightening is not before
the thond. though it seem so.
yet is it not caused before the noyce if any thonder at all do follow, but
either is after it or with it. Wherefore that we see it, before we hear the
tho^der, may be ascribed, either to the quicknes of our sight, that preuenteth
ye hearing, or else to the swyft mouinge of the fire and the light thereof, to
our eyes, Sight preuenteth hearing.
and the slow mouynge of the sound unto our ears and hearing. These three
kinds of lyghtnynges, are more fearful then hurteful, but the fourth seldom
passes without some damage doing.

Of the fourth kind called Fulmen
THe most dangerus, violent, and hurtful, kind of lightning is called
Fulmen, whose generation is such, as follows. What time, a whote Exhalation,
is enclosed in a cloud, and breaking the same, bursteth forth, it is set on
fire, and with wonderful great force stryken down toward the earth: The
crack of thonder, that is made when this lightening breaks out, is sudden,
short, and great, like the sound of a gonne. And often times a great stoone
is blown out, with it, which they call the thonder bolt, The thonderbolt cast
out of the clouds.
which is made on this manner. In the Exhalation, which is gathered out of the
earth, is much earthy matter, with clotterynge together by moisture, being
clammy by nature, consistynge of brymstone and other metallycke substance, by
the excessive heat, is hardened as a brycke is in the fyere, and with the
mighty force of the Exhalation, stronglye cast toward the earth, and
stryketh down steples, and high buildings of stoone, and of woodde, passes
through them and sets them on fire, it cleueth trees and sets them on
fire, and the stronger the thing be that resists it, the more harm it does
to it. Strongest things are most hurt of lightenyng.
It is sharp poynted at one end, and thycke at the other end, which is
caused by reason, that the moyster part, as heauyer, goes to the bottom of
it. So is the top small, and the bottom thick.

Men write that the thonderbolt goes never above five foot deep, when it
falls upon the earth, How deep tho^der bolt goes into the earth.
which stands with reason, both because the strength of it is weakened,
before it com so near the ground, and also, because the continual thicknes of
the earth, breaks the force, were it never so great.

Both Aristotle, Seneca and Plinius, Aristot. Plinius. Seneca.
divide this lyghtning into three kinds.

Of the first.
THe first is dry, which burns not, Dry lightening.
to be felt but deuideth, and perceth with wonderful swyftnes. For being
subtyle and pure, it passes through the pores of any thing, be they never so
small, and such things, as give place unto it, it hurts not, but such
things as resists, it deuideth and perseth. For it will melt money in men's
purses, the purses being whole, and unharmed. Yea, it will melte a sword in the
scabberde, Money molten in men's purses and swerds in scabberds
and not hurt the scabberd at al. A wine vessel it will cleave, and yet the
wine shall be so dull, that by the space of three days it will not run out. It
will hurt a man's hand and not his glove. It will burn a man's bones within him
to ashes, and yet his skin and flesh shall appear fair, as though nothing
had commen to him. Yea otherwhyle the whole man in the moment of an hour,
shall be burned to ashes, where as his clothes, shall not seem to have been
touched. It will also kill the child in the mothers belly, and not hurt the
mother. And all because the matter is very subtyle, and thin, burning, and
passinge through whatsoever it be, that will not give it free passage.

Of the second kind.
THe second kind is moist, and because it is very thin, Moist lightninge.
it burns not to ashes, but only blasteth, or scorcheth trees, corn, and
grass: and by reason of the moistnes, Why it makes black.
it makes all things black, that it comes near, as moist wood burning, is
smokye and makes things near it to be black and smokie.

Of the third kind.
THe third kind is most like our commen fire, Gross lightning.
that we have here on the earth of gross and earthly substance, wherefore it
leaves a prynte where it has been, or else consumes it into ashes, if it be
such a body as wylbe burned with fire.

Of the maruayls of Lightening and their causes.
BEside the wonderful effects of lightnyng, The marueiles of lightning
that have been already remembered, there be many other which hereafter ensue,
with the reason and causes unto them belonging, as thus.

The nature of lyghtning is, Light poysoneth.
to poison beasts that are stryken therewith, as though they had been bytten
by a serpent. The cause of this is, that the matter of lightnyng, is much
infected with brymstone, and other poisonous metallike substances, which will
poison the rather in lightening, because it is thinn and gives the^ passage
into every part of the body. It is notable, that Seneca writes, how wine
vessels of wood being burned with lightning, Senecae. Wine not ronning the
vessels being broken.
the wine would stand still, and not run out, the reason hereof, is the
swyfte alteration and change, whereby also, all the clammynes of the wine, is
drawn to the outward most part, and so keeps in the wine, as in a skin,
that by the space of three days, it will not run. It will also poison wine,
in so much that they which drink thereof, shall either be mad or dye of
it. The cause hereof was set forth before.

Lightning that strikes a poysenous beast purges it from the poison,
Lightni^g purges a poisonous beast.
in so much that it causes a serpent or snake which it kylleth, to bread
worms, which otherwise it would not do, but being purged from the natural
poison by the swyfte percyng of the lightning: nothing lets, but that it may
bread worms, A snake breadeth no worms.
as all other corrupt flesh will do.

If lyghtning strike one that slepeth, it opens his eyes, and of one that
waketh, it shytteth the eyes. Lightni^g opens his eyes that slepeth and
closes his that waketh.
The cause is this, that it waketh him that sleeps, and kylleth him before he
can close his eyes again. And him that waketh, it so amaseth, that he wynketh,
as he will do at any sudden chaunse, so he dies before he can open his eyes
again.

All living things, turn their face toward the stroke of the lyghtenyng,
Lyuinge things turn their face toward lyghtning.
because it is their nature, to turn their head if any thing com suddenly
behind them. The rest that have their face toward it, when it comes, never
turn before they be killed.

The reason why it kylleth the child in the mothers womb, not hurtynge the
mother, is the tenderness of the one, and the strength of the other, when the
lightenyng is not vehement, otherwise both should dye together.

Sometime lyghtening burns only the garments, Garments burnt the body unhurt.
shoes, or hear of me^, not hurtynge their bodies, and then the Exhalation is
nothing vehement. Some time it kylleth a man and there apereth no wound
without, neither any hurt within, no not so much as any sign of burning:
for then the Exhalation which being kindled is called lyghtning is wonderful
subtle and thin, so swiftly passing through that it leaves no mark or
token behind it.

They that behold the lightening, are either made blind, or their face
swells, or else become lepers, Lightning causes blindness swelling or leprosy
for that fyery Exhalation, received into the pores of their face and eyes,
makes their face to swel, and break out into a leprosy, and also dries up
the Christalline humor of their eyes, so that consequently they must needs be
blind.

Eutropius shows, Eutropius.
that the same day in which Marcus Tullius Cicero, M. Tullius Cicero.
was borne, a certain virgin of Rome ryding into Apulia, Apulia.
was stricken with lightening, so that all her garments being taken from her
without any rendinge, she lay stark naked, the lasing of her breast being
undone, and her hose garters untied: yea, her bracelettes collers and rings,
being also loosed from her. Likewise her horse lay dead with his bridle and
girtes untied.

The places of them that are burnt with lightning are colder then the rest of
their bodies, The wou^des of lightning cold
other because the greater heat draws away the lesser, or else because, that
by the great violence the vital heat is quyghte extinguished in that place.

The sea Calfe is never hurt with lyghtening, Sea calfe not hurt with
lightening.
wherefore the Emperoures tents, were wont to be covered with their skins.

The Baye trees, and box trees, are never or seldom stryke^ with lyghtning.
Bays and box seldom hurt with lightning.
The cause of these may be, the hardness of their skin, which has so few
pore holes, that the Exhalation can not enter into them.

The eagle also among fowls is not stryken with lightening, wherefore the
Poets feign, that the Eagle carries Jupiters armur, The Eagle Jupiters harnes
bearer
which is lightnyng. The reason may be the thicknes and drienes of her
feathers, which will not be kindled with so swift a fire.

Of storm wyndes.
A Storm wind, Storm wyndes.
is a thycke Exhalatio^ violently moved out of a cloud without inflammation or
burning. The matter of this storm, is all one with ye matter of lightening,
that has been spoken of: namely it is an Exhalation very whot and dry, and
also gross and thycke, so that it will easily be set on fire, but the^ it has
another name, and other effects

The form or manner of the generation is such. When abondance of that kind of
Exhalation is gathered together, within a cloud, which needs will have one
way out or other: it breaks the cloud, and causes thonder, as it has been
tought before, but if the matter be very thick, and the cloud somewhat
thynne, then does it not re^de the cloud, but falling down, bears the
cloud before it, and so is carried as an arrowe out of a bow. It does always
go before a great soden showere, for when the cloud is broken, the water
must needs fall down. Also it is so gross, and so thick, that it darkeneth
the air, and makes all the lowest region of the air, to be in manner as a
dark smokye cloud. It causes tempeste in the Sea, and wonderful great
danger to them that bear sail, whom if it overtake, it brings to utter
destruction. So soden it is, that it can not be resisted with sodeyn help. So
violent it is, that feeble force can not withstand it. Finally, it is so
troublesome with thonder, lyghtnynge, rain and blaste, besides these
darkness and cold, that it would make men, at so near a pynche to be at
their wits ends, if they wear not accustomed to such tumultuous tempest.
Wherefore it wear profitable, to declare the signs that go before it, to the
end, men might beware of it. But they are so commen to other tempests, that
either they are known well enoughe, or else being never so well known, in a
seldom calamytie they would little be feared. The Sea ships subject to
more danger, have more help if it be used in time, but no signs foreknowen,
can profit the dweller of the land, to keep his house from ruin, except it
wear to save his life from the fall of this mansion. The soden violence of
this tempest to him, is more seldom times, but more incurable when it comes
then to the Maryner, who has some aid to look for, by his coming, the
other if he escape with his life, may comfort him self, that he was near a
great danger, and cast with him self to build up his house again.

Of whyrle wyndes.
A Whirlewinde, Whirle wyndes.
is a wind breaking out of a cloud, rolling or wynding round about,
ouerthrowying that which stands near it, and that which comes before it,
carrying it with him a loft in the air.

It differs from a storm wind in three points.

First in the matter which is less in quantity, and of thinner substance.

Secondly in the moving, which is circulare wyndyng about, where as the storm
blows a slope and sydelonges. Also a whyrlewynde in the mouinge divides not
it self abroad, and blows dyrectly as the storm does.

And thirdly in the manner of the generation, for a storm does always come out
of one cloud, but a whyrlewynde some time is caused by means of two contrary
wyndes that meet together. In like manner, as we see in the streates of cities,
where the wind is beaten back from two walls, meetinge in the myddest of the
streate, there is made a little whyrlewynde, which whiskynge round about takes
up the dust, or strawes and blows it about after the very similitude of the
great and fearful whirle wind. The reason of the going about, is this, that
when the walls beat back the wind from them, which abounds in that place,
and those wyndes, when they meet by reason of equal force on both sides, can
neither drive one ye other back again, nor yet pass through one ye other: it
must needs be, that they must both seek a way on the side at once, and
consequently, be carried round about, the one as it were pursuing the other,
until there be space enough in the air, ye they may be parted asonder.

The matter of a whyrlewynde, is not much differing from the matter of storm
and lyghtening, that is an Exhalation whote and dry, breakyng out of a cloud,
in diverse parts of it, which causes the blowyng about* also it is caused as
it has been said, by two or more wyndes, blowyng from diverse places, which
may be of particular causes yt has been shows before in the chapter of
wyndes. The troubles of whirlewyndes.
This tempest is noisome to man and beast, Sea and land, things living, and
life lacking. For it will take up both men and beasts, stoones and cloddes of
earth, which when it has borne a great way will not be so curtues as to
set them down again, but neglygently lets them fall from a great heyght,
or else violently throws them down to the earth.

It breaks trees wyndyng them about and pulling them up by the roots. It
turns about a ship and brooseth it in peaces wc other mischiefs beside.

Of the fyred whirle wind.
Sometime a whirlewynde, is set on fire within the cloud, Fyered whyrlewynde.
and then breakyng forth, flies round like a great cartewhyle, terrible to
behold, burning and ouerthrowynge all dry things, that it comes near, as
houses, woods, corn, grass, and whatsoever else stands in the way.

It differs not from a whirlewind, saving that it is kindled and set on fire,
so apearing, else the generation of both is called one.

Of Circles.
THe Circle called Halon, is a garland of diverse colors that is seen about
the sun, the Moon, or any other sterre specially about Jupiter or Venus,
Circles about the sun, the moon and other sters Jupiter and Venus Planetes.
for their great bryghtnes. It is called of the Greeks a compassed platte, of
the Latins a crown or garlande.

The matter wherein it is made, is a cloud of equal thicknes, or thinnes,
coming directly under ye body of the sunn, the Moon, or other sterres, into
which the light of the heavenly body is received, and so appears round,
because the sterre is round, or as a stoone cast into the water, Circles in
the water
makes many round circles, dilatyng in breadth, until the violence of the
mouyng is ended: so is it in the air the light beams percynge it, causes
broad Circles to be delated, The colors of circles.
which appear whyght, purple, black, read, green, blewe, and other collors,
according to the disposition of ye clouds matter. The cause of such colors,
is showed before in the peculiar treaty of colors.

This circle is oftener seen about the Moon, then about the Sun, because the
heat of the Sun draws the vapors to high, where it can not be made. Also,
because the night is a more quiet time then the day from wind, it is more
often in the night, the^ in the day. Syldome about other sterres, because
their light beams ar to weak often to perse a cloud, yet oftener about small
sters then the Sun, because the light of ye Sun, perceth the cloud more
forcively, then that this Halon can many times be cause.

Otherwhyles it is seen about a candell, Circles about a ca^dle.
which must be in a very thick and gross air, of such proportionate
thicknes, that it may receive the light as the cloud does from the sterres, as
in smoky places, or whotehouses.

This kind of Circle, is sometimes like a raynbowe, saving that it is a whole
circle, unless the sterre under which it is caused, be not all risen, or else
the cloud in which it is seen be not al come under the sterre, or after it
has come under some part thereof be dissolved from the rest.

These Circles be signs of tempest, the signs of these circles.
and wyndes, as witness both Virgile, and Aratus. Virgilius Aratus. Poets.


The wind shall blow from that quarter, where the circle first begins to
break. The cause whereof is this, that the circle is broken, by the wind that
is above, which is not yet come down toward us, but by this effect above,
we may gather both that it will come, and also from what quarter.

A great Circle about the Moon, betokens great cold and frost to follow
after. Sign of frost.


But if it vanyshe away and be dissolved altogether, it is a sign of fair
weather. Sign of fair weather.


If it be brooken in many parts, it signifies tempest. Sign of tempest.


If it wax altogether thicker, and darker it is a fore warnyng of rain. Sign
of rain.


One alone after Ptolomee, Ptolomeus.
pure and white, vanyshing away by little and little, is a token of fair
weather. Sign of fair weather.


Two or three at once, portendeth tempest, if they be ruddy, they show wind
to come, and toward snow, they seem as it were kroken and rockye.

Being dark or dymme, Sign of snow.
they signify all these forsayde euentes, with more force and abundaunce, it
is oftener caused in Autumn, and spring then in winter or summer, the cause is
the temperatnes of the time.

The cause why it apeareth sometime greater, and sometime lesser, is in the
qualititie of the matter, which as it is gross, or thynne, will more or less
be dylated, and stretched abroad, and also as some will have it, of the
weakness of men's sight. Of which Aristotle brings an example in one Antipho,
Arist. Antipho.
which did always see his own image before him in the air, as in a glass,
which he affyrmeth to have been for the weakness of his sight beams, that
could not pearce the air, so that they wear reflected again to him self.

And thus much for Halone and the causes, signs, or tokens of it.

Of the Raynbowe.
THe Raynbowe, Rainbow
is the aparition of certain colors in a cloud opposite against the sun,
in fashion of half a Circle. Possidonius said, Possidonius.
it was the suns lookyng glass, wherein his image was represented, and that
the blewe colloured, was the proper color of the cloud, the red of the
sun, all the other colors of commixtion.

It differs manifoldly from Halone, for the raynbowe is always opposite
against the sun, but Halone is directly under it.

They differ not only in place, but also in fashion, the raynbowe, is but
half a Circle, the Halon is a whole Cyrcle.

Likewise they vary in colloure, for the raynebowe is more dymme and of purple
color, the Halone whyter and bryghter.

Also in continuance, for the raynebowe may continue, longer, then Halone.

The image of the raynbowe may be seen on a wall, ye sunn striking through a
six pointed stoone, called Iris, a precious stone called iris.
or any other Crystal of the same fashion, also through some glass wyndowe.

Halone is seen about candelles, in smoky places, as are bathes and kychenes.

The manner of the generation of the raynbowe is such, there is opposite
against the sun, a thycke watrye cloud, which is already resolved into
dewye drops of rain, as (for a gross similitude) is seen on the potlidde
when the water in the vessel has sodden, A similitude.
or is very whote, the lydde wylbe al full of small drops of water, which
come from the water in the vessel, first by heat resolved into smoke, after
when it cannot go at large, it is resolved again. Wherefore upon such a
cloud, the sun beams strykynge, as upon a smoothe glass, do express the
image of ye sun imperfectly, for the great distance. Or else the sun beams,
strike into an hollow cloud, where they are refracted or broken, and so comes
to the eyes of him ye beholds the raynbowe.

The similitude thereof is seen, Similitude of the raynbowe.
when men sail or row in boats, the sun shyneth upon the water, which
casts on the vessels side, the colors and image of the raynbowe.

Likewise water in an vrinall holde^ against the sun, receives the light and
shows colors on the wall.

There be two kinds of rainbowes, one of the sun, Rainbow of the sunn
another of the Moon, Rainbow of the Moon.
the one by day, the other by night, the raynbowe of the sun often, but of
the Moon very seldom, in so much that it can be but twyse at the most, in
fiftye years, and that when the Moon, is in the East or West, full in perfect
opposition. It has not been many times seen sense the writing of histories,
yet some times and for the rarenes, is taken for a great wonder. Yet is it in
color nothing so beutiful, as the suns, but for the most part, whight, as
milk, other diversities of colors are scant perceived. When it appears, it
is said to signify tempest.

The time of the raynbowe, is often after the point of Autumn, both for the
placing of the sun in competent lownes, and also for abundance of matters,
seldom or never is the raynbowe seen about the midst of summer.

There may be many raynbowes at one time, yet commenly but one pryncipall, of
which the rest are but shadows, and images, the second shadow of the first,
the third of the second, as appear by placing of their colors.

It remains to show why it is but half a circle, or less, neuermore, and
why the whole cloud receives not the same colors, that the raynbowe has.
The cause of the first is, because the center, or mydle point of the raynbowe,
that is Diametrally apposite to the center of the same, is always either in
the Horrizon (that is the circle cutting of our sight of heaven by the earth)
or under it. The cause why the whole cloud is not colloured, is because that
in the myddest the beams as strong, perse through, but on the edges where
they are weaker, they are reflected or refracted.

Now for so much, as God made the raynbowe a sign and Sacrament of his
promise, some think it was never seen before the floude. Their reason may be
this, that the earth after the first creation was then so fruictfull, that it
neaded none, or very little rain, so that such dark clouds, wear not often
gathered, the fruictfull ground not so easily remitting his moisture, that then
was fat and clammye, hard to be drawn up: so it might be that there was no
raynbowe before, as we cannot find that ever it rayned before. But whether it
were or not, it is certain, that then it became a Sacrament, where as it was
none before, which when we behold, it behooves us to remember, ye truth of
God in all his promyses, to his glory and our comfort.

The milk way called of some the way to saint James and Watlyng streate.
THe milk way, is a white circle seen in a clear night, the white circle seen
in the night.
as it were in the firmament, passing by the signs of Sagittarius and Gemini.

The cause thereof, is not agreed upon among Philosophers, whose opinions I
thought best to report, before I come to the most probable causes.

First of all Pithagoras, Pithagoras.
is charged we a Poetical fable, as though it had been caused by reason that
the sun did once run out of his pathway, and burned this part whereof it
looks white.

Other as Anaxagoras and Democritus, Anaxagoras, Democritus.
said, that it was the light of certain sterres, shining by them selves, of
their own light, which in the absence of the sun, might be seen. But this
opinion is also false, for the sterres have no light of them selves, but of the
sun, also if it were so, it should apear about other sterrs,

Democritus is also reported to have said, that it was nothing else but
innumerable little stars, which with their confuse light, caused that
whytnes, to this opinion, Cordanus
Cardane seems to subscribe.

The Poets have four fables of it, one that Phaeton, Phaeton.
which on a time guided the Chariot of the sunn, and wandering out of the way,
did burn ye place, wherefore of Jupiter he was stryken down with lyghtnyng.

The second, that it is the high street in heaven, that goes straight to
Jupiters palace, Ovid. Meta. Pr.
and both sides of it, the common sort of Gods do dwell.

The third, that Hebe, Hebe.
one which was Jupiters Cupbearer, on a time, sto^bled at a star, and shed
the wine or milk, that was in the cup, which colloured that part of heaven
to this day, wherefore she was pout out of her office.

The fourth, that Apollo stood there to fight against the Giantes, Apollo.
which Jupiter made to appear, for a perpetual memory.

Theophrastus a Philosopher affirmed, that it was ye joining together,
Theophrastus.
or seem of the two half globes, which made it appear more light in that
place then in other.

Other said, it was the reflection of the shyning light of fire, or sterre
light, as it is seen in a glass, but then it should be moveable.

Diodorus, Diodorus
affirmed, that it was heavenly fire, condensede or made thick, into a circle,
and so became visible, whereas the rest for the pureness, clearenes, and thinnes,
could not be seen.

Possidonius whose mind to many seems very reasonable, Possidonius.
said: it is the infusion of the heat of sterres, which therefore is in a
circle, contrary to the Zodiake, Zodiake.
(out of which the sun never wandreth) because it might temper the whole
compass with vital and lively heat. Although in my mind he has rather
expressed the final cause, then the efficient.

Aristotle's opinion is, Arist.
that it should be ye beams of a great circle, which is caused by a cloud or
Exhalation drawn up by those sterres, which be called Sporades Sporades.
This opinion of Aristotle's is myslyked of most men, that have trauayled in
this science and worthily. For if it were of the nature of elements, as
Exhalations are, it would be at length consumed. But this circle never
corrupts, therefore it is not of Exhalatio^s. Also it nether increases or
diminishes, which is a plain proof, that it consists not of elementall
matter. Although Aristotle seem to make a double circle, one celestial,
another elementall.

The last opinion is of them that say, it is of the nature of heaven, thycker
in substance then other parts of heaven be, having some lykenes to the
substance of the Moon, which being lightened by ye same, as al ye stars be,
apereth whight. And this opinion I take to be ye most probable, because that
sentence of sterrelight seems not so reasonable to be only in that place, and
not else where.

The final cause of this milkewhyte circle, has been already touched in the
opinion of Possidonius, Possidonius
whereunto also in Plinius in the xviij. book and xxix. chapter of his natural
history agrees, Plinius.
affirming yt it is very profitable, for the generation and fruitful increase
of things that grow on the earth. The breadth of this circle
The Mathematicians that have measured ye breadth thereof, affirm that toward
the north it passes over the eclipticall line of the ninth sphere, from the
xviij. degree of Gemini unto the second degree of Cancer which is xiij.
degrees, and toward the South, from the viij. degree of Sagittarius to the
xiij. degree of the same sign, and because it is there divided into ij.
branches (as may easly be seen in a clear might) it reaches from the xxiiij.
of Sagittarius to the second degree of Capricorn.

This circle if it be of the nature of heaven, is improperly placed among
Meteores or impressions, but because of Aristotle's mind, who will have it to
be an impression kendled, and their opinion which think it proceadeth of ye
light of sterres it is not without good cause in this place entreated of.

Of beams or streams of light appearing through a cloud.
There is yet another kind of impressio^ caused by the beams of the sun,
Beams or streams.
stryken through a watery cloud, being of unequal thines, ye is thinner in one
part the^ in another, so ye it cannot receive the beams in any other form,
the^ ye they appear direct or slope downward, of diverse collors, and ye same ye
ar ye collors of ye raynbow, though not so evident, because ye reflection is not
so strong. They vary in colors, some ar more purple, or ruddy, when the
cloud is thicker some yealow and whitish when the cloud is thinner, and so
other collors ar caused likewise, whereof you may read the proper causes in the
colors of clouds and other like parts of this treatise. The common people
call it the desce^ding of the holy ghost, or our Ladies Assumption, because
these thing are painted after such a sort. Other say that it is rain,
stryking down in another place, as though they could see the drops falling.
And they are not altogether deceived, but in the time, for sone after it will
rain, because this impression appears out of a watery cloud. They are called
by diverse names, as rods, wandes, coardes of tents, unto which they are not
much unlike, staves and little pyllers, when they seem greater and thicker,
many being joined together. The rain bow, the circles and these lyghtbeames,
are all of one manner of generation, in so much that if you divide the circle,
it shall be a raynbowe, if you draw it straight, in length, it makes streams
or beams. Herein they agree, namely in form and matter, but they differ in
outward form, which we may call fashion, as the one is round, the other half
round, and the third direct, straight or falling a slope. Also they differ
in place, about which they stand, for streams are only about the sun,
raynbowes about the son often, and seldom about the Moon, but circles both
about the sun and the Moon, and also about any other of all the sterres, yet
rather and oftener about bright sterres. To make an end of these streams,
they apeare diversely, after the fashion and place wherein the cloud hangs in
respect of the sun.

For some time they are seen only in the edge of a cloud, all the breadth of
that cloud. Sometime through the mids of a cloud, being thynner there, then
in other parts, and then they are spread round about like a tente or pauilon
used in war. They are most commenly seen in such times, as there is great
abundance of rain, which they, by their apparition do signify not yet to
be ended. And thus much concerning direct light beams called rods etc.

Of many Sons.
Many Suns at once.
IT is strange and marvelous to behold, the lykelyhode of that, which
Alexander the great, Alexander the great.
sending word to Darius, Darius.
said to be impossible, that two sons should rule the world. But
oftentimes, me^ have seen, as they thought in the firmament, not only two
sons, but oftener three suns, and many more in number, though not so often
appearing. These how wonderful soever they appear, proceade of a natural
cause, which we will endeavor to express. They are nothing else but Idols, or
Images of the sun, represented in an equal smooth and watery cloud, placed
on the side of the sun, and sometime on both sides, into which the sunn
beams being received as in a glass, express ye likeness of fashion and light,
that is in the sun, appearing as though there were many suns, where as in
deed there is but one, and all the rest are images. This thick and watery
cloud, is not said to be under the sun, for then it would make the circles
called crowns or garlonds, it is not opposite to the sunn, for the^ would it
make the rainbow, but it is said to be on the side, where the imapert may be
best represented. Also it may not be to far of* for then the beams will be to
feeble to be reflected neither yet to near, for if it so be the sun will
disperse it. but in a co^petent and middle distance, for so representation of
many suns is caused.

They are most often seen, in the morning and evening, about the rising or
going down of the sunn, seldom at noonee time, or about the midst of the
day, because the heat will soon dissolve the^. Yet has there been some seen,
which began in the morning, and continued all the day long, unto the evening.
Many small suns like stars Similitude.
Sometimes there apeare many little suns, like unto little stars, which are
caused after the same sort, as we do see a man's face, to be expressed in all
the pieces of a broken glass. So when the cloud has many separations, there
appear many suns, on one side of the true sun, sometimes great, and
sometimes little, as the parts of the cloud separated are in quantity.

They do naturallye betoken tempest, and rain, The signification of many
suns.
to follow because they can not appear, but in a watery disposition of the
air.

Also if they apeare on the Southside of the sun they signify a greater
tempest then if they appear on the Northsyde. The reason is alleged, because
ye Southern vapor is sooner resolved into water, then is the Northern.

For a supernatural signification, they have often times been noted to have
portended, the contention of Princes for kingdoms. As not long before the
contention of Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, Galba, Otho, and Vitellius
for the Empire of Rome, there appeared three suns. Also of late toward the
slaughter of Jews king of Hongary, were seen three sons, betokening three
princes that contended for the kingdom, namely Ferdinando now Emperor, John
Vayuode, and the great Turk.

Of many Moons.
AFter the treaty of many suns, if wear not hard for any man, without
farther instruction to know the natural cause of many Moons. Many Moons.
For they are likewise Images of the Moon, represented in an equal cloud,
which is watery, smothe, and polyshed, even like a glass. Some call the^ (as
Plinius says) night suns, Plinius.
because they joined with the light of the true Moon, give a great shynning
light, to drive away the shadow and darkness of the night.

It were superfluous to write, more of their causes, or effects, which are al
one with those, that have been declared of the suns.

It may be doubted why the other stars do not likewise express their image,
Why other sterrs are not so represented.
in watery clouds, and so the number of them to our sight should be multiplied:
it may be answered, that their light or beams, are to feeble, and weak to
express any such similitude or lykenes in the watery clouds. For although
they have garlandes, or circles, about them, that are caused in a vapor, that
is under them: yet it is manifest, that this apparition has not need of so
strong a light, as is required to prynt ye images of them in the clouds.
Again the garlandes are direct under, and therefore apter to receive such
apparition.

It may be again objected that the stars have their image perfectly and
sufficiently expressed in glasses, Objection.
here on the earth, yea, and at the day time, when their light is either none
or most feeble, and weak, as we see it is used at mid-sommer to behold that
great star called Sirius, Syrius a great star seen at noone in Summer.
in a glass even at noone days.

Also we see every night, the image of the stars in calm and quiet standing
waters, then what should let, but that their images might also be expressed in
watery clouds.

Hereto may be answered, An answer.
that the let is in the cloud, which is neither so hard as is the glass, nor
yet so continual as the water, but consists of innumerable small drops, so
that except the light of the stars were stronger, it can in the^ express no
uniform images of them, as it does in glasses, and in the water.
Notwithstanding, in writers of wonders, we read some such like thing sometime
to have chaunsed.

There has been often seen many suns, in the day time, and after the
sun settinge, at the rising of the full Moon, there have appeared many
Moons, which was by this means that the same cloud, that received the sun
beams, in the morning, tarried in the same place, and at ye Moons rising, was
ready also to receive her image.

Of wonderful apparitions.
WE will close this book, Wonderful aparitions.
with a brief declaration of the natural causes, of many things, that are seen
in yt air, very wonderful and strange to behold, which in these later
years, have been often seen and beheld, to the great admiration of all men,
not without the singular providence of God, to forwarne us of many dangers,
that hang over us, in these most perilous times.

The aparition of which, as it is most wonderful, so the serching of the
cause, to us is most hard and difficulte. A great deal the rather, because
no man has hitherto enterprysed (to my knowledge) to seek out any cause of
them, but all men have taken them as immediate miracles, without any natural
mean or cause to procure them.

And I truly, do acknowledge yt they are sent of God as wonderful signs, to
declare his power, and move us to ame^dement of life, in deed miraculus, but
not yet so, yt they want a natural cause. For if they be well weighed and
considered, it is not hard to find, yt they differ much from such miracles,
as ar recorded in ye scripture, and admitted of divines. So that, as I ahhorre
the opinion of Epicures, to think that such things come by chance, but
rather by ye determined purpose of gods providence: so I consent not with them,
that suppose when any thing is derived from any natural cause, God the chief
and best cause of al things is excluded.

Some of these wonderful apparitions consist of circles and rainbowes, of
diverse fashions and placings, as one with in another, the edge of one touching
another, on dividing or going through another, with like placing of small
circles, about great circles, or parts of small circles, some with the ends
upward, some downward, some aside, and some acrosse, but all for the most part
in uniform order constituted or placed, for the order of them pleasant to
behold, but for the strangenes somewhat fearful. Such a like apparition, is
made with the sunns or Moons images, joined unto these circles, set also in
good and uniform order.

The cause of these is the meting together, of all those several causes, that
make the circles, rayn bowees, streams and images of the sunn or moon, which
joined altogether, make the wonderful sight of strange raynbowes, positions of
circles, crosses, and diverse lyghtes, which perteyne to the knowledge of
Optice and Catroptice, Optice Catroptice.
that teach how by diverse refractio^s and reflectio^s of beams, such
visions are caused. So that he, which will know how they are generated, must
return unto the several treatyses of raynbowes, circles, streams, and
images, of the sun or Moon, and if in the^ he find not knowledge
sufficient, to instruct him, I must send him to the demonstrations of
perspectiue, where he shall want nothing.

Another sort of them, no less often beheld within these few years, then ye
former, but a great deal more strange and wonderful to look upon, are the
sightes of armies fighting, in the air, of Castles, Cities, and Towns, with
whole countries, having in them hills, valies, ryuers, woods, also beasts,
me^, and fowls, monsters, of which there are no such kinds on the earth, and
finally all manner of things and actions, that are on the earth, as burialles,
processions, judgments, combats, men, women, children, horses, crowns, arm
of certain noble men, and contries, weapons of all sorts, sometimes stars,
angels, as they are painted with the image of Christ crucified, besieging of
castles and towns, many things and gesturs done by men or beasts, the very
similitude of persons known to the beholders, as of late, was seen the very
image of the Emperor Charles, insomuche that they which beheld it, put of
their cappes, thinking verily it had been he, and of Iho^ Frederick prince
Elector of Saxon, who ye time was prisoner with the emperor. Also the image of
small crosses, which has been not only in the air, but also on the earth, on
men's apparel, on dishes, platters, pottes, and al other things so that the
Jews have been full angry, that they could neither wash, nor rub them out of
their aparell. In Germany, also fyers and many such things, as it were long
stories, seen in the air.

All these wonderful aparitions, may be caused two manner of ways, the one
artificially, the other naturally. Artificially by certain glasses, and
instruments made according to a secret part of that knowledge which is called
Catoptrice, Catoptrice
and so peradventure some of them have been caused, but the most part
doubtless naturally, when the disposition of the air, has been such, that
it has received the image of many things placed and done on the earth. And
because it is apt to receive diverse images, as well in one place as in
another, these monstrous forms and strange actions, or stories proceade of
the ioyninge of diverse forms and actions, as if two histories, were
confusely painted in one, the whole picture would be strange or (as the Poet
says,) if a paynter to a man's head, should set a horses neck, Horatius
and after diverse feathers. Sometimes also, one image is multiplied in the air,
into many or infinite, as ar letters and crosses, which fill all the air,
even beneathe. And the light of the sun, received into little parts, makes
to apeare, as it were many small stars. Let this suffice, concerning these
wonderful apparitions: once again admonishyng the Reader, though I have
enterprysed to declare these by natural reason, yet believing yt not so much as
on sparrow falls to ye ground, without Gods providence, I do also
acknowledge Gods providence brings these to pass, to such end as before I
have showed, using these causes, as means and instruments to do them.

The fourth book of watery impressions.
THose be watery impressions, that consist most of water. In ye treaty of the^,
are wont to be handled, these impressio^s, namely clouds, rain, dew, hoar
frost, hayle, snow, springes, ryuers and the great sea it self.

Of clouds.
A Cloud is a vapor cold and moist, Clouds.
drawn out of the earth, or waters by the heat of the sun, into the mydle
region of the air, where by cold it is so knit together, that it hangs
until either ye weight or some resolution cause it to fall down.

The place wherein the clouds do hang is said to be in the middle region of
the air, because men see it is necessary that there should be a cold which
should make those vapors so gross, and thycke, which for the most part are
drawn so thin, from the earth, that they are invisible, as the aier is. And
although they are known oftentime as Aristotle witnesses, Arist.
to be in the lowest region of the air, near to the earth, in so much that
sometimes, they fall down to the earth, with great noise, to ye great fear of
men and no less loss and danger. Yet may it be reasonably thought, that
these clouds were generated in ye middle region of the air, far distant from
the earth, which by their heuines do by little and little sink down, lower
into ye lowest region, and sometimes also fall down to the earth.

The commen opinion is, the height of the clouds.
that they go not higher then nine mile, which because it leans to no
reason is uncertain.

Albertus Magnus, Albert Magnus.
whose reason also is to be doubted of, affirms, that the clouds do scarce
exceade three mile in heyght, when they are highest.

And some let not to say, that oftentimes they ascend not past the half of
one mile, in heyght.

Again other pretending to find out the truth by Geometical demonstrations,
make it above fifty mile to the place where the generation of clouds is

How these men take the distaunce from the earth, it is uncertain. whether
that they assign ye least distance, mean it from the highest part of the
earth, as are hill tops, or from the commen plain. Again, whether they yt
assign the highest distaunce to be from the lowest vallyes, of the earth, or
from the hylle tops.

The reason before showed, moves me to think that the most usual and common
generation, I mean the condensation or making thick of these thin vapors,
into clouds is in the middle region of the air. But for the distaunce of the
clouds, when they be generated I think they be sometime nine mile, sometime in.
mile, sometime half a mile, and sometime less then a quarter of a mile from the
earth.

Of Mystes.
THere be two kinds of mistes, Mystes.
ye one ascending, the other descending.

That which ascends, goes up out of the water, or ye earth as smoke, but
does not commonly spread over all other parts, it is seen in ryuers and moist
places.

The other mist, that goes down toward the earth, is when any vapor is lifted
up into the air, by the heat of the sun, which not being strong enough to
draw it so high, that the cold may knitte it: suffers it after it is a
little made thick, to fall down again, so it fills all the air with the
gross vapors, and is called mistes, being usually a sign of fair weather.

Of empty clouds.
THere be certain clouds, yt ar empty, Empty clouds.
and send no rain, they come of ij. sorts.

For one sort are the remnantes of a cloud, that has rayned, which can not
be converted into water, for there dryenes. Another sort is of them, that are
drawn up, of wett and dry places, and be rather Exhalations then vapors, that
is they be day, whot, and light, so that it were hard for them to be turned
into rain. They look white like flocks of woile, when ye light strikes into
the^. There be also empty clouds, when ye wyndes haus dispersed abroad, any
cloud, they are scatered over all the sky, but these clouds, though for a time
they be emptye, yet because they consist of such a substance as is watrye,
they may be and are often times, gathered together and give ple^tifull rain.

Of the colors of clouds, The color of clouds.
we have spoken in the second book of fyry Meteors, where those colors and
the causes of them, are described, which seem to be fyerye, or may be thought
to be inflammations or burninges, as be read fyry and yealowysh.

But beside those, there be white, black, blewe, and greane.

White clouds be thynne, and not very watery, so that the light received in
them, makes the^ to appear white.

Black clouds be full of thick, gross, and earthely matter, that makes them
look so dark.

Blew clouds be full of thick, gross, and earthly as the black, so the light
received in them, makes them to seem blewe.

Grene clouds are altogether watery, resolved into water, which receiving into
them the light, appear grene as water does in a great vessel, or in the sea
and ryuers.

Of Rain.
AFter the generation of clouds is well known, it shall not be hard to learn,
Rain.
from whence the rain comes.

For after the matter of the cloud being drawn up, and by cold made thick, (as
is said before) heat followynge, which is most commenlye of the Southern
wind, or any other wind of hot temper, does resolve it again into water,
so it falls in drops, to give increase of fruit to the earth, and move men
to give thanks to God.

There be small showers, of small drops, and there be great storms of great
drops.

The showers with small drops, proceade either of the small heat, that
resolves the clouds, or else of the great distaunce of the clouds from the
earth.

The streams with great drops, contrariwyse, do come of great heat,
resolving or melting the cloud, or else of small distaunce from the earth.
Whereof we see an experiment when water is powered forth, from an high place,
the drops are small, but if it be not from height, it will either have no
drops or very great.

The cause why rain falls in rou^droppes, is both, for that ye parts desire
the same form that the whole has, which is round* and also that so it is
best preserved against all contrary qualities, like as we see water, powered
upon dry or greasy things to gather it self into roundels, to avoid the
contrariety of heat and dryenes.

It is not to be ommitted, that rain water although a great part of it be
drawn out of the sea, yet most commenly it is sweet and not salt. why rain
water is not salt.


The cause is, because it is drawn up in such small vapors, and that salt
part is consumed by the heat of the sun.

The rayn water doubtless, does more increase and cherishe things growyng on
the earth, the^ any other water where with they may be watered, because the rain
water, reteineth much of the sunns heat in it, that is no small comfort to all
growyng plants. The water that comes from heaven, in rain will sooner come
to putrefaction, or stinking, then any other, because it has been made very
subtle by heat, and also for that it is mixed with so many earthly and
corruptible substaunces.

Rain water that falls in the summer, by Auicens judgment, Auicen.
is more wholesome then other water, because it is not so cold and moist as
other waters be, but whotter and lighter.

Sometime there is salt rain, Salt rain
when some Exhalatio^ which is whot and dry, is co^mixd we the vapor whereof the
rain consists.

Sometime it is bitter, Bitter rain.
when sum burnt earthly moisture is mixed with it. This rain is both
unwholesome and also vnfruictful. In these countries, there is great store and
plenty of rayn, because the sun is of such te^perat heat, yt it gathers
many vapors, and by immoderat heat does not consume them. But in ye East
parts, in some whot co^tries, it never or seldom is seen to rain, as in Egypt
and Siria, but insteade of rain Egypt has ye river Nilus, The river Nilus.
whose ouerflowings, does maruelously fatten ye earth. In Syria and other like
countries, they have more plentiful dew, then we have, which does likewise
make their earth exceading fruictfull.

Seneca testifies, Seneca.
that ye rayn soketh no deper into the earth the^ tenn foot deep.

Of the signs of Rain.
FIrst if the sky be redd in the morning, it is a token of rain, Signs of
rain.
because these vapors which cause the rednes, wylbe shortly resolved into rain.

If a dark cloud be at the sun rising, in which the sun soon after is
hid, it will desolue it, and rayn will follow. If then appear a cloud and
after vapors are seen to ascend up to it, that betokens rain.

If the sun or Moon look pale, look for rain.

If the sun in the East, seem greater then commonly he appears, it is a
sign of many vapors which will bring rain.

If the sun be seen very earlye, or few stars appear in the night, it be
tokeneth rain.

The often changing of the wynds, also shows tempest.

The most suer and certain sign of rain, is the southern wind, which
with his warmenes, always resolves the clouds, into rain.

When there is no dew at such times as by nature of the time, there should be,
rain follows, for the matter of the dew, is turned into the matter of watrie
clouds.

If in the West about the sun setting, there apeare a black cloud, it will
rain that night, because that cloud shall want heat, to disperse it.

When much dust is raised up, and when the woddes make a great noise, some
tempest is toward.

Hard stoones wylbe moist and sweat against rain, lamps, and candles, by
sparcling, frogs crying, trees breaking, leaves falling, and dust clottering
forewarne us of a tempest.

Flees, flies and gnats, byght sore toward a tempest, kyne feed greadely, birds
seek their vitels more besilie, for in the gross air disposed to rain,
their stomach is whoter and they more hongry. But these kind of signs
perteine not so properly to Meteorologie, as to maryners and husba^drie, which
have a great many more then these. And Virgil in his first book of Georgikes,
has a great number for them, that list to learn. Wherefore let these hitherto
suffice.

Of monstrous or prodigious rain.
Hitherto we have made mention only of natural rain, Of monstrous rain.
and that which is common which no man does marvel at. But there is sometime
such rain, that worthily may be wondered at, as when it raineth, worms, frogs,
fishes, blood, milk flesh, stones, wheat, iron, wol, brick and quicksiluer.
For histories make mention, that at diverse times, it has rained such things,
whose natural cause for the most part, we will go about to express,
notwithstanding accomptinge them among such wonders, as God sends to be
considered, for such ends, as we have before declared. Worms and frogs may
thus be generated, Worms and froggs
when fat Exhalations ar drawn up into ye air by a temperature of whott and
moist, such vermyn may be generated in the air, as they are on the earth,
without copulatio^ of male and female. Or else that with the Exhalations and
vapors, their seed and eggs are drawn up, which being in ye clouds brought
to form, fall down among ye rain.

Likewise the spawne of fishes, Fishes.
being drawn up makes fishes to rayn out of the clouds. Milk.
The vehement heat of the sun, in summer and specially in whot contries,
draws milk out of the pappes of beasts and cattle, which being carried up
in vapors and resolved again into milk, falls down like rayn.

After the same manner the sun also from places where blood has been spilt,
draws up great quantity of blood, Blood.
and so it rayneth blood.

It raineth flesh, Flesh.
when great quantity of blood being drawn up, it is clottered together and
seems to be flesh. Auicen says that a whole calfe fell out of the air,
Auicen.
and some would make it seem credible, that of vapors and Exhalations with the
power of the heavenly bodies, concurring, a calfe, might be made in the
clouds. But I had rather think, that this calfe was taken up in some storm of
whrlewynd, and so let fall again, the^ agree to so monstrous a generation.

It is a great deal more reasonable, that stones of earthly matter gathered in
clouds, Stones.
should be generated as we have said before of ye tho^derbolt. Yet some men
think, ye wynd in caves of ye earth, breaki^g upward violently, carries before
it, earth and stones into ye air, which can long abide, but fall down and are
compted among prodigius rain. Exhalations that be earthy and drawn out of
claye, have much gross substance in them, Brycke.
which gathered together, and by great heat burned in the clouds, make brick,
which is no great marvel.

He that has seen an eggs shell full of dew, drawn up by the sun into the
air, Wheat.
in a May morninge, will not think it incredible, that wheat and other grain,
should be drawn up in much whotter countries then ours is, much rather the
meal or flower which is lighter.

A certain mossynes, like woll, as is upon quinses, Wolle.
wyllowes, and other young fruictes and trees, is drawn up of the sun, among
the vapors and Exhalations, which being clottered together, falls down like
locks of wolle.

Quicksiluer all men know, Quicksyluer.
with small heat wylbe resolved into most thin vapors. Whereof when
quantity is drawent up, it falls down again. As it is read, that once at
Rome, it rayned quicksyluer, wherewith the brazen money being rubbed, it looked
like silver.

Titus Liuius, makes mention, that it rayned chalk, Chalk. T. Liuius
whereof the cause can not be hid to them, that read how stoone and brick
come into the air.

Iron has also rayned out of ye clouds, and sundry times, as histories
witness. Iron.
Whereof this has been the cause. The general matter of all metalles, with is
quicksiluer, and brymstone, which the special matter of mixtion, that makes
irone, wear all drawn up together, and there concocted into the metal, so
came the strange rain of iron.

Auicen says, Auicen.
he saw a piece of iro^ that fell out of the clouds, that weighed about an
hundred pound weight, where of very good swerdes were afterward made.

Of Dew.
Dew is that vapore, Dew.
which in spring and Autumn, is drawn up by the sun in the day time,
which because it is not carried into the middle region of the air, abidyng in
the lower region, by cold of the night, is condensede into water, and falls
down in very small drops.

There is common dew and sweet dew. One kind of the sweet dewes, is called
Manna, Manna.
being whyghte like sugar, which is made of thick and clammye vapors, which
makes it so to fall thick and white. It falls only in the East parts. As
for that Manna which God rained to the Israelites was altogether miraculous. In
Arabia (as Plinius writes) is a very precious kind of dew, Plinius. Arabia
yt is called Ladanum, Ladanu^.
which falling upon the herb Cusus, Cusus.
and mixed with the iuyse of that herb which goats do eat, is gathered of
goats hears and kept for a great treasure. There is another kind of sweet
dewes, that falls in England called the meldewes, which is as sweet as honey
being of such substance as honey is, drawn out of sweet herbs and flowers.

There is also a bitter kind of dew that falls upon herbs, bitterdew
and lies on them like brann or meal, namelye because it is of an earthly
Exhalation, and so remains, when the moyster is drawn away: this dew
kylleth herbs.

The comme^ dew, drunk of cattle, toth, rotte them because the matter is full
of viscositie, bringing the^ to a fluxio^.

There be three things, ye hinder dew from falling, that is great heat, great
cold, and wind. For dew falls in the most temperat calm time.

Of hoar froste.
HOare frost or whight frost, is nothing else but dew congeled by ouermuche
cold. Hoar frost
The South and East wynd, does cause dew, but the North and Northern wyndes,
do fryese the vapors, and so it becomes hoare froste, which if that
excessive cold had not been, should have turned into dew.

The dew and the hoare frost, agree in three things, namely in matter, in
quality of time, and place of their generation. In matter they agree, for they
are both generated of a subtle and thin vapor, also small in quantity.

In quality of time they consent, for both are made in a quiet and calm time,
for if there were great wind, it would drive away the matter, and so cold there
be no generation.

Thyrdly they are both generated in the lowest region of the air, for (as
Aristotle affirms) upon high hills, Arist.
there is neither dew nor hoare frost.

They differ also in three things. For the hoare froste is congeled before it be
turned into water, so is not the dew.

Secondly, the dew is generated in temperate weather, the whight froast in
cold weather.

Last of all, whote wyndes, as the South and East do cause dew, but cold
wyndes as the North and Weast do cause hoare froast.

Hoare froast does often stynke, because of the stinking matter whereof it
consists, which is drawn out of lakes and other muddy and stinking places.

Of Hayle.
HAyle is a hot vapor in the mydle region of the air, Hayle.
by the cold of that region, made thick into a cloud which falling down to
the soden cold of the lowest region is congeled into Ise.

There be so many kinds of hayle, as there be of rayn. The fashion of hayl, is
sometime round, which is a token yt it was generated in the mydle region of
the air, or very near it, for falling from high, the corners are worn away.

When the hayle stones are square, or three cornered, the hayle was generated
near the earth.

Often times, there is hard a great sound in the clouds, as it were of
tho^der, before hayle, or as it were of an army fighting etc. the cause is,
that vapors of contrary qualities, being enclosed in the cloud, do strive
to break out, and make a noise even as cold water does put into a seathing
pot.

In spryng and harvest time, is often hayle, seldom in summer and winter. In
winter there wants whot vapors, in summer, the lowest regio^ is to whot, to
congele the rain falling down. In spring and Autumn, there wants neither
whot vapors, to resist the cold, nor sufficient cold to harden the drops of
that whot shower of rain.

The haylestones are sometimes greater, and sometimes lesser: greater with
greater cold, and lesser with lesser cold.

There is seldom hail in the night, for want of whot vapors to be drawn up.

Sometime hayle and rain, falls together, when the latter end of the cloud
for want of cold in the lowest region, is not congeled.

Hayle stones are not so clear, as Ise, because they are made of gross and
earthy vapors, ise is congeled of clear water.

Hayle is sooner resolved into water, then snow, because it is of a more sode^
and swyft generation.

Of Snow.
Snow is a cloud congeled by great cold, Snow.
before it be perfectlye resolved from vapors into water.

Snow is whyght, not of the proper color, but by receiving the light into
it, in so many small parts as in some, or the whyghte of an egg beaten.

Snow is often upon high hills, and lies long there, because their tops
ar cold as they be near to the mydle region of the air. For oftentimes it
rayneth in the vallye when it snoweth on the hills.

Snow melting on the high hills, and after frosen again, becomes so hard
that it is a stone, and is called Crystal. Original of Cristall
Other matters of snow because they are common with rain, are nedeles to be
spoken of. To be short, sleet is generated even as snow, but of less cold,
or else begins to melte in the falling.

Snow causes things growing to be fruitful, and increase, because the cold
dryueth heat unto the roots, and so cherysheth the plants.

Of Springes and Rivers.
THe generation of springes is in the bowels of the earth, Springes.
and therefore something must be said of the body of the earth. The earth
though it be solid and massy, yet has it many hollow gutturs and veins, in
which is always air to avoid emptines. For the ignorant in Philosophy
must be admonished, yt all things are full, nothing is emptye, Nothing is
empty.
for nature abhors emptines, so that where nothing else is, there is air and
vapors, which by cold as it has often ben said, wylbe resolved into
drops, as we see experience in marble pillars and such like hard stoones,
toward rain. This aier and vapors therefore being turned into drops of
water, these dropps sweet out of the earth, and find some issue at the length,
where many being gathered together make great abundance of water, which is
called a fountain or spring. The cause why such sprynges do run
continually, is because that air can never want in those veins, which by
cold will always be turned into water, so that as fast as the water runs
forth, so fast is air again received into the place, whereby it comes to
pass, yt so many springes are perpetual, and never dried. But if any be dried
up, it is in a whot summer, and such springs also they be, whose generation is
not deep in the earth, and therefore the vapors may be made dry and the earth
warm, so the spryng may fail.

There be four kinds of spryngs, fountains, brooks, ryuers, and lakes.

Of Fountains.
Fountains be small springes, Fou^tains.
which serve for wells and conductes, when there is but one place, where the
water is generated, and that is not very abundaunt, either because it is of
small compass, or small veins and not many.

Of Brooks.
Brooks, Brooks.
boornes, or fordes, be small streams of water, that run in a cha^nell, like
a river. They are caused when either the spryng occupies a great compass, or
else two or three small sprynges meat together in one channel.

Of Ryuers.
Ryuers.
Ryuers are caused by the meatynge together, not only of many springs, but also
of many broocks and fordes, which being received in diverse places, as they
pass ar at the length, carried into ye broad sea, for the most part. Howbeit
some rivers are swallowed up into the earth, which perchance run into the
sea by some secret and unknown channels, some ryuers there be, that hide their
heddes under the earth, and in another place, far of break out again. They
write also, that some ryuers being swallowed up of the earth, in one Island do
run under the bottom of the earth and sea, and break forth in another
Ilonde. There be also many great ryuers yt run under the earth in great caves
which never break forth. Aristotle shows of pondes and lakes, Arist.
that be under the earth. And Seneca speaks of a pond that was found by
such as dug in the earth, Seneca.
with fishes in it, and they that did eat of them died. As eeles ye be found
in dark places, as wells that have been dammed up etc. are poison.

Of Lakes.
LAkes ar made by the meting together of many ryuers, Lakes.
brooks and springs into one deep valley. Whereof some are so great, that
they have the name of seas, as ye great lake called Hircane, or Caspia^ sea.
These lakes sometimes unlade themselves into the sea, by small rivers, somtymes
by passages under the earth.

The cause of the swiftnes of ryuers, is double, for they are swyfte either for
the great abundance of waters, or else because they run down from an hylly
place, as the river Rhene falls down from the top of wonderful high
hills.

Of whote bathes.
SOme waters that are generated and flow out of veins of brymstone, Whote
bathes.
are sensybly warm, and some very whott, because they run out of whot
places. These waters being also drying by nature, are wholesome for many
infyrmities, specially breakyng forth of scabbs. etc. Such are the bathes in
the Weste country, and S. Ann. of Buckstones well in the North part of England
and many other else where.

Of the diverse tastes that are perceived in wells.
FOr a general reason, the waters receive their taste of that kind of earth,
Tastes of waters.
through which they run as through a strainer. Some salt, that runn through
salt veins of the earth, some sweet, that be well strayned, or run through
such myneralls as be of sweet taste.

Some bitter, yt flow out of such earth, as is bitter by addustion or
otherwise.

Some sower or sharp like vinegar, which run through veins of alum,
coporous, or such mineralls. Aristotle writes of a well in Scicilia,
aristotle.
whose water the inhabitauntes used for vyneger. Well waeter used for vinegar.
In Bohemia near to the city called Bilen, Bohemia.
is a well that the people use to drink of in the morning, in stead of burnt
wine. And in diverse places of Germany, be sprynges, ye taste of such sharpnes.

Some have the taste of wine, as in Paphlagonia, Paphlagonia.
is a well that makes men drunk which drink thereof: which is because that
water receives the fumosite of brymstone, and other mineralls through which it
runs, and so fills the brain as wine does.

A recital of such ryuers and springes, as have marvelous effects whereof no
natural cause can be assigned by most me^, although some reason in a few may
be found.
CLitumnus which makes oxe^, ye drink of it whyght, maruelus water. Clitu^nus.
it is a river or spring in Italy. Propert. lib. 3. Propertius.
This may be ye quality of the water very flegmatike. In Boetia is a river
called Melas, Boetia.
Melas.
yt makes sheep black if they drink thereof.

Seneca speaks of a river yt makes read hears. Seneca.
These two with the first, may have some reason, that the quality of the water
may alter complexion, and so the collor of hears may be changed, as we see in
certain diseases.

In Libia is a spring, Libia.
that at the sun rising and setting, is warm, at midday cold, and at
midnight very whott: this may be, by the same reason that well water is colder
in summer the^ it is in winter. Seneca writes, Seneca.
that there be ryuers, whose waters are poison, this may be naturally, the
water running through poisonous minerals, taking much fume of them. Other wells
that make wodde and all thing else that be cast into them stones, such wells be
in England the cause is great cold.

Another well, makes men madd yt drink thereof. This also may have as good
reason as that which makes me^ drunk. As also that well which makes men
forgetful by obstruction of ye brain.

The same Seneca speaks of a water that being drunk, provoke unto lust and
lechery. And why may not that quality be in a water, which is mixed with
diverse mineralls, and kinds of earth, which is in herbs, roots, fruict.
liquors. S. Augustine speaks of a well in Egypt, S. Augustine.
in which burning torches are quenched, and being before quenched, are lighted.
Among the Garamantes is a well so cold in the day, Garama^tes.
that no man can abide to drink of it, in the night so whott, that none can
abide to feel it.

It is incredible, that is written of a well in Scicilia, Scicilia.
whereof if thieves did drink they were made blind.

In Idumea was a well, Idumea.
that one quarter of a year was troubled and moddy, the next quarter bloody,
the third green, and the fourth, clear.

Seneca writes of another well that was six hours full and runninge over,
Seneca.
and six hours decresing and empty, per chaunse, because it ebbed and flowed,
with the sea, or some great river that was near it.

In the hill Anthracius, Anthracius.
is said to be a well, which when it is full, signifies a fruictefull year,
when it is scarce and emptye, a barren and dear year. The sufficiens of
moisture, makes fertility, as the want causes the contrary.

Men say there is a River in Hungarye, Hu^garia
in which Iron is turned into coper. Which may well be, seeing ink in which
is but small coperus, and artificially myxed, of Iron, does conterfeyte coper
in color. In this stream may be much coperus, and that is naturally myxed.

Both Seneca and Theophrastus, Seneca Theophrasius.
witness, ye waters there be, which within a certain space being drunk of
sheep, as ( Seneca says) of birds (as Theophrastus will have it) changes
their colors from black to white, and from white to black.

Vitruuius writes, Vitruuius
that in Arcadia, Arcadia
is a water called Nonacrinis which no vessel of silver, Nonacrinus.
brass, or Iro^, can hold, but it breaks in pieces, and nothing but a mules
hoof, will hold it and conteyne it.

In Illyria, Illyria.
garments yt are holde^ over amost cold well, ar kindled and set on fire.

In the I Will of Andros, where the temple of Bacchus stood, andros Bacchus.
is a well that the fifth day of January flowed wine.

Isidore says, Isidorus.
there is a well in Italy, that heals the wounds of yt eyes.

In the I Will of Chios, Chios.
is a well that makes men dulwitted, that drink thereof.

There is another that causes men to abhor lust.

Lechnus a spryng of Arcadia, Lechnus.
is good against abortions.

In Scicilia are two spryngs of which one makes a woman fruictfull, Scicilia.
and the other barren.

In Sardania, Sardinia.
be whote wells that heal sore eyes.

In an I Will of Pontus, Pontus.
the river Astares, astares.
ouerfloweth the fields in which the sheep that be fed, does give black
milk.

In Aethiopia, aetiopia.
is a lake, whose water is like oil.

Also many sprynges of oil have brooken forth of the earth, which comes of
the viscositie or fatnes of ye same earth.

The lake Clitorie, Clitorius.
in Italye, makes men that drink of it to abhor wine.

The lake Pentasium (as Solinus says) is deadly to serpents and wholesome to
me^. Pentasiu^. Solinus.


Seneca writes of certain lakes that will bear men which can not swymm. And
that in Siria, Syria.
is a lake in which brickes do swymme, and no heavy thing will sink.

It is said, that the river Rhene in Germany will drown basterd children that
be cast in it, Rhenus.
but drive alonde them that be lawfully begotten.

The river Hypanis in Schithia, Hypanis Schithia.
eueryday brings forth little bladders, out of which flies do come that die
the same night.

Matrona the river of Germany, Matrona.
as ye common people says, never passes day but he takes some pray.

Of the Sea.
THe sea in this treatise, The sea.
has place as a mixed substance, for else the eleme^t of waters being simple,
were not here to be spoken of.

The sea is the natural place of the waters, The natural place of the water.
into which all ryuers and other waters, are received, at the length.

And here it is to be understood, yt the very proper and natural place of
the water, were to cover all the earth, for so be the elements placed. The
earth lowest, and round about the earth, the water, about the water the air,
and about the air the fire. But God the most mighty and wise creator of all
things, Genesis 1.
that the earth might in some parts be inhabited of men and beasts, commanded
the waters to be gathered into one place, that the dry land might appear,
and called the dry land earth, and the gathering of waters he called seas.

In the sea are these two things to be considered, the saltnes, and the
ebbinge and flowyng.

Of the saltnes.
THe saltnes of the sea, according to Aristotle's mind is caused by ye sunn,
Arist.
that draws from it all thin and sweet vapors, to make rain leaving the
rest as the settling or bottom, which is salt. But men of our time,
peradventure more truly, do not take this for the only and sufficient cause,
to make so great a quantity of water salt, but say, that the sea by Gods
wisdom is gathered into such valleys of the earth, as were other wise barren
and vnfruictful, such carthes are salt, the sea water then mixed with that
earth, must needs be salt, else ryuers by Aristotle's mind, should be salt as
well as the sea. The Reader may choose which opinion is most probable.

Of the ebbing and flowyng.
THe ebbing and flowing of the sea, as Aristole seems to teach, Ebbinge and
flowing. aristotl^s.
is by reason of Exhalations, that be under the water, which drive it to and
fro, according to contrary bounds, and limits, as upward and downwarde, of
wide and narrow, deep and shallowe. This opinion of Aristotle also, as more
subtle the^ true, experience teaches men to mislike and to ascribe the cause
of ebbing and flowyng to the course of the moon, which rules over moisture,
as the sun does ouerheate, for from the new Moon to the full, all humors do
increase, and from the full to the new moon, decrease again. Also the very
true time of the ebbing and flowyng may be known, by the course of the Moon.
with whom as the lady of moisture, we will close up the fourth book of
moiste and watery impressio^s.

The fifth book of earthly Meteores or bodies perfectly mixed.
THis last treatise conteyneth such bodies whose chief matter is the earth,
Earthly bodies.
and are called perfectly mixed because they are not easly resolved in to the
chief matter, whereof they are generated. These are divided into four kinds.
The first be diverse sorts of earth, the second be liquors concreat, the third
be metalls and metalliques, the fourth be stoones. This division is not
altogether perfect both for that there be many of these mineralls which partake
of two kinds, and also for that the names of some of these kinds may be said
of other. Yet mindyng as plainly as can be, to declare the things them selves,
the controuersye and cauillation of names, shall not greatly trouble us.
Especially seeing we pretend not to teach Philosophers, but such as need a
ruder and plainer instruction. They may therefore be co^te^t wc this division,
which shall not serve them to dispute of these matters, but to understand ye
truth of these things that they desire. Of these fowr, therefore we will speak
orderly and generally, not mynding to entreat of every particular kind (for
that were infinite) but to open such universal causes, as they which have
wit, may learn, (if they list) to apply unto al particulers.

Of earthes.
THe earth is an element, Of earths
one of the four, cold and dry, most gross and solyde, most heavy and
weighty, the lowest of all other in place. When I say an element, I mean a
simple body uncompounded. This earth is no Meteore, but as it was showed in the
water, to ye end there should be generation of things, there is no element that
we can have, which is pure and simple, but all are mixed and co^pounde. Our
fire is gross and compounde, so is our air our water, and our earth. But the
earth notably and above the rest is mixed. For the puer and natural earth is
dry and cold, but we see much to be moist, and much to be hot The natural
earth is black of collor, but we see many earthes white many yelowe, and many
read. So that first the greatest part of ye earth is mixed with water, that
makes it to clean together, with air and some fire, which make an oily fatt
or claymy earth, as is claye made. etc. Another great part is dried not into
the natural drienes of the first quality, but as a thing ones mixed and after
dried, either by to cold, as sand gravel, etc. or else by heat, as chalk, oker
etc. And yet somewhat more plainly and particularly to discourse vpen these
causes, admitting the natural color of the earth to be black, of ye water to
be blewe, of the air to be white, and of the fire to be ruddy, it follows
that upon the mixtion of these colors, or chief domination of them, al
things has their color. The gross substance of the earth therefore being
diversely myxed with other elements, and those myxtures again being eftsoon
altered, by diverse and sometime contrary qualities, has brought forth so
many kinds of earth, as claye, marle, chalk, sand, gravel etc. Claye is
mixed with fat moisture taking his colloure of the mixture with read from
white, but being cold, it is not so fructfull as marle, which is not always
so moiste as it. Chalk is an earth by heat co^cocted, after diverse mixtions
and dried up. Oker both yelow and red with such like are of the same nature
with mixtio^ of read more or less.

Sand and gravel are dried erthes, as it were froasen by cold, gravel is
gross and apparent, sand though it be finer, is of the same generation
consisting of many small bodies, which are co^geled into stones. Sa^d seems to
be clay dried by cold and coacted together into small stones, whereof some ar
through shining which were the moist parts, the thick were of the gross
part. The same is grauel, but of greater stoones consisting. The like
judgment is to be given of all other kinds of earth, whose generation by the
similitude of these, will not be very hard to find out. They that list to
know the diverse kinds of earthes, must have recourse to Plinius, Cardane,
Plinius. Cardanus
and other writers, that recite a great number of them, but these are the chief
and most commen kinds.

Of liquors concreat.
WE take not lyquors co^creat so largely, as the word does signify, for than
should we comprehend, both the other kinds followyng. But only those
liquors, called in latin Succi, which are as it were middle between metals and
stones, of which some being fat and only, do burn, as brimstone, seecoles,
geate, bitumen, etc. and the kinds of all these. other some does not burn, as
salt, alu^, coperus, saltpeter, etc. and the kinds of these. Of the first
sort, which are generated of earthy and ayry vapors, fumes and Exhalations, the
chief and most notable, is brimstone, which seems to be the matter of all dry
and whot qualities, yt ar in earthly Meteores. The rest are generated of such
like vapors as brymstone is, but the^ they be diversely mixed. As ye coals, have
much earth mixed with brimstone. Get, seems to be all one, but better
concocted then coals. Of amber is great contention whether it be a mineral, or
ye sperme of an whale, for it is found in the sea, cast up on the shore. Now ye
whales seed, being of the very same qualities, is taken more and less
co^create of diverse hardness, some al most as hard as amber, some softer, and some
liquid. Yet Cardan plainly defines, Cardanus
that amber is a mineral. Whether he have reason or experience, contrary to ye
vulgar opinion, let them consider that list to co^tende. These minerals that
will resolve with fire, it is apparent, that they were concreat with cold. In
that they burn it is manifest, they have a fat and cla^my substance, mixed
with them. As the other kind has not, which will not resolve so well with
fire, as wc water, which be salt, coperus, saltpeters, etc. these burn not
being watery, earthy, and not fatt, vnctuus, nor clammy.

These be of diverse colors, black as coals and geat, because there is much
earthy substance mixed with their sulphureus matter. Some be shere as saltt
and alume, having a substance watery, dried, and concreat. Coperus is greane,
because it has much cold matter that is blwe, mixed with it. Salt the most
common and necessary of all these liquors concreat, that be moist and not
fatty, has two manner of generations, one natural, and the other artificial.
The natural generation, is when it is first generated, in the earth, after
comes the water of the sea, and is infected with it, out of which the salt
is again artificially gathered. Of these liquors concreat be those strange
wells and sprynges infected, of which was spoken, in the latter end of the
fourth book. Most notably brimstone causes the whot bathes, and burns in
aetna, of Scicilia, and Vesuuius of Italye, Aetna and Vesuuius
casting up the pumise stones, of which is no place here to entreat.

Of Metalles.
MEtalles be substaunces perfectlye myxed, Metalls.
that will melte, with heat, and be brought into all manner of fashions that a
man will. Of these the Alcumistes say, there be seven kinds, to answer to
the seven Planetes. Gold, silver, copper, tynne, lead, Iron and quicksyluer,
that they call Mercury. Mercury.
But saving their authorities, quicksyluer is no more a metal, then brymstone,
which is as necessary to the generation of metal, as quicsyluer is. For they
all agree, that all metalles are generated of sulphur, Sulphur.
that is brymstone, which because it is whot, they call the father, and
Mercury that is quicksiluer, which because it is moist, they call the mother.
So by as good reason, may they call brymstone a metalle, as Mercury. Then there
remains but six perfect metalls, Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, and Iron.

Of Gold.
THat most unprofitable and hurtful of al metalls gold, Gold.
which most men disprayse, and yet all men would have, is of all other metalles
the rarest, it is only perfect, all other be corruptible. Gold never corrupts
by rust, why gold rusteth not.
because it is pure from poysonus infection and most solid, that it receives
not the air into it, which causes all things to corrupt. It is perfectly
concocted with sufficient heat, and mixture of Sulphur, all other metalls,
either are not so well concocted, or else they have not the due quantity of
brimstone. This opinion has also place among the Alcumistes, The opinion of
the Alcumistes.
yt because nature in all her works, seeks the best end, she ente^deth, of al
metals to make gold* but being let either for want of good mixture, or good
co^coction, she brings forth other metals, in deed not so precius, but much
more profitable, and the less pretius, the more profitable, for there is more
use to the necessity of man's life, in Iron and lead, then is in gold, and
silver. But either the beauty, or the perfection, or at lestwyse the rarenes of
gold and silver, have obteineth the estimation of al men, so yt for them is
sold al manner of things, holy, and profane, bodily and spiritual. What pains
does not men take to wynn gold? every man has one way or other, to hunt after
it, but ye Alcumist despising all other ways as slow, unnatural, and
unprofitable, laboreth either to help nature in her work, as of imperfect
metals to make perfect, or else to force nature to his purpose, by his
quintessence and elixors, so that what by purging, what by co^cocting, what by
mixing of sulphur and quicksiluer, and much other like stuff, at length he
turns the wrong side of his gown outward, all the teeth out of his head, and
his body from health to a palsy, and then he is a Philosopher, and so he will
be called.

Of Silver.
Silver the most pure metalle, Silver.
next unto gold, has indifferent good concoction in the earth, but it wants
sufficient heat in the mixtur, that makes it pale. It is found as they say,
running into diverse veins as all other metalles be, but this most specially,
after ye shape and fashion of a tree, lying alonge with a body or stock of
proportion like to the body of a tree, also with arms, branches, leaves and
fruictes. This metal silver, lacks sufficient heat, and therefore comes
neither to the color, soliditie, nor perfection of gold, and is generated in
cold countries, near unto the North, and South poles. In so great quantity,
that hasbandmen, when they plowe the ground turn up silver, among the clottes
in their daily labors. Which they do hyde, and conceal, least the gready
Princes, for covetousness of the metal, should ouerturne and destroy their
land. The gold mines, are contrarywyse, most found in the whote countries
of India and Aethiopia, because in them is sufficient of heat for that unhappy
generation.

This silver also, the Alcumistes would feign make by art, but Mercury the
chief master of the work, is so subtle, and so slye, that nothing can hold
him, nothing can kill him. For if the glass be not very thyck, he will soon
break out of prison, and so there is nothing left.

Of Copper.
COpper in color, Copper*
coming nearest to gold, being not solyde, nor massy, (for of all metal
gold is the heauiest) gives way to corruption, being infected with that
greane mineral copperus. Hereof be diverse kinds, brass, latin and such
like, which differ in in digestion, the copper being purest, is of best
digestion and nearest unto gold, and so the rest in like degrees. Copper is
most like to silver in the wayghte, and in the hammeryng, wherefore the
Alcumistes have learned to make it white, that it deceyueth men's syghte and
handlyng, but the Goldsmythes do easily try it and by the teast of
cou^terfect silver, makes copper again. Copper or brass, does always grow
near unto the mine of copperus, which runnyng with it in the digestion or
natural contoction, hyndreth it of perfection, makes it to stynke, and to be
eaten of a greane ^^se. Much a do the Alcumistes have to turn it into gold,
if it might be, they dispute very reasonablye, and conclude almost necessarily
in their talk, that it may be converted into gold as, a body, that wa^teth
little of perfection which may be easily added unto it. But in conclusion of the
work, it is an harder matter, to bring it to pass, then it was to purpose
before they had done it, to build an abbay at every miles end, upon Salisbury
plain, as one was minded.

Of Tin.
TYnne, whereof great plenty grows in the West parts of England, Tin.
in bewty and color comes nearest to silver, and of silver wa^teth nothing,
but soliditie and hardness. For tinn is a raw and undigested metal, also very
porose and vnco^pact, which causes it to crashe, when it is broken or bitten.
So it fails of heat, in the co^mixtio^ and also sufficient digestio^ in the
earth. Otherwise it is a fair and proffitable metal, to serve ye use of the^,
unto whom silver and gold are not so plentiful.

Of Lead.
LEad also found in great abundance wtin this realm, Lead.
is a raw and undigested metal, as tin is, but yet of better digestio^ the^
co^mixtio^. For it is mixed, wc a gross earthy substance, which makes it to
be in collor so black, and so fowl to corrupt. So that of ye same fumes and
exhalatio^s, which if they had been pure and well digested, if ye place and
matter would have suffered, should have been concreat into silver, for lack of the
same, lead is generated, which coming plentifully, does better service the^
silver.

Of Iron.
IRon the most necessary and profitable of all other metalls, Iron.
and yet as ill used of many as any other, is generated of such substance as
silver is, but myxed with a red mineral, which eats it with read ruste,
and also being of two extreme degestion, passing all other metalls in hardenes.
And as other metals to the perfection of silver, want sufficient co^coction,
whereby they comme not to the same hardenes: so Iron paseth and exceadeth silver
in immoderate digestion. But though it come not to the perfection of silver,
God forbid that al Iron had been turned into silver, for then we should more
have myssed it, then silver or gold, the want of which would hurder us
nothing at al.

Of Quick silver.
THough quicksyluer, be no metal, Quicksyluer.
yet because it is the mother of al metals, some thing is here to be spoken of
it.

There be diverse and sondrie opinions, both of the generation, and also the
qualities of it, which make the generation to be hard to find out. For if
the quality were certainly agreed upon, there were an easier way found, to
try out the generation. Some affirm, that it is exceading whott, and that
they would prove, by the swyfte percing there of into other things, that be
porose.

Other say, it is exceadyng cold, and that they prove, by the exceadyng
weight of it. As for the percyng, they say: is caused of the exceading
moystnes, of which quality both parts do grant that it is. Concerning the
generation, some have said that it is pure and elementall water, some again
has thought, that it droppeth out of heaven, and is a part of the heavenly
substance. And other said, that it is generated in the clouds, and falls
down in the field, in a circle, on those round circles, which are seen in many
fields, that ignorant people affirm to be the rings of the fayries danses.
It is certain, that quick silver has diverse times fallen out of the clouds,
as we have declared in the treatise of wonderful and merueylous rain, but
whether it so fall in circles, it is doubtful. The most probable opinion is,
that it is generated of moist vapors of the earth, coacted by cold, much like
to water, as brymstone is of hot fumes coacted by cold, much like to fire.
And thus much of metalles.

Of Stones.
STones the fourth kind of earthlye myxed bodies, Stones.
have two manner of generations, by most contrary qualities. For heat does
harden moist bodies in to stones, as we see that of claye it makes exceadyng
hard brycke.

Also the tho^derboltes in the clouds, are generated by heat, as before has been showed. But cold does by congelyng, generate, many more stones then heat
does: for the most part of all the stones that are dug out of the earth,
are generated by cold, which is able to convert any other kind of myxed
substance into stone, as has been partly showed in the nature of wells, and
sprynges, of which there be some in England, which by their cold turn
wodde or any like thing into stones. I (...) sufficiently shall be said, of the
virtue of stones.

That virtue that is ascribed unto them, is either natural or magical. The
virtue of stones either natural or magical.
Natural virtue is either that which is known to have a natural cause, or a
natural effect, as the Magnes, or loadestone to draw iron, which is by a
similitude of nature, and such an appetite, as is between the male and the
female. Also the said Magnes, Magnes.
moves toward the North, and as some say, there is an other kind found in
the Southe, that draws toward the south. They say, that there is great
hills of this stone, in the North and South, which makes it look that way.

Other bring a Mathematical reason, which because it is more curious then can
be understood of the commen sort, not exercised in Geometry, I omit.

The get and amber draw hears, chafe, and like light matter, but being
before chaffed, Geat and amber draws chaf
for heat is attractiue.

Also the precious stone called Astroites, moves of it self in vinegar,
Astroites a stone moves in viner.
the sharpenes of the vinegar, percing it, and the air excluded, driving it
forward. These virtues because I have seen, I have set for an example,
generally all other like natural virtues, proceade of like natural causes,
which by their effect the ingenious must seek to find out. As for Magical
virtues be they, which are grounded of no reason, or natural cause which if
they take effect, it is rather of the superstition and credulity of him that
uses them, then of the virtue of the stones. As that an Emerald increases
love, a Saphir favor, a Diamonde strength, and such like virtues of which
Albertus in his age surnamed the great, Albertus Magnus.
took pains to write a book, which I suppose be englished. To conclude with
the cause why stones melte not as mettalles do, may be gathered by yt which
has been said before, because they are congeled past that degree, and also
because there is left in them no vnctuus, or clammy matter. Let this suffice
for stones, and so the whole purpose is at an end.

W. F.

FINIS.
THINK AND THANK, LIVE IN FERE, KNOW THY SELF, FAR AND NERE.


Impryted at London in Fletestreate, at the sign of the Faucone, by William
Griffith: And they are to be sold at his shop in S. Dunstones churchyard in
the Weste. 1563.


