THE MINTE of deformities

G S


Imprinted at London for William Jones dwelling near Holburne Conduit at the
Sign of the Gunne. 1600.

To the gentle Perusers of my unpolished Primitiae,
THe never vewing warehouse of conceit,
like (old Silenus ass) would feign repeat,
Unto the open world, dark ignorance,
Making it glowe with harsh intellegence,
You shall not surfeit on the gilded crummes,
which with incapable conceits begun,
Making the world believe their high pitched vain,
renowned eloquence admired strain,
With sounding terms to crack the open vault,
of vnconceiued labors, and to walk,
The statly round of all sought loftiness,
daining fair entrance to each common meaness,
This do I hate, all men may me conceive,
I seek to please, and not your wits beicaue.
No Thrasion harp, but a steeld surious whippe,
no Nightingales, but Mandrakes shreeking sound,
Adastors snakes to make these Thrasors skippe:
whose cages, vultures, limewands, to confound:
the reeking limits of an vnstayd head,
with aspish toys to bring green wits to bed.
Oh I am mad to see the chopping style,
and cheating slaueries of these mustie days,
The words of art (yet artlesse which beguile)
deep diuing vathrifts of their honest prays,
yet not their own, for one short year will board
what their progenitors did forty hoord,
Vertues-decayed-world is out of use,
and honest trading minds are clean extinct,
Down goes all virtuous means, set up a stuise:
a broking brothell is delicious drink:
a broker (quoth you) oh it is an honest trade,
twill be defended who so ere gaynesayd.
Gross swalowing terms disdain a brokers name,
which does support base drudging underlings,
Whose silken robes varnish their bastard shame:
and foggie clowring-birth-enamilingsh.
whose statling-twelue-pence makes the shine as bright,
as Cynthias beams in a storme-wintring night.
Whose maistring terms lies in their sattan rags,
a purchased shift will make them gentlemen,
Though not a penny in their woorships bags,
yet are they noblier borne then better men:
their suits will guild their gentry, and the rather,
the devil is become their godfather.
I knew a Piper in a silken coat,
so far inamord of his peacockes plumbes,
That needs his painted picture must afloate,
or else his gentle mind with grief consumes:
who drew it but his father? fie fond man,
to name his father, he is a gentleman.
I wonder (Orpheus) thou did near commence?
thou could have played four organs roundelaies,
And yet thou never had pre-eminence?
though thou surpassedst in astonished brayes.
Now by the Trenitie it was not welldone,
to make a gentleman a paynters son.
But who more proud then beggars mounted hie,
Whose three years gentry from a brokers shop,
Will prove his stenching-silke stamped pedigree,
from C. sol. fay. vt. or an organes stop.
beware, beware, the knauish beadle waytes,
to bear you to the consistory states.
A Taylers sheares clips of this brokers shape,
a perfumd-crosseleged-rare-artificiall,
Whose gentrie's painted in a woman's cape,
a gentleman? why its common un o all,
he takes part with the^ both, therfor't must follow
he has a broking vain, a singing swallow.
If any envious disalowing tongue,
seek to depresse this ancient customdvse,
Which with the downfalne Adam first begun,
I crave the single combat for his abuse,
our arms shall soon decide that doubt, and then
Tailors I hope are no mean gentlemen.
In azure rampant sticks a pair of sheares,
our coat (out of a thousand) one we will sort,
A spanish needle pendant, and that bears
our crest, which is our ornamentall port:
a bodkin iacent with a lowse does hold,
makes our impression in honors mould.
Our tongues we shape not to each common cry,
we keep our residence, stir at no call:
We use no what do you lackes, what is it you buy?
but sit securely on our shopboord stall:
nobles attend us for our judgments, then
who will deny us to be gentlemen.
Become our harrold (gentle master scribe)
enormous pens we hate, and rustie boasts,
Blase our antiquity? and for a bribe
fear not: we will fee you to the uttermost,
here take this velvet romnant what you need,
our vnderboording box supplies with speed.
Our persumes smell not like the slauering crewe,
of middy take pains, or such unsavory sway,
Our garments vndisfigured and new:
Unlike December flourishing as May.
our hamering heads tired with invention,
scorn base vpbrayding reprehension.
A codpeece breech clean out of fashion,
a swim-swamd flapping-lagging ore the knee,
A cost-deuised-admiration.
Is used of all: oh spightfull forgerie.
when God fair fashioned parts, vnfashioning,
they both deforme those gracious parts, and him.
O that young heads should have such slender wit,
to yield their humors to these odious baits,
Their careless moodes ways naught, but more fit
and new stamped fashions their undoing waits,
what strange deformes lurkes in these motions,
must needs be stamped in their fashions.
Unfit conceits shipped from the Persians,
all christians hating Pagan fantasies,
Remote attires of the Graesians,
are enterteynd as solemn ceremonies,
Persians, Turckes, Graesians, all fashions I believe,
are safe compiled in one English sleeue.
Let one attire creep in our heads to day,
to morrow twill be common, odious,
It must be single or it bears no swaye,
if two possesseit oh it is scripulous,
some strange-imaginarie shape alone,
must fit my humor, or I will have none.
To day like a French gaiboile, round and flat,
to morrow like a Spaniard, naught but britch,
Then in the strange Italian native plat,
then in the whotte Barbarians swelting pitch,
that I do wonder that in London trades,
like Kit chinstuffe (what fashio^s have you maids.
I know a trifling student three hours space,
contriuing in what form to make his shoe,
First he would have it square, with a pinkt race,
then round, then straight, at length all would not do,
at last he found a fashion pleased him most,
but wanted money to defray the cost.
What must he do? his wants must be supplied,
the ordinary shapes dislikt his mind,
Money he wanted, but what ere betide,
he must have that with labor he did find,
but at the last, when the best means were scand,
he brook the shop, and for those shoes was hanged.
It Is strange to see the nature of our clime,
our fashion-mongers pass all other worlds,
The close-reseruing orders of strange times,
are in contempt all into England hurld,
that neither Spaniard, Duch, Polonian,
can be disstinguisht from an Englishman.
Each Country keeps his native fashion,
same England, which does revel with them all,
No method in his attired function,
will make his pampered joints vnbestiall:
a strait Polon sleeue, large Italian scerting,
a Spanish belly close, and a French wing.
A right Camelions, no perfect Joseph's shape
what God made perfect, that they will amend,
There lewd opinions prisd at a higher rate,
then their own goodness, or good finished end,
inuenting trifles now keep such a quoile,
what God made good, they making better spoil.
Babels new built, confusion rules the tongue.
their racked wits aspire to loathsome crimes,
Sodoms foundation is a fresh begun,
to make our falls warnings to after times,
oh this inhumaine fault's propitious,
portending wracte unto our weal and us.
What do these cutting suits portend but shame,
ensinges to bawdie tauerne-boulsteres,
The stained mapp of a loose gouernd name,
and swaggering crew of hateful chauilers,
whose only grace is blurd in perjury,
with mouthing oaths to blase there infamy.
Skimd superficies of this crew is ripe,
and riper would be, but for Tiburns rod:
The saint they worship a Tobacco pipe,
and their bedawbed loosenes is their God,
yet let me give this counsel to that ward,
that master Tiburne capers very hard.
One snurts Tobacco as his nose were made,
a perfumd Iakes for all scurrilities,
Another with his hair (as if a iayde,
had lost his tail to feed his enormities,
hanges ore his shoulders with a fond devise,
to make a warmer covert for the lice.
An other slave which long time has been chaind,
and got an eare-stamp for his filching trayde,
To cloud this shame, a Jewel must be hanged,
at the same hole the burning iron made,
who then dare call him rogue, who seems to savor,
the undeserved bliss of his misti is favor.
If iewellings obscure such foul disgrace,
and will eclipse the laws due punishment,
Who will not lead this jolly swaggering race,
to be inthrald in the worlds blandishment,
but (gentle Roister) bridle your jolly scope,
or else the next degree will be a rope-
The next that marches in this cutting crewe,
noble Dicke Swash, with sword and buckler oaths,
He swears the Spaniards his brave valor knew,
and says his terrifieng frights them most:
oh how he lies? for i will besworne that Dicke,
nere took a pray, unless a hedging trick.
Oh infamy unto a soldiers name,
oh scandal to our predecessing worth,
Thy death shall bury this disgrace and shame,
and rue thou shall the hour of thy birth,
but (signior Bragadino) advise you better,
a slitting collar is a plaguie debtor.
Tut he is well enough advised of that,
if without company he be alone,
He will not draw to hurt a man, that's flat:
what he a quarriler? tut heel save one.
but it a tavern crew together meet,
heel be the first to draw, but last to feight.
Where has he not been where Belona swayes,
in the Low countries, there his name's known best,
In Britanie and Gascoine many days,
and gaynst the Turks his service has been pressed:
all these renowned countries did he skip,
when scarce he knows the inside of a ship.
Yet will he roundly tell the honored names,
of the chief leaders, where is their regiment,
Their worthes ceclipse his vndesiphered shames,
perfume his base thoughts to an ornament,
his victories are registerd in the book,
when I dare swear he knows no enemies look.
Then with his ruby-pumpeld-wine-fir'd snout,
a quaffing health must to his captain fly:
He that denies the acceptance in the route,
his valure-hating poniard makes him dye,
their villainous attempts may well be said,
that Chaueleiring-murtherings grown a trayd.
Judgment they fear, God never comes in mind,
if justice frowning-guerdon were not death,
Then good men's hauokes, their pursuing kind,
would by their hating-goodnesse clip their breath,
and hell, rape cruelty, would bear such sway,
that good-reformed minds should quite decay.
It that a man deny to quaffe his scour,
or would leave off before he be stark drunk,
Nay if he will not drink so many hours,
after his braynlesse sense to sickness sunk:
then straight they vow mutual conjunction,
he dies a foe to a belching fraternion.
When grosepate chaplains of devouring sin,
do channel their lewd corpse with scandold shame,
And steeles the broken issue of there skin,
whose ouerweining loosenes racks his name,
then is he mad, and to this Marshall crewe,
will make conjunction with his Priestlike hew.
If any man will drink till be dead,
Lincoln black pots will cry Amen to it,
A christian-seiming so will make him sweat,
with Lees of drunken homiles scoures his wit,
whose text does fume out of a smoking toast,
lining his belching crast in a good seimd boast.
But it is no marvel, when all trades are done,
the only refuge is to be a priest,
When all profaned vice, and murders scumme,
maskt in those honored robes are counted blessed,
But I would wish this Marshal keep his daughter
least that a wraying song procure his slaughter.
There was a certain unreformed strain,
And base corrupted-broking of a place,
Crept in the head of an unhallowed brain,
Where he securely might obscure his race:
ah Nicholl, Nicholl, that a quoistring room,
should be subjected to a bloody scumme,
But where gould stamps, there virtue falls aboard,
he that out biddes, merits the highest scailes,
Five trades will drive one back, (though nere so good)
and shag-rackt-wits though golden force preuailes,
five places, when five houses he does master,
and to each one three, Scullion, Collier, Baker.
When he does preach, not against, but on good ale,
when he does storm, not against, but on good souls,
He not against, but on precise does rail,
still his (against) is fixed on goodness moulds,
he enuies good, yet seems not such a one,
this is a church-like epigramation.
He reads much, and yet he cannot see,
he studies much, and yet he cannot speak,
He gayneth much, yet all by perjury,
he swears much, tut that's a silly cheake:
he reads on Angel letters, studies evil,
his brocage gain corrupts, swears like a devil,
Many may ask who this damned slave may be,
And may by great inquire find his name,
Rather seek virtue then impiety?
Seek not too much, too soon coms lothsom shame
HANG-LET this Marshall, hate his deformed evil,
And thou expelst him, and in him the devil.
Let not the feind mask safe in Samuels robes,
Let not the pulpet-hater, and Gods word,
Let no prophaner Gods sacred Temple rob,
Let no bloodthirstie slave with fury spurd,
to triumph or the silly-cheated flock,
by such an vntaught-domineiring block.
He Is an Idolator indubitate,
for like a carved image nere remoues,
unless a suitors goulden fees do prate,
a goulden eloquence is all he loves:
many good Angels does he stand possessed,
and yet one devil thinks his part is best.
Oh that a servant (as he thinks him self)
should for preferment) good-corruptings slave)
Disgrace his master for a little pelse,
dash of the blessed light, and darkness crave,
and though that God offer such gracious proffers,
he ways them not, so he may fill his coffers.
He reads Gods word (yet thinks there is no God)
he serves the devil (as his unknown friend),
And though his priuate-lurching hearts abode,
be fixed at home, on his sin swallowing end,
yet are his heauen-heaud eyes with such a grace
though God, and his own thoughts, forswere the place.
Look to thy children, and reform thy race,
the time yet serves, be not too obstinate,
Refrain thy lewd paths in this time of grace,
with true contrition: be not obdurate.
now is the saving time to make thee blessed,
and dye thou may a saint, who lived a beast.
If that a spleening mind, and storming race,
should countermure my furious swelling brain,
And with a wounding ire bedawbe my face,
to make my pen depaint thy mischeiues vain,
twould make thee swear in a revenging fire,
whole do it as well, as any in Linconshire,
Oh that gross pates whose reasons stamped in sin,
should fetter goodness with vncurbed shame,
With unresisted yielding to let in,
the shameful show of a loose gouernd name,
this therefore shall remain my last advice,
love fair incountred virtue, and hate vice.
Room, room, my masters, for a lethern pelt,
tapster six pots? here Tom, hers three for thee,
Since thou have challengd me, i will make my belt,
break out her bounds ere we part company.
charge and discharge (for we will drink for the heavens,)
till one or both purchase the feeld uneven.
A health to my mistress (down on thy maribones)
oh prophand name common in every mouth,
Who would erect good phrases, when such ones
as Cobblers, tapsters, waterbearers route,
who with their rotten-lisping-stumpes vnsould,
what gentlemen for their due customs hold.
Each rustie sect of base artificers,
will rob their base hides with the brauest show,
And pitch their pleasures seat as high, as theirs,
who triumph in the cost-fantastick hew:
for their presumptions this aledge they can,
when Adam digd who was a gentleman.
Poore-tankard-slaues? who think them selves as great,
whose prest-downe-backes continual weight inures,
Whose grunting labor, for a penny sweats,
whose half hours toil one moment but indures.
yet do they in as sweet contentment rest,
and spend and drink Tobacco with the best.
Let a new fashion once come starting in,
they with an open sent devour the pray,
Their ragged joints though freese, whose open skin,
feels no could-icy storms in winters days,
they retchlesse stand so they may have there swaie,
though their benumbed corpse with could decay.
The land Lord with a base deienerate shifte,
to paint his carcass rackes his tenants rent,
Sink in their downfall, (so he get a lift)
he ways not their undoing languishment,
their backs be gaye, their minds though loathsome be,
silk robes dismember hospitality.
A less who names hospitality,
he is banished for returning to our clime,
When hospitali's scorn desteind penury,
and egent cripples swagger with the time;
this worlds faire-countred vice is so alowd,
base beggars lusty, stearne controwlers proud.
Now lustful youth with a bard swelting cry,
pursues his eager-burning-fire of lust,
Fostring his held fast clogge of cruelty,
to gain a remnant-limit, which he must,
needs circumuent, for whosoere denies,
his wrath will butcher, parents or dearest allies
If that his mind stand to a loathsome soul,
whose dowrie's but an ounce of durtines,
His base-ingendred mind without comptrowle,
must shroud impression of his beastlines.
or else grace-hating vice will clip him short,
intoumbing sage advice, which should dehorte,
When shallow purchase of a broken style,
shall shipp a shifting name to worthiness,
Whose sensual mischeifes rubisht with a file,
of fond-vaine glory, hides his scuruines,
what must this sensual affectation yield,
when virtue hates shame, shame wins the field.
What has he got, a Moore, his mind's content,
what has he won, a whore, his humor's pleased,
What has he lost, his parents, it was his consent,
whom did he hate, his friends, his heart is eased,
let his deep-swallowing sins think of this cheer,
doomes day will come, and then his woes appear.
Our youthful minds, is like a poisoned glass,
which being broken by some casual means,
A stander by (which feign would bring to pass
reiunction of the loss: those poysned streams,
impartial either to his foe or friend,
will woork his senceles baine which sought amend.
Let us beware least that our customd sin,
which the true gospel long has covered,
Be not erepted, and our shame begin.
to stain our minds, (which long has houered)
and Gods just frown on our lewd corpse be seen
taking the gospel, and our gracious Queen.
FINIS.
To the woorshipfull my very loving Cosen M. Thomas Rickarde of Hatfield-chase,
in Yorkshire.
GOod cosen, not any desert of mine own worth, but hoping to be countenanced
by your woorthines, makes me thus bold to rely on your acceptance of this
idle work, compounded (as the French nod) of sundry fashions, a thing (which
if it prove pleasing to you in the least respect) I shall think it valuable to
my cost and labor: I do not doubt but as always you have looued me, so you
will not now reject this instance of my zealous affection which I have had from
my cradle to gratify you, protesting (if you will boulster me in this) never to
step so far into the press again, and thus withal respective ceremonies I
take my leave.

Your loving Cosen C. G. Gent.

To the favorable readers.
GEntlemen) I do not immitate the new start up fashion of writings in these
days, who so obscurely will begin, and so duskely end, as it will both
strain their own conceit, and the perusers knowledge, for a man to write
that which none shall conceive but himself, is to make a laborinth to catch
every idle br ayne in: that which I do, I do to please, which must be by
understanding: I do not seek to take flies, but to remove fleas, which as I
would not troble my self with the one, so I would willingly reduce the other.
Our countries good, the unfit education of base minds, the arrogancy of
Peasants, the pride of paynters, (like Don Hiltonio knave of the Trenitie)
provoke my vnpolish stumbling pen, to exasperate the vndecentnesse of their
nurture, and unfitness of my own nature. If any scorn my labor, he does me
no wrong, because I looked for no other, yet I hope true gentles, will gently
conceive some better hope of better fruit from so vnripened a blossom, my
industry and toil with my self, I humbly subject to every man's censure,
craving none to be earnest to know him, who will not acknowledge them, or
hardly himself.


