A confutation of a Popish, and sclaunderous libelle, in form of an apology:
given out into the court, and spread abroad in diverse other places of the
Realm.

Written by William Fulke, Bacheler in Divinity, and fellow of S. Ihons
College in Cambridge.

Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kingston, for William Jones, and are to be sold
at the new long shop, at the West end of Poules.

To the right honorable and virtuous Lady, the Lady Margaret Strange.
YOur honorable and Godly request (madame) to have this infamous, and Popish
Apology confuted, may be a sufficient testimone, both of your loyal
affection toward your prince and country, and also of unfeigned love
toward God, and his true religion. For as the libell being sclanderous
against our sovereign and her laws, and blasphemous against God and his
truth, might be a reioysyng to the obstinate and rebellious, and an offense to
the weak and ignorant, if the clouds of calumniation, and deceiptful
reasonyng used therein, were not driven a way with the blaste of some
confutation: so the falshod thereof being opened, and the craft discovered, by
your L. procureme^t, shall be a matter of gladness to the godly, of grief to the
wicked, of strenthenyng to the weak, and of learning to the ignorant. VVherby
truth being maintained, and error confounded, many men shall be profited, and
God himself shall be glorified. And your L. for preferryng so many fold goodness,
may be assured to receive worthy thanks of men, and plentiful reward of god.
But this especially, wherein your L. ought chiefly to rejoice, is not to be
omitted, that as god has justified you in the merits of his son through
faith conceived in your heart, so he has given you an occasion hereby, of his
holy name and religion, to make open profession in the world. When according
to the testimony of the Apostle, as a true and lively belief of the heart is
necessary for justification, so a clear and open confession of the mouth is
requisite to salvation. So that this your L. request, might seem in all
poinctes most fortunat, if it had not found so mean an instrument, as I am to
acco^plishe it. For beside that, I am inferior to very many of my brethren,
that are meat to take such a matter in hand, I have been for these two years
almost, as it were sequestered, both from serious study, and plenty of such
books, as for such a purpose, were most convenient. Notwithstanding, esteming
your L. motion, as a prouocatio^ sent of god, to occupy my idle time, and to
employe some part of gods gifts, to the profit of his Church, as my duetye
binds me, I thought good to show my self, rather unable, the^ willing to
satisfy your godly desire. Not that the obiectio^s of the adversary were of
such weight, but that they might easily be avoided by many thousand
christians, whom God has endued with meaner gifts of knowledge, and
understanding, then it has pleased him to bestow upon me: but that I am
privy to mine own imperfection, whereby I am less apt, to beautify a
matter, with such copy, and eloquence as many other are, and I would wish that
this argument might have been handled. Nevertheless, according to my bare, and
simple faculty, I have endeavored to set forth the truth, rather with
substance of matter, then with florishyng of words, not caryng how finely,
but how plainly, I might cause it to appear, seeing it is no less charitable
to teach the ignorant, then it is commendable to please the learned. And this
labor I have bestowed for the profit of others, and not for the praise of my
self. For which cause also I thought it not best, to encomber the simple
reader with many reasons, or authorities to prove one matter, but to enstructe
him with a few, and those pitthie, and of force to persuade. Saving that in one
question of justification, in multitude of testimonies, I may seem to be over
tedious, if the cause be not considered, which provoked me thereto. For seeing
the adversaries without shame cry out, that our doctrine of justification, is
such a strange paradox as never was heard of in the world, before our time,
the same doctrine, being the chief foundation of true Religion, I thought it
expedient, that the unlearned were admonished, what ple^tifull witnesses it
has of antiquity, as it has most manifest authority in the holy word of
God. To conclude, there were two other considerations that encouraged me, to
take upon me this co^futation. One because this Popish apology discovers no
great learning of the aucthor, there is no great connyng to be required, in
him that should make answer to it: and for that it has presumed, to thrust it
self into the princes court, it is not impertine^t that it should be confuted,
by one that is atte^dant in the same. Thus having done my good will, I most
humbly desire your L. to take it in good part: besechyng almighty God so to
continue and increase his gifts of virtue, and godliness in your L. that you
may be blessed with true honor, and prosperity in this life, and afterward,
rewarded with eternal joy, and felicity.

Your L. to command in the Lord William Fulke.

An answer to a Popish apology An Apollogie of a Papiste confuted by W. F.
THere was found in the court, either cast of purpose, or lost of negligence, a
certain small pamphlette, conteinyng an Apollogie, or answer of a Papiste, to
some friends of his, that persuaded him to conform himself, to the Religion
now received in the realm, by public authority: which when it came to my
hands, supposyng it might do some hurt among them that are ignoraunte, I
thought good, briefly to confute it. But because the copy which was found,
was unskillfully written, I had some diffultie to read it in certain places,
and sometimes I might plainly perceive, that the aucthours meaning was
changed by untrue writing: So that the aucthour, or his friends, may have
some occasion to cavil at my publishing of the copy, which was so much
corrupted: In consideration whereof, I would have been very glad, to have had
the principal copy of the aucthours own hand, if I could have known how to
come by it. But seeing I was out of hope of that, I perused, and restored the
copy that I had, as faithfully as I could, desiryng the aucthour, or his
friends, that have the original, if I have erred in any word of any momente,
to let me have knowledge thereof, and I will thereby reform the apology,
and alter mine answer thereto accordyngly. The writing had this title.

The Papiste.
Certain considerations and causes, mouyng me not to be present at, nor to
receive, neither use the service of the new book, otherwise called the Common
book of prayers.

The answer.
If the copy of your title, as it came to my hand, was not perverted, you
show your self in your title, to be a very perverse* and froward person,
that may not vouchsafe to call the book, as it is commonly called. Especially
when you pretend to give it the name, which commonly it bears, for you are
not ignorante, that it is called the book of Common prayer, and not the Common
book of prayer. But a man may easily, and peradventure truly guess, why you
refused to call it the book of common prayer, least any man should conceive by
the only name, that common prayer, which is so necessary for the Church of
Christ (a form whereof that book contains) is altogether wantyng in your
Popish Church, where, in your Missalles, Processionalles, Hymnalles, Grailes,
Antiphonalls, and Pontificalls, are not contained common prayers, to the
edification of all the church, but idle, and unprofitable ceremonies, to the
mainteinaunce of ignorance, and superstition.

The Papiste.
The first consideration is, because the said seruis book, was condemned as
heretical and schismatic, Anno domini 1553. both by the clergy and
co^uocation of this realm, and by the nobility and commons of the same, by all
whose consentes there passed an act of Parliament, for the repeal thereof.
Beside that Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer, the chief aucthours and composers of
the said book, were therefore openly condemned by the Church, and Laws of
this realm, and suffered the pains of death in Oxforde. S. Paul in his
Epistle willed the hebrews, to have in remembrance their Bishops, which
preached unto them the word of God, and diligently to observe and look upon
the end of their lives and conversation.

The answer.
The first consideration co^teineth two causes of your refusal, the one because
the book of Service, was repealed by Act of Parliament, the other, for that
Cranmer Ridley, and Latimer, were burned at Oxforde for it. To the first I
answer, that if you account the authority of the Parliament of force to
condemn it, why do you not acknowledge th'aucthoritie of the same, in
establishyng it, for anno. 1551. by all the states of the realm, that book was
allowed, and appoincted to be used. Also by diverse Acts of Parliamente, in
the time of our sovereign Ladies reign, established, and confirmed. But it is
no hard matter, to gather your traitorous meaning, which is common to you,
with all them of your religion. You accoumpte no acts of Parliament, passed in
the time of king Edward, or Queen Elizabeth, to be of any authority, being
confirmed by the royal assent of those, whom you esteem to be no lawful
Princes, seeing your father the Pope, has pronounced sentence of deprivation
against them.

Your second reason, I will turn upon your own neck. Seeing Cranmer,
Ridley, and Latimer, did so constauntly suffer death, for the confirmation of
that doctrine, which they had taught, it is a good argument, that they
dissembled not with us, but uttered that truth unto us, wherein as they lived,
so they were content to dye. The text of the Apostle to the Hebres. 13. you
apply very straungely, as though we should think well of none, that
suffers death by martyrdom, whereas the Apostle means clean contrary, and
exhorts the Jews, to follow the faith of them, the end of whose
conversation, they had seen to be agreeable to their doctrine, who, as they had
preached diligently, so did they end their lives by torments, in the same
confession constauntely, and patiently.

The Papiste.
The second consideration is, that the said book so universally condemned by
all degrees of men here in this realm, was received and brought in again only
by the nobility and commons of this realm, clean contrary to the whole
minds of our Clergy, no one person in the Parliamente did give his consent
thereunto. Besides that the whole convocation did exhibit their book to the
contrary. VVherin the sheep taking upon them to establishe this book,
contrary to the learning and conscience of their shepherdes, they have done
against the express words of our savior Christ, who in describing the office
of good shepherde, and the duty of good sheep said that a good shepherde
must know his sheep, and his sheep must know him, hear his voice and
follow him. And the Apostle S. Paul in his Epistle Cap. 13. willed the
Hebrews to obey their shepherdes, and spiritual governors, and to submit
themselves unto them, for they do watch even as men which must give
account for their souls. Obey them therefore says S. Paul that they may do
it with joy, and not with grief.

The answer.
Your second consideration, is determinable, by such as are skillful in the
laws of this realm, what persons must concur, in the Parliament, that it
may be an Act of Parliamente, and I doubt not, but the matter was so ordered,
by the judgment of them that had knowledge, as was for the honor, and
wealth of the realm. But if any error had been committed, at that time you
speak of, it was since by all three estates in Parliament redressed, the same
book of service, by their authority being confirmed. But whereas you
complain, that the Sheep in that first Parliament, took upon the^ against
their shepherdes, I answer naie, but the Shepherdes against the Shepebiters,
for your Clergy consisted all of Wolves, and not of Shepherdes, wherefore it
was the duty of the Prince, with the nobles, and senators of that
Parliamente, to deliver the Sheep out of their cruel tyra^nie, and to banishe,
and remove all such raueinous beasts, from the flock. And touching the
book, you say they exhibited, of what credit would you have it to be, when
they so shamefully refused conference, before the most part of the
Parliamente, upon a frivolous pretense, in Westminster church. At which time
al wise men saw, that their cause was naught, which durst not abide the
trial in the open light.

The Papiste.
The third consideration is, that it is prohibited by the Canons of the
apostles, and by the general caunselles also, that a christian man should not
communicate neither in Sacraments nor yet in common prayers, with Heritikes
and Schismatikes. As it appears in the tenth Canon, and in the second Canon
of the counsel holden at Antioche. It was decreed there, that it was not
lawful to communicate with excommunicate persons, nor to enter into any house,
nor to pray with the^, nor lawful to receive them that are excommunicate out
of one church into another church. And in the counsel holde^ at Laodicea, it
was prohibited there, that the christian men should enter into the churches or
church yerdes, of the heretics, there to pray with them, and in the 33.
Canon of the same counsel the like prohibition is there expressed for prayer
with Schismatikes. And in the 4. counsel holden at Carthage Canon 73. it was
decreed, that christian men should nether pray nor singe with Heretics. And
who so ever did pray, singe, or communicate, with any excommunicate person,
whether he were of the Clergy or of the Laity, should be thereby
excommunicated. An example we read therefore, how the christian men at
Constantinople would not communicate with the Arianes, neither in Sacraments,
nor yet in common prayers, notwithstanding that the Arians did agree with the
Christen men in them both, as in all Sacraments, and in all poinctes of
praiyng, saving that the Arians did sing Gloria patri in filio, and the
Christian men, Gloria patri and filio, etc. And therefore, and for that only
poinct, Iho^ Chrysostom then being Bishop of Constantinople, did appoincte
unto the christian men a separate place, and manner of prayer from them, as it
appears in the sixth of the History Ecclesiastike. And therefore the notable
doctor S. Augustine does conclude, on this wise, saying, that they shall not
communicate in Sacraments with us, whose doctrine we cannot approve and allow.

The answer.
Your third consideration, stands upon a foolish fallation of Sophistry,
called petitio principij, which is, when a man will take that as true, which
his adversary will not grant him. As you do in this your argument, where
you take that for a true principle, which you shall never be able to prove,
namely that we are Heretics, and Schismatikes. And so you commit double
folly. First, in prouyng that so diligentely, which no man will deny
(which is, that a man ought not to communicate in religion with Heretics)
and secondly, in bringing no proof at all, of that, which all your adversaries
will deny, namely that they are Heretics, or Schismatikes. For you must first
prove that they are such, before you can prove, that you ought to avoid
their society.

The Papiste.
The fowerth consideration is, that the receiuyng of this new book of service,
is a condemnation of the old, whereby is taken away 5. of the. 7. Sacraments,
the real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament of the alter, the
sacrifice of the mass, many traditions of the Apostles, as the holiyng of the
Font, oil and Chrisma in Baptism and Confirmation, the making of the sign
of the Cross, prayers for the dead and unto saints. All sacramental, and
godly ceremonies, frequented in the universal church of Christ, and brougt
into this realm with the faith of Christ by S. Augustine, and here by him
established, as suer signs and tokens of christian faieth, like as the holy.
S. Bid witnesses in his first book de gestis Anglorum, in the 25.29.30.
chapiters, beside that all the foresaid things have been alwaie approved,
used, and allowed throughout the universal church of christ. And therefore
says S. Augustine all these things which have been received in the
universal Church of Christ, and approved by the use, and consent thereof,
ought not to be overthrown, nor yet to be changed by the judgment of one
private person, be his learning and living never so good, nor yet by the
Bishops of any one province or country, when thereby they should break the
unity of Gods spirit, which is the chief treasure in his Church, commended
by our savior Christ unto his Apostles, wishynge and praiynge the same unity
to be amongst them, which was betwixt him and God (Joan 17) the father. The
Apostle S. Paul tought the Corinthians above all things to observe this
unity, and willed the Romans that with one mind and one mouth they should
glorify God. And in the Epistle to the Ephesians, he besought them most
entirely to observe this unity. Again. S. Augustine says, these things
which the universal church does teach, therefore are to be observed and
kept of all men, because the church which is the spouse of Christ, has the
full authority of her husband Christ, and such government also of the holy
ghost, that she cannot consent, but to true things, nor she cannot command
but only such things which are both holy, wholesome and good. And farther the
same S. Augustine says, that in the ministratio^ of the Sacraments, and in
the manner of praiyng used of Priests, there must be an uniformity observed
in Christ's catholic Church, that by their Law and manner of praiyng there
may be established the law of beleuyng. And lest that the law, and manner of
praiyng being changed, may also bring forth a change and alteration of
faieth, like as it has so proved in this realm. Beside that S. Ambrose does
think that there can not be the faieth, where Schism is, for albeit that
schismatikes may have faieth toward God, yet they cannot have faieth toward
the Church of God, whom they suffer to be dismembered, and discerped in
pieces. For whereas our savior Christ suffered for his Church, and the
Church is the mystical body of Christ, how therefore may they have faith in
christ, by whom his Passion is made frustrate, and his mystical body drawn
in pieces. And therefore would not we should change an order set, or a
custom of Christ's church. For albeit says he, the reason or cause of a
custom may be sought for, yet must it be so sought for, that the custom
thereby be not infirmed or broken, for the search may not be made unto
destruction, but unto aedification, whereby thou may better observe the
custom when thou art assured of the cause and reason thereof. I do praise thee
(says Tertuliane) which first does believe the custom to be observed,
before it has learned the cause and reason why and wherefore.

The answer.
In your fowerth consideration, you should have likewise considered, that such
things, as are granted of both parts, need small proof, and that those
matters, which are in controversy, should be substancially confirmed. As for
example. How necessary unity is for the Church of Christ, no man
doubts, so it be in truth, and not in falshed: for there is unity among
the most wicked, but not in truth, and honesty.

On the other side, that there be five sacraments, more then the book
allows, that there is a carnal presence in the Sacrament of the Lords
body, and blood, that there is, or ought to be, a Sacrifice in the mass, ye
bring not one word of proof.

Concerning Ceremonies, which you call traditions of the Apostles, you say in
deed a little, although to little purpose, and yet so confusely, and out of
all good order, that you seem rather to confound, then to instruct your
simple reader, for what an hochpotte is this? in the mids of your
Sacraments, and Sacramentalles, to choppe in prayers for the dead, and
invocation of saints, which be articles of doctrine, and not Ceremonial
observations. Again, when you have rehearsed by name, diverse Ceremonies, as
oil, and chrisme in Baptism, your manner of confirmation, the sign of the
Cross, and all other your Sacramentalls, and Ceremonies, you bring in certain
broken, and imperfect sentences of Doctors, which speak generally of
Ceremonies, used in the church in their age: and do not show that your
Ceremonies were used then in such manner, as you use them now: which is a mere
mockery of your readers. For whereas you do comprehend the^ all, under the
name of Traditions of the Apostles, if you be a man of such learning, as you
would seem to be, I dare say in your behalf, you will be ashamed to come to
trial of this poincte, that you use all those Ceremonies, that were used in
the time of those doctors, whose names you allege or that al your Ceremonies,
were used in the times of those Doctors, upon whose aucthorities you would
seem to ground. But to consider your grounds particularly, that Augustine,
whom you call saint Augustine, was an unlearned Monk, as appears by his
questions, propounded to Pope Gregory, that came into this land, to corrupt
the sincerity of faith, which the Britons had received, even from the
Apostles, about six hundred years after Christ, and lived two hundred years
at the least, after the aunciente father saint Augustine bushoppe of Hippo in
Africa, of whose pride and folly, you may read in Galfridus Monumeth.
Matheus Westmin. and others. And truth it is, that much superstition, and
false doctrine, he brought in, and by tyranny maintained, as our stories
witness, but not all that you hold at this time, for your religion, in all
points, is nothing so old. And as for Beda, he lived long after Augustine.
But where you affirm, that all your Ceremonies have been always approved,
used, and allowed, throughout the universal church of Christ, I can no
longer forbear you, you say more then all the Papists in the world, will be
able to prove.

Touching saint Augustine, although the place by you alleged, is not to be
found in his undoubted writyngs, yet I confess that he speaks favorably of
Ceremonies commonly used, to be quietly suffered, and borne withal, rather
then unity to be broken. But what makes this, for your Ceremonies, which
you teach to be necessary for salvation, and meritorious: which if they had
been in saint Augustines time, or that men had so taught of them, there is
no doubt, but he would have utterly misliked them, as hereafter in place more
conueniente, I shall plainly declare. In your next sentence out of saint
Augustine also, I must needs tell you, you play the subtle Merchant, to set
for the counterfeict ware, in steed of true marchandice, for Augustine never
was of that opinion, that the Church has the full authority of her husband
Christ, and such gouernemente of the holy Ghost, that she cannot consent, but
unto true things, neither has he any such words in all his works. For it is
well known, that the book de dogmaticis ecclesiasticis, out of which this
sentence seems to be borrowed, is not accounted among the Authentical
works of Augustine, but forged of much later time, and falsely fathered upon
S. Augustine, to steal credit from his name, which it could not obtain of it
self.

And yet if this saying were granted to be true, it pertains nothing to
your church, which is the Sinagoge of Satan, and not the Church of Christ.
Concerning your third testimony of saint Augustine, I can hardely think
that saint Augustine, would have an uniformity of Ceremonies, in prayer, and
administration of the Sacraments throughout all the world, because I am able
to show his authority to the contrary, as in his. 118. epistle to Ianuarius,
he discourses at large. And whereas you say, that the change of the manner of
praiyng, has brought in change of faith in this land, it is clean
contrary, for the diversity of faith, teaches us to pray, otherwise then
you use, for invocation comes of faith, as witnesses saint Paul. Roma. 10.

The testimony of saint Ambrose, although you declare not, where a man
should find it, makes little for your purpose. For we agree with him, that
Schismatikes are to be abhorred, but we will not grant to you, that we are
Schismatikes, as long as we know, that we are members of Christ. The
testimony of Tertuliane concerning custom, if it be faithfully rehearsed of
you, I se not what it makes for you. For although laudable customs, may be
observed, without searchyng their beginning, what is that, to your Ceremonies,
which contain manifest impiety? For you your self will not be so mad, to
allow all customs, seeing many are contrary to the word of GOD. And although
Tertuliane was to much addicted to the maintainyng of Ceremonies, and customs
in some places, yet otherwhiles he either expounds his meaning, or corrects
his error, as in his book De virginibus velandis, where he writes in these
words. Hoc exigere veritatem, cui nemo praescribere potest, non spacium
temporum, non patrocinia personarum, non priuilegium regionum. Ex his enim fere
consuetudo initium ab aliqua ignorantia vel simplicitate sortita, in vsum per
successionem corroboratur, and ita aduersus veritate^ vindicatur. Sed dominus
noster Christus, veritate^ se, no^ consuetudine^ cognominauit. Si semper
christus and prior omnibus: aeque veritas sempiterna and antiqua res, viderint
ergo quibus nouu^ est, quod sibi vetus est.

Haereses non tam nouitas quam veritas reuincit. Quodcu^que aduersus veritatem
sapit hoc erit haeresis, etiam vetus consuetudo. That is to say. This the
truth requires, against which no man can prescribe, not the continuance of
time, not the defense of persons, not the privilege of any regions. For of
these, custom taking her beginning, for the most part, through ignorance,
and simplicity, is confirmed into an usage, by succession, and so is bosted of
against the truth. But Christ our Lord called himself the truth, and not the
custom, if Christ were always, and before all, truth is, as eternal, and
aunciente a thing as he. Let them be well advised therefore, to whom that is
compted new, which of him is coumpted old. Heresies (says he) not so much
their novelty, as truth does convict, for what soever sou^deth against the
truth, that shall be an heresy, yea though it be an old custom. By this
testimony of Tertuliane, every man may see, what he thought of old custom,
when it was alleged to deface the truth, and of what customs he speaks,
when he commends customs, namely such as agree with the truth, and not
every blind, and superstitious Ceremony, whereof a great number were
invented, many hundredth years after his death.

The Papiste.
The fifte consideration is, that whereas I am not persuaded that the form of
prayers set forth in the said book, is lawful and catholic, my coming to
hear it should be an act, not only contrary to mine own conscience and
also to my damnable sin, but also my coming thereto, should be to the weak
and ignorant, an occasion of ruin, and deadly sin, which is called scandalum
infirmorum, and I am bound by the words of our savior Christ, to avoid that,
saying woe be to that man, by whom any such offense or slander shall vprise
and come. For of my coming thither, either they must judge that I am a
dissembler in doing against my conscience, or else they must judge that I am in
conscience persuaded thereunto. And thereby gather by mine example a likyng of
that thing to be good and holy, which in my very conscience I do utterly
condemn, and that this slander shall not be so taken, as scandalum acceptum,
but so given as scandalum datum of my part. And where as it has been often
times objected unto me, how that it is but a very small matter to stick or
stay at, for to come to the Church, and hear the said service, being set at
liberty, secretly, and privily to pray with my self whatsoever I shall think
mete, for he answer, I do read in the Scriptures how Eleazarus the Priest
is in the same commended, because he would not dissemble the eating of swynes
flesh, whereas he might have escaped the pains of death thereby. Tertulliane
writes a book in the praise of a Soldier, and entituleth his book de corona
militis, because that Soldier refused in natali die Seueri imperatoris, to
wear but a Garlande of flowers vpo^n his head, because he should therein then
have followed the manner of the gentiles, and heathen people. And rather or he
would do so small a mattet, as to wear but a Garland of flowers, he did suffer
inprisonment, and therefore is commended of so great a clerk, as Tertullian
was. Theodoritus in his second book of the history Ecclesiastike, in Cap. 24.
does note Leontius Bishop of Antioche of great dissimulation, for as much as
he, being present in the quire at Antioche, and in the hearing of christian
men, there to sing Gloria patri and filio, etc. and the Arians Gloria patri in
filio, etc. Contrariwise he did there openly take nether party, but privily at
the end of every psalm did sing Gloria pari in saecula saeculorum. Amen. And
so he mumbled it up to him self, vt ab instantibus vix audiri posset, whose
example therefore being so manifest, and so well admonished thereof, I purpose
not to follow God willing. When to dissemble with a man I hold it no
honestly, to dissemble with my Prince, it is the just deserte of perpetual
discredit, and infamy, but to dissemble with God, it is most impiety, from
the which detestable sin, I am utterly resolved by the word god, spoken by
the mouth of Helias saying: Vsquequo claudicatis in duas parts? How long will
you halte or limpe on both sides? And S. Ihon in his revelation says: Because
thou art neither whot nor cold, therefore I shall begin now to vomit and
cast thee out of my mouth. The premises well waighed, it cannot be justly
said that I stick at a trifling or small matter, but a matter of great
importance, and conscience moves me thereunto, and forces me that I should
not unadvisedly without great cause separate my self, from the unity of the
Church, neither to condemn the universal church, unheard having no just or
weighty cause why I should so do. For I have always, and do thus weigh the
matter with my self, that the poinctes and matters of religion, which this
book of service, has condemned or taken away, either they were thought matters
of small importance and did no harm, but being rightly understood might have
done good, or else they were to be taken, for matters of impiety and
intolerable to be borne withal. In case they were of the first sort, which
they have condemned and abolished. Then in my judgment they should have been
tolerated and borne withal, for charities sake, and for the continuance, and
increase of unity betwixt us and the universal Church of christendom. On the
other side, in case they had been taken for matters intolerable, and could in
no wise have been borne with all for their impiety, as it has been pretended,
then yet in my conscience, we ought to have been better advised then by our
private condemnation of them, to have showed our self to condemn thereby, all the whole universal church of impiety unheard, which things the universal
church has used from the Apostles time, and do to this day. As touching
matters of right faieth, and godly manners, the church of Christ being the
spouse of Christ, was never destitute of the holy ghost, neither could nor
would in all this time have borne or dissembled any impiety like as. S.
Augustine writes hereof. The Church of God being placed and put among much
chafe, and many Cockles, and wedes, the same church does suffer, and bear
with many things, yet that notwithstanding, touching the things which are
against faith, and against good life, the Church does neither approve them,
nor yet let them escape unspoken against.

The answer.
In that you will not dissemble against your conscience, if you do not
dissemble, but speak as you think, you are to be commended: but if your
conscience, as you say, is not yet persuaded, you are by no means to be
excused, for in this so clear light of the Gospel, you could not be so
blind, if you did not obstinately close your iyes, from receiuyng the Sun
beams into them.

And whereas you think it not reason, to depart from the unity of the
church, nor to condemn the universal Church unheard, you stand upon a
false ground, as you do always, that the Popish Church, is that
universal Church, but that you shall never be able to prove. For was the
Popish church at any time, or is it now vniuersalle? But the Romish
church, you will say, is always universal, though it have never so many
enemies. But I can show you by saint Augustines judgment, that the
universal Church, may be without the Romish church. For writing to
Casulane. Epi. 86. he has these words, speaking of one that defended the
Ceremonies, and custom of the Romish church, against the whole catholic
Church. Quod vtinam sic quaereret, aut sic affirmaret, vt toto terrarum orb
diffusam, exceptis Romany and adhuc paucis occidentalibus, apertissime no^
blasphemaret ecclesiam. that is to say: which thing I would he did seek in
such manner, or so affirm, that he did not most manifestly thereby, blaspheme
the church, dispersed through out the whole world, except the Romans, and a
few other Western Churches. Do you not here see, that when the Romish
church, with a few other that agreed with her are exempted, the universal
church of Christ still remains, by saint Augustines judgment? and that
if the Romish Church, depart from the whole Catholic Church, the Romish
Church is a Schismatike, as it is at this day, and has been a long time,
even since Antichriste set up his seat there, and made a general departing
from the faith of Christ, which saint Paul prophesies should come to pass.
ij. Thessal. ij. All the which time, though there were but few that continued
in true faith, and honoring of God, yet those few, wheresoever they were
scattered in all the world, were the true catholic Church of Christ, and were
always ioigned together in Christ their head, by unity of true religion.

And whereas you say, your Church is unheard, I marvel what you mean, for
what can the Pope, or any of her proctours, say in her defense, but it has
been heard, and confuted by the scriptures? Which thing has caused, the most
part of the regions of Europe this day, to forsake your Heretical,
Schismatic, and Antichristian Church of Rome, and to ioigne them selves to
the true Catholic, and Apostolic church of Christ, which approves all her
doctrine, out of the holy Scriptures, and by the same reproves all your
heresies, and erroneous opinions: the judgment, and trial of which holy
Canonical scriptures, you never yet durst abide. It is not therefore any
private condemnation, which is pronounced out of Gods word, against
heresies, whose authority in all things is highest, and of al men to be
obeyed. Finally, where you affirm, that the church of Christ, was not
destitute of the holy Ghost, I agree with you, but that your Church, is the
Church of Christ, I may in no wise acknowledge. And truth it is, that the
true Church did always reclaim, against the heresies of your church, as they
sprung up and increased in the world, and received that reward, which true
Prophets have accustomed to receive of wicked tyrants namely, persecution,
imprisonmente, and cruel death, as appeared in Bertramus, Marsilius of Padua,
Pauperes de Lugduno, Johannes de Gandauo, Bruno Andegauensis, Johannes
Wickleue, Johannes Hus, Hieronimus de Praga. etc. all which with many other,
in several times, and places, reproved, and confuted your false Church, and
the errors thereof, some in Italy, some in France, some in Flaunders, some
in Germany, some in Bohemia, and some in England, and for the most part,
were either murdered, or otherwise cruelly persecuted for their labors. But
yet the heresies of your church, did not escape unspoken against, and confuted
by them.

The Papiste.
The sixte, and last consideration, that I come not to their church, is,
because I am not of their Church. S. Augustine in putting difference of
churches says, how unto them which have not all one Sacraments, there can
not be one religion, nor consequently one Church. And the cause why I am not
of their Church, but refuse to communicate with them in religion, besides
this saying of S. Augustine, that we should not Communicate in sacraments with
those men whose doctrine we can not aproue and allow: I do refuse to be of
their church, because I cannot learn nor understand, of what church they are
of. For they being first Baptized in the catholic church, and in the very
self faieth and religion, wherein I do at this present time, believe and remain:
they are departed therefro, some to the Lutheranes Church, some to the
Zwinglians, and coming last of al to the church Geneua, they are in manner fled
from that church also, and by attributing the chief and supreme government of
this their English church unto the Queen's highness, they are in doctrine
directly against their old master Calvin, being the chief Apostle of the
Church of Geneua, which Calvin in the eight Chapter of the book of his
institutions, does directly reason against Kings, and Princes, for taking
upon them spiritual government in the Church of Christ, and in the same
Chapter he does much commend the holy Bishop S. Ambrose, and the noble
Emperor Theodosius, Ambrose for his great stoutnes and resistance made
against the Emperor: And Theodosius for his great submission, and obediens
showed unto the Bishop. The history whereof is at large expressed in
Ecclesiastica historia. And the said Calvin in his exposition upon the
fowerth Chapter of the prophet Amos, does tax King Henry the eight by name,
because he alone, of all other Princes was the first that took upon him in the
Church of Christ spiritual government, whose example in that poinct, there was
never one Prince in all Germany, nor yet in any place else where, of the whole
world, that would follow the same, but his own natural son King Edward
the sixte, being then in his minority, and again the Queens highness that
now is, If therefore I shall depart from the common known catholic Church
wherein I stand, I would gladly know of them unto what Church I should
repair, to be instructed with out errors, wherein unity, charity, and
verity do dwell, what form of a church are they able to show, whereupon a
christian man may be bold to assure himself? And if peradventure they cease
not to pretend, that the Primitive Church is that plat form of the Church
whereunto they would reduce us: I answer, that there be so many poinctes
wherein they do dissent from the Primitive Church (like as I shall make
sufficient proof thereof) that it can not be so, it is only pretended, but it
shall never be proved: The Anabaptists, the Libertines and the Arians do
pretend gods word, and the Primitive Church as well as they: And because
they are so bold to name the primitive church, I ask of them but this one
question, whether that this day 50. or, 60. years last paste, was their
Church here in this realm, or in any other part of christendom? What
particular Church either here in England, in the last year of King Henry the
eight his reign, or any other realm else, can they name that taught or
received universally throughout, in all poinctes the doctrine, that this
present Church of England does now teach, or from that day, a thousand
years before that, or from thence, unto the time of Christ, and his Apostles.
If they can not show any one such Church (as I am well assured, they shall
never be able to do) then it must needs follow, that either Christ had no
Church in the world all that time till now their coming, or else it must
needs follow that their Church, is a new invented and vpstert Church, which
with christ's Primitive church has no agreans, like as it shall most plainly
appear unto you by these profes followyng.

The answer.
In your last consideration, you do inconsiderately allege, that you are not
of our Church, but show no sufficient reason, why you ought not to be one of
our Church. You say, we are departed from the church, in which we were
baptized, as though, if a man were Baptized in a Church of heretics, he is
bound to remain in the same Church, and heretical faith of that Church, in
which he was baptized, so that if a man were baptized in the Church of
Arrianes, Nouatianes, Donatistes, Pelagians, he might not forsake the faith,
and Church, in which he was baptized, to become a true Christian catholic. A
child of seven year old, may see how slender a reason it is for a man, to
continue in any Church, or Religion, because he received baptism therein. For
if a Papist may not become a Protestant, because he was Baptized in the
Popish church, by the same reason, a Protestant must not become a Papist, if
he were baptized in the Protestants Church, which you your self by no means
will grant.

The second reason you bring, is of the diuersitye of churches, the Lutherane,
the Zwingliane, and the Geneuian. As though the diversity of some opinions,
not of the greatest importance, makes diverse churches. The church of
Salisburie, the church of York, and the church of Bangor, had some
diversity in their manner of serving God, and yet you will say, they were all
one Popish Church. But to the purpose, you recite more names, then there be
diversities of opinions. For Zwinglius, and Calvin, in the matter of the
Sacrament, which you shoot at, are all one, and Luther differs from them.
And yet the difference is not so great, but that they be all of one Catholic
Church, because they agree in the only foundation, Jesus Christ, and in all
opinions, that are necessary to Salvation, although Luther in his opinion of
the Sacrament (as a man) was deceived. And that diversities of opinions (so
long as the principal grounds of faith be observed uncorrupted) does not
make diversity of churches, you may easily see, by this example S. Cypria^
and all the Churches of Africa, were in this error, that such as were baptized
by heretics, should be baptized again, which was a very perilous error.
Cornelius, and Stephanus the Bishops of Rome, with the Churches of Europe were,
in the contrary opinion. And yet no man ever refused S. Cypriane, to be a
member of the Catholic church, nor judged the churches of Africa, that
followed his error, to be of any other the^ of ye universal church of
Christ, among whom were many martyrs, and godly men which lived and died in
the same error. Now compare Cypriane, and Luther, the one erring in the
Sacrament of Baptism, the other in the Sacrament of the Supper, if the error
of the one, did not separate him from the communion of the catholic church, no
more ca^ the error of the other. Which thing, if it were well weighed, would
remove that sto^blyng block, that troubles many weak persons, but can
hinder no learned man, concerning the controversy of Luther, and Zwinglius.

The third reason is, that we are departed, from the Church of Geneua, because
we ascribe supreme government, in Ecclesiastical matters, to the Queens
highness. First, we must be bold to tell you, that as we reverence, and
honor all particulare Churches, where true religion is established, so we do
not ground our self upon either the opinion, or custom, of any one, but only
upon the word of God, and so far forth to follow every one, as they come
near to the same rule. But whereas you would set that excellent, godly
Church of Geneua, at variaunce with us, about the supremacy, your childishe
quarrellyng, shall easily appear to all men. You allege Calvin against
us, in two places, one in his Institutions, an other in his Comentarie of the
Prophet Amos. A man in deed, from whom we would be loathe to dissente, except
it were for a great cause. A man of such godly learning, and profounde
knoweledge in divinity, as all the Papists, that ever were, are not worthy
to carry his books after him. But before I answer you, I must admonish
you, that either your copies, which came to my hands, were very much
corrupted, or else you have recited those places by hearesaie, rather then by
your own observation. Your copies sends me to the, viij. Chapter of his
Institutions, namyng no book, and to the fowerth. Chapter of Amos, whereas
that you speak of the one place, is in the fowerth book, and twelve Chapter
of his Institutions: the other in the seven Chapter of Amos. So that in deed,
it was more labor to seek your places, then to make answer to them.
Concerning the first, I marvel you were not ashamed, to allege Calvin
against us, where he says, that Kings, and Princes, are subject to the
discipline of the Church, as Theodosius was content to be excommunicated by
saint Ambrose, for the murder he had committed in Thessalonica, (which none
of us denies) and do not remember, how substauncially he proves, that godly
Princes have authority, and ought to maintain true religion, by laws
decrees, and judgments, which is all the supreme gouernemente, that we
ascribe to the Queens highness.

And as for the place of Calvin upon Amos, the truth is this: Calvin finds
fault, not with king Henry, but with those that did ascribe that title unto
him, and shows for what reason, he misliked the same. Not that he denied his
lawful authority, which was meant by that title, of all his godly, and true
subjects: but because, Steven Gardener bishop of Winchester, by false
understanding thereof, declared that he understood nothing thereby, but the
tyranny, which the Pope usurps over the church, to be translated unto the
king. And therefore at a solemn conference, at Ratisbone in Germany, after the
Popes authority by act of Parliament, was abolished out of the realm, he
defended all Popish religion, which remained unreformed, to be good, and
godly, because it was established by the kings authority, who was supreme
head of the church. He disputed not by reasons, neither cared he for the
testimonies of scriptures, but said, it was in the kings power, to abrogate
all Laws, and establishe what he thought good in the church, as to forbid
Priests marriage, to forbid lay men the use of the Cup in the Church,
and all other such matters, he said, were in the kings authority. This he
said of the Kings power abroad, and how he abused that noble Prince at
home, to make the Act of six Articles, and other things of like effect,
there be many yet alive, that can remember. But seeing this title of
supremacy, does so much offend you, I pray you let me demand one
question of you. Who did first invent it here in England? Or who did first
ascribe it to king Henry? Was it not the whole Popish Clergy of England?
when they were cast in the Praemunire, for mainteinyng the power Legantine of
Cardinal Wolsey, and submittyng them selves unto the King, they flattered
him with that title, and offered him a great sum of money, for their pardon:
as witnesses Halle, and Grafton in their histories, and there be yet alive
many, that can remember it. So that if there were any fault in it, you should
blame them, and not us for it. For so farforthe, as being rightly understood,
it declares the lawful power of the Prince, we did, and do yield unto it,
but not in Steven Gardiners sense, which Calvin in the place by you alleged,
does confute.

After this, you require us to show you a Church, where unto you may
resort, which has continued even since Christ, which if it can not be
showed, you conclude in the end, that Christ had no church, or else our Church
is not Christ's Church. Again where our Church was fifty, or sixty years
agon. If a man had asked of Elias, where the church of God was in his time,
he could not have made answer, and yet God had his Church in Elias time. The
Church is not always apparaunte, to the iyes of the blind world, in which
she is a stranger, but is compelled sometimes to fly into the wilderness,
out of the sight of men, by the persecution of the devil, and his members, as
it is Prophesied in the xij. Chapter of saint Ihons Revelation. And yet for
fifty or sixty year agone, it had been no hard matter, to have showed you
diverse members of our Church, both in England, and in Bohemia, as the
history of the church declares at large. Also in France at Merindoll, and
about Lyo^s, but these you will say, agreed not with us in all poinctes, but I
will answer you, they agreed in the chiefest poinctes, necessary to eternal
salvation. For whatsoever we are able to show, for our Church, I am sure you
are never able, to show your self, for your church, that which you require
us to show: namely a church that has continued from this time upward, unto
the Apostles, that taught uniformly, and in all poinctes, the doctrine that
the Popish Church now teaches. Which thing when you have performed, I will
do the like for our Church. In the mean time, that which is a sufficient
rule, to find out the true Church, by the judgment of Saint Augustine, I
will declare unto you. In his book the vnitate ecclesiae. Capi. 2. Inter nos
autem and Donatistat, quaestio est, vbi sit ecclesia. Quid ergo facturi sumus?
In verbis nostris eam quaesituri sumus, an in verbis capitis sui domini nostri
Jesus Christi? Puto quod in illius potius verbis eam quaerere debemus, qui
veritas est and optime nouit corpus suum. Between us, and the Donatistes
(says saint Augustine) the question is, where the church should be. What
shall we do then? shall we seek her in our words, or in the words of her
head, our Lord Jesus Christ? I think that rather in his words, we ought to
seek her, which is the truth, and best knows his own body. And in the.
xvj. chapter of the same book, he writes thus of the Donatistes Vtrum ipsi
ecclesiam teneant, non nisi diuinaru^ scripturarum canonicis libris ostendant.
That is, whether they have the church on their side, let them show none
otherwise, but by the Canonical books of holy scriptures. Many other such
testimonies are in S. Augustine, by which it is plain, that he gives this
infallible rule, to know the true church, to examine the doctrine thereof,
only by the scriptures. But whereas you say, that Anabaptists, Libertines and
Arians, pretend the word of god, and the primitive Church, what mean you
thereby? that we should forsake the word of god and the Primitive church, by
which all heretics have been confuted, what soever they pretended. For though
heretics pretend the scriptures, yet only by the scriptures they are to be
confuted, and though they appeal to the judgment of the primitive church,
yet by the primitive church they are condemned for heretics. I may as well
say, that Arianes, Libertines, and Anabaptists, boste them selves to be the
true Catholic Church, therefore we must not allow the true catholic
church. It is pity to see men, that would be coumpted wise, and learned, to
reason so fondly, and unlearnedly. For of all other reasons, it is the vainest,
and feeblest shift that the Papists use, to fly from the scriptures, to the
authority of the Church, in confutation of heresies. For there was never yet
heresy did arise, but there was as great controversy, of the Church, as of
the opinion: for every heretic, boasts as well of the Church, as of the
scriptures, but when all is dooen, his bragges of both, must be beaten
down, only by the scriptures. But because you make so proud vauntes, that
you will so plainly prove, that our Church has none agreans with the
primitive church of Christ, in discourse of that controversy with you, I will
set for the both what is the Primitive church, and how we agree therewith,
and I doubt not, but that I shall be able by the grace of God, both to
justify our cause, against your false accusations, and also to overthrow
your falshodde, which you have heaped up, to ouerwhelme the truth.

And as I have confuted your six considerations, which unto you seem of great
importance, so by Gods help I shall avoid all other your calumniations, in
which with some subtlety, but more impudency, and most of all impiety, you
go about to entangle the consciences, of such as be ignorante, and
unlearned, to withdraw their obedience* from the godly laws of this realm,
which are established, for the mainteinyng of Gods true Religion, and the
abolishyng of all Idolatry, and superstition.

The Papiste.
Arguments gathered out of the Scriptures, prouyng that this late reformed
English church has none agreans with the Primitive church of Christ.

The answer.
The very title of your arguments declares, of what force your arguments
are. Your reasons are ten in noumber, which if they were all granted to be
true yet follows not this conclusion, that our Church has no agreance, with
the Primitive Church of Christ, except you would affirm, that all the
doctrine of the Primitive Church, were comprehended in these ten poinctes.
Again your own Popish Church differs, in these ten poinctes, as much
from the Primitive Church, as ours, therefore by your own Logike, I will
conclude, that your Popish church, has no agreance with the church of Christ.
1. For neither you have all things common, 2. neither do you sell your
houses, and lands, to put the price in common. 3. Neither do you make
division to every manne, according to his necessity. 4. Neither are all
members of your Church so provided for, that none do beg. 5. Neither do
you baptize only in the name of Christ. 6. Neither do you give the holy
ghost, by laiyng on your hands. 7. Neither do you restore them to health,
whom you annoincte with oil, being sick. 8. Neither do you make open
confession of your sins. 9. Neither do you celebrate the Sacrament, after
supper. 10. Neither do you abstain from bloodde, and strangled, therefore by
your own reason, you have no agreance with the Primitive Church of Christ.
Or if you may have any agreance, these differences notwithstanding, why may
not we the same differences, nothing lettyng us, have sufficient agremente
therewith? You see that either your argument is nothing worth, or else you have
as little agreance with the Primative church, as we. Your only refuge is this,
that it is not necessary for you, to have any agreance with the primitive
Church. And that is the opinion of all Papists, which is diligently to be
noted, that you disclaim of al title of the Primitive Church, which you
hold, was but an infant, and by addition of your doctrine, and Ceremonies, is
grown to be of womannes state. As though Christ married his Church, when she
was under age, and so the matrimony was not ratified, and consumated, before
the Pope had nourtured her in his schole, until she came to years of
discretion. For it is as lawful for me, so to infer upon your allegory, as
for you so to allegorise of her.

But that you may the better understand, what we mean by the primitive
Church, I put you out of doubt, that none of us does attribute unto her,
such long limits, as you do in your arguments, gathered out of the
Doctors: where you allege the second counsel of Nice, as a determination
of the primitive church, which was holden almost eight hundred years after
Christ. Of which thing you were not ignorant, but you thought it was
sufficient, to fill unlearned ears, with great blastes, void of all reason,
or truth. Wherefore, when we appeal to the Primitive Church, we mean the
Church of the Apostles, and their successors, so long as they continue in
the doctrine of the Apostles, whereof trial is to be made, by the Canonical
writings of the Apostles. That whereas you accuse us for departing from your
church, as though we were of no Church, we defend our selves to be of the
true church, seeing we retain the faith, and doctrine of the primitive
Church, which without all controversy, was the true church. Now as I have
showed you, what we account to be the primitive church, so must I declare,
in what things we are bound to consent, and agree with the same. For which
purpose, we must mark this difference, which I suppose, no Papist is so far
paste shame, to deny: namely, that in the primitive Church, some things were
necessary, and immutable, some things again were temporal, and variable. Of
the first sort is the doctrine, and Sacraments, of the latter sort are
Ceremonies, and politic constitutions. To the doctrine no man may add, no
man may diminishe, no man may alter, any thing thereof. The Sacraments
being, as Augustine calls them, the visible word, be of the same nature
with the doctrine. On the other side, Ceremonies, and public constitutions,
mate be retained, or changed, as they make best for edificatio^, for order,
and for comelines. And of this latter sort, are all those things, which you
allege, in which we differ from the primitive church. But yet, so long as we
hold still the same faith, and the same Sacraments, which are left to us
by the primitive Church, all reasonable men will judge, that notwithstanding
your reasons, we have such agreance with the primitive Church, as may prove
us to be members of the same. For it is the unity of faith, and Sacraments,
not of Ceremonies, and constitutions, that ioigneth us unto the body of
Christ, as witnesses saint Paul to the Ephesi. iiij. One faith, one
baptism, one God. etc. Now let us particularly consider your ten differences.

The Papiste.
First it is written how the beleuers in the Primitive church had all things
in common. And no one man did reckon the thing that he did possess, to be his
own or private.

The answer.
First, it it is a sport to see, how to make a show of a great multitude
of dishes, and to fill up the noumber of ten, you divide one matter into
four quarters, which is of the co^munitie of al things, that was in the
primitive Church, which should have been served all in one mease, but for
fashio^s fake. That they had all things common, one while in Jerusalem, it is
very true, but that they had so always, and in all places, it is most false,
for saint Paul exhorts the Corinthians, to give almose to the poor
liberally. j. Cor. xvj, and he wills Timothe, that he charge the^ that be
rich, in this world, to be ready to distribute unto yt necessity of their
brethren. j. Timoth. vj. which neded not all, if all things had been common.
This was therefore a variable order, and constitution, which continued but a
short time, neither was it profitable, but only then, when the noumber of the
disciples was but small, in comparison, and lived all in one place at
Jerusalem.

The Papiste.
Second in the Primitive Church such of the beleuers, which were possessors
of Lands and Houses soulde them, and powered it down before the Apostles, but
the beleuers of this our late reformed Church are not come to that
perfection, nor yet are aminded so to do.

The answer.
This is all one with the former, for how could they have had all things
common, if every man had retained his houses, and lands, to his private use.
And yet no man was compelled to this community, for Peter says, plainly,
to Ananias, that he neded not to have sold his land, neither to have brought
the price, but of his free will. But whereas you accoumpt it a perfection to
have all things common, I must be bold to tell you, ye savor of
Anabaptistrie, for although it was then expediente for thal time, among a few,
yet it were not tolerable to be used as a pefection among all the church of
Christ But would bring a mere confusion, and disorder of all things, beside
that it is impossible, that all Christian men, in all places, should have all
things common.

The Papiste.
Thirdly in the primitive church, Christ's Apostles and their successors were
chief governors of the beleuers, and of such goods as they had in common
amongst them, division unto every manne was made thereof, by the appoinctment
of the Apostles, according as they thought it needful or necessary. And
because Ananias the husband of Saphira went about to keep back a portion of
that common money, for the which they sold their Lands, the Apostle. S. Peter
did strike them both with sudden death. But in this our reformed English
church, beside that the beleuers are at no such appoinctment of the Bishops
and successors of the Apostles, they do by their laws spoil them of all
they have, by taking from them so much of their temporal lands, and so much
of their goods, for first fructes, tenthes and subsidies as they list. And
therefore in this poinct it has no agreans with the order of the Primitive
church.

The answer.
The Apostles kept not that government long in their hands, but committed it
over to the Deacons, as it is declared in the sixte chapter of the Acts, by
which it is manifest, that it was no perpetual order, which in so short
time, was altered. For in such things, the Church may institute, and
change, as often as it shall seem expediente. But whereas you charge our
Prince, to be a spoiler of the church, by withdrawyng the lands, and gooddes
thereof, by taking first fruictes, tenthes, and subsidies, you show your self
what an honest subject your are. We for our parts, acknowledge, that it is in
the Princes power, to increase, or diminishe the stipend of the ecclesiastical
ministers as shall be thought expedient, and that it is our duties, to pay all
such taxes, tributes, and subsidies, as by lawful authority, are laid upon
us. But I marvel why you should accuse our princes, for taking of subsidies,
as though Popish princes, do not take subsidies of their Cleargies also, and
most of all when the Pope who has no authority, to demand one penie, has
extorted such infinite sommes of money, for annates, first fruictes, palles,
pardons, and such other tromperie: whereof how great complaints the Clergy
of England has made, you may read in Mathewe of Westminster in the lives of
diverse kings, and namely of Henry the third, and Edward the first. One
history is notable, that the Pope fente a Legate called Otto, with a letter,
complainyng of the great poverty of the Church of Rome, which was the cause
that she was compelled, to pille, and polle poor suitors, that sued to the
Court of Rome, in remeadie whereof, he demanded of every Cathedral church
two prebendes, and of every Religious house, so much as the portion of two
Monks, or cloisterers came to by year. But the Clergy would in no wise
grant it. The same request was made in France, but could not be obtained.
Wherefore every man may see, how maliciously you slander the prince, which
has authority to take for necessary affairs, of the realm, so long as a
competent living, remain unto the Ministers

The Papiste.
Forth it is written of the Primitive church, that of such goods which they
had in common, there was such equal division made by the hands of the
Apostles, that no one man of the beliuers did lack, or was forced of
necessity to beg. But since the reformation of this English church, many
especially of the Clergy which were before well able to live, are now brought
unto a very bare and beggarly life and estate.

The answer.
This division lasted not long among the Apostles at Jerusalem, for saint
Paul from the Churches of the Gentiles, received almose, to supply the
necessity of the poor saints at Jerusalem, and by Peter, James, and Ihon
he was exhorted so to do, as you may read, in the second to the Galathians,
and the second to the Corinth. viij. and. ix. And as for your Clergy, if any
of them be brought to beggerie, it is through their own ignorance, and
frowardness, which either will not forsake their heresies, or are not able to
minister in the Church of Christ, if any worthy men be neglected, it is
the fault of some private persons, and not of the whole Church.

The Papiste.
Fiueth in the Primitive church, christ's Apostles did baptize the beleuers
only in the name of Jesus Christ, and not by express words of the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost, the which form of baptizyng used in the
Primitive church, these new reformatours use not.

The answer.
That any of the Apostles, Baptized, only in the name of Jesus Christ,
excludyng the name of the father, and of the holy ghost, it is a detestable
sclau^der of the holy apostles. Who as they had an express commandment, of
our savior Christ, to baptize in the name of the blessed Trinity, the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, so there is no doubt, but they did
always observe it, which is easily to be gathered, out of the. xix. chapter
of the Acts where certain disciples of Ephesus, being unorderly baptized, by
some preposterous disciples of Ihon: answered they knew not, whether there
were an holy ghost or no, saint Paul then does demand into what they were
baptized, as though he should say, if you had been rightly Baptized, you could
not have been ignorante of the holy ghost, but by their answer, he perceived,
that they were baptized into the name of Ihon, and not of Christ, as though
Ihon had been the head of their religion, and not christ. Then after S. Paul
had declared yt Ihons doctrine and baptism, was to be referred altogether to
Jesus Christ, they were baptized into the name of Jesus Christ, that is to
acknowledge Jesus Christ to be the head and aucthour of their Religion, not
that in the form of their Baptisyng, the name of the father and of the holy
ghost was excluded. And so are all other places to be expounded, where it is
said, that any are baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. And in no place is it
said, that any manne was baptized only in the name of Jesus Christ. Wherefore
this cauillation as it unprofitable for your purpose, so is it slanderous, and
blasphemous against the Apostles.

The Papiste.
Sixte in the Primitive Church the Apostles, Peter, Ihon, and their
Successors, did give the holy Ghost unto their beleuers, that were before
baptized by laiyng their hands upon their heads, which thing our
reformators of this our English church do refuse to do by their denial made
of the Sacrament of Confirmation.

The Answer.
Although I will not contend with you, on what part of men's bodies, the
Apostles laid their hands, yet it is boldly affirmed of you, that they laid
their hands on men's heads, which you read not in any place of the
scripture, but concerning the substance of the matter, the Apostles by the
ceremony of imposition of hands conferred the holy ghost, that is to say, the
visible graces and gifts of the holy ghost, as the gift of tongues, the gift
of prophecy, the gift of healyng and such like, which gifts, as they were
temporal in the Church, to beutifie the ministry of the gospel, in the
first publishing thereof, and now are ceased, so the ceremony by which they
were conferred, is rightly abrogated. For now the ministers by laiyng on their
hands, can not give those external graces of the holy ghost, wherefore they
ought not to use that Ceremony. An other imposition of hands, was used by the
Apostles, on those that were Baptized, being infantes, which after they came to
years of discretion, professed their faith before the Church, to which they
were Baptized, and so were received only by imposition of hands, which was
therefore called confirmation. Not that it was a Sacrament, or a sign of Gods
favor, suppliyng that which wa^ted in baptism, but that it was a testimony
of the Churches allowing, of those that were so Baptized, and after learned the
principles of their faith. And this Ceremony, we retain in our church, not
as a Sacrame^te, which is a visible sign of an invisible grace, between God
and us, but as an external approbation, and receiuyng of the person, in such
sort Baptized. As for your Oil and Chrisme, that you occupy in your Popish
confirmation, has none institution of Christ, and therefore is no Sacrament.

The Papiste.
Seventh the order and manner was of the Primitive church, if any man was
dangerously sick, to send for the Priest, to pray for him, and oinct him
with Oil in the name of our Lord God, which the reformatours of this our
English church do refuse to do, by their denial of the Sacrament of
extreme unction.

The answer.
In the primitive Church, the Elders of the Church, had the gift of healyng,
and therefore, when any man was sick, they used to send for the Elders of the
Church, who prayed for him, and anointed him with Oil, in the name of the
Lord, by which Ceremony, it pleased GOD, to restore the party to health,
as you may read in the v. Chapter of saint James. And in the sixte of
saint Marks Gospel we read, that the Apostles being sent abroad of
Christ, to preach, and work miracles, used by the same ceremony, to heal
many that were sick. But now when the gift of healyng, continues not in the
Church, it were a very ridiculous thing, to use that Ceremony. And as for
your extreme unction, by no means can be accounted that usage, of the
Apostles, for you anoint none almost, but such as are past hope of recovery,
so far you are from restoring any to health by your beggarly ceremony.

The Papiste.
Eight in the Primitive church we do read in the nintinth chapter, of the
acts of the Apostles, how upon a certain plague there made upon seven
brethren, the sons of one Sceba, by a man that was possessed with the
Diuelle, many of the people which did believe in Jesus Christ, theruppon came
and made vpen confession of their sins, and made declaration of their private
acts and deeds, which the reformatour of this our English Church will none
of, by the denial of Sacrament of penance, and all the parts thereof.

The Answer.
It is strange to see, unto how narrow shifts, you are driven, to make up a
number of arguments. Have you nothing but open confession, to prove your
private and auriculer confessio^s God be thanked, there are many also in our
church, that make open confession, and declaration of their former life, led
in blindenes and superstition, of their falling in time of persecution and
other like offenses, but what is this to your popish Sacrament, of auricular
confession? or what likelihode has it with the same? First the faithful
bringyng forth certain examples of their actions, acknowledge how they were
seduced by the devil before they embraced the faith: the popes law compels
men to rehearse all their deeds, words, and thoughts. These men made their
confession once, the popes law requires each man to confess every year once
at least, these came forth to this confession of their own accord, the pope
compels all men upon necessity of salvation. Again the text says, that
many came, but not all, the popes law excepteth none, these Ephesians made
open confession, before all the church, as you your self acknowledge, the pope
commands every man to whisper his confession, into a priests ear. Let al
men judge, what agreement this their confession, has with your auricular
confession. And whereas you say, we deny the Sacrament of penance, and all the
parts thereof. The truth is, we preach repentance, as we are commanded, by
the word of God, but no Sacrament of penance, do we find in the
Scripture, what you mean by the parts of penance, I cannot well tell, but if
it be those three, that be commonly set forth in writers of your dunsical
divinity, contrition of heart, confession of mouth, and satisfaction of work,
you shall here, what we think of them. They are such, as a very limme of
the Devil, may perform, and yet go to the Devil, when he has dooen.
Example in Judas Iscarioth, who had contrition of heart, as the Scripture
teaches, when he was sorry for his fact. And he made confession of mouth, to
the priests, when he said, I have sinned, in betraiyng of innocente blood.
Finally, he made satisfaction of work, when he restored the thirty
siluerlynges, which he received for his treason. And when he had so dooen,
went and hanged him self in despair. You see, that Judas lacked none of your
three parts of penance, but he lacked faith, without the which, all
contrition, confession, and outward satisfaction is nothing auailable. And
therefore you teach a very wholesome kind of penance, in which faith in the
blood of Christ, is no part at all. Neither is it necessarely required
thereto, by your own doctrine. For Sacraments (you teach) give grace ex opere
operato, that is, of the work wroughte, so a man does not withstand the
receiuyng of them, which you call ponere obicem. And therefore penance being
one of your Sacraments, and absolution of sins, may be received without
faith, in the merits of Christ. Therefore keep your penance for your friends
we can not skill of such Sacraments.

The Papiste.
Ninth the order and manner of the Primitive church, was to celebrate the
Sacrament of christ's body after supper, as it apeareth, both by the example
given thereof by our savior Christ, and by the testimonies of the Apostle
saint Paul, which they do not observe nor follow.

The answer.
You are not able to prove, that any such order was established, in the
primitive Church, that the Sacrament of the body, and blood of Christ,
should be received after Supper. Although it was by our Savior institited
after his last Supper. Not appoinctyng any time, in which it ought of
necessity to be received, no more then the Sacrament of Baptism, is bound
either to Morning, or Euenyng, day, or night, or to any time of the day, in
which it was first ordained. And whereas you allege the authority of
saint Paul for your purpose, you do him great wrong, for he reproves the
Corinthians, for confoundyng drunken, and profane bankettes, with the holy
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. i. Cor. xj. And as for the time, place, and
other like circumstances, perteinyng to the ministration of the Sacraments,
they are in the discretion of the church to appoinct, as they may best serve
for order, comeliness, and edification. But over the substance of the
Sacraments, the Church has no power, as to take the cup from the lay
people, which none but the church of Antichrist would presume to do.

The Papiste.
Tenth in the Primitive Church, it was decreed by a solemn law holden by the
Apostles of Christ at Jerusalem, that the christen men men should abstain a
sanguine, and suffocato, from blood and all suffocate things, which our
reformatours perform not, nor will admit any fasting from meats and drinks
at all, by the which testimonies, and proves gathered out of the divine
scriptures, how plain a matter it is that they purpose not in their
reformation to reduce us to the Primitive Church of Christ, when therewith
besides they have no agreaunce, they do all things clean to the contrary,
like as ye have partly heard by profes made therefore out of the divine
scriptures, and shall heareafter more at large by the writings, and testimonies
of the most best learned, and grauest fathers that ever were in Christ's
Church.

The answer.
The Apostles in that Counsel, made not a perpetual law, to bind any
man's conscience, but only a temporal decree, to avoid offense of the weak
Jews: who were accustomed to abstain from such things, and this decree, as
occasion served, was broken, and altered. But where you say, we can admit
no fasting from meats, and drinks, at all. You shall understand, that we
compte it no fasting, to abstain from one kind of meat, and to fille your
beallie with an other kind, as to refrain flesh, and to glutte your stomach
with fish. Or as the Maniches abstained from living creatures, and riotted in
fruictes, spices, and delicate confections. Neither did the Apostles, by that
decree command any fasting, but only abstinence from blood, and strangled
beasts, which was offensive to the Jews. And for such end of auoidyng
offenses, or for civil policy, we can, and do admit abstinence, from some
kinds of meats, and drinks, but not for Religions sake, neither accoumptyng
any such abstinence to be fasting. But true fasting, to tame the body, and
to bring it into subjection, to humble our selves, to make us more apt to
pray, we commend, and exhort men unto it, although we make no tyrannical
laws, to entangle any man's conscience with all. Your feeble kind of
reasonyng, should not incur so great reprehension, if you had not as well in
your title, as in your conclusion, made so bold bragges, of your plain
proofs, which be so plain in deed that every manne may see, they have no
force at all in them. And whereas you threaten to show, that we do all
things, contrary to the primitive Church, you do well to sat, it shall be
performed in such sort, as you have proved already, that we have none
agreaunce with the same. For he that has experience, how pithely you have
reasoned out of the scriptures, can not but hope, that you will dispute, even
as profoundly out of the Doctors.

The Papiste.
Arguments gathered out of the holy Fathers and aunciente doctors, prouyng
that this late reformed English Church has no agreance with the primitive
church of Christ.

The answer.
A man may easily perceive, that you delight in great nombers. For as before
in your former arguments, one matter was cut into four parts, to fill up
the number, so likewise in these arguments without order, or disposition,
diverse things are twice or thrice repeated. As dipping in baptism, oil, and
Chrisme, and crossyng whereas if you would have followed any order, all these
should have made but one argument of Ceremonies, or Traditions. Or if you would
needs divide them into their particulers, you should have made thirty, or
forty arguments of them, and not ten only. But now, how well you difine
the primitive Church (as I have touched before) a man may marvel to see:
sometime, you allege two hundredth, sometime three hundredth, sometime four
hundredth, sometimes six hundredth, and at length you come almost to eighte
hundredth years after Christ, when you allege the second Counsel of Nice,
which was holden in the year of our Lord, seven hundred eighty and one. So
that the greater half of all the time, that has passed from Christ's
ascension, until this day, you would have us to take for the primitive
church. But you know full well, that none of us, would allow all that time,
for the primitive Church, especially when we speak of that state, which we
would have to be a pattern and example to all churches. Only your purpose
was, to amase your unlearned friends, to whom you made this apology, with the
names of so many aunciente fathers, as you rehease, and yet like a wise man,
you note but few places, where a man should find their aucthorities, as you
allege them, lest you should happen to be discredited. Which must needs be
compted fraudulent dealyng, because you note some whereof no learned manne will
doubt, and pass over so many, which seem somewhat strange, that any such
things should be, to those that parhappes have read, as much of the
aunciente doctors as you. But unto all, your ten as gumentes, I will first
oppose one answer which is sufficient, to take them all away, namely that
such things, as you bring in, to have been used, of the primitive church,
were not in the first church of the Apostles, which is most properly called
the primitive church, but in the latter and more corrupt age, and the further
from the Apostles, the farther from sincerity. Beside that of Ceremonies, not
manifestly impious used in the aunciente church, after the Apostles, the
church at al times after has power, to abrogate or alter them, as they grow
to be abused, or cease to be profitable, and therefore diversity of
Ceremonies, makes not diversity of Churches.

The Papiste.
First in the Primitive Church they did mix in our lords cup water with
wine, and so for to do, est lex Euangelica, and traditio dominica, as
witnesses S. Cypriane, Irenaeus, Eusebius Emissenus which these our
reformatours will none of.

The answer.
The primitive church observed in the sacrament, that, which in drinking of
wine, they commonly used, that is to put water among the wine, to allaie the
strength of it, in which thing, there was no harm, so long as superstition,
and opinion of necessity was away, but that it should be as you say, lex
Euangelica and traditio dominica, the law of the Gospel, and the tradition of
our Lord, I suppose, you are not able to prove, by authority of those
Doctors, whose names you recite. In deed Cypriane, very earnestly urges the
law of the Gospel, and the institution of Christ, for wine to be used
therein, against certain heretics, of his time, which contended, that it
should be ministered only with water. And so he writes lib. 2. Epist. 3. to
Caecilius. Admonites autem nos scias, vt in Calice offerendo, dominica traditio
seruetur, neque aliud fiat a nobis, quam quod pro nobis dominus prior fecit. Vt
Calix qui in comemorationem eius offertur mixtus vino offeratur. Nam cum dicat
Christus, ego sum vitis vera, sanguis Christi non aqua est vtique, sed vinum.
That is. Know thou, that we are admonished, that in offering the Cup, the
tradition of our Lord be observed, and that none other thing be done of us,
then that which our lord before did for us. That the cup which is offered in
remembrance of him be offered mingled with wine. For seeing that Christ
says, I am the true Vine, not water truly, but wine is the blood of
Christ. By this testimony, it is manifest, that Cypriane urges wine, and
not water, to be of the institution of Christ, and the law of the Gospel.
But I marvel how any Papiste can be so shameless, to accuse us for taking
away water out of the Cup, which was no part of Christ's institution, when
they them selves are so bold, to take away the cup altogether, which is
the one half of the Sacrament, of Christ's own institution, and continued in
the Church 1400. years after Christ, until the late Counsel of Constance,
which was but. 155. years agoen. They may rob the people of the bloodde of
Christ, which Christ appoincted for them, and we are heinous heretics, for
not using water in the Cup, whereof as there is no use, so was there none
institution. This is the judgment of those, that be blinded with their own
pride, to epsy a mote in an other man's iye, and not to see a beam in their
own.

The Papiste.
Second in the Primitive Church in baptising, they used to dippe the party
baptized thries in the water, and S. Basile affirms, that it was a tradition
of the Apostles, that who so ever did not so, he should be deposed therefore,
whereas our reformatours do but sprincle a little water in the foreheade of the
party baptized, it may be quickly espied that they follow not the primitive
church.

The answer.
Our savior Christ, commands us to Baptize, in the name of the Father, and
of the Soonne, and of the holy Ghost, which, whether it be by dippyng the
body into the water, or by powryng water upon the body, the mystical
signification of washyng, is sufficiently expressed, and so long the Baptism
is right, as for the number of dippinges, is nothing material. We read in the
scriptures, diverse forms of washing. The Eunuche, was Baptized by Philip,
going in naked into a River or Brook. And so Baptized Ihon in Jordan. Other
that were Baptized in their houses, it is most like that water was powered on
them, as Cornelius, and them that were with him. And the keeper of the prison,
with his household. Acts. xvj. And as for the Ceremony of thrice dippyng,
although it was used of many, to signify the Trinity, yet was it not
general, nor of any necessity. For in the fowerth Counsel of Toledo, it was
determined, that all was one, whether a child were Baptized with three
dippynges, or with one, alone. And yet it was there decreed, upon a good
consideration, that in Spain they should use but one dippyng. The words are
these, in the fowerth Counsel Toletane, and the fiueth Canone. Ne tamen
haereticis videamur consentire, qui tertio mergum, dum eorum morem seruamus,
cautum est ne in Hispaenia, fiat baptismus, nisi in vna mersione. that is to
say. Least we should seem to agree with heretics, which use to dippe thrice,
while we retain their manner of baptisyng, it is decreed, that no Baptism in
Spain, be ministered but with one only dippyng. In this decree of the
Counsel, two things especially are to be noted. First, that the three
dippynges was not always, and in all places observed, as a necessary matter:
and therefore your argument is fallen to the ground, Secondely, that it is
profitable to alter, and change such Ceremoeies, as are used of heretics,
that we seem not to agree with them in any thing, in which it is lawful for
us to disagree. And for this consideration, do we refuse to dip thrice,
because we would not seem to agree with you, which are heretics, although we
acknowledge, that of it self, it is a thing indifferente, to dippe twice, or
thrice, or ones, or not at al to dip, but only to pour on water, in sign of
that spiritual ablution, which is represented by that Sacrament of Baptism.
Wherefore, you have a very quick sight, that can epsy a knotte in a Rushe,
and of so small a gnat, to make so great an Elephante, as though all
Christianity stood in thrice dippyng of a child in Baptism, which I have
proved not only, not to have been always observed, but also by decree of a
Counsel to have been expressly forbidden. Which Ceremony, although it be
noumbred among the canons, commonly called of the Apostles, yet has he a mean
judgment in antiquity, that can not descerne them from Apostolic writings.
But because you bring in the Tradition of the Apostles, you must needs give me
leave, to press you, with the same authority, and to show that you your
self, observe not the Traditions of the Apostles. In the vj. Canon of the
Apostles, it is commanded that no Bishop, Priest, nor Deacon, shall put
away his wife, under color of religion, and they that do so shall be
excomunicate. And in the ninthe, and tenthe Canons it is decreed, that
whosoever is present at the Communion, and does not communicate, that he
should be excommunicate. How these Canons of the Apostles (if you will needs
have them so called) be observed in your Popish Clergy, and your private
Mass, what need I to rehearse? And yet you agree with the primitive Church in
all things, and we have none agreaunce therewith at all.

The Papiste.
Third in the Primitive church they used Oil and Chrisma in the ministratio^
of diverse Sacraments, which christ himself did ordain and sainctifie the
night before his passion as witnesses S. Cypriane. And his Apostles did
commend the same unto the Church by their traditions as witnesses saint
Basile and S. Augustine, which these our reformatours will none of.

The answer.
In the Primitive Church, there was not so many diverse Sacraments as you
speak of, but only the Sacrament of Baptism, and of the body and blood of
christ, and in neither of these, was there any institution or usage, of oil
and chrisme. And although, in the later time, ceremonies increased, that oil
was used in baptism, yet was there not so many Sacraments, for Augustine
says, unto Ianuaerius Epis. 118. Vnde Sacramentis numero paucissimis,
obseruatione facillimis, significatione praestantissimis* societatem noui
populi colligauit, sicut est Baptismus Trinitatis nomine consecratus,
communicatio corporis Christi, and sanguinis ipsius, and si quid aliud in
scripturis canonicis co^mendatur. Wherefore (says Augustine) God has bound
the society of his new people, with Sacraments in number fewest, in
observation easiest, in signification most excellent, as is baptism
consecrated in the name of the Trinity, the communion of the body and blood
of Christ, and if any thing else be commended in the Canonical scriptures. The
same Augustine and Chrysostom also upon the water and blood that issued out of
Christ's side, do gather, that the Sacraments of the church, flowed out of his
side, namely Baptism and the Supper of the Lord. Aug. Hom. in Ioann. 20.
Chrysostom. ad Neophytos. Augustine also in the third book, de doctrina
christiana Cap. 9. rehearses but these two Sacraments, speaking of those
that are properly called Sacraments, for otherwise both he and other ancient
writers, extend the name of Sacrament, to al ceremonies. And yet Gregory
accompteth washyng of feet to be a Sacrament, as Baptism and the Supper,
which is no sacrament with you. And as for the ceremony of annointyng in
baptism, it is as lawful for us to abrogate, as for you to omit the drink
of milk and Honey after baptism, and other such ceremonies, which you know
were used as well as oil and Chrisme. But our Savior Christ, the night
before his Passion, did ordeine and sanctify. Oil and Chrisme for such
purposes: I marvel what Cipriane dare be so bold to affirm it, seeing the
Evangelists make no mention thereof, and here again if you had noted the
place of Cipriane, we might better have considered of his authority. Diverse
writings are set forth in his name, which were never any of his works.

The Papiste.
Fowerth, S. Basile says, that all determiminations and instructions which
are preached and kept in the Primitive church of Christ, we have received
them partly of the scriptures, and partly by the traditions of the Apostles,
which both has like force and strength unto godlynes. As for example, the
instructions which they have that trust in the name of Jesus Christ, to sign
them selves with the sign of Christ's cross, to pray toward the East, to
use words of invocation at the showing of the Bread and the Cup in the holy
Euchariste: to bless the water of the Font, the Oil of the holy unction, and
that he also which is baptized, should be thrice dipped in the water, and such
other like things which are taught and observed in the Sacrament of
Baptism, as to renounce the Devil and his angels, salt, spitle, and the
exorcisme there made to the expulsion of the devil. All these things, and
other like which are tought and observed in christ's church, we have them
says saint Basile either of the scriptures, or else by the tradition of the
Apostles, which are of like force and strength unto piety and godlynes,
whereas the reformatours of this English church do esteem and judge all the
premises for impiety, and ungodliness.

The answer.
In this your fowerth argument, if it may be called an argument, you huddle
up a number of Ceremonies, together, all which out of Basile, you would prove
to be Traditions of the Apostles. In deed Basile in the. xxvij. Chapter of
his book De spiritu sancto, is driven to this shifte, that either he must
acknowledge many such vnfruictfull Ceremonies, as in his time were crepte into
the church, to be unprofitable, or else to fly to the tradition of unwritten
verities. The same in effect ceaceth Augustine, and yet neither of both, was
so ignoraunte, but that at such time as they did thoroughly consider, either
the dignity of the holy scriptures, or the natures of such human
Traditions, they judged otherwise of the whole matter. For Basile in his
moralles Diffinit. xxvi. says. (...) etc. that it behooves every word, and
deed, to be aucthorised by the testimony of the scripture inspired of God,
both for the certain persuasion of the good, and the confusion of the evil.
And in the 8. diffini. (...). etc. If all that is not of faith, is sin, as
the Apostle says, and faith is of hearing, and hearing by the word of God,
what so ever is beside the divine scripture, being not of faith, is sin.
Upon which conclusion, a man may infer, that all such Traditions, as
Basile before defended, being beside the scriptures, ar sin. The same Basile
in his brief diffinitions to this question, whether it be profitable for them,
that come newly to the faith, immediately to be instructed out of the
scriptures? Makes this answer. (...). etc. It is both conueniente, and
necessary, that every manne far his necessary use, should learn out of the
divine scriptures, both that he may be certainly persuaded in his Religion,
and also, that he be not before accustomed to human Traditions. Let this
therefore suffice for saint Basile to answer himself.

Saint Augustine also in his 118. Epistle, where he speaks most favorably
for Traditions, has these words. Sed hoc nimis doleo, quod multa quae in
diuinis libris saluberrime praecepta sunt, minus curantur and tam multis
praesumptionibus, sic plena sint omnia, vt grauius corripiatur, qui per octauas
suas terram nudo pede tetigerit, quam qui me^tem vinolentia sipelire est. But
this (says Augustine) does grieve me to much, that many things, which in
Gods book, are most wholsemly commanded, are less regarded, and all things
are so full of presumptions, that he is more sharply reproved, which has
touched the earth with his bare foot, in time of his vtas, then he that has
buried his mind with dronkennes.

And in the same place he says, of Traditions: Quamuis enim neque hoc
inueniri possit, quomodo contra fidem sint: ipsam tamen religionem, quam
paucissimis, and manifestissimis celebrationum Sacramentis, misericordia dei
esse liberam voluit, seruilibus oneribus premunt, vt tolerabilior sit conditio
Iudaeorum qui etiam si tempus libertatis non agnouerint, legalibus tamen
sarcinis, no^ humanis praesumptionibus subijciuntur. that is to say. For
although this can not be found, how they are contrary to the faith, yet they
oppress with sclauishe burdeins, the religion it self, which the mercy of
God, would have to be free, with most few, and manifest Sacraments of
celebrations: So that the state of the Jews, is more tolerable then ours: for
although they have not acknowledged the time of liberty, yet they are subject
to burdens laid on them by the law, not to human presumptions.

By this you see Augustines right judgment, of such unprofitable Ceremonies,
and Traditions. Which although Basile, and he conjecture, and guess to have
been received of the Apostles, because they knew none other original of
them, yet it does not follow, that they were delivered by the Apostles in
deed. For many of them (if your own aucthours do not lie) were instituted
by diverse Popes of Rome, long after the age of the Apostles. And some it is
plain, were invented by heretics. For the first that we read of, in any
ancient, and authentical writer, that had in reverence the sign of the
Cross, were the Valentiniane heretics as witnesses Irenaeus, libri primi.
Capit. 1. which they called Oron crucem confirmatiuam, the strengthenyng
Cross. And abused the testimonies of saint Paul, as you Papists do, where
he says verbum crucis. etc. The word, or preaching of the cross, and mihi
non eueniat gloriari. etc. God forbid that I should rejoice, but in the
Cross of Christ. But afterward true Christians used that sign, to testify
unto Heathen men, that they were Christians, and were not ashamed of the
ignominious death of Christ, which the Gentiles did dispightfully cast in
their teeth, and at length it grew to a meare superstition, and last of all,
to most horrible Idolatry, when the Image of the Cross was worshipped,
sensed, and prayed unto.

Prayer toward the East, was used of the Christians, in the aunciente Church,
to testify, that they differed from the Jews, who prayed toward the West,
least they should seem to worship the Sun risyng, as the Gentiles did. And
although words of invocation were used, at the showing of the bread, and the
Cup, yet was there no invocation, of the Sacramental bread and Cup, but
of God.

Of the other Ceremonies, of anoinctyng, and thrice dipping, has been spoken
before. That the Apostles used no such blessyng of the water of Baptism, as
you do, it is manifest, when they Baptized in every River, and Brook that
they came to. In deed they did consecrate the water for that time, when they
used it to serve for ye holy use, but did put no holiness into it which should
remain after that baptism was ministered with it, as you do. As for the
stipulatio^ of renouncyng the devil. etc. is in deed ye doctrine of the
Apostles. Hebr. v. (which we retain) although you say in the end, we do not.
As for salt, spettle, and co^iuration, or exorcisme, they ar altogeher
superfluous, at this time. Of exorcisme, there was some use in the ancient
church, but of salt, and spittle, which never are not mentioned in that place
of Basile. As there were many possessed with Devils, so there was some, that
that had this power of the holy ghost, to cast out Devils which were called
exoreistes, as witnesses S. Cypriane in his fowerth book, and Epis. vij. ad
Magnu^. Quod hodie etia^ geritur vt per exorcistas, voce humana, and potestate
diuina, flagelletur et vratur, et torqueatur diabolus. Et cu^ exire, et hoe^s
dei dimittere saepe dicat, and in eo tame^ quod dixerit fallat, and id quod per
Pharaone^ prius gestu^ est eodem, mendacio obstinationis, et fraudis exerceat:
Cu^ tamen ad aqua^ salutare^, atque ad baptismi sanctificationa^ venitur, scire
debemus and fidere, quia illic diabolus opprimitur, and homo dicatus diuina
indulgentia liberatur, that is: Which thing also, is done at this day, that by
the exorcistes, through the voice of a man, and the power of God, the devil is
scourged, burned, and tormented. And although he says oftentimes, that he
goes out, and lets go the men of God, and yet in so saying deceives, and
practices the same thing, that was dooen before by Pharao, with the same lie
of obstinacy, and deceit: yet when we come to the wholesome water, and
sanctification of Baptism, we must know, and believe, that there, the Devil
is oppressed, and the man, which is there dedicated, is by the mercy of god
delivered. This one testimony among a number is sufficient, to declare both,
that there was in the Church, men endued with the gift of castyng out
Deuilles, which visibly, and sensibly did possess men: and that Exorcisme
at Baptism, was used for none other end, but to deliver such as were
possessed, and could not be delivered by the Exorcistes, before they were
baptized, not yt every person which was Baptized had need of exorcisme, but
only such as were vexed with unclean spirits. And seeing that gift of
castyng out Deuilles, does no more continewe in the Church, and they that are
to be Baptized, are not possessed with Deuilles, it were not only ungodliness,
but also mere madness, for such to take upon them that power, which have it
not, or if they had it, to exercise it, where there is no need of it.

The Papiste.
Fifte in the Primitive church they builded churches, erected therein alters,
and offfered sacrifice thereon, which was a suer token and argument of the
faieth of Christ, received like as Chrysostom writes of England, how that
they had received the faieth of Christ, because they had builded churches, and
erected Aultars in the same. S. Beade witnesses, that saint Augustine at the
bringyng in of Christ's faieth into England, did set up Aultars, whereupon
the people did make their oblations, and the priest did celebrate Mass, which
these our reformatours do deny and destroy, as great blaspemie unto God.

The answer.
For buildyng of Churches in any sumptuous manner, the primitive church was not
careful, but until Constantines time, continued in such places as they could
get, sometimes and most commonly in caves under the yerth, when they were
persecuted and durst not assemble in open places. And we at this time, if we
had not convenient places for the holy assembles would and where such
convenient howses lack do build, Churches and Oratories. But not in the
honor of Saints and Angels as you do, which thing the primitive and
ancient Church, did not, but judged it to be meare Idolatry, sacrilege, and
blasphemy. As Basile in his. 141. Epistle proves the holy ghost to be God,
because he has a temple, so does Didymus in his treatise de spiritu sancto,
because no creature but God only, can have a temple S. Augustine de vera
religione, Cap. 55, says, concerning saints. Quare honoramus eos charitate,
non seruitute, nec eis Templa co^struimus. etc. Wherefore we honor them with
love and not with seruise, neither do we build churches unto them, for they
will not be so honored of us. Likewise in the. 8. book. 27. cap. de ciuitate
dei, he says, that christians build no temples to Martyrs, and in very many
other places, he writes to the same effect. And as for Alters and Sacrifies,
the primitive church used none, more then we. The ancient church in deed,
names Aulters and sacrificyng, but they meaned nothing less, then such
Aulters and sacrifices, as the Papists use. For the fashione of their alter,
which was the Communion Table, and so called of them also, is to be seen in
the Panegyricall oration made before Paulinus Bishop of Tyrus, where also the
fashion of their Temples is described. Eusebius. lib. 10. Cap. 4. There was but
one Altar in all the Church, which stood not against the furthest wall, at
the East end of the Church, as your Aulters, but in the midst of the
Church, and was compassed round about with Grates or Lattesses of woodde,
which were called Cancells, the Chauncel, with in which place so incloased,
the Communion was ministered, and at the time of the ministration, the Ministers
and Deacones, stood round about the Altar, which is a manifest proof, that
it was not an Altar against a wall, like youres, but a Table standing in the
midst as ours is. Last of all, what they understood by the name of
sacrifice, I will discloase by one Testimony of Chrysostom, which shall be in
stead of a great number. For this he writes upon the. x. chapter to the
Hebrews. Hom. 17. Speaking of the sacrifice, which the Church does offer. Hoc
autem quod facimus in comemoratione^ quidem fit eius quod factum est. Hoc enim
facite inquit in meam comemorationem. Non aliud sacrificium sicut Pontifex, sed
ipsum semper facimus, magis autem recordatione^ sacrificijeperamur. This
Sacrifice (says he) that we do, is done in remembrance of that which was
done. For he said, do this in remembrance of me, we do not offer an other
Sacrifice, as the high Priest, but we offer the self same always, or rather
we exercise the remembrance of that sacrifice. By this testimony of
Chrysostom, it is evident, that the old writers, when they spoke of
Sacrifice, did not mean the Popish sacrifice of the Mass, but only the
remembrance of the sacrifice of Christ, which is the ministration of the
Communion. The Testimony of Beda, concerning Augustine the Monk, that came
into England, which you alleged, is neither aunciente, being above six
hundred years after Christ, neither yet of authority to be followed, the
same Augustine being a superstitious proud, cruel, and unlearned Monk. For
his superstition, Bid testifies, his pride and cruelty is set forth in our
English histories, his ignorance, in doubts and questions, which he
propounds to Gregory B. of Rome.

The Papiste.
Sixth in the Primitive church both men and women, made solemn vows to the
abdication of all propriety in worldly goods and possessions, and also of
perpetual chastity, as it may appear. Acts. 5. Math. 19 and. 1. Corinthians.
7. 1. Tim. 5. Example whereof, was in the time of the Apostles in Iphigenia a
professed virgin, who^ Hirtacus King of Ethiopia would needs have taken to
his wife, but the Apostle S. Matthew vouched to him, that he could not so do
for that she had vowed her virginity to God. Whereupon Hirtacus put the
Apostle saint Mathewe to death, as witnesses Abdias and others. The Canons of
the Apostles does prohibit the marriage of priests. The counsel holden at
Chalcedon and all the auncie^ fathers, Dionysius, Areopagita. S. Basile. S.
Ambrose. S. Augustine. S. Chrysostom, Epiphanius, and diverse others. This
notwithstanding our reformatours do defend such marriages to be lawful and
good, having no regard of any vow or profession made to the contrary.

The answer.
In the Acts are mentioned those, that were content to give their gooddes in
common, but no vow spoken of, that they might never have any propriety of
gooddes. Our savior Christ also speaks of some, that had made them self
chaste, for the kingdom of heaven, having the gift of continency, but noe
vow, that they were bound unto. Saint Paul to the i. Corinthians. vij.
chapter, commends Virginity, in such as have the gift, but he binds
none with any vows, for if a Virgin marry, he says she does not sin.
But in the first of Timothe. v. he entreats of widows, which as they were
nourished by the Church, so they did minister unto the Church, and these made
no vow to God, but a promise to the church, that they would continue
unmarried, that they might attend to their charge, being free from
housebandes, which saint Paul would not have to be chosen under sixty
years of age, when carnal lust is paste. What is this to young girls, that
are professed Nonnes, at fiftene, or sixtene years of age, before they know,
whether they are able to live chaste, without any housebande, or no? As for
your fable of Iphigenia, and Hirtacus out of your new found old doctor
Abdias, we give small credit unto it: the very names do sufficiently
bewraie, the forgerie, which sound nothing like to the Ethiopian language.
The Canons commonly called of the Apostles, do excommunicate, a bishop, or a
clearke, that does put away his wife under color of Religion, as I have
showed before. The counsel of Chalcedon Canon, xiij. forbids Clerks to
marry wives of a contrary Religion, as Jews, or Paganes. But not simply
forbids the^, much less would allow them, to put away their lawefull
wives. But when you proceade further, and say, that all the aunciente fathers,
do prohibit Priests marriage, you are to general: For I can bring you some
proves to the contrary. In deed the most of the later sort of aunciente
writers, are very much addicte to the praise of sole life, yet was not
marriage clean taken away from priests, for more then a thousand years
after Christ. You rehearse certain aunciente writers, and among them
Dionysius Areopagita, of who^ I must admonish the unlearned reader, that he is
not that Dionysius who^ saint Paul at Athenes converted, but one of much
later time. For the rest of the Doctors, if you had alleged their sayings,
as you do their names, I should have said some thing unto them. But that
all aunciente fathers as you say, do not forbid marriage of Priests, and
such as have vowed virginity, you may know by these examples.

First, Tertullian was a married man, and writes a book to his wife.
Epiphanius rehearses many heretics, which forbadde marriage. Also of such
as had vowed virginity, and could not keep their vow, he writes Contra
Apostolicos libr. 2. Tom. 1. haeres. 61. Melius est itaque vnum peccatum
habere, and non plura. Melius est lapsum a cursu, palam sibi vxorem sumere
secundum legem and a virginitate multo tempore poenitentia^ agere, and sic
rurssus ad ecclesiam induci, velut qus mala operatus sit, velut lapsum and
fractum, and obligatione opus habentem, and non quotidie ocultis iaculis
sauciari ab improbitate quae a diabolo ei infertur. Sic nouit ecclesia
praedicare, haec sunt sanationis medicamenta. It is better therefore, to have
one sin and not many. It is better for him, that is fallen from his course,
openly to take him a wife, according to the law, and to repent along time,
for his virginity, and so again to be brought into the church, as one that
has done evil, as one that is fallen and bruised, and has need to be
bound up, and not to be daily wounded with privy Darts, through the
improbitie which is wrought to him by the Devil. So the Church knows to
preach, these are the medicines of healyng. You see here that Epiphanius,
would have such as could not keep their vow of virginity, rather to
marry, then to burn, according to the doctrine of saint Paul.

Chrysostom, whose name also you rehearse in his second Homely upon the first
Chapter of the Epistle to Titus, has these words. Obstruere prorsus
intendit haereticorum ora, qui nuptias damnant, ostendens ea^ rem culpa carere,
imo ita esse pretiosam, vt cum ipsa etiam possit quispiam ad sanctum*
Episcopatus solium euehi. That is to say. He purposes utterly to stop the
mouths of heretics, which condemn marriage showing how that thing is without
fault, yea to be so precious a thing, that with it any man may be advanced
to the holy see of a Bishopric. Chrysostom therefore is not so whole on your
side, as you make him, no more is any of the ancient fathers, though it please
you to abuse there names for a show. But who among all the old writers was
either a greater admirer of virginity? or a more defacer of matrimony, then
Jerome was? and yet he writes thus of virgins, that have vowed continence, ad
Demetriadem: Sanctum virginum propositum, and caelestis angelorumque familiae
gloriam, quarundam non been se aegentium nomen infamat. Quibus aperte dicendum
est, vt aut nubant si se non possunt continere, aut contineant si nolunt
nubere. That is, the ill name of some, that behave not them selves well, does
slander the holy purpose of virgins, and the glory of the heavenly family of
aungelles, to whom it is openly to be spoken, that either they do marie, if
they can not contain, or else that they must contain, if they will not marry.
By these witnesses it is apparent, that all ancient fathers, be not of your
judgment, if we shall believe their own writings, rather then your sayings.
And concerning them, that have vowed continence, if they have any conscience of
their vow, and are able to perform it, none of us exhorts them to break
it. But such as are not able to perform honestly, that which they have vowed
rashely, we teach according to the doctrine of saint Paul, that it is better
for them repentyng of their rash vows to marie, then to burn in
concupiscens, then to commit fornication, and uncleanness. And this we do not
without the consent of old writers, as partly I have showed, and more could
show if need required.

The Papiste.
Seventh in the primitive church Images of Christ, his Cross and of his
saints, were used, as in Csarea was the Image of Christ set up, by the
woman which Christ cured of the flux of blood, as witnesses Eusebius and
Basilius magnus, and the general Counsel holden at Nice, of three hundred and
ten Bishops, does constantly affirm and vouche, that the Image of Christ
and of his Sanctes in the church, were of the tradition of the Apostles. And
saint Gregory Nyssen does write how he did behold the Image of Christ's
passion, and that oftentimes not without tears and weapyng. Chrysostom
says, that he that does any injury or valiny to the Image of Caesar, he
does commit the same against Caesar himself. S. Beade writes, how saint
Aug. entered into this Realm with a Cross of Silver, and an Image of Christ
painted in a table in procession wise, singyng the Letanie, to which
notwithstanding, what violence, and dishonor has been done by our
reformatours herein this Realm, to the Image of our savior Christ and of his
saints it is not unknown.

The Answer.
It is a proper Primitive Church, which you allege of the second Counsel
of Nice, which was seven hundred eighty and one years after Christ, holden
by a multitude of Idolatrous, flatteryng, and unlearned Prelates, which to
feed the humor of that wicked Empress Irene, were gathered together, not in
the name of Christ, but against Christ, whose express commandment, they did
impugn. And with such leude, and insensible reasons, and wrestynges of the
scriptures, that if a man of purpose, to mock the Idolaters, would inuente
arguments to laugh at, he could not divise more ridiculous matters. God made
manne after his own Image, ergo we must make Images, God is marvelous in
his saints, ergo we must make Images. (Theodofius of Amorie reasons,
whatsoever is written, is written for our learning, ergo we must have Images
to teach us.) No man lights a candell, and puts it under a Bushel,
ergo Images must be set on the Alters, with a hundredth such substanciall
proofs. And to make the matter most manifest, Theodorus bishop of Mire,
proves that Images must be worshipped by his Archedeacons dreams, and so
does other by dreams, and miracles, and at last, Tharasius Archebishoppe of
Constantinople, with the whole Synod concludes, that Angels have bodies,
and men's souls also be bodily, and therefore they may be paincted.
Against this Idolatrous, unlearned, and blasphemous Counsel, Carolus Magnus
wrote a book, which is extante, in which he confuteth the gross heresy, of
adoration of Images.

As for the primative church of Christ, regardyng the second commandment of
God, did make no kind of Images, to be had in any use of religion, but
utterly forbad them. As for the Image of Christ, whereof Eusebius speaks, if
it were true, was only a monumente of the history, set up in the streate,
in remembrance of the miracle, not in the church to be had in veneration, or
worshipped. Neither was there any Image received into the Church, for three
hundredth years after Christ. The Epistle of Epiphanius, translated by saint
Hierome, is a notable testimony.

Cum venissem ad villam quae dicitur Anablatha, vidissemque ibi praeteriens
lucernam. etc. When I came to a village, which is called Anablatha, and saw
there as I passed by, a candell burning, and inquiryng what place it was, and
understanding that it was a Church, I entered in, to pray, and found there a
veil, or linen clothe, hangyng at the door of the said church, stained,
and painted, and having an Image as it were of Christ, or of some saint. For
I do not well remember, whose Image it was. Therefore when I saw, this
thing, that the Image of a man was hanged up, in the Church, contrary to the
authority of the Scriptures, I did rende it in pieces, and gave counsel to
the kepers of that place, rather to wrappe it about some poor body that was
dead, to bury him with all. Contrariwise, they murmured, and said. If he
would needs rende it, it were reason, he should give us an other veil for it,
and so change it. Which thing when I heard, I promised, that I would give
them one, aad send it shortly. There passed not long time, but that I sought
to send them a very good veil for it. For I thought that one should have
been sent me out of Cypres. And now I have sent such a one, as I could
get. And I pray you to command the Elders of that place, to receive that
Veil of this bearer, which is sent by us. And to give them charge, that
hereafter in the Church of Christ, such vailes be not hanged up, which are
contrary to our Religion. This writes Epiphanius to Ihon bishop of
Jerusalem, by which it is euidente, what was thought of Images, at that time,
when a painted veil, might not be hanged before a Church door, to keep out
the wind, or for some such purpose, and not in any respect of religion, or
worshipping. The same Epiphanius, among the heresies of Carpocrates rehearses,
that he made privily the Image of Jesus, and Paul Homer, and Pithagoras, and
worshipped them. Also he inueigheth sharply against the Antidicomarians, and
Collyridians, for vsyng, and worshippyng the Image of Marie the Virgin. As for
your testimonies, out of Gregory Nyssene, and Chrysostom, serve nothing to
the purpose, for Gregory speaks not of the history of Christ's passion, as
you untruly report, but of the oblation of Isaac, by his father Abraham. Conc.
Nicen. 2. action. iiij. But this picture was in some private place, not in the
Church, and place of worshippyng.

And Chrysostom in his saying, concludes not, that therefore we must have
Images of GOD, and of Christ in the Church, but he that does injury to any
manne, that is made after the Image of god, or disobeieth a Magistrate, which
represents the person of God. etc. He does injury to God. For he that
makes any Image of God, does God great injury, transformyng the glory of
the invisible GOD, into the shape of any corruptible creature. Romans j. But what
Chrysostom and diverse other godly fathers, thought of the use of Images, in
the church, is exdressed in the counsel of Ephesus, which condemned Images
before the Counsel of Nice, which restored them. And the Counsel
Elibertinum, four hundredth years before that, under Constantine the great,
made this decree. Capt. xxxvi. Placuit picturas in ecclesia esse non debere, ne
quod colitur aut adoratur, in parietibus depingatur. That is. It is thought
good, that pictures ought not to be in the Church, least that thing, which
is worshipped, and honored, should be painted on the walls. To conclude,
that which you allege out of Beda, concerning Dan Augustine the Monk, I will
answer by the authority of saint Augustine the Bishop: who in his book
De consensu Eua^gelistarum libr. i. Capit. 10. Speaking of certain Heathen
adversaries, which noumbred Paul among the twelve Apostles, that were with
Christ, while he lived, writes in these words. Credo quod pluribus locis
simul eos cum illo pictos viderunt, quia merita Petri, and Pauli etiam propter
eundem passionis diem celebrius, and solemniter Roma commendat. Sic omnino
errare meruerunt, qui Christum, and Apostolos eius, non in sanctis codicibus,
sed in pictis parietibus quaesierunt. I believe that in many places they saw
them painted together with him, because the City of Rome, commends the
worthiness of Peter, and Paul, more notably, and solemnly, because of the
same day of their sufferyng. So altogether they were worthy to be deceived,
which sought Christ and his Apostles, not in the holy scriptures, but in
painted walls. And so all they that followed your Augustines superstitions,
were justly blinded, and deceived, because they sought not Christ in the
scriptures, but in painted Tables, which is the punishemente due for
Idolatry, as saint Paul testifies. Roma. j.

The Papiste.
Eight in the primative church the manner of fasting was merueilous straight, in
so much that Faustus Manicheus. 1300. years ago, did tax the christian men,
that they should in time of Lent, abstain from all meat, that is spoken of
by the Apostle. S. Paul in the first to Timothy the fowerth Chapter. And did
blaspheme the doing and teaching of Christ's church to be doctrinam
daemoniorum. But Jerome upon the same place does make answer, like as saint
Augustine in many places, that the church in their fasting to abstain from
meat, not thereby to condemn any kind of meat, as Manichaeus did, but for
penance, and to subdue the carnal concupiscens, and such other like good
purposes* And farther for the straight fasting in the primitive Church. S.
Iheronime writes ad Nepotianum, Epiphanius in Anchorato, which is now
thought of these reformatours to be superfluous and folishe, and therefore they
mind not to reduce and bring us to the order of the primitive church.

The answer.
Concerning Fasting, I have spoken sufficiently, in answer of your tenth
argument, out of the scriptures, where you make mention of fasting also.
Eusebius. lib. v. Capit. xviij. Testifies that Montanus the heretic, was the
first that prescribed laws of fasting, whom you follow altogether. And
especially the heretics call Archontici, of whom Epiphanius writes lib. i.
Tom. iij. Here. 40. which pretended fasting, but observed none in deed, and
the Manichees of whom S. Augustine testifies, that under color of abstinence,
they refrained from eating of any living thing, and from drinkyng wine, yet did
they glutte, and pamper them selves with delicate fruits, and spices, with
drink made of the juice of Dates, etc. such was your Popish fast: on
Fridaies at Dinner, to eat no flesh, but as much fish, as the beallie would
hold, with good store of wine, at night to eat no living creatures, but
Figs, Reasons, Almondes, Wardens, and Quinces baked, Suckette, and Marmelade,
and other fruits conserved with good wine, or Hipocras to help digestion.
This was a straight kind of fast, yet this was Catholic enough, so long as
great Prelates used it.

The Papispte.
Ninth in the primitive church, they used prayer for the souls departed,
which was the tradition of the Apostles, as witnesses Dyonysius Areopagita de
caelesti Hierarchia. Cap. 7. Epiphanius Chrisostom in. 1. ad Cor. Hom. 41. and
in Math. 33. and Ho^. 69. ad populum Antiochenum, which thing is proved also
by the Scriptures, affirmed of all ancient writers, and has always been
continued in Christ's Church, and now denied and taken away by our
reformatours, and therefore they mind no to reduce us to the primitive church.

The answer.
I must needs confess, that prayer for the dead, is one of the oldeste
heresies, that the Papists do maintain, and yet has it no authority of
Gods word, nor of the primitive Church, for two hundredth years after
Christ. They used in deed, to make mention of them, at the celebration of
the Communion, and to give God thanks for them, which some time is called a
Sacrifice offered for the^, as of Cypriane. Lib. iiii. Epist. v. Speaking of
Martyrs, of whom none doubts, but they were in heaven, and neded no prayers
to be made for them. Sacrificia pro eis semper vt meministis offerimus,
quoties martyrum passiones and dies anniuersaria commemoratione celebramus.
That is: We offer Sacrifice for them always, as you remember, so often as
we celebrate the passion, or days of the Martyrs, by yearly commemoration.
But this improper kind of speaking, and bold attemptes, without scripture to
name the dead in the Communion, did breed in the posterity, many errors, as
prayer for the dead, the Sacrifice of the Mass for the dead, Purgatory, and
such other. But in this nineth argument, you bewraie your fraudulent dealing
in the other, for here you note the places of the doctors, which you know no man will deny, and in other places, where you affirm, that none of us will
grant, you allege their names only, without quotyng the places.

The Papiste.
Tenth in the Primitive church christen men were taught, to arm them selves
with the sign of the Cross, which consignatio^ of the Cross was used in the
administration of the Sacraments, and that of necessity, as saint Augustine
says: words also of invocation before the consecration of the Sacrament of
the Altar, were used in the primitive church, like as the sanctifiyng of the
Font, the blessyng also of the Chrisme and Oil, to annoincte the party
baptized, all which things were of the traditions of the Apostles, as
witnesses Basili. saint Cyprian, saint Augustine, Damas, and many other*
which things being now utterly abolished by the new reformatours, they
purpose not to bring us to the order of the Primitive church. Seeing therefore
it can not be denied by so many testimonies gathered out of the divine
Scriptures, and holy fathers, that they agree not with the primitive church of
christ, but do dissent and are clean gone from it, in so many diverse
poinctes as I have expressed. Therefore this their reformation to reduce us to
the primitive church, is only pretended of their parts and shall never be
proved.

The answer.
You leap to, and fro, backwarde, and forward, more like to one that
daunseth, then that disputes, Have we not heard enough before, of crossyng,
and blessyng, of Oil, and Chrisme? But they must now be repeated again,
which if they were granted to you, and used of us, as they were in time of
those doctors, whose names you recite, what had you gained there by? It is your
blasphemous doctrine, that me do most abhor, and your Ceremonies, we hate
the more, for your doctrines sake. You should therefore stand to the defense
of your doctrine, and not fight so egerly for your Ceremonies, if you would use
good policy. Now for these observations, I have answered before
sufficiently, by which, as by the rest of mine answers, I trust it shall
appear, to every manne of indifferente judgment, that notwithstanding, all
your twenty arguments of both sorts, our Church has such conformity,
and agremente with the primitive Church of Christ, that she may be truly
compted a member of the same, and partaker in the communion of all the saints
of God.

The Papiste.
Of what force, streingth, and estimation those things are of, which have
been used in christ's catholic church, it shall appear by these testimonies
of saint Augustine followyng.

The answer.
Before you had spoken of the force of those matters, you should have done well
to have considered the force of your arguments, which, how strong so ever
those things be, are to weak to prove that, which you propounde, namely.
that our Church has none agreaunce at all, with the Primitive Church of
Christ. But seeing you will needs set for the dignity of these matters, we
will severally consider, all these four arguments.

The Papiste.
First saint Augustine writing against the Donatistes, says, look what
things the universal church of christ observe, and has at all times
observed, if the same be not ordained by any general counsel, the^ it ought
most firmly to be believed, that it came to us only by the authority, and
tradition of the Apostles.

The answer.
Although I know what to think of unwritten Traditions, yet if you be able
to prove, that al these things whereof you speak, the universal Church of
Christ, does, and has always observed, I will yield to you, that they are
the Tradition of the Apostles, according to your testimony, which if you
can not do, (as I am well assured, you will never be able to do it) by
your own reason, and authority, we need not hold them for Traditions of
the Apostles, nor yet decrees of general Counsels.

The Papiste.
Second saint Augustine in his Epistle ad Casulanum, says, how in all these
things, whereof the Scriptures has made no certain determination, the manner
of the people of god* or decrees of our elders, must be taken and holden as a
law to govern our selves, and in the same Epistle he makes mention how the
Sondaie, because it is not fasted, which fasting is a Sacrifice acceptable to
God* Therefore says he, the Sondaie may not be celebrated and kept without
an other Sacrifice which is acceptable to God.

The answer.
The Scripture has determined of all necessary articles of faith, and
against all superstitious opinions, and Ceremonies. And these things you
speak of, we proved to be such, therefore in them by Saint Augustines
rule, neither the custom of people, nor the decrees of elders must take
place, but the authority of Gods word. But of such things as be
variable Ceremonies, for edification, order, and comeliness sake, diverse
particular Churches, may make particular decrees, which are nothing
preiuditiall to the universal Church of Christ, which is the principal
argument that saint Augustine handeleth, in that 86. Epistle to Casulanus,
where he defends the custom of the most part of the Church, against the
custom of the Church of Rome. As I have touched before, which thing, of you
will in no wise be allowed. And as concerning the Sacrifice he speaks of, to
be celebrated on Sondaie, he means not the propiciatorie Sacrifice of the
Mass, as perhaps you would seem to infer. But the celebration of the
communion, for thus he writes in the same Epistle against Vrbicus. Dicit
cessisse pani pecus, tanquam nesciens and tunc in domini mensa, panes
propositionis poni solere, and nunc se de agni immaculati corpore partem
sumere, dicit cessisse poculo sanguinem, no^ cogitans etiam nunc se accipere in
poculo sanguinem. He says that the Sheep has given place to the bread, as
though he were ignorant, that then also the Shewbread, was used to be set
on the Lords boarde, and that now also he takes part of the body of the
immaculate Lamb: he says that bloodde has given place to the Cup, not
considering that now also, he receives blood in the Cup. These words
declare, both that the Sacrifice was nothing but the Communion, and also that
the wine is none otherwise called bloodde, then the bread is called a lamb,
and that the bread in nature, and substance is such, as was the Shewbreade,
in which was no transubstantiation, and thirdely, the necessity of the
Communion in both kinds, if this analogy of Augustine must stand, wherefore
saint Augustine in this Epistle, makes little for your purpose.

The Papiste.
Third saint Augustine in his third Epistle ad Ianuarium says, that the
things which we do observe throughout the whole world, being not written,
but delivered unto us, either from the Apostles or general counselles (the
authority whereof is notable) and as of them received, ought to be observed,
as the yearly remembrance and feasts of the passion of Christ, of his
ascension into heaven, and of the coming of the holy ghost, which are
celebrate in the Church of Christ, or any other like thing which is
universally observed from whatsoever it first came fro, and therefore says
saint Augustine in the same Epistle, to reason or dispute why the same thing
ought to be observed, which of long time has been observed throughout the
whole world, by the authority of christ's church, insolentissima insania est,
it is a poincte says he of extreme madness. And therefore says saint Aug.
the change made of so long a custom, yea though the same should be very
profitable, yet by the newnes thereof it does vex and trouble the Church of
Christ, it is made unprofitable, vnfruictful and finally hurtful to the
church of christ, and for an example thereof, he does there allege how the
disciples of christ did receive the body and blood of christ, not fasting but
after supper, is the universal church of christ therefore to be reproved, or
the custom thereof to be changed, whereby we do in the same, receive the body
and blood of christ fasting, and that for a more reverence thereunto, in
preferryng the food of the soul, before the food of the body? doubtless so
for to do it, should be after the mind of Augustine, both hurtful unto the
church of christ, and a great ponct of madness.

The answer.
This testimony in effect, is the same with the former. Saint Augustine would
have such Traditions, as have always been used in the Church, to be
supposed, that either they came from the Apostles, or from the generell
Counsels: but here we have, diligently to consider, that we admit not all
such things, as are called Traditions, but only such as are universally,
and have been always used in the Church. Secondely, that they be not
contrary to the doctrine of the Apostles, contained in the holy scriptures,
for then it is most certain, they are no Traditions of the Apostles, for they
did not deliver one thing in writing, and a contrary thing in Tradition.
Thirdly, that whatsoever Tradition of the Apostles, is not contained in the
scriptures, although we knew it came from the Apostles, it is lawful upon
good consideration to alter it. For seeing that all necessary matters, are
conteigned in the scriptures, whatsouer they delivered, which is not contained
in the scriptures, was but temporal, and might be changed, as well as the
decree De sanguine et suffocato, of blood, and strangled.

And that we ought not to receive, whatsoever is commended to us, as a
Tradition of the Apostles, may appear by these examples. Irenaeus was a man
that lived nere to the age of the Apostles, for he saw, as he himself does
testify, Polycarpus the disciple of saint Ihon. And he declares that it was
a Tradition, commonly received in Asia, as of saint Ihon the Apostle, and of
other of the Apostles, that our savior Christ lived fifty years, which is
contrary to the truth of the Gospel. Irenaeus libri. 2. Cap. xxxv. If such a
fable could be credited, for an Apostolic Tradition, so sone after the
Apostles departure, what may be judged of those, that in two hundredth, three
hundredth, five hundredth, six hundredth, eight hundredth years after the
Apostles, were not heard of, but suddenly were set out in the world, as
Traditions of the Apostles. Eusebius also reports, libri. v. Cap. xviii. that
it was alleged as a Tradition of the Apostles, that Christ commanded them,
not to depart from Jerusalem, twelve years after his ascension, which is
manifestly contrary to the the history of the Acts of the Apostles.
Tertuliane after he was fallen into the error of the Montanistes, voucheth the
Tradition of the Apostles, against the Catholics, whom he calls Psychicos,
that is, animales, natural men, and not spiritual.

Ieronime in Euangel. Math. libr. 4. Cap. xxv. declares that it was a
Tradition among the Jews, that Christ should come at midnight, whereupon he
gathers, that the Tradition of the Apostles was derived, that on Easter eve,
the people should not depart out of the church, before midnight, but tarry
there for the coming of Christ. A likely matter, that the Apostles would make
a Tradition, of the error of the Jews. The same Ieronyme upon the first
Chapter of Agge says very well of the Apostolical Traditions: Sed and alia
quae absque auctoritate, and testimonijs scripturarum quasi Apostolica
traditione sponte reperiunt atque confingunt, percutit gladius dei. But other
things also (speaking of heretics) which they find out, and feign of them
selves, without the authority, and testimonies of the scriptures, as it were
by Tradition of the Apostles, the sword of God does strike. By these
examples, and testimonies, it is manifest, that we must not by and by,
receive what soever is said, to be a Tradition of the Apostles.

The Papiste.
Fowerth saint Augustine in his third Epistle ad Ianuarium, in speaking of
these things, which in diverse parts are observed in christ's Church
diuersely, he gives that certain and sure rule, that if they be not against
the professed faieth of christ's church, nor against the good living and
manners of men, but have in them some manner of encouragement of a better life,
wheresoever says he we do know any such thing diuersely to be used, we
shall not only not disalow them, but also follow the^, with praise, and
innovation of life. So that the infirmity and weakness of some men be not let
thereunto. when otherwise if more profette may come thereby unto the good, then
hurt unto the weak offended thereby, sine dubitatione facie^da sunt, without
doubt (says he) al such although they be diverse, and in diverse places
diuersely observed, yet they ought to be continued and kept.

The answer.
We agree with saint Augustine, that such Ceremonies as are instituted for
order, and comeliness sake, being diverse in diverse churches, if they be not
contrary to the Scriptures, are to be observed of such, as remain in those
Churches. And what this should make, either for you, or against us, I do not
see at all. For your Ceremonies, are void of edifiyng, unorderly, indecent,
for the church of Christ, and then the opinion of merit, and satisfaction,
that you ioigne unto them, being contrary to the Christian faith, and the
authority of the Scriptures, makes the^ to be utterly abominable.
Furthermore when you make them essential parts of the religion, and worship
of GOD, our savior Christ him self, out of the Prophet Esaie, does utterly
condemn the^. For GOD will not be worshipped, with the doctrine, Traditions,
and precepts of men. Matthew. xv. Thus neither your ten reasons, out of the
scriptures, nor your ten arguments out of the doctors, nor your four
bulwarks out of S. Augustine, are able to defend your Popish church from
overthrow, which if she take upon her, to encounter with the truth, must
needs be discomfited, and come to utter destruction.

The Papiste.
Besides that this reformed English church, has no agreaunce with the
catholic church of christ, the religion thereof does only stand of
negatiues, like as it shall appear in the process followyng.

The answer.
Besides that your Rhetorike in railyng on our Church, is very unreasonable,
your Sophistry it self, in quarellyng against us, is void of sufficient
subtlety: not only to defend it self, but at least wise, to hide it self.
For what impudente kind of arguing call you this: by enumeration of a few
particulers, to conclude any universal proposition? These new reformators
deny twenty things, which the Papists affirm, ergo, their religion
stands only of negatiues. May not I likewise reason, the Papists deny
forty things, that the Protestauntes affirm: Ergo the Religion of Papists,
stands only upon negatiues. Furthermore, when every affirmative proposition
implies a negation of his contradictorie, and every negative proposition,
imports an affirmation of his contradictorie, you may as well say, that it
stands altogether upon affirmatiues, as you do, upon negatiues. Like as in
the ten commandments of GOD, only two are affirmative, and eight are
negative, wherein all the duty of a Christian manne consists, you might
reason, that Gods commandments stand almost all of negatiues, as though
God did only tell us, what we should not do, and did not teach us, what we
should do, like as you conclude afterward, upon the sale of Clare the
Butchers horse: but that right reason tells us, that the prohibitiue
Commandments, are also preceptiue, and the preceptiue commandments, are
also prohibitiue, for he which forbids adulteterie, commands a chaste
life, and he which commands to honor our parents, forbids us to
disobey the same. But because faith, which is the foundation of religion, is
an affirmation of those things, which are believed, to prove that our Religion
stands not all upon negatiues, but chiefly upon affirmatiues, it shall be
sufficient to declare that we believe, and affirm all the articles of the
Christian faith, and what soever is affirmed in the word of God as truth,
like as we deny all falshode, and untruth. We believe, and affirm, that
there is but one GOD: we affirm that in this God-heade, there are three
persons distinct, but not divided. We affirm that the son of God was
conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the virgin Marie, and so forth, as
it follows in the Creed, by which it is manifest, that our Religion
stands not all in negatiues.

The Papiste.
Saint Augustine does define religion to be cultus diuinus a divine service
dew unto God, whereby as Isidore says, we do bind our selves to the
worshipyng of God with a full purpose and intent to serve God. True religion
being in this wise put in a dew worship and service to be done unto GOD, the
late begone religion of this reformed Church, can not be the true religion
of GOD, for as much as it does not consiste in any action or service more now
unto God then was before, but only this religion stands as I suppose by
negatiues, by an overthrow and subuersio^ making of all things before
appoincted for the government of his people, both in the old Testament and
new, some precepts which were moral, some judicial, some ceremonial, also
sacrifice and sacraments, the doctrine of this new religion and reformed
Church, which as I said does stand only or wholly by negatiues does
deny.

The answer.
I will not stand in argument with you, whether this be a full difinition of
religion, which you allege out of Saint Augustine. It is not by and by, a
diffinitio^ of Religion, which may be truly said of Religion. But what
should move you to think, that our Religion teaches not men to worship
God? When we only teach, the right kind of Gods service, set forth in his
word, whereas you, and all other heretics, worship God after the precepts
of men, which is no religion but superstition. You say our religion does not
consist in any action or service, more now unto God then was before, but how
true this is, let every man judge, when we ascribe all religious service,
obedience, honor, faieth, invocation, and thanks geuyng, only to God by our
savior christ: whereas you give the greatest part thereof to creatures, some
to Images, some to saints departed, some to your own merits, some to your
beggarly Ceremonies. Let every man therefore judge, whether our religion give
not more to God in Christ then you, when we give all to God, the only aucthour
of all goodness, and Christ our only mediator of all benefits to be received
of God, and you give him but part of all the service that is due to him, and
make so many mediators beside our savior Christ. Finally, where as you charge
us, with the subuersio^ of the precepts moral, ceremonial and judicial, of
Gods law it is a strange matter to see your boldness. What moral precepts of
God do we gainsaie? do we not teach men to observe all the ten
Commandments? And what Ceremonial laws remain there, to us which were not
utterly abrogated by Christ? As for the judicial precepts of the Iewishe
law, who ever required the christians to be bound unto them? The only
propiciatorie sacrifice of Christ's Passion, we embrace, and al Sacraments of
christ's institution. Wherefore we neither stand al upon negatiues, neither
deny we any thing, that we ought to affirm as true.

The Papiste.
First it denies that the moral precepts are possible to be kept of man.

The answer.
It shall not be needful our doctrine, being so commonly known to the world,
to make a large discourse, upon every one of these negatiues, but only to
declare briefly, how we deny them, and to show a reason of our denial. We
deny in deed that it is possible for any manne, except Christ only, to
keep the moral precepts of God. Which is not such a strange paradoxe, to
any man that is not a stark hypocrite, but his own conscience will testify
the same unto him. The moral precepts are contained in these two poinctes,
as our savior testifies: Thou shalt love the Lord thy GOD, with all thy
heart, with all thy soul, with all thy strength, and thy neighbor as thy
self. Who is so paste all fear of God, that he dare affirm, that he is able
to perform this? Again, what is the cause, that the scripture does so often
pronounce, that no man can be justified by the works of the law? but because
no man can fulfill the law. Which if a man could perform, he should live
therein, and have eternal salvation without Christ, but no man can be saved
without Christ, therefore no man can fulfill the law. For the law was
given, to show us our weakness, and so to bring us to Christ.

The Papiste.
Second it denies that any judgment in spiritual causes, or in the high
court of conscience, is to be given to the Priest.

The answer.
The high court of conscience, is Gods own jurisdiction, the judgment
whereof, pertains neither to Priest, nor lay manne, but to God alone. But
in causes spiritual, to judge according to the word of God, we do not
deny, but it pertains to Ecclesiastical persons, from which rule of
justice, if any of them depart, he is subject to the correction, and
punishemente of the Civil Magistrate, As Aaron had his authority of
judgment in Spiritual causes, yet was he reproved by Moises. And Abiathar the
high Priest, was deposed by Solomon, and Sadoc set up in his place. And should
not Ahaz, if he had been a godly Prince, have deposed Vriah, for making the
profane alter?

The Papiste.
Third it does deny all kind of Ceremonies.

The answer.
We deny all kind of Ceremonies, that are of man's invention, to worship
God, or to merit salvation by them. For in the worship of God, we must
do only that he commands us. Other Ceremonies that are only for order,
and decency, ordained in the Church, we receive, as I have often showed
before.

The Papiste.
Fowerth it does deny the sacrifice of christ's Testamente.

The answer.
The Sacrifice propitiatory, that only takes away the sins of the world,
is the Sacrifice, which Christ offered ones for all, upon the altar of the
cross, and thereby making perfect for ever, those that are sanctified, can
not be repeated, without horrible injury dooen unto the Passion of Christ,
and the merits thereof. Hebr. vij. ix. x. and almost through out the whole
Epistle. In deed the Sacrifice of the Mass* if it be the Sacrifice ye mean,
we utterly deteste, as blasphemous, and abominable. For which you have
neither commandment, nor example of Christ, what soever you pretend, by
these words of our Savior, Do this in remembrance of me. For besides
that, to celebrate the remembrance of Christ in the Sacrament, has nothing
to do with a Sacrifice, by those words it is easy to prove, that you can
offer up no Sacrifice, in the celebration of the Sacrament. For by this word
of Christ (do this) you can do no more, but that which Christ then did.
But Christ did then offer no Sacrifice of his body, therefore you can offer
no Sacrifice of his body. That Christ did then offer no Sacrifice of his
body, is manifest by the Apostle to the Hebrews, which often times
testifies, that he offered him self but ones, which was on the Cross,
Chapit. vij. ix. x. therefore he did not offer him self on the table at his
supper, as you most falsely surmise.

The Papiste.
Fifte it does deny the Sacraments of christ's church.

The answer.
We receive the Sacrament of Baptism, and of the Lords Supper, which only
we find in the scripture, the other five, which you call Sacraments,
because we find them not in the scripture, instituted of Christ, in the
nature of Sacraments, we do not receive them as Sacraments. Matrimony,
Confirmation, election of Ecclesiastical ministers, with their authority, as
we find them by the word of God, so we retain the pure institution of
them, refusyng the corruption, and superstition builded upon them, by
Antichriste. Extreme unction, is an idle Ceremony, and nothing pertainyng to
our time, as I have declared before, and for that cause is justly abrogated.

The Papiste.
Sixte it does deny the real presence of christ's body and blood in the holy
Eucharist.

The answer.
We do not deny the real presence of Christ's body, to the faith of him
that receives worthily. But the carnal, and gross immagination of
transubstanciation, which is contrary to the scriptures, which teaches that
the body of christ, is like unto our bodies, in all things, sin excepted,
and therefore can not be in diverse places at one time, and is also contrary,
to the doctrine openly taught in the Church, for seven or eight hundredth years
after Christ. For Bertramus did write his treatise, as some think, to Carolus
Caluus, which lived eight hundredth years after Christ.

The Papiste.
Seventh it does deny that Christ's Church is visible or possible hear to
be known.

The answer.
We deny, that the Church of Christ is visible, to the world, at all times,
because our savior Christ prophecieth, that the most part of the world
should be deceived by false Prophets. Math. xxiiij. and S. Paul prophesies,
of the general apostasy, that should be made by Antichriste. Saint Ihon
also in the Revelation shows, that the Church should fly into the
wilderness, and all the world should worship Antichriste. Apoca. xij. and.
xiij. Wherefore the Church is not always in sight of the world, although it
be sometime delivered from such extreme persecution, as it is, God be
thanked at this time.

The Papiste.
Eight it does deny the free choice and will of man.

The answer.
We affirm, that Adam by his fall, lost the fredome of his will, both in
him self, and from his posterity. So that a man has now no freedom of will,
so much as to think a good thought. ij. Corin. iij. much less to do we any
good of our selves. Which seeing it is the just judgment of God, upon Adam,
and his posterity, for sin, we make not God aucthour of evil, as profane
dogs do bark against us, or rather against God, but just in all his
judgments, and holy in all his ways. But of free will, I shall have
occasion to speak more hereafter, toward the latter end of your discourse.

The Papiste.
Ninth it does deny our justification by penance, by Baptism, by hope, by
charity and good works.

The answer.
We affirm with saint Paul, that a man is justified before God by
faith, without the deeds of the law. Romans iij. not that dead faith, which
saint James speaks of, but a lively, and fruictefull faith, that woorketh
by love. But of justification, I must speak more hereafter.

The Papiste.
Tenth it does deny the merits of all good works, Gods promises made to
the contrary notwithstanding.

The answer.
We affirm, that all good works, shall be rewarded by God, for his promise
sake, but neither for worthiness of them, nor for the worthiness of us. For the
worthiness of them, deserves nothing, because they are imperfect. And our
worthiness in doing them, does merit nothing, because they proceade of
God, and not of us, and secondly, because our sins are many more in noumber,
then our good deeds. And when we have dooen all that we are bidden, we are
unprofitable servants, Luke the. xvij. therefore we deserve nothing by
them, but that GOD of his infinite mercy, vouchsaueth for his promise sake in
Christ, to accept them, and reward them.

The Papiste.
Eleventh it does deny fasting from any one kind of meat more then an
other, or upon this day more then an other.

The answer.
To teach men to abstain from meats, and marriage, is the doctrine of
Deuilles. j. Timo. iiij. Otherwise true fast we deny not, but affirm, and
commend as has been declared ones, or twice before.

The Papiste.
Twelft it does deny time and days of watches and prayers.

The answer.
We deny the superstitious observation of days and times, but we affirm,
allow, and use certain days, and times appoicted for prayer, and godly
exercises. By watches, if you mean your vigiles, of saints days, you your
selves use only the name, and not the observation of those watches. Which
although they were used of old in the Church, yet for diverse inconveniences,
they were left of, and by decree of the Counsel Elibertinu^ abrogated Can.
35.

The Papiste.
Thirtene it does deny the observation of holy and solemn promises, and
vows made unto God.

The answer.
We do not deny the observations of any lawful promises, made unto GOD, that
are possible to be kept of those that make them. But we teach men, not
to be rash in making promises, before they be sure, that they are able to
perform them. And if they have made a rash or unadvised vow, as to abstain
from Marriage, which they are not able to observe, but by committyng
fornication, and uncleanness, we counsel them to repent of their
rashenesse, and to return to the ordinance of GOD, which is the remeadie of
incontinence, rather then to lead an abominable life, in filthiness.

The Papiste.
Fowertene it does deny the chaste life apertainyng to the order of
Priesthode.

The answer.
We affirm, that chaste life appertains to all men, and especially to
Ecclesiastical ministers. But we do not count marriage an unchaste life, as
you do, but holy, and honorable in all men, and the marriage bed to be
undefiled. Hebr. xiij. And seeing that the holy ghost by saint Paul, in his
Epistles to Timothe and Titus, describyng the best qualities required in
Bishops, and Deacons, allowed marriage, we dare not presume to disalowe it,
or to forbid any man from it, least we should teach the doctrine of
Deuilles, as you do.

The Papiste.
Fiftene ie does deny the invocation, and honor due unto saints.

The answer.
How shall we call upon them, in whom we do not believe? Roma. x. We
believe only in God, therefore we call upon God only. We acknowledge no
mediator of God and men, but only Jesus Christ. j. Timoth. ij. Neither of
redemption, nor intercession: For the Apostle in that place speaks purposely
of intercession, saying, I beseech you therefore brethren, that prayers,
supplications, etc. be made for all men. And as for honor that should be due
to saints, we acknowledge none, being taught by so many places of Scripture,
that al honor, and glory, belongs only to God: who is a ielous GOD, and
will not give his honor to any other. Wherefore as Augustine says, honoramus
eos charitate, non seruitute, we honor them with love, and not with service,
by which testimony of that godly manne, your blind distinction of latria,
and doulia is overthrown, for what is doulia, but seruitus? Which kind of
honor, saint Augustine, does utterly deny to be given to saints. August.
De vera religione. Capi. 55. The same Augustine does also declare, wherein
their honor does consist, namely, in followyng of their example. Honorandi
sunt propter imitationem, non adorandi propter religionem. They are to be
honored for imitations sake, not to be whorshipped for religions sake. And
you your self diffined religion before, to be cultus diuinus, the service due
unto GOD, how would you then that true Religion, should do any service to
men, or Angels, which are but creatures of God.

The Papiste.
Sixtene it does deny oblations and prayers for the souls departed.

The answer.
We affirm according to the scripture, that the dead which die in the lord
are blessed, for they rest from their labors, and therefore to pray for
them that are happy, were superfluous. And as for those that die not in the
lord, they are accursed, and therefore no prayer is to be made for them: and
all that die, do either die in the lord, or not in the lord, for between
co^tradictories there is no mean. Apo. 14. Our savior christ testifies of
them that believe in God, that sent him, that they have life everlasting, and
come not into judgment, but pass from death to life. John. 5. And if any
had need to be pourged for satisfaction (as you teach, that men must be in
purgatory) the holy thief, that was crucified with Christ, should have been
one especially, but our savior christ made him assurance of felicity
immediately, this day (says he) thou shalt be with me in Paradise. Luke.
23. And seeing the Scripture neither commands nor commends Prayer for the
dead, it is intolerable presumption for any man, to use it. And as for
oblations, we find none in Gods word apoincted for the dead, that we
should offer: no not in the oulde law, where there was so many diverse
kinds of Sacrifice, no one was appoincted for the dead. Wherefore the example
of Judas rehearsed by the aucthour of the second book of Machabees is neither
to be allowed, nor followed, because he had no warrant of Gods law to offer
any such Sacrifice.

The seuententh negation was altogether left out in the copy which came first
to my hands, I suppose by negligence of the writer, but in another copy I
find it thus.

The Papiste.
Seuententh it does deny Images, and the cross of Christ.

The Answer.
According to the word of God, and the consent of the primitive church, we
deny the use of Images in the Church, which are the doctrine of vanities and
lies, as the Prophet witnesses Abac. 2.

The Papiste,
Eightene it does deny the burial of the dead bodies in the Church yeardes.

The answer.
We are not so careful for the burial of our dead bodies, to dispute where
they must be laid, so that dew reverence without superstition be used in
their Sepulture, nether do we refuse to bury them in the Church yerdes
and places of common burial, although we think no holiness to be more in one
place then in an other.

The Papiste.
Nintene it does deny the hallowyng of the Font, Oil, Palms, and Ashes.

The answer.
Of hallowyng the water of baptism, I have spoken sufficiently before, as for
oil Palms, Ashes, and such other beggarly Elements of the world, that
have no word of GOD to comende them, we have no use of them in our
religion: but in their Civil use, all the creatures of god are hallowed to us
by the word of God and prayer. Gal. 4. Coll. 2.1. Tim. 4.

The Papiste.
Twenty it does deny holy bread, holy water, Vestimentes, Chalices, Copes,
Tunicles Candlestickes, lights, Sensors, Orgaines in the church, singing in
the quere, relics of saints, pardones and pilgrimages, whereby it does
appear, that the religion of this new reformed Church does stand wholly of
negatiues, by destroiyng, subuertyng, and deniyng of all things before used in
the Catholic Church of Christ.

The answer.
As this twentieth differs from the ninetenth only in words, so one answer
shall serve both. These weak and beggarly Elements of the world, christian
religion needs not, having Christ in whom dwells all fulness and
perfection, wisdom, iustificatien, sanctification. And generally, of all
Ceremonies as is often said before, we admit none as part of Gods
whorshippe, which are instituted of men: only such as be accidental, and
mutable, if they be ordained for edificatio^, order, and decency, and be void
of superstition, we observe them. But so that no man's conscience be bound
to them. And that when soever occasion serves for better edification and more
comely order, it is lawful to abrogate them, and to institute new in their
places.

The Papiste.
Wherein the aucthors composers and deuisers of this new religion have dealed
much like as one master Molande Vicar of saint Peter's in. Oxforde, did with
Clare the Butcher, a near neighbor and parishner of his, unto whom by the
way of a merry ieste, he made sale of an horse, all by negatiues on this wise,
saying unto him how that his horse had not a great head, his horse had not a
pair of Ass ears, his horse had not one touth in his head longer then an
other, his horse had not a sadle back, no Splent, Spauen, or Ringbone, his
horse was not pincromped, sicle hought, nor broke winded, and so forth all by
negatiues, he soulde his horse to Clare the Butcher, not expressyng what his
horse had, but what his horse had not. Dealyng therein with much like faieth
and truth, as our Preachers do with the people of this Realm, which go
about to plant a new religion amongst them, which stands as I have here
expressed wholly by negatiues, in affirmyng nothing, and deniynge all things.

The answer.
You conclude your matter, as it is very mete, with a merry tale, I had
almost said of Robin Hoode, and little Ihon, but I should say of master
Molande, and Clare the Butcher of Oxforde. Whereby a man may perceive, you
were pleasauntely disposed, that in so short a treatise, would needs thruste
in so long a tale, and the same to dilate with all the circumstaunces, whereas
you had no leisure to note the places of your Doctors, that ye allege in good
earneste. But now sir, (saving your tale) and to apply it to the purpose. If
master Molande, as he rehearsed some faults, of which perhaps his horse was
free, so he had recited all the faults, that may be in any horse, and denied
them all to be in his horse, might not Clare the Butcher, have boughte a good
horse, of him by negatiues? But master Molande like a subtle Sophister,
repeateth a many of his defaultes, and suppresseth as many, or more, and so he
begileth poor Clare the Butcher. And this Sophistry of master Molande, is
your Logike throughout all your treatise, of a few particulars, to infer an
universal. And this your Jade belike, you thought to sell unto some, as simple
as Clare the Butcher, that could no more discern of your divinity, then Clare
the Butcher, could see of master Molandes Sophistry. Or else if you mente good
faith, as you do pretend, I must needs say, to quitte your tale, that if
Clare were not a better Butcher, then you show your self to be a Logicien, or
divine, you might both proceed in one faculty, and master Molande be your
presenter. For as he sold his horse by negatiues, so you have proved, that all
our Religion stands wholly upon negatiues, that we deny all things, and
affirm nothing.

The Papiste.
Dew objections made against the premises. For whereas ye have saiede the
religion of this new reformed Church, to stand wholly by negatiues, in
affirmynge no one thing more then was before used, in the Catholic church of
Christ, how untrue this is who sees not when the religion of this new
reformed Church, does affirm, and has brought in many things as good, godly,
and lawful, which before were straightly denied.

The answer.
It must needs be a clerkely disputation, where you may be both opponent, and
respo^dent your self, where you may make arguments for us, and make answer
for your self. But as he that answers, if he get the victory, overthrows
him that opposes: so you taking upon you to oppose, and answer your self,
you can overthrow none, other but your own self. But never a one of these
five objections, is holden of us, in manner and form, as it is propounded of
you. And therefore I would desire you henceforwarde, to defend your own
matters, as well as you can, for you shall get neither money, nor thanks, to
play the Proctor for us.

The Papiste.
First it does affirm, that it is lawful, and both good and godly that
Priests should take wives, and being first made Priests, it is lawful to
marie.

The answer.
We affirm that it is unlawful, that any manne should be bound to sole
life, which has not the gift of continence. And that marriage is as
honorable in ecclesiastical ministers, as in all other men, whether they were
married before they were called to that office, or to whether they marry
afterward. Hebre. xiij. j. Timoth. iij. and Tite. j.

The Papiste.
Second it does affirm, that Freers Monks, and Nonnes after their vows
made solemnly unto God of their chaste and co^tinent life, that it is lawful
for them to mary together, and hold the same to be good and lawful wedlock.

The answer.
We affirm, that who soever has made a rash, and unadvised vow of
continence, which he is not able to keep, ought to repent him of his
rashenes, and rather to marry, then to burn. j. Cor. 7.

The Papiste.
Third it does affirm, that a man being deuorced from his wise for
fornication, may thereupon marie again, and take another, and so it is lawful
for him to have two wives a live, the one in the bed, the other divorced.

The answer.
We affirm that they, which are lawfully deuorced for adultery, are no more
housebande, and wife. For the knot of marriage by lawful deuorsemente, is
clean dissolved, and therefore a man so deuorsed, may marry, and not have
two wives at ones, according to the doctrine, and right understanding of our
Savior Christ's words. Math. v. and xix.

The Papiste.
Fowerth it does affirm Bread ad wine, to be the whole substance of the
Eucharistie, after the consecration.

The answer.
We affirm according to the scriptures, and faith of the Church, for a
thousand years after Christ, that bread and wine remain in the Sacrament,
and are necessary there to remain, that it may be a Sacrament, for the
word must come to the Elemente, and so make it a Sacrament. But we do not
affirm, that bread, and wine is the whole substance of the Sacrament, but
the body and blood of Christ, received by faith, is the principal part
thereof, as in Baptism the outward Element is water, but the principal part
thereof, is the pourgyng of our sins, by the secret, and wonderful workyng
of the holy ghost.

the Papiste.
Fifte it does affirm that only faieth justifies, and that faieth alone is
sufficient to procure and purchase for us, gods grace and mercy, for the time
of this present life, and at the end and term thereof, life everlasting.
Beside many other like diverse things that the religion of this new reformed
church does affirm as things lawful, and have brought them into this
realm, as things good and godly.

The answer.
We affirm, that the free mercy of God in Christ, is the efficient cause of
our justification, which mercy we apprehe^de by none other hand, or
instrumente, but by faith. But that either faith does procure, or purchase
Gods grace, or mercy, by any whorthinesse of it, we utterly deny, as also
that only faith is sufficie^te for a christian man: when we teach that this
faith, by which we are justified, is not a solitary faith, but of necessity
accompanied with many virtues, and good works, although by receiuyng Gods
mercy, no works, but only faith does justify us.

The Papiste.
An answer against the objections.

For answer beside, that there is no one of their affirmatio^s, now by them
brought that makes any thing ad cultum diuinum, to the service and honoring
of god, wherein true religion does consiste, as it is before proved by the
diffinition thereof, given by Augustine al their affirmations do include some
negatio^s of a far more better thing, then is brought in by their
affirmations.

The answer.
But even now, in the latter end of the first objection, you confess, that
we affirm many other things, beside these five, which you have rehearsed.
And now as though, we had no other affirmations, you conclude, (as your manner
is) that no one of our affirmatio^s, makes any thing ad cultum diuinum to gods
service, and that all our affirmations do include a negation, of a far
better thing, then is brought in by them. So that when we affirm all the
articles of the Creed, none of them pertains to Gods service, but rather
include a negation of a far better thing. When we affirm, that Christ only
is the head of his universal Church, we do it not to the honor of Christ,
but we include ye negation of a far better thing, that is the supremacy of
the Pope. Which by your assertion, is a far more better thing, then the
supremacy of Christ. So when we affirm, that only the scripture must be the
rule of true Religion, it makes nothing for Religion, to worship God as he
has commanded, but it includes a negation of unwritten verities, which are
far more better things, then the scripture. When we affirm that we must put
our trust in God alone, we do no honor to God thereby: but we deny yt men
must put their trust in creatures, which by your rule, is a far more better
thing, then to put our trust in God alone. When we affirm, that we must
pray to God alone, it pertains nothing, to Gods service, but includes the
negation, of praiyng unto saints, which is a far more better thing, then
to pray unto God. And when we affirm, that the only Sacrifice of Christ's
passion, is sufficient for our salvation, we yield no honor to God thereby,
but deny the Sacrifice of the Mass, which is a far better thing, then the
Sacrifice of Christ's passion. And thus if I had leisure, and pleasure, as you
have, to number examples by tennes, and by twenties, I might rehearse a whole
hundredth of the like sort.

The Papiste.
As for example their affirmation that it is lawful for Priests to take
wives, is a denial of chaste and continent life of priests, which as the
Apostle saint Paul says is much far better.

The answer.
We so affirm marriage of Ecclesiastical ministers, as an honorable, and a
chaste life, neither do we deny contine^s to those that have the gift
thereof. And whereas you vouche saint Paul to warantie. I answer, that
saint Paul in no place, does require virginity of Ecclesiastical
persons, and wheresoever he commends it, he praises it, no more in
priests, then in lay men. I would all men were, says he, as I am, but
every one has his proper gift of God, some of one sort, and some of an
other. j. Cor. vij.

The Papiste.
Their affirmation that Freers, Monks, and Nonnes, may mary together, is a
flat deniyng of the vow of chastetie, which by saint Paul's judgment is
far better.

The answer.
We deny not the observation of any promises, or vows, which are lawful
for men to make, and possible for them to perform. Neither does saint
Paul at any time commend any such vows, or allow them to be kept, but
gives a general rule, that to avoid fornication, let every manne have his
wife, and every woman her housebande. j. Cor. vij. And if a virgin marry, she
sins not: so that if you would understand virgins in that place, for vowed
Nonnes, you should manifestely contrary your self, that coumpte it so heinous a
matter, for a Nonne to marry. And as for the widows, which (as I said
before) made no vows to God, but promises to the church, if you would needs
understand them for Nonnes, Saint Paul says, it is better for them that
are under three score year old to marie, and bear children, then to vow
chastity. j. Timo. v.

The Papiste,
Their affirmatio^ that the divorced man may again marie, is a plain denial
of reconciliacion, which ought to be made again, betwixt man and wife, the
Apostle saint Paul geuyng counsel thereof, that the woman being departed
from her housebande, should remain unmarried to be reconciled again unto her
housebande.

The answer.
Concerning diuorses, if that which we wish, might take place, all
controversies should be cut of. For we wish that adulterers, according to
the law of God, should be punished with death. But if the Civil Law does
fail in that poincte, the next remeadie for the innocente party, is
diuorcemente, and after deuorcement, marriage, if he can not live unmarried.
For our savior Christ excepteth the case of fornication, as well for marriage
after deuorcemente, as for the diuorcemente it self. Math. xix. And for
amendment of the party offendant, the Ecclesiastical sword of
Excommunication, must be drawn out: which must continue so long upon the
offendour, until his unfeigned, and hearty repentance, do sufficiently
appear to the Congregation. Which in that case, may not refuse to receive
him again. The party then so received, both of god, and the church, and not
being able to lead to a continente life, is at liberty, to marry also in the
Lord. For the first marriage by the diuorcemente, is as clearly dissolved,
as if it had never been. And as concerning the reconciliation saint Paul
speaks of, he means not between them, that are lawfully divorced. But
between those that separate them selves, without a sufficient cause, which is
only fornication. Like as our savior Christ, when he says, that who so
marries her, that is put away, commits adultery, understands of her
that is unlawfully put away, for any other cause, beside fornication, in all
which causes (the case of adultery only excepted) she continues still wife
to him that did put her away so that he which marries her, marries an
other man's wife, and so commits adultery. But she that is divorced for
adultery, is no man's wife, and therefore he that marries her, commits
none adultery.

The Papiste.
Their affirmation that bread and wine is the whole substance of the holy
Eucharistia, is a plain denial of Christ's very body in the same, which is
much far better, and a thing of a far more greater price then bread and
wine is. So that by their affirmations they do nothing better, but sooner
appaire and diminishe the preciousnes of every thing they meddle with all.

The answer.
We do not so affirm bread, and wine in the Sacrament, that we deny the
presence of the body, and blood of Christ, to the faith of the worthy
receiver. But that gross, and carnal presence, which you do faigne to be
received, as well of wicked men, as of Godly: which immagination being of
flesh without the spirit, our Savior Christ affirms, to be altogether
unprofitable. For if you did not separate it from the spirit, it must needs
give life to those that receive it. As Christ himself affirms, whosoever
eats his flesh, and drinks his blood, has life everlasting. Ihon. vj.
Again you feigned presence, is impossible to the nature of his human body,
which he has in all poinctes like to ours, sin excepted. Heb. ij. and. iiij.

The Papiste.
And by their affirmation that only says does justify, they do deny all
other things else, as Baptism, penance, Confirmation, the holy Eucharistia,
hope, charity, and generally all kind of good works. For all learning does
agree of three kinds of Iustifications to be expressed in holy scripture,
whereof the first iustication is Qua quis ex impio fit iustus, whereby a man is
made of a wicked man, and a member of the Devil, a good manne, and a very
member of Christ, the which justification is performed in infantes, by the
Sacrament of Baptism. And therefore to ascribe our justification to only
faieth, is not only to deny with the Anabaptists Baptism of infantes, but
also that the Sacrament of Baptism is needful, or necessary for our health
and salvation.

Second justification is, qua ex homine lapso post baptismum, fit conuersio ad
deum, whereby a man being fallen into sin, after Baptism, does return
back again unto God, the which justification is performed in us, by the
Sacrament of penance, and therefore the affirmation of our justification by
only faieth, is a plain denial of the Sacrament of penance.

Third justification is, qua ex iusto redditur quis iustior, whereby a man has
increase of rightousnesse, and of a rightous man before is made more rightous
in the sight of God, whereof speaks saint Ihon in his Apocalipse, saying that
he which is rightous must be made more rightous. Which justification is
performed in us, partly by the Sacrament of Confirmation, partly by the rest
of Christ's Sacraments, and chiefly by the Sacrament of the holy Eucharistia,
and more generally by all kind of good works, whereof speaks the Apostle
saint Paul, Saying to the Philippians, do you work your own salvation with
fear and tremblyng. And the Apostle saint Peter in confirmation thereof,
wills us to give all diligence for to minister, in our faieth virtue, and in
virtue knowledge, in knowledge temperaunce, and in temperance patience, in
patience godliness, in godliness brotherly love, and in brotherly love charity,
for if these are among you and plenteous, they will make you, that you shall be
neither idle, nor vnfructful in the knowledge of our lord Jesus Christ. But he
that lacks these things is blind, as says the Apostle saint Peter, and
gropeth for the way with his hand, and has forgotten that he was pourged
from his oulde sins. Wherefore brethren says (the Apostle saint Peter)
give you more diligence for to make your calling and your election by your good
works more suer, for if you do such things you shall not sin, yea and by
this means an entering in shall be ministered unto you abundantly, in the
everlasting kingdom of our lord Jesus christ. And by the affirmation of our
justification by faieth alone, they do deny not only the Sacrament of
Baptism, of penance, of the holy Eucharistia, with the rest of Christ's
Sacraments, but more generally they do deny all kind of Good works, here
commended and tought, both by saint Peter, and saint Paul. Saint
Augustine in his book de fide and operibus, gave to us sufficient admonition,
how dangerous an error and heresy it was, to put our whole justification to
faieth only, and faieth alone, and says how upon the mistakyng of the
words of saint Paul of our justification by faieth, upon these words
misconstrued, certain persons denied the merit of good works, vprising and
springyng of faieth, promising to them selves, safety and security of
saluatien, by only faieth and faieth alone, for reformation of the which
error Augustine says, that the Apostles saint James, saint Peter, and
saint Ihon did write their Canonical Epistles, which admonition thereof given
by S Augustine, should have sufficed both learned and Christen men.

The answer.
By affirmyng that only faith does justify, we neither deny the
Sacraments to be received, nor any good work to be exercised, as GOD and all
the world does know. For ascribyng to faith, that which is her peculier
office, we do not deny the offices of any other things, that belong unto
them. As if I affirm that only the eye does see, I do not deny the ear
to hear, or the tongue to taste, or the hand to handle, or the foot to go,
but I deny that the ear, or any other member does see, save only the iye.
So affirmyng, that only faith does justify, we do not deny, the
Sacraments to be seals of Gods promises, nor good works to be fruits of
our justification, by which God is glorified, and our election in us
established, and yet we deny, that the Sacraments, or good works, or any
other thing in us, does justify, save only faith, that takes hold of
Gods mercy, by beleuyng Gods promises. As it is written of Abraham, not for
him only (as saint Paul testifies) but for us also, Abraham believed God,
and it was imputed to him for righteousness: so that faith does not justify
us by the merit, or worthiness thereof, but by Gods imputation of
righteousness thereunto. For to be justified before GOD, is not to be righteous
by any quality that is in us, but to be accoumpted righteous of GOD for
Christ's sake, having our sins purged by his passion. But whereas you take
upon you, to talk of justification, and that so substancially, that you will
tell us what all learning agrees thereof, you declare that your learning, and
discretion are both a like. For it were enough for you, to speak of all your
own learning, which you know, and not of all learning in general, which
you know not. It is not by and by all lernyng, that the Master of the
Sentence, and after him all the sentenciaries, and whole rabble of Papists also
do hold. There is some learning of the old writers, and there is some
learning of the new writers. And the Protestants I trust, be not void of
all learning. It were sufficient for you, to challenge truth, though you did
not boaste of all learning. But seeing all learning is on your side, as you say
your self, will you give a poor manne of small learning, leave, to ask you
one question, concerning that division, which all learning does agree of? Is
this your division, of the word of justification? Or of the thing it self,
which is Justification. If it be only of the word justification (saving the
correction of all learning) I find in scripture three other diverse kinds of
justification, of which never a one, can be comprehended in any of your three
kinds of justification. The first is, in the. Lj. Psalm. Vt iustificeris in
sermonibus tuis, and vincas cum iudicaris. That thou may be justified in
thy sayings, and get the upper hand, when thou art judged. The second, is
in the eleventh chapter of saint Matthew. Iustificata est sapientia a filijs
suis. Wisdom is justified of her own children. The third is. j. Timo. iij.
Deus manifestatus est in carne, iustificatus est in spiritu. etc. God was
showed in the flesh, justified in the spirit. etc. Lo hear, are three
several iustifications more, then your learned division does contain. But if
you understand your division, not of the diuerses acceptions of the word, but
of the thing it self, I would demand by what kind of justification, the
Publicane was justified, of whom our savior Christ does testify, that he
departed justified, rather then the Pharisie. Luke. xviij. The first kind you
say, is by Baptism, but he was not baptized, the second you make by
penance, but he received no penance: and by the third kind, he could not
be justified, for he came thither a Publicane, and a sinner, Therefore all
learning has left out one kind of Justification, which Christ himself does
teach. And that is the only true justification, whereof we mean, when our
sins being pardoned by the free mercy of God in Christ, we are accoumpted
righteous before him, which is confirmed to us, when we believe his promises
thereof. And this is that justification, whereof saint Paul disputes at
large, in the Epistle to the Romans. By which it may appear, what a
clearkly division you have made, that excludes the only true justification,
which is the thing we co^tende of, and is so most properly called. But now to
consider rightly, the parts of your division. You say, the first kind of
justification, is when of an ungodly manne, is made a godly man. Which if it
were rightly understood, is the same justification, that we speak of, when we
say only faith does justify. But when you restrain it to Baptism of
infauntes, you are far wide from our understanding, and from the truth. For
what is Baptism to us, more then Circumcision was to Abraham? but Abraham was
not justified by Circumsition, as S. Paul proves at large, therefore neither
are we justified by Baptism. But Abraham was justified by faith, and received
Circumsition, as a seal of his justification, So we being justified by faith,
receive Baptism, as a seal of our righteousness, which is by faith. Thus we
do not deny the Sacrament of Baptism, as you most shamefully do slander
us, but we show the right use, and profit thereof, out of the scriptures. For
when we have received by faith, the promises of Gods favor, and mercy, in
which our salvation depends, we do not refuse the seals, which are the
Sacraments, which GOD has added for confirmation of our faith. But whereas
you restrain this justification to infauntes, you show your ignorance in the
Scriptures, for he that ex impio fit iustus, that is, of a wicked man is made
righteous, must believe in him that justifies the ungodly manne, as it is in
saint Paul. Roma. iiij. and so his faith is imputed, or accoumpted to him
for righteousness, and in such sort, that it is without respect of works,
which is nothing else, but that we affirm, an ungodly manne is justified by
faith only, for what works can he have, that should co^curre with faith,
to justify him, which is an ungodly manne, before he be justified, and
therefore Augustine says very well of good works. Sequuntur iustificatum,
non praecedunt iustificandum. They follow him that is justified, they go not
before him that is to be justified. Seeing therefore, that faith is necessary
in this justification, and infauntes (to speak properly) have no faith, this
justification can not be restrained to Baptism of infantes, which if they dye
before they hear the word of God preached, that they may believe, are saved
by election, if they be the children of God, and not by faith. For as the
doctrine of faith, pertains to them only, that live to hear the Gospel
preached, to which they may give credit, and bring for the fruictes of good
works accordyngly, to the praise of Gods glory: So the doctrine of
Justification, by faith only, pertains to them, and not to infantes. And
therefore your assertion, that infantes are justified by Baptism, comes
nearer to the error of the Anabaptists, for both you, and they require faith
necessary, to be in all them that shall be Baptized, whereupon springs
two heresies, the one of the Anabaptists, deniyng the Baptism of infa^tes,
because they have no faith: the other of the Papists, fantasiyng that they
have faith, and therefore are justified by Baptism. Whereas the saying of our
savior Christ, which is misunderstoode of you both (he that believes, and
is baptized, shall be saved) must with all equity, be expounded, according to
the matter whereof he speaks, according to the words going before. Which
are, Go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. Mat.
xxviij. Mark. xvj. So that where preaching has gone before, their faith is
necessary to salvation, and necessary to be required, before a man be
Baptized. For we must remember, that our savior Christ, does not in that
place, institute Baptism, but show how it must be added, as a seal of the
Gospel, for confirmation of the beleuers, and for a testimony of their
profession. But seeing that God has also a secret operation in Baptism,
whereby the children of GOD are regenerate, by his holy spirit, and that the
favor of God, extends by his promise, not only to our selfs, but also to
the seed of us that are faithefull, we minister the Sacrament of Baptism, to
our infantes also, because they are comprehended within the compass of Gods
couenaunte, and therefore ought to have the seal, and cognisaunce of Gods
couenaunte set upon them. And yet not bindyng the grace of GOD so straightly,
to the outward Elemente, but that, he may save the children of the faithful,
without Baptism, whom he takes out of this life, before they can receive this
sacrament in the church, according to his holy institution.

And this justification by faith only, we do not make to be an inconstant
quality of righteousness, that should be within us, which is abolished so
often as we fall into sin, but a perpetual acceptance of God, whereby he
imputes not our sins unto us, but accoumpteth us righteous, for the
righteousness of Christ, according as saint Paul difineth justification by
faith, without works, out of the xxxj. Psalm. Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to
whom the Lord does not impute his sin. Roma. iiij. For whom God does
justify by faith, he does not justify them for a day, or a year, but for
ever, as S. Paul testifies, whom he has justified, he has glorified. Roma.
viij. Whereby it is easy to see, what a vain justification that is, which
you make to be your second kind by penance, which is lost, by every fall
into deadly sin, of which kind of justification, the scripture speaks not
one word, but it is a fantasy of your own brain, to set up a Butcherie
of men's consciences, and to make your selves Lords, over their consciences,
by binding the^ upon necessity of salvation, to your beggarly Penance. For
although a man that is regenerate, and justified of God, is not only
subject to infinite falls, as the scripture testifies (the righteous manne
falls seven times a day, and rises again) but also sometimes falls into
great, and notable crimes, as David into murder, and adultery, yet can he
never fall from the favor of God, but that he is called to repentance, and
his sins are forgiven him. For this foundation shall never fail, the Lord
knows who are his, and whom soever he has known before all time, them he
will call in time thought convenient to his wisdom, and them who^ he has so
called, he has justified, and whom soever he has justified, he will glorify
eternally. Roma. viij. And in this justification, whereby God receives us into
his favor, and pardonyng our sins, imputes rightousnes unto us, there is no
degrees, for when he does justify us, he makes us his children, and so his
children, that we are his heirs, and heirs by adoption, annexed with Christ
his only begotten soonne by nature. Roma. viij. Wherefore although faith,
and good works, the one being the instrument to receive, the other being the
fruits to show our justification, may, and ought to increase daiely in us,
that are justified: Yet our justification before GOD, is not thereby increased,
who imputes righteousness unto us, for Christ's sake alone, and not for our
own worthiness. Whereby it is euidente, how unlike your third kind of
justification, is to the justification of God, who justifies not the
righteous, but the ungodly manne, that believes in him. And as for the
testimony that you allege, out of the Apocalipse, although it may have a
true meaning, that he which is just, may be made more just, and he that is
holy, may be made more holy, which is of the increase of virtues, and not
of justification: yet the best interpretation, according to the Greek phrase,
is rather of continuance, then increase, and so it is best translated, he that
is righteous, let him be righteous still, and he that is holy, let him be
holy still. Wherefore, you se upon how weak a foundation, your third kind
of justification does lean, namely upon a corrupt translation. But admit
it be so, as you do take it, there is great difference between a just
manne, and a man justified. For a just manne, is he, that is endued with the
virtue of justice, which may increase, or diminishe in him: But a justified
manne is he, whose sins are forgiven him, and he accoumpted rightous, not for
his own worthiness, but for Christ's sake, therefore, although the virtue of
justice, which is a quality in him, may increase, yet, because in Gods
sight, there is no respect of his worthiness, his justification can not
increase thereby. For what can he be more then the soonne of GOD, and inheritour
with Christ, of the kingdom of heaven. If you say, he may have greater
reward, that has greater virtues, I will not contend against you, so that
this be remembered, that his virtues are rewarded, not as his merits; but as
Gods gifts, for his promise sake. So that a just, or righteous man, is he
that exercises himself, in the keeping of Gods commandments, so near as
God shall give him grace, and the infirmity of man's corrupt nature, will
admit. But a justified manne, is he that having no justice, or righteousness
in him before, is accepted of God for just, his iniquities being pardoned, and
his sins covered. And for them that be simple, an example will make the
matter plain. There are two men standing before a prince, the one that has
not transgressed the princes laws, which may be called a just manne: The
other that has grievously offended, and is pardoned of the prince, which may
well be termed a justified manne. But this difference there is to be noted, in
this example, that before God, none can be just, or righteous, but he that is
first justified, neither can any manne be so just, but that he offends in
many things, and has need of great mercy. Thus it is clear, how
impertine^tly the increase of faith, and good works, with tertes of
Scripture belongyng thereto are of you drawn to justification before God.
Wherefore by our affirmation, that only faith justifies, we neither deny
the exercise, and commodity of christ's Sacraments, nor yet the study, and
practice of all good works, commanded of God, but rather established them:
when we teach, that the Sacraments are seals, and confirmation of this
faith, and good works, are the fruits of the same: first to the glory of
God: secondly for the example af others: and thirdly, for assurance of our
election to us ward, and increase of our reward before God. And as for that,
which you allege out of saint Augustine, which of all other writers, is
most clear of our judgment, for election, justification, and
sainctification, makes nothing in the world against us. For we do not
teach (as I have often said) that a bare faith alone, which is void of
good works, is sufficient for our salvation, but that a true, lively, and
fruitful faith, only does justify us before God, that GOD may have all
the glory, of our salvation in Christ: And that sanctification, or good
works, of necessity must follow a justified man, whereby God may be
glorified, his neighbor profited, and himself rewarded, not of merit due to
his works, but of mercy, according to Gods promise.

And that which saint James speaks of faieth, that it does not justify,
alone, he means, as he himself expounds, of a dead faith, which is
void of good works, of an historical faith, that there is one God. etc.
which the devil believes, not of a lively faith, which works by charity,
nor of a iustifiyng faith, which embraces the mercy of God set forth in
his promises. So that this saying of saint James, a man is not justified by
faith only, is all one with this, a dead faith or an historical faieth does
not justify, which we do always affirm. And whereas he speaks of
justification by works, he means of arguments proves, and certain signs
to the world, of justification before God, as it is manifest by his examples.
For Abraham was justified before God by faith, without respect of his works,
as saint Paul does testify, when he believed the promise, and that the
scripture said his faith was imputed to him for rightousnes, which was long
before he offered his soonne Isaake: but this his obedience, was a trial and
manifest testimony, of his justification by faith, to all the world,
whereupon as saint James concludes, it was evident to al men, how this
scripture was fulfilled: Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness. Likewise the harlot Rahab, as witnesses the Apostle to the
Hebrews the. 11. was justified by faith, when she believed the word of God,
concerning the destruction of her Country, and all them that did not ioigne
theimselues to the people of god: but she showed the fruict of this faith, when
she enterteined and dismissed the spies, that came to her house. So that by
this distinction, of faith and justification, saint James agrees with S.
Paul, which without it, can never by reconciled. For that confusion of faith
and works, which the papists make to concur in justification, can never
make them agree, for saint Paul does flattly exclude works from that
office. We determine says he, that a man is justified by faith without the
works of the law. Romans 3. But this is the judgment of both the Apostles,
that a lively faith alone does justify. The one affirms, that nothing is
required to justify but faith, the other affirms, that faith which only
is required as sufficient to justification, is not dead, solitary or
vnfruictfull, but lively, fruictfull, and accompanied with many virtues, and
good works. For he that acknowledges his sins to be forgeuen of God for
Christ's sake, and that he is received of God as his child (which is to be
justified) must needs love God, and all them that love God, must needs have
a desire to obey God, honor God, to be thanckefull to God, and to profette
all them, that God has commanded him to love. And this is the worste effect
of only faith iustifiyng. But because you make it so strange a matter, as
though it had never been heard of in the world before now, that faith alone
or only faith does justify, I will rehearse you the sentences of a few
doctors, that I have readde, which in plain words affirmed the same, many
hundred years before you and I were borne. Not doubtyng but they, that have
read more then I, are able to bring forth a great deal more then I have
brought.

Origines, though otherwise a very vnpure writer, yet for justification by
faith only, speaks very plainly, although not in all poinctes truly, upon
the Epistle to the Romans lib. 3. Cap. 3. Dicit sufficere solius fidei
iustificationem, ita vt credens quis tantummodo, iustificetur etiamsi operis
nihil ab eo fuerit expletu^. Imminet igitur nobis qui integram esse scripturam
Apostoli conamur asserere, and ordine suo cuncta constare, vt requiramus, quis
sine operibus, sola fide iustificatus sit. Quantum igitur ad exemplum pertinet.
etc. S. Paul says that the justification of faith alone, does suffice, so
that he which believes only, may be justified, although he have done no
good work. Wherefore it stands us upon, that take in hand to defend the
writing of the Apostle, to be perfect and all things therein to stand with
good order, to enquire who was justified by faith only without works.
Therefore for examples sake, I think that theife is sufficient, which being
crucified with Christ, cried to him from the Cross. Lord Jesus remember me
when thou come into thy kingdom. Neither is there any other good works of
his described in the Gospel, but for this faieth only, Jesus said to him,
verily I say to thee, this day thou shalt be with me in Paradise. Thus far
Origin. Nevertheless we must remember, as I have said before, that although
this thief was justified by faith only, yet this faith was fructefull of
such good works, as the time suffered him to express, as invocation,
repentance, reprehension of his fellow. etc. The same Origene says. Idem
enim ipse deus, ex vtroque populo non circumcisionis, aut praeputij priuilegio,
sed solius fidei contemplatione iustificat. The same God out of both the
people, not by privilege of Circumcision, or uncircumcision, but by the
contemplation of faith alone, does justify. And in the. 4. book and. 4. Cap.
Initium iustificandi a deo fides est qua credit in iustificantem, and haec
fides cum iustificata fuerit, tanquam radix imbre suscepto haeret in animae
solo. etc. Faith is the beginning of iustifiyng before god, which believes in
him that justifies, and this faith after it is justified, as a root that is
wattered with a shower of rain, abides fast in the ground of the soul,
that when it begins to be dressed and delued by the law of God, the
boughs arise in it, which bring forth the fruicte of good works. And in
diverse other places Orige^, shows himself to be of the same mind. Saint
Cypriane ad Quirinum. Cap. 4. In nullo gloria^dum quando nostrum nihil sit. We
have to bost of nothing, seeing nothing is our own. Where be then our merits?
Again. Cap. 42. Fidem tantum prodesse, and tantum nos posse, quantum credimus.
He affirms that faith only does profitte, and that so much as we believe,
so much we may obtain. Wherein he agrees with our savior Christ saying,
all things are possible to him that believes. Also in his book de duplici
Martyrio, he writes thus. Non credit in deum, qui non in eo solo collocat
totius foelicitatis suae fiduciam. He doothe not believe in God which does
not place in him alone the assurance of all his felicity. In whom then do
Papists believe, that trust in their own merits and in creatures? Saint
Hilarie agrees in the same sentence de Trinitate. lib. 2. Et cum sola fide
expleri quae praecepta sunt oporteret. etc. Seeing that these things which are
commanded, must be accomplished by faith only, that is to worship the
father, and with him to honor the soonne, and to abound in the holy ghost,
we are enforced to extend the baseness of our speech, to those things that
are unspeakable. Also writing upon Mathewe Canone. 21. he has these words
Nam inuiti licet confite^tur quis obsecutus sit voluntati junior scilicet,
filius obediens professione licet non efficiens in tempore. Quia fides sola
iustificat, atque ideo publicani and meretrices in regno coelorum erunt
priores, quia Ioanni credideru^t. For they confess though it be against their
will, who has obeyed the fathers will: namely the younger, son obedient in
profession, although not performing in time. Because faith alone does justify,
and therefore the Publicanes and harlattes shall be sooner in the kingdom of
heaven, because they believed Ihon. etc. And in the. 8. Canon he has this
plain conclusion. Fides sola iustificat, faith alone does justify. Therefore
we are not alone that teach so. Gregorius Nazianzenus in his Oration. 22. de
modestia in disceptationibus. Prope te ait verbum est, thesaurum hunc
intellectus habet, and lingua, hic quidem credens, illa vero co^fitens, quid
his opibus succinctius, quid dono hoc facilius? Confitere christum, and credas
eum a mortuis suscitatum esse, ac saluaberis: siquidem and credere solum
iustitia est, salus autem perfecta confiteri, loquendique libertatem addere
scientiae. The word says he, is near unto thee, and this treasure thine
understanding, and thy tongue has, the one beleuyng, the other confessing,
what can be more short, then these riches? what more easy then this gift?
Confess Christ and believe that he is raised from death, and thou shalt be
saved. For to believe only is rightousnes, and perfect salvation to confess
and to add freedom of speech to knowledge. The same Gregorius carmine de
rebus suis, speaking in the person of the publicane that prayed with the
Pharisie. No^ opera me saluabunt, tua autem gratia, tuaequs misericordia, mihi
stillet profano, quam solam miseris rex praebuisti spem peccatoribus. Works
shall not save me, but let thy grace and thy mercy drop upon me profane
man, which only hope, O King thou have given to miserable sinners. From him
dissenteth not Basilius Magnus de humilitate hom. 51. Haec enim est perfecta,
ac integra gloriatio in deo, quando neque ob iusticiam suam quis se iactat, sed
nouit quidem seipsum verae iusticiae indigum esse, sola autem fide in Christum
iustificatum esse. This is a perfect and full reioysyng in GOD, when a man
does not boast himself of his own rightousnes, but knows himself to be
void of true rightousnes, and to be justified by faith only in Christ. The
Papists now adays says it is great pride and presumption which Basile
acknowledges to be true humility.

Saint Ambrose in many places, shows himself to be of the same mind, as
in his exhortation Ad virgins, speaking of the dowry, that Christ requires
of us, to ioigne with him in marriage: Sola est fides vtrique indiscreta sexui,
census virorum dos virginum. It is faith only, which is indifferente to
both sexes, the substance of men the dowry of virgins. Also in the same
work. Nam vnde mihi tantum meriti est cui indulgentia pro corona est? For
whence should I have so great merit, when mercy is my croune. And again,
Non ex operibus sed ex fide vnusquisque iustificatur a domino. Not by works,
but by faith is every one justified of the lord. And in his Epistle. 82. Ad
Vercellenses: Sola vos comitabitur fides. Erit sane etia^ iustitia comes si
fides praeuia sit. Only faith shall bear you compaignie. And righteousness
also shall be your companion, if faith goes before. Also in Lucam lib. 2.
Capit. 2. Nihil in hoc censu verearis terribile, nihil immite, nihil triste,
sola vnumquemque fides signat. Fear nothing in this taxyng, that should be
terrible, nothing cruel, nothing sad, or heavy: only faith does mark
every manne? But these places, you will say, are somewhat darcke: You shall
have therefore, them that are plain enough. Upon the Epistle to the Romans.
Chapit. iij. upon these words. Iustificati gratis per gratiam ipsius, that is,
Being justified freely by his favor, he writes thus: Iustificati sunt
gratis, quia nihil operantes, neque vicem reddentes, sola fide iustificati sunt
dono dei. They are justified freely, because without any woorkyng, or
requitynge, they are justified by faith alone, by the gift of God. And upon
the iiij. Chapter Quomodo ergo Iudaei per opera legis iustificari, se putant,
iustificatione Abrahae, cum videant Abraham non ex operibus legis sed sola fide
iustificatum? Non ergo opus est lex, quando impius per solam fidem iustificatur
apud deum secundum propositum gratiae dei. Sic decretum dicit a deo vt cessante
lege sola^ fidem gratia dei posceret ad salutem. That is. How do the Jews
think, that they may be justified through the works of the law, by the
justification of Abraham, when they see that Abraham, was not justified by the
works of the law, but by faith alone? Therefore the law is not necessary,
seeing the ungodly manne, is justified before GOD, by faith only, according
to the purpose of the grace of God: for so he says it is decreed of God, that
the law ceasyng the grace of God requires faith alone to salvation.

And in the same Chapter, Beatos dicit, de quibus hoc sanxit deus vt sine
labor et aliqua obseruatione, sola fide iustificentur apud deum. He says
they are blessed, of whom GOD has decreed this thing, that without labor, and
any observation, they should be justified before God, by faith alone. And
again: Manifest beati sunt, quibus sine labor, vel opere aliquo, remittuntur
iniquitates, and peccata teguntur. Nulla ab his requisita poenitentiae opera,
nisi tantum vt credent: It is manifest, that they are happy, to who^ their
iniquities are forgiven, and their sins hid, without any labor, or work
of theirs, and no works of repentance, required of them, but only that they
should believe.

And in the. 10. chapter. Nullum opus dicit legis, sed solam fidem dandam in
causa Christi. He says, that no work of the law, but only faith must
be given in the cause of Christ. And in the eleventh chapter. Et quoniam
versutia aduersarij cumulari peccata coeperunt, vt per interdictum magis reus
homo constitueretur: deus clementia bonita it is suae semper, homini procurans,
vt and quod sine lege erat peccatum, and in lege non possit deleri, hoc
decreuit, vt solam fidem poneret, per quam omnia peccata abolerentur, vt quia
nulla spes per legem omnibus hominibus erat, dei misericordia saluarentur. And
because through the subtlety of the adversary, sins began to be
increased, so that through the forbiddyng, a man was made more guilty, God
prouidyng alwaie for manne, by the mercy of his goodness, so that, that which
was sin without the law, and by the law could not be put away, he
decreed this, to prepare only faith, by which all sins should be taken
away, that because there was no hope to all men by the law, they might be
saved by the mercy of God. And upon the j. Cor. Cha. j. Datam dicit gratia^, a
deo in Christo Jesus, quia gratia sie data est in Christo Jesus, quia hoc
constitutum est a deo, vt qui credit in Christum saluus sit sine opere, solae
fide gratis accipiens remissionem peccatorum. He says, that grace is given
from God, in Jesus Christ, because grace is so given in Christ Jesus, for
that it is so appoincted of God, that he which believes in Christ, shall be
saved without works, receiuyng forgiveness of his sins freely, by faith
alone.

And upon the ij. Cor. Chap. iij. speaking of the law of the Gospel. Haec lex
dat libertatem solam fidem poscens. This law gives liberty, requiryng faith
alone.

And in the Preface before the Epistle to the Galathians. Si ergo haec dicta
intelligerent, a lege recederent, scientes a praedicatione Ioannis Baptistae,
legem iam cessare, vt sola fides sufficiat ad salutem abbreuiata ex lege. If
therefore they did understand these sayings, they would depart from the law,
knowing that since the preaching of Iho^ the Baptiste, the law is now ceased,
and faith alone suffices, which is an abbridgemente of the law. Also upon
the third Chapter of the Epistle to the Galathia^s Sed aliud aduersum
improuida praesumptione defendunt, putantes iustificationem sine operibus legis
prouenire non posse, cum sciant Abraham qui forma eius rei est, sine operibus
legis per solam fidem iustificatum. But they maintain an other contrary thing,
by unskillful presumption, thinkyng that justification, can not be obtained
without the works of the law, whereas they know that Abraham, which is the
example of that matter, was justified by faith only without the works of
the law.

And again. Manifestatis enim peccatis suis conclusi sunt vt se excusare non
possent, sed quaerere^t misericordiam vt veniens qui promissus erat Abrahae,
solam fidem ab eis posceret, quam habuit Abraham. For when their sins were
made open, they were concluded, so that they could not excuse them selves, but
were feign to seek mercy, that when he came, which was promised to Abraham,
he might require only faith of them, which Abraham had. And upon the v.
Chapter. Atque per hoc neque praeputium valet quiquam neque Circumcisio. Sed
sola fides opus est in charitate ad iustificationem. And by this, neither
Circumcision, nor uncircumcision is worth any thing, but only faith in love,
is necessary to justification.

Chrysostom also, although he do often say, that faith alone is not
sufficient to salvation, he means it of a dead, and an historical faith,
which is not fruictefull of good works, as saint James does: But that he
acknowledges a true, and lively faith, to justify alone, may sufficiently
appear by these testimonies. First upon Math. Chapter. j. Hom. i. Non enim
laboribus nostris, neque sudoribus, non doloribus and arumnis, sed per dei in
nos tantu^modo charitutem, ta^ gra^dia haec promissa suscepimus. Not by our
labors, nor our travails, not by our sorrows, and griefs, but only by the
love of God toward us, we have received these great promises. And in the
twelve Homely. I am non visibili specie qua vtique non egemus, cum nobis pro
cunctis sola fides sufficiat. We have not need now of outward show when only
faith suffices us for all things. And upon the Acts Home. xxx. Vide quomodo
vbique omnia tribuunt deo. Hos and nos imitemur. Nihil nostrum esse putemus,
quandoquidem and ipsa fides non est nostrum opus. See how they ascribe all
things, every where to god. Let us then follow them, let us think
nothing is our own, seeing that faith it self is not our work. And again
Home. xxxij. A sola fide (inquit) illa assecutisunt, and non operibus, vel
circumcisione. They obtained (says he) those things by faith alone, not by
works, or Circumcision. Again De prodit. Iud. Speaking of the penitente
Thief, whether he had any good works, or were Baptized. Neque enim de hoc
contenderim ego, sed illud vmim asseuerauerim, quod sola fides per se saluu^
fecerit. Of that matter I will not contend, but this one thing I will affirm,
that only faith by it self, made him to be saved. Also upon the Episto. ad
Roma. Home. ij. Speaking of righteousness. Non enim sudoribus, and laboribus,
illam comparabis, sed ex diuino gratiae done quod ex supernis est gratis vt
accipias oportet. Vnum hoc solum adferens de tuo, vt credas. Thou shall not
obtain it by labors, and travails, but thou must receive it freely, by the
gift of Gods grace, which is from above, bryngyng this one thing only of
thine, that thou believe. Again, Hom. vij. Hic virtutem dei ostendit, quod non
solum saluauit, sed and iustificauit, and in gloriationem induxit, nullis ad
hoc vsus operibus, sed fidem tantum exigens. Hear he shows the power of God,
that he has not only saved us, but also justified, and brought us into a
reioysyng, vsyng here to, none of our works, but requiryng faith only. And
again. Quam primum homo credidit confestim iustificatus est. So sone as a man has believed, immediately he is justified. And Hom. viij. Ne enim quis
dicat quid vetat quominus, and fidem habeam, and legem interim seruem, ostendit
fieri non posse. Fidei siquidem virtutem de honeflat, quisquis legem vt velut
saluantem seruat. And least any manne should say, what lets, but that I
may have faith, and keep the law also? He shows it can not be, for he
dishonors the virtue of faith, who so keeps the law, as able to save him.

And in the 9. Hom. Nos solam fidem attulimus, we have brought faith alone.
And in the same Homely Apostolus cum dicit spes non confundit, non recte
factis nostris, sed dilectioni dei rem omnem acceptam fert. When the Apostle
says, hope does not confound, he ascribes the whole matter, not to our good
deeds, but to the law of God. And in the. 14, Hom. Vnum enim hoc tantummodo
donum dei obtulimus, quod futura nobis promittenti credimus, at que hac sola
viae saluati sumus. This only gift we have offered to God, that when he
promises us things to come, we believe him, and by this only way we are
saved. Also upon the Epistle ad Galath. Cap. 2. Scientes quod non
iustificabitur homo ex operibus legis, sed tantum per fidem Jesus Christi,
knowing that a man shall not be justified by the works of the law, but only
by says of Ieseus Christ. And upon Cap. 3. Tum enim valet fides, cum nihil
accesserit exlege. Then faieth is of force, when nothing of the law is added
to it. Also speaking of Abraham. Quod si is ante gratiam ex fide iustificatus
est, idque cum and operibus bonis floreret, multo magis nos. Quid igitur illi
detrimenti attulit, quod no^ esset sub legee? nihil, sed sufficiebat ei fides
ad iusticia^. If he before the time of grace, were justified by faith, and
that when he flourished in good works, much more we. What hurt was it then to
him, that he was not under the law? none at all. But his faith was
sufficient to him for righteousness. Again. Rursum illi dicebant qui sola fide
nititur execrabilis est, hic contra demonstrat, qui sola fide nititur, eum
benedictum esse. They said, he that trusts unto faith alone is accursed,
but he says, contrariwise, he that trusts unto faith alone, is blessed.
Quu^ enim lex esset infirmior quam vt posset hominem ad iusticiam perducere,
repertum est non leave remedium, nempe fides, quae quod legi erat impossible,
per se redderet poffibile. For when the law was of less force, then that it
was able to bring a man to righteousness: a remedy of no small fores was
found out, namely faieth, which by herself, should make that possible,
which was impossible to the law. Also upon the Epi. ad Ephesians. Hom. 5. Ex sola
quippe fide nos saluauit. For he saved us by faith alone. And upon the Ep. ad
Colloss. Hom. 5. Apparet quidem and in reliquis magna mysterij huius gloria,
veru^ multo magis in istis. Hoe^s enim lapidibus stupidiores ad angeloru^
subito dignitatem simpliciter nudis verbis, solaque fide fine omni operum
adminiculo euehere reuera gloria est, ac misterij huius diuitiae. The great
glory of this mystery truly appears in the rest, but much more in these.
For to advance men that are more doltishe then stones, suddenly to the dignity
of Angels, simply with bare words, and faith alone, with out all help of
works, is glory in deed, and the riches of this mystery. And in the 6. Hom.
Per fidem operationis dei qui exitauit eum ex mortuis. Benedixit, totum enim
fidei est. Credidistis deum exitare posse, atque ita exitati estis. By faith of
the operation of God, which raised him from the dead. He has said well. For
it is all of faith. You have believed that God can raise you, and so you are
raised. Again, In decretis (inquit) quibus decretis fide: satis est credere,
non operibus opera, sed fidei adiunxit opera. In the decrees (he says) which
decrees? In faith for it is sufficient to believe, he ioygneth not works to
works, but works to faith. Also upon. 2 Thessalonians. Hom. 4. Quo modo in
salute^? vt sanctificaret nos per spiritum. Ab istis namque salutis nostrae
summa dependet, nusquam ab operibus, nusquam a recte factis, sed per fidem
veritatis How unto salvation? that he might sanctify us by his spirit. For
hereof depends the sum of our salvation, not at al of works, not at all of
good deeds, but by faith, or belefe of the truth. Also upon the 1. Tim. Hom.
3. Id solum inquit attulimus nos quia credidimus christu^ nos posse saluare.
This only says he have we brought, namely, that we have believed, that christ
is able to save us. And in the. 4. Hom. Quid igitur est? ita cui difficilis
habebatur fides, quod inimici, quod peccatores, quod hi qui in lege non
iustificantur, neque per opera, hi continuo ex fide sola primas parts
meritorum consecuti sunt. etc. what is it ihen? so that to whom faiethe seemed
a hard matter, because that enemies, because that sinners, because that they
which cold not be justified by the law, nor yet by works, these immediately
by faith, alone obtained the chief worthiness. And in the same place.
Incredibile enim videbatur, siquidem homo qui omnem priorem vitam frustra,
atque inaniter consumpsisset, duxissetque per mala opera, post modum ex fide
sola saluandus diceretur. For it seemed an incredible thing, that a man,
which had spent all his former life vainly and to no purpose, but passed it
away in evil works, should afterward be said to be saved by faith alone.
Also the Epistle to Titus. Hom. 3. Si enim credis fidei, cur alia infers quasi
fides iustificare non sufficiat sola. If thou trust unto faith., why
bryngeste thou in other things? as though faieth alone were not sufficient to
justify. Likewise upon the Epistle to the Hebrews Cap. 4. Hom. 7. Accedamus
cu^ fiducia petentes. Tantum fidem adferamus, and omnia tribuet. Let us
approache near with confidence making our petition, let us bring forth faith
only, and he gives all things. These testimonies does aboundauntly declare,
what Chrysostom thought of justification by faith alone. Let us now see what
saint Jerome will say to the same matter. First therefore against the
Pelagians. lib. 1. He writes thus. Ergo iusti sumus quando nos peccatores
fatemur, and iustitia nostra no^ ex proprio merito, sed ex dei consistit
misericordia. Then are we rightous, when we confess our selves to be sinners,
and our unrighteousness consists not of our own merit, but of the mercy of
god. And in the. 2. book of the same work. Manifest ostendit non in hominis
merito, sed in dei gratia esse iusticia^, qui sine legis operibus credentium
suscipit fidem. He shows manifestly, that rightousnes is not in the merit of
a man, but in the grace of God, which receives the faieth of beleuers
without the works of the law. Also in his Commentary upon Mark Chap. 14.
Gratia non meritis saluati sumus a deo: we are saved of God by grace, and not
by merits. And oftentimes else where he speaks to the same effect, but
especially in the Commentary upon the Epistle to the Romans, which bears
his name. Cap. 4. Conuertentem impium per solam fidem iustificat deus, non
opera bona quae non habuit. God justifies the ungodly man when he conuerteth
by faith alone, not by good works which he had not. And Cap. 10. Ignorantes
quod deus ex sola fide iustificat, and iustos se ex legis operibus, qua^ no^
custodiebant putantes. etc. Not knowing that God does justify by faith alone,
and thinking them selves just by the works of the law which they did not
keep: Again. Talis est ille qui Christum credidit die qua credidit, qualis
ille qui vniuersam legem impleuit. He that believes in christ, is such a one ye
first day in which he believes, as he is, yt has fulfilled all the law. And
again Moses distinxit in leuitico inter vtramque iusticiam, fidei scilicet
atque factorum, quod altera operibus, alterae sola fidei credulitate accedente
fiat. Moses in Leuiticus made distinction of both kinds of righteousness,
namely of faith and of deeds, that the one is brought to pass by works, the
other by only belief of faith coming unto it: yet again in the same
Chapter. Ergo si fides sufficit ad iusticiam, and confessio ad salutem, inter
Iudeum and Gentiles crede^tes, nulla est discretio. Therefore if faith suffice
to righteousness, and confession to salvation, there is no difference between
the Jew and the Gentile that are beleuers. And upon the Epistle ad Gal. Cap.
1. Gratia vobis qua sola estis fide saluati. Grace to you by which alone
through faith you are saved. And Cap. 2 Non ex operibus legis, sed sola fide
sicut Gentes, vitam in Christo inuenisse te nosti: He makes Paul speaking to
Peter saiynge: Thou know that thou thy self, haste found life in Christ,
not by the works of the law, but by faith alone as the Gentiles have.
Again. Si enim gentes fides sola non saluat, nec nos, quia ex operibus legis
nemo iustificatur. If faith alone does not save the Gentiles, no more does it
save us, for no man is justified by the works of the law. And upon these
words of Paul. In fide vino filij dei. In sola fide quia nihil debeo legi
antiquae. Abiecta enim est gratia, si mihi sola non sufficit. I live says
Paul by the faith of the soonne of God, that is says Jerome by faith
alone, for I owe nothing to the old law. For grace is cast away, if it alone
be not sufficient for me. And Cap. 3. Spiritum sanctu^ sola fide accepistis,
qui non nisi a justice accipitur: iustos autem sine legis operibus vos esse
constat. You have received ye holy ghost by faith alone, which is not
received but of righteous persons. And it is plain that you are righteous with
out the works of the law. Moreover. Abraham eredidit deo, and reputatum.
etc. Ita and vobis ad iustitiam sola sufficit fides. Abraham believed GOD, and
it was accoumpted to him for righteousness. So faith alone is sufficient for
you also to righteousness. Furthermore in the same Chapter. Quaeritur sane
hoc loco si fides sola sufficiat Christiano, and vtru^ non sit maledictus, qui
Euangelica praecepta contemnet. Sed fides ad hoc proficit, vt in primitijs
credulitatis accedentes ad deum iustificet, si deinceps in iustificatione
permaneant. Caeterum seen operibus fidei, non legis, mortua est fides. It is in
deed demanded in this place, if faith alone be sufficient for a Christian
man, and whether he is not accursed, that shall despise the precepts of the
Gospel. But faith profits thus far, that in the beginning of beleuyng, it
justifies those that come unto god, if afterward they continue in
justification. But without the works of faith not of the law, faith is
dead. Also speaking of the law. Quia nemo illam seruat ideo dictum est quod
sola fide iustificandi essent credentes. Because no man keeps the law,
therefore it is said, that the beleuers must be justified by faith alone.
Also so vt sola fide Gentes benedicerentur, in Christ sicut promssum est
Abrahae, that the Gentiles might be blessed, by faith alone in Christ, as it
was promised to Abraham. Also* Lex autem non est ex fide nam iustificat sola
fides. The law is not of faith, for faith alone does justify. Again,
necesse est sola fide saluari credentes. It is necessary, that the beleuers
should be saved by faith alone. Again Aequaliter and Iudaei, and Gentes per
solam fidem filij dei estis, qua credidistis Christo. Both Jews, and
Gentiles, you are a like the sons God, by faith alone, by which you have
given credit to Christ. Also upon the v. Chapter. In sola fide crucis dico
esse salutem, I say, that salvation consists in faith alone of the cross:
That is, of the death of Christ. And upon the vj. Chapter. In sola fide spes
collocatur animarum, In faith alone rests the hope of souls. Also upon the
Episto. ad Ephesians. ij. Gratia saluati estis, non meritis prioris vitae sed sola
fide. You are saved by grace, not by merits of your former life, but by faith
alone.

Also upon these words, Legem mandatorum in decretis abrogans) per solam
fidem, iustificans, moralia sola decerne^s. Abrogatyng the law of precepts,
that was in decrees iustifiyng by faith only, and decreeyng the moral
precepts, only to be observed. And upon these words, Per crucem
interficiens inimicitias) per solam fidem crucis, quae nullum deterret, non
enim grauis aut difficilis est, quam habere etiam latro potuit crucifixus. By
his Cross slaiyng the hearted) by only faith of his cross which makes no man
afraied, for it is not heavy, or hard, which even the Thief that was
crucified might have. Finally, upon the Epist. ad Philip. iij. Where saint
Paul says, that he has not the righteousness, which is of the law, but
that which is by the faith of Christ Jesus he notes: Sed illam quae a deo
pro pace, and sola fide collata. But I have that righteousness, which is
given properly of God, and by faith alone, Ruffinus also, which otherwise was
a great adversary of saint Hieromes, yet in this poincte, he is his very
friend, and of the same judgment, as he was the iudger of al learned men at
that time, except Pelagius the arche heretic, and his fellows. Ruffinus
therefore, in his exposition of the Creed, upon the Article of remission of
sins, writes thus. Verum de remissione peccatorum sufficere debet sola
eredulitas. Quis enim causas, aut rationem requirat, vbi indulgentia
principalis est causa. But for remission of sins only, belief ought to
suffice, for who should require causes, or a reason? where mercy is the
principal cause? So that when justification, is through remission of sins,
as saint Paul proves out of the Psalm. xxxij And remission of sins is
obtained by faith alone, who ca^ deny that justification is obtained by faith
alone. Saint Augustine, although he do not so often repeat the terms of
faith alone, yet no writer more often, nor more substancially sets forth
the righteousness by faith alone, and as he had specially more occasion,
being troubled with the Pelagians, and Celestianes, in his confessions Libro.
x. Capit. xxix. Tota spes mea, non nisi magna valde misericordia tua. Da quod
iubes, and iube quod vis. All my hope is nothing else, but thy exceadyng great
mercy (O God) Give that thou commaundeste, and command what thou will. Also
in his Epistle to Sixtus. 105. Restat igitur vt ipsam fidem vnde omnis iustitia
sumit initium, propter quod dicatur ad ecclesiam in Cantico Canticorum venies,
and transies ab initio fidei, non humano quo isti extollu^tur saluamus
arbitiro, nec vllis praecaede^tibus meritis, quonia^ inde incipia^t bona
quaecu^que sunt merita, sed gratuitum donu^ dei esse fateamur, si gratia^ veram
id est fine me ritis cogitamus. It remains therefore, that we do not ascribe
to the free will of man, whereof these men are so proud, nor to any merits
going before, that have faith it self, of which all righteousness takes his
beginning (for which it is said unto the Church, in the Canticle, thou shall
come, and pass by the beginning of faith) because that hereof all good
merits, whatsoever they be begin: but that we confess it to be the free
gift of God, if we think of true grace, which is with out merits. Also in
his 120. Epistle to Honoratus, speaking of faith: Ex hoc quippe in cipiunt
bona opera ex quo iustificamur, non quia precesserunt iustificamur, For hereof
begin good works, whereof we are justified, we are not justified, because
they went before. In his Enchiridion ad Laurentium Capite 99. Sola gratia
redemptos disceruimus cernimus a perditis quos in vnam perditionis concreuerit
massam ab origin ducta causa communis. We discern them, that are redeemed
from those that are lost, by grace alone, whom the common cause, derived from
the beginning, has bredde into one lump of perdition. Also in his book De
fide, and operibus. Capit. 22. In illis duobus tota lex pendet, and Prophetiae,
licet recte dici posset ad solam fidem pertinere dei mandata, si non mortua sed
viua illa intelligatur fides, quae per dilectionem operatur. In these two the
whole law, and the Prophets depends, although it may be well said, that
the commandments of God, pertain to faith alone, if not, a dead faith
be understood, but that lively faith, which works by love. And in his
treatise Octoginta trium questionum. lxviij. Ipsa eutem gratia, quae data est
per fidem, nullis nostris meritis data est. The same grace, which is given
through faith, is given to none of our merits. Also Quest. lxxvi Quapropter
non sunt contrariae duorum Apostolorum sententiae Pauli, and Iacobi, cum dicit
vnus iustificari hominem per fidem sine operibus, and alius dicit inanem esse
fidem fine operibus, quia ille dicit de operibus quae fidem praecedunt, iste de
ijs quae fidem sequuntur, vt etiam ipse Paulus multis locis ostendit. Wherefore
the sentences of the two Apostles, Paul, and James are not contrary, when the
one says, that a man is justified by faith, without works, and the other
says, that faith without works is vain, because the one speaks of
works going before faith, the other of such as follow faith, as Paul
himself shows in many places. And that true faith can not be without good
works, he shows in his book De fide and operibus. Capi. xxiij.
Inseperabilis quippe est bona vita a fide, quae per dilectionem operatur. Good
life can not be separated from faith, which works by love. Also in his book
De natura, and gratia. Cap. xi. Fateor dilectioni vestrae, cum ista legerem
repent laetitia perfusus sum, quod dei gratiam non negaret, per quam solam
homo iustificari potest. Hoc enim in disputationibus talium maxim detestor and
horreo. I confess unto your charity, that when I read these things, I was
suddenly filled with gladness, because he denighed not the grace of God, by
which a lone, a man can be justified, for that thing in such men's
disputations, I do most of all deteste, and abhor. And in the Chapter.
xvj. Haec est fides ad quam praecepta compellu^^ vt lex imperet, and fides
impetret, This is faith unto which the commandments does drive a man, that
the law commands, and faith obteineth. Also upon the. lxvij. Psalm. Sine
bonorum operum meritis per fidem iustificatur impius. The ungodly man is
justified by faith, without the merits of good works. And upon the 88.
Psalm. Et quia sola fides in Christum mundat, no^ credentes in Christum soluti
sunt ab emundatione. And because faith alone in Christ does cleanse, they that
believe not in Christ, are free from clensing. But what should I tarry longer,
in rehearsyng sentences of Augustine, when so many books, Epistles, and
Homelies of his are extante, which wholly, and purposely, were composed for
the same matter, against the Pelagians? Paulinus also a learned manne, in
saint Augustines time, in an Epistle written to Augustine. Episto. 58. Has
these words. Quid enim sis ad salutem quae sola fide quaentur, prodest in
legis memoria, et meditatione versari. etc. What does it profit them, to be
conuersante in the remembrance, and meditation of the law, toward
salvation, which is sought by faith alone. Marcus Heremita an ancient greek
writer in his treatise, of them that think they may be justified by their
works writes on this wise, (...). The Lord willing to show that every
commandment is of duty, and that the adoption is of gift by his own blood
says. When you have done all things that are commanded you, then say you,
we are unprofitable servants, and we have done that which we ought to have
done: Therefore the kingdom of heaven is not the reward of works, but the
free gift of the Lord prepared for faithefull servants. Faustus also an
ancient Bishop in France writing a book de gratia meritis and libero
arbitrio, has these words. Tempus gratiae in quo redempti sumus, merita
hominum non expectauit, opera penitus non quae siuit, sola deus fidei nostrae
deuotione co^tentus fuit iuxta illud apostoli, credidit Abraham deo, and
reputatum est ei ad iustitiam. The time of grace in which we are redeemed did
not tarry for the merits of men, did not require works at all. But god was
content with the only devotion of our faith according to the saying of the
Apostle, Abraham believed god, and it was imputed to him for rightousnes. And
although Claudianus Mamertus Bishop of Gallia Viennensis, for his error
concerning Angels in which he followed saint Augustine does confute him,
and Ioannes Maxentius Archbishop of Constantinople, for his opinion of grace
and merits in which he disagreeth from S. Augustine, reproves him in his
answer against the Epistle of Hormisda Archbishop of Rome: yet for excludyng
merits from justification no man finds fault with him. For the same Ioannes
Maxentius concerning the free will of man, whereupon all merits are grounded,
has this catholic confession. Liberum autem natural arbitrium ad nihil aliud
valere credimus, nisi ad discernenda tantum, and desidera^da carnalia, sieve
saecularia, quae non apud deum, sed apud homines possunt fortasse videri
gloriosa. Ad ea vero quae ad vita^ aeternam pertinent, nec cogitare, nec velle,
nec desiderare, nec perficere posse nisi per infusione^, and inoperatione^
intrinsecus spiritus sancti. We believe that natural free will avails to
nothing else, but only to discern and desire carnal or worldly things, which
may perchance seem glorious before men, but not before god. But for those
things that pertain to life everlasting, that it can neither think of them
nor will them, nor desire the^, nor perform the^, but by the inward infusio^
and working of the holy ghost. And lest the judgment of this Ioannes should
be doubted of, because he wrote against the B. of Rome. This is the same
Ioannes, whose confession the same Hormisida sent unto the Bishops of Spain
as catholic and true. Albinus the school master of Carolus magnus much
later in time, but in sentence all one with him, upon the. 119. Psalm part.
19. writes in this manner. Definit in nullo homini esse praesumendum, nisi in
sola dei pietate, quae ex miserit beatos facit, ex mortuis viuos. He
determines that a man must presume in nothing but in ye only mercy of god
which of miserable makes us happy of dead me^ alive.

Another godly man of good antiquity, not so famous in name which of purpose
he suppressed to avoid vain glory in all his writings, calling himself
Idiota, is nevertheless of the same opinion in diverse places of his works,
especially in Regulis sancti viri. Quinta regula, quod in illis duodecim armis,
nec in quocunque alio humano remedio confidas, sed in sola virtute Jesus Christi
qui dixit, confidice ego vici mundum: and alibi, princeps huius mundi eijcitur
for as, quare and nos sola eius virtute confidamus, and mundum posse vincere,
and diabolum superare. The fifte rule of a godly man is, that thou do not
trust in those twelve pieces of armor, nor in any other humane remedy, but in
the only virtue of Jesus Christ, which says be of good courage, I have
overcome the world, and in an other place, the prince of this world is cast
out, wherefore let us trust by his virtue alone both to overcome the world,
and to vanquishe the Devil. Also in his book de conflictu carnis, and animae.
Cap. 6. Tibi domine deus meus attribuitur quicquid pertinet ad potentiam:
diuinam autem potentiam euidentius nihil manifestat, quam iustificare impium,
hoc est trahere peccatorem, iuxta quod legitur, Deus qui omnipotentiam tuam
parcendo maxim, and miserando manifestas, melius enim est iustificare quam
creare, cum creando detur natura, iustificando autem, and auferatur culpa, and
conferatur gratia. To thee O lord my god is ascribed, whatsoever pertains to
power, and there is nothing that sets forth the power of God more
evidently, then to justify an ungodly man, that is to draw a sinner, according
as it is read (O God which show thine almighty power most of all in
sparyng and showing mercy) for it is a greater matter to justify, then to
create, whereas in creating nature is given, but in iustifiyng sin is taken
away, and grace given. I will conclude with Venantius in his exposition of the
Creed, wherein he follows Ruffinus upon the Article of remission of sins,
and using almost the very words of Ruffinus, says on this manner. Remissionem
peccatorum nobis in hoc sermon sola cre dulitas sufficit, nec ratio requiritur
vbi principalis indulgentia comprobatur. Only belief in this speech is
sufficient to give us remission of sins, neither is any reason required,
where mercy is proved to be the principal cause. Seiyng therefore that we are
compassed (as the Apostle says) with such a cloud of witnesses, I cannot
but marvel with what face the adversaries can so co^fidently pronounce that
the doctrine of justification by faith alone, is new doctrine never hard of
in the Church before this forty or fifty years. And for as much as the
witnesses are in number so many, in time so ancient, in learning so excellent,
that of all men they are reverenced, and seeing their testimonies are so
diverse all to one end, some affirmyng the doctrine in plain terms, some
yeldyng reasons thereof, some showing proofs and arguments for it, some
aunsweryng objections made against it, and every one of these in several
words phrases and manners of speaking, I am suer though subtlety can devise,
startyng holes to elude some of them, all the craft of the Devil cannot be
able to avoid them al. And if the only admonition of August. be thought of
you sufficient for both learned men and Christian men, which is that a baren
dead and vnstructfull faith is not sufficient for salvation, what think you
so many admonitions of so sundry, both learned and christian writers, ought to
work with all men, teaching that a true and lively faith alone in the only
mercy of God by Jesus Christ does justify? We agree with Augustine, that a
solitary faith does not justify, if you can as well agree with the scripture
and almost all ancient Fathers, that a fruictfull faith alone does justify
not by merit of the fructes, but by taking hold of Gods mercy.

The Papiste.
And that which is most of all to be meruailed at, whereas the religion of this
reformed Church has left us nothing to serve God withal, but this only and
alone faith which they do affirm to suffice, they do by the free choice and
will of man denied, clean take away this only faith also, like as al other
gifts, and graces, and benefits vprising unto man, by the death and blood
sheding of Jesus Christ. For so much as the free will of man is the seat
of grace, and the mansion house of faieth, whereby faieth is produced and
brought forth by the grace of God, as chief agent and worker thereof, and in
the will of man, as in an apt receptackle and place to receive the same, when
no man can believe but he that will. And therefore for man to believe both these
two things are necessarily required. First is the act of Gods grace,
stirryng and mouynge the will of man thereunto, second is the consent of man's
will to apply, and receive the same, without the which consent of man's
will, Gods grace knocks all in vain. As it appears by the citezeins of
Jerusalem, unto whom our savior Christ says in the Gospel. Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, which dooest slaie the Prophets, and stonest them to death, that
are sent unto thee, how often times would I have gathered thy children, like as
a Hen gathers her chickens, underneath her wings, and thou would not. I
would says christ, but thou O Jerusalem would not. VVherby it appears,
that god by his grace does not work his belefe in the soul of man, as in a
stock, or in a stone, with out any consent of man's part, to be given
thereunto, when there is no man, that can by any other mean, receive faith,
then by the consent of his own will, and therefore in the work of faith,
Gods grace, and man's will must consent, and ioigne together both. The
Apostle saint Paul, in witness thereof says, by the grace of God, I am
that I am, and his grace in me was not in vain, but I have labored more
abundantly then they all, and not I says saint Paul, but the grace of God
with me, and not without me as workyng before in me, and without my consent,
but mecum, with me. For Augustine says, that almighty God, which in the
beginning, did create manne, without any consent, askyng of man thereunto, he
will not now justify manne constreinedly, and whether he will or not, but
with his own consent, will, and desir^ thereunto. For the kingdom of heaven,
says our savior Christ suffers violence and the only violente men,
which here will travail, labor, and fight therefore, shall be partakers of
that kingdom. When the joys of heaven are not so vile, nor so mean things,
like as the Apostle saint Paul says, but they are worth the labouryng
for: seeing therefore it can not be denied, without denial of the express
testimonies of the scriptures, but that the consent of man's will, must
necessarily come with Gods grace to receive faith, therefore, in the deniyng
of the consent of man's will, they deny faith, and thus in fine, the religion
of this new reformed church is brought (all circumstaunces being duly
examined) from only faith, and faith alone, to have no faith at all.

The answer.
It is a great marvel to see you, and such as you are, that boaste of your
free will, to be so obstinately blind, that you will not see the truth, but
that we do acknowledge the just judgment of God in those that strive
against him. But to avoid al your cauilling of free will, where by you go
about to amase the understanding, of such as be simple, I will first show,
what we teach of free will, and then answer your peuishe Sophistry. And
because the name of free will, is ambiguous, and of diverse significations, it
is expediente, to set forth the sonderie meanynges thereof. Free will is
sometimes taken as it is contrary to coacted or constrained will. Sometimes as
it is contrary to a servile, or bond will. And sometimes as it is, the
election of that, which seems good, and is contrary to refusyng. But in the
ambiguitie, of the two former significations, all the doubt of this
controversy does consiste, whereof we determine after this manner. That manne
before his fall, had free will, in every respect: he might have chosen freely
without any let, or compulsion, that which was good in deed, and acceptable
to God: For there was in his nature, nothing to provoke him to evil. But man
after his fall, both in himself, and in all his posterity, has utterly
lost that free will, which I make the second meaning of the word, and has
his will, now altogether servile, and bound, so that he can will nothing of
him self, that is good, and acceptable before God. And therefore the scripture
says. Genesis the. vj. and viij. That all the immaginations of the thoughts
of men's hearts, are only evil continually. Our savior Christ also Matthew.
xv. teaches, that out of the corrupt heart of man, proceadeth all
wickedness. And saint Paul. ij. Corin. iij. affirms, that we are not apt
(...) of our selves, as of our selves, to think any thing, that pertains to
the glory of God. With an infinite noumber of places beside, to the same
effect, through out the Scripture, declaryng that before we be regenerate, and
borne a new, we can will nothing but that which is well. Nevertheless, we
do not deny, that a man has free will in the first meaning, for although
his will is bond, and slave unto sin, before it be made free, by the grace
of God, yet is it not compelled, nor enforced by any external coaction or
Stoicall necessity unto evil, but volu^tarily embraces that, which is
evil, and delights therein, and voluntarily does refuse goodness, and
pleases it self in ille doing. As for the third kind of free will, which is
an appetite, or election of that, which seems good, continues in man after
his fall (but yet subject to Gods providence) whereby he guides all his
external actions, but this is improperly called free will, and therefore may
be well omitted in this disputation. The whole matter of doubt rests
therefore in this, whether a man has his will so free, and uncorrupted, that
he can discern any thing in true godliness, and apply him self to receive
it. And here in this your discourse, a man can hardely perceive, whether you
defend free will simply with the Pelagians, or partly with the Papists. But
this is the manner of you all, to show your self, where you dare for shame,
plain Pelagians in deed, for all your divinity of free will, is out of
Aristotle and not out of Gods word, but when you be pressed with the
authority of scripture, to fly to some sorry shift of defense. But it is all
one in a manner, to confute the Pelagians, and you, when it is proved out of the
word of God, that the grace and goodness of God, woorketh all together,
whatsoever is good in them that are regenerate. For it is neither of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of GOD only, that shows the mercy.
Therefore it is no hard matter, to avoid most of your cauillations, with that
one distinction of free will, which is either free from coaction, and
compulsion, or free from corruption, and bondage unto sin. As when you
wrangle of the receiving of faith, that no man believes but he that will, I
answer, no man is compelled to believe, but he that believes, does believe
willingly, and of his own accord, but that he has a will to believe, is not
of himself, but of God. For GOD does not only offer mercy to our will, but
also gives us a will to receive it. As saint Paul testifies, God woorketh
in us, both to will, and to perform whatsoever is good, and pertainyng to our
salvation. Phili. ij. And where God gives not a will, there men can not
believe, though grace, and mercy be offered unto them. As saint Ihon
testifies in the. xij. Chapter of his Gospel, that the Jews after so long
preaching, and so many miracles woorkyng among the^, did not believe in him, and
they did not believe, because they could not believe in him, for that God,
according to the Prophecy of Esaie, had given them over, into a reprobate
mind. But if every man had free will, as you defend it, it might not be
truly said of any men, they could not believe, because God had blinded their
iyes, and hardened their heart. For you hold, that every manne may believe
that will, and that every manne has this will, in his own power. And the
first part of the sentence in some respect may be granted, that each manne
may believe that will, but the second part is altogether false, that each
manne has this will in his power. But those only whom God has appoincted to
salvation, he makes willing to believe, that they may be saved.

And whereas you quarrel, that Christ would have gathered, and Jerusalem
would not, it makes nothing to prove, that the Jews had power of their will,
to receive Christ, which saint Ihon utterly denies, saying, they could not
believe. And concerning the will of God, and Christ, you should not be
ignoraunte of that distinction, which your Sentiaries does acknowledge.
That there is one will of Gods determination, and an other of his precepte,
or commandment, which they call voluntatem signi. As when GOD commanded
Abraham, to kill his soonne, he declared one will by his commandment, and
yet the end declared that he willed not the death of Isaac. These diverse
wills, are not repugnant in God, neither does he intend, contrary things
by them, but such as may well stand together. For he determined to save
Isaac, for his promise sake, and yet to try the obedience of Abraham, by the
commandment. So when Christ preached to Jerusalem, he determined to call
those only, that were elect of God, and yet to make the other inexcusable,
when he offered mercy unto them, and they by no means would receive it. The
rest that you add, of the consent of man's will, to be necessary unto
justification, is so impertinent, that I muse what you meaned to speak one
word of it. For who ever said that God woorketh in the faith of a man as
in a Stock or Stone, or who ever denied the consent of a man's will to be
required in believing? This is no part of the question. But whether every man
that is not predestinat of god to salvation, has it in his power to consent
unto faith, that he may be justified, and so be saved, which is clean to
overthrow the election and predestination of God, which is the chief
foundation of our faith, and consequently to overthrow the power, wisdom,
glory and authority of God over his creatures. For if every able and scilful
workman, determines of the end and use of his workmanship, before he
begins it: with what reason can we take that from ye creator of all things,
who as Solomon witnesses, made all things for his own glory, even the wicked
man for the day of his wrath. Your conclusion is very clerkely, that we have
driven all things to faith alone, and when all is duly examined, we have no
fathe at all. When Zeno had disputed long that there was no mouynge, Diogenes
walked up and down his scole, and being demanded, what he was doing, he
answered I am confuting of Zeno his arguments. In which behauour he showed a
dooble example of wisdom, first because he vouchesaued not to answer the
subtilties of Zeno in so vain a matter, and secondly for that his sensible
action, did sufficiently confute the Philosophers vain speculation. We will
therefore hold our peace in this case, and let the matter it self speak for
us. If it were not that we had faith to Godward, why should we troble our
selves in this controversy of religion? If we sough riches, honor, pleasures,
or whatsoever the outward man can wish for, where should we sooner find it,
then in Popery? If we sought any thing in this life by our profession, why
should we not leave it in time of persecution? Let the life and death therefore
of them that have suffered martyrdom for our religion, declare whether for
maintenance of faith and trust in God, or for confidence in the world, we
have taken this contention in hand. But seeing you are disposed to dally with
us in deniyng our faith, you shall give me leave to disprove in good earnest,
your justification. For if you have none other but these three, which al
learning (you say) does agree of, I suppose it not impossible by your own
learning, to convince that justification in papistry, is either very vain, or
else none at all. And because your distinction is so preposterus of it self, it
shall not be against order to begin with the last kind first, which is (you
say) when of a just man is made a more just man. If no man be just, how can
there be degrees in justification? If the scripture teach (as I wene you will
not deny) that all men are sinners, and that no sinner is just, then no man can
be made of a just manne more just. But because I promised to deal with you
rather by your own learning, the^ by scriptures, if I can disprove your two
first kinds of justification, the third must needs vanishe away of it
self. Justification by baptism is your first kind, by penance, your second
kind. If a child be justified by Baptism, and die in that state of
justification, he comes not into purgatory. And therefore needs neither
Dirge nor Mass to be said for him: but by saying Dirge and Mass for such
one, you acknowledge him to be in purgatory, therefore you confess he is not
justified. And so your own catholic doings deny your learned sayings of
justification by Baptism. Let us see if justification by penance be any
thing surer. When a man has shryuen himself, and received absolution, I
trow you will say he is justified by penance. But so soon as he is gone
from the Priest, if he fall into deadly sin, he is become lapsus again. And
it is the doctrine of all the Sententiaries, yt every evil desire, with consent
is deadly sin, as if the party, that is shriuen, when he comes out of the
church, sees a fair woman, and lusts after her, he has committed adultery
in his heart with her, if he meet his enemy, and desire reuengement, he is a
murderer. If he behold any house, land, or other goods, and cattelles, that is
not his, and covet it, he breaks the x. commandment, and so of the rest.
Wherefore, so so^e as ever he thinks an evil thought, after his absolution,
all the fat is in the fire, he has lost his justification. So that he must
be shriuen ten thousand times in a year, or else he must not tarry, but a short
while in his justification. A miserable conscience or none at al, must that man
have, that trusts to such a justification. But you will say, he needs not
to fall by concupiscence so often. But I say, he is a false hypocrite, that
dare so say, of him self. Saint Paul was not inferior to any man, in the
grace of regeneration, and yet he confesses, that there was an other Law in
his members, which was resistaunte to the law of his mind, and so far
prevailed, that it brought him continually, captive unto the law of sin, in
so much that it did wring out of him, this pathetical exclamation: miserable
man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin? And finds no
other comfort, but the mercy of GOD in Christ Roma. vij. Wherefore seeing
both the first iustifications fail, the third must needs fall, and
therefore except you can find another justification you are like to have
none at all at lest wise of any value to make you rightous by your own
learning.

The Papiste.
My poor wit, learning, and conscience being fully persuaded, that all the
premises, be of such truth, and verity, as I have expressed. I thought it
good to make declaration there of chiefly for discharge of conscience, and
partly to meet with this common objection, that we have nothing to say, but
stand wholly upon a wilful frowardness, obstinacy, and vainglory, having
neither scripture, doctor, argument nor reason to allege, for the defense of
the matter, that we stand in. And for some trial to be made of my fidelity,
and truth, in the allegatio^s of the premises, I do offer my self to turn
the books of the scriptures, doctors, and holy fathers, when where, and before
whom I shall be called. And by the books being indifferently read, judge
betwixt us. Doubtless this is the whole desire, and intent I had in the
writing hereof, and not any other desire, I had of liberty, enlargemente, or
hear to live. For what desire should a christian man have, to live in that
Realm, that sleaeth them that would their wealth, and is angry with them that
would help their euilles, what desire should a christen man have, to live in
that realm, that sets naught by, and destroys, those that do watch,
and pray to do good, and sets by those, that do watch, and travail for to
do evil? Who would desire to live in such a Realm, where the Elders, and
aunciente men thereof, the wise, godly, and verteous, do live discontented,
and whereas the youth, witless, graceless, and vicious, do live best
contented, and pleased? who would desire to live in that Realm, where such
vices are of subjects openly committed, which in all other Christian realms
they fear to do in secret? and where all that they desire, they procure, and
all that they procure, they do attain, and all that is evil, they think,
and all that they think, they say, and all that they say, they may do,
and that that they may do, they dare do, and put in operation. And
therefore, I can have by no right reason, any desire of enlargemente of
liberty, or yet hope any while to live.

The answer.
A man may doubt for all your protestation whether your wit, learning and
conscience be so persuaded of all the premises, as youprete^de: of which some
be so absurd, that no man of any wit or learning can be persuaded in
them. And whereas you think you have answered the common objection that you
have nothing to say, I suppose by the judgment of wise men you have rather
confirmed the same, that either you have nothing to say, or that which you
say is nothing to the purpose. Your fidelity in the allegations should
better have appeared, if you had noted the places at the first, which either
must be imputed to fraud or to lack of books that it was omitted, but by
notyng of some places it should seem you wanted no books, and your straight
keeping I suppose is not such, but you might have had books if you list. You
conclude your Apology with an odious diffamatio^ of the whole state of our
princes gouernemente, which if it have failed in any poincte, it was in over
much clemency showed toward such as you are. It cannot be denied, but
men of good profession are oftentimes wicked in living, and many of no
profession be a slander to those of true religion. But how soever men be
malicious and ungodly bente, the state allows them not, but punishes them,
that by order of law are convicted to be such. Wherefore to make such an
outcrie, as though nothing but murder oppresssion, filthiness and all kind of
ungodliness, yea nothing else but a confusion of al wickedness were openly
maintained: it sauoureth neither of truth, nor of the spirit of God, nor of
the affection of a good subject. If Nero Domitian or Heliogabalus raged in the
world, with what other Rhethorike would you have painted out their regiment
then this that you have abused against this present government? the praise
whereof if the present age envy, the posterity will merueile at it, when
neither in memory nor in monumentes being compared without afffection, the
like shall ever be found before it. God give all true Subjects grace to be
thankful for it, and so to behave themselves therein, that through his mercy
it may be many years more, most happily continued.

FINIS.

